a7 da hme aoe wee er Oe OO CULT 


7H 2 


ty 
or 
he 
rs 
rh 
e- 
ht 
ri- 


1i¢c 


tu- 


th, 


nal 
or, 
ted 
nst 


est 


ind 


onal 
(tor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVIII, No. 10 


DECEMBER 30, 1938 





THE MILITARY CONSEQUENCES OF MUNICH 
by Major George Fielding Eliot 
A military survey of the principal powers of Europe, with 
a forecast of the military policies to be expected after the 
Munich accord of September 30 which, according to the 
author, served notice on the world that force underlies all 
international relations as a possible final arbiter. 


December 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents each 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 




















U.S. COUNTERS JAPAN’S “NEW ORDER” IN ASIA 





a WO months after the capture of Hankow and 

Canton, Japanese forces are still struggling with 
their essential military problem of crushing organ- 
ized Chinese resistance. Contrary to forecasts made 
at the time, Chinese opposition has not degenerated 
into purely guerrilla operations. North of Changsha 
and Nanchang the Chinese front-line positions are 
still strongly held, while the Japanese drive into 
Kwangsi province from Canton has made little 
progress. A stream of Japanese reinforcements has 
flowed through Canton, indicating that this new 
southern front is proving an additional strain on 
Japan's man power. At the present rate, Japanese 
efforts to close the 400-mile gap along the Canton- 
Hankow railway will take months of severe cam- 
paigning. Important Eighth Route Army victories in 
North China, resulting in heavy Japanese casualties, 
have held up the projected Japanese drive against Sian 
—terminus of overland supplies from the U.S.S.R. 
Both in the north and around Shanghai, Chinese 
guerrilla operations continue to harass Japanese 
lines of communication. Confronted with this stale- 
mate, the Japanese military command has resorted 
to destructive bombing raids on China’s interior cities 
and towns. 


The Chinese authorities have meanwhile been 
making strenuous efforts to provide lines of access 
for military supplies from abroad. One of these 
routes—the Haiphong-Yunnanfu railway—has ap- 
parently been definitely closed since early Novem- 
ber by the French authorities of Indo-China, in 
accordance with a reported “deal” by which the 
Japanese undertake not to molest Hainan island. 
The potential importance of the alternative Burma- 
Yunnanfu route, however, has markedly increased 
as a result of the 25 million dollar credit placed at 
the disposal of China by the United States Export- 
Import Bank on December 15. This credit has al- 


ready enabled the Universal Trading Corporation, 
a newly formed Chinese-American concern, to pur- 
chase 1,000 American motor trucks, which will be 
used to transport supplies over the recently com- 
pleted motor road from the Lashio railhead in 
northeastern Burma to Yunnanfu. Similar Chinese 
orders, reportedly placed with British firms, are to 
be covered by anticipated credits from the pending 
British export credits guarantee bill. In addition, the 
American treasury has extended the Chinese-Ameri- 
can monetary agreement of July 9, 1937 by which 
China is enabled to obtain dollar exchange against 
its gold reserves in New York. 


These first positive aids to China by the Western 
powers, apart from their material value, are im- 
portant psychologically as a buttress to Chinese 
morale. They help to offset the large American and 
British sales of war materials to Japan, which are 
still continuing. On December 26, for example, the 
Department of Commerce released figures showing 
that of 450,001 gross tons of American scrap iron 
exported in November, Japan took 319,943 tons. 
Western moves to aid China apparently followed 
a virtual ultimatum by Chiang Kai-shek to the 
American and British Ambassadors, in which the 
Generalissimo declared that unless Western help 
were forthcoming China would be forced to rely 
exclusively on the Soviet Union. 


Official spokesmen at Tokyo, while firmly stress- 
ing Japan’s intention of establishing a “new order” 
in eastern Asia, have failed to go beyond hints at 
possible reprisals. A lengthy statement issued by 
Foreign Minister Arita on December 19 defined the 
new order as “a relationship of mutual aid and 
coordination between Japan, Manchoukuo and 
China.” An equally important declaration on De- 
cember 22 by Premier Konoye, announcing decisions 
made by the Imperial Conference on November 20, 











stated Japan’s war aims as follows: Chinese recog- 
nition of Manchoukuo; Chinese adherence to the 
“anti-Comintern pact”; Japanese garrisons at specific 
points in China; designation of Inner Mongolia as 
“a special anti-Communist area’; and facilities for 
Japanese exploitation of Chinese resources, especially 
in North China and Inner Mongolia. The declaration 
repudiated any desire on Japan’s part for territory, 
indemnities, or an “economic monopoly” in China. 
On the other hand, it stated that China’s economic 
connections would be restricted to “those third 
powers who grasp the meaning of the new East Asia 
and are willing to act accordingly,” and threatened 
that Japan was prepared to consider “abolition of 
extraterritoriality and the rendition of foreign con- 
cessions and settlements.’ Postponement of this 
declaration is attributed to the refusal of General 
Wu Pei-fu to head a unified Chinese puppet régime, 
proclamation of which had been scheduled for early 
December. Once the new régime is formed, Japan 
expects that German and Italian recognition will 
follow automatically, thus providing a legal pretext 
for economic discrimination in favor of its Euro- 
pean allies. 


There is no evidence that such a development 
would modify British-American determination, which 
has notably increased during the past month, to de- 
fend equality of commercial opportunity for their 
nationals in China. On December 26 Ambassador 
Grew, on the basis of instructions from Washing- 
ton, informed Foreign Minister Arita that the United 
States would continue to insist on the traditional 
open door policy. In parallel conversations with Mr. 
Arita, the British Ambassador is apparently taking 
the same stand. At present Japan is in no position to 
adopt an intransigent attitude toward the Western 
democracies. Germany and Italy can render little 
direct assistance to their Japanese ally, although 
their activities on the European end of the axis con- 
stitute valuable indirect support. The burden on 
Japan’s finances entailed by the military operations 
in China shows no sign of lifting in any predictable 
future. In his customary s at the Diet’s open- 
ing session on December 26, the Emperor made an 
unprecedented appeal for approval of the 1939-1940 
budget estimates, which call for an expenditure of 
more than 8 billion yen. Japanese business men are 
apprehensive over the possibility of even more rigid 
“economic control” measures; quotations on Jap- 
anese bonds, both foreign and domestic, have sharply 
declined; and occasional leaks in the censorship point 
to a growing wave of strikes, accompanied by steady 
dissolution of Japanese trade union organizations. 
In addition, Japan has been engaged in serious con- 
troversy with the U.S.S.R. over several issues, in- 
cluding the fisheries treaty. These factors all sug- 








Page Two = 





gest that Japan’s “new order” in East Asia, which 
would involve the disappearance of China as an in- 
dependent nation, must surmount formidable ob- 
stacles before it becomes a fait accompli. 


T. A. Bisson 


NAZIS REACH OUT FOR UKRAINE 


Evidence that the Third Reich was energetically 
pursuing its campaign of eastward expansion ap- 
peared in various parts of Eastern Europe during the 
past week. The spearhead of its drive seemed to be 
Ruthenia, Czecho-Slovakia’s eastern province, where 
Nazis are encouraging agitation for the “liberation” 
of 50 million Ukrainians from Polish and Soviet 
rule. Although Magyar, Russian and Ukrainian cul- 
tural tendencies had competed fiercely in Ruthenia 
ever since the World War, the Ukrainian element, 
sponsored by the Reich, quickly gained supremacy 
after the Munich accord. M. Brody, first Premier of 
the autonomous provincial government, who was 
pro-Magyar and favored a plebiscite concerning 
Ruthenia’s future, was replaced by M. Volosin, an 
exponent of the Ukrainian independence movement. 
Since then, the new government has ostentatiously 
cooperated with Germany and has apparently en- 
couraged irredentist agitation by Ukrainian refugees 
from Poland and the Soviet Union. In Germany an 
open propaganda campaign in favor of Ukrainian 
independence was implemented by the dispatch of 
various officials to Ruthenia, and the registration of 
stateless Ukrainians on December 16 for service of 
an undisclosed nature. Although the Grand Duke 
Vladimir, pretender to the Russian throne, made a 
highly publicized Christmas visit to Berlin, he de- 
nied any intention to negotiate with Hitler regarding 
a separatist Ukrainian movement. General Denikin, 
former White Russian leader, declared in Paris on 
December 20 that he had rejected German proposals 
for a separate Ukraine several years ago, and denied 
that such a campaign would find widespread support 
among Russian exiles. 


The Polish government, which helped to partition 
Czechoslovakia, has shown growing concern over 
the probable effects of the Ukrainian campaign on 
its own 5 million Ukrainians. Representatives of the 
minority in the Polish Sejm submitted a bill for 
Ukrainian autonomy, which the speaker rejected on 
December 21. In the same month the Polish govern- 
ment sent two energetic protests to Czecho-Slovakia 
against Prague's toleration of the irredentist move- 
ment. Although the Czecho-Slovak government 
promised to investigate, it can hardly suppress a 
movement so strongly supported by the Reich. 
Simultaneously, Poland made overtures to the 
U.S.S.R. for political and economic collaboration. 


(Continued on Page 4) 








ch 


cy 
of 


ent 


the 
on. 





Washington News Letter 


a 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
Dec. 27.—It would be premature to announce a 
new government-controlled foreign loan program 
to implement a “positive” American foreign policy. 
For one thing, Congress will not convene until next 
week, and it is always dangerous to forecast any 
major trend in our foreign policy without taking 
into account the influence and temper of Congres- 
sional opinion. In the second place, the President has 
not yet indicated just how far he intends to go in 
pressing an affirmative policy. Nevertheless, enough 
has transpired during the past few weeks to convince 
well-informed Washington observers that the Ad- 
ministration not only desires to develop a more “posi- 
tive” policy but is seeking new economic and finan- 
cial powers to advance such a policy. 


New Weapons of Diplomacy. Evidence of this 
trend is found in three semi-diplomatic moves an- 
nounced during the last ten days: (1) the $25,000,- 
000 credit extended to China by the Export-Import 
Bank on December 15; (2) the $10,000,000 loan to 
the International Telephone and Telegraph Com- 
pany to extend its operations in South America, ad- 
vanced by the same agency on December 13; (3) the 
announcement by Secretary Morgenthau that the 
Treasury will continue its extension of credit to 
China against Chinese gold held in this country. 

Officially, the State Department is still maintain- 
ing discreet silence with respect to these transactions. 
Actually, however, these three steps represent the 
first definite move toward employment of new 
weapons of diplomacy for the purpose of supporting 
American interests abroad, enforcing American 
policies, and offsetting the activities of foreign states 
which discriminate against the United States. 

The immediate effect of the credits to China is to 
give material assistance to the government of Chiang 
Kai-shek at a moment when the Chinese are in des- 
perate need of war materials. The official announce- 
ment states that the credits will go to the Universal 
Trading Corporation of New York to finance ex- 
portation of “American agricultural and manufac- 
tured products to China, and the importation of 
wood oil from China.”” The credits will be guaran- 
teed by the Bank of China and mature over a period 
of five years. Under this credit prograin General 
Motors and Chrysler are supplying 500 motor trucks 
each to support a “commercial’’ transport system 


over the new road from Burma into the interior of 
China. 


The I. T. & T. loan is similar to other advances 
made by the Export-Import Bank, ostensibly to facili- 
tate American exports to South America. In this 
transaction a group of New York banks are ad- 
vancing an additional 5 million dollars, raising the 
total to 15 million. 


What makes these transactions particularly sig- 
nificant at this time is the fact that other similar 
loans, and additional economic and financial meas- 
ures, have been widely discussed in official quarters 
during recent weeks. Administration officials deny 
that they contemplate a new program of “dollar 
diplomacy.” Some of them are well aware of the 
disastrous consequences which might flow from an- 
other era of foreign lending comparable to that of 
the 1920's. And yet some of the projects now under 
consideration seem to ignore the lessons of the past 
and suggest the possibility of a new spending orgy, 
with the government itself in the rdle of financial 
agent. 


Whether the President intends to ask for wider 
powers to extend the scope of this foreign lending 
program is still uncertain. Existing agencies, how- 
ever, are hardly adequate to carry out any far-reach- 
ing program. The Export-Import Bank was presum- 
ably organized for the purpose of aiding the exports 
of American agricultural and industrial products, 
and not as a government loan agency. It was created 
by an Executive Order signed by the President on 
February 2, 1934, under the original National In- 
dustrial Recovery Act. Shortly afterwards it was in- 
corporated as a banking corporation under the laws 
of the District of Columbia, with a Board of Trustees 
composed entirely of government officials, includ- 
ing the Secretary of Commerce, an Assistant Secre- 
tary of State, an Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, 
and officers of the Reconstruction Finance Corpora- 
tion and the Department of Agriculture. The capital 
stock of 21 million dollars is held by the R.F.C. In 
continuing the functions of the R.F.C., Congress has 
authorized the continuance of the Export-Import 
Bank as an agency of the government until June 30, 
1939. During its first four years the Bank made com- 
mitments aggregating 134 million dollars; it actu- 
ally disbursed 42 million, and received payments 
amounting to 25 million. 

How far the Administration will attempt to carry 
its lending program depends in large part on the 
attitude of Congress. The R.F.C. may increase the 
capitalization of the Export-Import Bank at any time, 





SP 








operations very far without further Congressional 


authorization. It is also doubtful whether Congress 


will underwrite an aggressive “dollar diplomacy” in 
Latin America and the Far East without critical 


scrutiny. W. T. STONE 


NAZIS REACH OUT FOR UKRAINE 
(Continued from Page 2) 


On November 26 the two governments had already 
renewed their non-aggression pact of 1932; and on 
December 20 Warsaw announced that negotiations 
for a Soviet-Polish trade agreement would begin in 
January. Two days later it concluded a new trade 
agreement with Lithuania. Poland’s post-Munich 
tendency toward cooperation with the Soviet Union 
and France was strengthened by the outcome of the 
municipal elections in 52 cities on December 18. 





Page Four ——. 
but it is doubtful whether the Bank can extend its 





— 


Although the elections were fought on domestic 
issues, the socialist and democratic parties, which 
have opposed cooperation with Germany, won 639 
Seats as against the 398 held by the government 
coalition. 

The visit of Count Ciano, Italian Foreign Min. 
ister, to Budapest on December 19-22 was widely 
interpreted as an attempt by the Berlin-Rome axis 
to include Hungary in its plans by diverting Magyar 
ambitions from Ruthenia to Rumania. Mussolini, 
whose attempts to secure Ruthenia for Hungary 
were blocked by Germany, may seek satisfaction for 
his protégé in Transylvania. Such a move might also 
suit Hitler's purpose, since King Carol’s ruthless 
execution of Iron Guard leaders and his opposition 
to German expansion have provoked strong Nazi 


hostility. PAuL B. TAYLOR 





The F.D.A. Bookshelf 


Eastern Industrialization and its Effect on the West, by 
G. E. Hubbard. New York, Oxford University Press, 
1938. $7.00 
This is a revised edition of one of the most important 

studies of the industrial development of Eastern countries, 

including India. The revision has brought statistical ma- 
terial up to date and taken into account the effects which 
are likely to flow from the second Sino-Japanese war. 


Gateway to Tibet, by Robert B. Ekvall. Harrisburg, Pa., 
Christian Publications, Inc., 1938. 


A brief history of more than a generation’s missionary 
activity carried on by The Christian and Missionary Alli- 
ance in the far western reaches of Kansu province. 


China Fights Back, by Agnes Smedley. New York, Van- 

guard, 1938. $2.50 

For several months in late 1937 Agnes Smedley marched 
with units of the Eighth Route Army which were fighting 
the Japanese invaders in Shansi province. This account 
is a first-hand picture of the famous guerrilla tactics of 
the Chinese Communist forces as applied against the Jap- 
anese. It also indicates the methods whereby the Com- 
munist leaders have built up an organized popular move- 
ment of millions of Chinese peasants in North China—a 
movement which has restricted Japan’s military control 
in the northern provinces to narrow railway corridors. 


The Development of Japan, by Kenneth Scott Latourette. 
New York, Macmillan, 1938. $2.50 
A fourth edition, revised and enlarged, of a deservedly 
popular summary of Japan’s historical development. 


Creation of Rights of Sovereignty through Symbolic Acts, 
1400-1800, by Arthur S. Keller, Oliver J. Lissitzyn, and 
Frederick J. Mann. New York, Columbia University 
Press, 1938. $2.50 


An important contribution to the law governing the 
acquisition of sovereignty over territory. The authors’ 
conclusions are particularly interesting in the light of the 
American government’s recent claim to two islands in the 
Central Pacific. 


Mediterranean Cross-Currents, by Margaret Boveri. New 
York, Oxford, 1938. $5.00 


An interesting blend of tourist observation and political 
conjecture regarding a vital area in world politics. De- 
spite an attempt at objectivity in the description of the 
imperialist clash in the middle sea, the influence of Ger- 
man propaganda is here and there visible, particularly in 
the comment on Spain. 


The Canadians: The Story of a People, by George M. 

Wrong. New York, Macmillan, 1938. $3.50 

The history of Canada from the sixteenth century to 
the present, written for the general reader by a dis- 
tinguished Canadian scholar. Americans will find this an 
excellent introduction to the colorful story of a country 
whose national development parallels and affects that of 
the United States. 


Handbook of Latin American Studies, 1937, by Lewis 
Hanke (editor). Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University 
Press, 1937. $4.00 
The second annual number of a valuable annotated bib- 

liography, covering the humanities and the social sciences. 


The British Empire, by a Study Group of Members of the 
Royal Institute of International Affairs. New York, 
Oxford, 1937. $6.00 


A useful survey of individual countries and analysis of 
the major problems of the Empire. 


Industrial Price Policies and Economic Progress, by Ed- 
win G. Nourse and Horace E. Drury. Washington, 
Brookings, 1938. $2.50 


A relatively reassuring picture of the changing price 
policies of leading corporations. 


Speeches and Documents on International Affairs, 1918- 
1937, edited with an introduction by Arthur Berriedale 
Keith. New York, Oxford, 1938. 2 volumes. $1.60 
A handy, pocket-size selection of documentary material, 

distinguished by special emphasis on post-war develop- 

ments in Europe and a complete disregard of events in 

Latin America. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 10, Dscempzr 30, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Leste Bugit, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Bos 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Ai 


| 


DI 


Jan 


~- A A et PO? RS OS 


as 





