nistra- 
Great 
$e COY- | 
y these 
Canada 
ile the 
»rthern 


er, has | 
ions in | 
ite the 

Owens, | 
low to 
o bea 
isoline, 
. Total 
creased 
1 1940, 
g from 
‘ue that 
> tools, 
sed off 
he De 
pan de 
o $l; 
ucts aie 
ow the 
ssia, on 
),000 in 


olicy of 
rt trend 
nths ate 
-ontrols. 


TONE 


rues 
y a> U 
yo 
o . 


y Entered as 2nd class matter 


"AR 29 194y 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


VoL. XX, No. 23 


—_— 


Marcu 28, 1941 


YUGOSLAV PACT FACILITATES NAZI ATTACK ON GREECE 


_— the capitulation of Yugoslavia to Axis 
demands, one more obstacle to German inva- 
sion of Greece has been eliminated. The German 
troops in Bulgaria, variously estimated at between 
200,000 and 500,000 men, now appear ready to 
move down the Struma River Valley toward the 
Aegean Sea. To meet this threat the British have been 
rushing supplies and troops to Greece and making 
every diplomatic effort to obtain the assistance of 
Turkey. A new battle front is thus rapidly develop- 
ing in the Balkans. 

A LIMITED AXIS VICTORY. The pact which 
the Yugoslav Premier and Foreign Minister signed 
in Vienna on March 25 falls far short of a complete 
German victory. As forecast by advance reports, 
Yugoslavia has refused to permit Germany to occupy 
the country, or march its legions down the broad 
Vardar River Valley which affords the easiest route 
for the invasion of Greece and the most direct access 
to the key Greek port of Salonika. Belgrade’s adher- 
ence to the Axis involves primarily economic con- 
cessions. Yugoslavia is expected to give Germany 
transit facilities for the movement of war material to 
Bulgaria, and to admit technical experts who will 
speed up Yugoslavia’s output of agricultural and 
mineral products. The Germans will probably also 
require demobilization of the Yugoslav army so that 
soldiers may resume farm work. 

Germany evidently limited its demands only be- 
cause it feared that insistence on complete subjuga- 
tion might provoke armed resistance. Three Cabinet 
Ministers resigned on March 21, and popular demon- 
strations against any form of agreement with the 
Axis have been held throughout the country. The 
Serbs, who constitute the largest national group in 
Yugoslavia, remember with pride their long struggle 
for independence against Austria, and many would 
gladly take up arms once more. The Germans evi- 
dently did not wish to risk a major military cam- 


paign for the sake of establishing complete control 
over Yugoslavia. 

On the other hand, Prince Paul, the Yugoslav 
regent, and the Cabinet of Premier Dragisha Cvet- 
kovitch had no assurance that resistance might not 
provoke an immediate German invasion. Their ac- 
quiescence in the pact was apparently dictated not 
by Fascist or Nazi sympathies, but by the Conviction 
that war would end in the complete extinction of 
Yugoslavia’s hard-won independence. The possibil- 
ity of successful military resistance was small, be- 
cause the Axis had been allowed to take control of 
virtually all neighboring countries. Yugoslavia’s 
hard-pressed army could have obtained supplies and 
assistance only through Greece, and this life-line 
might have been cut by a sudden thrust of German 
troops from Bulgaria. 

Moreover, the six Croat Ministers in the Cvetko- 
vitch government, who represent the second largest 
national group in the country, were strongly in favor 
of compromising with the Axis. Vice-Premier Vladi- 
mir Matchek, the Croatian peasant leader, appar- 
ently feared that the Germans would incite the 
Croats to desert the Serbs in the event of war. The 
deep-seated antagonism which has divided Serbs and 
Croats ever since the formation of the Yugoslav 
state in 1919 was only partially bridged in August 
1939 when Prince Paul and Dr. Matchek reached an 
agreement providing for the establishment of an au- 
tonomous Croatia within Yugoslavia. This settle- 
ment, however, did not fully satisfy Croat demands 
for equality with the Serbs, so that many Croats are 
today agitating for complete independence. Their 
campaign has been directed by Dr. Anton Pavelitch, 
leader of a Croatian terrorist movement, who has 
lived in Italy for a number of years and is said to be 
heavily subsidized by the Axis. The extremists have 
undoubtedly made gains at the expense of the mod- 
erates. For this reason Dr. Matchek, although funda- 


mentally democratic and anti-totalitarian, chose to 
deal with the Axis rather than jeopardize his leader- 
ship of the Croats and the unity of Yugoslavia. 


TURKEY STANDS FIRM. Meanwhile, Nazi 
diplomacy has been working feverishly to insure the 
neutrality of Turkey during the projected Greek 
campaign. German professions of friendship, how- 
ever, appear to have had no effect in Ankara. In fact, 
signs are multiplying that the Turkish government, 
contrary to previous reports, may actively help Brit- 
ain defend Greece. During the past week the Greek, 
Turkish and British Chiefs-of-Staff are said to have 
conferred; and the British and Turkish Foreign Min- 
isters consulted once more on March 18. The very 
fact that British troops and supplies have landed in 
Greece is believed by some observers to indicate that 
Turkey has undertaken to attack or immobilize Ger- 
man troops in eastern Bulgaria. Turkish intervention 
was further facilitated on March 25 when the 
U.S.S.R. and the Ankara government exchanged 
declarations reaffirming the treaty of friendship of 
1925 and pledging themselves to neutrality if either 
were engaged in war with another power. By indi- 
rectly encouraging Turkey to resist German aggres- 
sion, the Kremlin has once more revealed its grow- 
ing anxiety over Nazi penetration in the Balkans. 
As yet there is no indication that the Soviet Union 
will itself actively oppose the German advance, al- 
though it is reported that deliveries of Russian oil to 
Germany have ceased. 

Ankara’s decision will be determined, in the final 
analysis, by the military aid Britain can furnish Greece. 


Page Two 


—— 


How many troops Britain has landed or is prepared 
to land in that country is still unknown. London hy; | 
not even confirmed the reported debarkations 
Greek ports, although the British censor has passed 
news of the movement of long convoys to Greece 
The British apparently hope that a strong defensiye | 
line can be established in northern Greece. Some 
Greek troops can perhaps be spared on the Albanian 
frontier, where heavy Italian counterattacks haye 
been successfully repelled. A comparatively smalj 
Greek and British army may be able to hold the 
mountains directly west of the Struma River Valley 
through which the Germans must come. During the 
first World War Allied forces held the Greek fron 
for more than three years, although the Germany | 
never really made a serious attempt to dislodge them | 
and always scornfully referred to the Salonika are | 
as the war’s “largest internment camp.” 
The British undoubtedly face great difficulties in | 
Greece. To transport and supply a considerable Brit 
ish force by sea will be no easy task, particularly after | 
Britain’s heavy losses in merchant shipping. If the 
Nazi army succeeds in entering Greece, it may catch | 
the British expeditionary force in a trap from which | 
escape would be impossible. The Churchill gover. | 
ment has chosen to face these risks only because it | 
realizes that British prestige throughout the Near | 
East and the Balkans might be irretrievably lost if | 
Greece were permitted to collapse. Moreover, if the | 
gamble succeeds and the Germans are halted, the 
Balkan campaign may prove the turning point in 
the war. 


' 
' 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


SPANISH COUP AT TANGIER AIDS AXIS 


General Franco’s government reiterated its belief 
in a German victory on March 16, when it ousted 
the native Moroccan ruler of Tangier and recon- 
verted his palace into a German consulate. The last 
symbols of internationalism in Tangier disappeared 
as the new Spanish-appointed Pasha took office on 
March 17, and the German flag flew in the former 
international zone for the first time since the World 
War. Although these acts represented the logical 
conclusion of Spain’s occupation and annexation of 
Tangier in June and November 1940, they marked a 
sharp divergence from Spanish policy of the last two 
months. 


For an appraisal of our defense preparations in 
outlying American bases in the Pacific, read: 


U.S. DEFENSE OUTPOSTS IN THE PACIFIC 
by A. Randle Elliott 


25¢ 


March 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


Madrid's ‘forward policy” was last demonstrated | 
on December 14, when the Spanish authorities dis | 
missed British, French and Italian employees of the | 
old international administration in Tangier and as 
sumed charge of the finance, health and public works | 
of the zone. Tangier— only 15 miles across the 
Straits from Gibraltar — had been administered for 
a number of years by an international commission set 
up in accordance with the General Act of Algeciras 
of 1906, a series of agreements concluded in 1911 
and 1912, a tripartite convention of 1923, and 4 
protocol added to the Tangier Statute in 1928. Under | 
these agreements France, Spain and Britain were the 
controlling powers at Tangier, although the 1928 
protocol accorded Italy almost equal rights in the 
government of the international zone. Germany had 
been wholly excluded on the insistence of France if 
August 1914, and under the Treaty of Versailles all 
German property in Tangier and Morocco had beei 
liquidated. Following Spain’s action of December 14, 
1940, Britain immediately reserved its rights undet 
the international conventions, and entered into nego 


—— 


tiations ' 
ief WOU 
oe the 
26 that 
duration 
nant pos 
ment acc 
matters t 
tional zo 
Gener 
recarion 
of the A 
difficult 
through 
attack G 
ticipatior 
Spanish 
oil, whic 
supplies. 
commod 
will of I 
that Ma 
ests in T 
Argentin 
while th 
cellor H 
the war 


BRIT! 
diploma 
by its rec 
The Brit 
Africa 2 
althougt 
initiative 
fortified 
March ; 
victories 
from the 
forces fc 
position: 
last thre 
all of t 
summer 
penetrat 
Ethiopia 

On M 


' tal of B: 


water pt 
for rapi 
South / 
British 1 


—_—_—_—_—_— — 


FOREIGN 
Headquarter 
Entered as : 


Bw 181 


ee ee 
_ — 


tiations with Madrid to obtain assurances that Tan- 
gier would not be fortified. After prolonged discus- 
sions, the British government announced on February 
26 that an agreement had been concluded for the 
duration of the war; Britain recognized Spain’s domi- 
nant position in Tangier, while the Spanish govern- 
ment accepted international control over commercial 
matters there and promised not to fortify the interna- 
tional zone. 


' Catch 


General Franco’s policy in Tangier reflects Spain’s 
precarious position between the conflicting interests 
of the Axis powers and Britain. Spain would find it 
dificult to resist Nazi demands for transit rights 
through its territory in case of a German decision to 
attack Gibraltar. Madrid probably owes its non-par- 
ticipation in the war to the deplorable condition of 
Spanish transportation and to its lack of food and 
oil, which would impose a further drain on German 
supplies. For its vital imports of food, fuel and other 
commodities, Spain depends on the continued good 
will of Britain and the United States. It is significant 
that Madrid’s February concessions to British inter- 
| ests in Tangier followed Britain’s permission to shi 


which | Argentine food into Spain through the blockade, 
overn | while the March 16 measures coincided with Chan- 
wuse it | cellor Hitler's statement that Germany would win 


Near 
lost if 
i 
d, the 
int in 
LDE 


strated 
es dis 
of the 
nd as 
works 
ss the 
ed for 
ion set 
gecitas 
1 1911 
and 4 
Under 
ere the 
> 1928 
in the 
ny had 
ance if 
les all 
d been 
ber 14, 
, undet 
) nego 


the war in 1941. 


_ BRITISH SUCCESSES IN AFRICA. Britain's 
| diplomatic setback at Tangier was more than offset 
| by its recent successes against Italian forces in Africa. 
| The British stopped their westward advance in North 
| Africa after capturing El Agheila on February 9, 
_ although “Free French” forces have retained the 

initiative in southern Libya, where they seized the 
| fortified oases of Kufra on March 2 and Jarabub on 
| March 21. Following closely on the Free French 
victories in the Libyan desert, “Free Belgian” troops 
from the Belgian Congo joined the British and allied 
forces for a major drive against the remaining Italian 
positions in East Africa. On that front, during the 
last three months, the British have retaken practically 
all of the outposts which Italy seized during the 
summer and fall campaigns of 1940, and have also 
penetrated deep into Italian territory in Eritrea, 
Ethiopia and Italian Somaliland. 

On March 16 Britain’s recapture of Berbera, capi- 
tal of British Somaliland, gave British forces a deep- 
water port on the Indian Ocean, and opened the way 
for rapid replenishment of men and supplies from 
South Africa, Australia and New Zealand. The 
British now control most of British Somaliland and 


Page Three 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: THE BATTLE FOR THE ATLANTIC 
Speaker: David H. Popper 
Date: Sunday, March 30 
Time: 2:15 p.m., E.S.T. 
Station: NBC, blue network 


We welcome your comments and suggestions 


all of Italian Somaliland, and are closing in on the 
heart of Ethiopia from three directions. On March 17 
the capture of Jijiga—only 50 miles from the vital 
Jibuti-Addis Ababa railroad — opened direct com- 
munications between Berbera and eastern Ethiopia, 
thus shortening British supply lines by more than 75 
per cent. The fall of Neghelli, on March 24, gave 
Britain control over an important network of strate- 
gic roads and a large water supply in southern 
Ethiopia. Most of the Italian resistance in East Africa 
is now concentrated at Cheren, Eritrea, where a de- 
cisive battle appears imminent. There the British 
have Italian troops almost surrounded, with the rail- 
road between Asmara and Massawa already severed. 
Britain has also made a strong bid for the military 
cooperation of French Somaliland, which is com- 
pletely cut off from the homeland. A diplomatic suc- 
cess for Britain in East Africa, resulting in the adher- 
ence of French Somaliland to the Free French cause 
of General de Gaulle, would hasten the collapse of 
Italian East Africa and release British troops for 
further active aid to the Greeks or service against the 


Nazis on other fronts. A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 


THE FPA TO GIVE 
DINNER IN HONOR OF 
VICE PRESIDENT WALLACE 


The Vice President of the United States will be 
the guest of honor at a dinner to be given by the 
Foreign Policy Association on Tuesday evening, 
April 8th, at The Waldorf-Astoria. Mr. Wallace will 
speak on “America’s Second Chance.” Mr. James G. 
McDonald will preside. We hope very much that 
many members of the Association and their friends 
will be able to attend. Reservations may be made at 
National Headquarters. 


Introduction to the Constitutional History of Modern 
Greece, by Nicholas Kaltchas. New York, Columbia Uni- 
versity Press, 1940. $2.00 
Written by a brilliant Greek who studied and taught in 

America, this book surveys in brief compass the consti- 

tutional history of Greece from the Revolution of 1821 to 

the end of the first World War. The approach is not legal- 
istic but dynamic, emphasizing the effect of external poli- 
cies and events in the shaping of Greece’s political system. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 23, Marcu 28, 1941. 
quarters, 22 East 38th Screet, New York, N. Y. 


Bw 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera Micneres Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


i Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Mar. 24.—With little dissent and with relatively 
slight public attention, Congress is day by day taking 
action on defense appropriation measures of un- 
precedented magnitude. By the end of this week, 
Washington sources believe, the President will re- 
ceive for signature three of the largest money bills 
in the history of the country: the $7,000,000,000 
grant for aid to Britain under the lease-lend author- 
ization; the $3,415,000,000 regular Navy Depart- 
ment Appropriation Bill for the fiscal’ year 1942— 
almost three times the size of this year’s regular 
appropriations; and the fifth of the supplementary 
national defense bills for 1941, allocating $4,174,- 
000,000 for Army and Navy needs. Total defense 
appropriations for the fiscal years 1941 and 1942 
have now reached the staggering sum of $25,182,- 
674,015, not including the seven billion for assistance 
to the British. Not all of this money can be spent 
within the allotted time. Although the monthly rate 
of expenditure for defense is steadily rising — it 
reached $592,000,000 in February — the actual out- 
lay for the fiscal year ending June 30 is not expected 
greatly to exceed $5,000,000,000. The funds hitherto 
voted, therefore, provide for production at an in- 
creasing tempo until some time in 1943. 


AMERICAN DEFENSE OBJECTIVES. As each 
of the appropriation bills is passed, the broad out- 
lines of the Army and Navy programs for total 
American defense become somewhat clearer. A few 
of the principal features may be described as follows: 


Army. Besides completing the equipment for an army of 
1,418,000 men—the strength to be reached on July 1—the 
supplementary defense bill also makes available funds to 
equip and supply 2,000,000 men in combat status—that is, 
to replace their estimated matériel losses in a military cam- 
paign. New productive facilities are now to be built suf- 
ficient to maintain an additional 2,000,000 troops under 
the same conditions. Thus the Army is making full provi- 
sion for the material needs of the 4,000,000-man force on 
which its mobilization plans have been based ever since 
1920. To sustain the air components of this force, an ulti- 
mate productive capacity of 21,000 planes a year for Army 
needs alone is envisaged under the new appropriations. 
The existing Army air program calls for completion of 
18,000 planes some time in 1942; over $1,000,000,000 is 
now added for the rapid production of 3,600 two- and four- 
motored bombers whose long range makes them pre- 
eminently suited, among other things, for Western Hemi- 
sphere defense. 


Navy. The measures under consideration notably adyang 
naval preparedness in all four fundamental components of 
fleet strength: ships, aircraft, men, and bases. The Navy 
Department Appropriation Bill devotes $1,515,000,000 fo 
progress on a shipbuilding — involving 729 vessels 
of all sizes. Relatively few of these can be completed withia 
the next year, but in 1942 and 1943 large numbers of 
destroyers, submarines, auxiliaries and coastal patrol craft | 
will be finished and added to the fighting forces. As fg 
aircraft, funds appropriated last year have been only slightly 
supplemented to assure expeditious completion of the 
Navy’s schedule. This provides for procurement of 7,12 
planes by June 30, 1942, so that the total naval aircraft 
strength by that date should closely approach the Navy 
immediate goal of 10,000, barring construction delays, 

The personnel of the Navy, moreover, is being rapidly 
increased to prepare for operation of the two-ocean fleet by 
1946. In testimony on a pending authorization bill, naval 
officials disclosed that a total of 532,500 men would ed 
be required, as compared with an actual active duty strength 
of 214,710 on March 4, 1941. The new complements will 
be inducted by easy stages. Legislative sanction for a limit 
of 300,000 is now being sought, and the strength of the 
Marine Corps, whose ability to carry out shore operations 
in conjunction with the fleet has been greatly enhanced by 
recent appropriations, is to be increased from 46,100 to at | 
least 60,000. At the same time, large-scale construction has | 
been authorized at virtually all our naval bases and outlying 
insular stations to facilitate operations against an enemy a | 
great distances from our shores. 


CONVOYS BELIEVED IMMINENT. Without! 
denying the importance of these long-range pro | 
grams, many officials in Washington are much mor 
concerned with the immediate problem raised by 
British shipping losses in the Atlantic. There have 
been hints that, as a stop-gap measure, the Navy may 
soon transfer to Britain some of its recently acquired 
auxiliary vessels and its motor torpedo boats, or even 
its oldest light cruisers, to ease somewhat the strain 
on the British merchant marine and navy. Increas 
ingly, however, the view is expressed that it would 
be more logical to permit American ships unde 
American command to safeguard transport actos 
the North Atlantic. Such a course would keep i 
American hands combatant tonnage which might 
prove highly useful in the future. When the Pres! 
dent returns from his vacation cruise, therefore, fur 
ther consideration will doubtless be given to tht 
problems of convoy or patrol in Atlantic waters. 


Davip H. Popper 


CORRECTION: The Washington News Letter of March 2! 
erroneously referred to the Adsaicieecatoe of Export Conti 
as Colonel R. L. Maxwell. In February 1941 Colonel Ma 
well was promoted to the rank of Brigadier General. 


SS 
Vou. XX 


. hem 

navy 
dominat 
For the 
tries anc 
slavs, T 
lent cha 
Europes 
war on 
long be 
reverses 
Matsuo! 
just bee 


| gauge t 


The 
regency 
Premier 
to powe 
slavia’s 
the Axi 
asm abi 
mally e 
Ministe 
mander 
Only th 
overrun 
their at 
Dr. VI; 
in the i 
leader | 
hope o: 
by Bels 
and the 
from a 
Simovit 
or the | 
March 
to stan: 
for the 


