





































Vian 
t— 
altic 
sat. 
lege 
urts 


itive 
s by 
and, 
has 

de. 
shed 
and 
the 
tion 
sian 
ners 
1 to 
it to 
lazis 
ever 
iven 
- Cif 
lian, 
- the 
nave 
nitly 
feat, 
rLiti- 
vith- 
ated 


aR 





| 


tional 


York, 





asi", #i 


29 re 
4iiam i. 5ishopEntered as 2nd class matter 
De 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 36 


JUNE 26, 1942 





—-_ 


LIBYAN SETBACK HIGHLIGHTS ALLIED SUPPLY PROBLEM 


INSTON CHURCHILL’s second war visit to 

the United States comes at a time when the 
Axis 1942 drives are approaching a peak of vigor 
and effectiveness. While surprise moves in new sec- 
tors may possibly be launched, it appears that at 
resent the enemy forces are heavily committed in a 
few well-defined areas where their strategic pur- 
poses have long been clear. The successes thus far 
won are not crucial, but are sufficiently important 
to dissipate false optimism in the United States and 
stimulate the American public to intensification of 
its war effort. 

THE GERMAN DRIVE FOR OIL. In recent 
weeks the anticipated German offensive toward the 
Caucasus, Iraq and Iran—the most accessible new 
sources of petroleum in the East—has been gradu- 
ally strengthened until it threatens the hold of Brit- 


‘ain and the Allies on these vital Middle Eastern 





? 








territories. The most spectacular Nazi gains have 
been scored in North Africa, where a campaign 
which had begun on May 26 under rather unfavor- 
able auspices for the Nazis has now been converted 
into an Axis triumph signalized by the unexpectedly 
rapid fall of Tobruk on June 21. Although the Cairo 
communiqué of June 19 stated that the British were 
‘holding strong fortified positions on the Libyan 
frontier and in the Tobruk area,” the city, situated 
on the best harbor in Libya, fell after a struggle of a 
few brief hours. In an effort to restore flagging 
Italian morale, Italian officers were allowed to re- 
ceive the British surrender; and Axis sources claimed 
the capture of 28,000 prisoners. Much valuable 
equipment has been seized and is already being used 
by the German forces. 

The news that the British Eighth Army had been 
forced back into Egypt has provoked widespread 
speculation concerning the causes of Britain’s in- 
ability to meet Field Marshal Erwin Rommel’s 
troops on even terms. From early, incomplete reports 


of the battle, it is difficult to draw definite answers 
to questions of strategy and tactics. It seems evident, 
nevertheless, that the German command proved su- 
perior to British generalship, especially in the co- 
ordination of planes, tanks and guns on the battle- 
field. With few exceptions, moreover, the Germans 
have retained a technical mastery in equipment for 
desert warfare. Thus the British, despite their claim 
of continued air superiority until the closing phases 
of the fighting in Libya, suffered from their failure 
to produce a dive-bomber, a type unrivalled in ac- 
tion against desert land forces. On the ground, 
German Mark IV medium tanks seem to have domi- 
nated the field, while the German 88-millimeter gun 
destroyed many British armored vehicles, especially 
in a deadly ambush of tanks on June 13. The medium 
American tanks, known as the General Grant and 
mounting a 75-millimeter gun, have given good 
service during the campaign but could not be re- 
placed as rapidly as they were used up. The most 
effective asset of the Nazis, in fact, seems to have 
been the organization of supply and transport. 
Indeed, there is reason to believe that the success 
of the Axis in neutralizing Malta by intensive air 
attack, so that supplies could be ferried across to 
Marshal Rommel while British Mediterranean con- 
voys were badly mauled, may be the key to the whole 
British debacle in Libya. 

RUSSIA’S DOGGED RESISTANCE. German 
progress has been much slower in Russia, where the 
center of attention has shifted from the Kharkov 
area, scene of inconclusive offensives by both sides, 
to the besieged Crimean city of Sevastopol. Appar- 
ently the Nazis have penetrated the outer defenses 
of the port, at terrific cost to themselves, and are 
attempting to wipe out this last focus of resistance 
to a drive against the Russian Caucasus. The Russian 
contention, expressed by Soviet President Mikhail 
Kalinin on June 21, is that the long campaign against 


ee 








—————_————_—m—_—_—_—_—————————==——=_ Page Two 


the Red Army has enfeebled the opposing German 
_ forces, both physically and morally, so that attacks 
will be limited in scope and power. 

Whatever the truth of this view, the months to 
come will determine whether the Nazis are to reach 
the oil necessary to sustain the dash and maneuver- 
ability of their motorized and armored forces. They 
will reveal, too, whether the supreme effort in this 
direction will be made across the Egyptian sands in 
summer desert weather, across the Straits of Kerch 
and Caucasian territory, or by air invasion of the 
Levant from Crete, where there are signs of a great 
concentration of Nazi aviation. If any or all of these 
routes are followed with full success, the Nazis may 
be able to push onward to the Persian Gulf, wiping 
out the Allies’ Middle Eastern defensive bastions 
and threatening India itself with the prospect of 
being caught in a German-Japanese vise. 

In their countermoves against these threats, the 
Allies are handicapped not only by the multiplicity 
of possible battlefronts in and near Asia Minor, but 
also by the need for containing the Japanese forces 
thrusting in several directions to strengthen Japan's 
hold on Eastern Asia. A recurrence of rather heavy 
air attacks on Port Moresby and Port Darwin has 
aroused new apprehensions regarding the security of 
Australasia, while the slow strengthening of Jap- 
anese positions at Attu and Kiska in the Aleutians 
apparently masks Japanese designs in the north. 
Meanwhile, Japan’s principal effort is now being 
made in Kiangsi province, where the Chinese are 
still clinging tenaciously to a short stretch of the 
Hangchow-Nanchang railway. Full control of the 
railway would give the Japanese an important link 
in their projected overland route to Malaya, whose 
completion would greatly ease the strain on the 
Japanese merchant marine. The situation of the 
Chungking government, cut off from all but a trickle 
of Allied assistance, is growing more precarious— 
not so much because of immediate danger to the 
capital as because of growing wart-weariness and ap- 
peasement sentiment in a nation which has lost its 
most important cities and communications arteries. 


THE TASK FOR 1942. What these Axis gains 
prove is that our foes can still utilize the advantage 
of interior lines of communication, whereas the 
Allies are grappling with the unprecedented prob- 
lems of supply in a global war. The disparity be- 
tween the manpower and resources of the contestants 
is undoubtedly diminishing as the full weight of the 
United States is thrown into the struggle. Yet the 
long-continued toll of Allied shipping taken by Axis 
submarines has so far prevented the anti-Axis forces 
from concentrating an overwhelming volume of 
men and equipment in any major theatre of land 
warfare. Hence there is no doubt that priority must 








ey 


still be given to the campaign to safeguard the se, 
lanes, especially in the Atlantic, where losses are the 
greatest. Among the most encouraging steps takey 
in this direction are the greatly augmented nays) 
patrol craft program and the introduction of Atlan, 
tic coastal convoys; the agreement, announced og 
June 19, for the use of Cuban facilities in the a. 
tempt to clear the entrance to the Gulf of Mexicg 
and the Caribbean of enemy craft; and the assistang 
of British trawlers and personnel on this side of the 
Atlantic. Axis submarines which have been sowin 
mines as well as launching torpedoes, and which 
have shelled shore targets on Vancouver Island and 
in the Pacific Northwest, will long continue to be, 
menace; but there is no intrinsic reason why that 
menace should not be reduced to manageable pro 
portions, as it was around the British Isles. 

Until this task is well on the way to success, the 
outcome of a major Anglo-American offensive or ; 
second front in Europe will be highly problematical, 
To be sure, landings may be made on the Wester 
European coast in 1942, but the transportation diff. 
culties are such that the objective of the attack seems 
likely to be diversionary rather than truly offensive 
In this event, that portion of the Allied public whid 
has most vociferously demanded the second front 
must not be dismayed if it is quickly wiped out; fo 
the success of the maneuver would depend not on 
the territory held, but on the relief accorded the 
Russian or Middle Eastern Imperial forces at a cru 
cial moment by division of the German army. 

The fateful responsibility weighing upon Prime 
Minister Churchill and President Roosevelt in theif 
conversations here has been to decide how much of the 


military strength now held inactive in Britain shall 


be thrown against the enemy, and when and wher 
the effort shall be made. In all probability, this will 
be our primary military task in 1942. It will be sup 
plemented, of course, by the dispatch of American 
air power and equipment to fronts still more widely 
separated than those on which they have already 
appeared. But essentially the Allies are still endeav 
oring to keep the enemy within restricted bound 
pending the day when, having solved their problemi 
of supply, they can launch an offensive great enough 
to bring about a decision. In the interim, it is to be 
expected that military defeats will have politica 
reverberations in the United Nations. Mr. Churchill’ 
position has undoubtedly been weakened by the re 
verses in Libya and by his reluctance to lend his 
sanction to plans for an immediate attack in West 
ern Europe. It would be unfortunate if, at this crite 
cal moment, political conflict in Britain or Russia 
dissatisfaction with the British effort were to intet 
fere with active prosecution of the war. 


Davip H. Popper 


















\ 















> $€4 
> the 
aken 
aval 


1 on 
e at. 
>xico 
‘ance 
F the 
Win 8 
hich 


be a 
that 
pro- 


, the 
Of 4 
tical, 
stern 


diff 


sive 
hich 
ront 
: for 
it On 

the 


Cru 


rime 
thei 
f the 
shall) 
here 
will 
sp 
rican 
idel| 
eady 
leav- 
unds 
lems 
ugh 
o be 
tical 
nill’s 
e re 
| his| 
V est: 
citi 
Sian 
ntet- 








ER 

















The speech delivered on June 22 by Pierre Laval, 
Chief of the Vichy government, is undoubtedly the 
most outspoken pro-German plea yet delivered by a 
French statesman. Beside declaring outright that he 
was hoping for a German victory, Laval urged his 
compatriots to go en masse to work in German fac- 
tories to produce weapons for “victory over bol- 
shevism,” and depicted such a policy as the only one 
capable of saving France. He stressed the fact that 
since Germany is at war against the Soviets, the labor 
power of the French war prisoners has’ become in- 
dispensable to it, and declared that general libera- 
tion of the prisoners could not be expected, but only 
the “transformation of their lot into that of free 
workmen.” In doing so, the French Premier de- 
stroyed the hopes held for more than two years that 
the French prisoners still captive in Germany would 
be permitted to return home. He further proceeded 
to explain the “generous” offer made by Adolf Hitler 
to the French people: to free an undefined number 
of French farmers, now prisoners in Germany, if 
and when large contingents of French industrial 
workers reach that country; and appealed to the un- 
employed French workers to “help free these men by 
agreeing to go to Germany.” 

Five days before, on June 17, Marshal Henri Pé- 
tain, speaking on the second anniversary of his ap- 
peal to Germany for an armistice, was forced to 
admit that his pleas to the French people for col- 
laboration with the Germans had met with only a 
feeble response. French men and women do not ap- 
pear to be supporting the pro-German policy of 
Vichy. Resistance to the conqueror’s plans is especial- 
ly apparent in the reluctance of French laborers, 
despite all promises, pressure and propaganda, to 
work in Germany. 


LABOR IS ADAMANT. This incapacity of the 
Vichy government to recruit large numbers of 
French workers for Germany has given rise to nu- 
merous threats and protests from the Nazis, but to no 
avail. So far, only one hundred to two hundred 
thousand French laborers have agreed to go to Ger- 
many. This total is far below the numbers needed 
to overcome the dangerous labor shortage existing in 


Page Three 


LAVAL URGES TOTAL “COLLABORATION” WITH GERMANY 





Many of our vital raw materials—rubber, tin, man- 
ganese, mica and quinine—have fallen under Axis 
domination. For an analysis of our position, read: 


REPLACEMENT OF STRATEGIC MATERIALS 
LOST IN ASIA by L. E. Frechtling 


25c 





June 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 














Germany since the opening of the Russian front, 
even taking into account the 1,250,000 French pris- 
oners still in that country, most of whom are work- 
ing in agriculture or industry. Hence on June 17 
the Germans called a labor conference in Paris, at 
which a special representative of the Fuhrer de- 
manded an “enormous effort’ from French labor in 
support of German economy “as proof of unstinted 
collaboration.” Following this demand, the Vichy 
government is reputed to have consented to the open- 
ing of German labor recruiting offices in the princi- 
pal towns of unoccupied France. It remains doubt- 
ful, however, that large numbers of French workers, 
even though unemployed, will leave the country of 
their own accord, and more rigorous measures may 
soon have to be introduced, such as, possibly, with- 
drawal of the ration cards of workmen who refuse 
jobs in Germany. 

Laborers recruited for German factories are re- 
luctant to leave their families behind. At present, 
however, many workers of Western Europe agree to 
go to Germany and live with the utmost economy 
so as to be able to send their families a substantial 
part of their wages, in the hope of staving off starva- 
tion. The German authorities have a direct interest 
in making the amount sent home as large as pos- 
sible; because, actually, the money sent by French 
workers to their kin is an outright gift from France 
to Germany. The workers’ families receive French 
currency which is simply deducted from the large 
credits France has been forced to grant Germany. 


COORDINATION OF INDUSTRY. The policy 
of “collaboration” with Germany has found greater 
response among the French employers than among 
the workers. A number of French industrialists re- 
garded the Nazis as the only force that could save 
them, and soon decided to work for Germany. 
There was, it is true, not much choice; the industrial- 
ists had either to close the factories for lack of raw 
materials, or else work for the invaders. Very soon, 
moreover, many French industrialists found them- 
selves under German financial control, and no 
longer had freedom of action in directing their en- 
terprises. Using the colossal sums put at their dis- 
posal by the capitulating French government under 
the guise of occupation costs (300 million francs a 
day), German interests bought their way into all 
important French corporations. This infiltration was 
made easy since special German commissioners had 
been appointed in each French bank to make all 
important decisions. Gradually, all French industries 
important to the Germans were coordinated with 
corresponding German corporations. 

The French Kuhlmann chemical trust, for in- 
stance, which for some time refused to accept Ger- 














man interference, was soon required by the German 
commissioner of the Banque de Paris et des Pays-Bas, 
from which the trust had received a large long-term 
loan, to repay this debt instantly, or else agree to an 
increase of capital sufficient to give a controlling 
interest in the firm to the German chemical trust, 
I. G. Farbenindustrie. The French concern had to 
yield. The new shares were “‘paid’’ out of the occu- 
pation levy. Today the French dyestuff industry, re- 
organized in a new trust called Francolor, is, for 


all practical purposes, merely a branch of the power- 
ful German trust. 


The same type of procedure has taken place in all 
industries which Nazi Germany considers useful to 
its war effort. The French automobile and aviation 
plants have been merged into one trust and are now 
working for the German Luftwaffe. A special bank, 
the Aérobanque, connected with the Bank der 
Deutschen Luftfabrt which finances all airplane pro- 
duction in Germany, has been established in Paris 
to coordinate the production of tanks, trucks, air- 
plane engines and parts for the German forces. 
It works with funds put at the disposal of Germany 
by the French government as “occupation costs.” 


Profound changes have also taken place in the 
textile industry. The famous silk weavers of Lyons 
now make parachute cloth for Germany, and the 
twenty principal French textile firms have been 


THE F.P.A. 


Ten Years, by Dwight Lee. Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1942. 

$3.75 

Subtitled “The World on the Way to War, 1930-1940,” 
this is a remarkably comprehensive and well balanced ac- 
count of Europe’s descent into the abyss. The author pre- 
sents the salient events of the decade against the back- 
ground of resurgent political and economic nationalism in 
Germany and Italy, and the ill-planned, shortsighted quest 
of the democracies for prosperity and security. 


Design for Power, by Frederick L. Schuman. New York, 

Knopf, 1942. $3.00 

The story of the breakdown of peace, in which the in- 
iquities of the Axis powers and the delinquencies of the 
democracies are set forth in a style that is incisive and 
exciting. Brilliant as a document, its interpretations are 
nevertheless colored by the author’s own values and 
prejudices. 


France on Berlin Time, by Thomas Kernan. Philadelphia, 
J. B. Lippincott, 1941. $2.75 


An American publishing executive who witnessed the 
first seven months of the German occupation of France 
describes the incredibly well-planned, efficient, and subtle 
manner in which the Nazis are systematically exploiting 
and ruining France. 


Page Four == 














ia 


F.P.A. Radio. Schedule 
Subject: SHADOW OVER THE NEAR EAST 
Speaker: William P. Maddox 
Date: Sunday, June 28 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 


For station, please consult your local newspaper 











grouped in one large organization called France. 
Rayonne. This group is under close control of the 
German artificial silk and cellulose cartels that are 
supplying the French mills with materials and fore. 
ing them to work to German specifications. By their 
total control over the distribution of coal, cellulose, 
and other raw materials, as well as over rail and 
road transportation, the Nazis are able to force most 
French industries to work for them. Those indus. 
tries which the Germans do not consider useful are 
slowly throttled by lack of supplies, or are invited 
to adapt themselves to German needs. Such a “te. 
organization” of French industry, which has al- 
ready necessitated the closing of 1,300 French fac 
tories, is doubtless part of a long-range plan to make 
German industry dominant in Europe. Today, prob- 
ably more than 75 per cent of French industrial pro- 
duction, in both the so-called free zone and occupied 
France, is destined for the German war effort. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


BOOKSHELF 


Meet the South Americans, by Carl Crow. New York, 
Harper, 1941. $3.00 


The author, who has lived many years in the Far East, 
attempts an interpretation of the Latin Americans after 
a whirlwind tour. The results make interesting reading but 
are neither accurate nor profound. 


War in the Air, by David Garnett. New York, Doubleday, 
Doran, 1941. $3.50 
A very revealing analysis by a British Air Ministry offi- 
cial of aerial warfare during the first 20 months of the 
conflict, with interesting commentaries on air strategy, and 
the relation of the air arm to the other fighting forces. 


World Economic Survey, Ninth Year, 1939-41, by the 
Economic Intelligence Service of the League of Na- 
tions. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1941. $2.50 
This survey, the ninth of a series, sustains a well- 

deserved reputation for general excellence. In a succinct 

and clear-cut manner it analyzes the impact of war on 
economic conditions throughout the world. 


I Can’t Forget, by R. J. Casey. Indianapolis, Ind., Bobbs 
Merrill, 1941. $3.00 
The title itself might well be the reader’s comment on 
this newspaper correspondent’s story of the early days of 
the war in Europe. A sprightly style and good bit of 
humor do not conceal his penetrating observations. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Secretary; Vera Micweres Dean, Editor 
N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Ss 


36, JuNE 26, 1942. 


Three Dollars a Year. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 
Frank Ross McCoy, President; Witttam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lest, 


Davy H. Popper, Associate Editor, Entered as secon 


Association, Incorporated. National 


i-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Vou. X 


| 


— 
tor 
Churc 
mate 

Natio 
fo Cul 
Germ 
latter 
June 

as CO! 
theatt 
Gene 


W) 
Unite 
sifica’ 
infor 
to ha 
espec 
in re 
But | 
taker 
are t 
ment 
of tk 
ness 
carry 
the « 
whic 
is di 
—a 
Brit 
sible 
| is ne 

til ¢ 
reck 
turn 
to ¢ 
pro 


by 











