—— 
—<$<—$—<—<—<—<—— 


the only 
{uisition 
ing re. 
the rail. 
to the 
izure of 
ine base 
nila and 
th alarm 
numbers 
1. With 
ch Indo- 
yf prime 
1€ south, 
A 
n China 
xploring 
y reason 
| by the 
Is on of 
the con- 
did not 
ese gov- 
 Ameri- 
coercive 
bservers 
surances 
1ese Con- 
Belgian 
cle of a 
rer Pact, 
e further 
confront 


OPPER 


by E. H. 


rnational 
r laymen 


by Felix 
Iniversity 


pe. Well 


Rappard, 
sw York, 


pean gov- 
ments of 
ie Soviet 


1. National 
-class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


pERIODICA! ROB) West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
DENERAL LIBRARY 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


I, No. 2 


NOVEMBER 5, 1937 


—_—-- 


LIQUIDATING THE PALESTINE MANDATE 
by David H. Popper 


This report analyzes the clash of Jewish and Arab nation- 
alist aspirations in an area strategically important for Britain; 
the success of the Jewish National Home; and the desperate 
measures which the Arabs have taken to prevent Jewish 
domination of this territory. It points out the difficulties in- 
volved in the Palestine Royal Commission partition proposal 
for a Jewish and an Arab state, and a British mandated area. 


November 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


_ 


General Library 
Inf wawrs tees a wt ab & 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, 


MAJOR OFFENSIVE LOOMS 


IN SPAIN 


. berg London’s non-intervention subcommittee 
held one more fruitless meeting last week, 
Spain’s warring factions actively pushed prepara- 
tions for what may prove to be the decisive struggle 
of the civil war. Prior to the London session on 
October 29, the way seemed paved for Britain and 
France to accept the Italo-German demand that 
belligerent rights be granted the Spanish Rebels as 
soon as “substantial progress” had been made in 
withdrawal of volunteers. The four powers were 
reported ready to go ahead on this program even 
without the U.S.S.R., which had taken a resolute 
stand against discussion of belligerent rights until 
the last foreign combatant had left Spain. But when 
the subcommittee met, the U.S.S.R. was saved from 
isolation by the unexpected insistence of Herr von 
Ribbentrop, German Ambassador to London, on the 
unanimity rule—a step which made it impossible 
for the four Western powers to proceed as long as 
the Soviet Union remained adamant. At a subsequent 


session, on November 2, the German demand was 


withdrawn and the Soviet representative, M. Maisky, 
volunteered temporarily “to step aside and refrain 
from voting” on controversial points. But the only 
tangible result of this exhibition of mutual tolerance 
was an agreement to request from both parties in 
Spain approval of the program for gradual with- 
drawal of foreign fighters. This proposal conveni- 
ently serves to spin out diplomatic discussions, while 
postponing the danger of a new deadlock. 


Meanwhile, reports of the landing at Cadiz of 
additional thousands of Italian troops suggested that 
the flow of assistance to General Franco suffered 
from no such paralysis as the non-intervention com- 
mittee. On October 31 a New York Times dispatch 
from Majorca in the Balearics revealed the presence 
there of 500 Italian and German airmen—Bruno 
Mussolini among them—as well as approximately 


one hundred planes and six submarines. A week 
earlier a French submarine chaser and two other 
vessels had been bombed by “pirate” airplanes in 
the vicinity of the islands. Following these attacks, 
Britain ordered the battle cruiser Hood to Majorca, 
while France dispatched a destroyer to the neigh- 
boring island of Minorca. 

On the peninsula, the fall of Gij6n on October 21 
had marked the virtual completion by General 
Franco of the conquest of the northern provinces. 
Thus the Insurgents have eliminated a long-time 
threat to their rear. Some 75,000 troops can now be 
released for service on other fronts. In addition, 
the economic resources of the Franco régime have 
been materially augmented by control of valuable 
coal and iron mines, and by possession in Bilbao of 
an important industrial center. 


The stubborn resistance to the Rebel advance of- 
fered by the Basques and Asturians prolonged the 
northern campaign. Now winter threatens to handi- 
cap offensive operations in various parts of the 
peninsula. Both Loyalists and Rebels are reported 
preparing major drives, but it is possible that these 
may not be launched before spring. Pressure from 
Italy and Germany for a speedy victory, however, 
may force Franco to attempt a new advance in the 
near future. 

Any new offensive by the Rebels will encounter 
far stiffer opposition than that offered in the north. 
While the Salamanca régime now controls two-thirds 
of the peninsula, the Loyalists are reported to have 
the numerical advantage in troops, claiming an 
army of at least 500,000, as compared with 350,000 
or 400,000 for Franco. The Valencia-Barcelona 
government has gone far in converting its original 
raw levies into disciplined soldiers, who operate 
under what is substantially a unified command. 


Equipment has notably improved, although Franco 


— 


= Page Two 


still holds the apparent advantage in airplanes, ar- 
tillery and possibly tanks. Moreover, he has com- 
mand of the sea and is potentially in position to shut 
off the flow of supplies to his opponents. On Oc- 
tober 28 he announced a blockade of the entire 650 
miles of eastern and southern coastline left to the 
Loyalists. 

Behind the lines, both sides have attempted with- 
in recent months to develop political unity, which 
had been menaced by the pull and haul of partisan 
rivalries. On October 21 the Salamanca government 
announced the establishment of a Fascist National 
Council, in which the Carlist monarchists and the 
fascist Phalanx were represented together with mili- 
tary leaders. Reports of friction marring the rela- 
tions of Spanish, Italian and German troops con- 
tinue in circulation. In this connection, it may be 
significant that, while the rdle of Italian soldiers 
in the fall of Santander was widely publicized, 
Spanish troops alone were reported to have effected 
the capture of Gijén. 


On the other hand, friction among the Loyalists 
has been more open and perhaps more acute. A 
factor of major importance has been the increasing 
strength of the Communists, whose numbers are re- 
ported to have grown from approximately 50,000 
at the outbreak of the revolt to some 400,000 today. 
The Communist party has skillfully exploited a pol- 
icy of moderation toward socialization of industry 
and agriculture to win the support of numerous 
small farmers and business men. The growth of the 
Communist party has coincided with a decline in 
influence of the groups demanding drastic social 
revolution—the anti-Stalinist POUM, the Anarcho- 
Syndicalists and the left-wing Socialists, led by for- 
mer Premier Largo Caballero. When the Cortes 
convened at Valencia on October 1, the majority of 
Socialist deputies aligned themselves with the Com- 
munists and Left-Republicans to support the win- 
the-war policies of the Negrin cabinet. The possi- 
bility that middle-of-the-road elements might drift 
to Valencia rather than Salamanca was suggested 
on that occasion when Miguel Maura and Manuel 
Portela Valladares, prominent leaders of two Cen- 
ter parties, resumed their seats in the Cortes. 

The transfer of the Loyalist capital from Valencia 
to Barcelona, officially consummated on October 30, 
has been interpreted variously as a confession of 
weakness and a promise of greater strength and co- 
hesion. Barcelona is less open to attack than Valen- 
cia, either from the Teruel salient by land or from 
the Balearics by sea. On the other hand, it is un- 
doubtedly hoped that this step will bring Catalonia’s 
industry as well as man power more actively into 
the conflict. The move exemplifies the intensive 
mobilization of all available resources now being 
carried out by both of Spain’s warring factions. 


———€ 
—— 


Recognizing apparently that this trend eliminates fo, 
the time being the possibility of mediation, the State 
Department declined on November 2 the Cuban jp. 
vitation of October 21 proposing a joint offer of good 
offices to the Spanish factions by all countries of the 


Western Hemisphere. CHARLEs A. THOMSON 
VAN ZEELAND RESIGNS 


The “Belgian New Deal’ of Paul Van Zeeland 
came abruptly to an end early last week, when the 
Prime Minister and his cabinet resigned amids 
charges of corruption in connection with the Na. 
tional Bank. As Van Zeeland retired to private life 
seeking to clear his reputation and restore his fail. 
ing health, King Leopold on October 31 invited 
Hubert Pierlot, Catholic Minister of Agriculture, to 
form a new cabinet. 

Dr. Van Zeeland, a non-party economist, had 0 
ganized a coalition cabinet in 1934, based on thy 
cooperation of the three major democratic parties 
Catholic, Liberal, and Socialist—in an effort to com- 
bat the depression and to head off the Rexist, ot 
Fascist, party of Léon Degrelle. Pursuing a moder. 
ate course and appealing for national unity, the 
Premier was able to restore confidence and to pro 
mote recovery, especially through devaluation of the 
belga in September 1936. The prospects of the 
Rexists were further diminished last April, when 
Van Zeeland overwhelmingly defeated Degrelle in 
a Brussels electoral contest.* As the emergeng 
which had created the coalition government gradu- 
ally passed, however, internal friction reappeared 
among the constituent elements. The several groups 
manoeuvred toward obtaining future power, and 
a few members of the cabinet, including the Social: 
ist Minister of Finance, Henri de Man, apparently 
became involved in an intrigue against the Prime 
Minister. 

The fall of the cabinet was precipitated by charge 
of financial corruption long hurled by the Rexist 
against bankers and more recently made by Gustavu 
Sap, a Flemish leader and former Finance Minister 


It was charged that Van Zeeland frequently received 
large sums from the National Bank, of which he had 
previously been Vice Governor. A special sessiot 
of Parliament, summoned on September 7 by the 
Prime Minister, promptly cleared him of any im 
proper conduct. Dr. Van Zeeland proved that o# 
leaving the Bank he had merely accepted his jus 
share of a common fund provided for the directors, 
The government decided, however, to abolish thi 
“pool” and to reduce the salaries of the bank offi 
cials, several of whom were receiving over five tim 
as much as the Premier. Public suspicion regardin 
the National Bank was accentuated by the Van 
(Continued on Page 4) 
~ ©"Belgian Fascism in Retreat,"’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, April 16, 1937. 


——— 


inates for 
the State 
Cuban in. 
r of good 
ies of the 
OMSON 


1 Zeeland 
when the 
-d amidst 
| the Na- 
‘ivate life, 
e his fail. 
»1 invited 
culture, to 


it, had or- 
ed on the 
| parties— 
rt to com- 
Rexist, or 

a moder. 
unity, the 
id to pro- 
ion of the 
ts of the 
sril, when 
egrelle in 
emergenc 
ent gradu: 
‘eappeared 
ral groups 
ower, and 
the Social: 
apparently 
the Prime 


by charge 
he Rexist 
y Gustavu 
> Minister. 


ly received 
ich he had 
ial session 
7 by the 
f any im 
>d that on 
-d_ his jus 
> directors, 
bolish thi 
bank offt 
- five tim 
_ regardin 
> Van 


ril 16, 1937. 


W. ashington News Letter 


ED 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 1—On the eve of the Brussels conference, 
Washington officials are somewhat concerned by the 
“brutal logic’ of those commentators who have 
condemned the Nine Power meeting to utter and 
complete futility. No one denies that Japan’s curt 
refusal to attend the conference has put a serious 
crimp in the program of “peaceful settlement.” But 
State Department officials are represented as feeling 
that there is still a middle ground between the dras- 
tic alternatives of punitive action to stop Japan and 
somplete acquiescence in the breakdown of all in- 
cernational morality. At any rate, the effort will be 
made to find a basis for restoring peace without 
resort to force and without sacrificing the integrity 
of China. The question is how this can be accom- 
plished without another Hoare-Laval deal, which is 
officially frowned upon in both Washington and 
London. 

The prospects of constructive action are admit- 
tedly slim, however. While Japan might conceiv- 
ably be willing to accept an armistice, its terms 
would certainly include the military occupation of 
all territory now in Japanese hands in the north, and 
the retirement of Chinese troops from the Shanghai 
area—which China could not possibly accept. On 
the other hand, while China might welcome a truce 
based on the restoration of the status guo ante, these 
terms would hardly be acceptable to Japan. There 
is no real answer to this dilemma in Washington. 
The best proposal advanced is a vague suggestion 
that methods of procedure will be found to keep the 
door Open to negotiation as long as possible. This 
may take the form of a small subcommittee, com- 
posed of Britain, France and the United States, for 


the purpose of approaching Japan and China. 


MacArthur’s retirement. Although it passed 
almost unnoticed in the American press, the prema- 
ture retirement of General Douglas MacArthur, 
military adviser to President Quezon and Field 
Marshal of the Philippine Army, represents the end 
of a long struggle waged under cover in Washing- 


| ton since the inauguration of the Philippine Com- 


monwealth. Certain officials of liberal bent, who 
are striving to make Philippine independence a real- 
ity rather than a mere form, have from the first op- 
posed the MacArthur mission. To them it is a symbol 
of American tutelage in the upbuilding of a Philip- 
pine defense system. Critics have emphasized the 
anomaly of having an American army officer in 


active service at the head of the military forces of 
a country preparing for self-government. They have 
never ceased to suspect that Filipinos were being 
conscripted and taught to bear arms to further 
American as well as Philippine aspirations in the 
Western Pacific. 

The retirement of MacArthur, the moving spirit 
behind this development, marks a victory for his op- 
ponents. It does not necessarily mean that militariza- 
tion of the Philippines under the “MacArthur plan” 
will be retarded. Whether or not his aides remain 
in the Islands, American officers and troops will be 
stationed there until 1946. The link with the War 
Department will be strengthened by Quezon’s se- 
lection of General Creed F. Cox, retired chief of 
its Bureau of Insular Affairs, as his personal adviser 
in Manila. Nevertheless, a top-rank American of- 
ficer, reported to favor a strong anti-Japanese policy, 
will no longer remain in command of the Philip- 
pine Army. 

Czech and British trade agreement negotiations 
advanced. Secretary Hull’s trade agreement machine 
continues to move steadily along its well-charted 
and unspectacular course. Last week the process of 
making an agreement with Czechoslovakia reached 
the stage of public hearings by the Committee for 
Reciprocity Information, under the new procedure 
introduced early this year. Domestic shoe manu- 
facturers, aroused by the inclusion of their product 
in the list of commodities on which tariff reductions 
may be considered, descended on Washington in 
force to present a vigorous case against any conces- 
sions to their Czech competitors. Although the Com- 
mittee tries to restrict the hearings to the presenta- 
tion of facts, interests which want protection have 
quite naturally succeeded in using them as a sound- 
ing-board for their views. Exporters and consumers 
who would benefit by tariff reductions have unfor- 
tunately contented themselves in the main with un- 
publicized written briefs. But the preponderance of 
adverse publicity is no new story in trade agreement 
negotiations, and officials therefore see no unusual 
difficulties in the way of the Czech agreement. 

Their most pressing need at the moment is an 
anodyne to assuage the bitter opposition of many 
American farmers to a program they erroneously 
believe responsible for increased agricultural im- 
ports. This will be provided, they believe, if the 
long-pending trade agreement with the British can 
be concluded in a form which will enlarge the for- 
eign market for American export crops. Here con- 


—— Page Four — FC 
_— n 
siderable progress has been made. The one vital _ investigation. It was contended that Barmat had 
obstacle which remains is found in the Ottawa agree- received large advances on ‘doubtful paper because gt | 
ments, which bind the United Kingdom to grant of political pull with Van Zeeland and Louis Franck | 
— tariff rates to the Dominions. On this Governor of the Bank. Although a recently passed 
cy point material progress has been made in recent _— retirement law compelled his resignation at the end} J, 
— a. a Canada, which was offi- of the year, Franck hastily took a leave of absence to.| —— 
FT eed 8 Cun ‘ye D~ return for defend himself. The situation was further compli- 
“s sfonde ng — aang wesean * ae tl cated by the suicide of General Etienne, reported 
Be neee aL Opportunity fo ciscuss @ kormuta fOr to have been the go-between in the Barmat negotia- 
dealing with the Ottawa preferences, and apparently ' . 
f tions, which occurred on the eve of the Van Zeeland 
narrowed the field of disagreement. It would not olalntaiditilie 
surprise well-informed Washington observers if a 8 
formal announcement on the British pact was forth- The retirement of Dr. Van Zeeland, a trained 7 
coming during the next few weeks, and if the re- | economist and liberal statesman, is widely regretted 
sults were more significant than anything yet because of its implications for Belgium and for Eu. 
achieved under the trade program. ropean appeasement in general. It is feared that} == 
VAN ZEELAND RESIGNS the Rexist party may be strengthened and Belgium's 
(Continued from Page 2) impressive recovery jeopardized by the breakdown} —— 
land incident, which occurred while loans made to of the democratic combination. P3 
Julius Barmat, a German refugee, were undergoing JAMES FREDERICK GREEN | 
vices 
Brus 
The F.P.A. Bookshelf Gert 
The Far East Comes Nearer, by Hessell Tiltman. Phila- The Poland of Pilsudski (1914-1936), by Robert Machray. and 
delphia, Lippincott, 1937. $3.00 New York, Dutton, 1937. $3.75 achie 
This survey of the political situation in Eastern Asia A valuable reference work brought up to date. Dif- Brus 
is at once timely, sprightly and reasonably well-balanced. fuse but useful. Excellent index. 
The author attempts to state the Japanese as well as the Rebuilding Trade by Tariff Bargaining, by George P. edge 
Chinese case, but falls into confusion by simultaneously Auld. New York, National Foreign Trade Council,| the 
supporting the Japanese claim to predominance in China 1936. $1.00 fashi 
and condemning the violent methods by which it is A conscientious defense of Secretary Hull’s reciprocal] . 
achieved. trade program. tons 
Spain: A Tragic Journey, by F. Theo Rogers. New York, Philippine Independence: Motives, Problems, and Prospects, Pow 
Macaulay, 1937. $2.50 by Grayson L. Kirk. New York, Farrar and Rinehart,} a sm 
An American journalist uses observations taken on 1936. $2.50 to o 
both sides of Spain’s civil struggle to argue for the cause After an analysis of their problems which is generally 
of Franco. sympathetic to the Filipinos, the author urges substitution} St! 
Single to Spain, by Keith Scott Watson. New York, E. P. of a loose protectorate status for the present goal of com-| and 
Dutton, 1937. $2.00 plete independence. comy 
The author gives an entertaining account of his Leadership in a Free Society, by T. N. Whitehead. Cam- 
experiences as soldier and journalist with the Loyalists. bridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1936. $3.00 Ez 
Cabinet Government, by W. Ivor Jennings. New York, A well-reasoned argument that technological civilization on } 
Macmillan, 1936. $5.50 can produce human satisfaction only if it develops “ of F 
A work of first importance dealing with the nature of routines” which recognize that individual liberty and col- “a 
the British government. lective action are essential to each other. | com 
Historical and Commercial Atlas of China, by Albert The New Deal: An Analysis and Appraisal, by the oe ets © 
Herrmann. Harvard-Yenching Institute, Monograph of The Economist (London). New York, Alfred A.| the 
Series, Vol. I. Cambridge, Harvard University Press, Knopf, 1937. $1.50 | dele: 
1936. $5.00 Critical study from an English point of view. : mn 
Indispensable reference work, especially for the teaching A History of Peaceful Change in the Modern World, by P 
of Chinese history. C. R. M. F. Cruttwell. New York, Oxford University | ™4n 
Soviet Money and Finance, by L. E. Hubbard. New York, Press, 1937. $3.00 | clea: 
Macmillan, 1936. $4.50 A useful analysis of ways in which peaceful changes i" | mer, 
The author unravels the mysteries of Soviet finance international conditions have been brought about in the | Soe 
with great clarity and traces the gradual adoption of past. , 
more orthodox financial practices. Sugar—A Case Study of Government Control, by John F. COOP 
Ancient Life in Mexico and Central America, by Edgar L. Dalton. New York, Macmillan, 1937. $3.00 | cept: 
Hewett. New York, Bobbs-Merrill Company, 1936. $4.00 The former head of the AAA sugar section surveys the) ond 
A popular description of the pre-historic Indian cultures government’s efforts to control the production and market- i. 
of Mexico and Guatemala. ing of this commodity. ‘ 
in © 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 2, NovemBer 5, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationd Fina 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lusi BUusELL, President; VERA MICHELES DEN, Editor. Entered as second-class mattei} cjg] 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. viev 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


