


Fe bPi\ \ 


Car, 


ncil 
ans 
ces, 
fer- 
ug- 
rkly 
uch 
--all 
ited 
eas, | 
om-| 
ing- 

this 








Dr. William yw. Bist Entered as 2nd class matter 


Saop De 
% University of tr; ch “e a 
Saws 45an wibrary 
Aff Arbor, Mich. 5 


MAR 9 1942 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 12 


JANUARY 9, 1942 





RIO CONFERENCE TO TEST GOOD NEIGHBOR POLICY 


S the United States embarks on what seems 
destined to be a long uphill struggle on the 
battlefronts of the world, its good neighbor policy so 
assiduously pursued in Latin America since 1933 
will be subjected to a supreme test. The least common 
denominator on which all the American republics 
can work together should become fully apparent at 
the conference, which will assemble in the mid- 
summer heat of Rio de Janeiro on January 15. 

The agenda for the conference, as adopted by the 
governing board of the Pan American Union, are 
sufficiently broad to provide the framework for 
thoroughgoing continental unity. In the political 
field, measures will be considered to insure ‘‘the de- 
velopment of certain common objectives and plans 
which would contribute to the reconstruction of the 
world order’’—elastic phrases clearing the way for 
any joint declarations and actions which can receive 
unanimous approval. Beyond the most general state- 
ments, most South American statesmen are maintain- 
ing a guarded silence on the concrete possibilities in 
this respect. The only specific point in the political 
program of the conference is a provision for study 
of methods to curb dangerous alien activities, includ- 
ing the exchange of information regarding the pres- 
ence in the Americas of undesirable foreign agents. 

ECONOMIC PROBLEMS ON AGENDA. On the 
other hand, it seems evident that economic arrange- 
ments of great importance will be worked out at Rio 
de Janeiro. This is logical enough, since the immedi- 
ate preoccupation of the Latin American states is to 
assure the maintenance and development of their 
foreign commerce to the extent permitted by wartime 
exigencies. In the United States, where the degree of 
self-sufficiency is great, it is not generally realized 
how acute is the pinch of inadequate imports or how 
burdensome the weight of export surpluses through- 
out South America. Even the simplest of metal ar- 
ticles, such as wire and nails, are extremely scarce 


and often the object of wild speculation. Construc- 
tion and transportation are being increasingly ham- 
pered by the shortage of iron and steel products. 
Paradoxically, this situation tends to retard rather 
than encourage the development of home industry, 
for virtually all industrial activity in this region is 
dependent on foreign raw materials or machinery. 


At the same time, the productive economy of a 
number of countries is being forced into a lopsided 
pattern by war conditions. In Chile, for example, the 
continental European market for such agricultural 
exports as apples has vanished, while the extraction 
of minerals is proceeding at an abnormal pace. Al- 
though developments of this type bring great finan- 
cial prosperity to large sectors of the community, they 
force painful readjustments upon others. Meanwhile, 
rising price levels for a wide range of articles in 
common use create additional hardships. Holding 
the economic destiny of many of these countries in 
its hands, the United States is inevitably saddled 
with responsibility for the increasing stringency de- 
veloping on the continent. Hence it is encouraging 
to note that seven of the nine advisers to Under 
Secretary of State Sumner Welles at Rio de Janeiro 
are high officials serving in important Washington 
economic agencies. The subjects to be discussed in- 
clude: 


1. Control of Latin American exports. Some type of ar- 
rangement is already in effect in all quarters to prevent the 
re-sale to outsiders of products imported from the United 
States, and our “preclusive purchase” agreements taking A 
the entire production of a number of strategic materia 
have been gradually extended in recent months. Certain 
gaps still remain, however, although their importance is 
minor in view of the difficulty of transportation across the 
Allied blockade. With the cessation of service by the Lati 
airline connecting Argentina and Brazil with Italy—a step 
accomplished by choking off the supply of aviation gasoline 
—the last direct regular link between the Axis and South 
America has gone out of existence. A steamship service from 
Spain continues, with the acquiescence of the British. 











q—=~e>=Ee=mqeeEeE=eEe=e—eE—=E==E=E=EEEEE_EEEE 





2. Increased production of strategic materials. With the 
interruption of trans-Pacific shipments of rubber, vegetable 
oils, tin and other commodities, this matter is now of re- 
doubled importance. It has the widest ramifications, for it 
involves the direct intensification of agricultural and mining 
activities, together with the whole range of attendant pro- 
duction problems. Supplies of labor must be recruited and 
maintained; provision must be made for the manufacture 
and shi t of heavy mining machinery; railroad and port 
facilities must be enlarged and modernized; and technical 

el furnished. 

3. Maintenance of adequate shipping facilities. The exist- 
ing shortage of inter-American shipping will doubtless be 
somewhat intensified during the next few months because 
of the supply problem on the Asiatic front. But the strain 
is being eased to some extent by the increasing use of for- 
eign shipping which took refuge in American ports, under a 
plan worked out by the Inter-American Financial and Eco- 
nomic Advisory Committee and accepted by the British 
government. When all these vessels have been placed in 

tion, about 546,000 gross tons of shipping will have 
been added to the available hemisphere shipping facilities. 

4. Control of alien financial and commercial activities 
deemed prejudicial to the welfare of the American republics. 
Under this head fall the measures already taken by a number 
of Latin American republics freezing the funds of Axis 
subjects. 

5. Supply of essential imports to the various countries. 
The policy of the United States has been and will in all 
P ility continue to be one of treating the civilian 
needs of the Latin republics on the same basis as the fulfill- 
ment of civilian requirements in this country. Now that we 
are actually at war and are dramatically restricting the sale 
of numerous articles of common use at home, many Latin 
Americans may accept with better grace the troublesome 
shortages to which they are being subjected. 


OBSTACLES TO COLLABORATION. The 
tangible gains achieved at Rio de Janeiro will serve 
as a gauge of the support the United States is to re- 
ceive from its South American neighbors in the try- 
ing months to come. Whatever the accomplishments 
of the conference, there should be no illusions about 
the difficulty of the task confronting this country for 
the remainder of the war. Essentially, there are two 
grounds on which we can seek the loyal cooperation 
of the Latin states: the defense of democ. 7 and 


/ 


Page Two 





— ee 
— 


the defense of these continents. It would be wrong 
to suppose that, for the greater part of the governing 
stratum in South America, the Anglo-American claim 
to be champions of democratic values has more thay 
an academic appeal. Dominant groups in the South | 
American republics have historically cherished demo. 
cratic concepts as a theoretically desirable ideal; but 
in recent years the vitality of these concepts has been 
alarmingly sapped by the dynamic advances of dic. 
tatorial régimes in both hemispheres, in contrast to 
the ineffectiveness of many democracies. On the other 
hand, the principle of hemisphere defense commands 
fairly general acceptance. The difficulty is that many 
individuals cannot perceive any immediate threat by 
the Axis to their security—a view no more surpris. 
ing than our own complacency for many months after 
Europe went to war. It is evident, moreover, that 
North American prestige has suffered a severe blow 
because of the early course of the war in the Pacific, 
which cannot be overcome by calling attention to our 
vast productive powers and grandiose war plans, but 
only by success on the field of battle. 

In these circumstances, North American policy 
must be directed toward securing the utmost degree 
of collaboration from the Latin countries, especially 
in the economic sphere. As a corollary, we must go 
to great lengths to preserve their internal stability, 
for revolutionary turmoil and international disputes, 
in this hemisphere will certainly diminish their pro- 
ductive power and permit Axis sources to start 
troublesome diversion actions. In this task, the! 
United States has the greatest of assets: almost un-| 
limited economic and financial power, and a legacy 
of good will. These must, however, be used wisely. 
In some Latin American countries there has been a 
tendency of late to regard the United States as a/| 
dispenser of money, armament, and economic favors | 
for which nothing had to be given in return. Durable | 
good-neighbor relations are impossible except on a 


foundation of reciprocity. Davin H. Popper 








UNIFIED COMMAND STRENGTHENS ALLIES IN FAR EAST 


Unification of the Allied command in Southeast 
Asia, announced from the White House on Janu- 
ary 3, marks a significant forward move in the most 
critical sector of the world struggle against the Axis- 
Japan combination. All forces in the region, sea, 
land and air, will operate under the supreme com- 





THE NETHERLANDS INDIES AT WAR 
by T. A. Bisson 


November 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports * 25c per copy 


A survey of the Netherlands Indies in wartime; its sig- 
nificance as a supplier of war materials and as a strategic 


link in the defense of Southeast Asia. 


[ForeicN Po.icy Reports are published on the 1st and 15th 
of each month. Subscription, $5 a year; to FPA members $3.] 











mand of General Archibald P. Wavell, who con- 
ducted the lightning British sweep into Libya a year | 
ago. Major General George H. Brett, chief of the 
United States Army Air Corps, will be his deputy, 
while Admiral Thomas C. Hart, commander of the 
Asiatic Fleet, will control the Far Eastern naval 
forces under General Wavell’s direction. This com- 
prehensive solution of the difficult command prob-| 
lem in Southeast Asia, where British, American and 
Dutch forces, against heavy odds, have been seek-| 








—_— 


exercis 
nese W 
The 
sector 
plans 
troops 
countr 
ward s 
streng 
Thaila 
Chien; 
Bangk 
forces 
Japan 
ern In 
gically 


| ifan i 


Indo-( 
side ¢ 
had te 
1941 

tacks. 


posse: 


reserv 
in thi 
move 
positi 
the w 

Wi 
have 
Japan 
of H 
witht 
Britis 
The | 
ently 
so fa 
in th 
third 
comn 
Yueh 
vision 
onstr 
Sugg 
the o 

TI 
of M 
Iippin 
tions 
exact 
Ame 


ing to halt Japan’s onslaught, should add greatly to oh 


the efficiency and drive of future Allied operations. 
CHINA'S ROLE. This picture of strategic coor: 

dination in the Far East was rounded out by the an- 

nouncement that Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek will 


FOREI 
Headey 


Enteres 


> 





Dut 


ree 


Lly 


ity, 
tes | 
TO- 
art 





the | 
un- | 
acy | 
ely. 
na 
5 a 
fs | 
ble 


ha 


Oo 
fp 
onl 














— Page Three = 


exercise supreme land and air command in the Chi- 
nese war theatre, including Indo-China and Thailand. 
The allocation of Indo-China and Thailand to the 


| sector commanded by Chiang Kai-shek indicates that 


plans are being laid for a flank attack by Chinese 
troops on Japan’s forces of occupation in these two 
countries. Allied preparations are being rushed for- 
ward so that an attack can be undertaken in sufficient 
strength to offer good hopes of success. A drive into 
Thailand from southeastern Burma might strike at 
Chiengmai, terminus of a railway leading down to 
Bangkok. Once in the Bangkok area, the Allied 
forces would present a serious threat to the rear of 
Japanese troops driving toward Singapore. In north- 
etn Indo-China, at Laokay, Japan possesses a strate- 
gically located air base, which must first be mastered 
if an invasion along the easiest route via the Yunnan- 
Indo-China railway is attempted. On the Yunnan 
side of the frontier, moreover, the Chinese forces 
had torn up a considerable section of the railway in 
1941 as a safeguard against threatened Japanese at- 
tacks. The invading forces, on the other hand, would 

ssess the advantage of China’s great man power 
reserves. If Allied air superiority can be established 
in this sector, there is the prospect of an effective 
move on a land front which flanks Japan’s advance 
positions in the Malayan peninsula and, indirectly, in 
the whole of Southeast Asia. 

Within China itself, the Generalissimo’s armies 
have already struck two powerful blows against the 


| Japanese since December 7. On the mainland back 
| of Hongkong, a Chinese offensive had driven to 
Y| within 20 miles of the Japanese besiegers before the 


British island fortress succumbed on Christmas Day. 
The latest Japanese drive on Changsha was appar- 
ently directed toward containing the Chinese armies 
so far as possible, in order to forestall such attacks 
in the south as occurred near Hongkong. For the 
third time, however, the Chinese forces at Changsha, 
commanded by the redoubtable General Hsueh 
Yueh, have inflicted heavy losses on the Japanese di- 
visions and broken the offensive. The strength dem- 
onstrated by China’s troops in these engagements 
suggests that they may yet prove a decisive factor in 
the outcome of the Pacific struggle. 

THE PHILIPPINE FRONT. Accepting the loss 
of Manila on January 2, General MacArthur's Phil- 
ippine-American defense forces took up new posi- 


| tions west of the capital where they continue to 


exact a heavy toll from the Japanese invaders. The 
American fortress on Corregidor Island, subjected 


to heavy bombing attacks, still dominates Manila 








F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: WHAT WILL BE DONE AT RIO? 
Speaker: David H. Popper 

Date: Sunday, January 11 

Time; 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over NBC 

For station, please consult your local newspaper 











Bay and, so long as it holds out, will prevent the 
Japanese from making full use of the harbor. The 
strong resistance in the Philippines, forcing Japan’s 
high command to land more troops and equipment 
on Luzon, has been of considerable indirect assistance 
to other fronts. In Malaya, the most vital sector of 
all, the British defenses have gradually stiffened, 
although the invading Japanese forces continue to 
drive closer to Singapore. 


Should the Philippines be effectively occupied, 
additional economic resources of considerable im- 
portance would fall into Japan’s hands. The chief 
Philippine products are agricultural, of which the 
large quantities of manila hemp, lumber, copra and 
sugar would be most useful to Japan. Gold valued 
at $39,200,000 was produced in 1940, but the pro- 
duction of base metals, valued at $6,500,000, is of 
much greater strategic significance. By far the most 
important base metal is iron ore, exports of which— 
mainly to Japan—totaled nearly 1.2 million tons in 
1940. Manganese (1940 exports, 52,000 metric 
tons), chromite (1940 exports, 186,000 metric tons), 
and copper ore have also been mined on an in- 
creasing scale since 1935 and would help to meet 
Japan's acute deficiency in these metals. With the 
Philippines, Indo-China and Thailand in its posses- 
sion, Japan would control half of Southeast Asia— 
but the poorer half. The vital commodities—petrole- 
um, tin and rubber—lie almost entirely within the 
East Indies, Malaya and Burma. T. A. BIsson 


WAR DEPARTMENT USES F.P.A. MATERIAL 


The increasing importance of F.P.A. publications 
as a channel for adult education is indicated by the 
fact that the War Department has just purchased, at 
cost, 190,000 HEADLINE Books and WorLD AFFAIRS 
PAMPHLETS, to be used as supplementary reading for 
a series of lectures on world events since 1931 which 
will be provided to nearly all Army units beginning 
January 12. The publications selected to date by the 
War Department are Why Europe Went to War; 
Shadow Over Asia; America Rearms (revised) ; War 
Atlas (revised) ; Toward a Dynamic America; The 
Struggle for World Order; and Germany at War. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 12, January 9, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frawk Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micuaies Dagan, Editor. 
Entered as 3econd-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Pest Office at New York, N. Y., umder the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


B's Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, including Foreign Policy Bulletin, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 














JAN. 9.—The declaration of solidarity by 26 anti- 
Axis states made public on January 2 and the creation 
of a single command over the Far Eastern forces of 
the “united nations” are the first results of the con- 
ferences in Washington to be revealed to the public. 
They indicate that the nations resisting Axis aggres- 
sion are making considerable progress toward the 
coordination of activity and unification of policy 
which are essential for a successful war effort. They 
also disclose, however, that there are barriers yet to 
be surmounted—lingering mutual suspicions, na- 
tional pride, distrust of other peoples and races — 
before a completely unified front is presented to the 
Axis. 

The signatories of the Washington declaration 
undertook to employ their full military or eco- 
nomic resources against the aggressors, act in co- 
operation with other “united nations,” and not 
make a separate peace with the enemy. In the pre- 
amble of the document they reaffirmed their adher- 
ence to the principles embodied in the Atlantic Char- 
ter and stated that they must defeat the Axis in order 
to defend life, liberty, independence and religious 
liberty and to “preserve human rights and justice in 
their own lands as well as in other lands.” 

It is significant that the signatories were described 
as “united nations’ —instead of Allies—probably a 
concession to political expediency. There are ele- 
ments in this and other countries who might balk 
at outright alliance with certain partners in the anti- 
Axis front, for example Russia. Moreover, the 26 
nations engaged only to “cooperate” with others in 
the war—an elastic term which remains to be defined 
by concrete plans. 


UNIFIED COMMAND. A definite step toward 
united action was made on January 3 when General 
Wavell was appointed “supreme commander”’ of all 
American, British, Dutch and Dominion forces in 
Southeast Asia. While the unification of commands 
seems somewhat belated, in view of the imminent 
danger menacing the Allied position in the Far East, 
the move represents a marked advance over Allied 
practice in the last war. Not until March 1918, when 
the German offensive on the Somme threatened to 
separate the British and French armies and drive to 
the sea, did the Allied and Associated Powers agree 
on the appointment of Marshal Foch as supreme 
commander, and then only on the western front. 
Even so, Foch had to depend more on influence and 
persuasion than authority to achieve some form of 
over-all control. “I was no more than a conductor 


of an orchestra,” he said later. 

The experience of other inter-allied agencies 
erating during 1914-18 will be useful in mapping 
out a program of cooperation in the second world 
war. It took the debacle of Caporetto to bring Allied 
statesmen to form a Supreme War Council at Ver. 
sailles in November 1917. Composed of Premiers 
of the principal powers and their military advisers 
the Council met periodically to work out plans of 
strategy. The Allied commanders, who were e. 
pected to implement them, were not bound to ac. 
cept the Council’s advice. Thus its sessions wer 
employed largely for speech-making. 

The Allied powers were more successful in co. 
ordinating activities outside the purely military field 
The Allied Maritime Transport Council controlled 
shipping the world over and is generally credited 
with performing an intricate and vital task with ; 
minimum of waste. The Allied Blockade Committe: 
directed the economic war against the Central Pow. 
ers and supervised the rationing of European neu. 
trals. The achievements of other agencies for the 
coordination of production, supply and finance wert 
somewhat less spectacular. But none of these inter 
allied committees began effective work until Decem: 
ber 1917, or after three years of war. 

From the conferences at Washington, some forn| 
of supreme war council may emerge. A single head 
of all Allied forces is not expected, as the fields of 
Operations are too widely scattered and the multi’ 
plicity of problems too great for one man to direct| 
Single commands over other theatres of war may be 
created—in the North Atlantic or the Middle East, 
for example. The establishment of technical boards 
for joint control of shipping, armament and supply 
production, economic warfare and propaganda i 


probable. 


The work of these bodies will succeed only so far 
as public opinion in the member nations permits 
If the distrust which has existed to a greater or lessei 
extent between nations now joined in a commor 
cause is not entirely dissipated, no machinery of ce 
ordination, however elaborate, can produce results 
The people of the United States, as well as of all 
the united nations, must be ready to make materia 
sacrifices in order that the forces of the other Allie 
may be armed and supplied. They must be willing! 
to see American men and American ships placed, On} 
occasion, under the orders of commanders of nation 
alities other than their own. 

Louis E. FRECHTLING 














VOL. 


NE\ 


H 


was | 
powe 
be m. 
peop 
ment 
virtu 
calle 
1942 
of ak 
plan 
prev 
whic 
the | 
now 
75,0 
airct 
194: 
8,00 
Mar 
stru 
next 


It 
reve 
out! 
30, 
in t 
defi 
bill 
nat: 
194 


I 
der 
as 
obs 


tior 


dra 





