PBRIGUDICAL ROU- 
@BRBRAL LIBRA’ 
only. OF Mich 


FOREIGN 


POR Y 


ary Entered as 2nd class matter 


AUG 28 1949 


BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Siaff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 45 


Avucust 27, 1943 


QUEBEC AND MOSCOW THROW SPOTLIGHT ON ALLIED RELATIONS 


AN air of tense expectancy, reminiscent of that 
preceding the Allied invasions of North Africa 
and Sicily, hangs over the British and American 
peoples as they await the launching of fresh attacks on 
Europe. As usual at such a moment, there is an op- 

rtunity to take inventory of inter-Allied relations, 
and developments connected with the Quebec Con- 
ference call for the entry of several new items—some 
feassuring and others disturbing. 


HEARTENING FACTORS. Among the hearten- 
ing events was the arrival at the Quebec parley on 
August 22 of China’s Foreign Minister, Dr. T. V. 
Soong, whose presence marked the first time our 
Far Eastern ally has been represented at the Roose- 
velt-Churchill wartime meetings, instead of being 
merely informed of decisions after they were made. 
This step indicates that new thrusts against Japan 
are being planned that will tie in directly with 
China’s war effort, and is also undoubtedly intended 
as a partial answer to the many Americans who feel 
China has been neglected in the past. Furthermore, 
the fact that Churchill has spent so much time in dis- 
cussing the war in the Pacific gives additional sub- 
stance to his frequent assertion that Britain will con- 
tinue full military cooperation with the United States 
and China until Japan is defeated. 

This cementing of British-American-Chinese rela- 
tions was accompanied by welcome military news 
when it was announced on August 21 that Canadi- 
ans and Americans had occupied Kiska on August 
15, thus opening up additional possibilities of aerial 
and naval assaults on Japan. From the airfield on 
Kiska—which, unlike that on Attu, is large enough 
for heavy bombers—the outlying enemy stronghold 
of Paramushiru is 938 miles away, a considerably 
shorter distance than that which American Liberators 
few on August 13 when they made their 2500-mile 
found trip from Africa to an Austrian aircraft center. 
Also included among Kiska’s assets is the best deep- 


water harbor in the Aleutians, from which Allied 
ships may operate in such a way as to oblige Japan 
to withdraw some of its naval strength from the 
South Pacific and engage in fighting on two fronts. 
Another indication of inter-Allied unity appeared 
at Quebec on August 22, when it was informally 
stated that President Roosevelt and Prime Minister 
Mackenzie King had created a joint U.S.-Canadian 
war committee to study problems arising out of their 
lend-lease and mutual aid programs. In view of the 
increased industrial output of Canadian war plants, 
it was natural that steps should be taken toward giv- 
ing recognition to Canada as an important ally. 
DISTURBING DEVELOPMENTS. These favor- 
able portents, however, have been counterbalanced 
by the doubts that arose on August 21 over the state 
of Anglo-American-Russian relations when announce- 
ment was made in Moscow that Maxim Litvinov 
had been relieved of his post as Ambassador to the 
United States. Since Litvinov’s removal came soon 
after the recall of Ambassador Ivan Maisky from Lon- 
don, this move was probably intended to register Soviet 
displeasure with the British and United States war 
record and plans for future action. It cannot be as- 
sumed that the U.S.S.R. would take a step as im- 
portant as the withdrawal of an Ambassador who 
has become a symbol in both Russia and the United 
States of Soviet-American friendship and collective 
security for light and trivial reasons. Neither can 
it be taken for granted that, as some observers com- 
placently suggest, Stalin was merely securing for 
himself the services of the best possible reporter on 
American attitudes. Litvinov has been in Russia 
since May and certainly could have continued to be 
available for consultations without being removed 
from his foreign post. The Russian move must be 
interpreted, therefore, as a warning that Anglo- 
American relations with the U.S.S.R., on which the 
future of the war and the peace so largely depend, 


need immediate attention. 

The chief differences between the Soviet Union 
and its British and American allies continue to lie 
in the degree of urgency each feels for a speedy end 
to the war and the method by which victory can be 
achieved. The Red Army’s ever-increasing losses and 
its difficulties in pushing the Germans beyond the 
Dnieper before fall rains begin emphasize the fact 
that, while the Anglo-American peoples are spared 
the miseries of actual invasion and naturally wish to 
hold their casualties to a minimum, the Russians feel 
there must be an early end to the war. In addition to 
this main obstacle in the way of good inter-Allied 
relations, there remain, of course, the divergences of 
Opinion over post-war European boundary questions 
and régimes for liberated Europe. 

The time is ripe for realistic appraisal of the 
situation by the three nations concerned. In order 


SHALL THE SENATE MODIFY ITS TREATY-MAKING POWER? 


Senator Vandenberg’s statement of August 18— 
that he looks for a series of “interim agreements,” 
subject to ratification by a majority of both houses of 
Congress, to speed the establishment of a just peace 
—coming as it does from a long-time supporter 
of isolationism, has raised hopes that a new relation 
between President and Senate in foreign affairs may 
be in the making. The Senator was speaking with 
reference to an appropriation, now likely to be 
passed, implementing a revised United Nations re- 
lief and rehabilitation convention. Such action would 
naturally signify support of the principle embodied 
in the convention. Congress has been cautious, how- 
ever, about giving any impression that such indirect 
and piecemeal ratification of the administration’s de- 
veloping plans for the peace will grow into a substi- 
tute for two-thirds concurrence in a full-dress treaty 
required by the American constitution. Indeed, Sena- 
tor Vandenberg was careful to point out that no such 
thing was contemplated, at least by him. 

THE TWO-THIRDS RULE. Under the Articles 
of Confederation, the negotiation of treaties was a 
function of Congress alone. Adoption of the present 
rule in 1789, therefore, represented a step in the di- 
rection of increased executive power. The Senate at 
that time was not intended to be a popular check on 
the executive, for it was not a popular body. Rather 
the fathers presumed that the Senators would act as 
an enlightened advisory council to the President. 
This plan never worked out, however, and in practice 
the Senate has come to represent popular control of 
professional treaty-makers. 

With the growing complexity of affairs, especially 
since Theodore Roosevelt's time, the making of ex- 
ecutive agreements, or international understandings 
less solemn and far-reaching than formal treaties, 
has grown up and spread into many fields. Just how 
far the President and his advisers may go without 


Page Two —. 


to be more clearly understood, the Soviet Uniog 
Britain and the United States must state their posi. 
tions directly rather than by implication. Since they 
recognize that their fundamental goal is the same 
it behooves them to end the ambiguities that breed 
dangerous rumors at the slightest provocation. One 
of the disturbing things about the dismissal of Lit 
vinov, in fact, is the crop of suspicions to which it 
immediately gave rise in the United States, indicat. 
ing that much of the friendship generated since 
1941, when Soviet fortunes were pooled with ours 
in a common cause, was superficial and capable of 
being easily dispelled. A great deal remains to be 
done, therefore, before an understanding essential to 
speedy victory is achieved and even more before a 
bond strong enough to outlast the present conflict 
is formed. ; 
Winirrep N. Hanser 


taking the Senate into partnership is uncertain. But, 
although James Madison proposed in 1787 that peace 
treaties be exempted from the requirement of Con. 
gressional concurrence, no responsible person today 
would seriously suggest carrying this principle % 
far. Any attempt to build the next peace by exea- 
tive agreements alone, or to by-pass Congress in the 
making of a general settlement, may be dismissed a: 
politically inconceivable. 

It is proposed, however, that the part played by 
Congress be made simpler by constitutional amend- 
ment. One widely favored proposal would make an 
ordinary majority in both houses sufficient to sustain 
a treaty. Obviously it is feared that, as in 1919, 2 
supposedly self-seeking minority may defeat the will 
of the presumptive majority. A sense of guilt over, 
the consequences of that disastrous failure outweighs 


in the minds of many the fact that in only six other 
cases in all our history has the two-thirds rule) 
wrecked a treaty where a majority of the Senate! 
favored it. Four of these were commercial treati¢s | 
and two dealt with arbitration of claims. 

PROSPECTS FOR AMENDMENT. Probably few 
would argue that retention of the present rule is 
vital, but the possible hazards in the way of formal 
amendment must not be underestimated. Despite its 
hundred and fifty odd years of growth and develop 
ment, the constitution has been so amended onl 
eleven times—if we except the Bill of Rights. One 
should not too readily assume that the American 
Senate, a body conspicuously jealous of its privileges, 
will approve a change, especially since two-thirds of 
its members must concur in any proposed amend 
ment. With a most critical election year drawin{ 
close, few events could be more lamentable than 4 
partisan controversy over constitutional reform 
which might raise and exaggerate the very issues it 
supporters seek to avoid. 


— 

It wou 
such a C 
even one 
a treaty 
support c 
of irreco 
mustered 
if the co 
It is no 
against t 


IN 


Althor 
increasec 
may beg 
own eco 
in East 
vigor. Fi 
nomic a 
capable 
economy 
United 
responsi 
the Japz 
military 
pressing 
enable t 
they are 
ditional 

LOW 
now rea 
times or 
less dan 
where i 
country’ 
—but tl 
fect, for 
trial pre 
year to 
prices | 


What 
For a 
preoc 
today. 


TH 


FOREIGN 
Headquarte 
second-class 
one month 


Ee 181 


\erican 
ileges, 
irds of 
mend: 
ra wing 
than 4 
eform, 
ues its 


—_ 
— 


It would be more to the point to inquire whether 
such a change is really necessary. Is it likely that 
even one-third of the Senate would dare to obstruct 
a treaty which had the genuine and unmistakable 
support of the American people? Could any little band 
of irreconcilables, no matter how resourceful, have 
mustered 35 votes against any kind of treaty in 1919 
if the country had been strongly opposed to them? 
It is noteworthy that no general popular outcry 
against the Senate minority followed rejection of the 


Page Three 


Versailles Treaty. It may be that the public of those 
days—or even of these—was regrettably ignorant 
of its duty to the world, but one may fairly argue 
that the cure for such ignorance, either in or out of 
Congress, lies less in overhauling the mechanism of 
government than in educating the governors. To the 
extent that we have improved on our predecessors, 
those who dread a repetition of 1919 are fighting 
ghosts. 


SHERMAN S. HAYDEN 


INFLATION UNDERMINES LIBERAL GROUPS IN CHINESE POLITICS 


Although air shipments into China have recently 
increased and operations to reopen the Burma Road 
may begin later this year, it is apparent that China's 
own economic effort must be stepped up if the war 
in East Asia is to be prosecuted with the umost 
vigor. Free China, it is true, has made significant eco- 
nomic advances during the past six years, but it is 
capable of supporting a far more powerful war 
economy with the resources at its disposal. The 
United States and Britain, of course, bear major 
responsibility for initiating new offensives against 
the Japanese and supplying Chungking with heavy 
military equipment. Yet the adjustment of China's 
pressing economic problems from within would 
enable the Chinese to intensify the kind of warfare 
they are already conducting and to prepare for ad- 
ditional campaigns. 

LOW INDUSTRIAL OUTPUT. Inflation has 
now reached a point at which prices are a hundred 
times or more above their pre-war level. This is much 
less dangerous than it would be in the United States 
where impulses are quickly transmitted from the 


| country’s nerve centers to all parts of the economy 


—but the situation is serious enough. It has the ef- 
fect, for example, of gravely interfering with indus- 
trial production which, despite small increases from 
year to year, remains very low. The excessive rise in 
ptices has been accompanied and accelerated by 


What role will Russia play in post-war Europe? 
For a survey of some of the basic questions that 
preoccupy public opinion in the United States 
today, READ— 
THE U.S.S.R. AND POST-WAR EUROPE 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


August 15 issue of FOREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members $3. 


large-scale commodity speculation, 
hoarding of goods. 

The net result is to increase the obstacles facing 
the Chinese manufacturer by raising his cost of pro- 
duction and making it h: azardous to plan future out- 
put. At the same time, since profits from hoarding 
and speculation are often much higher than returns 
from industry, the latter is starved for capital. A 
few months ago China’s leading newspaper, the 
Ta Kung Pao, summed up conditions by remarking 
that landlords frequently invest in commercial enter- 
prises and merchants often put their money into 
land, but that neither group is interested in investing 
capital in industry. Under the circumstances it is not 
surprising that in 1942 Free China produced only 
10,000 tons of steel and that even this was more than 
users of steel were in a position to buy. 

POLITICAL EFFECTS OF INFLATION. The 
repercussions of high prices are of considerable im- 
a. in the political field. Among those hardest 
hit by the rising cost of living are the intellectuals, 
largely composed of government and business em- 
ployees who receive fixed salaries. The wife of a 
bank clerk may find that a new dress will cost an 
entire month’s wages or that a suit for her husband 
will be equally expensive. More significant is the 
problem of securing food, lodging and the bare 
necessities of existence. Many large institutions— 
such as banks—have dormitories for their employees 
to live in, and the government sells rice, salt, coal 
and other essentials at nominal prices to its per- 
sonnel. But the effect of such measures is to make life 
possible rather than to produce any fundamental im- 
provement of economic conditions. 

As a result, the intellectuals are losing their po- 
litical influence—a fact of some importance to the 
United States in view of the general sympathy for 
Western ideas exhibited by members of this group. 
There is a danger that other circles less friendly to 
the democracies and to democratic ideas will come 


involving « the 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 45, Aucust 27, 1943. 
second-class matter December 2, 


One month for change of address on membership publications. 


Published weekly by the Foreign P 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FranK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lust, Secretary 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


olicy Association, Incorporated. National 
Vera MicHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 
Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ee 181 Pre 


duced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


—— OO Page Four 


to the fore. Such elements are represented, for ex- 
ample, by various bodies of “economic police,” which 
play a significant role in Chinese politics although 
they have been little heard of in the United States. 
One such force was estimated a year ago to include 
more than 150,000 men. Its supposed function was 
to aid in carrying through various economic measures, 
but it has also had the by no means incidental effect 
of helping to silence liberal persons and groups in 
Chinese life. , 

DEMOCRACY AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS. 
So far the government has combined two methods 
in dealing with hoarding and speculation: the occa- 
sional arrest and punishment of guilty individuals, 
and the issuance of various price and production 
regulations similar in form to the wartime laws of 
highly industrialized countries. The former policy is 
more important for its effects on popular feeling than 
for any permanent results; while it is highly doubt- 
ful whether the latter method can work in a country 
that is so lacking in the technical facilities for cen- 
tralized administration. If centrally directed price con- 
trol is a difficult matter in the United States where the 
_ Mecessary modern requirements are present, one can 
imagine the situation in China with its insufficiency 
of business machines, communications, transport 
lines, and trained personnel. 


It is probable that this is what Wendell Willkie 
had in mind when he remarked in One World that 
one of the “chief features” of a Chinese program 
against inflation “must be a loosening of the tight 
controls over Chinese economic life. . . .” He de- 
clared that “a greater degree of decentralization of 
financial control” and a “more widespread ownership 
of the land” would help in organizing and financing 
increased production. And he indicated that,’ while 
“the government will inevitably play an important 
part’’ in any plans along these lines, “it seemed to me 
it might be wise to cut the people in on it to a larger 
extent.” These suggestions imply that, since the ef- 
fort to control Chinese economic life from the center 
has not been markedly successful, it might be more 
appropriate to consider what can be done by the 
people acting in their communities. 

Undoubtedly, the local population, which is better 
acquainted with the facts of village existence than 
any visiting administrator can hope to be, is capable 
of serving as an extremely valuable instrument of 
central economic policy. If the Chungking govern- 
ment could enlist effective aid from the countryside, 
as the guerrilla administrations have in north China, 
hoarding and speculation might decline in strik- 
ing fashion, thus creating more favorable conditions 
for expanding production. There is, of course, no 
simple solution of the country’s economic difficulties, 


——e 
—— 


which are bound to remain great as long as China 
continues under what is essentially a blockade, but 
any amelioration will be helpful in the war effort, 
This is likely to be all the more true if improvement 
occurs as a result of increased popular participation 
in the nation’s affairs. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(This is the third in a series of four articles 
on the present crisis in China.) 


CURTIN WINS AUSTRALIAN ELECTION 


Latest returns from the general election of Av 
gust 21 assure the Labor government of Prime Min- 
ister John Curtin a clear-cut majority in the Australian 
House of Representatives. Although service men’s 
votes are not yet in, it seems certain that Labor will 
have at least 50 of the 74 seats in the new House, 
where previously it had 36, the Opposition 36, and 
Independents 2. This victory, in conjunction with 
that won in the Senate, must be considered a de- 
cisive rebuff to Opposition efforts to create a Na- 
tional government, and a vote of censure on the dis- 
unity among Opposition leaders. More important, it 
indicates wide popular support of the government's 
war administration—the basic issue before the elec- 
torate—and of the government’s plans for post-war 
reconstruction, which include a program of large- 
scale public works. But whatever the post-war im- 
plications of this election—the most decisive Labor 
victory in Australian history—both government and 
people are now concentrating all attention on win- 


ning the war. H.P.W. 


HERBERT HOOVER TO BROADCAST FOR FPA 

On Friday, September 3, the address of the Hon- 
orable Herbert Hoover, at a joint meeting of the 
Minneapolis and St. Paul Branches of the FPA and 
the University of Minnesota, will be broadcast over 


the Columbia Broadcasting System at 9:30 p.m., Cen 


tral War Time. Mr. Hoover's subject will be: “A 
New Approach to the Making of a Lasting Peace.” 


Amphibious Warfare and Combined Operations, by Lord 
Keyes. New York, Macmillan, 1943. $1.50 
Contending that such coordinating of attack under single 
command is not new in the present war Lord Keyes traces 
its history for two centuries and tells interestingly of his 
part in such operations in the First World War and 
this one. 


The Armistices of 1918, by Sir Frederick Maurice. New 
York, Oxford University Press, 1943. $2.00 
An able discussion of the 1918 armistices with Bulgaria 
and Turkey, and with Austria and Germany. Dispels some 
erroneous notions about the mistreatment of Germany, and 
adds a number of Allied documents not previously brought 
together. 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


aa” ' 


a 
Yo. XXII 
na 


MOL 


§ the 
end. 
furopean 
mer ofte: 
American 
the Germ 
in Bul gas 
ties Hitle 
defensive 
“NEW 
bellion 
scuttled : 
to Swede 
tion of 
cent anti 
tage. Acc 
‘led to t 
Premier, 
internme 
‘control of 
terror int 
have pla 
\ serves. N 
on the p; 
ities is u 
prestige 
The d 
garla—o 
) Balkans- 
Boris we 
ept Hit 
by one | 
German 
cure. B 
atch’s di 
and a p 
from the 
garia mi 


be disco 


