Entered as second- 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


1 tter December 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff - - - —- 
cab nor Subscription, Two Dollars a Year Office at New York, 


N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


al 
pb LED REIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
jo" 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XIX, No. 12 JANUARY 12, 1940 JAN 16 19. 
AMERICAN NEUTRALITY AND MARITIME RIGHTS General Librar 
by David H. Popper . 
University of Michigan 
A keen appraisal of the implications of the Neu- 
trality Act of 1939, together with complete text of Ann Arbor, Michtzan 
the Act and a brief summary of the United States’ 
experience as a neutral in the first World War. 
iam January 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 
being | = — 
aa HULL PROGRAM HITS SNAG IN ARGENTINA 
cia 
“a — athatbeagge persistent reports that no basis for embargo on imports of fresh, chilled or frozen meat. 
‘unt agreement could be found, the Department of Under the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930, the 
nited State officially announced on January 5 that nego- quarantine imposed by the Department of Agricul- 
at iN | tations for a reciprocal trade pact between the ture in 1927 on meat from areas infected by the foot 
medi United States and Argentina had broken down. On and mouth disease was extended to include every 
oo January 8 it was admitted that efforts to conclude part of a country in which the disease existed. In 
30 | 4 trade agreement with Uruguay had also been 1935 the United States and Argentina signed a sani- 
fore brought to an end. Thus, for the first time, the Hull tary convention which would have permitted im- 
fman | wade agreement program has hit a snag in Latin ports of meat from disease-free zones, but the Ameri- 
rmal | America where, at least in the number of pacts al- can Senate refused to ratify this instrument. While 
some | ready signed, it has met with the greatest degree of the matter may not be of fundamental importance 
atlier | success. The reasons for this failure, while compli- to either country from the economic point of view, 
essed | ted by many side issues, fall into three general the embargo has been deeply resented by Argentina 
ult to categories. as unfair discrimination. During the recent negotia- 
cated 1. SIMILARITY OF ECONOMIC STRUCTURE. tions any increase in the importation of even canned 
‘tons | Perhaps the most important difficulty arises from | Argentine beef—which is virtually non-competitive 
© his | the fact that the exports of both Argentina and — with domestic products — was bitterly attacked by 
te of Uruguay are made up largely of agricultural or Western cattle interests in this country. An element 
, and pastoral products similar to those of the United of irony is injected into the situation by the fact that 
t het | States. Between 75 and 85 per cent of the value of the immense Argentine meat-packing industry was 
ill be Argentine exports in recent years has consisted of developed and is still owned in large part by Amer- 
cereals, linseed, meat and wool, and the same prod- ican capital. 
keen | ucts account for about two-thirds of Uruguay's sales 2. BRITISH TRADE DRIVE IN ARGENTINA. 
Japan | abroad. Except under unusual circumstances, such Another reason for the breakdown of negotiations 
y and | 4s crop damage in this country, the United States lies in the close economic relations developed by the 
ukuo absorbs comparatively little of Argentina’s corn, United Kingdom with Argentina—as well as Uru- 
unes€ | which is that country’s largest export, and virtually guay. In addition to absorbing about 50 per cent of 
- €& | no wheat. On the other hand, the United States Argentine pastoral exports — including almost all 
t for provides a relatively good market—fluctuating in chilled beef and frozen mutton shipments—Britain 
‘ment } accordance with business conditions—for Argentine offers an important market for corn, wheat and cot- 
nven | linseed, carpet wool, hides and skins, quebracho ex- ton. Total British purchases from Argentina nor- 
unaty | tract and canned beef. Nevertheless, in the 15 years mally exceed sales to that country by a wide margin. 
t the} ended with 1938, Argentina’s imports from the Pressure to reduce this margin was applied by 
been | United States exceeded its exports to this country Britain as early as 1933 through the Roca Agreement, 
ected by almost a half billion dollars. which provided, in essence, that the proceeds of Ar- 
fora} The greatest single stumbling-block to improve- gentine sales in the United Kingdom should be 
it afe | ment in United States-Argentine commercial rela- utilized for remittances to Britain after deduction of 
ON tions over the past few years has been the American a “reasonable sum’ for payment of debt service due 


SS 


—_———— 


elsewhere. Now that the British are faced with 
heavy wartime requirements of foodstuffs and other 
taw materials, they appear to be more anxious than 
ever to canalize the flow of funds between the two 
countries. It is reported that, while negotiations were 
still in progress between the United States and Ar- 
gentina, the latter concluded a new agreement with 
the United Kingdom whereby sterling paid for Ar- 
gentine products could be spent only in Britain. Such 
a “blocked sterling” arrangement is an important 
instrument for the United Kingdom in its drive to 
maintain export markets during the war. But these 
trading methods, whether welcomed by Argentina 
or forced upon it by Britain, further limited the scope 
of concessions which the Argentine might make to 
the United States. 


3. OPPOSITION TO HULL PROGRAM. Under 
the circumstances, negotiation of an effective recip- 
rocal trade agreement would have been difficult at 
best. These difficulties were multiplied by the grow- 
ing clamor of opponents of the trade agreements 
program in the United States. The fire of the oppo- 
sition had already been drawn by the reduction in 
duty on petroleum embodied in the Venezuelan pact, 
and by the possibility of a decrease in the excise 
tax on copper—later abandoned—in connection with 
the proposed agreement with Chile. The Argentine 
agreement was opposed in this country as a challenge 
to agricultural interests, despite the fact that con- 
cessions with respect to wheat and fresh meat were 
not considered. With these major commodities 
eliminated, the United States was prepared to offer 
reduced duties on linseed, canned beef, certain grades 


Page Two 


ee 
——— 


of wool, hides and skins, and various other products 
but the volume of imports in some cases was to haye 
been limited by quotas. While these concessions faile 
to satisfy Argentina, owing largely to the quota pm. 
visions, they would have been sufficient to provi 
opponents of the Hull program with new ammunj. 
tion had the agreement materialized. 


Suspension of negotiations with Argentina and 
Uruguay, where approximately the same set of cip. 
cumstances prevailed, is unquestionably a temporary 
setback to the broad program of inter-American eq. 
nomic cooperation which has been accelerated by the 
war in Europe. At the same time, in breaking of 
negotiations which were opposed by agricultural 
interests, the Administration has demonstrated thar | 
it has no intention of jeopardizing American pro 
ducers. While this attitude may aid the Administra. | 
tion in its fight to preserve the reciprocal trade agree. | 
ments program, its inability or reluctance to face the 
issue involved in the importation of competitive 
products casts doubt on the efficacy of future nego. 
tiations with Latin American countries. If the United 
States is to expand its markets in Latin Ameria 
while Europe is at war, purchases of Latin American | 
commodities must be increased, and this increase 
cannot come about solely in non-competitive prod. 
ucts. The breakdown of negotiations with Argentina 
epitomizes the inter-American trade problem, partic 
ularly since Argentina—given the dollar exchange—| 
offers the greatest potential market in Latin Americ: 
for United States products. 


HowarD J. TRUEBLOOD 


HORE-BELISHA DISMISSAL PRECIPITATES CRISIS | 


| ment ir 


The resignation of Leslie Hore-Belisha as Minister 
of War has precipitated the first political crisis in 
Great Britain since the outbreak of the conflict. The 
brief official announcement on January 5, following 
a formal exchange of letters between Mr. Hore- 
Belisha and the Prime Minister, took the country by 
surprise, and led many members of Parliament of all 
parties to demand a secret session before the regu- 
lar meeting scheduled for January 16. The British 
press, almost unanimously critical of the Cabinet 
change, suggested a variety of reasons without bring- 
ing any confirmation from official sources. 


Mr. Hore-Belisha, who took office as War Minister 
in 1937, had effected a number of far-reaching re- 
forms throughout the Army. His most dramatic 
action, which probably aroused hostility in mili- 
tary quarters, was to promote Viscount Gort as Chief 
of the Imperial General Staff over the heads of 
several scores of senior officers, and to reduce the 
average age of the high command from 63 to 52. 
The dynamic young War Minister further attempted 


to broaden the base of recruitment for officers, in an 
effort to democratize an officer corps traditionally 
restricted to the aristocracy and the upper midde| 
class. Better pay and living conditions for the ranks| 
were also among the improvements he sponsored. 


It is possible, moreover, that Mr. Hore-Belisha’ 
resignation was caused by basic differences over ques 
tions of strategy and organization. The War Mis 
ister frequently consulted Captain B. H. Liddel 
Hart, formerly military correspondent of the London| 
Times and noted military historian, who advocated 
that Britain maintain a small, mobile army for purely 
defense tactics on the Western front, and use it 
naval and air power—as well as expeditionary forcts| 
on other fronts—for offensive: purposes. The te 
sponsible officers in the field—Lord Gort, now) 
Commander-in-Chief of the British Expeditionay 
Force, and General Sir Edmond Ironside, Chief of) 
the General Staff—probably opposed Hore-Belisha’ 
desire for campaigns of diversion in the Baltic of 
Balkans as being very dangerous at this time. 


— 
It seem 
Cabinet © 
Hore-Beli 
few brilli 
The War 
the milit 
Minister, 
Chamber 
air force: 
year. If r 
contemp! 
Ministry 
ments—| 
Lord of 
Mr. Cha 
Cabinet 
charged 
crisis, aS 
her of a 
the old, 
counted 
To m 
editors, 
alarmin; 
lowed. * 
son and 
landow! 
of Trac 
great d 
had be 
by Mr. 
markab 


| traffic f 


questio 
of Lord 


istry O 
criticize 
propag: 
has she 
the Bri 
amal ga 
equally 
of cont 

ENL 
Crisis £ 
isted s 
debate 
democ: 
civiliar 
merits 
Minist 
a Wa 


FOREIG! 
Headqua: 
Entered : 


= 


—} = Page Three 
ducts} It seems equally likely, however, that issues of have heavy administrative duties, rather than the 
5 have Cabinet organization played a part in the ousting of five-man War Cabinet that Lloyd George used. suc- 
failey| Hore-Belisha, who was recognized as one of the cessfully in the last years of the World War to 
a pro.) few brilliant, aggressive personalities in the Cabinet. formulate broad, executive policy. Civilian supervi- 
tovie| The War Minister is known to have desired to place _sion of military and naval operations will probably 
1munj.| the military air force—now controlled by the Air again create many controversies, for the politician 

Minister, Sir Kingsley Wood, a close friend of Mr. and the experts frequently tend to disagree over 
all Chamberlain—under the War Office, as the naval issues of policy—as in the case of the Dardanelles 

Md} air forces were placed under Admiralty control last and the Somme campaigns in the last war. 

of cir. year. If reports are correct that the Prime Minister is Mr. Chamberlain’s government, dominated by a 
Poraty! contemplating the institution of a single defense small group of elder statesmen whose policies in re- 
1 €0-} Ministry to direct the army, air and naval depart- cent years contributed in large measure to the coun- 
by the ments—possibly under Winston Churchill, now First try’s diplomatic and military weakness before the 
Ng of} ford of the Admiralty—it is more than likely that outbreak of war, has as yet evoked no great en- 
altura Mr. Chamberlain acted primarily in the interests of thusiasm in Britain, the Dominions, or neutral coun- 
d that) Cabinet harmony. Several British mewspapers tries. The speeches of Foreign Secretary Halifax 
peo | charged that social prejudice played a part in the and the British Ambassador at Washington, Lord 
nustta: | crisis, as Mr. Hore-Belisha was the only Jewish mem- —_—_ Lothian, however, have presented the British cause 
agree) ber of a Cabinet top-heavy with representatives of effectively. In a forceful and persuasive address be- 
ice the} the old, established families, but this charge was dis- fore the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations on 
este} counted by well-informed observers. January 4, Lord Lothian declared that the issue be- 
a To many members of Parliament and newspaper tween Britain and Germany was largely one of sea 
rm editors, the resignation of Mr. Hore-Belisha was less power, and that both joint control of sea power by 
ervey alarming than the new appointments which fol- the democracies and the establishment of a European 
i lowed. The War Office was given to Oliver Stanley, federation would be necessary at the end of this 
“pro | 9 and heir of Lord Derby—one of Britain’s largest war. It is even possible that if Britain is seriously 
hs ed landowners and wealthiest peers—who at the Board challenged by Germany next spring, the Prime Min- 
| of Trade and in other offices had not shown any ister—like Herbert Asquith in 1915—may have to 
part: great distinction. In 1934, moreover, Mr. Stanley give way to men of greater knowledge of foreign 
inge— | had been replaced at the Ministry of Transport affairs, like Lord Halifax, or of greater administra- 
meri) by Mr. Hore-Belisha, who immediately made re- tive ability, like Winston Churchill. 

matkable progress in solving Britain’s perennial JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 
oop | ‘affic problem. Mr. Stanley’s appointment was also 

questioned on the ground that his wife is a daughter The Defence of Britain, by Liddell Hart. New York, Ran- 

of Lord Londonderry, a leading advocate of appease- dom House, 1939. $3.50 aan Pan : 

ment in the so-called “Cliveden set.” At the Min- yr ".Tatogie defensive now being followed by the French 
,inan| istry of Information, Lord Macmillan — severely and British forces, and a general survey of British de- 
ionally| criticized for Britain’s mistakes in censorship and fense problems. 
niddle| propaganda—was replaced by Sir John Reith, who Sea Power and the Next War, by Lt.-Commander A. C. 
ranks} bas shown outstanding administrative ability at both Bell. New York, Longmans, Green, 1938. $2.00 
red, | the British Broadcasting Corporation and the newly, 2zteresting observations on ths nature of modern naval 
Lisha’s amalgamated Imperial Airways, but who has been and Italy. 
ques | equally notorious for his dislike of publicity and lack Germany Puts the Clock Back, by Edgar Ansel Mowrer. 
. Me of contact with the general public. 9g edition. New York, Morrow & Company, 1939. 
iddel| . END OF PARTY TRUCE? The Hore-Belisha ~ 


ondon 


crisis may possibly end the party truce that has ex- 


A bitter attack on Nazi Germany from the pen of a 
veteran American journalist who believes Hitler has 


ocated| isted since September and provoke a Parliamentary eine the vy tH “clear to Attila, to the destroyer, 
; the Scourge of God.” 
purely debate on one of the most difficult questions of AS 
=| d : ) h lati £ mili d World Economy in Transition, by Eugene Staley. New 
use @| “emocratic sovernment—the re ation of military an York, Council on Foreign Relations, 1939. $3.00 
forces} civilian officials during wartime—and on the general A thoughtful and well-written analysis of current eco- 
he re} Merits of Mr. Chamberlain’s government. The Prime nomic problems. Professor Staley argues effectively that we 
Mini i woes 1: are in a no-man’s-land between capitalism and collectivism, 
, N08 ister has been widely criticized for establishing receiving. the benefite of neither amd. the dia 
ionayy} 4 War Cabinet of nine members, most of whom of both, and that we must seek a workable compromise. 
vief of 
lisha's FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 12, January 12, 1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
rae Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotuHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera Micuetes Dgan, Editor. 
Itic of Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
Pe 181 F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JAN. 8.—In a manner befitting the Chief Executive 
of a neutral power, President Roosevelt in his mes- 
sage to Congress struck a more restrained and cau- 
tious note on foreign affairs than he might have 
done in times of peace. When he opened the first 
session of the Seventy-Sixth Congress a year ago, 
Mr. Roosevelt delivered an unexpectedly strong at- 
tack on the forces opposed to religion, democracy 
and international good faith. He called for “methods 
short of war, but stronger and more effective than 
mere words” to bring home the sentiments of the 
American people to aggressor governments. But last 
week he voiced the “hope and expectation” of the 
country that the United States would not become 
involved in “military participation in the war.” 


It would seem, nevertheless, that the Administra- 
tion has not materially altered the policy stated in 
January 1939. The President laid great stress on 
the futility of “ostrich” isolation and emphasized the 
effect of events abroad on American economic ac- 
tivity and cultural stability. The domination of con- 
centrated military force in the rest of the world, he 
declared, would be a matter of deepest concern to 
Americans and their children. Other nations admit- 
tedly have the right to choose their own forms of 
government, but the United States can never be 
wholly safe at home unless these governments are 
“predicated on certain freedoms which we think 
are essential everywhere.” 


‘To Washington the message foreshadows, for the 
present, a continuation of the “pro-Ally neutrality” 
within the framework of the neutrality law which 
has characterized the Executive's activities since the 
outbreak of the war. Mr. Roosevelt’s words have 
strengthened the general conviction that Washing- 
ton will not inaugurate peace negotiations in the 
immediate future. For if the fundamental issue of 
the war is the question whether dynamic govern- 
ments based on military force shall successfully 
destroy the values of the democratic system, then a 
patched-up compromise peace would, at best, pro- 
vide only a temporary armistice. In the opinion of 
unofficial observers, Administration policy rests more 
strongly than ever on the thesis that American se- 
curity is bound up with an Anglo-French victory, 
and that limited assistance to the Allies today con- 
stitutes our strongest insurance against a single- 
handed struggle with anti-democratic forces in the 
future. This assumption will doubtless be chal- 


lenged by isolationist forces during the current ses. 
sion of Congress. 


CONGRESS AND DEFENSE APPROPRIA. 
TIONS. The controversy over foreign policy is dj. 
rectly related to Congressional action on the up. 
precedented peace-time military appropriations pro. 
posed by the President in his budget message of 
January 4. For the fiscal year 1941 Mr. Roosevelt 
asked more than $1.8 billion in regular appropria- 
tions for the Army and Navy. In addition, he called 
for extraordinary expenditures estimated at $460, 
000,000 for emergency requirements in 1940 and 
1941—although the distinction between ordinary and 


emergency military measures is often far from clear, 
except for purely fiscal purposes. While the military 
schedule in the budget is conservative in relation to | 
some earlier forecasts, it represents an increase of 
almost $500,000,000 over the sum approved for | 
defense during the last regular session of Congress, | 
Since the expanded defense totals contrast sharply | 
with economies in other sections of the budget, and 

since Mr. Roosevelt—in an election year—has re- | 
quested new taxes to cover the emergency military | 

expenditures, Congress will not fail to subject the | 
Army and Navy demands to rigid scrutiny. 


The Congressional spotlight has already been | 
turned on the Navy's new program for 77 additional | 
combat vessels, 30 auxiliary ships and 3,000 ait | 
planes, on which the House Naval Affairs Com 
mittee began hearings on January 8. Authorization 
of the new program will entail an increase of 25 per, 
cent in naval tonnage except for capital ships, and | 
100 per cent in the number of naval planes. As a 
move to expedite its construction plans, the Nav | 
Department on January 3 recommended that the 
President be given sweeping wartime powers in 4 
national emergency to commandeer factories, ships | 
and materials, and to cancel or modify existing con- 
tracts. Apparently the Executive could utilize this| 
authority under the “limited emergency” proclama: | 
tion of September 8, 1939. Because of the adverse’ 
reaction in Congressional circles, however, the bill 
will not be pushed for the present. 


Discussion of these proposals will raise the ques 
tion whether the United States is confronted with 4 
situation demanding that war measures be taken | 
now to preserve its security. The Congressional 
answer to that question depends in part on the ex 
tent to which the views of the President on foreign 
policy are shared in committee rooms on Capitol hill 

Davip H. PopPER 


FORE 


An interpre 


FC 


Vor. XIX, 
E—7"—"e 


tem 


The Decem 


NE 


—_—--— 


ge 
as th 


sterS a V 


| been stub 


1931. Ac 
known ti 
amy to ¢ 
The form 
into the 


Lance 
caange if 


isto be a 
being fol 
sovernme 
practical 
Asia” is 
Japanese 
statesmar 
ciliating 
THE | 
aspect of 
merely h: 
mainly o 
tions. I 
handling 
ing to th 
to Warrat 


| itary Can 


cupation 
vict r1es 
Inaugura 
pet cove 
favorabl 
nation tl 
Empero: 
tablishm 
anese pe 
Nomura 
factory 1 


