










with 
Brit- 
far- 


ever 
orld 


The 
sug: 


for: 
onal 


peak 
LLES 





—1945 


FERIGUICAL xe 
AL LIBRARYy 
V, OF Mica: 


es 7945 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


veneral Library 
University of Michigan 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Yo. XXIV, No. 19 


FEBRUARY 238, 1945 





ha bold evolution of American strategy in the 
Pacific, following closely on the European settle- 
ment achieved at Yalta, constitutes a powerful blow 
to the hopes of Japanese leaders. It is clear that great 
problems are posed for the enemy by the American 
ndings on Corregidor, the two-day attack on the 
Tokyo-Yokohama area by more than 1,200 carrier 
planes, and the invasion of Iwo Island, 750 miles 
fom Tokyo. These moves point toward early conclu- 
sion of the key phases of the Philippine campaign, ac- 
eleration of the air and sea war against the Jap- 
inese homeland and the execution of new landings 
inthe Bonin Islands, or on Formosa and the China 
mast. But what is not so deeply appreciated in 
American comment is the political effect of the 
Crimea meeting on Tokyo's expectations that it can 
tither avoid military defeat or escape the full conse- 





quences of losing the war. 

YALTA DAMPENS HOPES OF JAPANESE. 
The Japanese government and a section of the Jap- 
aese people have been aware for some time of 
their inability to avert military disaster if the Pacific 
Allies remain determined to fight through to the 
end. These Japanese presumably have put their faith 
in the possibility that political divisions among the 
Allies—divisions which Japan would encourage by 
fighting as hard as it could to prolong the war— 
might finally bring an offer of negotiated peace or 
permit a revival of Japanese militarism after appar- 
mt defeat. The results achieved at Yalta indicate 
that these are dim prospects for, instead of disin- 
itgrating as the destruction of Nazism approaches, 
the Big Three coalition is growing firmer, and prob- 
lms that could not be handled adequately hereto- 
lore are being dealt with more concretely and satis- 
lictorily. Far from seeking to play a lone hand in 
settling the future of Europe, each of the major 
Allies is showing an ever greater tendency toward 
mpromise and the pooling of responsibility. 





YALTA PLANS FOR GERMANY OFFER MODEL FOR HANDLING JAPAN 


All this must be extremely discouraging to the 


militarists in Tokyo, for if the Big Three can main- 
tain and develop a harmonious approach to the de- 
cisive problem of Germany, it is very unlikely that 
their unity will later founder on the issues raised by 
the future of Japan. Moreover, the specific terms 
laid down for Germany at Yalta may well cause 
apprehension to Premier Koiso and his government, 
since these terms are also capable of being applied 
to a defeated Japan. 

There is, for example, no reason why the victori- 
ous powers in Asia should not follow some of the 
main clauses of the Crimea declaration and agree to 
disarm and disband all Japanese armed forces; break 
up for all time the Japanese General Staff; remove 
or destroy all Japanese military equipment; and 
eliminate or control all Japanese industry that could 
be used for military production. They could also 
pledge to bring all war criminals to just and swift 
punishment; exact reparation in kind for the de- 
struction wrought by the Japanese; wipe out mili- 
taristic laws, organizations and institutions; and 
remove all fascist and militarist influences from 
public office and from the cultural and economic 
life of the Japanese people. At the same time, with 
the Japanese as with the Germans, it should not be 
our purpose to destroy the people, but rather to offer 
them “hope for a decent life... and a place... in 
the comity of nations.” 

In view of the implications of Yalta, Japan may 
make intensive efforts to find a way out by offering 
attractive terms for a negotiated peace. It was against 
such stratagems that Admiral William F. Halsey, Jr., 
warned on February 19, when he declared that to 
stop short of unconditional surrender would be “the 
greatest crime in the history of our country.” 

WILL RUSSIA FIGHT JAPAN? The only Far 
Eastern implication of the Yalta agreement that has 
drawn much comment is the possibility that it fore- 



































a i 








shadows a deterioration in Soviet-Japanese relations. 
Speculation has revolved about the fact that the 
forthcoming conference on world security organiza- 
tion will open in San Francisco on April 25, the day 
on which the Soviet-Japanese neutrality pact went 
into effect in 1941. Under the terms of the treaty, 
it is to expire in 1946 at the end of a 5-year period, 
if denounced by either party one year before that 
time. But if neither signatory takes action, the pact 
is to be extended for an additional five years to 
1951. It is therefore clear that April 25 would be a 
particularly appropriate date for launching security 
discussions if the Russians had previously denounced 
the treaty. 

On the other hand, while the Japanese are un- 
doubtedly worried about the time and place of the 
San Francisco conference, these circumstances are ex- 
plicable without reference to Soviet-Japanese rela- 
tions, and it would be unfortunate if the American 
public risked unnecessary disillusionment by taking 
it for granted that the Russians intend to denounce 
the treaty. In recent years the Japanese have been 
extremely anxious to maintain good relations with 
Moscow, even going to the extent last March of 
surrendering their oil and coal concessions in Soviet- 
owned north Sakhalin 26 years before the expira- 
tion date of the leases. It is possible that the Jap- 
anese might now be willing to go still further in 
settling outstanding differences between themselves 


= Page Two 








—— 


and Moscow, for the sake of winning an extensigg 
of the treaty. 


NEUTRALITY PACT NOT MAIN ISSsug 
Actually the neutrality pact is not the decisive facto, 
in Soviet-Japanese relations, since the Russians up. 
doubtedly could find ample ground for entering the 
war at a later date without now denouncing th 
treaty, and if they do denounce the treaty, stijj 
would not be obliged to fight Japan. In fact, jf 
special emphasis is to be placed on the treaty, they 
it should be noted that the agreement is scheduled 
in any event, to remain in force one year after de 
nunciation. 


For some time it has seemed probable that the 
Russians will ultimately enter the Far Eastern wa 
and make a significant contribution to Japan’s de 
feat. There are two factors behind this conclusiog: 
the interest of the U.S.S.R. in playing a major part 
in the Far Eastern peace settlement, and the groy. 
ing unity of the powers on European questions, 
Both factors are indispensable, since Soviet self. 
interest could express itself in other ways than joint 
military action against Japan if harmony of the Big 
Three were not present. But precisely the opposite is 
the case, and the Yalta decisions seem to go a long 
way toward establishing the European political pre 
requisites for fruitful cooperation in the Far East 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


ARAB LEADERS DRAFT PLANS FOR MIDDLE EAST UNITY 


The conference on Arab federation, which opened 
on February 14 in Cairo, raises issues of ultimate 
interest to the United States. The conferees from 
Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Transjordan, Syria and 
the Lebanon have met at a time when the long- 
standing dispute on termination of the French Man- 
date over Syria and the Lebanon has arisen again as 
an indication of the unsettled status of all the Arab 
nations: This controversy appears momentarily of 
more interest than the question of Palestine. But 
both issues and the economic problems of the region 
suggest that the program now under consideration 
in Cairo will remain an idle hope unless the great 
powers which are vitally interested in the region give 
their sanction and aid to Arab unity. 

FRANCO-SYRIAN IMPASSE. Thus far, the ba- 
sis for Arab unity has been largely negative as is 
apparent today in the resistance to revival of French 
influence in the affairs of Syria and the Lebanon. 
The war has witnessed a weakening of French pow- 
er in the Middle East, although here as elsewhere 
General de Gaulle is pressing for maximum par- 
ticipation in areas where French influence was for- 
merly important. The present dispute arises out of 
the promises made in 1941, when Anglo-French 
forces entered the French Mandates to prevent their 


passing into the hands of Vichy followers. At that 
time the independence of the two states was pro 
claimed, and in 1943 General Catroux signed an 
agreement whereby all functions exercised by France, 
along with the staffs, were to be handed over to the 
Lebanese and Syrian governments. 

During 1944, when a final treaty was to be nego 
tiated with respect to remaining French interests 
in Syria and Lebanon, the Council of Ministers & 
France decided unanimously to reject the request 
that France relinquish control of special secutily 
troops in those two countries. The French desitt 
a treaty with the two states, patterned on the trea 
ties Britain has with Egypt and Iraq. On February? 
Georges Bidault, French Minister of Foreign Af 
fairs, reaffirmed France’s determination to pie 
serve its authority in this territory. But the issue tt 
mains in dispute, for the two Arab states refuse ® 
conclude any final treaty until they feel fully pos 
sessed of their sovereign rights. 

BIG THREE IN THE MIDDLE EAST. It now 4p 
pears that Britain will support French demands in tht 
Middle East, although it is clear that French powé 
there will be greatly reduced. While France's it 
fluence in the region has waned, the war has 
vealed that both the United States and Russia it 








be a 
DOW 
cant 
this 


at a 


FORE 
Headc 
seconc 
one 





FRFS Sr 8 


till 


Dart 
OW: 
ns, 
elf. 
oint 
Big 


ong 


pre 


‘ast, 


that 
pro- 


nce, 


ego 


rests 
$ i 
uest 
arity 
esife 
trea- 
ry 2 


pre 
e re 
e 0 


N ap 


owe! 
$ if 
$ ft 
a it 








————— 
—— 





tend to share with Britain in the development of 
the Arab world. The fact that the oil resources of 
the area constitute the world’s second largest 

troleum reserves inevitably foreshadows the fu- 
ture interest of all the industrial nations. During 
1944 Russian influence especially has grown mark- 
edly in the Middle East. In addition to the desire 
for oil concessions in northern Iran, the Soviet 
Union has recently established diplomatic relations 
with several of the Arab states. It is now reported 
that Russia may send to Teheran a Minister whose 
position would be comparable to that of Sir Edward 
Grigg, the British Minister Resident in the Middle 
Fast. Also, with the resurgence of the Orthodox 
Church in Russia, links with various Orthodox 
groups in the Middle East have been reestablished 
by the Soviet Union. 

Britain’s political and strategic interests, the oil 
resources and the Palestinian question remain of 
crucial importance in the region. Aside from India, 
Palestine presents the thorniest imperial problem 
Britain now faces. Yet, in view of the intransigence 
of both the Zionists and Arabs, most Britishers find 
it impossible to think in terms of relinquishing the 
Palestinian Mandate at any time in the near future, 
although British initiative is needed here as in India 
to resolve the deadlock. 


The Arab states have looked to Britain for as- 
sistance in the movement toward federation, which 
they feel should flow from the encouragement 
originally given by Foreign Secretary Eden in 1943 
to the cause of Arab unity. They believe that such 
unity would present an obstacle to further Zionist 
influence. But today there are some indications that 
the activities of Zionist groups in the United States 
have been publicized in the Middle East to counteract 
Arab desires. This tends to suggest to the Arab 
world that British and American interests in this 
fegion are in conflict, although heretofore it has ap- 
peared that Britain would willingly accept American 
entrance into Middle Eastern affairs. 


TREND TOWARD ARAB UNITY. The vexed 
question of Palestine can probably be solved only in 
terms of a broader arrangement for the whole area. 
Moreover since the Middle East must surely prove to 
be a testing place of the future relations of the great 
powers, the present Arab conversations are signifi- 
cant beyond the fact that plans for Arab unity up to 
this point have been largely negative in outlook. 
The agenda of the present Cairo talks was drafted 
at a preliminary meeting held last September-Octo- 





Page Three eaten. 





—_—_—_—_— 


ber in Alexandria. That conference went further 
than was expected when the representatives of 
Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, Transjordan and Iraq signed 
a protocol providing for the formation of a League 
of Arab States with a council designed to coordinate 
their political programs, safeguard their inde- 
pendence, and study problems affecting the general 
interests of the Arab countries. Six commissions were 
set up by the preparatory conference to outline plans 
for closer cooperation in economic and financial 
affairs, agriculture, trade, industrial development 
and communications. The Alexandrian protocol 
also recorded the desire that Britain maintain its 
engagement to restrict further Jewish immigration 
to Palestine and advance that country’s independence. 

During 1944 another Middle East conference 
dealt with financial problems of the area and recom- 
mended adjustments in price policies and the mod- 
ernization of tax machinery in the various states. A 
Middle East Council on Agriculture has already been 
established, under the auspices of the Middle East 
Supply Center, in order to work out joint projects 
for irrigation, research, technical development and 
education. Although it does not appear feasible to 
prolong the existence of the MESC, services similar 
to those it has performed, as well as the expert 
technical staff organized by the Center, could be 
utilized in further regional planning and de- 
velopment. However, many of these plans, which 
would entail loans for capital development from 
both Britain and the United States, can be realized 
only if the great powers are prepared to foster the 
agricultural and industrial development of the 
Middle East on a regional basis. 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 





Escape via Berlin, by José Antonio de Aguirre. New York, 
Macmillan, 1944. $3.00 
The young President of the Basque Republic tells the 
gripping story of his escape from Franco and the Nazis— 
a story brightened by Dr. Aguirre’s unflagging courage 
and the unstinted kindness of Latin American diplomats 
in Belgium and Germany who facilitated his escape. 


Racial State, the German Nationalities Policy in the Pro- 
tectorate of Bohemia-Moravia, by Gerhard Jacoby. New 
York, Institute of Jewish Affairs of the American Jew- 
ish Congress and World Jewish Congress, 1944. $8.00 
Valuable as a detailed case study of the application of 

Nazi policy in the first non-German country annexed. 


Great Soldiers of World War II, by Major H. A. De 
Weerd. New York, W. W. Norton, 1944. $8.75 
The associate editor of the Infantry Journal makes an 


interesting attempt to assess the more prominent military 
figures as the war progresses. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 19, Fasruary 23, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Sereet, New York 16, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; VERA Micua_zs Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


ont month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Bw 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


i 
i 
} 
if j 
{ 
i 
i 
{ iit 
he 
i 
if 
We 
f 
hits 
ty ' 
if 
4 
a 
y ; 








' Washington News Letter 














WILL MEXICO CITY CONFERENCE COPE WITH ARGENTINE ISSUE? 


Although the conference agenda ignores the issue, 
the most exciting question before the extraordinary 
meeting of delegates of the United and Associated 
Nations of the Americas, which assembled on Feb- 
ruaty 21 in Mexico City, is whether the United 
States can frustrate any attempt to divide the hemi- 
sphere on the Argentine question. The United States 
recalled Ambassador Norman Armour from Buenos 
Aires on June 27, 1944. It has steadfastly refused 
to consider resumption of diplomatic relations with 
a government which, as President Roosevelt said 
on September 29, has repudiated “solemn inter- 
American obligations” and has fostered “the growth 
of Nazi-fascist influence and the increasing appli- 
cation of Nazi-fascist methods in . . . this hemi- 
sphere.” 

PROBLEM OF ARGENTINA’S NEIGHBORS. 
The key to whether Argentine hopes are raised or 
dashed at Mexico City will lie in the action taken 
by representatives of governments in its neighbor 
countries. The principal goal of Argentine foreign 
policy has been the development of a bloc of satel- 
lites, while the United States goal in Western Hemi- 
sphere affairs has been the directly opposite one 
of maintaining inter-American solidarity—a solidar- 
ity that would isolate Argentina if its government 
continued on the course that inspired President 
Roosevelt's criticism, or would include it if its gov- 
ernment honestly opposed the Axis and reflected 
a democratic spirit. The United States delegation, 
at its departure for the meeting, was confident that 
it could present to Argentina's neighbors a program 
of inter-American mutual assistance in economic and 
political matters which would weaken Argentine 
influence in South America. 

As the opening day of the conference drew near 
Argentine policy wavered uncertainly, but no con- 
ciliatory gestures toward the United States, the 
United Nations and the inter-American concept have 
been made. On January 29 the government issued a 
decree of “national security,” which not only pro- 
vides imprisonment for citizens or foreigners who 
engage in espionage, attempt the overthrow of the 
régime, disturb public order, or in any way damage 
the military effectiveness of the armed forces, but 
also threatens foreign correspondents with imprison- 
ment if convicted of transmitting damaging reports 
to other countries. On February 16, however, as a 
result of repeated protests by diplomatic missions in 


FOR VICTORY ° 


Argentina, two papers friendly to the Nazis, Cabildy 
and E/ Pampero, were suppressed on the ground 
that they used imported newsprint. Although some 
hopeful observers see signs of a growing revoly. 
tionary underground, evidence that it is a factor of 
importance is lacking. 

MEXICO CITY AND SAN FRANCISCO. The 
Mexico City conference will seek to bring the inter. 
American concept into the projected world system 
of collective security to be established at the United 
Nations conference opening in San Francisco og 
April 25. Some American Republics are prepared to 
submit proposals which have little chance of accept: 
ance. Chile, for example, wants four seats set aside 
for the American Republics on the Security Coun. 
cil. Mexico would amend the Dumbarton Oaks pro- 
vision for five permanent seats and provide for six 
semi-permanent seats, to be reassigned every eight 
years. Brazil, which resigned from the League of 
Nations in 1926 because its demand for a permanent 
seat on the Council was not granted, would add a 
sixth permanent seat to the Security Council of 
the new world organization—which perhaps it 
would like to occupy. The desire of Latin Americans 
for some form of security in the post-war period is 
so great, however, that they will probably accept 
whatever world security system is proposed at Sas 
Francisco, provided adequate guarantees are given 
to the small nations. 

The bargaining power of the United States at San 
Francisco would of course be enhanced if supported 
by the American Republics. In the Western Hemi 
sphere today, only Venezuela and Argentina have 
not declared war on the Axis and cannot qualify foi 
invitations to San Francisco. Chile, Ecuador, Para 
guay, Peru and Uruguay signed the Declaration of 
the United Nations as belligerents this month, an¢ 
Venezuela has pursued policies friendly to the 
United Nations cause. Argentina, too, took the first 
step toward war when on February 17 it protested 
vigorously to the German Foreign Office against the 
denial of safe conduct to a number of Argentine 
diplomats who are now in Sweden awaiting repatria 
tion. It is speculative whether a declaration of wat 
would alter Argentina’s standing in the American 
comity of nations, unless it were accompanied by a1 
affirmation of the principle of continental solidarity 
and genuine evidence of the adoption of more demo 
cratic internal policies. BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





191 


VoL. 


I 

C 
man} 
necti 
Big ° 
sion 
the | 
spect 
form 
great 


> lishn 


land, 
Big T 
to be 

BE 
parti 
quest 
in Le 
devis 
grou} 
visior 
over 
of Fi 
to Br 
the is 

In 
Allie 
prov. 
whic 
Chur 
to P 
on F 
and | 





