






































FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 2 snaf 
Entered as second- 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff class matter December 
DICAL —" Subscription, Two Dollars a Year Pas pr pc Bsn 
AL LIBKA N. Y., under the act 
end-fy. OF MICHROREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3, 1879. 
tain 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
ina, 
aid} You, XVII, No. 16 Fesruary 11, 1938 
ench} ~~ 
ssed] TRENDS OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE ceneral Librers 
yund by Winthrop W. Case 
pan, Mr. Case, associate editor of The Annalist, maintains University of Michigan 
ad- that the future of international trade is bound up with 
fol- the trend toward economic nationalism, and doubts Ann Arbor, Mich. 
‘ash- whether there can be any thoroughgoing retreat from 
d to present nationalistic policies. 
im-| February 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents a copy 
ider-f 
oa .. 
rec} HITLER PURGE HITS ARMY AND FOREIGN OFFICE 
esent 
EN the new but bloodless “purge” carried out on Relations between the army and the National So- 
as February 4, Chancellor Adolf Hitler apparently cialist party have long been strained. Leaders of the 
strengthened Nazi control over the army and the Reichswehr have steadfastly resisted Nazi penetra- 
conduct of German foreign policy. At one stroke he tion of the army. Intent on keeping the Reichswehr 
accepted the resignations of Field Marshal von a “non-political” force, they have sought to incul- 
New, Blomberg, the War Minister, and General von cate in army recruits an ideology distinct from that 
Fritsch, Commander-in-Chief of the army, and as- of National Socialism and more closely resembling 
four} sumed “personal and direct command over all the that of pre-war imperial Germany. Recruited largely 
i armed forces.” At the same time he relieved Baron from the ranks of the landed gentry, these officers 
other} Constantin von Neurath of the post of Foreign Min- opposed Nazi attempts to democratize the Reichs- 
nsor-} ister and appointed as his successor a confirmed Nazi, wehr by introducing a spirit of “comradeship” in 
anied} Joachim von Ribbentrop, until then Ambassador to _ the ranks and tried to thwart Rosenberg’s efforts 
London. to establish “courses in Nazi ideology’ in the 
wv, This sweeping reorganization of the government army. Traditionally pillars of the Evangelical 
tures} WAS precipitated by a clash between Hitler and army Church, they did not conceal their opposition to 
after} chieftains over von Blomberg’s marriage with the Hitler's religious policies. Not only did they con- 
: a youthful daughter of a humble carpenter. A group spicuously encourage church attendance in the 
an of conservative generals led by von Fritsch sought Reichswehr, but they expressed sympathy with Pastor 
anited} to utilize this marriage, which violated the traditions Martin Nieméller whose trial on charges of sedition 
of “caste and class’’ so deeply entrenched in the began on February 7. Undoubtedly army officers also 
Bal.) upper ranks of the Reichswehr, as an opportunity to supported the sharp protest against Nazi paganism 
oust von Blomberg, regarded as far too amenable issued last November by the chaplains of the armed 
y evett to Hitler's personal influence. While the army was forces. In this protest the chaplains pointedly warned 
how} Song enough to compel the retirement of the War the authorities that the growing breach between Na- 
me an) Minister, it could not prevent Hitler from effecting tional Socialism and Christianity threatened to un- 
litieal} a complete shake-up of the army command and thus — dermine the national unity of the German people. 
a re-establishing his personal authority. Not only was Army leaders, moreover, have consistently advo- 
prove} VON Fritsch dismissed, but 13 army and air force cated a more conservative course in foreign and eco- 
generals were retired and new commands were given nomic policies. While unable to prevent the military 
York | © 22 generals and 8 colonels. The Fuehrer’s new re-occupation of the Rhineland in March 1936, they 
functions were deputed largely to General Wilhelm have been partially successful in restricting the 
y, ad} Keitel, a man without pronounced political views, scope of German intervention in Spain. The army 
wcifis™) who will have actual charge of the War Ministry is also known to be critical of the tripartite anti- 
and supervise “the unitary preparations for national communist pact which, in its opinion, has alienated 
an defense in all fields.” In the army the chief com- Britain and definitely estranged the Soviet Union 
; metey ™4Nd has been given to General Walther von whose army leaders have until recently maintained 
Brauchitsch, hitherto Commander of the First Army cordial relations with Reichswehr generals. Nor does 
Corps. the Reichswehr attach much value to Italy as a politi- 







































——— 














cal and military ally. Although the army is un- 
doubtedly grateful to Hitler for having reconstituted 
the Reich’s armed strength, it has criticized the pace 
of military and economic rearmament as being much 
too rapid. Most of the higher army officers sympa- 
thized with Schacht in his conviction that the Reich’s 
economic and financial resources were being strained 
to such an extent that the country was actually less 
prepared for war than before. 


The dramatic changes ordered by Hitler probably 
provide no definite settlement of this conflict be- 
tween the Reichswehr and the National Socialist 
state. With the displacement of von Fritsch and 
von Neurath—following that of Dr. Schacht— 
the influence of the conservatives has undoubtedly 
diminished. Yet Nazi influence has not completely 
triumphed in either the army or the Foreign Office. 
It is significant that Hitler was unable to appoint as 
War Minister such prominent Nazi leaders as Gen- 
eral Goring, who received the rank of Field Marshal 
as a consolation prize, or Heinrich Himmler, chief 
of the SS and secret police. While Herr von Ribben- 
trop, an enthusiastic proponent of the anti-Comin- 
tern pact, was given control of the Foreign Office, 
his discretion will be fettered by a special cabinet 
council on foreign policy headed by Baron von 
Neurath, and including, among others, Goring, Hess, 
Goebbels, Admiral Raeder and Generals Keitel and 
von Brauchitsch. Under these circumstances any 
dramatic change in foreign policy seems unlikely. 

JOHN C. DEWILDE 


PIRACY RECURS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN 


Resumption of “piracy’’ in the Mediterranean, 
together with intensified bombing of Loyalist cities, 
has—for the first time since the Nyon agreement of 
last September—served to make the Spanish conflict 
a threat to European peace. These new develop- 
ments appear to be a direct consequence of Franco's 
failure to drive the government troops from Teruel. 
Despite a new drive north of the city which by 
February 7 had reportedly won 400 square miles and 
made secure the supply road to Saragossa, the In- 
surgent leader still faced stalemate in the field and 
seems intent on forcing a Loyalist collapse behind 
the lines, through depletion of supplies by “block- 
ade” and destruction of morale by ruthless air 


bombardments. 


The sinking by the Insurgents of two British mer- 
chant vessels galvanized London into action. The 
freighter Endymion was hit, presumably by a tor- 
pedo, on January 31. The attack, which occurred 
near Cartagena, cost eleven lives, including those of 
three British subjects. Five days later bombs from 
Italian planes carrying the Insurgent insignia sent 
to the bottom the Alcira, bound for Barcelona with 
a cargo of coal. The presence on both ships of ob- 


Page Two 








I 














servers for the Non-Intervention Committee testified 
to the fact that their cargoes were free of contraband, 
Following loss of the first ship, London ordered its 
anti-piracy patrol restored at once to its full strength, 
and on February 2 requested France and Italy, its 
partners in the patrol, to adopt a policy of sinking at 
sight any submarine found submerged in the patrol 
area. France promptly accepted, and, after some de. 
lay, Italy also promised support for the new anti- 
pitacy program. On February 7 Britain warned 
Franco that swift retaliation would follow any fur. 
ther submarine or airplane attacks on shipping. 


Meanwhile, a French initiative on February 1 to 
pledge both Spanish factions against air bombard. 








ment of civilian populations had won British sup- 
port. The Loyalist authorities welcomed the move; in 
fact, Minister of Defense Indalecio Prieto had previ- 
ously offered to cease reprisals in the form of bomb- 
ing open towns, if General Franco would stop his air 
raids. But on February 6 Rebel leaders at Salamanca 
declared that bombings of Barcelona would continue 
unless all war industries were removed from the 
Loyalist capital. As an alternative, they proposed 


evacuation from the city of the entire civilian popu- , 


lation by an international commission. On January 
15 and 16 Insurgent air raids on Barcelona were 
directed chiefly at factories and were declared to 
have caused small loss of life. But in subsequent 
attacks, particularly the bombings of January 19 
and 30, the civilian population not only of Barcelona 
but of Valencia and other towns suffered severely; 
and hundreds of casualties were reported among 
“women, children and old men.” Insurgent bomb- 
ings from their Majorca base had been facilitated by 
the concentration of Loyalist air strength at Teruel. 
Following the bombing of Lerida by the Insurgents 
in November, when 225 were listed as killed, the 
Loyalists initiated a policy of reprisals, launching a 
series of air attacks, of which the most recent were 
the bombing of Salamanca, Seville and Valladolid 
between January 21 and 26. 


Fear of Rebel bombing forced the Loyalist Cortes 


to hold its semi-annual session on February 1 amid | 


much secrecy, at the monastery of Montserrat neat 
Barcelona. Prime Minister Negrin voiced no hint of 
“war weariness” in his address to the 170 deputies, 
who included some former Right-wing representa- 
tives. While admitting that the food problem was 
difficult, he condemned the idea of a negotiated 
peace, and forecast that the war might last “six 
months, a year or two years.” Parliamentary groups 
from various European countries were in attendance, 
and the Cortes also listened to a message of greet 
ings and good wishes sent by sixty American Sena- 
tors and Congressmen, which hailed the “heroic and 
determined fight to save the democratic institutions 


(Continued on Page 4) 











el 


fied 
ind, 
| its 
gth, 
, Its 
g at 
trol 
de. 
aNnti- 
med 


fur- 


1 to 
ard- 





sup- 
2; in 
revi- 
»mb- 
S air 
anca 
‘inue 
. the 
osed 
Opu- 
uary 
were 
d to 
juent 
y 19 
slona 
rely; 
nong 
omb- 
ed by 
eruel. 
gents 
|, the 
ing a 
were 


dolid 


“ortes 
amid 
- near 
int of 
ties, 
senta- 
1 was 
tiated 
r “Six 
LOUpS 
dance, 
greet- 
Sena- 
ic and 
utions 





W ashington News Letter 

















, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Fes. 7—In search of a policy. After listening to 
expert testimony before the House Naval Affairs 
Committee for more than a week, those Congres- 
sional critics who are searching for a foreign policy 
to explain the $800,000,000 naval expansion pro- 
gram are left as much in the dark as ever. Under 
existing circumstances this is hardly surprising. Even 
in normal times the hidden springs of national pol- 
icy are not spread out on the public record. And it is 
quite obvious that at this critical juncture high of- 
ficials of the government do not intend to proclaim, 
and probably cannot say precisely, what they have 
in mind. 

On its face the public record is confusing and con- 
tradictory. Culling the testimony of Admiral Leahy, 
chief of Naval Operations, the following points are 
noted: 


1. The existing navy is adequate to defend the 
Alaska-Hawaii-Panama triangle and the Pacific coast 
against any conceivable attack. 

2. The expansion program is designed “to provide 
defense against attack on our shores” and “outlying 
possessions.” 

3. There is nothing in the program that would 
permit of “‘aggressive action,” or a policy of “‘polic- 
ing the world,” or “projecting an attack against the 
territory of any other naval power.” 

4. It would require at least “three times the pro- 
posed increase” to prepare for aggressive action in 
the Far East. 

5. The “long-standing policy” of the navy is “to 
maintain a single fleet in one ocean.” 

6. The proposed increase is not sufficient “to 
guard against attack on both shores at once.” 


Reading between the lines, some observers discern 
a logical pattern in the contradictions of this public 
testimony. It is obvious that the armament program 
is a product of ‘‘the political conditions in the world 
at this moment both in Europe and the Far East.” It 
is equally obvious that the potential enemies are 
Japan, Germany and Italy, which Admiral Leahy 
linked together in computing the strength of leading 
naval powers. It is also clear from the expert testi- 
mony that the United States cannot be attacked in 
the Western Hemisphere by any single power and 
cannot, single-handed, undertake offensive opera- 
tions in the Far East. Even after completion of the 
hew program, the fleet will not be strong enough to 





Carry operations to Japan’s waters or successfully 
defend the Philippines. This factual evidence leads 
to two possible conclusions: (a) that the national 
policy is predicated on a single-handed defense of 
the Western Hemisphere against a possible threat 
from a combination of powers; (b) that under 
pressure of political developments abroad the Ad- 
ministration is about to abandon the traditional pol- 
icy of isolation and to implement an “‘active’” foreign 
policy with a navy designed for joint action with 
other powers. 

The first thesis is stoutly defended by the majority 
members of the Naval Affairs Committee, who point 
with alarm to the undefended Atlantic coast and 
urge the creation of a “two-fleet” navy to protect 
both coasts and defend the Monroe Doctrine. The 
second thesis is officially rejected by Admiral Leahy’s 
assertion that the navy has no “understanding” based 
on joint action with Britain or any other foreign 
power. And yet the burden of circumstantial evi- 
dence points to the second conclusion. It is supported 
by the undeniable fact that naval operations which 
cannot be contemplated on the basis of individual 
action can be carried out by joint action. It is sup- 
ported by Admiral Leahy’s significant statement that 
the traditional defense line in the Pacific has now been 
extended to include Samoa, which lies 2600 miles 
southwest of Hawaii, and the announcement that 
the annual manoeuvres, which begin in March, will 
take the United States battle fleet to Samoa for the 
first time. The circumstantial evidence also includes 
reports that Navy Department experts have been 
giving careful study to the possibility of a long-range 
naval blockade of Japan undertaken jointly by 
Britain and the United States. Under such a blockade 
the American sector would extend from the Aleutian 
Islands through Hawaii to Samoa, where it would 
meet a British line extending from Singapore around 
Borneo. In the minds of many Congressional critics 
this evidence, while not conclusive, confirms other 
indications that the navy is in fact designed to serve 
as an active instrument of diplomacy in the present 
Far Eastern crisis. 


The joint notes to Japan. While Congress con- 
tinued its search for a foreign policy, the United 
States on February 5 joined with Britain and France 
in serving notice on Japan that the three naval pow- 
ers will scrap existing limitations on battleship and 
cruiser building unless by February 20 Japan will 
agree to abide by the qualitative limits of the London 
Naval Treaty of 1936. 

















— are 














The notes, which were virtually identical, were 
prompted by reports that Japan is building capital 
ships and cruisers well above the limits accepted by 
the three treaty-powers. At the London Conference 
of 1936 the three powers agreed not to build new 
capital ships exceeding 35,000 tons or to construct 
other vessels between 10,000 and 17,500 tons. 
Japan, which attended the opening of the London 
Conference, withdrew when the other powers re- 
jected its demand for naval equality and subsequently 
declined to accept a British invitation to subscribe 
to the qualitative limitations of the treaty. Japan 
also declined to accept a limitation on the calibre of 
guns on capital ships. 

In giving Japan a last opportunity to accept the 
treaty limitations, the three governments agreed in 
effect to join in a new effort to reach a naval agree- 
ment but, should Japan decline, the other naval 
powers would resume “full freedom of action.” 

WituiaM T. STONE 
PIRACY RECURS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN 


(Continued from Page 2) 


of your young republic from its enemies both within 
and without Spain.” 


At the same time General Franco moved to solidify 
the political organization of his own régime. On 


Page Four == 








— 


January 31 he issued a decree substituting a Cabinet 


has ruled Insurgent Spain since October 1, 1936, 
He himself retains supreme control as President. 
Dictator and commander of the armed forces. The 
remaining posts in the government, which is to 
continue at Burgos, were distributed among three 
generals and eight civilians. The important political 
post of Minister of the Interior was assigned to 
Franco’s brother-in-law, Ramén Serrando Suner, 
While both groups of monarchists—the Alfonsists 
and the Carlists—as well as the fascist Phalanx are 
represented in the Cabinet, some observers view this 
move as favoring the monarchists, and particularly 
the Alfonsists, at the expense of the Phalanx. Fric. 
tion between the conservative monarchists and the 
fascists, whose platform contains some radical 
planks, has been frequently reported in recent 
months. The Alfonsists, moreover—whose leading 
figure, the Count of Romanones, is now Franco's 
representative at London—are reported to have 
British leanings, while the sympathies of the 
Phalanx incline toward Germany. If such an analysis 
is correct, significant political differences may underlie 
the apparent unity of Insurgent Spain. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


of twelve ministers for the technical junta which : 
N 





The F.DP.A. Bookshelf 


From U-Boat to Pulpit, by Martin Nieméller. New York, 
Willett, Clark & Company, 1937. $2.00 


This is not a “religious” book, but rather an adventure 
story in which the author relates his exciting war experi- 
ences and his subsequent training as a pastor in the turbu- 
lent post-war years. Although the narrative ends with 
Niemiller’s ordination, Dr. Henry Smith Leiper has added 
an excellent appendix decribing Dr. Niemdller’s courageous 
= - the strife between Church and State in Hitler’s 

eich. 


The Caissons Roll: A Military Survey of Europe, by Han- 
son W. Baldwin. New York, Knopf, 1938. $2.50 


The military and naval correspondent of the New York 
Times makes a recent tour of Europe’s military establish- 
ments the basis of a detailed, nation-by-nation survey of 
the war equipment and resources of that continent. As a 
conservative military theoretician, he concludes that sea 
power will remain decisive and that, despite airplanes and 
tanks, the war will probably be won or lost only after a 
long stalemate in the trenches. 


Japan Defies the World, by James A. B. Scherer. New 
York, Bobbs-Merrill, 1938. $2.50 


A strident and inaccurate account of the menace of 
Japanese military dictatorship, distinguished only by an 
unsupported—and constantly repeated—claim that Gen- 
eral Jiro Minami, Governor-General of Korea, is the “con- 
cealed Mussolini of Japan.” This statement, and others 
on the nature of Japanese polity, will amaze Far Eastern 
experts but scarcely convince them. 


Spanish Rehearsal, by Arnold Lunn. New York, Sheed & 
Ward, 1937. $2.50 


The Spanish conflict is interpreted by an English lit- 
erary man as a crusade to rescue “Christian Spain” 
from the menace of “the Red Terror.” A determination 
to fit the facts within a dogmatic thesis, and the presence 
of numerous inaccuracies, seriously limit the value of the 
volume. 


An Atlas of Current Affairs, by J. F. Horrabin. New 
York, Knopf, 1938 (fourth edition, revised). $1.50 
The addition of new material on Spain and the Western 

Mediterranean, Palestine, China and India preserves the 

timeliness of this simple guide to key facts and places in 

the contemporary world of affairs. 


The Plough and the Sword: Labor, Land and Property im 
Fascist Italy, by Carl T. Schmidt. New York, Columbia 
University Press, 1938. $2.50 
A Columbia University instructor who spent several 

months in Italy under a Social Science Research Council 

fellowship, contributes a thoughtful well-documented 
analysis of Italy’s agricultural situation, too often neg- 


lected by students of Fascism. He finds that the Fascist | 


government exacts heavy sacrifices from the peasants, to 
the advantage of big landowners and heavy industries 
engaged in the production of tractors and fertilizers. He 
severely criticizes Fascist labor, land and tariff policies, 
but admits that the emotional appeal of Fascism and its 
totalitarian control of thought “have not been without ef- 
fect in diverting the gaze of the masses from ‘material’ 
to ‘spiritual values.’ ” 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 16, Fepruary 11, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lasiim BuELL, President; Vera MicueLtes Dean, Editor. 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








National 
Entered as second-class matter 


FC 


A 


EKA 
NIY. | 


—_ 
Vo 
— 


| = 








