


ill 








Entered as 2nd class matter 


Will 
*Y a ;' ishop 
Biversrs. i —_ 
vn At bor, wes ee 





“FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 6 


NoveMBER 26, 1948 





EVENTS IN VICHY THROW NEW LIGHT ON EUROPE’S UNDERGROUND 


a. PETAIN’S futile attempt on Novem- 
ber 18 to defy his Nazi overlords—by deliver- 
ing a radio speech recognizing the National Assem- 
bly’s authority in the event of his death before pro- 
mulgation of a new constitution—clearly indicates 
the way the political wind is blowing in France. The 
Chief of State’s bid for Allied support abroad and de 
Gaullist sympathy at home also testifies to the effec- 
tiveness of the Allies’ war of nerves against Axis- 
held Europe on the eve of the grand assault against 
the continent. Like the Nazi soldiers and officials 
who, it is reported, are attempting to secure affidavits 
from people within the occupied countries stating 
that their past behavior has been exemplary, Pétain 
is trying to prepare for the day of reckoning. 
FRENCH UNDERGROUND REJECTS MOVE. 
His efforts appear doomed to failure, however, for 
Vichy has little to contribute to the deliverance of 
France, and the good will of the French people will 
not be curried by a last-minute conversion. As early 
as August, the important French underground news- 
paper Resistance foresaw the present attempted shift 
on the part of Pétain. It warned that he and other 
Nazi-collaborators were scheming to make Laval the 
scapegoat for the Vichy régime and insure their own 
escape from punishment by creating the impression 
that they favored restoration of democratic govern- 
ment at the first opportunity. But, as this journal con- 
cluded, “Frenchmen will not be caught in this snare. 
Men who engineered the defeat cannot claim to be 
the saviors who will rescue France from traitors.” 
Pétain’s belated effort to recognize democratic in- 
stitutions also indicates the present strength of the 
underground movement in France. The organizations 
of resistance began to take form in the autumn of 
1940, when small groups in occupied France tried to 
communicate with relatives and friends in the un- 
Occupied zone, and to do what they could to hinder 
the Nazis. The underground movement has grown 


with each indication that the German armistice terms 
were far harsher than the Vichy government orig- 
inally claimed. And after Laval announced in the sum- 
mer of 1942 that Frenchmen would be sent to work 
in Germany, it expanded rapidly. The liberation of 
Corsica and other Allied successes in the Mediter- 
ranean during the past three months further encour- 
aged its development into a force that is now strong 
enough to rock Pétain’s confidence in his régime. 


NEW LEADERS FOR EUROPE. Elsewhere in 
Europe similar signs of vigorous resistance to the 
Nazis point to the existence of groups which will fig- 
ure importantly in the future of Europe. Within the 
various occupied countries, underground movements 
have produced leaders who will continue to play dom- 
inant roles following liberation of their nations. Al- 
though the names of these men and women are al- 
most entirely unknown to us now, since their safety 
and present effectiveness require anonymity, there is 
abundant evidence from the underground press and 
witnesses who have escaped from Europe that these 
new leaders enjoy widespread popular confidence 
and will command positions of responsibility in Eu- 
rope’s post-war political life. 

Even more important than this supply of new 
leadership within the Axis-occupied countries is the 
reservoir of ideas concerning the future that the un- 
derground movements have created. To be sure, the 
elaborate post-war planning that flourishes in the 
United States is a luxury which Europe’s under- 
ground leaders cannot afford because of their pre- 
occupation with resistance to the Nazis. Since plans 
for war and peace are closely linked, however, and 
because hopes for a better future help keep resistance 
to the Axis at high pitch, some underground discus- 
sion of post-war goals has been carried on since the 
beginning of Axis occupation. And in recent months 
belief in the possibility of early liberation has ‘stimu- 
lated additional discussion of the complicated prob- 




















lems to be faced in Europe after victory is won. 

NO RETURN TO NORMALCY. Despite the in- 
evitable differences in points of view among the 
underground movements of the various occupied 
countries, unanimity exists on one point—that there 
shall be no return to “normalcy,” for pre-war condi- 
tions led in each country only to Axis conquest and 
succeeding years of privation and suffering. There is, 
however, a marked contrast between the aspirations 
of the resistance movements of those countries which 
had arrived at fairly satisfactory solutions to their 
political and economic problems in the pre-war peri- 
od, and those which had not. Whereas the under- 
ground in Norway, Belgium and the Netherlands 
stresses the extension of pre-war legislation providing 
for improved housing, better educational opportunities 
and greater social security for workers, leaders of re- 
sistance in other countries tend to advocate more far- 
reaching changes. 

In France there is general agreement that the Third 
Republic is dead and must be replaced by a Fourth 
Republic, characterized not only by greater political 
stability but by economic reforms which will improve 
the lot of the workers and end the control of great 
wealth by small groups. In Poland, Yugoslavia and 
Greece, opposition groups which were almost en- 
tirely silenced before the war by the semi-fascist 
régimes of their countries are now urging thorough- 
going political and economic changes. In Poland, the 
emphasis rests on establishment of truly representa- 
tive government and more equitable distribution of 
land and other forms of natural wealth. In Greece, 
the problem of whether the government should be a 


ELECTIONS TO BE TOUCHSTONE OF BOLIVIAN DEMOCRATIC PROCESS 


Mexico City.—Political activity in Bolivia has in- 
creased considerably in the past few weeks and will 
continue to do so until next year, when the Presiden- 
tial election campaign, scheduled for March-May, 
will be in full swing. 

President Enrique Pefiaranda del Castillo—in office 
since 1940, when he was elected to succeed the late 
German Busch by a vote of 75,000 to 15,000 over 
his Leftist opponent, José Antonio Arze—cannot be 
immediately reelected according to the Bolivian Con- 
stitution. Preliminary consultations as to a new Pres- 
ident are already under way at La Paz, and the ques- 
tion dominating discussions is: “Will the elections 
be really free, or will the President impose a successor 
of his own choice?” 

PRESENT POLITICAL SET-UP. Bolivia's popu- 
lation totals about 3,500,000 people, but only those 
who can read and write may take part in the elec- 
tions. As illiterate and desperately poor Indians con- 
stitute over 80 per cent of the population, the num- 
ber of voters is comparatively small. Moreover, they 
are so divided along political and ideological lines 


PageTwo 








monarchy or a republic is foremost owing to distry’ 
of the King engendered by his acquiescence in ¢ 
pre-war dictatorship. And the goal of the Yugos 

underground appears to be replacement of pre-y 
Serbian domination by a genuine federation of Ser 
Croats and Slovenes. 


ROLE OF THE BIG THREE. In view of strogy 
internal minority opposition in some countries jj 
these programs of reform, it would be Utopian to} 
lieve that the underground movements’ projectej 
changes can be realized without generating frictiog 
But whether this friction reaches its maximum » 
minimum proportions depends largely on the attitud 
the Big Three take toward Europe. If, as a meay 
of maintaining their own safety, the Anglo-America 
bloc follows the balance of power policy and th 
U.S.S.R. attempts to secure spheres of influence jj 
Europe, the Big Three will tend to intervene withi 
the liberated countries to improve their own position 
on the continent. Under these circumstances th 
tangled Yugoslav question, for example, could be 
come a testing-ground for the great powers, with 
the U.S.S.R. and the Anglo-American bloc supportiny 
rival groups and ignoring the wishes of the Yugo 
slavs. On the other hand, if the Big Three proceed tp 
develop the framework of cooperation outlined by 
the Moscow Conference and look toward a system 
of collective security to guarantee their interests, the 
underground leaders will be assured far greater free. 
dom in carrying out their proposed plans for the re 
construction of their nations. 








WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


that coalition governments are inevitable, since no 
single party is ever able to take power alone. At 
present, there are six important political parties 
the country, three of which (Republican, Genuine 
Republican, and Republican Socialist—this latter so 
cialist in name only) are generally considered con 
servative. The other three (Nationalist Revolution 
ary, Unified Socialist, and Revolutionary Left) are, 
in varying degrees, Leftist. The Bolivian Congress 
composed of a Senate of 28 members, in which repre 
sentatives of the conservative parties are in an over 
whelming majority, and a House of Representatives 
of 110 members in which the Right and Left are 
about equally represented. 


PRELIMINARY SKIRMISHES. The political ball 
for the coming Presidential, as well as Congressional, 
elections started to roll last month, when President 
Pefiaranda called in the leaders of the four “tradé 
tional” parties (those listed above, minus the Ne 
tionalist Revolutionary and Revolutionary Left), and 
asked them to accept a candidate of his choice, to bt 
selected later. Friends of the administration hailed 





Gene! 


two f 
desig) 
candi 
ing © 
Presic 
parti¢ 
to act 

Du 
May 
sourc 
politi 
earlic 
ordet 
of we 
at C 
This 
a co 
Febr 
ever, 
Pefia 
Bolit 
in tk 
José 
ary | 
retut 
activ 
for a 
com: 
justi 


Lati 
has 

in ¢ 
port 
mac 
tion 
in E 


soy " | 





REFS | 


r’’ 








e 0 
>. At 
es if 
nuine 
oT SO 
Con 
ition 
) are, 
SS is 
repre 
over: 
atives 
t are 


L ball 
ional, 
ident 
tradé 
> Ne 
), and 
to be 
nailed 








—_—_—_ 
— 





General Pefiaranda’s move as one in favor of unity 
and peace. Opponents, particularly members of the 
two parties not consulted, declared the measure was 
designed to deprive them of the right to present a 
candidate. The consultation and bargaining now go- 
ing on will probably last many weeks and, if the 
President succeeds in persuading the four traditional 
parties to back his plan, the minorities may be forced 
to accept his candidate. 


During an official visit to the United States in 
May 1943 President Pefiaranda, according to reliable 
sources, was advised in high places to grant greater 

litical freedom to opposition parties. Five months 
earlier, Secretary of the Interior Pedro Zilveti Arce 
ordered Bolivian troops to fire ruthlessly on a group 
of workers who had gone on strike for a wage increase 
at Catavi, one of Bolivian tin-king Patino’s fiefs. 
This. aroused so much protest all over America that 
a commission of inquiry was sent to Bolivia in 
February 1943. In the recent Cabinet shake-up, how- 
ever, Secretary Zilveti was confirmed by President 
Pefiaranda in his post. Nevertheless the situation in 
Bolivia seems to have somewhat improved. While 
in the United States, President Pefiaranda received 
José Antonio Arze, exiled leader of the Revolution- 
ary Left party, and formally promised that he might 
return to Bolivia and be free to resume his political 
activity. This and other facts have raised great hopes 
for a more effective democracy in the near future. The 


coming months will show whether these hopes are 
justified. 


BOLIVIA'S ECONOMIC PLIGHT. Like most 
Latin American countries, Bolivia since Pearl Harbor 
has been suffering from an excess of paper currency 
in circulation—the result of increased wartime ex- 
ports of strategic materials and decreased imports of 
machinery and other needed commodities. The infla- 
tion created by this state of affairs is greater by far 
in Bolivia than in any other Latin American country. 


Page Three 





For a survey of the post-war objectives of Belgium, 
Czechoslovakia, France, Greece, the Netherlands, 
Norway, Poland and Yugoslavia, READ: 


POST-WAR PROGRAMS OF EUROPE’S 
UNDERGROUND 
by Winifred N. Hadsel 


25c 


November 15 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 





a 








a 





According to statistics of both the Bolivian Bank of 
Issue and the League of Nations, Bolivia occupies 
the unenviable position of being the Western Hem- 
isphere country in which the cost of living has in- 
creased most since the war. The cost-of-living index 
established by the Bolivian Central Bank reached 701 
at the end of 1942 (1936100), representing a level 
seven times higher than seven years before. From 
January to December 1942 alone, the index went 
from 555 to 701. This goes far to explain the unrest 
among salaried people in Bolivia, whose wages buy 
less and less every month, 2nd who must constantly 
battle to secure at least partially compensating wage 
increases. 








ERNEST S. HEDIGER 





Is China a Democracy? by Creighton Lacy. New York, 
John Day, 1943. $1.50 
Although granting that China is not democratic in the 
sense of having universal suffrage or representative gov- 
ernment, the author believes that the spirit and people of 
China are democratic and that a new China is being built 
in the course of the war. 


American Diplomacy in the Far East: 1941, compiled with 
a foreword by K. C. Li. New York, K. C. Li, Woolworth 
Building, 1942. $3.00 
A collection of documents, consisting chiefly of official 

press releases of the Department of State. 


The Goebbels Experiment, by Derrick Sington and Arthur 
Weidenfeld. New Haven, Yale University Press, 1943. 
$3.00 
Matter-of-fact description of Nazi efforts to control the 

minds of Germans and their conquered peoples. Adds little 

to previous accounts. 


Greek Miracle, by Stephen Lavra. New York, Hastings 
House, 1943. $1.50 


Short account of Greek resistance to the Nazis which 
the author thinks kept them from advancing further in the 
Near East. 


Pacific Blackout, by John McCutcheon Raleigh. New York, 
Dodd, Mead, 1943. $2.50 
A journalist’s report on the fall of the Netherlands East 
Indies, together with several chapters on Australia. In- 
teresting, but superficial and lacking in detail. 


Exchange Ship, by Max Hill. New York, Farrar and Rine- 
hart, 1942. $2.50 


The former Chief of Bureau of the Associated Press in 
Tokyo describes his experiences in Japan before Pearl 
Harbor, his imprisonment by the Japanese and his return 
on the Asama Maru and Gripsholm in the summer of 1942. 


Malta Magnificent, by Major Francis W. Gerard. New 
York, Whittlesey House, 1943. $2.50 
With warm admiration for the people who went through 
a literal hell of bombing, Major Gerard describes his two 
years as Information Officer on Malta. He regards the 
island as having “held in her slim hands the destiny of the 
United Nations.” 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 6, NoveMBER 26, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Beis 


F,. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











Washington News Letter 














Nov. 22.—Rumania seems destined to be the first 
Axis satellite country to fall to the United Nations. 
It is shaken by the approach of the Soviet armies 
through the Ukraine toward the Dniester river; by 
the recent bombings of the Rumanian Ploesti oil 
fields and of Sofia, the Bulgarian capital a few miles 
south of Rumania; and by the prospect of Turkish 
entrance into the war or, at least, Turkish authoriza- 
tion to send Russia-bound Allied supply ships 
through the Straits into the Black Sea. Even before 
the Sofia bombings, General Ion Antonescu, Ru- 
manian dictator, conferred with Adolf Hitler and 
reportedly sued for permission to withdraw most of 
the Rumanian troops from Russia. And last week 
it was reported from Ankara and Berne that Ru- 
manian owners of merchandise are selling in panicky 
anticipation of the country’s collapse. 

CAROL’S CAMPAIGN. This prospect raises a 
strange political problem for the United States. Carol 
Hohenzollern, who abdicated on September 5, 1940 
and now lives in exile in Mexico City, has hired an 
American press agent, Russell Birdwell, to convince 
the American people that Rumania wants Carol to 
return as king; his son Mihai now rules. The Colum- 
bia Broadcasting System has agreed to let Carol tell 
his story in a nationwide broadcast, and a number 
of newspapers, inspired by Mr. Birdwell, are pleading 
the king’s cause. The campaign is intended to reach 
its climax about the time of Rumania’s defeat. 

The aim of this publicity is, of course, to arouse 
Americans to press for government assistance to 
Carol. Since the ex-king reached Mexico in July 
1941, the State Department has steadfastly refused to 
grant him a visa to enter the United States. On Janu- 
ary 7, 1942 Carol announced that he had organized 
a “Free Rumania” movement with himself at its 
head, and Leon Fischer, of New York City, a sort of 
precursor to Mr. Birdwell, issued statements to the 
American press. On February 12, 1942 Washington 
discouraged the movement; Sumner Welles, then 
Acting Secretary of State, said that the presence of 
Carol in this country would not be conducive to the 
war effort of the United States nor to the kind of na- 
tional unity we want during the war. 

The Birdwell undertaking, which marks the first 
time an ex-king has sought through press agentry to 
regain his kingdom, is embarrassing to the United 
States government, but any possibility that it will 
change its attitude toward Carol is remote. In the 
first place, decisions about Carol’s future will come 


not from this country alone but from the United 
States in company with its Allies and the Rumanian 
people, and no statement from Russia or Britain ip. 
dicates sympathy with Carol's hopes. In the second 
place, this government desires the United Nations 
to be in a position to take full advantage of Ru. 
mania’s fall when it comes; for us to raise the issue of 
Carol would only confuse the war in the Balkans. 


INSIDE RUMANIA. The prospect is slight of an 
internal crack-up in Rumania before the arrival of 
enemy troops at its frontier—considering that fron. 
tier as the Pruth river line fixed in June 1940 when 
the U.S.S.R. annexed Bessarabia and northern Buko. 
vina. The great majority of Rumanians are united in 
fear and dislike of Russia, and German soldiers 
now police Rumania. Nazi Minister von Killinger 
in Bucharest dictates to Dictator Antonescu, who has 
lost all his following in the country. Rumania sup 
ported Antonescu when he joined Germany in the 
war against Russia in order to regain Bessarabia and 
northern Bukovina, but interest in the war disap. 
peared when Rumanian troops crossed the Bessarabian 
boundary and invaded the Ukraine. Recent Rumanian 
defeats during the Red Army advance have made 
Antonescu intensely unpopular. 

Juliu Maniu, leader of the Peasant party, is first 
in popularity among Rumanian public men. This 
fact speaks well for Rumanian thought, for Maniu— 
a more than technically able politician—stands for 
the idea of freedom and democracy. Once Prime Min- 
ister before Carol became king, Maniu never formed 
a government under Carol; and during the past three 
years Antonescu’s police have kept him under close 
watch. What régime the Russians favor in Rumania 
is unknown. But it is interesting that last year Charles 
Davila, former Rumanian Minister in Washington, 
who speaks in behalf of Maniu in the United States, 
attempted to establish a basis of Rumanian-Russian 
rapport in a series of conversations with Maxim Lit 
vinov, then Soviet Ambassador to the United States. 

There is also the possibility that war may break 
out between Rumania and Hungary before Russiat 
troops reach the Balkans. Rumanian speeches, radio 
broadcasts, and newspaper articles reflect an intensé 
fying determination to retake the half of Transyl 
vania transferred to Hungary by the Vienna Award 
of August 30, 1940. Such an outbreak would speed 
Rumanian collapse, and collapse will disclose the 
extent of Carol’s political strength in his own countty. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 











landi 
three 
led t 
strate 
since 
front 
—ha: 
at WI 
the n 
actio: 
led tl 
deriv 
diate 
yond 
sive, 
origi 
prote 
cam 
threa 
were 
perh: 
tacul 
baul 
reali 
V. 
fore 
next 
of th 
answ 
Tara 
land 
erati 
Pacit 
We v 
here: 
num 
W 


