





























__| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN ae 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff class December 
utlaw Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 4 es: +5 wa 
_ The Gk) N. Y., under che act 
/ersity FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated — of March 3, 1879 
with- 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
f cor. 
d had} Vou. XVII, No. 13 JANUARY 21, 1938 
ilitary} ~ 
- goy-| BRITAIN’S FOREIGN TRADE POLICY General Library 
. The by James Frederick Green 
social This report analyzes the prospective Anglo-American trade Universi ty of Michigan 
onted agreement in the light of British commercial policy since 
a oe ey ae the —_ of the National Ann Arbor. M cht 
vernment’s met or combatting the depression, it dis- , zan 
ly ae: cusses the present prosperity of Britain and raises many 
questions regarding the future of its foreign trade. 
ca January 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents a copy 
infu-| =< = 
Tal FRANCE SP!IT.ON ECONOMIC ISSUES 
call T# fall of the Chautemps government on Janu- been a draw on “— —_- aig at 
eague ary 14 ushered in a new period of political the beginning of the new year for five billion francs. 
stance confusion in France. For nearly seven months the While M. Bonnet marshalled these facts in sup- 
aiding Radical Socialist Premier, by his tact and diplomacy, port of a more conservative policy, the Communists 
add had precariously held together divergent elements of and many Socialists had become equally convinced 
1009 | his parliamentary coalition. Now that he has suc- that unfavorable social and economic conditions 
_ cumbed under pressure from both the Right and the clearly demonstrated the failure of the “breathing- 
ing its Left, the Popular Front which has ruled France since spell” or “pause” inaugurated as early as last March 
world, | June 1936 seems threatened with disintegration, and by M. Blum. They were demanding, with growing 
es the | the country once more faces an uncertain future. insistence a new “forward” policy and the institution 
t with! The immediate cause of the Cabinet's resignation of foreign exchange control designed to prevent 
cen | Was the refusal of the Communists, who form part capitalists from sabotaging” the Popular Front by 
of the Popular Front, to vote for a motion of con- exporting their funds. 
fidence. The Socialists, unwilling to let the Com- Following M. Chautemps’ resignation, M. Bonnet 
munists escape responsibility for the government's was commissioned to form a new Cabinet. The So- 
measures, then withdrew from the Cabinet. Funda- cialists, however, declined to support him, and his 
k, Mor-} mentally, however, the crisis was precipitated by a obvious attempts to break up the Popular Front also 
determined drive of conservative groups to bring = made him unpopular with many Radical Socialists. 
* oa about a reorientation of governmental policy. Dis- The Socialist leader, Léon Blum, next sought in vain 
al turbed by the new wave of strikes and the absence to form a government including both the Commu- 
Berlin} of business revival, these conservatives demanded nists and the Centre. On January i7° President 
“a that the government repudiate Communist support Lebrun again entrusted Camille Chautemps with the 
che rise} 48 4 means of re-establishing the necessary “confi- task. The difficulties of forming a stable government 
dence.” The French Employers’ Association put pres- under present conditions are largely inherent in the 
sure on the Cabinet by declining Premier Chautemps’ political composition of the Chamber of Deputies. 
New| invitation to confer with the General Confederation Aside from the Popular Front, the only possible 
nserva- of Labor for the purpose of drawing up a “code of _ political combination is one including the Radical 
+ their | Mdustrial peace.” On January 12 Finance Minister Socialists, the Centre, and the Right. The Centre is 
ich has} Bonnet, whose orthodox financial policies had en- —_ so weak numerically that a government of moderate 
, 1 deared him to conservative circles, insisted that political elements is well-nigh impossible. The Radi- 
d, Brit- Chautemps break with the Communists and recon- cal Socialists face the bitter alternative of being 
e have-| Stitute his Cabinet to include representatives from __ prisoners of either the Right or the Left. New elec- 
ression.| the Centre groups in the Chamber. He apparently tions may prove the only way out of this dilemma. 
——| pointed out that capital was once more leaving The one reassuring factor is that public opinion, 
Bey France owing to the industrial unrest for which he weary of repeated political struggles, has remained 
held the Communists responsible, and that the calm in the midst of the crisis. 
Treasury, unable to borrow on the open market, had JOHN C. DEWILDE 
































PEACE TALKS FAIL IN THE FAR EAST 


The announcement in Tokyo, on January 16, that 
Japan would cease to deal with the Nanking régime 
culminated several weeks of political and diplomatic 
discussions during which Japan strove to secure 
Chiang Kai-shek’s agreement to its peace terms or, 
if that effort failed, to formulate Imperial policy for 
the future. Confronted with the distasteful prospect 
of years of conflict in the interior of China, involv- 
ing a drain on Japan’s economic resources as well as 
its military strength, the Japanese had utilized Ger- 
many’s envoys at Nanking and Tokyo as intermedi- 
aries in opening peace negotiations. Their failure 
was followed on January 11 by the convocation— 
for the first time since 1914—of an Imperial Con- 
ference attended by the country’s highest military 
and political leaders. Rejecting the alternative of an 
@atright declaration of war on Nanking—a course 
which might multiply complications with neutral 
powers—the Tokyo authorities have announced that 
they look forward to “harmonious cooperation’’ with 
a “new Chinese régime.” The way is thus open for 
the Japanese to establish a thinly veiled puppet 
control over the conquered coastal areas of China, 
and perhaps to limit the ever-increasing scope of 
their military operations. Such a move might possibly 
prevent the economic burden in Japan from becom- 
ing unbearable. 


On the Chinese side, Chiang Kai-shek appears to 
be inexorably determined to exhaust Japan by pro- 
longing large-scale hostilities. With strong enemy 
forces advancing from both north and south to- 
ward the Lunghai railway—China’s principal artery 
of east-west communication— the Chinese com- 
mander flew to the scene of battle on January 14 
and revitalized the resistance of his troops. Fierce 
engagements are being fought near Tsining, in 
southern Shanrong, in what many observers fear will 
be a futile and perhaps disastrous attempt to prevent 
the juncture of the converging Japanese forces. In 


Page Twe 








———ey 
— 


other areas a recrudescence of Chinese guerrilla ac. 
tivity is reported. Chiang Kai-shek’s renunciation of 
the post of Premier—announced on January 2—ip 
favor of H. H. Kung, formerly Finance Minister, 
leaves the Chinese leader free to devote all his ef. 
forts to direction of the campaign. The continuance 
of vigorous military effort has also been signalized 
by the enforced retirement of three old-line Chinese 
war lords, and the increased prominence of strongly 
anti-Japanese commanders and Chinese communist 
leaders. 


Meanwhile, fear has increased that the Japanese 
will soon take definitive steps to place the economic 
interests of Western powers at an impossible disad- 
vantage in Shanghai and the occupied areas as a 
whole. Japan has already utilized terrorist activities 
of Chinese nationalists in Shanghai, and incidents 
in which Japanese troops have molested foreigners, 
to press for a controlling voice in the governing 
organs of the International Settlement. On Janu. 
ary 4 the Japanese army demanded that Japan’s par- 
ticipation in the personnel and direction of the 
Settlement police force be increased, and that Jap- 
anese be placed in control of important municipal 
administrative bodies. The first of these demands 
has in part been met; and the British government, 
whese influence has hitherto been dominant in the 
Settlement, is reported prepared to compromise with 
the conquerors. Acquiescence in Japan’s pretensions 
in Shanghai, however, is not indicative of a complete 
retreat from the Far East. More significant, as a 
portent for the future, was the announcement from 
Washington on January 13 that American cruisers 
would attend the ceremonies to be held next month 
on completion of the new British naval base at 
Singapore. This news may be regarded in Tokyo as 
a sign that continuance of hostilities will increase the 
likelihood of that béte noir of Japan’s rulers 
American cooperation in the Orient. 


Davin H. Popper 


-Anglo- 





v; 


NEW SECRETARY FOR THE F.P.A. 


The Board of Directors takes pleasure in announc- 
ing the election of Miss Dorothy F. Leet as Secretary 
of the Foreign Policy Association, to succeed Miss 
Esther G. Ogden, whose resignation was announced 
in a recent issue of the Bulletin. It is expected that 
Miss Leet will enter upon her new duties in May. 

Following her graduation from Barnard College, 
Miss Leet became a member of the administrative 
staff at that institution. For the past fourteen years 
she has been executive head of Reid Hall, the Paris 
headquarters of the International Federation of Uni- 
versity Women. Reid Hall serves both as a residence 


for American university women studying in Paris 
and as an international center for women students 
from other countries. 


During her stay in France, Miss Leet won a dis- 
tinguished position in the country’s intellectual and 
social life. For her work at Reid Hall she was named 
a Chevalier of the Legion of Honor in 1934, the 
decoration being given for “furthering and strength- 
ening intellectual relations between France and the 
United States and thereby increasing international 
understanding.” 





— 


la ac. 
on of 
2—in 
Lister, 
is ef. 
uance 
alized 
rinese 
ongly 
1UNist 


anese 
nomic 
disad- 

as a 
ivities 
idents 
gners, 
“rning 
Janu- 
'S par- 
f the 
t Jap- 
ricipal 
mands 
iment, 
in the 
e with 
nsions 
nplete 
as a 
t from 
ruisers 
month 
ase at 
kyo as 
ise the 
A nglo- 


»PER 


. Paris 
udents 


a dis- 
al and 
named 
54, the 
rength- 
nd the 


ational 


Washin gton News Letter 











ns 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JAN. 17—Being unfamiliar with the atmosphere 
of power politics, a good many Washington cor- 
respondents have found it somewhat difficult to 
adjust themselves to the new tempo of American 
foreign policy. Occasionally they have been caught 
off guard when the President, without warning, has 
made a significant reference to foreign affairs, or 
when the State Department has inserted an impor- 
tant passage in an apparently routine press release. 
Recently, however, there have been indications that 
the press is responding to the educational campaign 
which the Administration launched with the Presi- 
dent's Chicago speech and continued through the 
Panay incident and the skirmish over the Ludlow 
amendment. The results are shown in the handling 
of three pertinent news items last week: 


1. On January 12 the President announced that 
economic ties with the Philippines may be extended 
to 1960. This statement, made in an off-hand answer 
to a question put to Mr. Roosevelt at his press con- 
ference, was quickly and correctly reported as a 
veiled warning to Japan that the United States does 
not intend to pull up stakes in the Pacific or to 
“abandon” the Philippines, even if the Islands ad- 
here to the present plan for complete independence 
in 1946. In this case the President was speaking de- 
liberately for publication, but apparently without 
the knowledge of his advisers on Philippine affairs. 
the latter were surprised and a little nettled, as the 
plan is still tentative and many points remain to be 

rked out with the Philippine delegation which is 
due in Washington next month. The effect, however, 
vas precisely what Mr. Roosevelt wanted. 


2. On the following day the Navy Department 
revealed that three American light cruisers will at- 
tend the ceremonies at the opening of the new British 
naval base at Singapore on February 14. The de- 
partmental press release did not amplify the an- 
nouncement, but Washington correspondents were 
able to write with assurance that diplomatic circles 
attach more than ceremonial importance to the visit. 
Some felt free to speculate on the possibility that 
the visit would result in close Anglo-American naval 
cooperation in the Far East, and their stories were 
not frowned upon by the State Department. The 
established facts, though less sensational, were 
equally pertinent: Four American cruisers are al- 
teady on their way to Australia, and three of these 











will proceed to Singapore. Great Britain is sending 
25 warships and a number of air force squadrons to 
Singapore to take part in the combined fleet and 
air manoeuvres. How many will remain in the Far 
East has not yet been revealed. 


3. On January 11 Vice President Garner made 
public the text of a letter addressed to him by Sec- 
retary Hull in response to a Senate resolution re- 
questing information on the number of American 
nationals, troops and investments in China. The 
letter furnished the desired information, which was 
not particularly new, but ended with an assertion 
that the transcendent interest of the United States 
in China (as also in Europe and on this continent) 
is not “the amount of investment’ but rather 
“the preservation and encouragement of orderly 
processes.”” And once again, the press responded by 
observing quite correctly that Mr. Hull had made 
the most important declaration on American foreign 
policy since the President's Chicago speech. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 


Washington refuses to mix oil and silver. 
Speculation on what is happening in Mexican- 
American relations has again \. en active here and 
the air has been alive with conflicting rumors. The 
oil wage controversy which American and British 
companies have waged with the Cardenas Adminis- 
tration awakened apprehension in certain quarters. 
It was asserted that a rift was developing een 
Washington and Mexico, and the State Department 
was pictured as backing the petroleym interests in 
a desire for a showdown regarding both this dispute 
and Cardenas’ whole program for the ‘“Mexicaniza- 
tion” of industry. Then came word that Washington 
had agreed with the Mexican government to con- 
tinue silver purchases, and to maintain a stable rate 
of exchange between the dollar and the peso. At 
once some observers abandoned their belief in an 
impending split, and interpreted these moves as 
acquiescence in the socialization policy of President 
Cardenas. Following the silver agreement, Mexican 
authorities displayed a somewhat more conciliatory 
attitude on the oil question. Among the more sus- 
picious it was then promptly assumed that silver and 
oil were linked in some devious fashion; and that as a 
quid pro quo for Washington's liberality on silver, 
Mexico would be more “‘reasonable”’ on oil. 

The facts as seen here are less colorful than the 
imaginations of certain journalists. Informed circles 
deny any tie-up between silver and oil, and assert 











=—_— — —= Page Four 





that Washington is handling these two matters sep- 
arately. The State Department has apparently kept 
out of the oil controversy, on the ground that the 
present dispute must first come before the Mexican 
courts. Rumor has it that in recent conversations 
here with the Mexican Finance Minister, Sr. Eduardo 
Suarez, the Department did not go beyond the ex- 
pression of hope that an amicable solution might be 
found. On December 18 the Federal Board of Con- 
ciliation and Arbitration at Mexico City had recom- 
mended that the companies increase by one-third the 
basic pay to their 18,000 employees. This was 
equivalent to a $7,000,000 raise, and double the 
amount previously offered by the petroleum com- 
panies. Spokesmen for both British and American 
corporations termed the verdict “a glaring denial of 
justice,” and intimated that unless it were modified 











they could not continue operations. On December 29 
the oil companies sought .an injunction from the 
Supreme Court; and, until the Court could rule on 
their petition, asked from the labor board a tem. 
porary stay in application of the increases recom. 
mended. The board promptly granted this request; 
and it is not believed here that the oil dispute defies 
solution. 

The silver agreement, announced on December 29, 
apparently promises to continue, substantially un. 
changed, the month-to-month purchase policy which 
has been followed for the last three years. In addi. 
tion, the New York Federal Reserve Bank is to take 
35,000,000 ounces of silver accumulated by the Bank 
of Mexico. The gold received for this purchase will 
strengthen the Mexican Bank’s reserves at a time of 
need. CHARLES A. THOMSON 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


The Folklore of Capitalism, by Thurman W. Arnold. New 
Haven, Yale University Press, 1937. $3.00 


In this unusually provocative book the author brilliantly 
exposes the theology and mythology that have grown up 
about our social and economic system and have given it a 
peculiar sanctity in public opinion. While he succeeds in 
demolishing many of the accepted ways of thinking about 
our institutions, he does not in all cases destroy the justi- 
fication for their existence. 


I Knew Hitler, by Kurt G. W. Liidecke. New York, Scrib- 
ner’s, 1937. $3.75 


A disillusioned Nazi, who was at one time the party’s 
agent in the United States, tells his story. Written with 
more restraint than is usual in books of this type, it 
throws revealing light on Hitler’s rise to power and on 
the clash of personalities in the National Socialist move- 
ment. 


Italy Against the World, by George Martelli. London, 
Chatto and Windus, 1937. 12s. 6d. 


A correspondent of the London Morning Post gives a 
balanced and penetrating account of the Italo-Ethiopian 
conflict, always probing for facts and motives behind dip- 
lomatie verbiage. Particularly valuable is his critical 
analysis of the confusion of thought prevailing in Britain 
during a crisis which proved a decisive test not only of 
collective security but of British foreign policy. 


The Message and Decisions of Oxford on Church, Com- 
munity and State. Published for the Universal Chris- 
tian Council of New York. Chicago, Willett, Clark & 
Co., 1937. 25 cents 
An historic document drawn up at the world conference 

of churches, defining with courage and depth the attitude 

of Christianity toward the present world crisis. 


Ends and Means: An Inquiry into the Nature of Ideals 
and into the Methods Employed for their Realization, 
by Aldous Huxley. New York, Harper, 1937. $3.50 


Having left behind him the disillusionment of the “lost 
generation,” Aldous Huxley emerges in this book as an 


eloquent, if not always convincing, advocate of non-vio- 
lence in attempts both to reform the national state and te 
achieve international peace. Champions of sanctions ané 
of an international police force should read his chapter o 
war for an intelligent rebuttal to their arguments. 


American Political and Social History, by Harold Under. 
wood Faulkner. New York, F. S. Crofts, 1937. $5.00 
The Federal Union: A History of the United States t 
1865, by John D. Hicks. Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1937, 
$4.75 
Two useful textbooks, carefully written and interest 
ingly illustrated by maps, pictures, and cartoons. Hick 
devotes 688 pages to American history down to Appomat 
tox, while Faulkner reaches the 1936 election in 705 peel 
The Faulkner volume is probably the more valuable, ii 
view of its broader and more thoughtful approach, mon 
readable style, and topical bibliographies for each chapter 
















International Trade in Certain Raw Materials and F 
stuffs by Countries of Origin and Consumption, Lea 
of Nations, 1986. New York, Columbia Universit 
Press, 1937. $1.25 


This is the second annual volume of a new statistied 
series published by the League of Nations. The League! 
performing a distinct service in making available th 
specialized information on international trade which wo 
otherwise be inaccessible. 


Labor in Canadian-American Relations, by Norman ¢ 
Ware, H. A. Logan and H. A. Innis, ed. New Havet 
Yale University Press, 1937. $3.75 
This volume forms an important contribution to th 

comprehensive series being undertaken by the Carnegt 

Endowment for International Peace on “The Relations ¢ 

Canada and the United States.” Mr. Ware discuss¢ 

“The History of Labor Interaction,” a valuable summaty 

of the history of trade unionism in both countries and th 

present controversy over the C.I1.0. “Labor Costs an 

Labor Standards” by Mr. Logan is a more techni 

study, containing comparative statistics regarding W 

and standards of living. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 13, JANUARY 21, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Natiook 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lusi Bugit, President; Vera MicHELEs DEAN, Editer. Entered as second-class matt} 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., umder the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








|<] 


i= Il 


