


much 


t, the 


ry to 
f the 


r ad- 
» fit a 
it the 
rill be 


ADSEL 


ION 

- East, 
P P.A. 
s has 


$3.00 
und in 
nation, 
pach. 











prens ae 
corse 
a 


SEP 14 1943 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Lip ary 
ty Se 
Unive 3 ty of 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 47 


SEPTEMBER 10, 1948 





AGREEMENT ON EUROPE MADE URGENT BY ITALY’S SURRENDER 


‘ oaridea unconditional surrender on September 8 
—four years and one week after Germany's 
invasion of Poland that opened World War II—is 
the first major breach in Hitler's “fortress of Eu- 
rope.” This surrender, which cannot but cause pro- 
found relief not only among the United Nations, 
but also among the Italian people, brings the Allies 
closer than ever to fateful decisions regarding the 
future of Europe, and the world. Much has been said 
by various commentators regarding the need for 
post-war collaboration between the Big Four—Brit- 
ain, the United States, Russia and China—but, until 
recently, few concrete proposals had been advanced 
as to the form such collaboration should take once 
the wartime need for mutual aid has come to an end. 

ANGLO-AMERICAN COLLABORATION ES- 
SENTIAL. It remained for Mr. Churchill to blaze 
the trail when, within the space of one week, he de- 
clared in no uncertain terms in Quebec on August 
31 that, pending a meeting between himself, Presi- 
dent Roosevelt and Marshal Stalin, a conference of 
their Foreign Ministers was “most necessary and 
urgent”; and, in his address at Harvard University 
on September 6, proposed that Britain and the 


, United States maintain after the war the machinery 


of political, economic and military cooperation so 
effectively developed in time of war. The British 
Prime Minister expanded the scope of the latter 


| Suggestion by stating that “stronger, more efficient, 


Henry | 


ational 
of the 
erence. 
as, de 


43 





more rigorous world institutions” than the League 
of Nations “must be created to preserve peace and 
to forestall the causes of future wars.’ Post-war 
collaboration between Britain and the United States, 
he said, “will not be a party question” in his coun- 
try. And, as if corroborating his thoughts, Governor 
Dewey declared at the Republican conference on 
Mackinac Island on September 5 that he favors an 
Anglo-American alliance, while a group of gov- 
ernors headed by Governor Baldwin of Connecticut 


urged the conference to adopt a nonpartisan, con- 
structive program on foreign affairs. 

ONLY A STEP TOWARD WORLD ORDER. 
At an earlier stage of the war any proposal for 
an Anglo-American post-war alliance would have 
seemed to be an attempt by Anglo-Saxons to domi- 
nate the world. It may still be so regarded by many 
people, especially in view of preparations for the 
administration of Axis, and possibly other, terri- 
tories by British and Americans associated in AMG. 
The activities of this organization have alarmed 
some of the conquered countries of Europe which 
are looking forward not to becoming wards of the 
Allies but to recovering their own freedom of action. 
At the same time, even those who are most suspi- 
cious of ulterior motives on the part of the Atlantic 
powers would admit that the only hope of escaping 
anarchy following the defeat of Germany and Japan 
is to lay right now the cornerstone of post-war col- 
laboration between the countries that command suf- 
ficient force to prevent future disturbances of the 
peace. Anglo-American collaboration, however, is 
but part of this cornerstone, and will prove no bul- 


‘wark against renewed expansion by Germany in 


Europe or by Japan in Asia unless it is comple- 
mented by similar understandings between Britain, 
the United States and Russia, on the one hand, and 
Britain, the United States, Russia and China on the 
other. But if these understandings are to be some- 
thing more than a four-power condominium laying 
down the pattern of world order for smaller coun- 
tries poor in armed power but rich in the contribu- 
tion they have made—and will once more make— 
to civilization, they must be so devised as not even 
to suggest that the Big Four intend to absorb their 
neighbors in the fair name of “collective security.” 
WHAT TO DO ABOUT GERMANY? It is on 
the crucial question of what Britain, the United 
States and Russia, respectively, plan to do with the 











fruits of victory in Europe that a misunderstanding 
had threatened to develop between the three coun- 
tries whose concerted action is essential both for the 
winning of the war, and of the peace after the war. 
All three have the same basic aims—defeat of the 
German army, the downfall of Hitler and his, as- 
sociates, and destruction of the Nazi order in 
Europe. No one familiar with the anger aroused in 
Russia by wanton German brutalities can doubt that 
the Soviet Union will fight until these aims have 
been achieved. The two points on which Britain, 
the United States and Russia differ are how to end 
the war most speedily, and what to do with a de- 
feated Germany. The Russians believe, rightly or 
wrongly, that an immediate invasion of western Eu- 
rope, synchronized with their victories in the east, 
could bring the war to a close this year and end the 
heavy loss of lives and resources they have suffered 
during the past two years. Their demand for the 
opening of a western front by the Allies belies the 
argument that the Russians want to exclude Britain 
and the United States from the continent. The Allies 
apparently believe that operations in other sectors 
will prove more practicable at this time—and only 
the future course of the war can prove the correct- 
ness of the various assumptions made in Moscow, 
London and Washington. 


Meanwhile, however, the Russians are doing 
everything in their power to hasten the end of the 
war by driving the Nazi armies back and by urging 
the Germans, through the leaflets and radio broad- 
casts of the Free German Committee, to revolt 
against Nazism and thereby earn a tolerable peace. 
The peace sketched out in the Free German mani- 
festo envisages retention of part of the German 
army, formation of a democratic régime, and main- 
tenance of private property. The latter two points 
coincide with Allied war aims, but the fact that the 
manifesto does not provide for Germany's disarma- 
ment has been taken to mean that the Russians may 
offer the Germans a ‘‘soft’” peace, as contrasted with 
the “hard” peace presumably envisaged by Allied 
insistance on unconditional surrender. The latter 
term, however, requires definition if it is to mean 
something concrete not only to the Germans, but 
also to others in Europe. Do the Allies visualize 
the demolition of German industry, the shooting of 


Page Two 














—$—$—— 


every tenth Gerrman, the dismemberment of th 
Reich, the reduction of the German people to ; 
status of slavery—or do they mean more or less wha 
the Russians say: that is, that once Germany's milj. 
tary power has been broken, and an internal y 

heaval has destroyed the power of the Junkers, the 
industrialists and the Nazi party, they hope to se 
the resumption in Germany of something resembling 
normal existence, even though it be under the - 
trol and supervision of a United Nations adminis. 
tration in which Russia would participate? Thos 
who are alarmed by the thought that Moscow might 
negotiate with some non-Nazi government appear to 
have forgotten Article II of the Anglo-Soviet alli. 

ance of May 26, 1942, in which Britain and the | 
U.S.S.R. undertook “not to enter into any negotia. | 
tions with the Hitlerite Government or any other 

Government in Germany that does not clearly te. ; 
nounce all aggressive intentions’”—thus apparently 
leaving the way open for negotiations with a gov. 
ernment that would renounce “‘all aggressive inten. 
tions,” provided, however, as specified further in 
Article II, that the negotiations for an armistice or 
peace treaty with Germany are undertaken “by mu 
tual consent” of the contracting parties. 

JOINT COMMISSIONS OFFER ANSWER. It 
will, of course, be supremely difficult for the United 
Nations to formulate and carry out a program which, 
on the one hand, would satisfy the natural demand 
for revenge of those who have been victims of Nazi 
terror and-prevent recurrence of such brutalities in 
the future and, on the other hand, create in Europe 
the conditions for return to more or less civilized 
existence among both victors and vanquished. The 
difficulties ahead, however, will be immeasurably 
eased if Britain, the United States and the Soviet 
Union can establish a basis for common action} 
through joint commissions, such as the Angio 
American-Soviet Mediterranean Commission whost| 
formation was announced on September 4. Each of | 
the three countries, not to speak of the nations now | 
awaiting liberation, has its own point of view, 
molded by centuries of tradition, experience, good 
fortune and bad. The task of statesmanship is not 
to make one of these points of view prevail over all 
others, but to reconcile them and weld them into a 


workable common policy. VgRA MICHELES DEAN 








RETENTION OF WARTIME MACHINERY ADVOCATED BY CHURCHILL 


Prime Minister Churchill’s suggestion in his Har- 
vard address of September 6 that the Anglo-Ameri- 
can Combined Chiefs of Staff Committee be con- 
tinued after the war is the clearest indication the 
Allied peoples have had that the broad concept of 
peacemaking today is in sharp contrast with that of 
1918-19. Two principles seem to underlie Mr. 
Churchill’s proposal: first, that the new world order 


must grow out of the war coalition and make ust 
of the machinery of collaboration built up during 
the war; second, that peace must be based for some 
time at least on the possession of overwhelming | 
force by the victorious nations. Neither of these 
principles was generally accepted after the last wat./ 

COLLABORATION IN 1917-18. Toward the] 
close of World War I the Allied and Associated 





or Fs 8 


a _J et @® Fre © CH 











might | 
Dear to | 
*t alli. 
nd the 





€gotia- 
Other 


rly te. : 


arently 
a gov- 
inten- 
her in 
tice or 
oy mu: 


ER. It 
United 
which, 
emand 
f Nazi 
ities in 
Europe 
vilized 
1. The 
surably 
Soviet 
action 
Anglo- 
whose 
‘ach of 





1s Now | 
view, 
, good 
is not 
ver all 
into a 


DEAN 


LL 


ike use 
during | 
ir some 
elming 


F these | 


st wat. 
rd_ the 
ociated 


, 











— Ts 
— ————— 


Powers had created effective machinery of collabora- 
tion in both the military and economic fields. A 
Supreme War Council, composed of the Premiers 
of Britain, France and Italy, was established in 
November 1917 to coordinate Allied military strat- 
egy. With the assistance of a committee of Military 
Representatives, on which the American general, 
Tasker H. Bliss, sat regularly, the Council watched 
over the general conduct of the war. In March 1918 
its appointment of General Foch as Allied Com- 
mander-in-Chief brought unity of command in the 
field. 

In the economic sphere, meanwhile, even more 
effective machinery had been developed to mobilize 
the economic resources of the Allied and Associated 
Governments. The pivot of this machinery was the 
Allied Maritime Transport Council, consisting—as 
do the joint boards now functioning in Washington 
and London—of national ministers responsible for 
the administration of executive departments. Around 
the Transport Council grew up a number of pro- 
gram committees, the most important of which 
were grouped under an Inter-Allied Munitions 
Council and an Inter-Allied Food Council. 

BREAKDOWN OF WORLD WAR I MA- 
CHINERY. In neither the military nor the economic 
field was collaboration as effective as that now in 
existence, but a great deal had been achieved and 
there was a strong feeling in both Britain and 
France that the wartime machinery should be con- 
tinued, at least during the reconstruction period. 
Anglo-French proposals to this effect were vetoed, 
however, by the United States government, which 
wished to disentangle itself from the inter-Allied 
machinery as soon as possible. By February 1919, at 
the time the Supreme Economic Council was set up 
to solve the economic difficulties of Europe and, ia 
particular, the problem of relief, most of the agen- 
cies had been disbanded. With the exception of 
certain individuals, there was no continuity between 








——— Page Three 





Will Japan crack in defeat? Should Japan lose its 
empire? Should its industry be destroyed? Should 
it pay reparation? Should there be military occupa- 
tion? Will Japan have a revolution? Read— 
WHAT FUTURE FOR JAPAN? 


by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25c 


September 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 














the wartime agencies and the economic bodies set up 
as part of the League of Nations. 
At the same time, the Supreme War Council be- 


came a meeting of heads of states, not a unified body - 


with a single aim. Except in the case of Germany, 


there was no common military policy to meet the 


chaos in Central and Eastern Europe, while pe i 
questions were reconciled with the greatest difficulty 
by the “Big Four”—Wilson, Lloyd George, Clemen- 
ceau and Orlando. Not until the Covenant of the 
League of Nations was embodied in the Versailles 
Treaty, and defensive treaties designed to prevent 
German aggression were concluded between France, 
Britain and the United States, did it seem that a 
basis had been laid for continued collaboration. But 
this hope vanished soon afterward when the United 
States Senate refused to ratify the defensive treaties 
and, rejecting the Treaty of Versailles on November 
19, 1919, decided that this country should not enter 
the League of Nations. When American representa- 
tives were also withdrawn from “continuation bod- 
ies” like the Reparations Commission, the Rhine- 
land High Commission, and the Inter-Allied Mili- 
tary and Naval Commissions of Control, wartime 
unity was completely destroyed. 


CHANGING CONCEPTS OF PEACE. This 
country’s withdrawal from both economic and politi- 
cal collaboration was not simply the result of a gen- 
eral desire of Americans to disentangle themselves 
from Europe. On the part of League supporters, at 
least, it was based also on a desire to build a new 
order on new foundations. The inevitable continuity 
between war and peace was not recognized, and the 
use of wartime machinery for peacetime purposes 
was rejected. More important, perhaps, was the feel- 
ing that the terrible price of war would prevent the 
outbreak of hostilities in the foreseeable future, par- 
ticularly with an organization such as the League 
to supervise the relations of states. The failure of 
the United States to enter the League actually had 
little to do with the weakness of the League’s mili- 
tary sanctions, or with the general feeling through- 
out the world that force could no longer be consid- 
ered a pillar of peace. 

When Mr. Churchill declared at Harvard that the 
League of Nations had failed because it was aban- 
doned and betrayed — abandoned by the United 
States and betrayed by the “futile pacifism” of 
Britain and France—he gave further emphasis to 
the need for post-war unity and the maintenance of 
force to keep the peace. His proposal to continue the 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 47, SEPTEMBER 10, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRaNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
One month for change of address on membership publications. 

F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Bw 181 





——————————— eee Page Four ——SSSSS>>_S_a_—_—_————_—_—_————— 


Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee embodies both ideas. 
But it seems clear that he envisaged this body as 
only the nucleus of post-war collaboration among 
the United Nations. And it may be assumed that 
he would favor also the continuance of wartime 
agencies, such as the Combined Raw Materials 


Board and the Combined Food Board, to provide 
for the economic as well as the security needs of the 
post-war world. United Nations collaboration could 
then become the prelude to a genuine world order, 


HowarbD P. WHIDDEN, Jr. 


WILL UNITED STATES PRESSURE BRING CHANGES IN ARGENTINE POLICY? 


The arrest in Buenos Aires on September 4 of 
several British and United States executives of the 
American and Foreign Power Company increased 
the tension that has long existed between Argentina 
and the Allies. Since this action was more extreme 
than that taken July 26, when the Argentine govern- 
ment investigated the books and stocks of eight 
foreign commercial firms, fears have arisen that re- 
strictions on the operation of foreign-owned prop- 
erty may be in the offing. Imposition of checks on 
American and British companies would, however, 
undoubtedly encounter stiff resistance, for capital 
from the United States and Britain has been heavily 
invested in telephone and radio communications, 
power plants, transportation facilities, the meat- 
packing industry, banking and insurance. 

ARGENTINE INVENTORY. When the seizure 
of British and United States citizens is added to the 
record of General Ramirez’ régime since it came to 
power by a military coup on June 7, Argentina’s 
unsympathetic attitude toward the Allies becomes 
increasingly apparent. In addition to maintaining 
diplomatic relations with Berlin, Rome and Tokyo, 
the new government has inaugurated several policies 
that may hinder United Nations efforts to crush the 
Axis. On August 31 Argentina replied to the re- 
quest of the British, Canadian and United States 
governments that it refuse refuge to Fascist or Nazi 
leaders by declaring that it would not deny asylum 
to any particular group of persons but would con- 
sider each individual case on its own merits. In case 
any fleeing Fascist or Nazi leaders should seek sanc- 
tuary in Argentina, therefore, their expulsion would 
be by no means automatic. The Argentine govern- 
ment, moreover, allows the publication and sale of 
El Pampero, Nazi news sheet, and the anti-Allied 
magazine, Clarinada, which in its August issue ad- 
vocated the seizure and destruction of “democratic- 
liberal books” and the expulsion of all Jews from 
Argentina. In domestic policy, too, repressive meas- 
ures similar to those employed by Fascists and Nazis 
have been adopted, with the current anti-Red drive 
resulting in wholesale arrests throughout the coun- 
try and the closing of labor unions. This repression 
of all persons even vaguely suspected of Communist 
affiliations not only silences critics of the govern- 
ment’s internal policies but also suppresses many sup- 
porters of the United Nations, such as Rail Damonte 


Taborda, whose arrest was ordered on September 6. 

On the positive side of the Allied-Argentine 
ledger it should be recorded that Axis radio mes. 
sages by code have been barred, although they still 
proceed if not coded; some action has been taken 





against presumed German espionage agents; and 


the government has declared that it intends to 
strengthen Western Hemisphere solidarity. Super- 
ficially considered, the decision the Argentine goy- 


ernment took early in August to end its recognition 


of the German U-boat zone in the North Atlantic 
appeared to foreshadow a break with the Reich. 
But in all probability this was merely an effort to 
take advantage of the waning danger from sub- 
marines in order to increase the country’s foreign 
trade. 

AT THE PEACE TABLE. Meanwhile, the decline 
of Axis military fortunes is making General Ramirez 
policy increasingly untenable, for if Argentina wants 
lend-lease materials, its course must change. Secre- 
tary Hull, in a letter made public on September 7, 
sternly rebuked the Argentine Foreign Minister, Vice 
Admiral Segundo Storni, for requesting armaments 
and machinery for his country’s oil industry while 
its armed forces fail to contribute to hemisphere 
security. Equally important, however, in alter: 
ing Argentina’s attitude toward the Allies may be 
the feeling that General Arturo Rawson, co-leader 
of the June revolution and newly appointed Minis- 
ter to Brazil, expressed on August 21 when he stated 
that “Argentina cannot absent herself from the peace 
table.’” The main reason for Argentina’s eagerness 
to have a hand in making the peace is undoubtedly 
the nation’s need for the early post-war disposal of 
agricultural surpluses, chiefly wheat. The Ramirez 
government, by turning its back on previous agri 
cultural restrictions despite the already existing sup 








ply of millions of tons of wheat, is encouraging pfo- | 


duction on a scale that will make Argentina the 
world’s biggest granary. Part of this produce is now 
being sent to other American republics and to Spain 
—with which a barter agreement was signed in Sep 
tember 1942 requiring Argentina to furnish a mil- 
lion tons of wheat and 3,500 tons of tobacco in te 
turn for two tankers and a destroyer. Argentina 
must look to the reconstruction of undernourished 


Europe and the Far East, however, for the disposal | 


of most of its surpluses. | Wynirrep N. HADsEL 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 





