




































rge 
af- 
eS, 
Ise, 
—a 
cal 
the 
Itic 
m1, 


azi 
and 


ne’s 
| 
> of 

be 

of 
leu- 
ker 
Nil- 

in- 
the 
ally 


iiona 


ad itor 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Sta 
Subscription, One ar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2. 1931, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














VOL. XV, No. 9 


DECEMBER 27, 1935 





COMING F. P. A. MEETINGS 


4 Should Western Powers Get Out of Asia? 

4 Boston Europe’s Hour of Decision 

7 Baltimore American Policy in the Far East 

9 Utica Europe’s Hour of Decision 

11 Albany The World’s Stake in the Ethiopian Conflict 
11 Philadelphia Europe’s Hour of Decision 


18 Boston ermany 

18 Providence British Foreign Policy 
18 Springfield Europe’s Hour of Decision 
25 Buffalo England and the World Crisis 


29 Minneapolis Is America Moving Towards Fascism? 


January New York 











BRITAIN SWINGS BACK TO 


THE LEAGUE 





OLLOWING a memorable demonstration of the 

influence which public opinion, when aroused, 
can wield in a democratic state, Prime Minister 
3aldwin on December 18 sacrificed Sir Samuel 
Hoare, an exponent of secret imperialist diploma- 
ey, and on December 22 replaced him with Cap- 
tain Anthony Eden, Britain’s most active advo- 
cate of a strong collective system. The impression 
that the new Foreign Secretary intends to urge 
drastic sanctions against Italy, even at the risk 
of war, was strengthened by simultaneous an- 
nouncement of plans for modernization and mech- 
anization of the British army and by reports of 
fresh negotiations between the general staffs of 
Britain and France. 


Despite frequent denials, it had been obvious 
even before the British elections that Sir Samuel 
Hoare and his Minister for League Affairs did 
not see eye to eye in the Italo-Ethiopian crisis. 
Sir Samuel held the view—which he elaborated 
once more in his speech to the House of Commons 
on December 19—that drastic sanctions would 
mean war; that while Britain would be able to 
“retaliate .. . with full success,” war would in- 
volve dissolution of the League; and that Britain 
should not become involved in such a conflict 
without the assistance of other League powers, 
notably France. He had consequently endeavored 
to avoid an Anglo-Italian clash by offering half 
of Ethiopia to Mussolini who, according to Hoare, 
had originally intended to “wipe the name of 
Abyssinia from the map.” Captain Eden, by 
contrast, has demonstrated his belief that sanc- 
tions, if sufficiently prompt and drastic to be 
really effective, may stop war before the aggres- 
sor has had either strength or opportunity to 
strike back; that, if pushed to their ultimate con- 
clusion, sanctions may mean war, but that this 
risk must be taken if future aggression is to be 
prevented by collective means; and that the best 
way for Britain to avoid the risk of war is to 


align all League states which can render military 
and naval assistance, thus implementing the 
League with the force it now lacks, and driving 
the aggressor to the wall. 


Captain Eden’s ability to carry out a policy of 
strong sanctions will depend, to a large degree, 
on the support he receives from Prime Minister 
Baldwin, whose attitude toward the League ap- 
pears little more than lukewarm. In a speech 
marked by both weakness and evasiveness, Mr. 
Baldwin pleaded, on December 19, for the sym- 
pathy of the House of Commons, which gave him 
a majority of 225 votes. He admitted that he 
had committed an “error of judgment,” which 
he attributed in part to lack of “liaison” between 
Sir Samuel Hoare, wrestling in Paris with M. 
Laval, and cabinet members engaged in the leis- 
urely occupations of the traditional British week- 
end. It was obvious, however, that he had not 
expected the exhibition of “deeper feeling” in the 
country “on what I may call grounds of conscience 
and honor’’—in spite of the fact that his govern- 
ment had been returned to power just three weeks 
before on a platform pledged to support of the 
League system. Lack of popular support, he 
declared, meant that the Hoare-Laval proposals 
were “absolutely and completely dead.” He in- 
dicated that, in his opinion, the principle of sanc- 
tions was fundamentally unsound, and that when 
the “melancholy affair of Abyssinia is over” the 
League might have to be reorganized. His speech 
strengthened the suspicion that, if the Hoare- 
Laval plan had not been revealed to the British 
public by a “‘leak’”’ in the Paris press, and had been 
accepted by Mussolini, the Baldwin government 
might have attempted to cram a fait accompli 
down the throats of both Ethiopia and the League. 


Britain’s abandonment of the Hoare-Laval 
scheme enabled the League Council, on Decem- 
ber 19, to give it decent burial. Henceforth, ne- 
gotiations with Italy will be handled not by Brit- 
























ain and France, which have aroused the mistrust 
of the small states, but by the Committee of 
Thirteen, comprising the entire Council member- 
ship with the exception of Italy, party to the dis- 
pute. The League Committee of Eighteen, 
charged with application of sanctions, will prob- 
ably meet early in January to discuss sanctions on 
oil, coal and iron. 

The unknown quantity in the situation remains 
the attitude of France. While the Hoare-Laval 
plan met with bitter criticism from the Left, 
which caused M. Herriot’s resignation as leader 
of the Radical Socialists, a large section of French 
opinion still believes that sanctions mean war and 
that war must be avoided at all costs. M. Laval 
succeeded in obtaining a vote of confidence in 
the French Chamber of Deputies on December 17 
and is generally expected to remain at the helm 
at least until the budget has been voted in Janu- 
ary—and possibly until the parliamentary elec- 
tions scheduled for May. Yet even M. Laval, who 
has hitherto displayed a genius for diplomatic 
prestidigitation, may have to reconsider his posi- 
tion if the new British Foreign Secretary steers 
the League in the direction of an oil embargo. 
Captain Eden had already sought to avoid the 
danger of playing a lone hand against Italy by 
consulting the Mediterranean powers — Greece, 
Turkey and Yugoslavia—as well as Rumania and 
Czechoslovakia, concerning the military and naval 
assistance they would be ready to furnish should 
an oil embargo lead to war. Their replies—given 
before publication of the Hoare-Laval plan— 
were apparently in the affirmative. If France, 
under these altered circumstances, continues to 
balk at drastic sanctions, it may find itself iso- 
lated in Europe—an eventuality which no French 
statesman can view with equanimity. 

The apprehension aroused in Italy by the ap- 
pointment of Eden—regarded as a sworn enemy 
of Mussolini—gives some measure of the difficul- 
ties confronted by /] Duce in his Ethiopian cam- 
paign. Mussolini’s delay in answering the Hoare- 
Laval proposals until they had been killed in 
London and Geneva clears the way for drastic 
League action at a time when the Italian forces 
in Ethiopia are faced with increasing difficulties 
in maintaining lines of communication and sup- 
ply. Now that the door to diplomatic concessions 
has been slammed, Mussolini might conceivably 
resort to the hysterical act of defying the whole 
world. The risk of provoking such defiance must 
be taken by all those who believe that the world 
will never enjoy security until the threat of un- 
punished aggression has been removed, by force 


if necessary. VeRA MICHELES DEAN 


Page Two 








ELECTION PROSPECTS IN CUBA 


Cuban elections, postponed four times be. 
cause of continuing unrest, are now scheduled t 


take place on January 10, 1936. However, the 
resignation of President Mendieta on December 
11, together with other recent events, raises doubts 
concerning both the possibility and the signifi- 
cance of the projected poll. The “reform” parties 
took no part in the struggle, charging that ballots 
mean nothing, with United States influence and 
the “Batista dictatorship” so dominant in island 
affairs. The old parties nominated candidates, 
but a bitter electoral dispute jeopardized their 
participation in the contest. 

There have been three leading candidates: (1) 
ex-President Mario G. Menocal, named by the 
National Democrats or former Conservatives; (2) 
Miguel Mariano Gémez, the joint choice of his 
own Republicans and of Mendieta’s Nationalists; 
and (3) Carlos Manuel de la Cruz, nominated by 
former President Machado’s Liberals. A com- 
plication arose regarding this last ticket. Al- 
though the national assembly of the Liberals 
backed de la Cruz, the provincial assemblies of 
the party—due to reported pressure from Colone!| 
Batista—shifted support to Gémez, choosing as 
their presidential electors the lists previously 
named by the Gémez parties. The Supreme Elec- 
toral Tribunal, however, vetoed this manoeuvre, 
and Gémez’ supporters threatened in consequence 
to withdraw from the contest. President Harold 
W. Dodds of Princeton University was invited by 
the Cuban government to suggest a solution for 
the difficulty. His formula gave the Gémez-Cruz 
electors freedom to choose between the two can- 
didates. On December 18 these electors voted to 
back Gémez, thus eliminating the candidacy of 
de la Cruz. General Menocal, however, had al- 
ready foreseen that the Dodds ruling would thus 
strengthen his leading rival, and had refused to 
continue in the race unless President Mendieta 
resigned—a demand which brought the presi- 
dent’s downfall and his replacement by Secretary 
of State José A. Barnet. 

Plans are thus going forward for an election 
in which only the two traditional parties will 
participate: the former Conservatives supporting 
Menocal, and the Liberals dominating the Gémez 
coalition. Political uncertainty has adversely af- 
fected economic conditions in the island.  Al- 
though Cuba has experienced some economic re- 
vival—largely as a result of United States sugar 
and trade policy—declining revenues in recent 
months and increased public expenditures, par- 
ticularly for the military, have stirred apprehen- 


sion for the future. CHARLES A. THOMSON 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 9, Degcemper 27, 1935. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nations! 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Leste Bum, President; EstHer G. OGpgn, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





29 Gas SOO CO oheeeel 


> 


—" —_ =—b> ewe Tf) 


