a 





nal 
Na 
tice 
‘has 
ider 
ken 
ted, 

the 
ra ry, 
»Fin- 
and 
dopt 
dent 


bel- 


goes 
20. 
run, 
The 
are 
)par- 
ance 
-eply 
1 the 
; an: 
they 
pos 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FORKEJGM POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


6 2ARMest 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
ad P ‘ iC. 





Vou. XVIII, No. 49 SEPTEMBER 29, 1939 





Look behind today’s headlines! Read: 


FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS 
AMERICAN NEUTRALITY AND THE WAR . . out Oct. 1 


BUROPE’S ECONOMIC WAR POTENTIAL . . owt Oct. 15 
JAPAN’S POSITION IN WAR CRISIS . . . . . out Nov. 1 
EFFECT OF WAR ON U.S.—L.A. TRADE. . . out Nov. 15 


RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF NEUTRALS .. . . out Dec. 1 
24 issues a year — To members, $3.00 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











8 
CT » . 
59 
General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











ALLIES REJECT AXI 


S PEACE OFFERS 





— the unexpectedly rapid conquest of 
Poland, neither Britain nor France is disposed 
to accept peace on Hitler’s terms. Although the 
Fuebrer expressly disavowed any war aims in West- 
ern Europe in his speech at Danzig on September 19, 
his intimation that Germany was willing to cease 
hostilities on the basis of the status quo met with a 
chilly reception in Paris and London. Speaking in 
the House of Commons on September 20, Prime 
Minister Chamberlain reiterated Britain’s determina- 
tion “to redeem Europe from the perpetually re- 
curring fear of German aggression and to enable 
the peoples of Europe to preserve their independence 
and liberties.” The same spirit characterized 
Premier Daladier’s address on the following day. 


| When I/ Duce broke a prolonged silence on Sep- 


tember 23 to suggest publicly ‘‘that it is a vain illu- 
sion to maintain, or worse still to reconstitute, posi- 
tions which history and the natural dynamism of 
peoples have condemned,” Paris and London tre- 
jected his peace proposals courteously but firmly. 
If the Reich is disappointed by this development, 
ithas given no indication of it. Hitler’s own speech, 
uncompromising and violent in general tenor, was 





» the 
the | 
Sup: | 
1S1St, 
cash | 
ntet: | 


ually | 
d by 
S Of 
id t0| 
and | 
basic 
tacle 
INE | 


little calculated to conciliate Germany's opponents. 
The larger part was devoted to a lengthy denuncia- 
tion of the Versailles treaty, Polish “barbarism” 
and British complicity. If Britain wished to make 
Hitlerism the war issue, Hitler declared, the Ger- 
man people were prepared to take up the challenge. 
Germany could hold out and would not capitulate 
even in the seventh year of war. Meanwhile Ger- 
many and the Soviet Union would settle the fate of 
Eastern Europe, while respecting each other's 
régimes. 

CONQUEST OF POLAND STRENGTHENS 
REICH. The supreme confidence of the Fuehrer was 
justified in many respects. By over-running Poland 


in little more than three weeks, the German mili- 
tary machine has demonstrated its terrible efficiency 
and smooth organization. By September 23 the Ger- 
man High Command could proclaim that the cam- 
paign in Poland was ended with the exception of 
“fighting at hopeless positions in Warsaw, in Mod- 
lin and on the Peninsula of Hela.” In its proud 
review of military accomplishments, it announced 
the capture of 450,000 prisoners and 1,200 guns, 
as well as the seizure or destruction of 800 Polish 
planes, After leaving a garrison in the conquered 
territory, the Reich is now turning its military 
power to the Western front. There the French army 
has not yet seriously penetrated the German de- 
fenses. The Germans have already launched a series 
of counter-attacks, while categorically denying 
reports from Paris that they are planning to turn 
the French flank by an invasion through The Neth- 
erlands and Belgium. 

Germany has also profited economically from 
the conquest of Poland. In that part of the country 
provisionally assigned to the Reich, the Germans 
have obtained rich coal fields which in 1938 pro- 
duced about 42,000,000 tons, or one-quarter of the 
output in Greater Germany. This Polish supply will 
not only relieve the threatened coal shortage in 
Germany, but will give the country a surplus it can 
barter against imports of foodstuffs and other raw 
materials. In addition, the Reith has acquired plenty 
of zinc, as well as practically all of Poland’s war 
industries. It can also draw on Polish labor reserves 
to maintair its agricultural and industrial produc- 
tion, although it will have to reckon with the possi- 
bility of passive resistance on the part of thousands 
of patriotic Poles. 

GERMANY PAYS STALIN’S PRICE. In other 
respects Germany's position is much less favorable. 
The likelihood that Britain can be forced to capitu- 


























late by submarine warfare seems rather small. While 
the Germans had sunk 196,925 tons of British 
and neutral shipping by September 26, the improve- 
ment in British defenses is gradually minimizing 
the submarine menace. In the East the Fuehrer has 
had to pay a heavy price for his non-aggression pact 
with Stalin. The military demarcation line in Poland, 
to which Germany agreed on September 22, assigns 
to the Soviet army three-fifths of the conquered ter- 
ritory, together with a population of about 14 mil- 
lion. In particular, it has deprived Germany of a 
common boundary with Rumania, from which the 
Reich draws vital oil supplies. 


Germany is determined, however, not to tolerate 
any interference with its sources of food and raw 
materials in the Balkans. On September 24 an organ 
of the German Foreign Office specifically warned 
the countries of Southeastern Europe not to court 
the fate of Poland. Possibly this warning was in- 
spired by the ruthless suppression of an abortive 
uprising attempted by the pro-German Iron Guard 
in Rumania on September 21. While members of 
the Iron Guard succeeded in assassinating Premier 
Armand Calinescu, the government of King Carol 


WILL U.S.S.R. BLOCK GERMANY’S EASTWARD PATH? 


As the fourth week of the European war was 
ushered in by a ‘‘peace offensive” from Berlin and 
Rome, the diplomatic situation seemed to be shifting 
in a direction more favorable to the Allied cause. 
Among various signs indicating possible setbacks for 
Germany were the course pursued by the Soviet 
Union in Eastern Europe; the apprehension aroused 
in Italy by Russia’s re-entrance into Balkan politics; 
and the avowed determination of France and Britain 
to endure a prolonged war rather than accept a peace 
settlement on Hitler's terms. 


‘ Whatever may have been the secret clauses of the 
Soviet-German pact, it becomes increasingly obvious 
that this pact envisaged not so much collaboration 
by the two totalitarian powers as parallel action in 
a region where both have something to gain at the 
expense of weaker neighbors. To what extent the 
German and Soviet lines of policy can continue to 
run parallel without crossing each other at some 
vital point is Europe’s most important question. The 
evidence available in the British White and Blue 
Books, published on September 1 and 21 respec- 
tively, would indicate that Hitler authorized the 
Soviet pact as a last resort, in the hope that it would 
effectively prevent France and Britain from fulfilling 
their pledge to Poland, and thus clear the way for 
a quick German victory over the Poles. The Anglo- 
French decision to resist Germany in spite of the 
Soviet pact nullified the principal reason for which 
Hitler had concluded it. 


Page Two 








—= 
promptly retaliated by executing several hundred 
of its leaders and appointing a “strong man,” Gep. 
eral George Argesanu, as Prime Minister. 

The determination of Rumania, pressed by Frang 
and Britain, to avoid any pro-German orientation j 
not the only obstacle with which the Reich mug 
contend in the Balkans. Most of the Rumanian gj 
industry is in the hands of foreign interests hostile 
to Germany. Of the total amount of capital jp 
vested, an Anglo-Belgian group controls 42 per cent 
a Franco-Belgian combine 23 per cent, and Ameti. 
can interests 6 per cent. In Yugoslavia the impor. 
tant copper mines are owned by a French company, | 
while the British control the lead and zinc mines 
Obviously Britain and France are supporting thes 
companies in their refusal to deliver unlimited quan. 
tities to Germany. The Balkans have thus become 
the object of a major tug of war. The Germans, hoy. 
ever, are strategically and economically still in the, 
best position. Unless Southeastern Europe is success. 
ful in playing the U.S.S.R. and Italy off againg 


Germany, it can hardly escape falling completely 
under German domination. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE | 


While Russia’s invasion of Poland may have 





hastened Germany's victory and permitted the 
transfer of some German forces to the Westem| 
front, it may have dangerous long-run consequences] 
for the Third Reich. The very fact that Hitler must] 
now wage a major war in the West makes it neces- 
sary for him either to denude the Eastern front— 
thus giving the U.S.S.R. added freedom for any 
diplomatic or military maneuvers it may choose] 
to undertake—or else weaken the Western front by| 
maintaining a sufficient force in the East to check} 
possible inimical moves by the Soviet Union. The) 
fourth partition of Poland has so far redounded 
strategically to the benefit of the U.S.S.R., which 
has not only obtained a common frontier with Hun- 
gary, but controls the entire former Polish frontier 
with Rumania and is thus in a position, if it wishes, 
to interfere with German attempts to obtain sup 
plies of wheat and oil in these two countries. Not 
will Russia itself, now that it is operating on a wat| 
basis, be able to furnish Germany with any com} 
siderable supplies except possibly wheat and map| 
ganese. Moreover, Moscow propaganda, which} 
combines the appeal of Slav unity with that of com | 
munism, may have far-reaching effects among the| 
backward, predominantly peasant populations of 
Eastern and Southeastern Europe. While the land 
owners, industrialists and white-collar workers of 
this region may prefer to accept Nazi rule, the 
peasants and other elements, notably Jews, may elect 





dred 


‘anice 
N js 
Must 

n oil 
Stile 
L in. 
Cent, 
Neti- 
1por- 
Dany, | 
Lines, 
these 
juan- 
come 
how. 
1 the | 
“CeSS- 
ainst 
etely 


have 





the 
stern| 
ences 
mus| 
eces-| 
ynt— | 
any 
1008¢ 
at by} 
“heck | 
The 
nded 
vhich 
Hun- 
nitier 
ishes, 
sup | 
Nor | 

| Wal 
Con | 
mat: 
vhich } 
com: | 
r the 
s of| 
land: | 
rs Of | 
_ the 
elect 








——— 
— 





to throw in their lot with the Soviet Union. In 
this respect the treatment accorded by Germany and 
Russia to the Poles will become an important object 
lesson to neighboring peoples. 


BALKANS STRIVE TO FORM NEUTRAL 
BLOC. No time has been lost by the countries which 
lie in the path of German and Russian expansion in 
seeking to conciliate the Soviet government. On 
September 23 Hungary, the most anti-Communist 
state in Eastern Europe, renewed diplomatic rela- 
tions with Russia, severed on February 24, when 
the Hungarian government signed Hitler's anti- 
Comintern pact. The Estonian Foreign Minister, M. 
Selter, hurriedly left Moscow on September 24, 
where he had ostensibly gone to conclude a trade 
agreement, just as the Soviet government closed 
passage through Leningrad via the Neva River to 
Finnish vessels. Bulgaria, which hopes to obtain So- 
viet support for its territorial claims against Rumania, 
is negotiating with Moscow regarding air communi- 
cations and trade. Yugoslavia, whose authoritarian 
régime has been under the influence of White Rus- 
sian refugees, is now considering the establishment 
of diplomatic relations with the U.S.S.R. Most im- 
portant of all, Turkey, which has been a friend of 
the Soviet Union since 1920, has sent its Foreign 
Minister, M. Saracoglu, to Moscow, where he is ex- 
pected to discuss the formation of a neutral Balkan 
bloc, possibly under Russian leadership. It would be 
unrealistic to expect that Russia’s plans are deter- 
mined by a desire to protect the interests of France 
and Britain; but these plans might eventually act as 
a brake on Germany's eastward expansion, and to 
this extent prevent establishment of Nazi hegemony 
in Europe. 

ITALY DISTURBED BY SHIFT IN BALKANS. 
The significance of this abrupt change in the Balkan 
balance of power has not been lost on Italy, whose 
share in the axis partnership was to be participation 
in control of the Balkans and domination of the 
Mediterranean. Should Germany now be forced to 
concentrate its efforts in the West, temporarily leav- 
ing Southeastern Europe open to Russian maneuvers, 
Italy’ S hope of event nally obtaining satisfaction in 
that region as be price of its collaboration with the 
Reich would be materially reduced. Like Russia, 
Italy apparently would like to assume the leadership 
of a bloc of neutral st ites, and has sought to rea ssure 
Greece and Turkey regarding its future designs in 
the eastern Mediterranean. By an accord con- 
cluded on September 20, Italy and Greece agreed to 
withdraw troops from the frontier created between 


Page Three 




















them by the Italian occupation of Albania last April; 
and on September 23 Italy announced that its gar- 
risons on the Dodecanese Islands, which it had ob- 
tained from Turkey in 1923, were being reduced to 
normal. A three-cornered struggle for a sphere of in- 
fluence in the Balkans may thus develop between 
Germany, Italy and Russia, unless Mussolini finds 
it necessary in the immediate future to reconsider the 
neutrality policy he had proclaimed on September 1. 
This policy appears to have been dictated by the hope 
that, if Italy remained scrupulously neutral, it might 
serve as a benevolent mediator the moment Poland 
was crushed, and win a reward from either or both 
sides for its mediation. The refusal of the Allies to 
consider I) Duce’s peace overtures at this stage of the 
conflict opens up the prospect of a prolonged war, 
which may have grave repercussions on Italy's al- 
ready strained economy. 


The determination of the Allies to continue the 
war until Nazism has been crushed, in the belief thac 
time is on their side, was demonstrated on Septem- 
ber 25, when forces on the Western front swung into 
action. The apparent passivity of the Allies, which 
had provoked criticisms in Britain and the United 
States, is explainable on the ground that France and 
Britain had no desire to sacrifice men and material 
in fruitless assaults on the West Wall until they felt 
they had some chance of success. In the long run, 
however, military operations may prove less de- 
cisive than operations on the diplomatic front, where 
Germany vies with the Allies in attempting to win 
the support of various neutrals. Most of these neutrals 
are less concerned with the ideological slogans of the 
two sides than with the prospects one or the other 
may hold out for the establishment of tolerable con- 
ditions of peace. If the Allies can demonstrate that 
they are not merely able to rebuff Hitler’s terms, but 
ready to frame the basis of a new and more workable 
order in Europe, their chances of winning neutral 
support will be immeasurably enhanced. If they do 
not, the chief beneficiary of the war may be neither 
Germany nor the Allies, but Russia. 


VerRA MICHELES DEAN 








The War and German Society: The Testament of a Lib- 
eral, by Albrecht Mendelssohn-Bartholdy. New Haven, 
Yale University Press, 1937. $2.75 


This volume is a notable attempt to describe the effects 
of the World War on German life. Instead of merely sum- 
marizing the other German monographs of the Carnegie 
Endowment’s war history, the author views the impact of 
the war in the light of his own subjective wartime im- 
pressions and of his reflections on German post-war de- 
velopments. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 49, SEPTEMBER 29, 1939. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, 


p> 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 


National 
Editor. 


Incorporated. 
Vera MICHELES DEAN; 
Two Dollars a Year. 


DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; 
, under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 


















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
SEPT. 25.—Senator Pittman’s “working draft’ of 
legislation to repeal the existing neutrality law 
presents President Roosevelt with a measure which 
meets his primary request—repeal of the arms em- 
bargo—but in all other respects conforms to the 
demands of the “mandatory” group in Congress. 
While the Pittman draft will doubtless be subject 
to change in the Foreign Relations Committee or in 
subsequent debate on the floor of the Senate and 
House, most Washington observers are predicting 
that such future revision will tend to stiffen, rather 
than relax, its mandatory provisions. 


WASHINGTON AVALANCHE. One basis for 
this prediction, and one explanation for the kind 
of resolution drafted by the fourteen Democratic 
members of Mr. Pittman’s committee, is found in 
the avalanche of letters and telegrams which has 
descended on Washington from all parts of the 
country during the past week. Contrary to recent 
polls of public opinion, the bulk of this correspond- 
ence urges the strictest neutrality, and a substantial 
majority apparently favors retention of the arms 
embargo. There is no doubt that the volume and 
tone of this week’s mail has astonished the Senators 
and Representatives who will soon be called upon 
to vote on the neutrality issue. While Congress has 
been flooded with communications from its constitu- 
ents many times in the past, no one has found any 
precedent for the current demonstration or any 
clear explanation for the marked divergence from 
recent polls. The contention that Congressional 
mail merely reflects the activity of organized pres- 
sure groups is not supported by the evidence found 
in Senate and House offices which have checked and 
tabulated their correspondence. While from 30 to 40 
per cent of this correspondence has been traced to 
such organized groups, the remainder is apparently 
spontaneous and represents the personal convictions 
of the writers. Whatever the reasons for this ava- 
lanche, its effect has been to cast further doubt on 
the outcome of the impending debate in Congress. 


THE PRESIDENT’S MESSAGE. In his message 
of September 21, President Roosevelt asked for im- 
mediate repeal of the arms embargo against bel- 
ligerents and return to the principles of international 
law as the surest safeguard against involvement of 
the United States in the European war. 

Ac the outset, the President assumed that every 
member of the Senate and House and every mem- 








FC it 
sibbes, 
pri) 
pens 
le 
ber of the Executive branch of the government “are al 
equally and without reservation in favor of such | 
measures as will protect the neutrality, the safety 
and the integrity of our country, and at the same WIL 
time keep us out of war.” Reviewing the efforts 
of the Executive to prevent the outbreak of war 
and tracing the traditional American policy based 
on “sound principles of neutrality and peace through 
international law,’ Mr. Roosevelt declared that 
the existing arms embargo was “most vitally dan. | —— 
gerous to American neutrality, American security| 
and American peace.” As a substitute for the exist 
ing neutrality law, President Roosevelt recom | ~ 
mended a measure based substantially on the pro. VY 
gram proposed by Secretary Hull at the last session 
of Congress. outli 
This program called for a discretionary cash-and. | beg! 
carry plan giving the President authority (1) to for | "8! 
bid American vessels or citizens from proceeding } The 
“through areas of combat operations’ as defined by } We" 
the President; and (2) to require that all goods} 0! 
exported from the United States to belligerents be } 9 
preceded by the transfer of title to foreign purchasers. | Stal 
While the Pittman resolution provides for repeal} F 
of the arms embargo, it not only fails to give the | sess 
President discretion in applying the cash-and-carry | Sch 
clause but further restricts his discretionary powers in | Est 
other sections of the law. Section 1 gives Congress | Sep 
as well as the President authority to proclaim the | his 
existence of a “state of war,” thus bringing the Act | wh 
into effect. Section 2 inserts a mandatory cash-and- | sig 
carry clause forbidding any American vessel to carry | am 
“any passengers, or any articles or materials’ to } tio 
any belligerent, as well as requiring the transfer of } oth 
title to foreign purchasers. The sole exception to } ev 
this sweeping prohibition is a proviso permitting } si0 
commerce on the Great Lakes between Canada and | ag 
the United States. If enacted by Congress, this clause } in 
would apparently prevent American ships from } ‘te 
calling at Halifax and Vancouver, and cut off } gt 
American-borne commerce from British and French | 2 
possessions in the Caribbean, as well as Australia, | ™ 
New Zealand, South Africa and other Allied terri- | 
tories far from Europe. Section 3 gives the Presi- } ti 
dent authority to forbid American vessels from pro- | 
ceeding through combat areas, while Section at 
limits “‘ordinary commercial credits” to 90 days, f 
without renewals, and requires the President to re | 4 
port to Congress every six months on all credits | P 
granted under this clause. Taken as a whole, this is } 4 
the strictest legislation yet proposed. W.T.Srone | 4 





