th in a 
. Sayre 
-rmina- 
en the 
te con- 
reason- 
1 econ- 
1 trade 
egulate 
esident 
rranted 
be con- 
on the 
iS. 
realized 
nust be 
id very 
visions 
rs from 
n of all 
nerally 
3. The 
a less 
positive 
 depen- 
‘sifying 
id sect- 
mprove 
titor in 
would 
its with 
s. But 
nust be 
y mem- 


CcOnces- ; 


2 jinde- 
)PPER 


National 
AN, Editor. 
Year. 


IEOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XVI, No. 27 


Apri. 30, 1937 


a FOR DISCUSSION GROUPS 


thinking and discussion. 


study helps and bibliography. 
15 cents each 


Please order by titles 
1 packet for each Headline Book 


Packets of discussion material, for use with HEADLINE 
Books, provide well-planned programs to stimulate 


In every packet: a four-meeting guide, group projects, 


Encered as second- 
class matter December 


2, 1921, at che Pos 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., ander the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Dr. William W. Bishop 


% University of Michigan Library 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 


NAZI AMBITIONS TROUBLE EUROPE 


EELERS for a general European settlement 

recently put out by France and Great Britain 
have brought cautious response from Germany. 
While the Hitler government is ready to partici- 
pate in any economic arrangements which will 
provide the Reich with foreign credits and re- 
lieve its shortage of imported raw materials, it 
appears to have no intention of abandoning its 
territorial ambitions in Europe or its determina- 
tion to fulfill the Four-Year Plan, designed to as- 
gure its economic independence in time of war. 
The calculations of the Western democracies for 
a general settlement must still take into ac- 
count the possibility that Nazi Germany, when the 
time is ripe, may attempt to absorb Austria and 
the German minority in Czechoslovakia. 

The disturbing effect of Germany’s territorial 
aspirations was shown once more at Venice on 
April 22-23, when Mussolini and Chancellor 
Schuschnigg re-examined Austria’s prospects for 
independence. Schuschnigg had gone to Venice 
| with the hope of obtaining renewed assurances of 
Italian aid against German penetration and of 
securing Mussolini’s support for one of two al- 
ternatives to Anschluss—Hapsburg restoration 
or Austrian participation in a Danubian bloc in- 
cluding Czechoslovakia. Much water, however, 
, has flowed under international bridges since 1934, 
when I] Duce massed Italian troops on the Bren- 
ner Pass to prevent a German putsch in Austria. 
Italy has staked its military and economic re- 
sources on success in Ethiopia and Spain, where 
its interests conflict with those of Britain, and is 
no longer in a position to challenge a heavily 
rearmed Germany on Austria’s behalf. It is not 
so much that Mussolini fears Anschluss less than 
he did in 1934, but that he fears Germany more. 
He also hopes to obtain a greater measure of 
German support for his plans in the Mediterran- 
ean. Nor is he ready, by open sponsorship of 
Hapsburg restoration, to compromise his new 


friendship with Yugoslavia, which may some day 
serve as Italy’s first line of defense against Ger- 
man penetration in the Balkans. At the same time, 
while favoring economic negotiations between the 
Rome bloc and the Little Entente, Mussolini op- 
poses an Austro-Czechoslovak political under- 
standing, which might spell the end of Italian in- 
fluence in Vienna. 

At the Venice conference Mussolini insisted 
that no settlement of Central European problems 
can be reached without active participation by 
Germany; made it plain that Italy cannot be ex- 
pected to check Anschluss by military force; and 
deprecated Chancellor Schuschnigg’s desire to 
block German aggression by political cooperation 
with Czechoslovakia. Undeterred by his disap- 
pointing reception in Venice, Chancellor Schusch- 
nigg reiterated his determination to preserve 
Austria’s independence. His success in carrying 
out this policy will hinge on the support he can 
obtain from France and Britain, whose rearma- 
ment is regarded in Eastern Europe as the most 
effective brake on Nazi expansion. 

The extent to which Britain is prepared to give 
explicit guarantees of security east of the Rhine 
remains obscure. A step in the direction of clari- 
fying the situation in Western Europe, however, 
was taken on April 24, when France and Britain, 
in a note addressed to Brussels, freed Belgium 
of its obligations to them under the Locarno treaty 
and the Anglo-Franco-Belgian arrangements for 
military consultations drawn up in 1936 follow- 
ing Germany’s repudiation of Locarno. France 
and Britain will continue to guarantee Belgium’s 
independence and territorial integrity, and Bel- 
gium’s release from its obligations in no way af- 
fects existing Franco-British undertakings. The 
new arrangement is based on the understanding 
that Belgium will defend its frontiers “with all 
its forces” against any aggression or invasion; 


will prevent its territory from being used for pur- 


— Page Two 


poses of aggression against another state by land, 
by sea or in the air; will organize its defenses in 
an efficient manner for this purpose; and will 
maintain its “fidelity” to the League Covenant. 
Some observers believe that Belgium, which 
continues to enjoy French and British guarantees 
of territorial integrity and has received an offer 
of similar guarantees from Germany, is now free 
to resume its pre-war status of neutrality. The 
new arrangement, however, apparently does not 
affect Belgium’s obligations under Article XVI of 
the League Covenant, which provides that in case 
of aggression against any League state, League 
members “will take the necessary steps to afford 
passage through their territory” to fellow-mem- 
bers. This provision would obligate Belgium 
to permit the passage of French and British 
troops in case of German aggression, and the 
reference in the Franco-British note to Belgium’s 
continued fidelity to the Covenant is presumably 
intended to cover such a contingency. As long 
as Belgium remains within the League system, 
it cannot expect to enjoy the advantages of 
neutrality; its position has altered in form 
but not in substance. Mr. Eden’s conversations 
with Premier Van Zeeland in Brussels on April 
25-26 would indicate that Britain hopes to include 
Belgium in a defensive bloc of Western democra- 
cies, so organized as not to offend the Belgian 
Rexists, who favor rapprochement with Germany. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


EUROPEAN POWERS PATROL SPAIN 


After repeated postponements the international 
patrol to prevent arms and foreign volunteers 
from entering Spain finally went into effect at 
midnight on April 19. Under supervision of the 
London non-intervention committee, warships of 
four powers—Britain, France, Germany and Italy 
—are to watch the coasts, while the French bor- 
der will be controlled by a mixed commission, and 
the Portuguese frontier by a British force. 
Eleven control ports are established, where ships 
bound for Spain are to stop for examination of 
their papers and cargo, and possible questioning 
of passengers and crew. 

The powers of the patrol observers, however, 
are limited. Their jurisdiction extends only to 
vessels of the 27 nations which are represented 
on the London Committee, and they possess no 
authority to halt such vessels, or to make a thor- 
ough search of their cargoes. Neither is any ef- 
fective control of airplane traffic provided. Should 
a vessel refuse to heed an order to stop, or should 
war material or volunteers be found aboard, the 


—— 
—e 


observers merely report the violation to the non. 
intervention committee, which in turn informs 
the government of the offending vessel. Inception 
of the plan was greeted not only by widespread 
skepticism, but by determined opposition on the 
part of the Valencia authorities. The Loyalist 
government ordered its warships to prevent ip. 
terference with all vessels flying the Spanish flag, 
and to accord protection wherever necessary to 
all other vessels in Spanish territorial waters. 

Within Spain the war seems to have reached 
a stalemate, except in the Basque region to the 
north. The rebel drive against Bilbao continued 
to make progress, and by April 26 General Mola’s 
troops were reported to have entered Durango, 
only sixteen miles from the Basque capital, 
Meanwhile, Franco’s attempted blockade of Bil- 
bao from the sea had prevented both the arrival 
of food-ships, carrying sorely needed provisions, 
and the departure of cargoes of iron ore, essential 
to the progress of the British rearmament pro- 
gram. Although London had not recognized the 
validity of the Rebel blockade, it had warned Brit- 
ish shipping against entering the port. On April 
20, however, the Seven Seas Spray, a British 
craft, safely ran the blockade into Bilbao. This 
event, combined with parliamentary criticism of 
the Baldwin government’s policy, led to substan- 
tial modification of the British attitude; shippers 
were merely advised that the government could 
not assure them that the port was free. The gov- 
ernment, moreover, without technically convoying 
British vessels, took steps to accord them pro- 
tection up to the three-mile limit. On April 23 
three more British food-ships ran the blockade. 
When they neared Bilbao, the battle cruiser Hood 
“happened to be in the vicinity,” and its presence 
prevented stoppage of the vessels by Insurgent 
craft. 

The trend of the Rebel régime toward an au- 
thoritarian pattern was markedly accentuated by 
a decree of April 19, when General Franco set up 
a single party under his leadership, ordering the 
dissolution of all other political groups and militia 
organizations. This measure liquidated the Cath- 
olic Popular Action, as well as two monarchist 
parties and the Fascist Phalanx. 
party adopted as its platform the 26-point pro- 
gram of the Fascists, and at the same time held 
open the possibility of eventual restoration of the 


monarchy. CHARLES A. THOMSON 


A History of the Far East in Modern Times, by Harold M. 
Vinacke. New York, F. S. Crofts & Co., 1936. $6.00 
Second revised edition of this valuable summary of 

modern Far Eastern developments. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 27, Aprit 30, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Srreet, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasimm Bugit, President; EstHmr G. OGpEN, Secretary; Vera Micne.zs Dran, Eéiter. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


The new state } 


Ani 


