





= 


a 
a 
¢ 


i=) 
Q. 
8 





il ves- 
ie the 
en no 
voted 
ry of | 
how- | 
ers of 
ot be 


ree to 
direct 
ops iS 
ritain. 


INE 





ch ne 
ro ¥ \ ue 
,) er ¢ » 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


PBeneral Library 


University of Mi 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vo. XX, No. 22 


Marcu 21, 1941 





MATSUOKA GOES TO BERLIN 


ae successfully dictating a peace settlement 
in Indo-China, Japan has dispatched its Foreign 
Minister to Berlin and Rome for conferences with 
its Axis partners. While the move is clearly intended 
asa gesture to impress British and American opinion, 


| the circumstances attending it serve to lessen its ef- 


fectiveness. The difficulty which Tokyo encountered 
in asserting its will in Indo-China, as well as the 
uncertainty which exists regarding the settlement’s 
ultimate results, have tended to emphasize the ob- 
stacles to Japan’s drive into southeast Asia. Against 
this background, it would seem that the Berlin-Rome 
conferences are perhaps designed more to reassure 
Tokyo than to lay down a bold scheme of concerted 
action in Europe and Asia. The fact that Matsuoka’s 
visit will mean at least a month’s delay before Japan 
is likely to embark on further action in the Far East 
emphasizes the hesitation which now exists in Jap- 
anese circles. 

PROSPECTS FOR MATSUOKA’S VISIT. An- 


| nouncement of the journey of Yosuke Matsuoka, the 


Japanese Foreign Minister, to Berlin and Rome 


| opened a wide field of speculation and conjecture as 


to the results which it might achieve. The formal 


| communiqué issued in Tokyo merely indicates that 


the Foreign Minister will ‘‘exchange personal greet- 
ings with the leaders of Germany and Italy, confer 


with them, and gather first-hand information on ex- . 
| isting conditions in Europe.”” There is reason to be- 


lieve that this noncommittal statement adheres more 
closely to facts than most official communiqués. 

The realities of the existing situation in the Far 
East, and of Japan’s relation to it, hardly admit of 
any Machiavellian strokes of policy. Tokyo would 
obviously like to assume full control over “Greater 
Fast Asia,” the region marked out as its sphere in the 
pact with the Axis powers. The Netherlands Indies, 
which constitutes the richest economic prize in this 
fegion, cannot be won without taking Singapore — 


the strategic key to southeast Asia. After the recent 
“Pacific crisis,” however, Japan is more than ever 
aware that any such attempt would meet with deter- 
mined opposition. Tokyo will hardly shoulder the 
risks involved unless there is greater assurance that 
Germany can overcome British resistance in Europe. 
On this question, the Japanese Foreign Minister 
might well desire an opportunity for independent 
observation and assessment of Germany's position, 
especially since his information is largely derived 
through army men like General Hiroshi Oshima, the 
Japanese Ambassador in Berlin, who are thoroughly 
committed to all-out cooperation with the Axis. A 
basic difficulty is involved in the Axis-Japan pact, 
despite its apparent advantages to both sides. While 
Germany would welcome an outright clash in the 
Pacific between Japan and the Anglo-American front, 
Tokyo is anxious to move into southeast Asia with- 
out becoming engaged in a major struggle. It re- 
mains to be seen whether this dilemma can be re- 
solved when Matsuoka confers with Hitler. 

A secondary, but undoubtedly important, reason 
for Matsuoka’s visit to Europe lies in Japan’s uncer- 
tain relations with the Soviet Union. It is understood 
that the Japanese Foreign Minister intends to confer 
with Soviet leaders in Moscow on his return trip. 
This itinerary will enable him to undertake a prior 
exploration of the issue of Soviet-Japanese relations 
with the German leaders at Berlin. The Axis-Japan 
pact was undoubtedly sold to Japan partly on the 
strength of Hitler’s alleged influence at Moscow. Six 
months have since passed, but except for the cus- 
tomary one-year renewal of the Soviet-Japanese fish- 
eries agreement—again, as usual, on somewhat worse 
terms for Japan—there have been no developments. 
Despite occasional hopeful announcements from 
Tokyo, the current prospects of a Soviet-Japanese trade 
treaty or a non-aggression pact do not seem favor- 
able. Tokyo’s Foreign Minister will have a chance to 








—— Ii] ]SS[S[[==s._ Page Two 


put this question directly to Hitler: can he deliver 
Moscow, or was he overrating his influence with 
the Soviet leaders ? 

THE INDO-CHINA SETTLEMENT. After sev- 
eral extensions of the Thailand-Indo-China armistice, 

a peace settlement was finally signed at Tokyo on 
March 11. The armistice had originally been con- 
cluded on January 31 for a ten-day period, but nearly 
six weeks elapsed before Tokyo succeeded in enforc- 
ing a definitive settlement. Under terms of the peace 
pact, Thailand was reported to have acquired 21,750 
square miles of territory in the Laos and Cambodian 
provinces of Indo-China. The extent of territory thus 
acquired by Thailand is considerably less than one- 
third of Laos and Cambodia, which was understood 
to be the basis of Japan’s first “compromise” pro- 
posal at the peace conference. In addition, the ceded 
territories become demilitarized zones, with equal 
treatment specified for Indo-China’s nationals in 
these areas, thus limiting Thailand’s full exercise of 
sovereign rights. 

While the settlement enhances Japan’s prestige as 
the “police power” in this corner of southeast Asia, 
certain of the corollary gains expected by Tokyo are 
more problematical. As part of the settlement, an 
exchange of letters made Japan the guarantor of its 
execution and expressed ‘‘an intention’’ by Thailand 
and Indo-China not to conclude with third powers 
any political, economic, or military agreement di- 











—<—— 











rected against Japan. On March 12, however, Pring 
Varavarn, head of the Thai delegation at Tokyo, 
declared in a press interview that Thailand woul 
continue to deal “‘on a mutual and reciprocal basis’ 
with all countries and could not accept the doctrine 
of an exclusive Japanese sphere in East Asia. 


The exact implications of this statement can op} 
be made clear by future events, but it tends to cop. 
firm the fact that as yet Japan has been unable to ¢. 
cure for itself the full results expected from the 
settlement. No further special rights seem to have | 
been won in Thailand, and even in Indo-China sp¢ | 
cific evidence of any large additional gains to Japan 
has yet to be revealed. When the truce was originally 
concluded, reports stated that Japan would obtain 
from Indo-China an army post at Saigon, use of | 
naval facilities in Cam Ranh Bay, and other military | 
concessions. None of these prospective gains in the | 
military-naval sphere have yet materialized, although 
a few Japanese warships and bombers have appeared 
at Saigon. Even in the economic sphere, with negotia- 
tions on trade matters still proceeding in Tokyo, 
there is some question as to how far Indo-China may | 
be forced to yield. On the other hand, Japan is prob 
ably in a better position to exact such concessions 
than before the Thailand-Indo-China conflict, anda 
gradual extension of Japanese control over Indo 
China may now be expected. 





T. A. Bisson | 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


My Sister and I, by Dirk van der Heide. New York, Har- 
court, Brace, 1941. $1.00 


The poignant diary of a 12-year-old Dutch boy who lost 
his mother in the bombardment of Rotterdam and finally 
found refuge in the United States. 


Total Defense, by Clark Foreman and Joan Raushenbush. 
New York, Doubleday, Doran, 1940. $1.25 


This ~nusual volume, published like a group of type- 
written sheets bound at the top, is printed in the form of 
two memoranda. The first is an imaginary summary writ- 
ten for Adolf Hitler by German officials, describing a hypo- 
thetical Nazi plan for gaining control of the Americas, 
principally by economic means. The second is a detailed and 
stimulating program by which the authors believe Pan- 
Americanism and democracy can be preserved and strength- 
ened in the Western Hemisphere. 





What is the crucial decision the U.S. faces in 
its Far Eastern Policy? Read: 


AMERICA’S DILEMMA IN THE FAR EAST 
by T. A. Bisson 


25¢ 


Vol. XVI, No. 7, of Foreign Policy Reports 











Report on England: November 1940, by Ralph Ingersoll. 
New York, Simon and Schuster, 1940, $1.50 
Vivid, first-hand account of recent events in Englani, 
with some controversial comments on air warfare ani 
American planes. 


The New Spirit in Arab Lands, by H. I. Katibah. New| 
York, the author, 303 Fifth Avenue, 1940. $3.00 
A Syrian Arab long resident in America attempts a study | 
of “Arab nationalism from the inside.” Many interesting | 
views are presented in the course of a rather disjointed | 
survey. A useful bibliography is appended. 


The Great Hatred, by Maurice Samuel. New York, Knopf, 
1940. $2.00 
A brilliant though disputable psychological analysis | 
anti-Semitism, construed as a furtive form of enmity w 
Christianity itself. 





F.P.A. Radio Schedule | 
Subject: THE BALKAN FRONT 
Speaker: John C. deWilde 
Date: Sunday, March 23 
Time: 2:15 p.m., E.S.T. 
Station: NBC, blue network 


Please let us have your comments. 








—— 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 22, Marcu 21, 1941. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. Nation# 





VerA- MicuE.es DeAN, Editon 
Two Dollars a Year. 


President; DorotHy F. Legt, Secretary; 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., 


Ao 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





sta 
on 
ve 
ac 
dr; 
M 
| gr 
clu 
su 


pic 


) have 
ia Spe- 


Japan 


1se of 
uilitary 
in the 
hough 
peared 
>gotia- 


Tokyo, 





1a may | 


; prob- 
>$Si0ns 
and a 


Indo- 





SON 


rersoll, | 


rgland, 
re and | 


1. New 


a study 
resting 
jointed 


Knopf, 


ysis of 
nity to 





Nation 
, Edin. 





Enactment by Congress of the lend-lease bill has 
met with widespread applause in Latin America. 
Aside from general Communist objections to any- 
thing regarded as contributing to ‘imperialist’ war, 
the only important criticism noted below the Rio 
Grande came from Chile. A long coast-line, and 
responsibility for control of the strategic Straits of 
Magellan, combine to make Chile especially appre- 
hensive of war in the Pacific. According to some sec- 
tions of Chilean opinion, the United States has 
brought the possibility of war one step nearer by its 
open support of the anti-Axis cause. 

This relatively minor complaint, however, can 
hardly be said to constitute a rift in the New World 
front vis-a-vis the Old. On the contrary, hemispheric 
solidarity appeared to be strengthened last week by 
Latin American comments on announcements that 
Mexico and Panama are cooperating with the United 
States in defense matters. Representative Montevideo 
editors, for example, called for similar whole-hearted 
cooperation with Washington on the part of the 
Uruguayan government; the Bogota newspaper, 
owned by the President of Colombia, gave unquali- 
fied approval to the arrangements; while the Mexi- 
can press declared that Mexico had blazed the trail 
for all Latin America to coordinate its defense facili- 
ties with those of the United States. 


U.S. AND MEXICO COLLABORATE. Identical 
statements issued in Mexico City and Washington 
on March 4 revealed that the two countries are de- 
veloping a joint program for “common defense,” in 
accordance with the declaration for mutual assistance 
drawn up in Havana at the Conference of Foreign 
Ministers of the American Republics. It is taken for 
granted that the completed arrangements will in- 
clude plans for the development of naval bases at 
such strategic points as Salina Cruz, Acapulco, Tam- 


| pico, Vera Cruz and Mazatlan, the improvement of 


airports, and possibly the lease of the railroad across 
the Tehuantepec Isthmus as an alternative inter- 
ocean route to the Panama Canal. The decision to 
improve Mexican airports confirmed reports first pub- 
lished in December predicting that the international 
airlines servicing the area between the Rio Grande 
and the Canal would be included in hemisphere de- 
fense plans 

It is also reported that a Mexican military mission 
will soon take up quarters in Washington, and that 
a permanent joint board similar to that established 


TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA 


By JOHN CLARK* 





by Canada and the United States may be set up. But 
just as important, for the moment at least, as the 
military aspects of the United States-Mexican deal, 
are its political implications. In the Mexican Senate 
last week José Castillo Torre, when asking for in- 
formation on these negotiations, declared: “We trust 
the people of the United States . . . as well as Presi- 
dent Roosevelt.” Complying with this request, For- 
eign Minister Ezequiel Padilla stressed the great 
sympathy of Mexico for its northern neighbor and in 
words colorful enough for a Churchill or Roosevelt 
affirmed: “The symbol of our international life 
should not be Lot's wife, turned into a pillar of salt 
for looking back at the flames of a dead city, but 
Pallas Athena, goddess of Democracy, facing danger 
and in whose bright lance hurled at the sun is found 
the call to liberty.” 

In more sober vein, Padilla explained that the 
bases to be developed in cooperation with the United 
States would be at the disposal of other New World 
countries and that they would be built by Mexican 
money and workers, and policed by Mexican soldiers. 


PANAMA PERMITS BASES. Similar emphasis 
on retention of all sovereign rights was made by 
Arnulfo Arias, President of Panama, in announcing 
a decision to permit the United States to erect de- 
fenses outside the narrow Canal Zone. Not the Dec- 
laration of Havana but an agreement signed a year 
earlier between the United States and Panama was 
the basis for this second practical contribution to 
inter-American defense. According to the announce- 
ment, Panama will retain jurisdiction over civilians 
within the new defense areas, which will be vacated 
by the United States when the war emergency has 
passed. Panama, moreover, will be compensated by 
the United States for the land to be occupied by the 
listening posts and anti-aircraft emplacements re- 
quired for adequate defense of the Canal. 

Two important overtones are to be noted in these 
new inter-American developments. In the case of the 
Mexican deal, the cordiality of officials in both Mex- 
ico City and Washington strongly suggests that the 
defense agreement presages a settlement of outstand- 
ing commercial and political differences, centering 
primarily around oil property rights. In the case of 
Panama, the cooperation shown by President Arias 
goes far to discount recent assumptions that he was 
moving away from, rather than toward, the ideal of 
Western Hemisphere solidarity. 


*Mr. Clark substitutes this month in the absence of Mr. McCulloch, who is at present traveling in South America. 


For more extensive coverage on Latin American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS, a bi-weekly newsletter edited by Mr. McCulloch. For sample 
copy of this publication, write to the Washington Bureau, Foreign Policy Association, 1200 National Press Building, Washington, D.C. 








| 
| 
I 
| 


| Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Mar. 17.—The machinery of government in 
Washington is swinging into action this week to 
carry out the vast program projected by President 
Roosevelt in his appeal to the nation on March 15. 
Heeding the call for speed in mobilizing the re- 
sources of the country for “total effort,” Congress has 
set the stage for prompt consideration of the $7,000,- 
000,000 appropriation bill covering the cost of all-out 
aid, with an early and favorable vote expected in the 
House. A dozen Executive agencies are at work on 
revising production schedules, consolidating British 
and American orders, establishing new priorities, and 
coordinating administrative machinery. 


SHIPPING AND ECONOMIC WARFARE. At 
the moment, first attention is being given the ship- 
ping crisis,* which will be the subject of important 
discussions with Sir Arthur Salter, Parliamentary 
Under-secretary for British shipping, now on his way 
to Washington. On March 17 a compilation of Brit- 
ish, allied and neutral losses made by Lloyd’s of 
London showed that they totaled nearly 5,000,000 
tons for the first 18 months of the war—600,000 tons 
more than in the first two and a half years of the 
last war. While plans for making use of all idle 
tonnage in the Western Hemisphere are under con- 
sideration, there is a growing feeling in Administra- 
tion circles that more drastic measures will soon 
be necessary. Moreover, following the President's 
pointed reference to ships in his Saturday speech, 
there is less reluctance to discuss the possibility of 
direct naval assistance, either in the form of an ex- 
tended Atlantic patrol or actual convoy of shipments 
to Britain. 


Another vital question brought to the front by 
President Roosevelt's speech is the probable exten- 
sion of export controls as an instrument of economic 
warfare. Relatively little publicity has been given to 
the operation of the export control system, adminis- 
tered by Col. R. L. Maxwell, head of the Export 
Control Administration, in collaboration with the 
State Department. During the past three months, 
however, several significant steps have been taken 
to broaden the powers of Colonel Maxwell and to 
extend the area of economic control. 


Since January 10, for example, no less than 27 new 
categories have been added to the license system, 


*For backeround of shipping crisis, cf. Washington News Letter, Foreign 
Policy Bulletin, March 7, 1941. 





most of which affect chiefly Japan and the Sovig 
Union. Recent additions include such items as gj 
well and refining machinery, sole leather and ¢ 

per wire, purchased in large quantities by the Sovie 
Union in 1940, and petroleum, coke and varioys | 
chemicals formerly exported to Japan. Emphasizing | 
these restrictions, the powers of Colonel Maxwell | 
were increased by an Executive order of March 15 | 
authorizing the Administrator to make additions to | 
or deletions from the general categories subject to | 
license. The effect of this ruling is to permit the Ad. | 
ministrator to make changes almost overnight, with _ 
out requiring the formality of a new Executive order | 
signed by the President in each case. 








At the same time, the Export Control Administra 
tion has taken steps to expedite shipments to Great 
Britain and Canada by issuing a blanket license cov. | 
ering the export of more than 130 items used by these 
countries. The blanket license system for Canada 
has been in operation since January 18, while the 
system was extended to Great Britain and Northen | 
Ireland on March 3. 


This tightening of economic controls, however, has | 
not yet removed certain apparent contradictions in 
the Administration’s economic policy. For despite the 
President's sharp indictment of the Axis power, 
large exports of war materials continue to flow to 
Japan. Throughout 1940, Japan continued to bea | 
heavy purchaser of American petroleum, gasoline, | 
machine tools, copper, scrap iron and steel. Total | 
exports of petroleum products to Japan increased 
from $45,285,000 in 1939 to $54,600,000 in 1940, 
while gasoline exports actually trebled, rising from 
1,198,000 barrels to 3,152,000 barrels. It is true that 
since last November shipments of machine tools, 
ferroalloys and refined copper have dropped of 
sharply. According to the latest figures of the De 
partment of Commerce, total exports to Japan de 
clined from $29,707,000 in January 1940 to $ll; 
588,000 in January 1941, but petroleum products are 
still high on the list and only slightly below the 
figures of a year ago. Total exports to Russia, on 
the other hand, have declined from $13,066,000 in 
January 1940 to $2,501,000 in January 1941. 


There are still those who are urging a policy of 
caution with respect to Japan, but the present trend 
is in the opposite direction. The next few months att 
likely to witness a broad extension of export controls 


W. T. STONE 





A 
Py 


~~ 


= 


Vol 


si0 
tro 
201 


