IC 


"Sity of Hitch; 


J —1944 Arbor, yr 0) 


JAN 11 1544 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


> cOuntry | Yor. XXIII, No. 12 


al condi- 


JANUARY 7, 1944 


lowever, PROBLEM OF EASTERN POLAND TESTS MOSCOW-TEHERAN ACCORDS 


eaded by 
ars, had 
mocratic 
n of salt 


- support 


. While 
ines may 
n revolt, 
on. First 
making 
Bolivia's 
ic Ocean 
. of this 
h all of 
table ex- 
ther en- 
Western 
pitate a } 
not only | 
Bolivia, 
me with | 
recalled 
German } 
Standard 
t lacked 
them— 
d its as- 
tely dis- 
:dlocked 
the pro- 
t port, 4 
Bolivian 
ogy may 
t so also 
veen na- 


OW that the Russians, at the turn of the New 
Year, have crossed the old Russo-Polish border, 
the problem of Eastern Poland assumes immedi- 
ate urgency. This problem is not only a test of the 
newly developed collaboration between Britain, Rus- 
sia and the United States, who at Teheran, pro- 
claimed their intention to assure the rights of small 
nations. It also promises to have important reper- 
cussions in this country, where the presence of a large 
population of Polish origin could easily transform 
an issue of foreign policy into a domestic controversy. 
AN ANCIENT DISPUTE. The problem of East- 
ern Poland is not new. Since the formation of the 
Polish state in the tenth century, relations between 
Russia and Poland have been dominated by a strug- 
gle for the borderlands of White Russia and the 
Ukraine, which both countries have claimed at vari- 
ous times—Poland on historic grounds, Russia on 
grounds of ethnography and strategic security. Fol- 
lowing protracted wars with Russia during the six- 
teenth and seventeenth centuries, Poland underwent 
three partitions—in 1772, 1793 and 1795—during 
which it was divided between Austria, Prussia and 
Russia. As a result of these partitions, Russia ob- 
tained for the most part lands which were ethnically 
non-Polish, although they had been included, for 
varying periods, in the Polish state. It was only at 
the close of the Napoleonic wars that Russia ac- 
quired purely Polish areas. 

Following the Bolshevik revolution of 1917, the 
Russian-controlled segment of Poland was reunited 
with the restored Polish state. At that time, when 
Russia was torn by revolution and civil war, Marshal 
Pilsudski sought to expand the country’s boundaries 
as far eastward as possible. In 1919 Polish forces 
overran Eastern Galicia; Vilna, just awarded to 
Lithuania by the Allies, was seized by the Poles; and 
in April 1920 Pilsudski attacked Russia, with the 
avowed aim of including Lithuania, White Russia, 


and the Ukraine in an enlarged Polish-Lithuanian 
state. The Russians drove the Poles out of the 
Ukraine, but under the Russo-Polish treaty of Riga 
concluded in 1921 Poland retained extensive Ukrain- 
ian and White Russian territories. 

RIBBENTROP-MOLOTOV LINE. In subsequent 
years the anti-Russian and anti-Communist policy of 
Polish leaders like Pilsudski and Colonel Beck, pa- 
triotic though it doubtless seemed to many Poles, was 
regarded by Russia as a threat to its security—all the 
more so when, in 1934, Colonel Beck adopted a 
course of “appeasement” toward Hitler. In all fair- 
ness, it should be said that Poland was not in a posi- 
tion to challenge Nazi Germany, nor was its govern- 
ment the only one in the world that sought to ap- 
pease the Nazis. In fact, the Russians did just that 
when, on the eve of Germany's invasion of Poland, 
they concluded a nonaggression pact with Hitler. The 
possibility, however, that Poland might become a 
base for German attack on Russia colored Moscow's 
attitude toward the Polish government. 

Under the Ribbentrop-Molotov agreement of 1939 
Russia obtained Eastern Poland. In this area the Poles 
constitute not a majority, but the largest minority (it 
is estimated that there are, in Eastern Poland, 5 mil- 
lion Poles, over 4 million Ukrainians, and over a 
million White Russians). That same year Polish 
White Russia was incorporated into the White Rus- 
sian Soviet Socialist Republic, while Polish Ukraine 
was incorporated into the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic. Since that time—although Eastern Poland, 
following the German invasion of Russia, has been 
occupied by German forces—the Russians have 
claimed that all inhabitants of these areas of Poland 
deported to Russia are legally citizens of the U.S.S.R., 
not citizens of Poland, as claimed by the Polish gov- 
ernment in London. 

Through the efforts of the late Premier Sikorski, 
who immediately after the German invasion of Rus- 


——————_—_—_ PageTwo 


sia adopted a policy of letting bygones be bygones, a 
basis was laid down for collaboration between the 
Polish government and the Kremlin. By the Russian- 
Polish treaty of July 30, 1941 the U.S.S.R. recognized 
“the Soviet-German treaties of 1939 as to territorial 
changes in Poland as having lost their validity.” It 
might have been assumed that Russian arrangements 
flowing from these treaties, notably the incorpora- 
tion of Polish White Russia and Polish Ukraine into 
the U.S.S.R., would have been equally invalidated, 
but the Soviet government has made no statement to 
that effect. On the contrary, it has consistently given 
the impression that there can be no discussion about 
the disposal of Eastern Poland, and that its accept- 
ance of the terms of the Atlantic Charter after the 
German invasion of 1941 in no way affects any meas- 
ures it may have taken before that time. 

It is dangerous to make dogmatic assertions about 
a controversy so hoary with ancient grudges and 
prejudices. There are a few points, however, that 
can be stated with some degree of certainty. These 
may be listed as follows: 

1. Neither Britain nor the United States will go 
to war with Russia to recover Eastern Poland for the 
Polish state. 

2. Public opinion in Britain and the United States 
will suffer disillusionment if the Soviet government, 
after a quarter of a century of opposing “imperial- 
ism’ and “‘territorial annexations,’ now insists on 
unilateral seizure of Eastern Poland, especially after 
having agreed that its 1939 treaties with Nazi Ger- 
many had lost their validity. 

3. Borders are not merely a matter of strategy 
or ethnography. They are also a matter of sentiment. 
The Polish government in London, headed by the 
Peasant party leader Stanislaw Mikolajczyk as 
Prime Minister and the trade union Socialist leader 
Jan Kwapinski as Deputy Prime Minister and Min- 


ister of Reconstruction, apparently feels just as cop. 
cerned about the retention of Eastern Poland withjg 
the Polish state as Polish conservatives. 


4. No statesman, no matter how omniscient 
would be able to fix a boundary satisfactory to both 
Russia and Poland in an area where populations haye 
intermingled for centuries. 


5. Russia does not need Eastern Poland eithe 
for additional territory, resources or population, | 
claims the area chiefly on the grounds of security, 


6. Security will not be achieved by mere seizure 
of territory. On the contrary, the efforts of Britain, 
the United States and Russia, through the Moscow 
accord and the Teheran declaration, to create a feel. 
ing of security on the part of small nations, may be 
defeated if the first move made toward the liberation 
of conquered peoples in Europe is the extension of 
Russian territory at the expense of a smaller nation, 

All these considerations would suggest that the 
only hopeful approach to this border problem, the 
most baffling in Eastern Europe, is neither automatic 
seizure of the territory by Russia nor its automatic re. 
turn to Poland, but an attempt to apply, in this first 
test case, some of the principles adumbrated at Mos- 
cow and Teheran. It is impossible at this time to 
arrange for an internationally supervised plebiscite 
in Eastern Poland. But it would be desirable if Russia 
invited Britain and the United States to participate 
with it in an Allied commission to examine this par- 
ticular problem, just as Britain and the United States 
invited Russia to sit on the commission on Mediter- 
ranean affairs. Should the U.S.S.R. agree to such a 
procedure, it would give the best possible indication 


that it regards United Nations collaboration not as 
one-way traffic but as a genuine attempt to achieve 
security for all nations, large and small. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


PEOPLE—NOT EMPEROR—HOLD KEY TO PEACEFUL JAPAN 


A new note in American policy toward Japan has 
been struck by our former Ambassador in Tokyo. 
Speaking in Chicago on December 29, Mr. Joseph C. 
Grew—now a special assistant to Secretary Hull— 
declared that, after decisively defeating Japan, the 
United Nations should “offer the Japanese people 
hope for the future.” The proper attitude, he said, 
would be to adopt ‘‘a helpful, cooperative, common 
sense spirit, devoid of browbeating or vindictiveness, 
with emphasis laid upon what the Japanese would 
have to gain by playing the game with the rest of 
the world.” 

This is a valuable contribution to healthy discus- 
sion of Japan’s future. For the closer we come to de- 
stroying Japan’s military power and aggressive plans, 
the more necessary it will be to have a policy that can 
give our arms genuine support in establishing and 


keeping the peace in Asia. The prevalent feeling in 
the United States that the Japanese are a nation of 
savages is due to a combination of the shock suffered 
at Pearl Harbor, underhanded Japanese tactics in the | 
South Pacific, racial prejudice, and ignorance of | 
Japan. A policy compounded of these elements can- 


not lead to a sound future for the Far East. Unques- | 


tionably we will not leave any stone unturned to 
prevent Japan from waging war again, but this in 
itself means that we must encourage every future 
tendency on the part of the Japanese people to look 
for a new non-militaristic way of life. 


WHAT OF THE EMPEROR? Mr. Grew is 0 . jp 


firm ground here, but his suggestion that Japanese 
emperor-worship may be a force for keeping the 
peace, if the emperor is ‘‘a peace-seeking ruler not 
controlled by the military,” is open to argument. It 


st as Of 


Nd Within 


MNiscient, 
'Y to both 


‘1ons haye 


nd either 
lation. It 
ecurity, 
re seizure 
f Britain, 
» Moscow 
ite a feel. 
S, may be 
liberation 
ension of 
er nation, 
that the 
blem, the 
automatic 
omatic re- 
| this first 
d at Mos- 
s time to 
plebiscite 
if Russia 
articipate 
this par- 
ted States 
Mediter- 
to such a 
indication 
on not as 


oO achieve 


| 


; DEAN 


feeling in 
nation of 
k suffered | 
tics in the | 
yrance of 
1ents can- 


Unques- 


turned to 
ut this in 
ry future 
le to look 


rew is OM . 
Japanese 
sping the 
ruler not 
ument. It 


i 
— 


may be asked whether he was expressing more than 
his personal views, even though he emphasized that 
on this point he was speaking for himself and not 
for the government. Several facts suggest a trend in 
policy-making circles toward absolving the Emperor 
of blame for Japan’s militaristic policies, thereby in- 
timating that we may later be able to “do business” 
with him. 

As far back as December 9, 1942 Elmer Davis, 
Director of the Office of War Information, declared 
that Emperor Hirohito had “no more say about 
Japan than I have.” A year later the State Depart- 
ment included in a collection of documents on Amer- 
ican-Japanese relations a memorandum of October 
25, 1941 sent by Ambassador Grew from Tokyo. Ac- 
cording to this report, which was based on the asser- 
tions of a Japanese informant, the Emperor had per- 
sonally ordered Army and Navy representatives to 
follow a policy guaranteeing that there would be no 
wat with the United States. It is significant that, in 
the words of the preface, this collection is not com- 
plete, but contains “only reports of special signifi- 
cance.” Not unnaturally, newspapermen at once 
drew the memorandum to the public’s attention and 
suggested that the Emperor's alleged desire for peace 
might ultimately help him to keep his throne. 

It is difficult to see why the United States at this 
moment has any need to take a stand on the Em- 
peror's future, openly or by implication. Not only 
do we know very little about the current political 
situation in Japan, but we are far from having de- 
feated the Japanese. And we have surely had abun- 
dant evidence that, if the Emperor actually desired 
to avoid war with the United States, he was singular- 
ly unsuccessful in his efforts. Moreover, emperor- 
worship and the prestige of the imperial household 
remain powerful weapons in the propaganda arsenal 
of the Japanese Army and Navy. The use to which 
they are being put at present is suggested by the Em- 


Page Three 


JUST PUBLISHED: a summary of the delibera- 
tions of the UNRRA Council at its first session, 
and six of the most important resolutions adopted 


at the meeting. 
UNRRA — A STEP TOWARD RECON. 
STRUCTION by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


January 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


peror’s rescript, read at the opening of the Japanese 
Diet on December 26. He stated on that occasion 
that ‘the people, all with the same spirit, must crush 
the inordinate ambition of the enemy nations with 
all the nation’s total efforts.” 

THE JAPANESE PEOPLE AND PEACE. Possi- 
bly, in a late stage of the war when Japan's position 
is hopeless, the Emperor will become the rallying 
point of groups seeking peace. It is equally possible 
—-since here we are in the realm of pure speculation 
—that, as the Japanese people realize the enormity 
of the crisis that faces them, they will turn not only 
against the militarists, but against the Emperor him- 
self as a tool of the armed forces. Since there is no 
way of testing these alternatives at present, it would 
seem to be just as unwise for us to intimate that we 
seek his survival as to pledge his downfall. Our task 
now is to prosecute the war against Japan with the 
utmost vigor. And, as Japan is driven toward defeat, 
we will want to observe internal developments close- 
ly, although maintaining a cautious attitude toward 
all leaders who claim to have become anti-militaristic. 
Only when a crack-up finally comes will we be in a 
position, on the basis of our own views and Japanese 
conditions, to determine in detail our attitude toward 
Japan’s political institutions. 

But one-thing can be said now. To place our hopes 
in the Emperor as an instrument of peace and stabil- 
ity does not bring us to grips with the problems of 
a defeated Japan. If anything is clear, it is that the 
Emperor cannot serve the cause of peace unless a 
significant section of the Japanese population is 
peaceminded and has some means of expressing its 
desires. If the militarists have had their way so far 
and have used the Emperor at will, is this not in part 
the result of rigid regimentation imposed on the Jap- 
anese people? In preventing a resurgence of militar- 
ism, a genuine popular voice in government is need- 
ed. We cannot rely on the inclinations of a “peace- 
ful’ emperor or “moderate’’ statesmen to keep Japan 
on a sound course. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


NEW RESEARCH STAFF MEMBER 

The Association announces with pleasure the ap- 
pointment to the Research Department of Grant S. 
McClellan. Mr. McClellan received his B.A. at the 
University of Nebraska and his M.A. at the London 
School of Economics. He has been on the staff of 
the National Research Council, the Office of Stra- 
tegic Services and the Office of Censorship, and has 
an honorable discharge from the Air Corps Admin- 
istration of the United States Army. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 12, JANUARY 7, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lggt, Secretary; VERA MicueLes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 
One month for change of address on membership publications. 


> 181 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


sitbes, 


JAN. 3.—The British and United States govern- 
ments have for some time been subjected to unre- 
mitting public pressure to relax the blockade of the 
European continent and permit relief food to be sent 
into German-occupied countries. Isolationist organs 
like the New York Daily News have attacked Prime 
Minister Churchill for not permitting food to pass 
through the blockade, although he shares this respon- 
sibility with other British, as well as American, offi- 
cials. Several of the Allied governments in London 
have urged Britain and the United States to permit 
the sending of food into the countries they represent. 

The United States and Britain, however, have re- 
fused to breach the blockade, with two exceptions: 
a feeding program for unoccupied France, which was 
suspended when Washington and Vichy terminated 
diplomatic relations following our invasion of North 
Africa in 1942; and a program for Greece, which 
remains in operation. Now advocates of shipping 
food through the blockade have gained new strength, 
as a result of the approval given on December 20 by 
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to a resolu- 
tion sponsored by Senator Gillette of Iowa. This 
resolution declares it is the sentiment of the Senate 
that food be sent by the Allies to children, nursing 
mothers, and expectant mothers in occupied Europe. 

FEEDING THROUGH BLOCKADE. The con- 
troversy over this poignant issue is not between good 
people who wish to feed the starving, and bad 
people who say “Let them starve.’ It is a controversy 
between those who believe that food sent through 
the blockade would reach the mothers and children 
it is destined for, and skeptics who contend that the 
Germans would use the food for their own advan- 
tage. Emotion naturally colors this debate, for men 
and women everywhere find it hard to contemplate 
starvation with equanimity, although the extent of 
actual starvation in Europe is difficult to measure. 

Right now the Germans are taking advantage of 
the Geneva prisoners-of-war convention which re- 
quires a belligerent government to feed the military 
prisoners in its control. The Nazis in many instances 
have withdrawn their contributions of rations to 
those who receive the “supplemental food” packages 
sent regularly from the United States and Britain. 
When in 1941 Herbert Hoover, who supports the 
“feed-Europe-now” campaign, sought German ap- 
proval for a Belgian food relief program, the Nazis 
were willing to authorize the control commission to 
operate in Brussels only; the British government then 


FOR VICTORY °* 


BUY UNITED STATES 


turned down the Hoover proposal. The Greek pro. 
gram, under a Swiss-Swedish commission with Inter. 
national Red Cross cooperation, works pretty well 
because its members and agents are permitted to 
travel all over the country and check on every move 
in the distribution of the food. Greece, moreover, 
unlike the countries of Western Europe, has few 
foodstuffs needed by the Germans. The authors of the 
Gillette Resolution recognize the possibility that Ger. 
many may be aided through relief programs, for the 
resolution urges “rigid safeguarding of such relief 
so that no military advantage whatever may accrue 
to the civil populations or armed forces of the in- 
vading nations.” 

The blockade is a weapon that accomplishes more 
in this “total war” toward harming Germany—de. 


pendent as it is on raw materials it normally imports | 


from all over the world—than in any previous con- 
flict. It is not a new weapon. Notwithstanding the 
blockade’s importance, the United States and Britain 
have indicated willingness to lift it for the shipment 
of food to the occupied countries provided the fol- 
lowing conditions are met. 

POSSIBLE CONDITIONS. (1) The relief pro- 
gram be limited to special recipients excluding adults 
working or capable of work. (2) Operation of the 
program to be under the complete control of a neu- 
tral commission whose personnel must be approved 
by the American and British governments. The com- 


mission must be permitted to maintain an adequate } 


staff and must have complete freedom of movement 
within the given country in order to supervise all 
aspects of the plan’s operation. (3) Germany must 
not purchase or requisition any food within, or ship 
any food from, the country in which such a program 
is instituted, except where surpluses, of particular 


foods exist that cannot be consumed by the local | 
population. (4) All arrangements which may be | 


negotiated by the supervising commission for the 
barter of locally produced commodities against food- 
stuffs or other relief goods from German stocks will 
be subject to review and approval in advance by the 
British and American governments. (4) Germany 
must continue to supply any foods now being sup 
plied to the given country in the same quantities 
(based on nutritive value) as at present. (6) All 
shipping required for the operation of the scheme 
must be by neutral vessels, at present unused, from 
within the blockade area. (Sweden has indicated 
readiness to place its ships in such service. ) 
Bair BOLLes 


WAR BONDS 


191 


