MAK 2 4 4949 


Ge: ___ Entered as 2nd class matter 
Sisson 20M neral Library 


= = eure Al Live ART 
) —1946 wav. OF 


‘? P 

JO iyvarett. ° 
teVorsity of Michigan 
“a 





Ann Arbor, Mich. 

















FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





























ts to An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
when FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
e the 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
"a Vout. XXV, No. 20 MarcH 1, 1946 
re of! - 
fects, re —) 1s — a 
nd of MANCHURIAN SETTLEMENT ESSENTIAL FOR CHINESE UNITY 
dur HE accord signed in Chungking on February 25, is no doubt whatever that the Chinese public has 
time providing for the unification of Central Govern- felt a real sense of bitterness and concern over 
M the) ment and Communist forces over the next eighteen the situation in the north@astern provinces. But 
| that | months, is an impor- when this reaction is 
fe i tant contribution to- accompanied by the 
- a ward long-term unity RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL smashing of the 
iré 0 . . . . . . 
in China. Yet serious 1896-1946 Chungking editorial 
n f : 
Thies obstacles face those The New York Herald Tribune, commenting on the death of office of the liberal 
€s, | who wish to carry out Raymond Leslie Buell in its issue of February 21, made the following Democratic Lea gue 
n for statement: “Mr. Buell probably attained his greatest public recogni- wie ll 
il the new pact. The re- tion through his activities with the Foreign Policy Association, one ne=Spaper—as we 
aa ported Russian eco- of the nation’s leading agencies in directing study to international as the Communist 
illies. . ; problems.” ie 
F last oe e ak nds in Raymond Buell came to the ping in = in _ Pe: er A. I aig ris 
| anchuria ave not intellectual powers, and he gave us of his best through twelve fruitfu ecomes  ciear 
1 the | : years. The Research Department had been a going concern since 1923, ca 
nt of | only aroused genuine operating on a very limited budget. Mr. Buell expanded its scope, other factors are in 
ela Chinese apprehension engendering on the part of — on eed and ee y that volved. The trend ,to- 
ae . fs : were contagious. The weekly conferences became exciting and even ‘ . 
E the §iv i ng ri . eto highly controversial, for Buell was provocative, and enjoyed the chal- ward violence, more 
Chiang Kai-shek’s dec- lenging of opinions, including his own. oe he was = rey ag ev Over, is not traceable 
| Zov- laration of Februa with a scorn of compromise which time alone tempered. Yet he he lely t the Man- 
TY | himself and hi i he objecti haling of fact Slay ae 
-erms — imse!lf and his associates to the objective marshaling of facts. , . 
_ 25 that negotiations In those early years there was a boyishness about him which dis- churian issue, for on 
in 1° | must be based on Chi- armed those inclined to stand in awe of his erudition, his explosive February 10, before 
tane- | rh: ideas and his almost superhuman capacity for work. He was generous Chi M ‘ 
Lon nese law, the Chinese- in his appreciation of the contribution - by women in the _ of ines¢ —— 
"| Sovi international relations. In the choice of his associates his judgment Opinion had become 
; 4 : : pact, , and was unerring. Today every one of the original group he selected holds : P a d il 
will China’s international an important position in the field of foreign affairs or higher education. In ame > an a -party 
treaties — but appar- When Buell became President of the FPA in iy! he —_ - co meeting in Chungking 
—but . of being easily accessible to every member of the staff, holding 
n fur | ently are also being that if any one had a grievance or, better still, a “bright idea,” he to celebrate the recent 
; used to the full by wanted to know it. Many a staff member had reason to appreciate his unity pact was broken 
ussia | Right-win elements warmth of heart and his sympathy in time of illness or personal sorrow. up and some of 
inese ; g & Raymond Buell was a man of rare scholarship, creative imagination oe £ lib- 
in Chungking who Op- and rugged character. He died in his fiftieth year with much that he China's foremost 
ween pose the Kuomintang- longed to achieve unattained. Deeply loyal in his affections, and always eral leaders were se- 
radio Pinmunist unity ine yr Ys wi —_ sense of public service, he wanted to live but faced verely beaten: Both fn 
P eath unafraid. ° 
on cord. According to ESTHER G. OGDEN this case and in the 
7 do. | “spatches from the smashing of its news- 
y : Chinese capital, the struggle between pro- and paper office on February 22, the Democratic League 
“a anti-unity views within the government seems has charged Kuomintang elements with responsi- 
ikely to reach a climax at the March 1 meeting bility. 
‘aced 
time of the Kuomintang Central Executive Committee. China’s internal situation and its relations with 
con- MANCHURIA IN CHINA’S POLITICS. There the U.S.S.R. are of grave concern to the United 
ES Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 























States, for this country’s interests require that China 
be spared the ravages of another civil war, and that 
Manchuria be under Chinese sovereignty. General 
Marshall's mission unquestionably has tended to les- 
sen the danger of civil conflict which was acute last 
fall. But fighting between Chinese forces is now 
going on in Manchuria, despite the general cessation 
of armed conflict elsewhere. 

It is a noteworthy fact that, while unity has pro- 
gressed in Chungking, Kuomintang-Communist re- 
lations in Manchuria are in roughly the same state 
as they were in embattled North China only a few 
months ago. Yet it is obviously impossible to 
achieve genuine unity in Chungking, Nanking, or 
Peiping if it does not exist in the Northeast; for 
Manchuria, with a population of more than 40,000,- 
000, a sizable fraction of the country’s area, and the 
preponderant part of China’s modern industry, is 
the kind of exception that can break any rule. It is 
true that the Kuomintang-Communist accord on the 
unification and reorganization of China’s armies in- 
cludes Manchuria and assigns a preponderant role 
in that region to the Central forces. Yet the basic 
political issues in Manchuria remain unsettled, and 
some decision will have to be reached on the 
Communist demand, voiced by a Yenan spokesman 
on February 14, that in taking over Manchuria the 
Central Government give ‘‘fair and effective repre- 
sentation” to all parties and groups; recognize and 
cooperate with anti-Japanese forces in the area; rec- 
ognize ‘‘all democratic county governments’; re- 
strict its own forces entering Manchuria “‘to a stipu- 
lated strength,” in view of the work of local troops 
in maintaining peace; and forbid the use of puppet 
troops in the area. According to the Communists, a 
“democratic joint army” of almost 300,000 exists in 
Manchuria in areas neither garrisoned nor evacu- 
ated by the Russians. 

LARGER ISSUES AT STAKE. The Manchurian 
situation, however, cannot be fully understood un- 








Page Two —. 





less it is viewed as part of a much larger Asiatic 
realm, stretching from Kamchatka to Indonesia ang 
from the U.S.S.R. to the Pacific islands formerly 
under Japanese mandate. If this vast region is studied 
as the unit that it actually is, then it is clear that ip 
the past six months both the United States and the 
Soviet Union have been seeking to fill the vacuum 
left by Japan’s defeat. This country, for example, has 
retained hold of the Pacific islands, established its 
dominance in Japan, occupied southern Korea, and 
maintained an important force of Marines in China, 
At the same time Russia has been incorporating the 
Kuriles and southern Sakhalin, re-acquiring rights 
it once possessed in Manchuria, and occupying north 
Korea. While the Russians would like to secure a 
powerful economic role in Manchuria, the United 
States has been moving toward a dominant position 
in the Chinese Central Government’s plans for eco- 
nomic development. The general effect, however 
justified or natural any individual action may be, is 
to create two power zones and to raise on a larger 
scale, but in less obvious form, the problem of zonal 
conflict that a Kuomintang-Communist civil war 
would create for American-Soviet relations. 

The Manchurian question is thus intimately re. 
lated to the general evolution not only of China, but 
of the post-war Far East as a whole. The first two 


prerequisites of peace would seem to be (1) the | 
achievement of a progressive Chinese agreement con- | 


cerning Manchuria by applying to that area the prin- 
ciples of the unity accord of January 31 covering the 
rest of China, and (2) the withdrawal of all foreign 
troops — Russian, American and Japanese — from 
China at the earliest possible date. Although in- 
numerable other problems exist, these measures 





would at least create a basis for the growth of a_ 
single Chinese government, sovereign throughout | 


China, and unhampered by the political influence of 
foreign forces on its soil. 
LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


CAN ARAB DEMANDS BE RECONCILED WITH GREAT-POWER SECURITY? 


Is the presence of foreign troops on a country’s 
soil a threat to peace? This question, already raised 
in Iran, Greece and Indonesia, is posed again by 
events in Egypt, Syria and Lebanon in the Eastern 
Mediterranean, crossroads of three continents and 
battleground of many peoples. On February 23 at a 
mass meeting of 10,000 Egyptian students, a two- 
week truce was called in the bloody anti-British riot- 
ing of recent weeks, but a spokesman for a ‘National 
Committee of Students and Workers” threatened to 
organize student “fighting forces” to expel the Brit- 
ish if they have not evacuated Egypt by the time the 
truce ends. 

ANTI-BRITISH RIOTING IN EGYPT. The 
British remain in Egypt by virtue of a 1936 treaty 
authorizing the maintenance of 10,000 troops and 


400 Royal Air Force pilots with auxiliary personnel. 
Traditional Egyptian suspicions of Britain have been 
exacerbated by the current intensification of Arab 
nationalism, the food shortage and accompanying in- 
flation, and the confused Egyptian political situation 
in which nationalists no longer in power are trying 
to make political capital by playing on anti-British 
prejudice. Britain's delay in answering an Egyptian 
note of December 20, which had asked for a revision 
of the 1936 treaty, aroused the Egyptian press to de- 
mand unsuccessfully that the government appeal, if 


necessary, to the United Nations Organization. Egyp | 


tian nationalists want not only the complete with- 
drawal of British troops, but incorporation of the 
Anglo-Egyptian Sudan into Egyptian territory, con 
trol of the Suez Canal, and territorial concessions im 





— 


Hea 


8 8 











nel, 


\rab 


7 = 


tion 
ying 
itish 
tian 
sion 
 de- 
1, if 
BYP” 
rith- 


con- 
S$ in 














——= 
—_ —— 


the former Italian possessions of Cyrenaica and 
Eritrea. 

The British, hard-pressed in Greece, Indonesia and 
elsewhere, delivered a conciliatory reply on January 
26 agreeing to review the 1936 treaty “on a footing 
of full and free partnership as between equals.” That 
the Egyptians considered this an evasion was revealed 
by an outbreak of violence on February 9, which cul- 
minated in another cabinet crisis and the resigna- 
tion of Prime Minister Nokrashy Pasha’s coalition 
government six days later. With considerable difh- 
culty 71-year-old Ismail Sidky Pasha succeeded in 
forming a new ministry, while the British announced 
on February 18 the replacement of their unpopular 
Ambassador, Lord Killearn, by Sir Ronald Ian Camp- 
bell, a personal friend of the new Prime Minister. 
These changes seemed to prepare the way for treaty 
negotiations, but student demonstrations continued 
in a bloody general strike on February 21, during 
which, according to an Egyptian official, 14 persons 
were killed and 123 injured. Strong warnings by the 
Egyptian government have persuaded the national- 
ists to postpone until March 4 a nation-wide general 
strike to commemorate the victims of February 21. 
Meanwhile, representatives of the Arab states de- 
cided on February 25 to bring the Anglo-Egyptian 
dispute before the March meeting of the Arab 





_ League Council. 


UNO DISCUSSES LEVANT ISSUE. Although 
the presence of British and French ‘troops in Syria 
and Lebanon has produced no such turmoil in recent 
months, the Syrians and Lebanese did bring the issue 
before the UNO on February 5 when they asked 
the Security Council to recommend the “total and 


_ simultaneous evacuation” of the troops of both pow- 


ets. A London-Paris pact of December 13, 1945 had 
already provided for withdrawal, but the last troops 
were not to leave until the UNO had made arrange- 


Page Three 





Recent FPA Publications: 
China as a Post-War Market 
by L. K. Rosinger 
U.S. Policy in Europe 
by Vera Micheles Dean 
A New Britain Under Labor? 
by Grant S. McClellan 
Turkey between Two World Wars 
by John K. Birge 
Palestine and America’s Role in the Middle East 
by Grant S. McClellan 


25c each 


FoREIGN PoLicy Reports are published on the 1st and 15th 
of each month. Subscription, $5; to FPA members, $3. 























ments for collective security in the Levant. Moreover, 
subsequent Franco-British negotiations for the start 
of troop withdrawals bogged down because the 
French declared they had assumed the British forces 
would withdraw to Palestine, whereas the British in- 
tended to regroup their forces in Lebanon along with 
the French until the desired collective security system 
was established. A general strike in protest against 
continued occupation was then staged in Damascus, 
Aleppo and Beirut on January 3. British and French 
troops remained, however, and Syrian and Lebanese 
delegates carried the case to the UNO. According to 
one report, denied by the Syrian Premier, Syria had 
received a written promise of Russian support in the 
Security Council. Whether this rumor was true or 
not, the Soviet Union did help to the extent of veto- 
ing on February 16, at the last session of the Security 
Council, a compromise United States proposal which 
even the Syrian and Lebanese delegates had pro- 
nounced acceptable. French Foreign Minister 
Georges Bidault told a press conference the follow- 
ing day that French and British troops would with- 
draw, but that a collective security system would be 
a prerequisite to evacuation, and that “nobody but 
France’’ could be in charge of such a system. 

The area of the Near and Middle East lying be- 
tween the Dardanelles and the Suez Canal is of such 
vital strategic importance that the great powers 
which have interests in that region will continue to 
try to maintain military establishments there. What 
is needed is an arrangement that will prevent the 
presence of foreign troops from becoming a threat 
to the peace. The wisest approach to the problem 
would be the internationalization of strategic points 
like the Dardanelles and Suez under an effective 
United Nations Organization. If such an arrange- 
ment proves impossible, sharp conflicts between the 
great powers, whether verbal or military, must be 
anticipated. The Russians want not only control of 
the Dardanelles, but influence over neighboring Tur- 
key. At present Turkey is within the British sphere, 
which partly explains Russia's support of Syria and 
Lebanon. The stand taken by Russia in the Security 
Council is one of many indications that it is seeking 
to win over the Arabs, isolating them from the 
Turks. Confronted by Russia’s aspirations Britain, 
which feels that its empire is again threatened, is 
trying to revise its relations with the countries along 
its Mediterranean life line in such a way as to satisfy 
their nationalist desires and at the same time pre- 
serve its own security. 

VERNON McKay 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 20, Marcu 1, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. ¥Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA Micue.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 


scond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Be 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








2 WES 








Washington News Letter 














U.S. DELAY ON ATOMIC POLICY CONTRIBUTES TO WORLD UNREST 


The special Senate Committee on Atomic Energy 
has begun to debate the gravest question affecting 
United States foreign policy. Have international re- 
lations deteriorated to such an extent that this coun- 
try should devote its main efforts to making itself 
militarily secure against all possible emergencies, or is 
the current state of tension a passing phase of post- 
war political readjustment whose termination the 
United States can hasten by demonstrating its con- 
fidence in the United Nations Organization as a 
safeguard of national security ? The immediate issue 
at stake is how we shall control the development and 
use of atomic energy. 


CIVILIAN OR MILITARY CONTROL? On 
February 19 the Senate concluded the hearings on 
atomic control legislation which opened on Novem- 
ber 27, 1945. The Committee is now debating 
whether it will recommend to the Senate the May- 
Johnson Bill, which would direct the President to 
establish a control commission empowered to deal 
with atomic energy as a primarily military question, 
or the McMahon or Ball bills, which call for the 
establishment of a civilian commission free from 
military domination. The latter two bills reflect the 
view that the capacity to produce atomic energy 
should be devoted to peacetime pursuits and used 
for the good of the world rather than merely the 
security of the United States. The Committee has a 
great responsibility, because its appraisal of exist- 
ing international relations will affect world affairs 
for years to come. One question facing Committee 
members is whether the continuing manufacture of 
the atomic bomb and the maintenance of secrecy 
about that weapon since Japan’s surrender have 
contributed to the unrest and instability revealed 
daily in reports from Manchuria, Egypt, India, Iran 
and Java. 

At present, atomic energy in this country is sub- 
ject to military control. Arguing for civilian control, 
scientists testifying before the Committee have 
stressed their belief that continued manufacture of 
the bomb would not assure our security for two 
reasons. First, they argued, other nations may learn 
how to make it. Second, there is what Dr. John A. 
Simpson, of the Nuclear Studies Institute, University 
of Chicago, on December 18 called the ‘“phenom- 
enon of saturation” —meaning that when State A 
has enough bombs to destroy State B, it is imma- 
terial whether State B has more bombs than State A. 
Scientists also told the Committee that the McMahon 


bill would not be harmful to the security of the 
United States if the United Nations Organizatiog 
should fail. Other scientists opposed military cop. 
trol because it would result in secrecy and thus 
hamper scientific research, and Dr Harrison Davies, 
of the Federation of Atomic Scientists, declared 
on January 29 that scientists have already begun 
to desert the field of atomic study because of the 
present secrecy requirements. Many witnesses at the 
hearings foresaw general use of atomic power. 


INTERNATIONAL BOMB PROBLEM. Mean. 
while, however, the announcement by the Canadian 
government on February 15 that a foreign power 
had been guilty of espionage strengthened the case 
for military control in the minds of some Commit. 
tee members. The subsequent revelation that the 
foreign power referred to was Russia caused the 
Committee on February 21 to question Secretary of 
State James F. Byrnes and Major General L. R 
Groves, head of the Manhattan Engineering Project, 
on their views as to the relation of the alleged espi- 
onage to the policy the United States should follow 
concerning the bomb. The State Department is not of 
the opinion that the security of this country is 
endangered by the evidence of spying uncovered by 
the Canadian government, and Secretary Byrnes on 
February 20 said that we still safely hold the secret 


of the bomb. The Federal Bureau of Investigation, | 
however, fears that spies seeking bomb secrets are at 


work in the United States. 
The length of time devoted by the Committee to 








its study of the problems raised by our monopoly 


possession of technical knowledge about atomic 
bomb production has itself disturbed international | 


relations, since other countries have been kept in 
suspense about the policy we intend to adopt toward 
this new weapon. “'I feel that it is a matter of urgency 
that sound domestic legislation . . . be enacted with 
utmost speed,” President Truman wrote Senator 


McMahon on February 2. “Domestic and interna: | 


tional issues of the first importance wait upon this 
action.”” While the Committee is studying bills re 
lating only to domestic control, it understands that 
the problem is essentially international, and the 
McMahon bill subordinates domestic development 
of atomic energy to international agreements. Early 
in March the Committee intends to hold a series of 
hearings on international aspects of the atomic energy 
problem. 
BLAIR BOLLES 








i) 


4a%°%OTwesd Se: oO 


an. omb oc tes 2G 2 7 ep Gr 


