LAAN) 


NCE 

e closed- 
es in the 
from the 
especting 


assume a 
ns never 
_ colonial 
zradually 
ty of the 
Jaks pro- 
0 discuss 
of inter- 
it by any 
”” covers 
d to con- 
a specific 


in antici- 
i posses- 
s acceler- 
cial and 
1e British 
mial De- 
1940, and 
IS pOsses- 
tutonomy 
h govern- 
after the 
ench col- 


eem will- 
; a larger 
concerns 
ween the 
der inter- 
advocate 
ich we in 
od. “It is 
Jetermine 
grate our 
>n French 
~ Colonel 
y, stated 
tation on 
s colonial 
t possible 
ire. 


BOLLES 
NDS 


PGRIODICAL Room 
@BNERAL Liveary 


> 


APR 29 194 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


Geseral wlorary 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIV, No. 27 


Apri. 20, 1945 


ROOSEVELT’S FEARLESS IDEALS—GUIDE FOR SECURITY CONFERENCE 


HE bell has tolled all over the world for a man 

who, to an extraordinary degree, was “involved 
in mankind.” The mourning is not for the President, 
who lived as full and satisfying a life as is ever 
granted to a human being, but for the loss to his 
contemporaries, young and old, of qualities always 
rare, and never so much needed as in the critical 
days ahead: courage in the face of adversity, a gay 
spirit, a genuine desire to understand and meet the 
views of other peoples, idealism made practicable by 
adaptability to circumstances, the daring to attempt 
the seemingly impossible. These qualities, which 
during the twelve years of his administration had 
come to permeate public life in this country and had 
deeply affected our friends and associates abroad, re- 
main as our national heritage. 

UNAFRAID OF OUR TIMES. The greatness of 
President Roosevelt was that, unlike many of his 
generation, he was unafraid of the soul-searching 
times in which we live. ‘“The only limit to our real- 
ization of tomorrow,” he said in a speech written the 
night before he died, “will be our doubts of today.” 
Some of his opponents sincerely questioned his po- 
litical and economic philosophy; others opposed all 
change, and criticized the President as the advocate 
of new deals at home and abroad. However much 
he may be thought to have erred on details of poli- 
cies, or in administrative practices, his major achieve- 
ment was his readiness to grapple with the two most 
crucial problems of the twentieth century: the need 
for orderly transition from an expansionist economy, 
with the emphasis on untrammeled individual initia- 
tive, to a stabilized industrial system, with the em- 
phasis on collective responsibility for social welfare; 
and the parallel need to fuse the aspirations of di- 
Verse nations, at widely differing stages of develop- 
ment, in an international organization capable of 
assuring the security and welfare of all peoples. 


Every country has faced these two problems. In many 
cases the war has merely postponed a showdown that 
will come the moment hostilities are over. 

President Roosevelt's signal contribution to this 
critical transition period was the belief that necessary 
change could be effected by timely reforms that 
would revitalize democracy, making it less vulner- 
able to extremist doctrines of both Right and Left. 
What some of his opponents failed to recognize was 
that, without such reforms, the United States might 
have drifted into a condition of internal strife from 
which a dictatorship might have emerged. In 1933, 
in the depths of the depression, the President, had 
he wished, could have resorted to far more drastic 
measures than those he adopted, with the acquies- 
cence of millions who were disoriented and frus- 
trated by the economic crisis. Although his domestic 
program alarmed many people at that time, his op- 
ponents recognized in subsequent election campaigns 
the need for most of his reforms, which have be- 
come an accepted part of the American way of life. 

Similarly, once the world was plunged in war, 
some critics claimed that the President had been a 
warmonger, while others deplored his delay in bring- 
ing the nation into the world conflict. But again, 
with a striking sense of what was practicable at any 
given time, the President, instead of pressing for 
immediate action, as some of the interventionists 
among us would have had him do, guided the nation 
through two critical years until a majority of the 
American people had become convinced of the neces- 
sity to take an active part in the war. In preparing 
for the establishment of a world organization, too, 
he took pains to lay the groundwork for acceptance 
by the United States of obligations under a Charter 
of the United Nations by seeking, in advance, the 
support of the Senate and encouraging wide public 
discussion of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals. He 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association, 


Pe Re ee ee wee ro —= aes pinecciviete wats: 2 = se 
——S = ee ee == ——————————— 


ih 
tl 
i 
| 


died without seeing the plans for world security he 
had discussed with the leaders of the other United 
Nations brought to fulfilment at San Francisco. But 
there should be some satisfaction in the knowledge 
that he died advancing toward the goal to which all 
mankind aspires as the war draws to a close. 

THE UNFINISHED STRUGGLE. As always in 
the hour of death our thoughts should be less for 
the one who died and is at peace, and more for those 
who must live to carry on the struggle. President 
Truman has the sympathy of all his fellow-citizens 
as he takes up the crushing burdens of his office. He 
and his advisers, like President Roosevelt before him, 
will need the unremitting support of the entire na- 
tion to carry to a successful conclusion the prosecu- 
tion of the war and the organization of the peace. It 
would be tragic if now, not through ill-will on any 
one’s part, but possibly through lack of sufficient de- 
termination, the vast structure of international or- 
ganization that the United Nations had just begun 
to build should be left unfinished; if the coalition 
maintained with such a remarkable degree of unity 
throughout the war should be allowed to disin- 
tegrate in the hour of victory. Such disintegration is 
the one hope that remains to Germany and Japan. 
But even if, as we must all see to it, this does not 
occur, there is always the danger that, once the 
pressures of war have relaxed, we will experience 


Page Two 


el 
a , 


the weariness and cynicism that set in after a periog 
of extraordinary exertion. If we should then alloy 
the dark forces of reaction, racial prejudice, economic 
and social strife that are latent in every society to 
gain the upper hand, Hitler, although defeated og 
the battlefield, would in effect have triumphed oye; 
democracy. 

The genius of the American people—that unend. 
ingly astonishing composite of many races, creeds 
political and economic beliefs—is its elasticity jin 
hours of crisis, its unfailing spirit of fair-play, its 
recognition of the need to be always on the move 
toward new objectives. The nation’s past, including 
the immediate past of the last twelve years which 
have brought the United States to the stage of ma. 
turity both in domestic and foreign affairs, should 
inspire us to go ahead—not shackle us in our en- 
deavors to find answers to the problems of this cen. 
tury. Writing at a time when the country was in the 
throes of another great crisis, Walt Whitman sound. 
ed a call that remains significant today, when he said; 


“We debouch upon a newer, mightier world, varied 
world, 
Fresh and strong the world we seize, world of labor 
and the march, 
Pioneers! O pioneers!” 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


GERMANY’S FUTURE HINGES ON ALLIED PLANS FOR EUROPE 


Allied leaders, stunned by the sudden death of 
President Roosevelt, have now to meet the test of 
unified action in dealing with the German problem 
beyond the range of combined military effort against 
the armies of the Reich. Officials forecast protracted 
Nazi resistance even after the juncture of Allied 
armies near Berlin but, as German military power 
disintegrates, we are faced with the immediate is- 
sues of administering the Reich and at the same time 
implementing the long-term principles of the Yalta 
Declaration. These policies, for which President 
Roosevelt labored at great cost, are to be carried for- 
ward by President Truman. His address to Congress 
on April 16 reflects the continuity of American pol- 
icy. Meanwhile, Russia has clarified its attitude to- 
ward the German people in a way that brings it 
closer to that of Britain and the United States. On 
April 14, in Pravda, the Communist party's official 
organ, the chief of the propaganda section of the 
party's Central Committee repudiated the stand taken 
by the popular writer, Ilya Ehrenburg, who has iden- 
tified all Germans with their criminal fascist leaders. 

GERMAN DISINTEGRATION. As our armies 
have pushed into Germany we have for the first time 
encountered large numbers of Nazi prisoners and a 
wide range of German civilians. No very clear pic- 
ture is yet available of the mentality of these people 


who have been cut off from the rest of the world 
during the war years. It is already apparent, how- 
ever, that our main problems are the Germans 
apathy and their ignorance of the issues at stake. 
Certainly no individual or group has risen which 
can either surrender to Allied authority or assume 
control in the German nation. These conditions con- 
stitute not only an unprecedented military problem, 
but challenge Allied forces to devise means of com 
pletely controlling a virtually defunct nation. Be 
cause of differences among the Allies, there has been 
little opportunity up to this time to define the terms 
of proposed policy toward Germany. Now, however, 
detailed plans are promptly needed. 

WHAT ALLIED CONTROLS? The Central 
Control Commission which is to be established under 
the Yalta Declaration for the purpose of coordinat- 
ing the joint occupation of Germany must proceed 
at once to weed out Nazi influence in the German 
state and disarm the military forces. This is no short 
term undertaking but, however difficult, it is one on 
which there will be least disagreement. Here the 
April 14 statement of Russia’s attitude toward the 
German people is pertinent. As a result, there 
may be less emphasis than in the past on attempts 
to draw distinctions between Nazis and non-Nazis 
in the lowest administrative ranks where Germati 


a 
oa al 


must in 
atmosp! 
should 
what n 
severely 
Wha 
be cleat 
tended 
minimu 
ing dis. 
tion fo 
industry 
has alr 
long-te: 
if they 
Unde 
tinction 
factors. 
many « 
be adju 
and se 
tend tk 
not be 
reconst 
servers 
no far 
future 
nation< 
other s 
Econo? 
treated 
ly cen: 
operat 
scheme 
tion. 
BIG 
versy « 
difficu! 
trol in 


Wh 
hist 


FOREIG 
Headqua 
second-c 
one mon 


= 


———: 
er a period 
then allow 
>» €CONOMic 
Society to 
efeated op 
iphed over 


hat unend. 
eS, creeds, 
lasticity in 
it-play, its 
| the move 
, including 
ears which 
age of ma. 
irs, should 
in our en- 
»f this cen- 
was in the 
nan sound. 
en he said: 


orld, varied 


wld of labor 


ES DEAN 


E 

the world 
rent, how- 

Germans 
's at stake, 
isen which 
or assume 
ditions con- 
‘y problem, 
ins of com- 
nation. Be 
re has been 
e the terms 
v, however, 


he Central 
ished undet 
F coordinat- 
ust proceed 
he German 
is no shott: 
it is one on 
. Here the 
toward the 
sult, there 
on attempts 
1 non-Nazis 
re Germans 


OT 
————— 


must inevitably be employed in great numbers. In an 
atmosphere of closer understanding on this issue, it 
should now be possible to specify when and in 
what manner ranking Nazi officialdom is to be 
severely punished. 

Whatever controls are finally imposed, it should 
be clear to the British and American public that ex- 
tended administration will be necessary even for the 
minimum purpose of extirpating the Nazis and insur- 
ing disarmament. Beyond this, the Yalta prescrip- 
tion for the elimination or control of all German 
industry that could be used for military production 
has already caused much debate. This calls for a 
long-term program on which the Allies must agree 
if they are to deal effectively with Germany. 

Under conditions of modern warfare, no valid dis- 
tinction can be made between military and economic 
factors. These are, in turn, intimately bound up with 
many extra-German questions as well, which may 
be adjusted when broader cooperation in economic 
and security matters has been achieved. Some con- 
tend that a final answer to German problems can- 
not be reached until the character of European 
reconstruction as a whole has been determined. Ob- 
servers who hold these views find it lamentable that 
no far-reaching plans have been formulated for 
future economic collaboration in Europe on an inter- 
national plane. Since this has not been accomplished, 
other spokesmen, notably the editors of the London 
Economist, insist that Germany must of necessity be 
treated as a national state, which is admittedly high- 
ly centralized economically, and must continue to 
operate on that basis in the absence of an Allied 
scheme for European rehabilitation and reconstruc- 
tion. 

BIG-THREE TESTING GROUND. The contro- 
versy over Germany suggests only the most general 
difficulties which lie ahead. Effective industrial con- 
trol in Germany, whether specifically directed against 


Page Three 


What will United Nations delegates discuss at the 
historic April 25 meeting? Read 

AFTER VICTORY... 

by Vera Micheles Dean 


25¢ 


January issue of HEADLINE SERIES 


A clear, brief survey of world organization in question 
and answer form. Cuts through the mass of technical 
information now being published. Includes text of Dum- 
barton Oaks agreement. 


Order from 


Foreign Policy Association, 22 E. 38th St., New York 16 


the production of future armaments or not, will 
present the most formidable challenge. In the last 
analysis, effective control will necessitate interna- 
tional supervision of scientific development in Ger- 
many. As was suggested by President Conant of Har- 
vard last October 7, such control will require a corps 
of specialists. These specialists, however, will be un- 
able to operate effectively unless the great powers 
have unified their policy and action with respect to 
Germany or other potential aggressors. 

Just as scientific advance is related to industrial 
control or disarmament of Germany, so too these 
latter cut across the question of territorial occupation 
or division. The proposed rectification of the western 
Polish border agreed to at Yalta may lead to further 
partition of Germany. Yet recent suggestions for the 
establishment of an independent Rhineland state 
meet with the same difficulties pointed out above. 
For, if Germany is to be treated on the premise that 
settlements now devised look toward its eventual 
incorporation into a European system as a na- 
tional state, then its territorial division at this 
point will only create future problems. Partition 
appears to be based on the premise of permanent 
occupation which, in turn, would seem to demand 
greater coordination of Allied action and far more 
extended commitments than either the British or 
American peoples are prepared to make at this time. 

To suggest that the most feasible program may be 
a minimum program of controls does not indicate a 
desire to treat the German nation with less severity 
than is demanded. It is to be hoped that, in the in- 
terim period during which Europe generally gropes 
toward rehabilitation, the Allies can develop meth- 
ods of collaboration with respect to Germany, where 
they will be in complete control, that may offer safe- 
guards against German aggression. That this can 
only be accomplished within a broader security 
system appears obvious. Unified action, supported by 
broader cooperation, might then be adapted to other 
spheres—economic, military or territorial—where 
the interests of the Big Three converge. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


F.P.A. REPRESENTED AT SAN FRANCISCO 

On invitation of the Secretary of State, the Foreign 
Policy Association has designated the president, Gen- 
eral McCoy, as consultant to the American delega- 
tion at the San Francisco Conference. Mr. W. W. 
Lancaster, Chairman of the Board, and Mrs. Dean, 
Research Director and Editor of F.P.A. publications, 
will act as alternates. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 27, APRIL 20, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New. York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Laer, Secretary; Vera Micue cas Dran, Editer. Entered as 
second-class matcer December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act ef March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


ZB 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


GOOD NEIGHBORLINESS F.D.R.’s LEGACY IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


The late President Franklin D. Roosevelt passed 
on to President Harry S. Truman a legacy of great 
accomplishment in foreign affairs. The future will re- 
veal whether Mr. Roosevelt had won the fundamental 
support of the American people for his policies, 
or whether his accomplishment depended on his 
personal powers of influence and persuasion—pow- 
ers which have died with him. The Truman Admin- 
istration received the legacy at the very moment 
when the whole future meaning of the late Presi- 
dent’s record hangs in the balance. For on April 25 
the United Nations will meet in San Francisco to 
draw up a charter designed to carry into the coming 
days of peace the firm wartime coalition of which 
Mr. Roosevelt was the principal fashioner. 

FOREIGN AFFAIRS LEGACY. The issue of 
world organization remains for the United States 
primarily a problem of the Senate rather than San 
Francisco, for it is the Senate that will determine 
whether the country effectively carries out the 
decisions of the conference. For this reason, the 
first great test of President Truman in international 
relations will be one of skill in domestic political 
affairs. He has decided to leave to diplomats and to 
the previously appointed United States delegation 
the task of working out a charter at the conference, 
for he does not intend to go to San Francisco. He 
will concentrate on the job of winning for the world 
organization policy the general sympathy of two- 
thirds of the Senators. Thirty-three Senators could 
kill any San Francisco charter; twenty are said to be 
irreconcilably opposed. 

In broad outline, the nature of the foreign policy 
which President Roosevelt hands on is clear. Its 
philosophical basis was Good Neighborliness, a tol- 
erant and helpful relationship among peoples. He 
stressed this point in his first inaugural on March 4, 
1933, and he returned to it in his final composition, 
the brief talk prepared for delivery on Jefferson Day, 
April 13, 1945, which went unspoken. In the coali- 
tion, this philosophy was put into practice as Good 
Neighborliness among friends for the common pur- 
pose of overwhelming the bad neighbors, the com- 
mon enemy. Tolerant compromise has been a key to 
the working of the coalition. 

Good Neighborliness generally marked the ap- 
proach to international economic questions. By the 
Trade Agreements Act, first passed in 1934, the 
Roosevelt Administration inaugurated a policy 


FOR VICTORY ° 


BUY UNITED 


against economic discrimination, for the Act not 
only embodied an attack on the American tariff struc. 
ture but fostered equal commercial opportunity for 
all states. In 1944 Mr. Roosevelt extended the prac. 
tice of Good Neighborliness in economic affairs by 
sponsoring the Bretton Woods Conference, which 
produced a program for international financial shar. 
ing to ease the flow of international commerce, and 
to enhance the fiscal stability of the various coun- 
tries on whose prosperity the United States in obvi- 
ous measure depends for its stability. 

MANY DETAILS UNSOLVED. Yet Mr. Roose. 
velt did not leave the course of foreign relations well 
charted for his successor. The details of political pol- 
icy with respect to many individual countries and 
areas (aside from Latin America) are unclear. Pres- 
ident Truman will bear the burden of participating 
in original decisions about our ultimate policy to 
ward China, which presents a difficult issue in the 
divergence between the central government and the 
régime in the northern provinces; toward the Near 
Eastern countries, where President Roosevelt in 
February established a personal friendship with King 
Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia while, at the same time, 
expressing sympathy for Zionist aspirations in Pales- 
tine which Ibn Saud opposes; and toward Europe, 
where conflicts impend between Russian, British and 
French views which the United States must grapple 
with if it is to remain an effective world power. 

The absence of an elaborate apparatus of policy 
is due to the recent emergence of the United States 
in the world arena. During the first years of his 
Administration, President Roosevelt concerned him- 
self but slightly with world political affairs. In 1933 
he dashed the hopes of the World Economic Confer- 
ence. The isolationist Neutrality Acts of 1935 and 
1937 received only his perfunctory criticism. But with 
the coming of the war, Mr. Roosevelt began to put 
his whole emphasis on foreign affairs and prepare 
the United States for a place in the world conflict 
and an active post-war role in the community 
of nations — first, by persuading Congress in 1939 
to amend the Neutrality Act; second, in 1941, by 
persuading Congress to pass the Lend-Lease Act; 
third, in 1942, by setting up the United Nations al- 
liance. He saw correctly that the security of the | 
United States depends on the security of our neigh- 
bors, who are all the peoples of the globe. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


STATES WAR BONDS 


1918: 


WAS! 
success 
on Inte 
Francis 
Britain 
governt 
ate ful 
reason 
Vyache 
for con 
of mon 


The 
missar 
early u 
master! 
questio 
and eff 
have f: 
to recc 
which 
while t 
in Was 
Polish 
of viev 
about | 


SOV 
the Po 
has as 
Canad. 
Unitec 
Russia 
povert 
Soviet 
gover 
to bot! 
by wh 
ZO er! 


