


pERIODICAL Rear 
RAL! 


wntv 





General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





ing, in 
E. N. 
clipper 


vith re- 
- return 

envoy, 
tronger 
at 100 
cal per: 
SE gov 
ave al- 
> bomb 
at from 
is also 
Chung: 
the de- 
US CON 
Chinese 


rn Min- 
-ommit 
gement 
ave ap 
1 which 
the Jap 
Hook if 
Eastern 


SSON 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XX, No. 26 


Aprit 18, 1941 





eee URE of the Soviet-Japanese neutrality pact 
at Moscow on April 13 crowned with success the 
furopean mission of Yosuke Matsuoka, Japanese 
foreign Minister, at the moment when it seemed on 
the verge of failure. Premier Konoye has welcomed 
the new pact as a signal triumph for his Cabinet, 
which desperately needed a diplomatic victory at this 
time to bolster its waning prestige. 


According to the agreement's preamble, the 
US.S.R. and Japan, ‘‘guided by a desire to strengthen 
ipeaceful and friendly relations between the two 
'countries, decided to conclude a pact on neutrality.” 
| Article I includes a mutual pledge to respect the “‘ter- 
‘titorial integrity and inviolability” of the signatory 
| powers. The kernel of the pact is contained in Article 

Il, which states: “Should one of the contracting par- 

ties become the object of hostilities on the part of 
|one or several third Powers, the other contracting 
, party will observe neutrality throughout the duration 
of the conflict.” The pact enters into effect on rati- 
feation, which is to occur “‘as soon as possible” in 
Tokyo, and is valid for five years. In an accompany- 
ing “frontier declaration,” a Soviet pledge ‘‘to respect 
the territorial integrity and inviolability” of Man- 
thoukuo is matched by a similar pledge on Japan's 
part toward the Mongolian People’s Republic (Outer 
Mongolia). 

TOKYO’S VIEW OF MOSCOW PACT. Con- 
dusion of this pact opens up a number of possibilities 
for Japan, provided that Tokyo is prepared to exploit 
them effectively at this time. It facilitates settlement 
of pending Soviet-Japanese issues; relieves Japan of 
its obligations toward the Axis in the event of a 
Soviet-German clash; and assures Tokyo of Soviet 
neutrality in case of a Japanese conflict with Britain 
or the United States. 

_At Tokyo, Premier Konoye greeted the pact as of 
epoch-making significance” to Soviet-Japanese rela- 
tions, and predicted that it would “serve as a basis for 








MATSUOKA WINS PACT WITH U.S.S.R. 


rapid solution” of pending questions between the 
two countries. Tokyo evidently hopes that the pact 
will be followed by conclusion of a Soviet-Japanese 
trade treaty, as well as the long-delayed permanent 
fisheries agreement. The frontier declaration, more- 
over, may lead to greater progress in the demarca- 
tion of Manchoukuo’s border than has so far occurred. 

In the second place, the Moscow pact lessens 
Tokyo's apprehension over the possible outbreak of 
Soviet-German hostilities in Europe. The tripartite 
alliance of September 27, 1940 had obligated Japan 
to come to Germany’s aid in case of a Soviet-German 
clash. Recent events in Europe, coupled with the fail- 
ure to bring the U.S.S.R. into the Axis-Japan pact, 
had led Tokyo to fear that such a clash might be 
imminent, and criticism of this feature of the tripar- 
tite alliance had seriously embarrassed the Konoye 
Cabinet. While the Soviet-Japanese neutrality pact 
meets this issue to Tokyo’s satisfaction, it is by no 
means so welcome to Berlin. By dissociating Japan 
somewhat from the orbit of the Axis, it revises the 
tripartite alliance to Germany's disadvantage. Berlin 
had originally thought to induce Moscow to become 
a full-fledged partner in the Axis-Japan alliance, but 
finds instead that Moscow has concluded a separate 
agreement with Tokyo. Thus, for Germany, the use- 
fulness of the Axis-Japan alliance is reduced so far as 
the Soviet Union is concerned, although there may 
be some recompense if the new pact induces Japan to 
attack the Singapore base. 


THE FAR EASTERN OUTLOOK. Tokyo sees a 
third—and possibly the greatest—gain from the pact 
in the sphere of its relations with Britain and the 
United States. It is now free to move against the 
Anglo-American positions in southeast Asia with- 
out fear of a flank attack from the Soviet Union. In 
this respect, Japan derives an advantage similar to 
that which Germany obtained in Europe by the 
Soviet-German pact of August 23, 1939. 

















While the similarity exists, there are at the same 
time considerable differences between the two cases, 
and it remains to be seen how far the Moscow pact 
will encourage greater truculence on Tokyo’s part 
toward Britain and the United States. The Konoye 
Cabinet is at present engaged in a desperate effort to 
cope with its economic problems. Recent Cabinet 
changes have given Japan’s business interests vir- 
tually a free hand in dealing with the economic crisis. 
Barring a coup d’état, which the extremists might at- 
tempt, Japanese “big business’ will be inclined to 
seek an economic solution in a modus vivendi with 
the United States, rather than risk a Pacific war. 

Nor has the Moscow pact improved Japan’s mil- 
itary position in China. Soviet assistance to China is 
not affected by the pact, and Moscow has assured 


MOSCOW ON ALERT FOR GERMAN DRIVE TO EAST 


After an initial week of Blitzkrieg, the Balkan 
campaign appeared to be developing into a series of 
isolated encounters in mountain sectors, where the 
Greek and Yugoslav armies, still largely intact, were 
attempting, with the aid of the British air force, to 
disrupt German communications. In such a war of 
movement, where Nazi superiority in airplanes and 
motorized equipment depends on maintenance of 
communications with German bases in Bulgaria, Ru- 
mania and Hungary, it was difficult to estimate the 
chances of the belligerents from day to day, or even 
from hour to hour. 

Meanwhile, another lightning advance of German 
motorized units, transported to Italian Libya from 
Sicily, had brought Axis forces into Egyptian territory 
within eighteen days. Profiting by the diversion of 
large portions of the British Imperial Army of the 
Nile to the Balkan and East African fronts, the 
Germans recovered the ground lost by the Italians 
during the winter campaign in Libya, and threatened 
to endanger depleted British forces in Egypt, as well 
as the British fleet based on the Egyptian port of 
Alexandria. 

DISMEMBERMENT OF YUGOSLAVIA. Ger- 
man victories in the Balkans and in Africa, taken in 
conjunction with intensive Nazi propaganda activ- 
ities in the Near East, notably Iraq with its important 
Mosul oil-fields, had immediate repercussions on the 
rapidly fluctuating situation in Europe. On April 10 
German sources reported the formation of a separate 





For a graphic display on Latin America, 
order a set of 


13 MAPS and CHARTS—$1.00 


Enlarged reproductions of illustrations from the 
HEADLINE Book, LOOK AT LATIN AMERICA. 
Use these to awaken interest in our southern neighbors. 











Page Two 








—=—= 
Chungking it will continue to send war supplies » 
China. Tokyo has gained a pledge of Soviet respey 
for Manchoukuo’s “territorial integrity and inyjg 
ability,” but this pledge will probably prove of sym. 
bolic significance only. It is still doubtful, despite th, 
pact, whether Tokyo will feel free to transfer trop 
from Manchuria to other fronts in eastern Asia. 
The immediate outlook in the Far East is ther 
fore not necessarily critical, so far as the threat of 
Japanese acticn is concerned. There may be a reer, 
descence of Japan’s efforts to secure strategic bass 
in Thailand or Indo-China, which would have » 
precede a southward drive. Before challenging th 
Anglo-American front, however, it seems likely thet 
Tokyo will await the outcome of Germany's cap, 
paign in the Mediterranean. T. A. Bisson 


) 


pro-Axis state in Croatia. This new state is to kk 
headed by Ante Pavelitch, a Croat terrorist who had 
been involved in the murder of King Alexander of 
Yugoslavia in 1934, and had been living in Italy. The 
next day it was indicated that Italy would claim th 
Kossovo region of Yugoslavia, containing about one 
million Albanians, if and when that country is divid. 
ed among the Axis powers. On April 11 Hungary,: 
member of the Axis group, profited by chaos in the 
Balkans to invade a strip of land in northern Yugo| 
slavia which that country had taken from Hungay 
under the peace treaties of 1919. By utilizing the te 
visionist ambitions of its allies—Italy, Hungary and 
Bulgaria—Germany apparently intends to break w 
Yugoslavia and Greece into several parts, whic 
could then be forced to join Hitler’s ‘new order.” 
In this emergency, Britain and its Balkan allies te 
ceived no hint of aid from Turkey. The Turkish! 
government continues to cling to its decision not to) 
enter the conflict unless its territory is attacked. I 
is possible, however, that Germany may avoid out 
right attack on Turkey, and seek to win it over by| 
offering attractive terms of trade, and even a shait| 
of British-dominated territories in the Near East. 


MOSCOW’S REBUKE TO HUNGARY. Tur 
key’s decision still hinges on the policy of the Sovie 
Union, which also has an interest in the fate of the 
Straits and the Black Sea. Moscow, after signing 
treaty of nonaggression with Turkey on March 24, 
and a pact of friendship with Yugoslavia on April 6, 
on the eve of the German invasion, has expressél/ 
its sympathy for the Yugoslavs and its disapprovil 
of Bulgaria’s action in permitting German occupt 
tion of its territory. A further step in the direction 
of what might be described as oblique and passitt 
opposition to German penetration in the Balkans wis 
taken on April 12, when the Soviet government off 
cially notified Hungary that the movement of Hut 
garian troops into Yugoslavia had created ‘‘a partic? 








} 
| 
\ 





Oo eae Of 


——+ > he: 


— ee -—- SS - FS 


a. ae ak) (fee 








—= Page Three 




















—| = —— 
pli larly bad impression” in Russia and could not receive ; 
a Soviet approval. In issuing this. statement, Andrei F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
invigi| Vishinsky, Vice Commissar of Foreign Affairs, See MEDITERRANEAN CRISIS 
of sym| added: “It is not difficult to realize what would be mn a oe die on mn 
pite thi the position of Hungary should she herself get into Time: 2:15 p.m., E.S.T. 
r troop.) trouble and be torn to bits, since it is known that there Station: NBC, blue network 
\sia, are national minorities in Hungary, too.” The same 


$ the.| day it was announced that the German Ambassador 
teat of} and the Slovak Minister to Moscow were returning to 


a tecn,| Berlin and Bratislava respectively for consultation that, during the period of civil war and intervention 


ic baggy} with their governments. after 1918 the British themselves sought to obtain 
have ») | The Soviet warning to Budapest probably refers control of the Caucasian oil-fields. 

ing th| to territory recovered by Hungary from Czechoslo- 

ely tha| vakia following the Munich accord. Under the Vienna It is conceivable, however, that if the Balkan con 
's cam] Awatd of November 2, 1938, arranged by Ger- paign should drag on, the Soviet Union might im- 
sson | many and Italy, Hungary was assigned a part of prove its own position on the West by claiming ter- 
Ruthenia and southern Slovakia (excluding the large ritory from Hungary and making additional demands 


way to try to bring Russia into the war on Britain's 
side. For the Soviet government has not forgotten 


river port of Bratislava, which is the capital of the © Rumania. Such a move might strike at Nazi com- 
; to lk} present state of Slovakia). Ruthenia, the most back- munications from the rear. It might also give Mos- 
ho haj| ward section of Czechoslovakia—to which it had been cow an entering-wedge for Communist propaganda 
nder of} awarded on the break-up of the Austro-Hungarian among peoples who have sub-marginal standards of 


ly. The} Empire in 1919—has a population extraordinarily living and have already shown interest in the kind 
iim the| mixed in language, racial origins, political sympathies of peasant collectivism that has been developed in 





Sut one/ and religious affiliations. According to the Czecho- the Soviet Union. 

s divid| slovak census of 1930, on the basis of nationality It is against this background of European develop- 
gary,1| more than half of Ruthenia’s total population of ments that K.ussia’s attitude toward its neutrality pact 
in the} 709,128 consisted of Ruthenes, Russians and Ukrain- with Japan must be weighed. Whatever Russia’s 
Yugo} ians. The Communist movement in Ruthenia, re- form of government, its foreign policy is necessarily 
ungay| ctuited largely from Ukrainians, was relatively conditioned by its geographic position—the position 
the re’ strong, and in the elections of 1935 the Communists of a landlocked continent lying between Europe and 
ry ani} polled nearly 80,000 votes out of a total of a little Asia. Under no circumstances can Russia become in- 
eak up| over 300,000. The major trends among the Ruthenes volved in a situation which would expose it to wat 
whid| have been in the direction of integration either with on both the European and Far Eastern fronts. While 
ler.” | Russia or with an independent Ukrainian state. Be- the Soviet-Japanese pact frees Japan for a drive into 
lies e| cause of pro-Ukrainian sympathies among Ruthenes southeast Asia, it also frees the Soviet Union for pos- 
‘urkish| it was thought at the time of the Vienna Award that sible action in Eastern Europe. Should such action 
not?! the Germans would eventually use Ruthenia as a involve Russia in hostilities with Germany, then 
ked. It} jumping-off place for a Ukrainian nationalist move- Japan, by the terms of the pact, would be bound to 
id out} ment designed to separate the Soviet Ukraine from remain neutral. In that sense, the. pact is,.as Premier 


wet by} the U.S.S.R. Moscow’s hint on April 12 regarding Konoye has said, “epoch-making.” It reaffirms what 
| shart} national minorities in Hungary indicates that the So- has been increasingly evident since 1939: that is, the 





Bast. | viet government may lay claim to Ruthenia on the return to the European diplomatic scene of the Soviet | 
Tur) ground that many of its people have racial and = Union, which at Munich appeared to have been | 
Sovitt| linguistic ties with Russia. relegated to Asia by both Germany and the Western jf 
of tht} WILL RUSSIA ACT IN EUROPE? The Soviet powers. The Soviet Union intends to preserve its neu- ; 
ning?) government is no more anxious today than it was in trality. It hopes that the war will exhaust both the 
ch 24; 1939 to become engaged in a major conflict with Ger- actual belligerents in the West and the potential 
pril 6, many, least of all for the sake of the British Empire. belligerents in the East—Japan and the United States. 
cessed} Nor was Mr. Churchill’s statement of April 9—that But this does not mean that it will passively accept ; 
prowl! Germany might now attempt to secure “the granary the “new order” Hitler is seeking to build in Eastern 
jccup| of the Ukraine and the oil-fields of the Caucasus to Europe and the Balkans. 
rection wear down the English-speaking world’’—a tactful VERA MICHELES DEAN 
assive 





ns was FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 26, Aprit 18, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
at oft Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera MicHeres Dgan, Editor. 
H Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 

: a: Bw 81 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 

artic F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 














Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


Apr. 14.—The task of fulfilling promises of effec- 
tive aid to all opponents of the Axis became more 
complicated last week-end as Washington weighed 
the military effect of Nazi gains in the Balkans and 
North Africa and the political consequences of the 
Soviet-Japanese neutrality pact. On the assumption 
that control of the seas will continue to be the 
decisive factor, regardless of the outcome of military 
operations on the continents of Europe and Asia, 
the Administration is directing its chief action toward 
keeping open lines of sea and air communication 
between the United States and the British Empire. 


GREENLAND—AND BEYOND. The most de- 
cisive step yet taken to assure control of vital mari- 
time routes was the Executive Agreement signed here 
on April 9 by Secretary Hull and Henrik de Kauf- 
mann, the Danish Minister, giving the United States 
the right to establish air bases and other military and 
naval facilities in Greenland. Precipitated by evidence 
of recent reconnaissance flights by German airplanes, 
the accord was entered into by the Danish Minister 
after concurrence by Danish authorities in Greenland, 
but without prior consultation with the German-con- 
trolled government at Copenhagen. The State De- 
partment, standing upon its declared recognition of 
the “sovereignty of the Kingdom of Denmark over 
Greenland,” strongly supported the Minister when 
he refused to comply with orders from the Copen- 
hagen Foreign Office demanding his recall, and an- 
nounced it would continue to recognize him. 

The practical effect of the agreement—apart from 
blocking a possible German occupation of the island 
—is to place Greenland under the protective custody 
of the United States for the duration of the war. In 
addition, it extends the area of American military 
operations well into the Arctic Circle and eastward 
in the Atlantic to within three miles of the Nazi- 
proclaimed blockade zone. Establishment of Amer- 
ican bases in Greenland will not only flank the 
Great Circle route between Europe and North Amer- 
ica, but may also provide stepping stones for airplane 
deliveries to England during the summer months. 
Recent surveys conducted by the Coast Guard are 
said to show that air operations may be feasible for 
about half of the year. While it is considered im- 
practical to send large convoys by way of Greenland, 
one apparent result of the agreement will be the 
formation of an American naval and air patrol strong 
enough to release British naval vessels now operating 





in the western half of the Atlantic. And the political 
corollary of this move, according to reports on Cap. 
itol Hill, will be a campaign to convince the country 
of the need for full convoying in the near future. 


OTHER MOVES SHORT OF CONVOY. Mean- 
while, until public opinion has had time to adjust to 
the new situation, other decisive moves have been 
made to meet the shipping and transportation crisis 
without resort to American convoys. On April 10 
President Roosevelt sent a message to Congress ask- 
ing for legislation to permit him to requisition for 
American service any foreign ships in American 
waters deemed necessary for national defense. If 
Congress grants this request—which it is expected 
to do within the next two weeks—the government 
will have legislative authority to take possession, 
with due compensation, of the Danish, German and 
Italian vessels seized on March 30, and approximate 
ly 133 other foreign ships now in American ports, 
The latter, however, include 73 Norwegian vessels 
most of which are operating under an agreement 
with the British, as well as 7 Yugoslav freighters 
which will be released with war materials for that 
country. The remainder of the foreign fleet consists 
of 19 French, 24 Dutch, 2 Belgian, 1 Rumanian, and 
7 or 8 Estonian and Lithuanian ships which have been 
claimed by the Soviet Union since its occupation of 
the Baltic countries last year. 

A third significant move was announced on April 
11, when President Roosevelt issued a proclamation 
removing the combat zone at the entrance to the Red 
Sea. This action, taken immediately after British 
forces had captured the port of Massawa in Italian 
East Africa, will permit American vessels to carry sup- 
plies to the Suez Canal Zone area. Under the terms of 
the Neutrality Act of 1939—still on the statute books 
although virtually nullified by the Lease-Lend Act— 
American merchant ships are forbidden to carry wat 
materials to belligerents and some question was 
raised in Congress as to the legality of shipments in 
American bottoms for ultimate delivery to belligerent 
nations. All such legal doubts were brushed aside at 
the White House, however, where prompt action was 
assured. In other quarters it was reported that as soon 
as Congress passes the enabling legislation, most of 
the 39 Danish ships will be placed in the supply ser- 
vice to Suez. 

The question which haunted Washington as it 
read dispatches from Africa, however, was whether 
the promised aid would arrive in time. 


W. T. STONE 





VoL 


—_— 


Par 
par 


jolt 





| duc 


8 











