We Sy + 
\ 


Ure Witlign W. cis Bptered as 2nd class mateet ; 


a TY , . ei 
_ y Valvevsity of Michigan Librars 
J . gan Library 
A wn . 
low n Ay hor. Wich - 3 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











ore, An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Pereign Policy Association 
the FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
and 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
dis. 
yuld} VoL. XXI, No. 40 Juty 24, 1942 
tion} 


= FINLAND'S CAS® ILLUSTRATES OPERATION OF GEOPOLITICS 


iN a note delivered in Helsinki on July 16, and in October 14, 1920, concluded by an independent Fin- 
ake! J 4 statement issued on the same day in Washing- land with the Soviet government, gave Finland an 
tool ton, the United States announced that it had closed outlet to the Arctic Ocean through the port of Petsa- 
NSS'T its consular offices in Finland, and had requested mo, but did not grant its demand for Eastern Karelia. 
d it} Finland to terminate its consular activities in this Subsequently Eastern Karelia was transformed by the 
ings country by August 1. Technical reasons were given Soviet government — which had promised it au- 
: 7 by the State Department for its action, but it is ob- tonomy by the Treaty of Dorpat — into an autono- 
tT Off vious that larger issues determined this change in our mous republic, member of the constituent republic 
n*} policy toward Finland. of the R.S.F.S.R. In its refusal to concede Finland's 
il The Soviet government has long been pressing for demand, the Soviet government was affected less by 
This rupture of Washington's relations with Finland, as ethnic considerations (Russian sources claim that the 


ther} Well as with Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria. Al- population of Eastern Karelia is one-third Finnish, 
, | though the United States, on July 18, officially pro- and two-thirds Russian) than by the-strategic fact 





_| claimed a state of war against the latter three coun- that the railway linking Murmansk with Lenin- 

will) tries, it has stopped short, even now, of an outright grad runs through Eastern Karelia. The very 
of a] break with Finland. This differentiation between fact that the Murmansk railway is an essential sup- 
', ©} countries all of which are fighting on the side of ply line for Russia explains why the Nazis are prom- 
pte) Germany against Russia—voluntarily or otherwise— ising Eastern Karelia to Finland as its share of the 
kow,} has been justified on the ground that there are strong post-war settlement—in the hope that the Finns will 
send} elements in Finland who, whatever their grievances now feel they have a stake in continuing the war. 
| the) against Moscow, have no desire to be identified with | RECONSTRUCTION AND GEOPOLITICS. No 
le o| the Nazi cause, and are anxious to end the war with impartial observer can fail to sympathize with the 
: ua the USSR. desire of the Finns for independence, which is no 
s has less natural than that of Poles, Czechs and other 
large THE QUESTION OF EASTERN KARELIA. 


from} Lhe State Department believes that opposition to 7 ante . en Se ee eon ies 
continuance of the war still prevails among a major- eS ee eS eee 
. a look Finland’s fear that a victorious Russia would 
ity of the Finnish people. On July 14, however, the ; ie pbeneiel i t Finnish 

least} Axis periodical Berlin-Rome-Tokyo published a en pase "os "he pac ig “ : — 
statement purportedly made by Finnish Field Mar- e case of Eastern Karelia, however, @ 6 gimme 





BEE Mannerheim, who on Jone 28 hed paid a return illustration of the many difficult problems confronted 
at, SOF. , : by those who would redraw the map of Europe. Since 
dank. | Visit to Hitler.* According to this statement, the Pearl Harb age hy d political 
', Field Marshal is said to have declared that Finland we 98 me ’ wa Pes onal pr gx — oe 
would not abandon the struggle until it had recov- WEHEES 2S COUETY, Oe ee 


ER | ered Eastern Karelia which, he added, had been premarin so on pantie De 
Vation’ . PrOMised to it by the F#hrer. It will be recalled that B°0P Randy wa peperpai sees 
— reconstruction of Europe—and other continents—in 
wv H.} Finland, long a part of Sweden, was annexed by ane comin & Th \ “ 
| Tsarist Russia in 1809. The Treaty of Dorpat of ee eee oe 

ae awe | maps have one thing in common: that is complete 
Se tees, ee ee ee ee eee ee disregard for the wishes or interests of the human be- 








ahi 











ings inhabiting the areas under discussion, which 
gives them a peculiar affinity, unconscious though it 
may be, with the basic assumptions of Nazism. 

But aside from considerations of humanity, which 
some so-called scientists dismiss as irrelevant, the 
geopoliticians seem to confuse means with ends. To 
point out the necessity of studying geography, not 
only in its purely technical aspects, but in the effect 
it has on political, economic, social and other factors 
that shape international relations, is plain common 
sense. Actually, there is nothing new, and least of 
all nothing rabbit-out-of-the-hat, about the study of 
political and economic geography. The information 
necessary for an understanding of geography has 
been accumulated over many years by universities 
and research organizations in this country, as well 
as by a number of government bureaus, notably the 
Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce. The 
question is not how to get hold of this easily avail- 
able knowledge, but what to do with it once it is 
obtained. Knowledge of geography is a tool, like 
any other. It is entirely conceivable, for example, that 
it could be used by British and American Fascists 
for exactly the same ends, in reverse, as those to 
which Hitler has applied the geopolitical theories 
of Professor Haushofer. The re-mapping of coun- 
tries and continents is not an end in itself, unless 
it can achieve the objectives for which, presum- 
ably, the United Nations are fighting—and that is 
improvement of human welfare without resort to 
tyranny and arbitrary violence. To assume that, by 
consolidating Europe into nine states, or Asia and 
the Pacific into eight zones, we shall thereby con- 


Page Two 








——, 
——— 


jure away the centuries-old problems of the peoples 
inhabiting these areas is not-merely naive—it is also 
unscientific. It is just as if a physician, having dis. 
covered the properties of a given drug, should be gq 
impressed with his discovery as to assume that jt 
could be indiscriminately applied to all maladies, 
without reference to the needs, desires, or physical 
peculiarities of individual patients. 


It is, of course, true that the political and economic 
atomization of Europe was conducive to war rather 
than peace. But so was the existence, before 1914 
of the large empires—German, Austro-Hungarian 
and Russian—that made solid spots of color on pre. 
First World War maps which, for some reason, are 
usually omitted by geopoliticians. It would be un 
fair to assume that all advocates of geopolitics are 
necessarily conscious or unconscious adherents of 
Nazi theories. But it may not be sheer coincidence 
that some of them have been educated in German 
patterns of thought, and have apparently 
despaired of international collaboration on a volun- 
tary basis—which has never been given a fair trial 
—as to take refuge in a program based on the old 
concepts of alliances and balance of power, dressed 
up to look like something new by pseudo-scientific 
references to geopolitics. Periodical reshuffling of 
boundaries will not assure the security of small and 
vulnerable countries, which have no desire to become 
vassals of one great state or another, but could enjoy 
cultural autonomy within an intercontinental or inter. 
national political and economic framework. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


NEW CRISIS IMPENDS BETWEEN BRITAIN AND INDIA 


Since the failure of the Cripps mission, relations 
between Britain and the Indian nationalist move- 
ment have rapidly deteriorated. On the surface, a 
stalemate has existed, with the British unwilling to 
make a new offer and the Indians standing by previ- 
ous demands. Actually, important political changes 
have occurred within the Indian National Congress, 
whose leaders—fearful of continued passivity—are 
seeking ways of breaking the deadlock. A friendly, 
yet genuine, struggle is going on between Gandhi's 
pacifist followers and those who are desperately 





A Russo-Japanese clash in Siberia this summer can- 
not be excluded from the United Nations’ strategy. 
For a survey of the resources of the Soviet Far 
East, and possible U.S. supply routes by air, read: 


The U.S.S.R. and Japan 
by Vera Micheles Dean 
JULY 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 


REPorRTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











anxious to participate in the war against the Axis on 
terms of equality for India. 

Americans frequently assume that the Indian Na 
tional Congress and Gandhi are identical, not re 
alizing that, although the latter is venerated by al- 
most all nationalists as a symbol, his views on non- 
violence are rejected by many. Recent Congress his 
tory indicates that Gandhi’s power to shape decisions 
has been in the ascendant only when the prospect of 
cooperation between India and Britain has been at 
its nadir. When the Indians have been more hopeful 
of agreement, they have turned to other leaders. 

By the middle of July Gandhi had persuaded the 
Working Committee of the Congress to vote for 4 
new civil disobedience campaign, designed to force 
Britain to quit India, i.e., to grant India immediate 
independence. This resolution is to be submitted 
to the All-India Congress Committee for ratification 
at its meeting early in August. Although independ 
ence has long been a Congress objective, the leaders 
are far from unanimous in their attitude toward mass 
non-cooperation. The Working Committee appat 











—— 


ently 
terms 
prom 
ment 
the ¥ 
age J 
there! 
Th 
fused 
cent « 
of th 
leave 
such 
if the 
tradic 
for C 
his o 
wind 
be n 
repre 
temp 
Ye 
resig. 
from 
the } 
need 
sents 
their 
their 
Azac 
ters 
unle: 
their 
the | 


B) 
attit 
Brit 
effor 
of | 
ably 
ably 
poss 
caus 
and 
sinc 
no ; 
Ind: 
can 
asm 
side 
by t 
FOR! 
Head 


secon 





5 ON 


Na 





re 
> al. 
100- 
his- 
10ns 
t of 
n at 
eful 


the 
or a 
orce 
liate 
tted 
tion 
end- 
ders 
nass 


par 








 ——— 
—_ 





ently had considerable difficulty in agreeing on the 
terms of its resolution, which was reportedly a com- 
romise among differing points of view. The state- 
ment that the nationalists did not wish to impede 
the war effort of the United Nations or to encour- 
age Japanese aggression against China or India was 
therefore much more than a remark for the record. 


This complicated situation has been further con- 
fused by the many inconsistencies in Gandhi's re- 
cent declarations, especially his abrupt abandonment 
of the demand that British and American troops 
leave India immediately in favor of the position that 
such troops are acceptable for the defense of India, 
if they depart with the end of the crisis. These con- 
tradictions arise largely from political circumstances, 
for Gandhi is a politician of great skill, who seeks 
his objectives by constantly trimming his sails to the 
winds of public and Congress opinion. It should also 
be noted that many of his utterances, far from 
representing Congress decisions, are actually at- 
tempts to commit the Congress to new policies. 

Yet the Congress remains united—despite the 
resignation of the Madras leader, Rajagopalachariar, 
from the Working Committee over policy toward 
the Moslem League. Aware that strong discipline is 
needed to keep together a movement which repre- 
sents many facets of Indian life, the leaders value 
their unity above almost everything else. Whatever 
their differences with Gandhi, men like Nehru and 
Azad would consider it suicidal to discuss these mat- 
ters in public or to refuse to compromise in private, 
unless they received a British proposal which in 
their opinion would really arouse the enthusiasm of 
the people of India. 


BRITAIN HOLDS THE INITIATIVE. Their 
attitude emphasizes the need for a new initiative by 
Britain to reopen negotiations and make a further 
effort to reach agreement. Should London’s policy 
of drift continue, passive resistance will prob- 
ably begin, with resulting violence and, presum- 
ably, suppression by the government. It is im- 
possible to calculate the damage that this would 
cause the United Nations in both a military 
and political sense. Yet, in the three months 
since the Cripps mission ended, London has taken 


no action except to elevate to new positions certain 


Indians long associated with the administration. This 
can hardly be expected to arouse popular enthusi- 
asm. At the same time, there exists in Britain a con- 
siderable body of responsible opinion—represented 
by the New Statesman and Nation and various mem- 


Page Three 





— 
—— 





bers of Parliament—that favors a reopening of dis- 
cussions with the Indian nationalists. 

STAKE OF U.S. AND CHINA. Recent Indian 
developments have aroused great interest in China 
as well as the United States, although from different 
points of view. American public opinion, which has 
long been sympathetic to Indian nationalism, 
changed somewhat following the rejection of the 
Cripps proposals. The feeling developed that, under 
prevailing conditions, the Indian demands were un- 
reasonable. Much attention was paid to the existence 
of a large Moslem minority in India as an obstacle 
to independence. It must be pointed out that the 
difficulties caused by so-called Moslem intransigence 
have been greatly exaggerated in the United States, 
since the Moslem League, although important, rep- 
resents only one section of Moslems, while there are 
many Mohammedan leaders of national standing 
who reject the League’s views on separation from the 
rest of India. 

In China, the government and press have mani- 
fested much concern over India ever since Chiang 
Kai-shek visited that country in February and urged 
that Britain grant India “real political power.” The 
Chinese are worried because, with the cutting of the 
Burma Road, India has become their most important 
foreign supply base. They also have considerable 
sympathy for the Indian nationalists, in view of 
their own struggle for independence. The Chinese 
have therefore followed a twofold policy, suggest- 
ing that the Indian leaders be moderate, and press- 
ing Britain to offer more. There is no doubt that 
the conclusion of an agreement in India is essential 
to the cause of the United Nations. The present situ- 
ation in that country plays directly into the hands of, 
the Axis, which is busily engaged in spreading propa- 
ganda throughout Asia. It is to be hoped that Britain 
will propose the resumption of negotiations before 
new developments make conditions even more 


difficult. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 





Norway and the War, edited by Monica Curtis. New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1941. $3.00 
A collection of official notes, communiqués, and broad- 
casts relating to Norway’s neutrality, the German inva- 
sion, and the fate of the country under Nazi occupation. 
It is issued under the auspices of the Royal Institute of 
International Affairs, London. 


Prisoners of Hope, by Howard L. Brooks. New York, L. B. 
Fischer, 1942. $2.75 
A graphic report of life in unoccupied France, by a 
member of a church relief mission and one of the few out- 
siders to inspect Vichy’s concentration camps. He found 
that the French people distrusted Pétain and many favored 
de Gaulle. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 40, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
second-class matter December 


Bes 


Jury 24, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MicHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 
2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. National 


Three Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








ao So 7-2 


anes ia 
hes 








Washington News Letter Ne 














i 











JuLy 24.—The precarious relations between the 
United States and the Vichy government, so often 
strained to the breaking point in the past, now seem 
nearer than ever to rupture. Should Field Marshal 
Rommel succeed in capturing Alexandria, the sev- 
erance of diplomatic ties with Marshal Petain’s gov- 
ernment is likely to be consummated. 

The latest crisis is due to the rejection by Pierre 
Laval, Vichy Premier, of two successive proposals 
made by President Roosevelt on July 3 and 9 for in- 
ternment in a port of the Western Hemisphere of 
nine French warships now immobilized in Alexan- 
dria, with a guarantee of their return to France 
after the war. Following Vichy’s rejection of the 
American notes, Mr. Roosevelt warned that the 
United States would approve the destruction of the 
warships in the event that Alexandria were occupied 
by the Nazis who, it is feared, would seize the ships 
for their own use. Laval, in turn, declared on July 13 
that the President, by refusing the French the right 
to recall these warships to France, has assumed ‘‘a 
responsibility the extreme gravity of which the 
French government again desires to stress.” It will 
be recalled that the bombardment of the French fleet 
at Mers-el-Kebir by the British in July 1940, shortly 
after the armistice, was the occasion for the rupture 
of Anglo-French diplomatic relations by the Vichy 
government. The Vichy government has also been 
disturbed by the appointment, announced on July 9, 
of Admiral Harold R. Stark, Chief of the European 
Naval Forces of the United States, and Brig. Gen. 
Charles L. Bolte, Chief of Staff of the United States 
Army, European headquarters, to represent the 
United States in consultations with General de 
Gaulle’s Free French National Committee in London. 


WHY WASHINGTON MAINTAINED RELA- 
TIONS. A break with Vichy would mark the defini- 
tive failure of the dogged and persistent attempt 
by the State Department to wean Marshal Pétain’s 
government away from the policy of Franco-German 
collaboration. The octogenarian Marshal accepted 
this policy at his meeting with Hitler at Montoire 
in October 1940, not because of any love for the 
Nazis, but because of his belief that Hitler would 
win the war and that France, if it were to survive as 
a nation, had to make the best possible terms it 
could with the prospective victor. 

Admiral William D. Leahy was sent as American 
Ambassador to Vichy by President Roosevelt toward 


the end of 1940 to convince Marshal Pétain that his © 


belief in a Nazi victory was based on a fallacy, and 


to impress him with the fact that the United State 
was committed to seeing Britain through to ulf 
mate triumph. That Admiral Leahy won a considep. 
able measure of success is best attested by the furioy 
blasts of the Nazi-controlled Paris newspapers, whic| @™ 
accused the American Ambassador of being the arch. 
saboteur of Franco-German collaboration. Up to the 
present moment, Vichy’s collaboration with the 
Nazis has been confined primarily to the economic} —— 
field, although its military policy with regard tp| %- 
Indo-China, Madagascar, Syria and North Africa has 
also directly aided the Axis. As yet, however, neither 
the French fleet nor the French air and naval bases} yyp 
in French North Africa, which are the principal ob. F 
jects of our concern, have been turned over to the} a 19s 
Axis. 

PIERRE LAVAL RETURNS TO POWER. But 
if the State Department cherished any illusions about 
ultimately persuading Marshal Pétain to abandon 
his neutrality and move his capital to North Africa} need 
with a view to renewing the war from there, these} 5; 
illusions were rudely shattered by the sudden retur} {jpji 
to power of Pierre Laval. The immediate recall of 
Admiral Leahy to Washington testified to the State 
Department's distrust of the new Vichy set-up. Up to 
now Laval has not perpetrated any of the worst] thej 
things that were feared when he assumed office. He 
has not precipitated a clash between the French and} can 
British fleets, or attacked the “Fighting French’’ col- 
onies in Africa, or even inaugurated a peace offensive 
for the benefit of the Axis. Nevertheless, the mere} Bri: 
presence at the head of the Vichy government of a} the 
man who publicly proclaims his desire for a German’ hac 
victory and who is now attempting to arrange for i| sid 
wholesale transfer of French workers to the Reich} bor 
for work in German munitions factories inevitably} in 
makes the links still connecting Washington and 
Vichy extremely tenuous. 








Barring an overt act of hostility on Vichy’s part, m 
however, the State Department is not likely to pre} 4, 
cipitate the break. The United States has certain} 4, 
distinct advantages to be gained by maintaining fe} ,, 
lations with Vichy, such as the first-hand informa- ly 


tion it can gain by keeping consulates in unoccupied 
France and French North Africa. The way to dis) 4 
credit Pierre Laval is not to break off relations with 
Vichy, but to win a resounding United Nations vic | 1 
tory over the Axis. Such a victory would cut the 
ground from under Lavalism, which is based first} 
and foremost on the theory of the inevitability of a} \ 

1 


German victory. JOHN ELLIOTT 








