


Ng- 


lan 
cti- 
1ed 
les- 


NS. 
hat 
on 


nt, 
ide 








| 


| 





cal | 


Re- 


uld 
sue 
The 
ork 
10's 


vill | 


of 


urn 
nd- 
Op- 
He 
use 
ate 
ote. 
np- 
on- 
aty 
But 
ous 

23 
ble 


to 








MAY 15 1944 


General 1; Entered as 2nd class matter 
4 Slbrar 
Y 
Univa> ri 
*¥ve sl? y of MN cht 
“*\i Ban 
Ann At 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vor. XXIII, No. 30 


May 12, 1944 





INVASION COMPELS ALLIES TO FACE UNRESOLVED PROBLEMS 


AS was to be anticipated, the tension of waiting 
for the invasion of Europe has exacerbated 
many of the political issues which are bound to come 
to a head once the Allies enter German-occupied 
countries. So long as Russia bore the brunt of fight- 
ing Germany's land armies—with increasing aid, of 
course, from Britain and the United States in the 
form of air warfare and sea-borne war materials— 
the Soviet government was in a strategic position to 
carty through its policy in Europe. Once British and 
American troops land on the continent, the political 
balance will be altered, and Russia’s Western Allies 
will be able to develop such plans as they may have 
for the future in a concrete way. It is to that mo- 
ment, when the relative position of the great powers 
among the belligerents will undergo a marked 
change, that the small countries are looking in an 
attempt to ascertain their own fate. In this breathless 
hour of waiting, the great powers themselves are re- 
examining their policies with an eye on the effect 
they may have in the post-war period. 
MOUNTING TENSION SHARPENS ISSUES. 
The agreement concluded by Spain with Britain 
and the United States, announced on May 2, by 
which the Franco government undertook to close 
the Nazi consulate in Tangier, expel Axis diplomatic 
agents, and reduce drastically exports of wolfram to 
Germany represents a last-minute concession to the 
Allies—a concession compensated by the resump- 
tion of much-needed oil shipments to Spain from the 
Caribbean. There is no doubt that the position of 
Britain and the United States with respect to Spain 
has improved to a striking degree since our invasion 
of Africa in November 1942 and our victory over 
the Germans in Tunisia. Even so, Nazi pressure on 
Franco—or the General’s attachment to the Nazis— 
proved so strong that the Allies had to apply eco- 
nomic pressure through suspension of oil shipments 
before Madrid yielded to their demands, and that 


at a moment when impending invasion may in any 
case prevent deliveries to Germany. The main point 
in this long-drawn out controversy is that, since Brit- 
ain and the United States, during the Spanish Civil 
War, made no effort to prevent the rise of Franco, 
they now have to deal with him whether they like 
it or not—until such time as an internal upheaval 
may oust him from power. Meanwhile, there is no 
indication that the Western Allies are giving any 
encouragement to anti-Franco elements who have 
taken refuge in the New World, notably in Mexico 
—and Franco’s prolonged defiance of Britain and 
the United States has encouraged a similar attitude 
on the part of Argentina and of Franco sympathizers 
throughout Latin America. 


POLISH-RUSSIAN DEADLOCK. The unre- 
solved crisis in Polish-Russian relations has been 
further envenomed by the prospect that Russian 
forces may soon march beyond the area of Eastern 
Poland claimed by Moscow into Poland proper. The 
Soviet government remains adamant in its refusal to 
deal with the Polish government-in-exile as com- 
posed at present, and looks to the formation of a new 
régime by Poles who remained in their homeland 
under Nazi rule. Such a policy is understandably dis- 
tasteful not only to Poles who are hostile to both 
Russia and the Soviet system, but also to those who 
want decisions about Poland’s future adopted with- 
out interference by any one of the great powers. The 
dilemma of Polish Premier Mikolajczyk is that, if 
he acquiesces in Russia’s seizure of Eastern Poland, 
he will face repudiation of his government by many 
Poles; if he rejects Russia’s territorial claims, he must 
face the possibility that the Russians will set up a 
rival government on Polish soil. In the handling of 
this dilemma—perhaps the most acute facing the 
United Nations—neither side has displayed con- 
spicuous tact. Moscow’s attempt to win the sympathy 
of Americans of Polish origin by inviting Father 





; 
: 
h 


reper te as s 


ig gh eye eg — 
Se ail 3 itr 


te a a ne a th ee 
Set Se 


SL Serer 


a SS NRT. T 
~—  — 


Ee 
eS eee eS, Se 


\ ele 











———— 











Russia, has only added fuel to an already sufficiently 
explosive situation. The one justification Moscow 
could claim for appealing over the head of the 
United States government to Polish-Americans who 
sympathize with Russia is that the Polish Embassy 
in Washington had previously injected itself into 
domestic politics by pressing the cause of the govern- 
ment-in-exile in the lobbies of Congress and else- 
where. 

It is natural that European political leaders should 
appeal directly to American citizens of similar ori- 
gin—as Benes and Paderewski did on behalf of 
their respective peoples during World War I. But it 
cannot be repeated too often or too strongly that 
American citizens of recent European origin must 
be particularly careful not to inject themselves into 
the conflicts of Europe in the role of special pleaders. 
The best way to destroy the unity of this country, 
built with the sweat and tears of immigrants from 
all over the globe, is to permit or encourage internal 
divisions on the lines of Europe’s nationalistic quar- 
rels. American citizens can, and should, assume their 
share of responsibility in seeking to adjust conflicts 
that lead to war—but we shall prove far more effec- 
tive, and exert far greater influence, if we do this 
as citizens of the United States, and not as Polish- 
Americans, or Italian-Americans, or any other 
hyphenated group. 

WHAT KIND OF SECURITY? Meanwhile, the 
approach of invasion has also emphasized differences 
between the United Nations concerning the future 
treatment of Germany. It is natural that Russia, 
which unlike the United States cannot escape, even if 
it wanted to, from the problems of Europe, should 
be more persistent and often more blunt than this 
country in formulating a concrete program designed 
to prevent the recurrence of German aggression. The 
destruction of the striking power of the German 
Army, and especially of its general staff—which ac- 
cording to reports seeping in from occupied Europe 
is already planning for World War III—is the im- 
mediate objective of the United Nations. But it is 
clear that this will not of itself be sufficient to elim- 


Page Two 
- Orlemanski of Springfield, Massachusetts, to visit 





sae 
ee 





inate the danger of German attack in the future, | 
will not be enough to weaken Germany. If the 
United Nations are to achieve a sense of securi 
after the war, they must stay strong and united. The 
desire expressed on May 7 in the Soviet publication 
War and the Working Class for a world organiza. 
tion with force at its disposal has for some time been 
voiced in Britain and the United States—but neither 
of the three great powers, so far as is publicly known, 
has yet gone beyond the stage of discussing the sub. 
ject. One of the reasons cited for our reluctance to 
proceed with the establishment of a world organiza- 
tion is that the intentions of the Soviet government 
had not been made sufficiently clear. If Moscow now 
intends to press for a system of collective security, 
then one obstacle—real or imaginary—to its creation 
will have been removed. But collective security, by 
definition, cannot be achieved if any one of the great 
powers insists on acting unilaterally on some issues, 
while demanding joint action on others. The best 
proof of the genuineness of Russia’s desire for inter- 
national collaboration would be if the Soviet govern- 
ment, whose right to participate in the determination 
of affairs in Italy has been recognized by Britain and 
the United States, would in turn recognize that the 
other United Nations have a similar interest in the 
settlement of the Polish problem. 

Any system of collective security will, obviously, 











— 


Ministe 
be helc 
after a 
mittees 
suficie 
a forn 
tary F 
day, S 
of cut 
tional 
of mu 


_ import 





\ 
| 


| 


be difficult to establish, and even more difficult to | 


operate. But the only visible alternative would be for 
each great power to assure its own security by its 
own means, irrespective of the interests of other 
countries. This is not only impracticable, as we have 
seen, but is bound to lead to conflicts between the 
great powers among the United Nations for the 
spoils of victory. Nor does collective security, as 
some pessimists assume, mean that the United States 
alone is expected to protect far-flung areas of the 
world. On the contrary, most nations want not single- 
handed protection by any one great power (whether 
Britain, Russia or the United States) but joint efforts 


by all countries, large and small, to assure the secur- | 


ity of all. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


CURRENCY PLAN—A STEP TOWARD RECOVERY OF WORLD TRADE 


The draft agreement for an international mon- 
etary fund, simultaneously announced from Wash- 
ington, London and Moscow on April 21, sets forth 
at the technical level a statement of principles be- 
lieved by experts to provide a basis for international 
monetary cooperation. Although no government is 
committed to the plan at this stage, a formal United 
Nations conference on currency problems is now as- 
sured. Most significant is the fact that the technical 
experts of some thirty allied and associated nations, 
including the USSR, Great Britain and the United 
States, joined in presenting the draft. 


REACTION TO STATEMENT. Editorial com- 
ment in the nation’s press has been generally favor- 
able, although the financial press has been some- 
what critical, suggesting that the proposed fund of 
$8,000,000,000 is excessively large for the purposes 
intended and that restrictions on borrowing from the 
fund should be tightened. Immediate reaction to the 
announcement was more favorable in Washington 
government circles than in London. The announce- 
ment of Sir John Anderson, Chancellor of the Ex- 
chequer, in the House of Commons was met by 
pressing questions that brought a promise from the 





DR 
of Apt 
inally 
Keyne 
Treast 
in the 
USSR 
produs 
as a | 
the ne 
docu 
sides, 
ment 
posals 
Keyne 
origin 
reviva 

The 
perm 
growt 
to ass 
rect « 
ment: 
woul. 
other 
temp 
butio 
centa 
ducti 
contr 


_— 


jt 


an 





FORE! 
Headq 
| second 
one m 





‘7 


j 


l 
4 


’ 





oe ae 
-_— 





Minister that an early debate on the fund would 
be held. Secretary Morgenthau, on the other hand, 
after appearing before both House and Senate Com- 
| mittees to explain the plan, indicated that there was 
| sufficient Congressional approval to warrant calling 
a formal conference ‘‘as soon as possible.” Secre- 
tary Hull, supporting this opinion the following 
day, said: “In my estimation, world stabilization 





/ of currencies and promotion of fruitful interna- 


tional investment, which are basic to an expansion 


) | of mutually beneficial trade, are of first order of 


t 


rr “=a ~~ + =a 


rr 


oe Do bet er 


ne 





_ importance for the post-war period.” 


j 


DRAFT OF PRINCIPLES. The announcement 
of April 21 follows within a year the proposals orig- 
inally offered for currency stabilization known as the 
Keynes and White plans. Basically the United States 
Treasury program emphasized the position of gold 
in the monetary scheme, and it is assumed that the 
USSR supported this plan in view of its large gold 
production. The British plan favored trade balances 
as a key to currency stabilization and emphasized 
the necessity of a clearing union. The resulting draft 
document has tempered first suggestions on both 
sides, taking advantage of the large area of agree- 
ment which already existed between the two pro- 
posals. Less comprehensive in scope than the original 
Keynes plan, the final draft is more flexible than the 
original White plan which appeared to many as a 
revival of the gold standard. 

The international monetary fund would provide a 
permanent institution to promote the balanced 
growth of international trade and exchange stability, 
to assist in multilateral clearing facilities and to cor- 
rect disequilibria in international balance of pay- 
ments. Subject to close restrictions, member countries 
would be enabled to buy from the fund currencies of 
other nations for legitimate trade purposes. The con- 
templated $8,000,000,000 would be raised by contri- 
butions from each country proportionate to its per- 
centage of world trade, its gold stock and gold pro- 


| duction. Under these terms the United States would 
| contribute about $2,750,000,000, Great Britain about 





Page Three 





JUST PUBLISHED —a political and economic 
analysis of 
ARGENTINA IN CRISIS 
by Ysabel Fisk and Robert A. Rennie 


25c 


May 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPoRTS are published on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 





— 














$1,250,000,000, and Russia about $1,000,000,000. 
The fund would be governed by a board and a nine- 
member executive committee including the five coun- 
tries with the largest quotas. Voting power would be 
“closely related” to contributions to the fund and de- 
cisions would be made on a majority basis. With- 
drawal from the fund could be effected by notice in 
writing. 

PRINCIPLES IN PRACTICE. Fundamentally, 
the function of money in the international field is 
the same as in the domestic field. Within a given 
country where a stable currency may be assumed, it is 
relatively easy for accumulated reserves to flow be- 
tween different areas enjoying varying degrees of 
prosperity. In the international field, however, the 
existence of separate currencies makes this more dif- 
ficult, and nations often attempt to correct a disequi- 
librium in balance of payments by altering the rates 
of exchange. In the inter-war years, when the world 
saw the development of planned economies, com- 
petitive devaluations, and subsidized trading, nations 
readily resorted to this practice of altering exchange 
rates, thus creating monetary instability. 

The present fund is proposed in order to promote 
exchange stability and to avoid competitive exchange 
depreciation, and it is hoped that it will tend to 
mitigate the other practices so disruptive to interna- 
tional trade in general. Criticism of the proposal 
does not attack this fundamental purpose, although 
there is some fear that many nations will not be pre- 
pared to follow the sound international trade and 
financial policies necessary to make the scheme effec- 
tive. The plan is limited to the question of monetary 
stability; agreement must now be reached on the bal- 
anced growth of international trade and on the re- 
duction of trade barriers. But official quarters have 
indicated that discussions are under way with regard 
to these questions, as well as the subject of an inter- 
national investment authority. It is to be hoped that 
the present agreement, which demonstrates the possi- 
bility of dealing with delicate questions of the widest 
import while the war is still in progress, may be ex- 
tended to these other matters. 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 





Tarawa, The Story of a Battle, by Robert Sherrod. New 
York, Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1944. $2.00 


A vivid eyewitness description of the bitter struggle last 
November between United States Marines and Japanese 
troops. The author does about as much as a journalist can 
do to give civilian readers a sense of what battle means 
to men who are in it. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 30, May 12, 


1944, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879, Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


> 181 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





i 
Bt 


eI) 


ee 
Se ee eg ee 
bn ee red in onde J - ~ 


ae mt 
er ae 


* rn ~ 
eS ee eee 


ail 
a 


Washington News Letter 

















May 8.—The Latin American Republics, with the 
exception of Argentina, have been of inestimable 
value to the United States during the war. They have 


, Supplied this country with strategic materials in large 


quantities. They have made their territories available 
to us as military bases. They have ousted spies and 
expelled Axis diplomats. These developments are 
welcome and useful fruits of the Good Neighbor 
policy, which has emphasized the principle of con- 
tinental solidarity. But now from Latin America 
come indications that the policy will need some bol- 
stering after the war if the solidarity principle is to 
survive into the years of peace. The management of 
this country’s hemispheric policy has gradually been 
losing force, and prospects of its reinvigoration have 
been further dimmed by reports of the impending 
resignation of Laurence Duggan as Director of the 
Office of American Republic Affairs in the State 
Department. 

TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA. The prestige 
of the United States has suffered in the southern 
Republics as a result of failure to implement our 
non-recognition of the revolutionary, nationalistic 
governments of Edelmiro Farrell in Argentina, Pres- 
ident since March 9, 1944, and of Gualberto Villaroel 
in Bolivia, President since December 19, 1943. Both 
régimes have demonstrated their ability to survive 
without our approval, and the prestige of Argen- 
tina has been correspondingly enhanced. Paraguay, 
Bolivia and Chile have recognized the Farrell gov- 
ernment, and President Higinio Morenigo of Para- 
guay on March 20 dismissed from his Cabinet, at the 
demand of nationalist army officers friendly to Ar- 
gentine militarism, the three foremost friends of the 
United States. 

Many countries north of the Argentine-bloc states 
are suffering from political ferment as they prepare 
for the coming era of peace. In Mexico, Ecuador 
and Colombia there are strong political groups un- 
friendly to the United States. Some Mexicans are 
inclined to blame our wartime buying policies for the 
inflation which bedevils their economic life. Like 
Mexico, Ecuador suffers from inflation and blames 
us for it. The Presidential elections in June will dis- 
close more exactly the trend of opinion there with 
regard to the United States. The strange reluctance 
of President Lopez of Colombia to end his leave of 
absence and formally resume his position is weaken- 
ing his party, the Liberals, and improving the pros- 
pect that the Conservatives, who oppose national 
solidarity and collaboration with the United States, 


FOR VICTORY ° 


may capture the Presidency in the elections of 1946, | 

To the advantage of the United States it can be | 
said that the two régimes which are most unfriendly 
to us are disturbed by internal rivalries. Within the | 
Argentine government Col. Juan Perén, Minister of | 
War, and General Luis Cesar Perlinger, Minister of | 
the Interior, vie for primacy. The government as, _ 
whole, however, has been taking an increasingly bold | 
anti-democratic line. In Bolivia two old colleagues, | 
President Villaroel and Paz Estenssoro, who led the 
December 19 revolution, are both potential candi. 
dates for the Presidency; Senators and deputies elect. 
ed on July 2 are to choose the President during a con. 
stitutional convention which is to meet on August |, 

PROBLEMS OF U.S. POLICY. Day-to-day de. 
cisions about our policy in Latin America are based | 
not on the views of State Department experts familiar | 
with the subject but on considerations of military 
expediency and, in the case of Argentina, on the | 
economic problems of our allies. This fact has pre. | 
vented the development of a strong, consistent pol- | 
icy. Our future relations with Latin America have | 
been subordinated to our present needs on the war 
fronts. In official discussions both Secretary of State 
Cordell Hull and Mr. Duggan have advocated eco- 
nomic sanctions to implement our policy toward 
Argentina and Bolivia, but others in Washington 
held that such a move might embark us on a major 
political adventure at a time when energies should 
be focused on the war. Britain’s need for Argentine 
beef, moreover, has prevented development of 3 
“tough” policy toward the Farrell government, and 
the recent relaxation of meat rationing here will not 
alter the situation. 

Since the departure of Sumner Welles from the 
State Department last summer, Latin American af- 
fairs have not been in strong hands. Duggan, 2 | 
Welles appointee, whose resignation is said to have 
no relation to his disappointments in matters of 
policy, has often wisely proposed, but others have 
disposed. As a result, Brazil alone among the strong 
New World: powers remains close to us, Yet it is 
probably not too late to strengthen the Good Neigh: 
bor policy in such a way as to prevent the disintegra- 
tion of our friendships in the hemisphere. An oppor 
tunity to launch an amplified and reinforced policy 
may come in the meetings of the Inter-American 
Development Corporation [which opened on May ? | 
in New York City}, devoted to economic collabora- 
tion among the American Republics. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


———— 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 











19 


