is the So. 
ern Iran?” 
1 the prov- 
d, but the 
1 in 1919, 
alism.” 


he United 
lent Soviet 
known. In 
its friendly 
ut friendly 
nment has 
citizens as 
petroleum 
iral police, 
rvices, im: 
nization of 
in Iran a 
he railway 
to Bandar 
move great 
the Soviet 
month of 


1as been of 
s that the 
Iran, while 
intry under 
9, 1942. A 
artments to 
1 Iran, and 
r, has beet 
1e obstacles 
concessions 
disposed to 
5. Army if 


R BOLLES 


INDS 


"> _—. 


NOV 2 2494 


Lit ~ ‘ on Oh 


% University of uidhin 
An Arbor, wen. 


ROO ARARY we 
GENERAL 


FOREIGN 


POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIV, No. 5 


—_-- 


NOVEMBER 17, 1944 


U.S. EVOLVING NEW ATTITUDES TOWARD BRITAIN AND RUSSIA 


een than any action the United States might 
have taken in international affairs, the Pres- 
idential elections, held in an atmosphere of order 
and national unity, have given hope to nations torn 
by war and threatened by civil strife that human 
beings, under favorable circumstances, can work out 
common problems by peaceful means. At a time 
when peoples liberated from German rule are in the 
throes of internal readjustment, they find reason to 
renew the touching faith so many non-Americans 
have in our democracy—a faith expressed by an 
American song-writer in words made popular by the 
Negro balladist Josh White: 
“What is America to me?.. 
A land that we call freedom 
The home of liberty 
With its promise for tomorrow, 
That’s America to me.” 

Not only has the actual holding of elections in the 
midst of a grueling war strengthened the confidence 
of those abroad who are seeking a middle course be- 
tween various forms of totalitarianism. The resound- 
ing defeat of notable isolationists throughout the 
nation has also aroused hope that the United States 
will not turn its back on the rest of the world, as in 
1919, and will do its share as a partner in the com- 
mon enterprise of post-war reconstruction. It would 
be dangerous, however, for us who are living here 
in relative peace to relax now, on the assumption 
that isolationism is dead and that international or- 
ganization is just around the corner. We have cleared 
the first hurdle—but many others remain. To support 
international collaboration in words is one thing. 
To practice it by day-to-day deeds is another, and far 
more arduous, undertaking. 

FEAR OF RUSSIA. The actual mechanics of 
United States participation in the organization tenta- 
tively mapped out at Dumbarton Oaks—notably the 
Way in which the American delegate on the Security 


Council is to vote—will occupy the attention of Con- 
gress and the public in the months ahead. But even 
more important than these questions of procedure 
will be our attitude toward the countries with whom 
we plan to collaborate in the establishment of a 
United Nations organization. 

American opinion on world affairs is sometimes 
distractingly mercurial. Exaggerated idealization of 
Russia and China tends to yield, at the first doubt or 
disappointment, to equally exaggerated apprehen- 
sion. This tendency to jump from one extreme to the 
other is particularly conspicuous today in a mew wave 
of suspicion concerning Russia. Now that the hostil- 
ity formerly aroused by Soviet practices with res 
to private property and religion has declined, fear is 
being increasingly expressed that a victorious Russia 
may seek to dominate Europe. That Russia will have 
a profound interest in the future development of the 
continent is beyond question. Russia is a European 
power, and we cannot exclude it from Europe even 
if we wanted to do so. But there is nothing to stop 
the United States and Britain from taking a similarly 
active interest—nothing except the return of that in- 
differentism which characterized the attitude of the 
Anglo-Saxon powers toward the continent during the 
inter-war years. 

The countries of Western Europe are only too 
eager to collaborate with Britain and the United 
States in the reconstruction of their economies and 
the establishment of a strong and lasting system of 
security against renewed aggression by Germany. 
And of all these countries France, which has emerged 
from its ordeal with renewed faith in itself and a 
strong desire for reform, can be most helpful in 
acquainting the Americans and British—whose prac- 
tical knowledge of the sufferings and needs of Euro- 
peans is still pitifully small—with the plans and 
aspirations of the liberated peoples. It is an encour- 
aging sign that, on Armistice Day the United States, 


a — pe TH 


eon aS ; —-. ——= | 
Britaifi and Russia announced France had been off- for the security of the United States in the Atlantic | prove 
cially invited to participate in the work of the Euro- —and that it is therefore in our interest to furthe 7 
‘ . . . . . . . . . 
pean Advisory Commission which is formulating Al- the economic revival of Britain after the war. By q | desir 
lied policy toward Germany. In the past France has _strange twist of fate, some of the liberated countries | wh 
exercised a iar sway over the minds of Euro- § —notably France—which suffered far less physical | form 
peans not only west, but also east, of Berlin. A re- destruction than Britain, are now in a position to | Mexi 
vived and strengthened France could now play a de- prepare for reconversion to peacetime activities ig | jcan | 
cisive role in stabilizing the continent. relative quiet, while the British must not only main. | jjmit 
Paradoxical as it may seem, fear that Russia will tain their wartime restrictions, but also face the pros. | addit 
seek to dominate Europe is usually coupled with fear pect of more active participation in the Pacific war } Unite 
that it may not shoulder a sufficiently large share of once war in Europe is over. Many Americans who | gese 
the burden of war in the Pacific. Russia is just as have recently visited England strongly believe that, s 
vitally concerned with Asia as it is with Europe. It is —_ instead of blocking Britain’s post-war recovery by tary 
in the interest of Russia that Japan, which ever since excessive demands for a disproportionate share of } Amer 
the Sino-Japanese war of 1895 has been a growing civil aviation, merchant shipping, and trade, especi- | sion 
threat to the Siberian mainland, should be defeated _ally in areas like the Middle East where we had been } ence 
and weakened. Stalin’s reference to Japan as one of __ relatively inactive before the war, we should do | syiati 
the world’s aggressors on November 6, the eve of everything in our power to get Britain back on its | {jpite 
the twenty-seventh anniversary of the Bolshevik revo- feet. The extent to which we are prepared to go in | jarto 
lution, does not mark a departure from accepted practice to achieve this objective will be revealed by | jjpite 
Russian policy. What it does indicate is that Russia the Chicago air conference and the negotiations now | techn 
is closer than at any time since its invasion by Ger- under way in Washington concerning possible te | comn 
many to the moment when, with the conclusion of vision of lend-lease arrangements in such a way as | sver 
war in Europe, it can turn its attention to war in Asia. to permit Britain to prepare for the resumption of | wine 
SWING TOWARD BRITAIN. Fear of Russia, export trade. ing f 
which has recently been linked to fear of Commu- The closer we come to the establishment of an in- } jirlin 
nism in this country, and doubts about China’s in- ternational organization, the more we begin to see | jute 
ternal strength, have resulted in an increasingly warm — that the Dumbarton Oaks proposals are necessarily | allow 
feeling here toward Britain, both among the general only a skeleton that remains to be clothed with flesh. } Gr 
public and among those government officials who, in To do this we and the other United Nations must | Visco 
the past, had seemed more concerned with a “hard’”’ learn to work effectively together, free both of nos made 
peace for Britain than for Germany. The impression talgia for isolation and of aspirations to imperialism. on O 
is gaining ground that the British Isles are essential VERA MICHELES DEAN} ster 
BRITISH AND U.S. AIR POLICIES SHAPED BY POSTWAR TRADE GOALS |)? 
The Chicago Civil Aviation Conference, which tained. There is now assurance that an interim coun he p 
opened on November 1, draws to its close with agree- cil will be established which will have consultative | 24 
ment foreshadowed on most of the technical prob- powers to deal with civil aviation during the transi | 404 
lems under discussion, but with slight hope that tion from war to peace. This council will serve only | ». 
any of the more ambitious plans for the creation of in an advisory capacity on such technical questions P 
an International Air Authority will be realized at the — as _ the rules of air navigation, safety regulations, be ‘ 
present time. The last-minute withdrawal of the — weather reports and landing signals. The broadet, | * 
Soviet delegation from participation in the confer- more crucial questions relating to quotas, rates, and :.. 
ence highlighted the opening of the parley. No fully _the allocation of routes will be deferred to bilateral | * “ 
adequate explanation is yet available of Russia’s re- negotiations where necessary, or until some latet |” 
fusal to allow its delegation, already en route to date when it may be possible again to consider the - 
Chicago, to join in the talks. Most observers believe international air transport problem. It is the solution * 
that the sudden decision may reflect Russia’s present of these questions which will ultimately determine |“ 
lack of interest in international aviation—dictated whether an international body, possessed of sufficient | P" 
at evies 7 Aprvesaple th 
by the fact that most of the projected air routes after authority to regulate as well as advise on all mattets |. 
the war will not pass over Soviet territory. relating to aviation, can be erected. “a 
AN INTERIM AIR COUNCIL. Profound differ- There was some hope for a time that a compre |, 2 
ences have developed during the conference between mise proposal of the Canadian delegation might be a 
British and American points of view. But all the con- accepted—a compromise which would have resulted } jog, 
ferees apparently have proceeded on the assumption in a stronger council and which would have granted | Mesdqu 
that there will be no interference with trade and in- more favorable terms to American companies by the am 
tercourse between nations, although sovereignty of institution of sliding scales for schedules and traffic 
the air space above any given territory will be main- Under the Canadian plan, if United States carriets | 


: Atlantic, 
o further 
war. Bya 
countries 
s_ physical 
Osition to 
tivities in 
nly main. 
> the pros. 
‘acific war 
icans who 
lieve that, 
covery by 
: share of 
de, especi- 
> had been 
should do 
ack on its 
d to go in 
evealed by 
itions now 
ossible te 
a way as 
mption of 


t of an in- 
gin to see 
necessarily 
with flesh. 
tions must 
th of nos 
nperialism. 
38 DEAN 


tOALS 
erim coun. 
onsultative 
the transi- 
serve only 
1 questions 
‘egulations, 
1e broadef, 
rates, and 
to bilateral 
some latef 
onsider the 
he solution 
determine 
of sufficient 
all mattets 


a compro 
n might be 
ve resulted 
ave granted 
inies by the 
and traffic. 
ites carriets 


ved more efficient, they would be granted in- 
creased traffic. In accordance with United States 
desires, however, the "’consultative” interim council 
—which will probably follow the organizational 
form suggested by Col. Pedro A. Chapa, head of the 
Mexican delegation and leader of the Latig Amer- 
can bloc at the conference—will have no power to 
limit competition or institute any quota schemes. In 
addition to this Latin American support, the general 
United States plan also has been favored by the Chi- 
nese delegation. 

U.S. AND BRITAIN AT ODDS. Assistant Secre- 
tary of State Adolf A. Berle, Jr., chairman of the 
American delegation, stated the United States posi- 
tion bluntly at the opening session. Making no refer- 
ence to the relation between a world agreement on 
aviation and world security in general, or to the 
United Nations organization outlined by the Dum- 
barton Oaks proposals, Mr. Berle indicated that the 
United States was prepared only for consideration of 
technical matters. He stated the one point of most 
gmmon agreement among all delegates—that the 
sovereignty of every nation over its own air be main- 
tained, with the right of innocent passage and land- 
ing for fuel and servicing to be extended to foreign 
airlines. But with regard to rate-fixing, schedules and 
foutes, he proposed that individual companies be 
allowed to work these out on a competitive basis. 

Great Britain, represented at the conference by 
Viscount Swinton, Minister of Civil Aviation, had 
made its position clear in a government White Paper 
on October 19. The White Paper favored a world 
ystem of regulation in opposition to full-fledged 
competition, a policy described by many as a proposal 
fora world ‘‘flight cartel.” This proposal, similar to 
the plan presented by the Canadian delegation, fav- 
med the creation of a strong regulatory body whose 
functions and powers would resemble those of our 
own domestic Civil Aeronautics Board. 


BASIC DECISIONS DEFERRED. The differences 
between the United States and Britain which have 
emerged publicly during the present conference may 
be explained both in terms of air transport and in 
terms of the broader trade relations of the two na- 
tions. The United States occupies a strong position 
because of its tremendous aviation industry, greatly 
dugmented during the war; its vast domestic trans- 
port system; and the great portion of future traffic, 
both passenger and cargo, which will undoubtedly 
Ofiginate within the United States. Britain, on the 
other hand, has no need for a large transport indus- 
tty within its island confines, although a sizable air- 


Page Three 


—————=[== 


craft industry has been built up there during the war. 
But the British Commonwealth and Empire can pro- 
vide bases throughout the world and, so long as the 
traditional theory of sovereignty over the air space 
above that territory is maintained, Britain has a for- 
midable bargaining point. 

The British-American differences are but part of 
the very difficult adjustments which must be made in 
all economic relations between the two countries in 
the post-war period. Knowing that they will be de- 
pendent as never before on an increase in foreign 
trade and on transport receipts—both in shipping and 
aviation—the British naturally feel they must press 
for maximum participation in future air traffic. Brit- 
ain is prepared to sacrifice competition in various 
areas of trade and transport in return for assurance 
that it will garner a share capable of guaranteeing 
equality of power with the other great nations, and 
commensurate with the financial needs of internal 
policies arising from the insistent demand for full 
employment and complete social security coverage. 
There is every evidence that Britain is prepared to 
make the adjustments which such policies entail, even 
if governmental control of economic life proves nec- 
essary or if regulation of competition internally or in 
the international sphere is demanded. 

The United States, on the other hand, flushed by 
a prodigious industrial expansion resulting from the 
war, and faced with the necessity of providing post- 
war employment opportunities, seeks expanding op- 
portunities abroad. In accordance with our tradi- 
tional anti-monopoly policies at home, and under 
pressure from the several domestic air carriers now 
desirous of a share in the expected foreign business, 
the American delegation naturally fosters maximum 
competition in post-war flying. It is this broader 
trade struggle between Britain and the United States, 
unresolved during the aviation discussions at Chi- 
cago, which still awaits clarification at the highest 


policy level. GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


F.P.A. DIRECTOR ELECTED TO SENATE 

The F.P.A. announces with pleasure that Mr. H. Alex- 
ander Smith, a member of the National Board of Directors 
since 1932, has been elected as the Republican Senator from 
the state of New Jersey. Mr. Smith, a graduate of Princeton 
and Columbia University Law School, has had wide experi- 
ence in international affairs. Among other activities, he was 
a member of Mr. Hoover's staff, U.S. Food Administration 
in 1918; a member of the Executive Committee and Di- 
rector of the European Children’s Fund; Director of the 
Commission for Relief in Belgium, Inc.; member of the 
American Friends of Yugoslavia; and member of the 
Executive Committee and Director of the Belgian American 
Educational Foundation. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 5, NovemBER 17, 1944. 


stcond-class matrer December 2, 
oe month for change of address on membership publications. 


Ss 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FranKk Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lurt, Secretary; Vara Micuees Dean, Editor. Entered as 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


National 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


TERRORIST ACTIVITIES SHARPEN PALESTINE ISSUE 


The murder of Walter Edward Guinness, first 
Baron Moyne, British Resident Minister in the Mid- 
dle East, on November 6 in Cairo, has focused atten- 
tion on the terroristic activities of two secret organ- 
izations, the Ir Zvei Leuni and the Stern Gang, 
which harass Palestine despite efforts made by police 
under British supervision to preserve order and pro- 
tect life. Baron Moyne, the highest ranking British 
political official in the Middle East, had recently been 
conferring on the problem of Palestine’s future. Two 
members of the Stern Gang confessed the crime, 
which occurred in front of the Minister’s house in 
Cairo. 


ZIONISTS OPPOSE TERRORISM. This terrorist 
movement is due to two main factors: the dissatisfac- 
tion of Zionist Jews with the British government's 
continuing reluctance to act on the 1917 Balfour Dec- 
laration, which promised the creation of a Jewish 
National Home in the Holy Land; and the dispute 
among Zionists as to the tactics they should use to 
prod the British into action. Dr. Chaim Weizmann, 
president of the Zionist Organization, advocates pa- 
tience; last summer he said that Britain is ‘“‘des- 
tined to become the guardian of Israel’s hope.” By 
contrast, the late Vladimir Jabotinski, founder of 
the schismatic New Zionist Organization, favored 
the immediate establishment of a Jewish Common- 
wealth an both sides of the Jordan River. 


In their current platform the New Zionists, who 
are using demonstrations, newspaper advertisements, 
mass meetings and press conferences to achieve their 
objectives, demand the following: British relinquish- 
ment of the Palestine mandate; Jewish representation 
among the United Nations; exchange of populations 
between Arabs and Jews; and acceptance by the 
United States of responsibility for fulfillment of the 
Balfour Declaration’s provisions of the mandate. Both 
the New Zionist Organization and the Zionist Organ- 
ization, however, oppose the terrorists in Palestine. 


These men actually are believed to number not more 
than a few hundred. They doubt that mere political 
pressure will ever settle the Palestine question as 
they would like to see it settled, split off into an 
extremist group. Putting their faith in armed, ter- 
roristic action, they formed an organization known 
as Irgun. When, in 1941, the Irgun decided to sus- 
pend its tactics for the duration of the war, Abraham 
Stern revolted and organized the Sternists as a con- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


tinuing terror society. Stern was killed in a clash with 
the police in 1942. 

Both the Irgun and the Stern Gang are secret so. 
cieties. Their membership, programs, and sources of 
weapons and bombs are unknown. The Moyne mur. 
der—the ninth this year—was the first venture of the 
terrorists outside Palestine. These terroristic methods 
are viewed with disfavor by most advocates of the 
Jewish National Home in Palestine. For example, 
Dr. Nahum Goldmann, member of the executive 
committee of the Jewish Agency for Palestine, said 
on November 10 that the majority of Palestinians 
“abhor’’ Sternist practices. 


BASIS OF U.S. INTERVENTION. This terror. 
ism is but a sympton of a problem that concerns the 
United States as well as Britain—the problem of con- 
tinuing unrest in Palestine, where British measures 
have placated neither the Jewish nor the Arab popv- 
lation. The Balfour Declaration disturbed the Arabs 
and incited them to riot and terrorism; in 1939 the 
British government issued its White Paper placing 
severe restrictions on Jewish immigration into Pales. 
tine. This, in turn, fomented Jewish terrorism. The 
vast majority of Palestine Jews, however, have given 
Britain wholehearted cooperation throughout the 
war; and 30,000 are serving with British forces in 
the Middle East. 

Since 1939 political opposition to the White 
Paper policy has developed in the United States, 
which claims interest through having signed the Pal- 
estine Mandate. Both the Democratic and Republican 
platforms of 1944 called for the transformation of 
Palestine into a Jewish Commonwealth. 


The State Department has not encouraged current | 


movements for United States intervention in Pales- 
tine affairs, but it is probable that the Washington 
administration will request Britain to review the 
whole question as part of an expected re-examination 
of League of Nations mandates. On June 23 Mr. 
Roosevelt told the Palestine Arab party that the 
future of their country would be determined by the 
governments responsible for the establishment of 4 
world order of peace and justice, after consultation 
with Jews and Arabs. The Palestine question may be 
one of the first that will have to be considered by the 
United Nations international organization envisaged 
in the Dumbarton Oaks document. 


BLamr BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


——e a 


191 


Vou. 2 


