


| 
S 


iS 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





you. XIX, No. 16 FEBRUARY 9, 1940 


PERIODICAL Room [946 
GENERAL LIBRAR’ 


UNIV. OF Micw 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














—_ 


For a survey of the military preparations and economic 
yar potential of the British Empire, read: 


THE BRITISH DOMINIONS AT WAR 
by James Frederick Green 


25¢ 


February Ist issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 











TOKYO DIET CHALLENGES CHINA POLICY 





— in Far Eastern affairs, following ex- 
piration of the Japanese-American trade treaty, 
shifted last week to the opening sessions of the Diet 
at Tokyo and the progress of hostilities on widely 
scattered fronts in China. New complications in 
Japan’s relations with the Western powers had also 
arisen from the successive bombings of the Indo- 
China railway into Yunnan Province which cost the 
lives of a number of passengers, including five 
French nationals. On February 3 it was disclosed 
that the United States, prior to the recent Japanese 
bombing raids, had made informal representations 
both in Tokyo and Paris against the delays and 
dangers to which American goods and passengers 
on the French-operated railway had been subjected. 


THE DIET DEBATE. At Tokyo the Diet was 
thrown into an uproar on February 2 when Takao 
Saito, a member of the Minseito party, openly chal- 
lenged the common assumptions on which the war 
in China is being conducted. After casting doubt on 


the prospects of achieving the “new order in East 


Asia,” he asked what the Japanese people had re- 
ceived in return for their great sacrifices in the war. 
Attacking Wang Ching-wei’s proposed régime in 
China as nothing more than “‘a central government 
in name,” he stated that it would neither be able to 
unify the country nor fulfill its international obli- 
gations unless supported “by a strong armed force.” 
Even more serious, in the opinion of Japan’s military 
authorities, was Saito’s declaration that, in view of 
China’s large territory and army, it “is doubtful 
whether Japan can overthrow” Chiang Kai-shek’s ré- 
gime. Saito’s incidental remark, ‘‘under the cloak of 
a holy war,” added the tinge of /ése-majesté to his 
already provocative interpellation. 

As an aftermath of his bold address, much of 
which was expunged from the official stenographic 
tecord, Saito was forced to offer his resignation from 


the Minseito party. His challenge, however, was 
formally answered on the following day by the 
Premier and the War Minister, and it appeared 
likely that the army's demand for his resignation 
from the Diet would not be satisfied. The boldness 
of Saito’s attack, as well as the possibility that it may 
be carried through with impunity, is due mainly to 
deep-seated popular dissatisfaction with the grow- 
ing hardships imposed by the war. 

Drastic restrictions on electric power consumption, 
announced simultaneously with Saito’s interpellation 
in the Diet, offer additional evidence of the serious- 
ness of Japan’s economic problem. The new restric- 
tions, fifth in a series imposed in recent months, will 
affect not only the export industries but also electric 
blast furnaces, aluminum smelters and machine shops 
in Japan’s major industrial centers. The power 
“famine” has been caused by the summer’s drought, 
which reduced hydro-electric power, and an increas- 
ing shortage of coal. The latter, in turn, is attrib- 
utable to the scarcity of skilled coal miners and the 
reduced shipping facilities available to handle coal 
imports. Over and above these difficulties affecting 
wartime industry are shortages in ordinary com- 
modities for mass consumption, which ate having 
a much more general effect on popular sentiment. 

The furor aroused by Saito’s interpellation over- 
shadowed important pronouncements made to the 
Diet on February 1 by the Ministers of Finance and 
Foreign Affairs. For the first time in Japan’s history 
the new 1940-1941 budget estimates, presented by 
Finance Minister Ishiwatari, exceed ten billion yen. 
Of this total, more than six billion are devoted to 
extraordinary military-naval expenditures, including 
provision for an arms replenishment program. Tax 
receipts, estimated at four billion yen, are nearly one 
billion higher than in 1939-1940, but still leave six 
billion to be raised by domestic loans. 














The Foreign Minister's annual message to the 
Diet, given by Hachiro Arita, expressed regret over 
the advent of a non-treaty status with the United 
States, but observed that as a result of steps taken 
by the American government in December ‘‘Japanese- 
American trade relations have in practice under- 
gone no change.”” While expressing hopes for con- 
clusion of a fisheries convention and commercial 
treaty with the Soviet Union during 1940, the For- 
eign Minister also declared that Japan would “con- 
tinue to cultivate . . . intimate relations with all 
signatory powers of the anti-Comintern agree- 
ment.” This statement was made on the same 
day that dissolution of the Soviet-Japanese bor- 
der commission, set up as a result of the truce 
last September, was officially announced in Moscow 
and Tokyo. For the present, despite the commission’s 
failure to agree on demarcation of the disputed fron- 
tier region, no essential change in Soviet-Japanese 
relations seems likely to occur. 


ACTIVITIES IN CHINA. In his address to the 
Diet Foreign Minister Arita reaffirmed Japan’s “‘basic 
policy” of establishing a “new order in East Asia,” 
and declared that the Cabinet would do all in its 
power to assist the “formation and growth” of the 
Chinese central government under Wang Ching-wei. 
His statement that this régime would “be established 
in the near future” is apparently borne out by the 
recent organization in China of a Central Political 
Council, consisting of Chinese leaders who are ex- 
pected to inaugurate the new government at Shang- 
hai during February. Defections by two members of 
this group early in January led to an exposé of the 
terms which Wang Ching-wei had been forced to 
accept—amounting to a much more extensive degree 
of Japanese control, especially over economic affairs, 
than had been expected. 

During the last few weeks, several further aspects 
of the future constitution and policies of the puppet 
régime have been revealed. Both North China and 
the Inner Mongolian areas are to retain a large 
measure of autonomy, thus testifying to the continu- 
ing difficulties of establishing an effectively central- 
ized authority at Nanking. Rivalry between different 
sections of the Japanese army, backing various 


Page Two 








——— 
—. 


Chinese puppet candidates, has consistently proved 
a barrier to the political centralization of occupied 
China. Administration of the lower Yangtze Valle 
is to be entrusted to Wang Ching-wei’s projected 
government, instead of being directly handled ly 
the Japanese authorities. As the Western powers are 
seriously concerned with the reopening of the rive, 
to navigation, they may be forced to treat diplomati. 
cally with the new régime over the issues that will 
necessarily arise. The extent to which they may thus 
wish to accord de facto recognition to the Japanese. 
sponsored government will create a delicate diplo. 
matic problem, somewhat mitigating the good effects 
expected to follow Japan’s fulfillment of its pledge 
to restore navigation rights. 

The Japanese armed forces in China are mean. 
while pressing forward with their military campaign, 
in an effort to strengthen the authority of Wang 
Ching-wei’s régime when it is finally inaugurated 
Fighting on a considerable scale is occurring on a 
least four widely scattered fronts in north, central and 
south China. Operations in the Nanning area, where 
large Chinese forces have concentrated during te 
cent weeks, have gradually assumed the proportions 
of a major campaign. Rapid Japanese thrusts north. 
east of Nanning, according to Tokyo reports, have 
trapped a large Chinese force and destroyed the pos. 
sibility of a successful Chinese offensive. As large. 
scale hostilities are still continuing, however, it is 
apparent that the outcome on this front may not be 
determined for some time. Much the same situation 
exists in Inner Mongolia, where a Japanese drive 
west of the railhead at Paotou is reported to have 
scored a victory over the Chinese forces under Gen. 
eral Ma Chan-shan, the cavalry leader of Manchurian 
fame. In northeastern Hupeh province a Japanese 
drive has been turned back, while south of Hang. 
chow a sudden Japanese thrust appears to have been 
halted after a slight advance. 

None of these drives, save possibly the operations 
at Nanning, offers any serious threat to the Chinese 
defenses. In south China, the struggle for Nanning, 
as well as the bombing raids on the Indo-China rail- 


way, indicate that Japan’s army command is continu: | 


ing its efforts to cut China’s routes of access to the 
outside world. T. A. Bisson 


BALKANS SEEK TO PRESERVE NEUTRALITY 


The vague communiqué issued in Belgrade on 
February 4, at the close of the three-day conference 
of the Balkan Entente, gave no support to rumors of 
sensational future developments which had been 
emanating from Balkan capitals during the preced- 
ing weeks. As indicated before the meeting, the 
members of the Entente Council—the Foreign Min- 
isters of Rumania, Greece, Turkey and Yugoslavia— 
apparently sought to strengthen the loose form of 
Balkan collaboration which has thus far served to 


the conflicting pressures of the great powers in this 
area, even a cautious reaffirmation of the trend to 
ward regional adjustments may be regarded as af 
encouraging sign. 

RESULTS OF THE CONFERENCE. The only 
concrete decisions made public by the conference 
relate to matters of procedure. The four Foreign 
Ministers agreed to extend the life of the Entente 
until February 1948; to meet at Athens in Februaty 








— 


1941; < 
They ¢ 
pacific 
jn con! 
goer 
war. 
over tl 
afarme 
frame 
own al 
and th 
over t 
to ind 
The E 
gave f 
tain a! 
states 
ing af 
Minis! 
rensiv 
Fro 
munic 
cessfu 
allel t 
ing it 
viet n 
intra- 
status 
turbe 
coope 
penin 
that 
Bo 
now 
Italy, 
neutt 
neigh 
and 
was 
Hun 
adva 
man 
oush 
Buls 
clog. 
Min 


| affir 
preserve peace in Southeastern Europe. In view of | 


the 

had 
flue 
Run 
the 

por; 
FORI 
Head 
Enter 


ZTaeeaeak 











— 
a 





1941; and to “remain in close contact” in the interim. 
They recorded their decision to “pursue a resolute, 
pacific policy of maintaining strictly their positions 
in connection with the present conflict in order to 
preserve this part of Europe from the ordeals of 
wat.” By way of veiled reference to their concern 
over the maneuvers of the great powers, they re- 
afirmed their “will to remain united inside the 
framework of the Entente, which pursues only its 
own aims and which is not directed against anybody, 
and their determination to maintain a common vigil 
over the preservation of each member state’s right 
to independence and national territorial integrity.” 
The Entente’s overtures to Hungary and Bulgaria 
gave rise to a statement stressing its desire ‘to main- 
tain and develop friendly relations with neighboring 
states in a conciliatory spirit of mutual understand- 
ing and pacific collaboration.” Finally, the Foreign 
Ministers called attention to the need for more ex- 
tensive commercial relations among Balkan states. 


From the general tenor of the Belgrade com- 
muniqué, it would appear that Italy has been suc- 
cessful in marshaling Balkan support for a policy par- 
allel to its own in Southeastern Europe. Italy, stress- 
ing its readiness to act as a bulwark against any So- 
viet menace, is working for the pacific settlement of 
intra-Balkan disputes in the hope of preserving the 
status quo. At the same time, Rome would be dis- 
turbed if the Balkan states should so strengthen their 
cooperation as to reduce Italian influence on the 
peninsula. To this extent its policy coincides with 
that of Germany. 

Both Italy and the Reich realize that Rumania is 
now the focal point for all Balkan disputes, and 
Italy, from its vantage-point as a powerful near-by 
neutral, has been active in restraining its dissatisfied 
neighbors. In a conference at Venice on January 6 
and 7, the Italian Foreign Minister, Count Ciano, 
was reported to have urged Count Stephen Csaky, 
Hungarian Minister of Foreign Affairs, not to take 


| advantage of Rumania’s difficulties to intensify de- 


mands for the return of Transylvania. Simultane- 
ously, Turkey has been counselling moderation in 
Bulgaria. After conferences with Numan Menemen- 
cioglu, Secretary-General of the Turkish Foreign 
Ministry, Bulgarian officials on January 13 re- 
affirmed Sofia’s neutrality and desire for peace in 
the Balkans. This statement encouraged those who 
had feared that the Soviet Union might use its in- 
fluence in Sofia to support Bulgaria’s claims for the 
Rumanian Dobrudja, and may even indicate that 
the Bulgarian government is willing to reach a tem- 
porary agreement with Bucharest on this question. 


Page Three 








TOWARD BALKAN CONCILIATION. On Ru- 
mania’s side there are similar signs that intransigence 
is giving way to a spirit of compromise. Confronted 
by the Soviet threat to Bessarabia and the difficulty 
of allocating its oil exports to the satisfaction of both 
Germany and the Allies, the Rumanian government 
seems more conciliatory toward its revisionist neigh- 
bors than at any time in the past twenty years. On 
January 20 the Yugoslav and Rumanian Foreign 
Ministers, Alexander Cincar-Markovitch and Grigore 
Gafencu, met at the little Yugoslav village of Versecz 
and apparently discussed the Bulgarian claims. The 
effect of the Italian, Turkish and Yugoslav efforts 
at pacification was apparent in the friendly refer- 
ences made to Bulgaria and Hungary by M. Gafencu 
in a formal declaration at Belgrade on February 3. 
In some circles it was even maintained that Rumania 
had agreed to surrender a small portion of the 
Dobrudja in settlement of the Bulgarian demands, 
and that Turkey and Greece were considering meth- 
ods of satisfying Bulgaria’s request for an outlet to 
the Aegean. It is still impossible, however, to confirm 
these reports, and there is but slight evidence of any 
solution for Rumanian-Hungarian difficulties. 


For the time being, at least, the Balkan alignment 
may be expected to remain flexible. A heavy strain 
is placed on the maintenance of the Entente itself 
by the divergent policies of its members. Yugoslavia, 
still preoccupied with the problems of internal re- 
organization, appears to be leaning toward Italy. 
Despite an Anglo-French guarantee, Rumania is des- 
perately striving to satisfy both belligerents by a 
middle-of-the-road policy—a hope which grew dim- 
mer when the Allies, on February 1, suddenly sus- 
pended the granting of licenses for exports to Ru- 
mania as a step in the battle for control of its oil. 
Turkey, having concluded mutual assistance pacts 
with Britain and France, is seeking, thus far unsuc- 
cessfully, to convert the Entente into a military bloc 
which might resist incursions by the U.S.S.R., Ger- 
many and Italy. 


The clash of interests between the four states was 
illustrated by a declaration of the Turkish Foreign 
Minister, Shukru Sarocoglu, on February 1, that Tur- 
key “is not neutral but merely out of the war” and 
that “‘it is necessary to take all measures to prevent 
the flames from spreading.” The implication that ac- 
tion might become necessary against the axis powers 
made a disturbing impression in Yugoslavia. Thus, 
while it is true that some steps have been taken to- 
ward Balkan unity, there can be no assurance that it 
will withstand the pressures to which the belligerents 
are certain to subject it. Davipp H. Popper 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 16, FEBRUARY 9, 1940. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


<P» 181 


Published weekly by the Forcign Policy Association, 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicueLes Dean, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Incorporated. National 











Washington News L ettec 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Fes. 5.—Concluding its hearings on the naval ex- 
pansion program, the House Naval Affairs Committee 
will report this week a modified Vinson bill cutting 
in half the original program recommended by the 
Navy. In place of the $1,300,000,000 authorization 
bill, providing for construction of 77 combat ships 
and 31 auxiliaries, the Committee has tentatively 
approved a measure limited to 21 combat ships and 
22 auxiliaries at a cost of approximately $655,000,- 
000. New airplane construction will be reduced from 
2,395 to 1,011 planes of all types. The new measure 
represents an increase of about 10 per cent in under- 
age combatant tonnage instead of 25 per cent as 
originally contemplated. 


PAPER REDUCTIONS. Although Secretary Edi- 
son opposed this reduction, it would be a mistake 
to assume that the Committee’s action represents a 
defeat for the Navy Department or a victory for 
Congressional advocates of economy. The difference 
between the two programs is largely on paper and 
will not affect the rate of new construction in any 
way during the next two years. In fact, as Chairman 
Vinson pointed out last week, the revised program 
actually provides for all the ships that can be laid 
down in government and private shipyards. The only 
essential difference is that the Navy asked Congress 
to authorize a five-year program now, while the 
Committee favors a two-year installment, on the 
theory that there will be time to provide the rest of 
the program later if conditions seem to require it. 


That there will be no reduction in shipbuilding 
activities or naval construction costs was demon- 
strated by the testimony of Rear Admiral Samuel M. 
Robinson, Chief of Naval Engineering, who stated 
that the short-term program will permit construction 
of 82 new warships within the next two years. This 
includes new construction and replacements already 
authorized under existing legislation. As amended, 
the Vinson bill will provide for 3 new aircraft car- 
riers totaling 79,500 tons, an unspecified number of 
cruisers totaling 66,500 tons, and submarines aggre- 
gating 21,000 tons. 


In adopting the short-term program, the Commit- 
tee appears to have taken the position that future 
naval needs cannot be foreseen at this time and may 
be altered—for better or worse—within the next 
two years. At any rate, the Committee is apparently 
not prepared to act on the outside possibility of an 


Allied defeat, which would leave the United State 
facing a combination of hostile powers. 


POTENTIAL COALITIONS. One of the chief 
arguments for the original 25 per cent increase ad. 
vanced during the House hearings was based on the 
possibility of such a coalition against the United 
States. Admiral Stark, Chief of Naval Operations, 
mentioned no countries by name, but cited earlier 
testimony referring to Germany, Italy, Japan and 
Russia. An interesting commentary on this theoy 
was made public by the Navy Department last week 
in the form of two charts showing the relative 
strength of the six leading navies. According to thes 
figures, which are not “official,” but are based on the 
fullest information available, the strength of the 
United States Navy last November was approxi- 
mately equal to the combined tonnage of Japan and 
Germany. At that time, the United States had in com 
mission modern under-age units totaling 1,021,270 
tons, as compared with 1,021,451 tons for Germany 


and Japan. 


Comparing the tonnage figures in the different 
categories, the United States is shown to be superior 
to the combined tonnage of Germany and Japan ia 
capital ships, aircraft carriers and cruisers, and im 
ferior only in under-age destroyers and submarines, 
in which Germany and Japan have specialized. If 
the ships now building are taken into account, the 
United States appears to be superior in all categories 
except submarines. 


The Russian fleet was not included in the Naw 
Department charts. If Italy should be added to the 
hypothetical coalition, however, the United States 
would still have a tonnage ratio in under-age ships 
of approximately 5 to the coalition’s 7. Officials et 
trusted with the technical problem of meeting any 
possible contingency must doubtless take this situa 
tion into account, however remote the forming of 
such a bloc may seem. But the ratio in itself is not 
particularly alarming unless it is assumed that Ger 
many wins a complete victory, destroys the British 
and French fleets, and acquires naval bases making 
possible an attack on the Western Hemisphere. This 

‘worst possible outcome” is not yet accepted by the 
Naval Affairs Committee, and seems unlikely to be 
accepted by Congress. Meanwhile, Congress might 
well consider a resolution introduced by Represents 
tive Van Zandt, proposing the establishment of 4 
National Defense Commission to survey defenst 
needs in relation to national policy. W. T. STONE 





mc 
conflic 
and th 
where 
and ni 


new ar 
where 
Finns, 
the Ne 
pepar 
or Rus 
that th 
ligerer 
by unc 
then e 
has so 
fa’ 
vanish 
seme 
that 1] 
in the 
spell t 
sbilit 
AL 
on wl 
today 
tions 
ng p 
and F 
until 
crush 
Britai 
policy 
were 
that 1 
other 
these 





