Entefed as 2nd class matter 


Dr, William iw. .Bishop De 


University of Hichigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mieh. 5 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of ihe Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIII, No. 1 


OcroBER 22, 1943 


TIME LAG IN FOREIGN POLICY HITS U.S. ROLE IN CHANGING WORLD 


od one of the most significant passages of his ad- 
dress at the twenty-fifth anniversary luncheon of 
the Foreign Policy Association on October 16, former 
Under Secretary of State Welles declared that only 
a “senile,” “‘puny” or “impotent” nation would seek 
to avoid formulating its own foreign policies for the 
post-war period until other powers had expressed 
their intentions. Implicit in the speech as a whole— 
and especially in this castigation of American isola- 
tionists—was a strong sense of urgency, a feeling 
that the United States cannot play a worthy part in 
world affairs if it hesitates to commit itself on funda- 
mental international issues at a time when the mili- 
tary struggle in Europe is moving toward a climax. 
Mr. Welles’ remarks were a warning against being 
caught in the diplomatic blind alleys of the past, pro- 
tected largely by policies considered adequate a dec- 
ade or two ago. 


NATIONAL PROCRASTINATION. That we are 
not keeping step with the times in our foreign relations 
has long been evident. This is indicated strikingly by 
the dilatoriness of the United States Senate in adopt- 
ing a resolution in support of cooperation with other 
nations for the establishment of machinery to preserve 
the future peace of the world. Such a move could 
have been made most appropriately a quarter of a 
century ago after we entered World War I. It would 
still have been useful in the inter-war years between 
1919 and 1939, or after Pearl Harbor—or even last 
spring when the issue of a resolution first came up 
in Congressional discussion. At the least, action 
should have been taken before Secretary of State 
Hull’s arrival in Moscow on October 18 for the 
three-power conference. Each of these opportunities 
has been lost, with the probable result that, when 
Something is finally done, little enthusiasm will 
be aroused either in the United States or abroad. The 
dominant note at home is likely to be a sense of relief 
that, after the introduction of the subject, Congress 


did not alienate us from the whole world by pigeon- 
holing the proposal or voting it down. Abroad, 
friends, neutrals and enemies alike may be more im- 
pressed by our slowness in acting than by the content 
of our declaration. There now appears to be only 
one remedy for this situation: to revamp the resolu- 
tion in the Senate so that it takes on a new aspect by 
dealing more concretely and boldly with current 
issues. 

Two recent developments in our Far Eastern policy 
also indicate how the lateness of an action may de- 
prive it of much of its significance. On October 6 
President Roosevelt sent a message to Congress ask- 
ing authority, after consultation with President 
Quezon of the Philippine Commonwealth, “to ad- 
vance the date . . . and to proclaim the legal inde- 
pendence of the Philippines . . . as soon as feasible.” 
He also urged Congress to make provision for Philip- 
pine post-war “physical and economic rehabilitation” 
and to determine what changes are necessary in exist- 
ing American laws governing economic relations 
with the islands to promote their economic security 
after independence. Less than a week later, on Octo- 
ber 11, the President asked Congress to repeal the 
Chinese exclusion laws and admit Chinese immi- 
grants under the quota system. This, he pointed out, 
would involve the admission of “only about 100 im- 
migrants a year,” but would “correct a historic mis- 
take and silence the distorted Japanese propaganda.” 


ACTIONS LONG OVERDUE. Both proposals- 
were excellent, forward-looking moves in Far East- 
ern political warfare, but one cannot overlook the 
time at which they were taken. The message on the 
Philippines followed by some months Japanese an- 
nouncements that an “independent” government 
would be established in the islands and occurred only 
eight days before October 14, when a Philippine 
puppet government was actually set up. The juxtapo- 
sition of events, suggesting a futile attempt on our 


—————————_—_—————— ss Page Two 


part to get under the Japanese deadline, makes it 
clear that while the United States long ago demon- 
strated its intention to grant Philippine independ- 
ence, we allowed Tokyo to steal a march on us in 
the field of propaganda. This political setback for 
the United States rests, of course, largely on the fact 
that Japan holds the Philippines and we do not. 

We have also delayed seriously in acting on Chi- 
nese exclusion. The first bill-for repeal of our dis- 
criminatory laws was introduced in the House of 
Representatives last February, shortly after Mme. 
Chiang Kai-shek addressed Congress in joint session. 
The time for its passage was while she was still in 
this country, so that Congressional action could have 
been interpreted in China as a measure of American 
esteem for her as a representative of the Chinese peo- 
ple. Such a step would have raised our prestige in 
Chungking, encouraging the liberal groups there and 
weakening the reactionaries who seek to undermine 
resistance by dwelling on any shortcomings of Amer- 
ican policy. Repeal, even now, will have considerable 
effect in promoting friendship with China, but action 
is too greatly overdue to arouse the same enthusiasm 
as half a year ago. 

FACING THE FUTURE. What steps can be 
taken in the field of policy, so that the United States 
can be abreast or ahead of events, instead of being 
forced periodically to catch up with the changing 
world? Many moves might be suggested, but two 
may be indicative of what is required. 


(1) After repealing the law against the exclusion 
of Chinese, will it not be desirable to apply the quota 


ee, 
——— 


system to other peoples of the East? The alternative 
is to wait a decade or two—perhaps even less—until 
the people of a new India, Burma or East Indies algo 
demand admission on terms of equality. The effec 
on the American population would be negligible 
since all these groups would receive the minimum 
quota, but the winning of the war in Asia and the 
avoidance of future friction would be facilitated. 
(2) Far more significant is the point suggested by 
Mr. Welles and others: that the United States must 
be prepared to conclude agreements constituting an 
alliance with its present major partners, Britain, the 
Soviet Union and China. It is certainly a measure of 
the backwardness of our policies that, after all the 
experiences of recent years, it is still not politically 
expedient, in terms of Congressional sentiment, to 
introduce an American-British, American-Soviet or 
American-Chinese treaty for Senate approval. The 
difficulties do not lie in the legislative branch alone, 
but the chief bottleneck is undoubtedly to be found 
there. One can understand the hesitancy of the ad- 
ministration to add to its political difficulties by urg- 
ing action in advance of indications that Congress is 
likely to approve. Yet Mr. Welles was not mistaken 
when he declared that the people of the country look 
to the President for leadership in the formulation of 
a foreign policy that will make known “what we be- 
lieve should be the foundations upon which the 
world of the future should be constructed, and what 
we are prepared to contribute to that end, so that 
this country of ours shall not again be plunged into 


war. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


FACTS DO NOT SUPPORT IMPRESSION CREATED BY ITINERANT SENATORS 


The storm which has buffeted Anglo-American re- 
lations since the return of the five world-girdling 
Senators appears to have blown over, but not with- 
out leaving some wreckage in its wake. Few observ- 
ers believe that the military and political ties which 
have developed between the United States and 
Britain during the war will be seriously jeopardized. 
It is probably true, none the less, that a false impres- 
sion of Anglo-American collaboration has been given 
the American people as a result of the charges and 
complaints reportedly made by the Senators during 
the “secret” sessions of the Senate on October 7 and 


For able analyses, and objective and constructive 
discussions of post-war problems, read these 
Foreign Policy Reports: 


What Future for Italy? 
What Future for Germany? 
What Future for Japan? 


25c each 


ForEIGN Poticy Reports are issued on the lst and 15th 
of each month. Subscription $5;.to F.P.A. members, $3.00. 


8. According to a dispatch in the New York Times 
of October 14, the Senator’s reports have aroused 
anew the skepticism of the Midwest toward both 
Britain and Russia, and will probably impede the 
hitherto successful drive to gain support in that 


region for post-war unity among the Allies. It may | 
be useful, therefore, to establish as far as possible | 


the facts relating to the chief points raised in the 
Senate. 

OIL, LEND-LEASE AND WAR NEWS. The 
charge that the British have been saving their petrol- 
eum resources in the Middle East when they might 
have contributed a larger share to the Allied wat 
effort is hardly borne out by the available evidence. 
Until the Mediterranean was opened by the conquest 
of Sicily arid the surrender of the Italian fleet, it was 
impossible to get oil from the Middle East to Britaif 
without sending tankers on the long voyage around 
the Cape of Good Hope. As a result, Britain received 
its oil almost entirely from British fields in Trinidad 
and Venezuela, and from the United States. But an 
even more important factor in the situation is that 
by far the largest part of the high-octane gasoline 


—————— 


ysed b 
type W 
come { 
refiner. 
plays é 
ait for 
ately h 
um res 
In c 
handec 
out in 
origin, 
States 
quanti’ 
sence O 
that E 
found 
progra 
lease g 
produc 
Certais 
to the 
over tl 
basis. 
In 1 
agenci 
speak 
it can 
cumbe 
own Pp 
dency 
would 
‘guilt 


States 
counts 
Latin 
States 
cause 
succes 
involy 
tures | 
the m 
Unite 
will 
struct 
some 
lease, 
ered | 
Bu: 


POREIC 
Headqu: 


*cond-c 


} %®€ mor 


= 


— 
native 
—until 
ies also 
e effect 
sli gible, 
inimum 
and the 
ated, 
sted by 
eS must 
ting an 
ain, the 
sure of 
all the 
Litically 
1ent, to 
viet or 
al. The 
1 alone, 
e found 
the ad- 
by urg- 
IZTess is 
nistaken 
try look 
ation of 
t we be- 
lich the 
nd what 
so that 
ged into 


[INGER 


TORS 


k Times 
aroused 
ird both 
ede the 
in that 
. It may 
possible 
d in the 


VS. The 
ir petrol- 
ey might 
lied wat 
evidence. 
conquest 
et, it was 
o Britain 
e around 
received 
Trinidad 
;. But afl 
n is that 
gasoline 


— = 


ysed by the Allies—and probably all of the newest 

with an octane rating well above 100—has to 
cme from the United States, the only country with 
sefineries to produce it. Since this American product 
plays a major part in the effectiveness of all Allied 
ait forces, it is understandable why a disproportion- 
ately heavy drain has had to be placed on the petrole- 
um resources of this country. 

In considering the criticism that the British have 
handed on lend-lease supplies to third countries with- 
out indicating that the goods were of American 
origin, it should be remembered that the United 
States has received credit in North Africa for large 

tities of material sent from Britain. In the ab- 
sence of specific evidence, it is probably safe to assume 
that British authorities have on certain occasions 
found it strategically desirable to fill their lend-lease 
program to Russia, for example, with American lend- 
lease goods, while retaining for their own use British 
products originally intended for shipment abroad. 
Certainly there is no reason to believe that exceptions 
to the normal lend-lease procedure are conducted, 
over the long run, on anything but a guid pro quo 
basis. 

In the case of the complaint that British news 
agencies specifically identify British victories but 
speak of American successes as Allied achievements, 
itcan only be assumed that their personnel has suc- 
qmbed to the human tendency to highlight one’s 
own prowess. But there is evidence of the same ten- 
dency in the news agencies of this country, and it 
would probably be difficult to assess the balance of 
“guilt” as between the two English-speaking allies. 

WAR-BUILT BASES. A matter more important 
than any of the foregoing, however, is the question 
of bases—particularly airfields—built by the United 
States in many parts of the world, and to which this 
country has no post-war rights, except possibly in 
latin America. It is clear, of course, that the United 
States requested permission to build these bases be- 
cause the high command believed them necessary for 
successful prosecution of the war, and that the cost 
involved is not essentially different from expendi- 
tures on tanks and airplanes. It is true that since only 
the movable equipment will be the property of the 


United States at the close of the war, our Allies 


will have been enriched by American war con- 
struction. In this sense the bases are comparable with 
some of the capital equipment shipped under lend- 
lease, and the problem will undoubtedly be consid- 
ted in any lend-lease settlement. 

But no one can expect that sovereignty over these 


 — 


PageThree — 


bases will be given up, or that we will receive com- 
mercial or military rights except under certain con- 
ditions. As to commercial rights, it is safe to’ say that 
roughly 85 per cent of the bases will be of no im- 
portance, and that with respect to the rest we will 
receive rights only in return for similar rights in 
bases on American territory. On the other hand, we 
can expect military rights only. if we continue the 
present military collaboration—albeit of a different 
character in peacetime—with our present Allies. 
Failing an alliance or military understanding with the 
sovereign power concerned, the bases would be of no 
use to the United States in any case, unless this coun- 
try intends to take them by force or threat of force. 

BRITISH REACTION. The impression in the 
United States—perceptibly augmented by the Sena- 
tors’ reports—that British civilian and military offi- 
cials work as a smooth-running machine and know 
just what they want from the future has already 
aroused some amazement, if not amusement, in 
Britain. In fact, there are the same disagreements and 
frictions in Britain between the services and between 
government departments as in the United States. 
The chief difference is that, as a result of the consti- 
tutional system and a more restrained press, the 
squabbles do not reach the public. It could be ex- 
pected, of course, that with over a hundred years’ 
experience in conducting the affairs of a world-wide 
empire and commercial system, the British should 
have well-informed officials in well-chosen spots 
throughout the world. 

The British press indicates that there has been a - 
good deal of resentment about the whole affair in 
Britain and that the storm has caused some concern 
about the future of Anglo-American relations. But 
the feeling in responsible quarters is that the United 
States is in process of hammering out a new foreign 
policy, and that it is better that grievances—even if 
imaginary—should be aired now while the need for 
collaboration is compelling, than that they should be 
nursed until victory is won and the need for unity is 


no longer so obvious. fyjowarn P. WHIDDEN, Jr. 


Passport to Treason, by Alan Hynd. New York, McBride, 
1943. $3.00 
Exciting, if a bit over-dramatized, story of spies in the 
United States and the work of the FBI. 


The Origins and Background of the Second World War, by 
C. Grove Haines and Ross J. S. Hoffman. New York, Ox- 
ford University Press, 1943. $4.25 
Careful attempt to explain the war in relation to the 


main currents of modern history rather than in terms of 
mere political events and diplomacy. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 1, Ocrossr 22, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRanK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lagr, Secretary; Vara Micuetes Dean, Béitor. Entered as 
t0nd-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


¢ month for change of address on membership publications. 


Ss) 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


Oct. 18.—The most startling development in 
American public opinion is the appearance of a new 
trend toward nationalism. Those who support the 
new nationalism are opposed to the mildest proposals 
for international political cooperation by the United 
States, suspect the motives and actions of other na- 
tions, and want the United States to play an influen- 
tial role in world affairs. An opportunity to test 
the strength of this faction will come in the 
course of the Senate debate on the foreign policy 
resolution which Senator Connally introduced on 
October 14, following its approval by a seven-to-one 
vote in a subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Rela- 
tions Committee. The resolution, now before the full 
committee, proposes: ‘That the United States, acting 
through its constitutional processes, join with free 
and sovereign nations in the establishment and 
maintenance of international authority with power 
to prevent aggression and to preserve the peace of 
the world.” 

MIDWEST INTEREST IN NATIONALISM. 
On October 13 Mr. Catledge reported in the New 
York Times that the statements of the five world- 
traveling Senators had inspired an upsurge of na- 
tionalism in the Middle West. This sentiment repre- 
sents a trend away from isolationism—not toward 
international collaboration but toward a policy of 
looking out for “American interests.” This trend was 
expressed in Congress on October 15, when the 
Senate Appropriations Committee ordered an in- 
quiry, to be made by itself and the Truman Com- 
mittee, into United States expenditures abroad and 
in behalf of foreign countries. This decision was 
brought about by the five Senators’ report that lend- 
lease funds were being misspent in some instances. 
Senator Hugh R. Butler, Republican of Nebraska, 
voiced the extreme nationalist view when he told the 
committee that lend-lease is ‘‘the most colossal dole 
of all time.” 

While nationalist sentiment is gaining some 
ground, so is sentiment favoring international col- 
laboration. Mr. Catledge reported that the nation- 
alistic views he found in Omaha were still out- 
weighed by advocacy of international collaboration. 
The National Opinion Research Center in Denver 
stated on October 16 that five out of every ten Amer- 
icans think there is a good chance that a world union 
will prevent future wars. Nebraska will have a for- 
mal opportunity to express itself on the issues of 
nationalism and internationalism in the Republican 
Presidential preferential primary next April, for on 


‘in Missouri, where the Republican organization had | 


October 7 the name of Lt. Commander Harold Stas. 
sen, former Governor of Minnesota, was entered ip 
that contest. Before joining the Navy, Stassen urged 
the establishment of a strong world organization and 
American participation in a system of international 
force to keep the peace. 

WILLKIE’S CHALLENGE. Wendell Willkie 
Republican Presidential candidate in 1940, demon. 
strated that in Missouri it pays to favor international 
collaboration. On October 15 he said in St. Louis; | 
“I should like to see this country exercise its utmost 
qualities of leadership and moral force to bring Great 
Britain, Russia and China and the United States toa 
point of understanding where they will make a joint 
declaration of intention as a preliminary to formin 
a Council of the United Nations and other friendly 
nations and eventually of all nations.” The New 
York Herald Tribune reported from St. Louis on 
October 17 that a check of Republican leaders “bore 
out the contention of Mr. Willkie and his friends that 
his address and ineetings had strengthened his hand” 


been opposing him. 

Advocates of international collaboration were ac 
tive in the Senate as well as out of it. A day after 
Senator Connally, Chairman of the Foreign Relations 
Committee, introduced his foreign policy resolution, 
eleven other Senators—Republicans and Democrats 
—announced they would seek adoption on the Senate 
floor of a strong amendment calling for this coun 
try’s participation in “an organization to promote 
cooperation among nations, with authority to settle 
international disputes peacefully and with power, 


including military force.” The Washington Post te 


ported that these words reflect Connally’s wishes; 


better than the resolution approved by the subcom- | 


mittee, which overrode him when he proposed that} } 


the resolution include the words ‘‘an international | 
agency” instead of *the vague “international author- 
ity,” and that it call for the use of “economic, mili | 
tary and naval sanctions’ to keep the peace. ) 

The lines are drawn for a sharp and penetrating | 
Senate debate. The resolution, even in its present] 
mild form, is a challenge to the nationalists because 
it approves of some sort of cooperation. It is possible, 
however, that nationalist sentiment will have some 
influence on the resolution the Senate finally passes. 
Testimony unfriendly to our Allies which, it is & 
pected, will be presented to Senatorial investigators 
of the lend-lease program undoubtedly will strengt 
en the nationalist arguments. BLAIR BOLLgsS | 


1918—-TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 | 


19. 


