









FOREIGN 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


ORIG. 18) iy 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





. Vou. XX, No. 1 


Ocrosper 25, 1940 





BELLIGERENTS VIE FOR MOSCOW'S AID ON BALKANS 


AS German airplanes and submarines harassed 
British industry and shipping, and the Italian 
air force made a foray to the Persian Gulf, Germany 
tightened its grip on the Balkans. Although damage 
to German industry by British bombers is apparently 
hampering deliveries of German goods to the Bal- 
kan countries under barter agreements, the Reich 
is now in a position, from its Rumanian base, to ex- 
tract further trade concessions by threat of force. On 
October 19 Yugoslavia, whose Premier and War 
Minister had delivered fighting speeches ten days 
previously, accepted a new trade agreement by which 
Germany will obtain 60, instead of 50, per cent of 
Yugoslav exports, chiefly cereals and an increased 
amount of copper and lead. Similar pressure is be- 
ing applied to Greece, whose pro-British ruler, King 
George II, is persona non grata to the Axis powers; 
and to Turkey, which has repeatedly declared that it 
will resist Axis encroachments. It is not yet clear, 
however, whether Germany and Italy will be forced 
to fight their way through the Balkans into the Near 
Fast, or will achieve their objectives in this region 
without open conflict, by bringing the Balkan coun- 
tries to terms one by one, as the Reich has already 
done in Western Europe. 

BRITAIN’S PROBLEMS. Developments in the 
Balkans and the Near East continue to hinge on 
Britain and the Soviet Union. Britain has not suc- 
cumbed to intensified air attacks and, on the con- 
traty, has carried the air war into Germany, with 
cumulative results that are beginning to affect Ger- 
man industry and German civilians. It would be 
wishful thinking, however, to believe that British war 
industry remains unaffected by constant disruption 
of production and disorganization of communications, 
hot to mention the difficulties created by evacuation 
and possible epidemics. Britain has thus become more 
dependent than ever on imports of armaments and 
airplanes from overseas and, to that extent, more 





vulnerable to increasing German attacks on British 
shipping. 

As long as the British fleet retains control of the 
high seas, war supplies of the British Isles can be 
replenished from the United States and the Domin- 
ions. But the rate at which such replenishments are 
now made will, in turn, have to be greatly increased 
as the process of destruction goes on. Moreover, the 
possibility remains that the Vichy government, or at 
least Vice-Premier Laval, may offer to collaborate 
with Germany against Britain in the hope of obtain- 
ing more favorable peace terms from the Nazis. It 
was apparently with this possibility in mind that 
Prime Minister Churchill, on October 21, urged the 
French not to hinder and, whenever possible to 
aid British efforts to defeat Hitler. At the same 
time, Britain is faced with the problem of maintain- 
ing a flow of men and supplies to that other theatre 
of war in the Eastern Mediterranean, which may 
assume decisive importance in the next few weeks. 
The visit of Mr, Eden, British War Secretary, to 
Cairo, and rumors that he is seeking to create a 
Balkan-Arabic front against the Axis powers, indi- 
cate the importance attached by the British govern- 
ment to the impending Battle of the Near East. In 
this battle many factors at present appear unfavor- 
able to the British cause. Among them are the re- 
luctance of Yugoslavia and Greece to antagonize 
Germany without the certainty of obtaining timely 
British support; the inclination of the Egyptians, and 
of the Moslem world in general, to remain onlook- 
ers, rather than participants, in the struggle between 
the great powers; the difficulty of bringing up rein- 
forcements and diverting them from home defense; 
and continuing uncertainty regarding the réle of the 
Soviet Union. 

MOSCOW WEIGHS ITS COURSE. The Soviet 
government has as yet given no official indication 
of the course it might follow in case Turkey decides 















































—_—_—_ 





to resist the Axis powers, although a brief state- 
ment by Tass, official Soviet news agency, on Octo- 
ber 14 indicated that Moscow had not been informed 
in advance regarding German plans for military 
occupation of Rumania. Far from being “enigmatic,” 
Soviet policy both in Europe and in the Far East has 
been motivated by stark realism. In August 1939 
confronted with a choice between a head-on con- 
flict with Germany, and the possibility that if 
Germany turned West its strength might be dissi- 
pated in war with France and Britain, the Soviet 
Union decided to come to terms with Germany. 
The refusal of France and Britain to pay the 
price then demanded by Moscow for a military 
alliance, which was recognition of Soviet control 
over the Baltic states and Finland, materially aided 
this decision. At that time Soviet leaders recognized, 
with a clarity not shared by Communist supporters 
abroad, that neither Russia’s industrial equipment 
nor its military preparations were adequate for a 
major conflict with Germany. 

These inadequacies have since been thrown into 
even sharper relief by the Soviet-Finnish war, and 
by the recently concluded maneuvers of the Soviet 
Baltic fleet which, according to Admiral Kuznetsoff, 
Soviet Navy Commissar, revealed serious deficien- 
cies in training and material. While the Soviet Union 
cannot relish the thought that Germany may win 
this war, and obtain hegemony of the continent, it 
is in no position to challenge German supremacy 
single-handed, especially now that Japan has become 
an official member of the Axis. Just as Germany, by 
conclusion of its non-aggression pact with Russia, 
sought to avoid war on two fronts, so today the So- 
viet Union is seeking to avoid simultaneous conflicts 
in the West and East. Granted that Moscow may be 
anxious to stop Germany at the Dardanelles, by 
lending all the assistance it can to Turkey, it must, 
in self-protection, conclude a non-aggression pact 


AXIS SEEKS MIDDLE EASTERN OIL 


Intensified Italian activities in Libya and East 
Africa and the reported presence of German units 
among Marshal Rudolfo Graziani’s troops in Egypt, 
coupled with the threat of a Nazi drive from Ru- 
mania through Turkey toward Iraq, portend an Axis 
drive to capture the oil fields of the Middle East 





What are the objectives of our Western 
Hemisphere policy? Read: 
RAW MATERIAL RESOURCES OF LATIN AMERICA 
PROGRESS OF PAN-AMERICAN COOPERATION 
WAR AND U.S.-LATIN AMERICAN TRADE 


ECONOMIC DEFENSE OF THE AMERICAS 
THE HAVANA CONFERENCE OF 1940 


SPECIAL OFFER—5 Foreign Policy Reports for $1.00 





Page Two 











—"" 
—e 





with Japan. Negotiation of this pact will apparently 
be the first task of Lieutenant General Tatekawa } 
the new Japanese Ambassador to Moscow, who og! 
the eve of his departure from Tokyo declared tha 
Japan was anti-Communist, but pro-Soviet. Even jf 
the Soviet government succeeds in freeing its hands 
for open resistance to Germany in the Balkans and 
the Near East, it must not be expected to undertake 
this course without some inducement from Britain 
and the United States. At this moment, as in the 
summer of 1939, the Western powers are competing 
with Germany for the assistance, positive or nega. 
tive, of the U.S.S.R. The Germans are variously te. 
ported to be offering Iran and Iraq, or control of 
the Dardanelles and a portion of Turkey. From} 
Britain and the United States Moscow is demanding | 
recognition of its territorial gains in the Baltic) 
states, Finland, Poland and Rumania, as well as in} 
dustrial equipment and certain strategic raw ma 
terials it lacks. Now that Washington has adopted 
a more lenient attitude toward Soviet purchases in 
this country, it is expected that Moscow will place 








large orders here, especially for equipment needed}, 


in copper mining, oil-drilling and oil-refining, and 
railway construction. 

The question of recognizing Soviet territorial 
acquisitions in order to obtain Moscow’s assistance 
against Germany and Japan raises a delicate issue 
for Britain and the United States. As in every prob | 
lem of international politics, there is a conflict here } 
between what is described as international morality 
and the unpleasant exigencies of Realpolitik. What 
ever the course adopted, it should be borne in mind 
that the Soviet government, like that of other coun| 
tries, will be actuated, in the final analysis, by con 
siderations of self-interest. It is therefore to its self 
interest, not to its principles, revolutionary or other 
wise, that the Western powers and Germany “7 
have to address their appeal. Vera MICHELES Dra 








' 


and, at the same time, sever vital British supplj| 
lines. Should British resistance in the Eastern Medi} 
terranean be crushed, Italo-German forces would od 
only be in a position to cut the Mediterranean-Rei| 
Sea route, but would also threaten British shipping! 
in the Indian Ocean. | 

THE FIGHT FOR OIL. The importance of tht) 
Arabian peninsula deserts and the barren hills 0} 
Iran (Persia) in the struggle between Britain ani 
the Axis lies in the oil fields of this region, tht 
richest outside the United States and Russia. [rat 
leads the Middle East with an annual production @ 
over 11 million tons, all of which is controlled by th 
Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, whose principal stock 
holder is the British government. From one of tht 
world’s largest and most complete refineries at Abé 





—_ 
—_ 


dan 
cart 
thes 
whe 
by 
the 
a 7 
fine 
bon 
Mec 
fens 
beet 
mat 
pan 
out 
proc 
1 
Iraq 
date 
Sinc 
Iraq 
the 
end 
und 
petr 
oil { 
duct 
all 


for 


A 
of 
estit 
at 2 
to { 
Run 
quit 
lion 
tion 
dict 
port 
and 
man 
alre 
Brit 
mar 
tank 
Stra 


B 
pow 
terr; 
OCccL 
FORE 
Head 


Enters 


S 





ace 
led 
ind 





‘tal 
nce 
sue 


ob 


ere 3 


lity 
nat: 
ind 
yun 
>On: 
elf. 
her: 
wil! 


EAN 
































—_ 
—_ 





dan, on the northern coast of the Persian Gulf, oil is 
carried to British military posts throughout Asia. Far- 
ther down the Gulf lies the Bahrein Island field, 
where Bahrein Petroleum Company, Limited, owned 
by two American concerns, the Texas Company and 
the Standard Oil Company of California, produces 
a million tons of oil a year. Storage tanks and re- 
fneries on Bahrein, a British protectorate, were 
bombed on October 19 by Italian planes flying from 
Mediterranean bases. Although the plant was unde- 
fended, the manager reported that little damage had 
been done. Opposite Bahrein on the Saudi Arabian 
mainland, California Arabian Standard Oil Com- 
pany, a subsidiary of Standard of California, sends 
out 500,000 tons of oil a year and is increasing its 
production rapidly as new wells come in. 


The 4.4-million ton output of the Mosul field in 
Iraq was formerly divided between the French man- 
date in Syria and the British mandate in Palestine. 
Since the fall of France, the northern branch of the 
Iraq pipeline has been closed, and all the oil is flow- 
ing to the British refinery at Haifa, which has been 
the object of several Italian raids. Near the southern 
end of the Gulf of Suez, a small but expanding field 
under British exploitation produces 600,000 tons of 
petroleum a year. Thus the British have access to 
oil fields in the Middle East with a total annual pro- 
duction of 17.5 million tons, a supply which covers 
all British needs in this area and leaves an excess 
for export to the British Isles and the Dominions. 


AXIS STILL NEEDS OIL. With the consumption 
of petroleum in Germany and occupied territories 
estimated at 7 million tons and Italian consumption 
at 2 million, the Axis powers have been hard-pressed 
to find adequate sources of supply. Seizure of the 
Rumanian fields will cover only part of the re- 
quirements, since these fields produce about 6 mil- 
lion tons annually. The problem of transporta- 
tion, moreover, remains unsolved. Oil men pre- 
dict that not more than 2 million tons can be trans- 
ported from Rumania to the Axis states overland 
and up the Danube, for railways connecting Ru- 
mania with the Reich, as well as Danubian barges, are 
already operating close to capacity. As long as the 
British fleet controls the Eastern Mediterranean, Ru- 
manian oil cannot follow its peace-time route by 
tanker from Constanza on the Black Sea through the 
Straits and out into the Mediterranean. 

Blocked on the sea by the British navy, the Axis 
powers apparently plan to make the Eastern Medi- 
terranean untenable for their enemy this winter by 
occupying all important bases. The Suez Canal is the 


Page Three 











key to the situation in the Middle East, with Alex- 
andria, a British naval base, and Haifa, the outlet 
for oil, next in importance. 

THE BATTLE FOR EGYPT. Marshal Graziani’s 
drive across northern Egypt in July stopped 60 miles 
inside the border because of supply difficulties, ac- 
centuated by British air and naval bombing. The 
Italians have not as yet met the main British force, 
which is strongly intrenched at Mersa Matruh, rail- 
head of the line to Alexandria. Meanwhile, the rains 
have started in northern Africa, making the advance 
of motorized forces increasingly difficult. The rains 
are over, however, on the Hast African front, where 
Italian forces which moved into the Sudan last June 
have again become active around Kassala. Since the 
army there must depend on supplies—now much de- 
pleted—brought through the Suez before Italy en- 
tered the war, an attempt may be made very soon 
to invade Egypt from the upper Nile valley while 
such a move is still possible. 

Britain is not allowing the Middle East to go by 
default. Latest-type airplanes are patrolling the skies 
over Egypt. As a result of the American destroyer 
deal, the British destroyer force in the Mediter- 
ranean has been doubled. New army units are be- 
ing landed in Egypt, and 200,000 men are reported 
to be stationed along interior lines of communica- 
tion. Yet opposed to them are possibly 600,000 
Italian and native troops, many of them trained in 
eastern warfare and backed by German technical 
efficiency. To meet this menace, Britain cannot di- 
vert much more strength from the home front, at 
least before spring, so that the Middle Eastern forces 
may have to hold off the Axis alone. 


Louis E. FRECHTLING 





Country Squire in the White House, by John T. Flynn. New 
York, Doubleday, Doran, 1940. $1.00 


In attempting “to explain the New Deal in terms of the 
man who sponsored it,” Mr. Flynn has written a thumb- 
nail biography of Franklin D. Roosevelt and a critique of 
New Deal measures and methods. Opponents of the Presi- 
dent will find in Mr. Flynn’s attack some very palpable 
hits, but Administration supporters will claim that a num- 
ber of the author’s thrusts are distinctly unfair. 


Why England Slept, by John F. Kennedy. New York, 
Funk, 1940. $2.00 


A stimulating appraisal of Britain’s unpreparedness by 
a son of the American Ambassador. After pointing out 
the mistakes of both Conservatives and Labor, who re- 
fused to believe war possible and were unwilling to make 
sacrifices, Mr. Kennedy warns Americans to rush their 
military and economic preparations. 


Historic Evolution of Hispanic America, by J. Fred Rippy. 
New York, Crofts, 1940. $5.00 


Brings up to date a useful review of the developments 
which have shaped Latin American civilization. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 1, Octrossr 25, 1940. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


is1 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera Micugeies Dean, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 

Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 

F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Oct. 21.—The announcement on October 19 that 
the Metals Reserve Company, a subsidiary of the 
RFC, would build or finance a large tin smelter in 
this country marked another step in the government's 
program to remedy existing deficiencies in the sup- 
ply of raw materials essential for national defense. 
Arrangements have been made with Bolivian pro- 
ducers to furnish enough ore concentrates to smelt 
about 18,000 tons of pig tin annually. Hitherto vir- 
tually all of Bolivia’s ore has gone to Western Eu- 
rope, and the United States has been compelled to 
buy its entire annual consumption of about 75,000 
tons from Europe and the Far East. Meanwhile, the 
Metals Reserve Company is also carrying out the 
agreement concluded last June with the International 
Tin Committee, which calls for the purchase of 75,- 
000 tons of pig tin at 50 cents a pound. Supplies on 
hand or en route to the United States are now said 
to be sufficient for more than one year. 

In recent months the government has also taken 
steps to insure adequate supplies of other raw ma- 
terials not readily available in this country. Among 
these are: 


1. Manganese. The Metals Reserve Company 
has contracted to buy more than 770,000 tons of 
manganese ore from both foreign and domestic 
sources. Cuba and Brazil are increasing their de- 
liveries. On October 8 Mr. Stettinius, head of the 
Raw Materials Division of the National Defense 
Advisory Commission, announced that stocks on 
hand or readily available in near-by Cuba were 
sufficient for two years’ requirements. 


2. Tungsten. As part of a transaction by 
which the Export-Import Bank extended a loan 
of $25,000,000 to China, the Metals Reserve Com- 
pany agreed in September to buy $30,000,000 of 
tungsten over a period of years from the Chinese 
National Resources Commission. 


3. Rubber. The Rubber Reserve Company, 
another RFC subsidiary, will purchase a reserve 
stock of 330,000 tons of crude rubber before the 
end of 1941 in accordance with agreements con- 
cluded in June and August with the International 
Rubber Regulation Committee. This amount is in 
addition to the 85,000 tons acquired under the 
cotton-rubber barter deal made with the United 
Kingdom in June 1939. The total of 415,000 tons 
represents about 70 per cent of our current annual 
consumption of crude rubber. 


4. Aluminum. Under a program developed 
by the National Defense Advisory Commission, 
the output of this raw material, so vital to the 
aircraft industry, will be raised from 325,000,000 
pounds in 1939 to 700,000,000 in 1942. The 
Aluminum Company of America has undertaken 
to extend its production facilities; and the RFC 
is financing construction of another plant by the 
Reynolds Metal Company. 

5. Wool. The Advisory Defense Commission 
is making arrangements whereby 250,000,000 
pounds of British-owned Australian wool will 
be stored in this country as a reserve available 
for American use in case of emergency. This 
amount equals more than two years’ normal im- 
ports of apparel wool. 


PRODUCTION OF WAR MATERIAL LAG- 
GING. Although the National Defense Advisory 
Commission has cleared $8,500,000,000 worth of de- 
fense contracts for the Army and Navy, including 
orders for 25,000 planes, actual production is get- 
ting under way rather slowly. .The greatest progress 
has been made in stepping up the output of planes, 
which is expected to reach 950 in the current month, 
as compared with a scheduled production of 1,133. 
The equipment of munitions plants is being retarded 
by a bottleneck in the supply of machine tools. Al- 
though the machine-tool industry is operating at 
virtual capacity, orders in some cases cannot be filled 
until 1942. The entire output for 1941 will be 
needed for our own national defense program and 
British requirements. 

NEW DEFENSE PLANTS. The construction and 
equipment of defense plants by private industry have 
been greatly accelerated by the inclusion of new 
amortization provisions in the excess profits tax 
bill and the emergency plant facilities contract 
developed by the Advisory Defense Commission. 
Meanwhile, the government is proceeding with its 
own program to erect plants for the production of 
powder and high explosives. Up to the beginning 
of October, eleven such plants had been located 
Production, however, will not begin in less than 10 
to 12 months. 

Despite the progress achieved to date, Washing- 
ton observers believe that the defense program will 
have to be speeded up in the near future. The ap- 
pointment of a single defense coordinator with 
definite powers and responsibilities may prove neces- 
sary, but no step in this direction is expected before 


the elections. JOHN C. DEWILDE 








———— 
VoL. 
a 


Tt 
0 
for ¥ 
front 
three 
Brita 
Gree 
ity.” 
agen 
pene’ 
"Gre 
outra 
name 
gove 
orou: 
day | 
decla 
fight 
after 
noun 
port’ 
in Aj 
army 
only 
Italic 
Ita 
and | 
aim 
terra 
tivel; 
some 
them 
Turk 
had 
tance 
erom 
the c 


venti 
PI 


