





Span- 
S$ con- 
, who 
1 Sep- 
> with 
panish 
ose of 
ing of 
at its 
—who 
obably 
clared 
2s that 
desire 
gal in 


‘en fe 
Panzer 
ontier, 
is here 
S gov 
enters. 
ending 
‘© that, 
» enter 
1€ SUp- 
policy 
ers the 
k com- 


IOTT 


DS 








General Library 


Ent R Lass Basten 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, KichiggnP@RIGUICAL Kuve 


FOREIGN 


=m wed 


GENERAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF MICH. 


MORO 1518) js Bay 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vor. XXII, No. 22 


Marcu 19, 1943 





PLAIN TALK ESSENTIAL TO INTER-ALLIED UNDERSTANDING 


HE efforts of the United Nations to find what 

Mr. Welles, in his Toronto speech, called “com- 
mon denominators” have been given new emphasis 
by Mr. Eden’s arrival in Washington on March 12, 
which coincided with somewhat conflicting state- 
ments of American officials regarding Russia, and 
with General Giraud’s Algiers speech of March 14. 
As the war drags on in Europe and Asia, the Allies 
begin to realize with increasing clarity that political 
strategy is not only as necessary to victory as mili- 
tary strategy, but also requires infinitely greater skill 
in the adjustment of conflicting interests. In North 
Africa, as in the vaster and more complex battle- 
ground of the European continent, the United Na- 
tions are learning that reconciliation of divergent 
interests through negotiation is far more difficult 
than the imposition of a given set of conditions by 
force—but potentially far more lasting. 

CONFLICTS BOUND TO OCCUR. The point 
too often neglected by those who like to indulge in 
the pleasant pastime of spinning world Utopias is 
that nations—which after all are nothing but ag- 
glomerations of human beings—do conflict, and will 
continue to conflict with each other on many issues. 
Whether these issues are real, or figments of the 
imagination, is irrelevant, since the ideas one nation 
forms of another are sometimes just as potent in 
creating trouble as actual grievances. To maintain 
peace it is mot necessary to avoid conflicts—that 
would in any case be humanly impossible; what is 
necessary is to find ways of adjusting these conflicts 
so far as possible by peaceful means, instead of by 
resort to force or threat of force. Such adjustment, 
however, usually depends on achieving workable 
compromise between divergent points of view. 

Yet unless we succeed in developing, in relations 
between nations, the democratic process of give and 
take, the United States will have no choice except 
armed isolationism or armed imperialism, which 


as a matter of fact represent two sides of the same 
policy—the policy of playing a lone hand. In one 
respect, such a course is admittedly easier to follow 
than the path of collaboration: it spares this coun- 
try the need to cope with the innumerable difficul- 
ties, misunderstandings and frustrations that are part 
and parcel of any attempt to work with other people. 
But the cost of such a course in terms of lives, ma- 
terial and money: is demonstrated all too clearly by 
a war which the United States had hoped to avoid 
through independent action, and which it now finds it 
can win only through cooperation with other nations. 

FRANK DISCUSSION REQUIRED. A working 
compromise on the issues that divide the United Na- 
tions, however, can come only as the result of frank 
and sincere discussion of their respective points of 
view. Such discussion, so far as Russia is 
was started by Vice President Wallace’s speech of 
March 8 in Delaware, Ohio, and Admiral Standley’s 
astringent remarks in Moscow on the same day 
regarding the alleged failure of the Soviet govern- 
ment to inform the Russian people of the scope and 
character of American aid to the U.S.S.R. While in 
both instances the official spokesmen aroused con- 
siderable criticism in this country, their statements 
appear to have cleared the way for realistic appraisal 
of the problems that have beset or may beset Soviet- 
American relations. 

While Admiral Standley exaggerated, perhaps pur- 
posely, the silence of the Soviet government on war 
material received from the United States, the Krem- 
lin, which definitely prefers blunt language to diplo- 
matic verbiage, lost no time in rectifying the omis- 
sions noted by the American Ambassador. At the 
same time, it cannot be stressed too often that, sub- 
stantial as is the number of American tanks, planes 


and trucks delivered to the Soviet battlefronts, it 
cannot be balanced off in any bookkeeping fashion 
against Russia’s tremendous losses in manpower. 








—_—_—_—___==[[=_——_—=—=zsa—a—aana»_»naanaa_ae===_=____—s Pave TU’ 


It is true that Russia has suffered these losses not 
because of any initial determination on its part to 
aid the United States (which was not yet at war 
when Russia was invaded), but because of the im- 
perative need to defend its own territory and na- 
tional existence. But neither did the United States 
enter the war to save Britain and Russia. All of the 
United Nations are fighting out of self-interest, to 
achieve national survival. There is nothing discred- 
itable about that. In fact, the most promising way 
to go about preparing for post-war reconstruction is 
to build on the self-interest-—which we must hope 
will prove enlightened—of all the nations concerned. 
We must never forget that the first impulse for the 
creation of the state sprang from the need of indi- 
viduals to achieve greater protection for their lives 
than they could obtain through their own unaided 
efforts. 


FEAR OF ANTI-SOVIET BLOC. But much as 
the Washington Administration may have been 
troubled by Stalin’s insistence that Russia alone is 
bearing the brunt of the war, the Soviet govern- 
ment, in turn, has been troubled by the suspicion 
that the United States is keeping a weather-eye on 
the possibility of some post-war settlement that 

would leave Russia isolated from Europe. To put 
" the matter as frankly as possible: the impression has 
arisen—and needs to be dispelled if it is incorrect— 
that religious and political groups in the United 
States, while completely united with the rest of the 
country in their desire for a defeat of Germany, at the 
same time fear the consequences of a Russian victory. 
Some fear the spread of the Soviet political and eco- 
nomic system, others the effect that Russia’s victory 











would have on the future of- organized religion. For 
example, since many Catholics in Europe and in the 
Western Hemisphere have in the past particularly 
opposed the anti-religious crusade of the Kremlin, 
the current hostility toward Russia is traced in part, 


rightly or wrongly, to some Catholic elements. This / 


suspicion has seemed to have been strengthened, ip 
recent weeks, by the activities of American diplo. 
mats and churchmen in Madrid and Rome; by the 
favor shown in this country to German Catholic 
leaders and to the Hapsburgs; and by the belief 
that the Vatican might play an important part in 
anticipated peace moves for elimination of Italy from 
the war. 

These misapprehensions, to which Mr. Wallace 
may have been alluding when he spoke at a Method- 
ist conference, of “double-crossing” Russia, cannot 
be effectively met either by official blanket denials, 
or by wholesale denunciation of the Catholic Church, 
It would be wholly unrealistic for the United States, 
which has millions of Catholics among its own pop- 
ulation, to disregard or minimize the influence ex- 
erted by the Vatican in Latin America, as well as 
in many countries of Europe—notably France, Bel- 
gium, Germany, Spain, Portugal and Italy. One of 
the reasons why we are fighting this war is that we 
prefer to live not in a totalitarian world, but in a 
world whose very multiplicity of interests, beliefs 
and origins constantly enriches human civilization. 
It would be just as unrealistic, even if it were prac- 
tically possible, to isolate the Vatican from world 
affairs in order to reassure Russia as it would be to 
isolate Russia in order to reassure the Vatican. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


NAZI ECONOMIC PENETRATION POSES COMPLEX PROBLEMS 


The distribution of immediate relief to the lib- 
erated countries will be only one of the tasks await- 
ing the Allies when war ends. Another, even 
more difficult to tackle, will be untangling the 
snarls in the financial, industrial and business life of 
Continental Europe caused by three years of Nazi 
occupation. From France to the Ukraine, the Nazis 





For a study of the problems which will confront 
any United Nations relief council, and six essential 
principles of relief planning for an effective re- 
habilitation policy in the countries freed from Axis 
control, READ— 


US. RELIEF FOR EUROPE 
IN WORLD WAR I 


by Winifred N. Hadsel 


25¢ 


March 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLticy REPORTS 
REPORTS afe issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











have seized Europe’s industrial and financial ma- 
chine, adapting it to their own needs and running 
it to their sole advantage. It is no exaggeration to 
say that today, in all the occupied countries, there is 
hardly a single important enterprise which is not in 
some way tied to German war production. 


TECHNIQUE OF NAZI PENETRATION. Only 
in a few cases have the Nazis taken over foreign 
business interests through straight expropriation. Al- 
though confiscation was widely applied in the pri- 
marily agricultural countries of eastern Europe, 
notably Poland, this was not the general rule in 
the industrially more advanced nations of northern 
and western Europe. There economic assets, such 
as factories, utilities, banks and business houses, 
have not as a rule been openly commandeered but 
quietly bought up with funds extorted from the 
“collaborationist’” governments. The system usually 
adopted is simple: the conquerors saddle the van- 
guished countries with a levy supposedly correspond- 








— 


. For 
1 the 
larly 
niin, 
part, 
This 
d, in 
liplo- 
y the 
holic 
relief 
rt in 
from 


illace 
thod- 
annot 
Nials, 
yurch, 
tates, 
: pop- 
"e €X- 
ell as 
, Bel- 
ne of 
at we 
t in a 
reliefs 
ation. 
prac- 
world 
be to 


3AN 


| ma- 
inning 
ion to 
here is 
not in 


. Only 
oreign 
yn. Al 
he ptt 


jurope, | 


‘ule in 
»rthern 
;, such 
houses, 
‘ed but 
ym. the 
usually 
1e Vati- 


*spond- 











——— 
— 


ing to the cost of maintaining the Nazi army of oc- 
cupation. In practice, these “occupation costs” have 
been fixed far above the actual expenditures of the 
occupying army. As a case in point, France—the big- 
gest single contributor tothe Nazi war chest—has 

id, so far, 300 million French francs a day, while 
the actual cost of occupation to Germany is reliably 
evaluated at less than a third of that amount. A simi- 
lar situation prevails in other countries occupied by 
Germany. The substantial difference between actual 
and imposed costs is used by the Nazis to “purchase” 
forcibly all kinds of goods, services and securities. 
While these operations respect the outward forms of 
legality, they have the great advantage of not costing 
Germany anything. The necessary funds are provided 
in national currency by the puppet governments— 
at the expense of their own people. 

Besides draining the occupied countries of their 
commodities, the Nazis, with the same funds, bought 
their way into every important European industry— 
either by acquiring shares or subscribing to addi- 
tional issues forced on the non-German enterprises. 
The creation of this web of financial control has been 
accompanied by a tremendous extension of activities 
on the part of the main German banks. New branches 
have sprung up all over Europe and thousands of 
German “authorized agents” have been placed in 
the firms to assure their integration into Nazi war 
production. 

As a result of these developments, the industrial 
fabric of Europe is now thickly interwoven with 
German interests. Original stocks and securities have 
been watered by new issues, bought and sold, signed 
over and revalued, and corporations have been di- 
vided, merged or transferred under German compul- 
sion to such an extent that any attempt to restore 
the pre-war state of affairs seems hopeless. Although 
the governments-in-exile are working hard to follow 
these transfers of ownership, they know that at best 
they can keep only a partial record. 

CAN GERMAN INFLUENCE BE ERADI- 
CATED ? At this stage, it is not yet clear what means 
the Allies will employ to eradicate German influ- 
ence from the economic life of liberated Europe. 
Except for the January 5 declaration of sixteen 
Allied governments warning the neutral countries 
that transfers of dispossessed property will be de- 
dared invalid, no definite working plan has yet 
been made public by the United Nations. In a 
mall number of clear-cut cases, it might be pos- 
ible to restore property to pre-war owners, but 





Page Three 




















in most cases the question of bona-fide ownership 
will be much too complex for quick settlement, and 
disputes between successive possessors will call for 
court decisions. In any case, as the London Economist 
declares, ‘‘things have reached such a state that to 
try to dissolve these economic marriages would not 
represent a wise solution, however great the duress 
under which some of the parties consented.” 

At the root of this problem is the fact that the 
monetary compensation received, willingly or not, 
by former titleholders was provided at the expense 
of the nation as a whole. In the last analysis, it is 
the people of each invaded country who have paid, 
by their privations and sufferings, for German. “pur- 
chases” and industrial investments. It would there- 
fore appear that the fairest solution would be to 
give the disputed enterprises in trusteeship to public 
agencies, at least temporarily, to be run for the 
common good. Moreover, industrial equipment in 
occupied countries previously used to produce war 
goods for Germany may have to be dismantled or 
transformed for peacetime output under United Na- 
tions supervision, and German heavy industry per- 
manently controlled or internationalized in order to 
prevent its use for war purposes. It has also been 
suggested that, after victory, all Nazi property for- 
cibly acquired inside as well as outside Germany, 
notably the acquisitions of huge corporations, such as 
the Herman Goering Werke, I. G. Farben, and Kon- 
tinentale Oel A. G., be turned over to the United 
Nations. To solve any or all of these problems, some 
kind of United Nations economic authority will have 
to be set up. Such an agency may-ultimately emerge 
from the discussions on economic problems now in 
progress in Washington between high representatives 


of the United Nations. ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


(The second of a series of four articles on post-war economic 
reconstruction.) 





Make This the Last War, by Michael Straight. New York, 
Harcourt, Brace, 1943. $3.00 
A demand that the United Nations strike as a militant 
liberal force against the danger of bringing only victory 
out of the war. A book devoted to basic principles rather 
than specific blueprints for peace. 


Italy from Within, by Richard G. Massock. New York, 
Macmillan, 1948. $3.00 
Former chief of the AP’s Rome Bureau describes Italy 
under German control. Vivid and anecdotal. 
Conversation in London, by Stephen Laird and Walter 
Graebner. New York, William Morrow, 1942. $1.50 
An enlightened little book comparing conditions in war- 


time Britain and Germany, presented as a dialogue be- 
tween two correspondents of Time magazine. 





POREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 22, Marcu 19, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micuates Dean, Editor. Entered as 
scond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


te month for change of address on membership publications. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Ss 








Washington News Letter 














Mar. 15.—The movement for increased coopera- 
tion among the United Nations in planning ‘the 
post-war world took definite shape last Saturday with 
the arrival of Anthony Eden, British Foreign Sec- 
retary, in Washington. It was perhaps not wholly 
fortuitous that it coincided over the weekend with 
the disclosure that a group of Senators were sponsor- 
ing a nonpartisan resolution, urging that the United 
States take the initiative in calling a conference 
of the United Nations not only to set up machinery 
for the settlement of international disputes, but also 
to create a world police force against aggression. 

But the first step to be taken to attain Allied unity 
of purpose and action must be the elimination of the 
mutual distrust now existing among the United 
Nations. No man is better qualified for such a task 
than the present British Foreign Secretary whose 
past record as a statesman has made his name a 
_ symbol for the policy of collective security. 

HITLER’S GAME. Premier Neville Chamber- 
lain’s dismissal of Eden as Foreign Secretary on Feb- 
ruary 20, 1938 heralded the ascendancy of the 
policy of ‘‘appeasement”’ which found its culmination 
seven months later at Munich when Britain and 
France sacrificed Czechoslovakia to Hitler to avert 
war. Most disastrously of all, the seeds of distrust 
were sowed between the Western democracies and 
Russia when Russia, the military ally of France, was 
deliberately ignored in the Munich settlement. 

The consequence was that the Soviet government 
lost faith in the League and the policy of collective 
security. Its counterpart to the dropping of Eden was 
the replacement of Maxim Litvinov by Molotov as 
Soviet Foreign Minister in May 1939. As Munich 
was the sequel to the first event, so the Russo-German 
non-aggression pact of August 1939, which precipi- 
tated World War II, was the result of the second. 
Hitler’s old game of conquering by dividing his ene- 
mies, which he had so often and so successfully em- 
ployed against his domestic foes, now brilliantly 
worked in the international field. 

Today the Fuehrer’s only hope of winning the 
war still lies in the growth of dissension among the 
Allies. It was feared by some in Washington that 
the outburst of Admiral William H. Standley, our 
Ambassador in Moscow, on March 8 against the So- 
viet government's policy of keeping news of Ameri- 
can aid from the Russian people might have an ad- 
verse effect on the prospects of the bill to prolong 
the life of lend-lease by one year. But this vital leg- 





islation was adopted by the House on March 9 

a vote of 407 to 6, by the Senate the following 

by 82 to 0, and was signed by the President the 
same day, the second anniversary of the passage of 
the original Lend-Lease Act. 

Much more serious were the implications in the 
warning given by Vice President Henry A. Wallace 
in his speech at Delaware, Ohio, on March 8, agains 
the United States trying to “‘double-cross Russia,” 

THE LESSON OF 1919. Mr. Wallace did not 
amplify his remarks, but one way of “double-cross. 
ing’ Russia would be for the United States to evade 
its responsibility for the maintenance of world peace 
as it did after the last war when the Senate refused 
to ratify the Treaty of Versailles. The French cer 
tainly felt they had been duped when they gave up 
the substance of the occupation of the left bank of 
the Rhine for the hope that proved vain of an Ameri. 
can guarantee against future German attack. 

Many Senators, looking to the future, are devising 
plans to prevent a repetition of the conflict between 
the Executive and the Legislature that wrecked 
Woodrow Wilson’s peace settlement in 1919. Sena- 
tor Alexander Wiley of Wisconsin has offered 3 
resolution to set up a foreign relations council, con 
sisting of the Secretary of State, the chairmen and 
ranking minority members of the Senate and House 
committees on foreign affairs, and such additional 
Senators as the President may designate to act as 4 
permanent liaison body between the two branches of 
the government. 

Sunday a group of six Democratic and Republi 
can Senators conferred with President Roosevelt on 
a resolution they propose to introduce which would 
put the Senate on record in support of detailed plans 
of cooperation, including American participation it 
an international army to suppress a future attempt 
at military aggression by any nation. While the 
President favors the general principle of interns 
tional cooperation after the war, he is understood to 
have been lukewarm to the idea of provoking a bit 
ter fight in the Senate just now with the isolationists 

But even if they do not lead to immediate concrett 
results, both the Eden conversations in Washington 
and the Senatorial discussions—if constructive— 
should go a long way toward converting the United 
Nations from a mere label into a political reality, 
indispensable guaranty, not only for military victoy 
over the Axis, but for the winning of the peat 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


FOR VICTORY * BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 








t~<t, 


