PERIGDICAL ROGA 
5—1944 @SNBRAL LIBRARY 
} mV. OF MIG. 


General Library Entered as 2nd class matter 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Ulchigan 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Tojo, he} You. XXIII, No. 42 
yar fervor 


“tem: 
elieve the 
inate role 
o placate 
ook what 
itical his 
0isoO—in- 
up a SUG 
disturbed 
employed 
2 tankers, 
ogress of 
Nai’s con 
ict of the 
battle for 
the Jap 
er of the 


ST. The 
nity Cab- 
it post of 
t Ginjito 
Japanese 
President 
extensive 
issociated 
ost indus- 
of cargo 
iment fe 
> that its 


len short 7 


BOLLES 


VDS 


| 


Avucust 4, 1944 


MIKOLAJCZYK VISIT TO MOSCOW MAY BRING COMPROMISE 


gE decision of Premier Mikolajczyk to fly to 
Moscow for conversations with Stalin, announced 
in London on July 27, has strengthened the hope 
that a compromise settlement may yet be worked out 
between the Polish government-in-exile and the So- 
viet government, which on July 26 concluded an 
administrative agreement with the newly formed 
Polish Committee of Liberation. The establishment 
of this committee, announced on July 22 from 
Chelm, the first large town on Polish territory west 
of the Curzon Line to be liberated by the Russian 
army, came as a surprise to those in London and 
Washington who had viewed prospects for Russo- 
Polish agreement with increasing optimism. Yet the 
very speed of the Russian military advance accel- 
erated political developments to a degree exceeding 
the expectations of the Polish government-in-exile, 
and possibly even of Moscow, necessitating prompt 
decisions that could brook no delay. 


Upon entering territory which —in contrast to 
Eastern Poland—it regards as Polish the Soviet gov- 
ernment, in a statement of July 25, announced that 
it did not intend to establish organs of its own ad- 
ministration, ‘‘considering this the task of the Polish 
people.” It also declared, in terms similar to those 
used when Russian troops entered Rumania on 
April 2, that “it does not pursue aims of acquiring 
any part of Polish territory or of a change of social 
structure in Poland, and that the military operations 
of the Red Army on the territory of Poland are dic- 
tated solely by military necessity and by the striving 
to render the friendly Polish people aid in its lib- 
eration from German occupation.” The Soviet gov- 
ernment has not recognized the Polish Committee 
as the government of Poland—any more than the 
ited States, which is now negotiating an agree- 


j ment with General de Gaulle concerning adminis- 


tration of liberated France, has recognized the French 
Committee of National Liberation. 


AGREEMENT ON LIBERATED AREAS. The 
agreement concluded in Moscow on July 26 by the 
Soviet government and the Polish Committee is 
similar to that concluded by the Soviet government 
with Czechoslovakia on May 8. It provides that in 
the zone of military operations on Polish territory 
after the entry of Russian troops, “supreme power 
and responsibility in all affairs relating to the con- 
duct of the war for the time necessary fpr the execu- 
tion of military operations” shall be concentrated in 
the hands of the Russian Commander-in-Chief. As 
soon as any part of the liberated territory of Poland 
ceases to be a zone of direct military operations, the 
Polish Committee “shall fully assume the direction 
of all affairs of civil administration.” While all 
Russian military personnel shall be under the gr 
diction of the Russian Commander-in-Chief, all 

sonnel of the Polish armed forces “shall be s 
dinated to Polish military laws and regulations? 
The civilian population, even in cases of crimes com- 
mitted against Russian troops (except for crimes 
committed in the zone of military operations), shall 
be under Polish jurisdiction. A special agreement is 
to be concluded regarding financial and economic 
problems relating to the stay of Russian troops on 
the territory of Poland, as well as those relating to 
Polish armed forces which are being formed on the 
territory of the U.S.S.R. 


It will be recalled that, on January 11, the U.S.S.R. 
offered to re-establish relations with the Polish gov- 
ernment—which it had broken off in 1943 follow- 
ing the Katyn incident—provided that government 
rid itself of certain individuals regarded in Moscow 
as hostile to Russia, and agreed to territorial nego- 
tiations on the basis of the Curzon Line.* Neither 
of these conditions was acceptable to all the mem- 
bers of the Polish government, which is composed 


*‘‘Russia Proposes Polish Border Settlement,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, 
January 14, 1944. 


AUG? 1944 


s* > 


tee * = 


“ree e Ce eee eS 
: s a a es 


of representatives of the major parties in pre-war 
Poland, with the exception of Fascists on the extreme 
right and Communists on the extreme left. 


MIKOLAJCZYK’S PROBLEMS. Premier Mikolajc- 
zyk, leader of the Peasant party, however, is said 
to be ready, personally, to negotiate on the basis of 
the Russian proposals of January 11, and to be 
favorably regarded in Moscow. His chief problems 
have been first, how to effect the purge of his cab- 
inet demanded by the Russians and, second, how to 
obtain his government’s consent to the Curzon Line. 
Now that Russian troops are on Polish territory 
and in a position to bar the return of the exiled gov- 
ernment, the latter has displayed a greater spirit of 
conciliation—but only after denouncing the Com- 
mittee as a body of “usurpers, nobodies, turncoats 
and Communists.” It is true that the Polish Com- 
mittee is by no means as widely representative of the 
pre-war political groups in Poland as the government- 
in-exile, being composed in large part of Communists 
and Communist sympathizers—and has been intem- 
perate in its denunciation of the London government. 
But the impression persists that Moscow is not com- 
mitted to a Communist or semi-Communist régime in 
Poland, and might settle for a coalition cabinet that 
would include some individuals now in London— 
possibly Mikolajczyk himself—and some of those 
now in the Polish Committee. On this point, as well 
as on final determination of the Russo-Polish boun- 
dary, the U.S.S.R., now riding a wave of military 
victories, is in a position, in turn, to display a spirit 
of conciliation. Some compromise is essential from 
the military, as well as the political point of view, 
since at the present time Polish forces abroad are 


U.S. QUARANTINE OF ARGENTINA REQUIRES HEMISPHERE SUPPORT | 


The statement on relations with Argentina made 
public by the State Department on July 26 indicates 
that a more aggressive attitude is replacing that of 
“watchful waiting” which has characterized our 
stand for the past six months. By calling on the 
American Republics and other United Nations to 
adhere to the present policy of non-recognition of 
the Farrell régime, the State Department is en- 
deavoring to complete the diplomatic isolation of 
Argentina which began with the withdrawal of en- 
voys by all the American states except Paraguay. 


Replying to a 25,000-word Argentine ‘white 
paper,” the memorandum brusquely states that Ar- 
gentina had not only “deliberately violated the 
pledge taken jointly with its sister republics to co- 
operate in support of the war against the Axis pow- 
ers,” thereby striking ‘‘a powerful blow at the whole 
system of hemispheric cooperation,” but had also 
“openly and notoriously been giving affirmative as- 
sistance to the declared enemies of the United Na- 


Page Two 


——_ 
divided—some fighting with the British and Ames} had | 
cans in Italy, under the orders of General Sosnkoyw.j jn A 
ski, War Minister in the Mikolajczyk cabinet, and} plied 
some with the Russians, under the command of} ¢lf 
General Berling. that 
The manifesto issued by the Polish Committee] sesp¢ 
does not differ materially from the program of po} its s 
litical, economic and social reforms elaborated by} inter 
Mikolajezyk and his Deputy Prime Minister, Jan} no a 
Kwapinski, leader of the Socialist party—except on} temp 
one important point, that of foreign policy. It not} coun 
only urges collaboration with Russia and accepts the) liftir 
transfer to Russia of Eastern Poland, but also de} view 
mands the transfer to Poland of Pomerania, Silesia} rece 
and East Prussia, all part of Germany in 1939, with} Bue 
a population of 10 million Germans—a deal pro-| the 
posed by Russia on January 11 but rejected by the | laxit 
Polish government. Otherwise, both the government’ ‘7 
in London and the Polish group in Chelm are com. 
mitted to termination of the dictatorial régime cre. 
ated by Marshal Pilsudski under the constitution 
of 1935, and to a series of industrial and agrarian 
changes which, while retaining private enterprise, 
would establish a considerable measure of state 
control over the nation’s economy. The United States 
continues to recognizes the Polish government in 
London, and has apparently sought no information} 4. 
from the U.S.S.R. concerning its ultimate intentions 
toward the Polish Committee. Yet it is clear that | 
Russia’s decision on Poland—so far taken unilater 


for 
ally, not in consultation with its western Allies—]} sey 
will not only be viewed as a test of its post-wat] ie. 


foreign policy, but will also have a profound effect 
on its future relations with Britain and the United}! 


States. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


tions.’” Where the Argentine document brought little 

evidence to support its evasive generalities regard- 7 
ing collaboration with the continent, the Hull memo} 
randum gives chapter and verse on the various ways | of 
in which that nation has been giving constant “aid, ™® 
and comfort’’ to the Axis. je 


U.S. STATEMENT RALLIES ARGENTINES. | 
While the immediate reaction in Buenos Aires was 
less violent than had perhaps been anticipated, it 
was also more united. The memorandum has had the 
effect of rallying behind the present military gov | 
ernment elements hitherto disposed to be friendly | >, 
toward the United Nations. Ambassador Adrian 
Escobar was recalled from Washington as a “first | M 
measure” intended to arouse Argentines to a sense 
of the “detriment to their dignity.” The following ' . 
day, Foreign Minister Orlando Peluffo went on the | 
air with a defense of Argentine policy which was ) “ 
significant chiefly for what it left unsaid. Omitting 
to reply to the charges that the Farrell government] « 


nd A meri. 
Sosnkow. 
inet, and} 
amand of 


ommmittes 
am of 
orated by 
ister, Jan 
€xcept on 
cy. It not 
ccepts the 
t also de 
ia, Silesia 
939, with 
deal pro- 
ed by the 
»vernment 
| are com 
‘gime cre 
stitution 
| agrarian 
enterprise, 
of | state 
ited States 
nment in 
formation 
intentions 
clear that 
. unilater 
Allies — 
post-wat 
und effect 
re United 


; DEAN 


ORT 


ught little 
es regard- 
ull memo- 
10us ways 
stant “aid 


ss 


NTINES. 
Aires was 
‘ipated, it 
as had the 
itary gov 
e friendly ; 
yr Adrian | 
is a “first 

‘Oo a sense 

following 

nt on the { 
vhich was j 
Omitting 
overnment 


had been giving fat contracts to Axis firms located 
in Argentina, involving the use of materials sup- 
plied by the United Nations, Peluffo contented him- 
self with following the now well-established line 
that the régime had fulfilled all obligations with 
respect to continental solidarity and would defend 
its sovereignty against any foreign intervention in 
internal or external affairs. In his remarks he made 
no answer to the allegation that Argentina was con- 
templating aggressive action against neighboring 
‘countries. He climaxed his speech by announcing the 
lifting of the much-hated censorship of the press. In 
view of the tempered approval of government policies 
recently expressed in the editorials of the liberal 
Buenos Aires dailies—La Nacién and La Prensa— 
the government may believe that it is safe in re- 
laxing—ostensibly at least—its press controls. 


The easing of censorship restrictions would seem 
to be in accord with Vice President Péron’s an- 
nouncement on July 22 that the military phase of 
the revolution had been concluded and a new stage 
teached, in which the army would retire and the 
people would take over and carry out the principles 
of the revolution. Whether this means that Péron 
now considers his prestige with the labor element 
strong enough to risk popular elections and relegate 
the colonels’ government to the background remains 
to be seen. Even if Péron assumes the Presidency, 
as is generally expected, his June 10 speech calling 
for total defense precludes the hope that with the 
new phase would come more peaceful relations with 
the rest of the continent. 


IS UNITED ACTION POSSIBLE? Whether or 
not listeners in the United States set much store by 
Argentine protestations, it must be remembered that 


Page Three 


the Peluffo speech was beamed at all America, Latin 
Americans in this country think it unfortunate that 
the Hull memorandum was issued as a statement of | 
United States policy, bearing the tacit approval 
of the other American republics, rather than a mul- 
tilateral agreement presented by some inter-Amefi- 
can agency such as the Montevideo Committee for 
the Defense of the Hemisphere. They hold that the 
State Department summary justifies to some extent 
the wedge-driving contention of Buenos Aires that the 
present crisis is of concern only to the governments 
of the United States and Argentina. Moreover, some 
of the Latin American governments may not find 
themselves in a position to take a firm stand against 
Argentina even if they want to. Strategically and 
economically vulnerable countries like Chile and 
Uruguay feel that something more than moral issues 
are at stake. In weighing the possibility of follow- 
ing up its strong words by strong action, the United 
States must realize that, if it advocates such action, 
it will have, in turn, to give strategic and economic 
aid to Argentina's close neighbors. 


The appointment of Marcial Mora as the new 
Chilean Ambassador to Washington is seen as a 
bright spot in a dark situation. Sefior Mora, the for- 
mer head of Chile’s organization for the aid of the 
Allies, Union for Victory, may take an active part not 
only in mediating in the present crisis but also in 
improving our relations with the other American 
states. If, as is sometimes claimed, the stock of the 
United States in Latin America is “steadily deteri- 
orating,” it is now more essential than ever that the 
democratic elements in the countries friendly to us 
assume greater practical leadership in hemispheric 
affairs. O.tveE HoL_MEs 


SOME RECENT BOOKS ON U.S. FOREIGN POLICY 


The Time for Decision, by Sumner Wells. New York, Har- 

per, 1944. $3.00 

The former Undersecretary of State presents a wealth 
of interesting material on this country’s foreign policy dur- 
ing the critical pre-war and war years, stressing the im- 
portant role that public opinion plays in its formulation, 
and presents his ideas for post-war international organ- 
ization. This book is an important contribution to the his- 
tory of our times. 


US. War Aims, by Walter Lippmann. Boston, Little, 
Brown, 1944. $1.50 


Mr. Lippmann, writing with his usual brilliancy, pre- 
sents a highly controversial plan for division of the world 
into three main regions—the Atlantic Community, the 
Russian Orbit, and the Chinese Orbit—with the eventual 
addition of a fourth region embracing the peoples of the 
Middle East, and bitterly attacks Woodrow Wilson for 
contemplating a universal organization of nations. 


Via Diplomatic Pouch, by 

Didier, 1944. $3.00 

The former American commercial attaché in Berlin, 
widely known for his previous volume You Can’t do Bus- 
iness with Hitler, here presents confidential reports on the 
rise of National Socialism which he prepared between 1931 
and 1937. His book reveals the extent to which sound in- 
formation on Hitler’s purposes and plans was available to 
the United States government long before the outbreak of 
war in Europe. 


Douglas Miller. New York, 


The Road to Foreign Policy, by Hugh Gibson. New York, 

Doubleday, Doran, 1944. $2.50 

In this thought-provoking, frequently tart little book, a 
well-known career diplomat who, among other assign- 
ments, served as American Ambassador to Belgium and 
Brazil, offers interesting suggestions for closer cooperation 
between the executive, Congress, and public opinion in the 
formulation of foreign policy. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 42, Aucust 4, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y 
Second-class matter December 2, 
One month for change of address on membership publications. 


1944, 


Published weekly 


by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Legt, Secretary; Vera MicHeies Dean, Editor. Entered as 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Br 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


IS OUR POLICY ON SPAIN A SUCCESS? 


As the war in Europe draws to a climax, the United 
Nations will expect greater contributions from the 
neutrals than they have received in the past. Already 
Turkey is contemplating at least a diplomatic break 
with Germany. The arrival of Soviet troops on the 
shore of the Baltic Sea would free Sweden from Ger- 
man encirclement and permit it to give positive ex- 
pression to the pro-Allied sentiments of the Swedish 
people. The time is also approaching when Spain can 
cancel all its trade with belligerent Germany. 

HAYES SOUNDS “HARSH” NOTE. Of all the 
neutral countries, none has tried American diplomacy 
as much as Spain. On June 9, a few days before he 
left Europe for his current visit to the United States, 
Ambassador Carlton J. H. Hayes hinted at American 
dissatisfaction with Spain's cautious neutrality. “At 
the risk of sounding a harsh note on this happy oc- 
casion,” he said at a banquet on the eve of the open- 
ing of the Sample Fair in Barcelona, “I must frankly 
recall to you and emphasize the fact that while Spain 
is today at peace, almost all the rest of the world, 
including my own country, is at war.” He warned 
that between warring countries and peaceful coun- 
tries commerce will be subject to “occasional dis- 
tasteful restrictions.” 

The main object of our policy in Spain has been 
to reduce that country’s wartime usefulness to Ger- 
many to the lowest possible degree. This policy, as 
expressed in diplomatic negotiations, has often neces- 
sitated circumspect public dealings with the Madrid 
régime—in contrast to the forthrightness of Dr. 
Hayes’ June 9 speech. There has consequently been 
an ever-present danger that our policy might appear 
to the world as a reflection of friendship, or at least 
of tolerance, for the political doctrine of the Franco 
government, whose ideological yc with the 
Nazis outrages democratic sentiments over here. Yet 
within the limited framework of its policy, the 
United States has drawn the attention of Spaniards, 
only a small percentage of whom sympathize with 
their government, to American ideals of freedom. 

In an address in Madrid on January 15, 1943, 
Dr. Hayes described American war aims in terms 
of the four freedoms. And the recent Barcelona Fair 
provided the United States with a new opportunity 
for publicizing democracy. One section of the exhibit 
—entitled “Our Hopes for the Future”—was intro- 
duced by this sentence: “We Americans today are 
striving for peace, a peace based on the essential 
dignity of the common man, a peace that sees no 


FOR VICTORY °* 


man slave, all men free, a peace that will allow all 
nations to share in orderly trade the agricultural, 
industrial and spiritual wealth of mankind.” A more 
striking portion of the exhibit was a large photo. 
gtaph of the Lincoln Memorial sculpture of Abra- 
ham Lincoln, surmounted by the celebrated phrase 
from the Gettysburg address: “Of the people, for 
the people, by the people.’”” Lincoln’s name in Spain 
evokes memories above all of the Abraham Lincoln 
Brigade, in which many Americans fought against 
the Franco armies in the civil war. | 

The aim of such an exhibit is not to reform the 
Ministers and close followers of General Franco, but 
to display for others what Dr. Hayes in his June 9 
talk called “samples of intellectual and spiritual 
enterprise of the United States.” Franco himself re 
mains unaffected by democratic sentiments. In an 
address of July 17 he praised the Falange, Spain's 
fascist party and the only legal party in the country, 
for its virility and spirituality. 

MANY QUESTIONS UNANSWERED. On July 
18, the eighth anniversary of the opening of the Span- 
ish civil war, Hitler sent Franco a message of congrat- 
ulations. Yet while the two dictators find a common 
ground in political concepts, they disagree on na- 
tional policy. Spain has been useful to the United 
States and on occasion has rebuffed Germany. Franco, 
for instance, submitted a bill to Berlin for Germany's 
use of the Spanish Blue Division on the eastem 
front. Spain has allowed 40,000 refugees from over | 
the Pyrenees to pass through into North Africa, at 
least 10,000 of whom joined the army of the French 
Committee of National Liberation. Spain also has 
reduced its wolfram shipments to Germany and pet- 
mits our agents to observe sales of wolfram to 
German buyers in order to restrict smuggling. 

Despite these and other concessions, three unan- 
swered questions make it difficult to pass judgment 
on our policy in Spain. Is Spain’s cooperation with 
the Allies due to Dr. Hayes’ diplomacy or to its in- 
herent distaste for war? Could Dr. Hayes have safely 
pressed Spain for greater concessions, such as liber- 
alization of its policy toward refugees? Should of 
could the State Department have granted a haven in 
this country for many anti-Franco Spaniards who 
have had to seek refuge elsewhere? In other words, 
is our policy toward Spain determined solely by our 


VOL. 


vane 
Eurc 
it h 
may 
vict 


by s 


the 
can 
fer 
Eu 
ney 
the 


desire to prevent aid to Germany, or are we looking | Al 


beyond immediate military needs, and planning to 
support pro-democratic Spaniards? § BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


iste 
ne\ 
rer 


