ee 


ora | 


ent 
y in 


Nti- 
and 


‘lize 


- the 
‘man 

But, 
| fur- 


orld, 
rkish 
ir tO 
h of 
t the 
alties 
vious 
ained 


prin 


938 


d by 
.eeler- 


rf the 
re the 
me a 
survey 
lective 
foun- 
it ten- 
refuge 
ic and 
to the 


National 
Editor. 





|FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Yor. XVII, No. 38 JULY 15, 1938 
REVIEW THE FAR EASTERN SITUATION IN 
FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS 





Progress of the Sino-Japanese Conflict, May 15, 1938 
China’s Financial Progress, Apr. 15, 1938 

Origins of the Sino-Japanese Hostilities, Mar. 1, 1938 
America’s Role in the Far Eastern Conflict, Feb. 15, 1938 


Can Japan Be Quarantined? Dec. 1, 1937 


SPECIAL OFFER—S for $1.00 or 25 cents a copy 


Ay 


J 7 ls, ( 

Entere - 
class matter 

2, 1921, at the Post 

Office at New York, 

N. Y., under the act 

of March 3, 1879. 














General Library 


University © f Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 











A YEAR OF CHINE 


SE RESISTANCE 





teen end of a year of war in China finds Japanese 

military, naval and air forces battering their way 
up the Yangtze River toward Hankow. Although oc- 
cupation of Kiukiang appears imminent, the capture 
of Hankow or the cutting of the Canton-Hankow 
Railway—Japan’s two main objectives on this front 
—are still far from being achieved. On other fronts 
the Japanese command faces even more discourag- 
ing conditions. Rains and floods have washed out the 
region between the Yangtze and Yellow rivers, halt- 
ing the Japanese advance toward the railway between 
Hankow and Chengchow. In Shansi province, a re- 
newed Japanese offensive is seeking to win back areas 
occupied during the early months of the year; it will 
hardly be in a position to cross the Yellow River and 
cut the Lunghai Railway west of Chengchow for 
some time to come. Although Hsiichow and the east- 
ern sections of the Lunghai were occupied nearly two 
months ago, Chinese guerrilla forces have thus far 
closed the Tientsin-Pukow Railway in this region to 
all but heavily guarded military traffic. In the south, 
we ruthless bombings of Canton failed to choke off 
the flow of China’s munitions, and the Japanese com- 
mand is unable to spare sufficient forces for an over- 
land offensive against the Kwangtung capital. 

At least 800,000 Japanese troops are disposed at 
these various fronts and along thin lines of railway 
and river communication. Between these lines, Chi- 
nese guerrilla and partisan forces are increasing 
steadily in numbers, armament and effectiveness. For 
the defense of Hankow, Generalissimo Chiang Kai- 
shek still musters a fairly well equipped regular army 
of several hundred thousand men. A united nation, 
headed by all prominent Chinese military and poli- 
tical leaders, stands firmly behind a program of pro- 
tracted resistance. As never before in this decade, the 
Generalissimo exerts centralized command over the 
whole of China’s military forces. During a year of 


warfare, moreover, the various Chinese parties and 
factions have moved steadily toward establishment 
of a more democratic régime. On July 6, 1938 the 
People’s Political Council—an embryonic legislature 
representative of all leading Chinese political groups 
—inaugurated its historic opening session at Hankow. 

Had this situation been foreseen by the Japanese 
military a year ago, the shots at Lukouchiao might 
never have been fired. Japan’s leaders made two seri- 
ous miscalculations. They felt that a show of force 
would result, as in aggressions of the previous six 
years, in Chinese surrender and compromise. As hos- 
tilities spread, they still discounted China's resistance 
and believed that a few hard blows would disin- 
tegrate the Chinese armies and shatter China's new- 
found political unity. In December they marched 
into Nanking in high triumph. At this crucial mo- 
ment the expected did not happen. Chinese unity was 
maintained, China’s badly riddled central armies 
were reformed, and a stiff defense held up the Jap- 
anese advance on Hsiichow. Early in April, the Chi- 
nese forces on this front won the startling victory 
at Taierhchuang. Confronted with this first serious 
military disaster in modern times, the Japanese au- 
thorities finally realized the full scope of their task. 
The steady march toward a totalitarian régime in 
Japan was speeded up, and drastic efforts were made 
to reinvigorate the military campaign. 

Since the outbreak of war, several steps toward 
establishment of a military-fascist state had been 
taken. In October an Advisory Council had been 
attached to the Cabinet; in November the Imperial 
Headquarters was formally organized. Admiral 
Suetsugu, outstanding naval extremist, took over the 
Home Ministry in December. The National Mobil- 
ization Bill was forced through the Diet in March. 
Widespread arrests dammed up forces of unrest, and 
the political parties were subjected to terrorism dur- 





he 


Ae er 


ag 
awh 


| 
i 
; 
4 
i | 
4 








dpe We Sebicignktg ter oR 


enn bE oe 














ing the deliberations in the Diet. The Taierhchuang 
disaster required further steps along this path, but 
no move was made during April—the month of de- 
feat. Several important sections of the National 
Mobilization Bill, however, were enforced at this 
time. 


Late in May, after the capture of Hsiichow, Japan’s 
ruling circles felt able to reconstruct the Cabinet. 
Three military men—two of them outstanding fas- 
cist extremists—entered the government; and Seihin 
Ikeda, representative of Japanese “big business,” as- 
sumed the Finance Ministry. Large Japanese military 
reinforcements—drawn for the first time from Man- 
churia—had been sent to the front and were moving 
toward Chengchow, while the advance up the 
Yangtze River had already started. Breached dikes 
and flood waters saved Chengchow—a timely inter- 
vention second only to the Taierhchuang victory in 
its importance to the Chinese cause. The Japanese 
drive against Hankow was thereby restricted to the 
more difficult and costly river approach up the 
Yangtze, and the Chinese forces received an addi- 
tional breathing-space before the struggle to defend 
Hankow started in good earnest. 


Under such circumstances, the first anniversary of 
the war constitutes an augury of success for China. 
The Chinese people are effectively carrying on that 
“war of attrition” by which alone they may hope to 
win victory and preserve their independence. Yet 
optimism on this score cannot be too lightly enter- 
tained. Japan is now drawing on its last gold re- 
serves, as well as its reserve stocks of war materials. 
It is doubtful whether the exchange value of the yen 
can be supported many months longer. Nevertheless, 
Japan possesses sufficient resources to continue the 
war for at least another year and will undoubtedly 
seek desperately to force a conclusion during the 
coming months. Only one measure can alter this 
prospect of continued devastation in China—refusal 
of the Western powers, particularly the United States, 
to continue furnishing war supplies to the aggressor. 


T. A. BIsson 
LEAGUE OPIUM COMMITTEE BACKS WATER 


The twenty-third meeting of the League Opium 
Advisory Committee, held in Geneva during May 
and June, has again focused attention on the opium 
problem. Although Japan has been accused for sev- 
eral years of pursuing a deliberate policy of narcotic 
drug and opium trafficking in the areas of China un- 
der Japanese jurisdiction, the proof has never been so 
convincing as that contained in the official statement 


Page Two 





a 





of the American representative on June 13. Mr, 
Stuart J. Fuller of the State Department charged the 
Imperial Japanese army with importing enormous 
quantities of raw opium from Iran in Japanese ships, 
consigned either to the army itself or to Japanese im. 
porters in Shanghai or North China. Transshipping 
and storage depots have been established in Macao, 
a Portuguese colony, where 1,100 chests of Iranian 
opium were landed the first week in April. The Jap. 
anese representative, Eiji Amau, admitted that there 
had been large opium shipments, but stated that he 
considered these importations lawful. 

Several other nations condemned the drug situa- 
tion in Manchoukuo and in the cities of Peiping and 
Tientsin, where secret factories turned out the heroin 
seized in the United States in quantities large enough 
to supply 10,000 addicts per year. Although the dele. 
gates of Great Britain, Canada, Egypt and Belgium 
supported these accusations, the Japanese represen. 
tative denied that the Japanese army was dealing in 
narcotics and hinted that Japan might withdraw from 
all the League’s technical organizations with which 
it is still cooperating. Bowing to this threat, the Com- 
mittee weakened its resolution, which devolved into 
a mere request that Japan, Iran, Portugal and China 
take “the most energetic measures” to remedy the 
situation. The weakness of this resolution—when the 
evidence clearly indicated a serious threat to the sup 
pression of the world illicit drug traffiic—suggests 
that there are political implications even in respect 
to the decisions of the technical committees of the 
League. Such practice may jeopardize the future of 
the narcotic control system functioning under the 
auspices of the League. 

The governments of Portugal, Iran and Japan are 
undoubtedly concerned over the grave accusations 
made by the delegates of the other nations in the 
open forum of Geneva last month. It is quite prob- 
able, however, that the Japanese afmy may be fol 
lowing a policy not approved by the civilian authoriy 
in Tokyo. Nevertheless the bombing of Canton has 
been no more shocking to many Americans than the 
revelation that the Japanese military are in the opium 
and narcotic business in China for profit—and for the 
apparent purpose of demoralizing large sections of 


the Chinese population. FREDERICK T. MERRILL 





China and Japan. Royal Institute of International Affairs, 
Information Department Papers, No. 21. New York, 
Oxford, 1938. 75 cents 
A brief survey of the political, economic and diplomatic 

situation in the Far East, together with an outline of the 

recent history of the region. Valuable for general back- 
ground purposes because of its accuracy and conciseness. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 38, Jury 15, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lestig BUELL, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


p's 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


| 


VOL. 


| 


PRC 


pra 








