General Lipp Entered as 2nd class matter 


ary 
rr? *. 
UN 2% QP a> bey 
| PBRIVVDICAL RUUM Versity oF utcn: AWW 9 
GENERAL LIBRARY Phe on 0 194; 
UNIV. OF MICH. Ann Arbor, Mtep bid 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vor. XX, No. 35 


JUNE 20, 1941 


aoe 


HITLER WAGES WAR OF NERVES ON STALIN 


A° the United States prepared for a showdown 
with Germany by freezing Axis assets in this 
country and ordering all German consulates to close 
at once, reports of another impending showdown— 
between Germany and the Soviet Union—filtered in 


reported from Bucharest that, during the visit to 
Munich on June 11 of General Antonescu, Rumanian 
Premier, Hitler promised him that Germany would 
recover for Rumania the provinces of Bessarabia and 
Moldavia (part of the Russian Empire before 1918), 


ollowing from belligerent and neutral sources. which had been occupied by Soviet forces in July 
on Gen: Since the exact nature of Soviet-German relations 1940. All these bits of information would seem to 
ee Peas} is the closely guarded secret of the Wilhelmstrasse weave into a pattern indicating a German ‘“‘war of 
uurrendet | nd the Kremlin, any attempt to predict their future nerves” against Russia. They were counterbalanced, 
down at} course belongs in the realm of speculation. From the however, by the sudden visit to London of Sir Staf- 
me thes welter of rumor and conjecture, however, emerge a ford Cripps, British Ambassador to Moscow, who 
niné tit) few shreds of more or less authenticated informa- was reported to have discouraged all hope of Soviet 
tion. German troops, estimated during the Balkan aid to Britain, and by rumors of a far-reaching eco- 
er proot campaign at about 30 divisions, have apparently nomic agreement between Germany and the U.S.S.R. 
smpet Of} been withdrawn from Greece, Bulgaria and a part WHAT WILL STALIN DO? In the face of 
» it Was! of Yugoslavia, their place in Greece being taken by studied Nazi silence on Soviet-German relations, 
he peat} an Italian army of occupation. Reports from Berne Tass, official Soviet news agency, declared on June 
ek. With} and Stockholm indicate that between 100 and 120 13 that “it should be assumed” that German troop 
Londot! German divisions have been concentrated along the © movements had no bearing on relations between 
vay sin} Soviet-German border from the Baltic to the Black © Germany and the U.S.S.R. According to this state- 
mentum | Sea, supplemented by 25 Rumanian divisions sta- ment, rumors abroad of an impending clash between 
cheduled tioned on the Soviet-Rumanian frontier, and that the two countries “constitute clumsily concocted 
nified by} German forces conservatively estimated at 45,000 propaganda of forces hostile to the U.S.S.R. and to 
¢ British} are now in Finland — leaving approximately 150 Germany and interested in further extension and 
ed Stats} German divisions available for operations elsewhere. unleashing of war.” Tass stated that Germany had 
ys Wash Ankara, in turn, reported on June 15 that Russia not presented any claims to the U.S.S.R.; and that, 
President} had ordered general mobilization and had cancelled “according to information at the disposal” of Mos- 
_,_) all leaves for reservists. The Finnish government, cow, Germany “abides by the provisions of the 
ny might too, has called up some reservists, and has ordered Soviet-German pact of non-aggression as unswetv- 
 militaty) evacuation of women and children from Helsinki ingly as the Soviet Union.’ Rumors to the effect that 
that Mt a3 a precautionary measure. Reported movements of the U.S.S.R. is preparing for war with the Reich, it 
n Britain the German and Russian fleets in the Baltic receive said, are “false and provocational.” The annual 
er —and some confirmation from a warning by the Swedish maneuvers of Soviet reservists, it concluded, have no 
inspired Minister of Education on June 6 that a threat to the other purpose than their training; “to present these 
n ultetio!} strategic Swedish island of Gotland “is a threat to measures of the Red Army as inimical to Germany 
not St0P} the heart of Sweden”; and Soviet-German tension is, to say the least, absurd.” 
etermilé} was apparently discussed at a meeting of the Foreign Whatever interpretation may be placed on this 
thing ©! Affairs Committee of the Swedish Parliament, unex- statement, news from other war sectors suggest sev- 
STONE | pectedly summoned on June 9. Meanwhile, it is eral possible developments. For the moment, it 


a 


= Page Two —— — — 


would appear that Germany has abandoned the in- 
tention (assuming it had any) of a drive against the 
Suez Canal through Syria, from which its advance 
agents and technicians have been withdrawn. In any 
case, one of Germany’s purposes: has been accom- 
plished by the Syrian campaign—that of precipitat- 
ing a clash between Vichy and Britain. At the 
same time, it is conceivable that, for a thrust through 
Syria and Turkey, Germany may now be planning to 
substitute a thrust through the Ukraine and the Cau- 
casus into Iran, from which it could then strike at 
British forces in the Near and Middle East. Such an 
expedition, however, would require Moscow's acqui- 
escence, if not actual military collaboration. In addi- 
tion, Germany appears to be pressing Russia for the 
right to place German technicians in charge of food 
and oil production in the U.S.S.R. 


It may be taken for granted that the decision Stalin 
will reach with regard to Germany’s demands will 
be determined not by sympathy for Britain (and 
this would explain reports of Sir Stafford’s discour- 
agement), but solely by consideration of Russia’s 
own interests, and by his calculations regarding the 
outcome of the war. Nor has Britain any induce- 
ment to offer Moscow for opposing Hitler. While 
Stalin has hitherto resisted any attempt to involve 
Russia in war, he might believe that, at this stage 
of the conflict, the only way to weaken a seemingly 
victorious Germany, and thus reduce the whole con- 
tinent to a state of despair and defeatism propitious 
to the spread of Communist doctrines, would be by 
engaging Hitler in a long-drawn campaign in the 
east. It is extremely doubtful that Russia would 
itself provoke such a campaign. On the other hand, 
many elements in Europe, especially in countries dis- 
possessed of territory by Russia such as Finland and 


——= 


Rumania, would be willing to cooperate with Ge. 
many in a crusade against the Soviet Union. 

If Germany should take the risk of war againg 
Russia, this would indicate first, that it had given up 
the hope of ending the war this summer by a quic, 
blow at Britain, and was consequently digging ip 
for a long struggle of attrition by replenishing jg 
sources of supplies at Russia’s expense; and, se. 
ond, that it still expects to paralyze the actual 1 
sistance of Britain, and the potential resistance of 
the United States, by ostensibly turning eastward 
against Russia. Some American observers contend 
that it would have been far wiser if France and 
Britain, instead of resisting Germany in 1939, had 
permitted and even encouraged Hitler to continue his 
Drang nach Osten, on the assumption that the te. 
sulting war between the Reich and the Soviet Unig 
would have destroyed the two totalitarian régimes 
leaving the Western powers free of danger from 
either Nazism or Communism. This assumption, 
however, overlooks the possibility that, should Ger 
many conquer Russia, it would then obtain an ec. 
nomic base of vast potentialities, which it could us 
as a pivot for the formation of the “new order” ip 
Europe, ultimately defying both Britain and the 
United States. The possibility that Germany might 
acquire such a base without opposition on the part 
of Russia must obviously affect the calculations of 
both London and Washington at this turning-point 
in the war. Yet, now that the similarities between 
the Hitler and Stalin dictatorships and their com 
mon hostility toward the democratic system are gen 
erally recognized in the West, it is difficult to believe 
that the British people, severely tried by Nazi ai 
raids, would come to terms with Germany for the 


sake of defeating Russia. wera MicHELEs DEAN 


BRITISH WAR EFFORT HITS CONSUMPTION 


While British Empire forces have been seeking to 
defend approaches to the Suez Canal in both Syria 
and Egypt, the Churchill government has continued 
in recent weeks its effort to bolster the home front. 
Shipping has remained the most critical single factor 
in Britain’s war economy, because—in the words of 
President Roosevelt's May 27 speech—"‘the present 
rate of Nazi sinkings of merchant ships is more than 
three times as high as the capacity of British ship- 


What are Germany's oil requirements? How much 
does it get from Russia? What are Japan’s needs, 
and where does Tokyo procure its oil supplies? 
What is the extent of Britain’s reserve stocks of 
oil? Read: 
OIL AND THE WAR 
by Louis E. Frechtling 


June 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports ... 25c. 


yards to replace them; it is more than twice the com 
bined British and American output of merchant ships 
today.” The current rate of losses probably cannot 
be met by British and American yards until the 
middle of 1942. The most recent Admiralty ae 
nouncement placed shipping losses in the Atlantic 
during April at 301,070 tons—the lowest in that 


~ 


ocean for eleven months—but calculated total losses, 
including transports in the Greek campaign, @| 
488,124 tons. Sinkings in the Atlantic during Ma) 
were also relatively low, according to Prime Mit} 
ister Churchill on June 10, but were augmented bj] 


Britain’s heavy losses around Crete. On June 15 tht 
Admiralty announced, moreover, the loss of its fit 
tieth destroyer since the outbreak of war. 

These severe losses of both ships and cargoes ift 
mediately affect British industrial output, and in tum 
Britain’s war effort. Britain was compelled to evad 


—— 


ate Cre 
cause 
to safe 
shorta} 
more, | 
the dis 
June ( 
butche 
ment < 
Act at 
shiplo: 
were s 
at Red 
can al 
month 
CUI 
pedite 
during 
measu 
to mil 
produc 
clothir 
7 the 
Wood 
govert 
a day 
spent 
Marck 
£5,00( 
ture C 
In ord 
tials, { 
to 50 
limits 
from 
will b 
indivi 
plan” 
after | 


The 
dustri 
four ; 
the co 
has c 
restric 
Marc 
Olive 
ing p 

non- 
maini 
(ty w 
FOREIC 
Headqu: 


tered 


—= 


vith Ger. 


t againg 
given up 
y 4 quick 
gging in 
shing its 
and, see. 
ctual te. 
stance of 
eastward 

contend 
ance and 
939, had 
tinue his 
it the re. 
et Union 
régimes 
per from 
umption, 
yuld Ger. 
1 an eco. 
could use 
order” in 
and the 
ny might 
the patt 
ations of 
ing-point 
between 
1eif COM 
| are gen 
to believe 
Nazi ait 
y for the 


DEAN 


the com 
ant ships 
ly cannot 
until the 
ralty at 
- Atlantic 
t in that 
tal losses, 
yaign, a 
ring May 
ime Min 
rented by 
ne 15 the 
of its fit 


rgoes if 
id in tuft 
to evadl 


—— 


ate Crete, according to Mr. Churchill, primarily be- 
cause the defending forces lacked anti-aircraft guns 
to safeguard the airfields of the R.A.F. Shipping 
shortages have required the Government, further- 
more, to tighten the food rationing system, to curtail 
the distribution of milk and eggs, and to order on 
June 6— because of lack of feeding stuffs — the 
butchering of 300,000 cattle. While the first ship- 
ment of American foodstuffs under the Lend-Lease 
Act arrived in Britain on May 31 and twenty-six 
shiploads of war equipment from the United States 
were scheduled to arrive about the middle of June 
at Red Sea ports, the British cannot count on Ameri- 
can aid to see them through the next few critical 
months. 


CURTAILMENT OF CONSUMPTION. To ex- 

ite Britain's war effort, the Churchill government 
during the past few months has taken several drastic 
measures for transferring production from civilian 
to military goods—heavier taxes, concentration of 
production, conscription of labor, and rationing of 
dothing. In introducing the 1941-42 budget on April 
7 the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Kingsley 
Wood, stressed the danger of inflation inherent in 
government spending, which exceeded £13,000,000 
a day during the first three months of 1941. Britain 
spent £3,884,000,000 during the fiscal year ending 
March 31, and is expected to disburse far more than 
£5,000,000,000 in the coming year, apart from fu- 
ture obligations under the lend-lease arrangement. 
In order to curtail civilian expenditure on non-essen- 
tials, Sir Kingsley Wood raised the basic income tax 
to 50 per cent, and lowered all personal exemption 
limits and earned income allowances. The proceeds 
from the reduced limits and allowances, however, 
will be credited, according to a sliding scale, to the 
individual taxpayer under a modified ‘Keynes 
plan” for compulsory saving — and repaid to him 
after the war. 


The shortage of skilled labor in the armament in- 
dustries, resulting both from the transfer of between 
four and five million men to the armed forces and 
the completion of numerous factories begun in 1939, 
has compelled the Government to impose severe 
testrictions in the field of industry and labor. In 
March the President of the Board of Trade, Mr. 
Oliver Lyttleton, announced a plan for concentrat- 
ing production in a relatively few factories in each 
“non-essential” industry, and closing down all re- 
maining plants. The “nucleus firms” in each indus- 
tty will thereby work to full capacity filling Gov- 


Page Three 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: APPRAISING GERMANY’S WAR 
PROSPECTS 
Speaker: John C. deWilde 
Date: Sunday, June 22 
Time: 2:15 p.m. E.D.S.T. 


Station: NBC, blue network 


ernment orders, supplying the export trade, and 
meeting the minimum needs of the civilian popula- 
tion. Meanwhile, the Minister of Labor and National 
Service, Mr. Ernest Bevin, has begun invoking his 
emergency powers both to require both men and 
women to register for work and to “freeze” employ- 
ees at their jobs. Starting with the shipbuilding and 
construction industries, Mr. Bevin has issued orders 
requiring official permission before an employer can 
dismiss a workman or an employee can leave his job. 


The effect of these measures was felt immediately 
in the textile industry, where the concentration of 
production scheme was expected to release many 
thousands of workmen. On May 31 the Government 
announced the rationing of clothing on the basis of 
a “point” system, similar to that introduced by Ger- 
many in November 1939. Each individual is allowed 
66 coupons—26 coupons being required for a man’s 
suit, 11 for a woman's dress, etc.—to spend at speci- 
fied intervals in the course of a year. This measure 
—in addition to the recently increased taxation, the 
strenuous campaigns for the purchase of war bonds, 
and the wholesale tax of 33 1/3 per cent imposed 
last October on most articles for civilian consump- 
tion—was expected to assist greatly the imperative 
diversion of production to war materials. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


This Fascinating Oil Business, by Max W. Ball. Indi- 
anapolis, Ind., Bobbs-Merrill, 1940. $2.50 
A layman’s introduction to the techniques and history of 
the petroleum industry. Emphasis is placed on develop- 
ments in the United States, but several chapters are de- 
voted to foreign oil and the war. 


Government and Economic Life, by Leverett S. Lyon and 
Victor Abrahamson. Washington, The Brookings Institu- 
tion, 1940. Vol. II. $3.00 
This is the second volume of a monumental work, which 

brings together in a convenient form a wealth of data on 

the complex relationships of government to industry, agri- 
culture, commerce, etc. 


The Defeat of Chaos, by Sir George Paish. New York, 
Appleton-Century, 1941. $1.00 


A prominent British economist outlines the economic op- 
portunities awaiting the world after the war, but offers 
few concrete suggestions about ways and means of provid- 
ing the future peace with a stable economic foundation. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 35, JuNE 20, 1941. 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Pw 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New Yom, M. T., 


under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Fr. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


= * 
- - . 
oe -—. 2+ 


<a fe 


i 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


JUNE 16.—President Roosevelt's first progress re- 
port under the Lease-Lend Act deserves greater 
attention than it has thus far received. When Con- 
gress passed H.R. 1776 last March, it laid special 
emphasis on the periodic reports which the Executive 
was to make. Section 5 of the Act provides that: 
“The President from time to time, but not less fre- 
quently than once every ninety days, shall transmit 
to the Congress a report of operations under this 
act, except such information as he deems incom- 
patible with the public interest.” When the first re- 
port was sent to Capitol Hill last week, however, it 
attracted relatively little notice. 

This was due in part to Washington’s preoccupa- 
tion with more sensational events. Issued on June 12, 
the report was quickly overshadowed by the wave 
of strikes in key defense industries, the controversy 
over the sinking of the American merchant ship 
Robin Moor by a German submarine in the South 
Atlantic, the freezing of German and Italian assets 
in this country, and the White House order closing 
all German consulates. But these developments 
raised no more disturbing issues than those revealed 
in the President’s summary. 

LEASE-LEND REPORT. The most surprising fea- 
ture of the 44-page report was its disclosure that, 
out of the $7,000,000,000 appropriated by Con- 
gress, only $10,729,684 has actually been transferred 
to Britain, China, and the “other nations whose de- 
fense is deemed vital to the United States.”” And the 
largest category of materials procured under the 
Lease-Lend fund was not munitions or implements 
of war, but foodstuffs, to the value of $7,998,261 
purchased by the Department of Agriculture for 
Britain. In addition, however, the report accounts 
for some $64,000,000 of primary war materials pro- 
cured under appropriations made prior to March 11, 
1941, bringing the total to date to $75,202,425. This 
covers all ordnance, aircraft, tanks, vessels and miscel- 
laneous military equipment, but does not include the 
50 destroyers transferred under the naval base deal 
last September, or the surplus army stores delivered 
to Britain in June 1940. 

One explanation for these small figures is that 
the major war shipments to Britain are still being 
made under orders placed last year and financed by 
the British Treasury. Thus, it is pointed out, the 
over-all exports to the United Kingdom have risen 
steadily, with total shipments during the first three 


months of 1941 amounting to $289,000,000, » 
compared with $177,000,000 in the same period gf 
1940. But the hard fact remains that current deljy 
eries are still short of Britain’s immediate n 
while shipments to China have actually declined 
American exports to China, according to the latey 
Department of Commerce estimate, dropped to $19. 
998,000 in the January-April period of 1941, as com. 
pared with $25,030,000 a year ago. 

In his covering letter to Congress, President | 
Roosevelt pledged the United States to help Britain 
“outstrip the Axis powers in munitions of war,” and 
promised that we “will see to it that these munitions 
get to the places where they can be used effectively 
to weaken and defeat the aggressors.” But the “facts 
and figures” cited in the report for the first 90 days 
are not altogether reassuring to those defense off. 
cials who insist that to outstrip the Axis the United 
States will have to take more drastic measures than 
we have yet been willing to accept. 


On the positive side the report shows that $4,300, 
000,000, or about 60 per cent of the $7,000,000,00 
voted in Congress, has been allocated for specific 
purposes. The breakdown by departments is sum- 


marized as follows: 
War $2,890,620,953 
Navy 589,339,958 
Maritime Commission 562,354,800 
Treasury 180,085,863 | 
Agriculture 54,886,305 
Administration 125,000 


$4,277,412,879 
On the negative side, it must be pointed out that 


the allocations fall considerably short of the requite ; 


ments submitted by Britain in March, and that in 
many cases actual contracts have not yet been made. 
The report, in fact, fails to show what portion of 
the total allocations have been contracted for. Bul 


the greatest cause for concern is the continued te 
luctance of American industry to face the need for 
drastic curtailment of “normal production” in ordet | 
to release men and materials for war production | 
While the O.P.M. has ordered a 20 per cent reduc 
tion in automobile production, effective August |, 
it is still resisting pressure for a 50 per cent al 
which the War Department now regards as essential 
for 1942. The moral of the President's first progress 
report is that the gap between promise and pet 
formance will not be closed until such steps are taken 


W. T. STONE 


Soviet: 


stantia 
other | 
ageres 
equal! 
cupat 
Bessar 
matic 
tempo 
ing Br 
the N 
ment, 
abidin 
Germ; 
umnex 
munis 
occup! 
sabota 
these < 
ers, we 
tion ¥ 
pose ¢ 
Hitler 
ace’ — 
the er 
shevis 
in Eur 


