


ind 
tter 
Jed 
Lip- 
an- 

by 
Cu- 
s by 
had 
1 of 
can 
nch 


NG- 
r of 
rald 
1 of 
yrre- 
and 
cor: 


City 
Co., 


| the 
ther 
F the 
y in- 
. the 


Vik- 


din 
ture, 


uble- 


who 


gton, 
\—its 








— > -———— 





Anh Arbor, Nich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
Dr. William yw, 


* Univers: 


Bishop b 
- 

aa : . 
ty of Nichigan 


Tee 
Med vrary 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 39 


JuLy 17, 1942 





NEW NAZI DRIVE TESTS RUSSIA’S WILL TO RESIST 


HE German offensive in southern Russia, now 

in its third week, is being conducted with such 
fierceness and such lavish use of men and materials 
as to indicate an urgent desire on the part of the 
Nazis to crack Russia’s resistance in the shortest pos- 
sible time. Soviet reports estimate that the Germans 
in their drive in the Don region, have been using 50 
divisions of infantry, 10 to 12 armored divisions, and 
up to 3,000 planes. As the Russians had feared all 
winter—when they were urging the Western powers 
to speed deliveries of armaments, and to open a sec- 
ond front in Europe—the Germans command superi- 
ority in tanks and planes, and even of man power in 
some sectors where they have marshaled Hungarian, 
Rumanian, Italian and other troops in addition to 
their own. 

NAZIS’ ADVANTAGE. The Germans have the 
obvious advantage that they have not only preserved, 
more or less intact, their industrial plant within the 
borders of the Reich, but can also utilize the fac- 
tories of occupied countries, as well as the labor of 
conquered peoples—of whorn 2,500,000, according to 
German figures, are working for the Nazi war ma- 
chine in industry or agriculture. The Germans, by 
contrast, have deprived Russia of one of its principal 
industrial areas, the Donetz Basin, as well as others. 
Russian industries in the occupied areas have either 
been moved to the Urals and Siberia, or else have 
been subjected by the Russians to the scorched-earth 
policy; and the Russians have had to evacuate be- 
tween 10 and 20 million workers and peasants into 
the interior of the country, with inevitable, even if 
temporary, dislocation of their production. Today, 
Russia must depend for war material on its secondary 
base in the Ural-Siberia region, which had been de- 
signed primarily to serve the needs of the Russian ar- 
mies in the Far East; and on supplies from Britain 
and the United States, which must be brought in over 
long sea routes, vulnerable to German submarine and 


surface ship attack, via the Arctic in the north and 
the Persian Gulf in the south. 

RUSSIA’S ASSETS. Like China, Russia has two 
important assets which may have a decisive effect on 
the course of the war: its enormous space, and the 
newly emerging national spirit of its people, forged 
by the common burdens and hardships of the war 
into a national unity never previously known. The 
centralization of political and economic power in 
Moscow had led many foreign observers to believe 
that Russia might disintegrate if some of its prin- 
cipal centers were occupied or menaced. But the 
Russian people, throughout their history, have been 
ruled from a distant capital—Moscow in the days of 
the earlier Tsars, St. Petersburg after Peter the Great 
had established his new capital on the northern 
periphery of the country. To sustain life they have 
perforce had to develop a whole network of local 
and communal relationships. Paradoxical though it 
may seem, the Soviet system strengthened these local 
relationships after the early period of civil strife by 
forcing the peasants to pool their efforts in collec- 
tive farms, and establishing a much closer link than 
had existed in the past between the workers and 
their factories, as well as between the local soviets 
and the populations within their jurisdiction. The 
defense of cities like Leningrad, Odessa, Sevastopol, 
in which, for lack of communications with the rest 
of the country, the local population had to assume 
a predominant part, and the guerrilla warfare waged 
in the countryside by bands of “partisans,” reveal 
the extent to which this war, for the Russians, is not 
merely ‘‘Stalin’s war,” but a people's war. 

RUSSIAN WILL TO RESIST. It also provides an 
answer to those who, in the case of Russia, as in the 
case of China, have been asking themselves whether 
defeatism might not set in in Moscow (or Chung- 
king), and create the atmosphere for a separate peace. 
It is entirely possible—and the Russians have never 


























nurtured any illusions on this score,—that the Ger- 
mans may advance much farther into the interior of 
the country than they did in 1941. Like the Japanese 
in China, the Germans are finding that they cannot 
conquer space, and are concentrating on the limited 
objective of depriving Russia of supplies needed for 
continuance of the war—by seeking to cut off its 
armies and collective farms from the oil of the Cau- 
casus, and by menacing Russia’s supply routes 
through Murmansk and the Persian Gulf. But per- 
ilous as Russia’s position may become within the 
next few weeks, the Russians have been made aware 
by the actions of the Germans themselves that de- 
feat would spell their obliteration as a nation, and 
destruction of the way of life they had been labori- 
ously constructing during the past quarter of a cen- 
tury at enormous cost in men and resources. It seems 
far less credible than it might have in 1941, before 
the Russians had experienced the full impact of 
total war, that they could accept any other outcome 
than victory over the Germans, no matter how long 
it takes to achieve, or what it may cost. Here the 
Germans have encountered a determination and a 
capacity for sacrifice at least equal to their own. 

But in the case of Russia, as in the case of China, 
Britain and the United States cannot assume that, 
because the Russian and Chinese people will con- 
tinue to resist until they have defeated their enemies, 
the Western powers can waver for a moment 
in the fulfillment of their own pledges of aid to their 
allies in Europe and Asia. The Russians, like the 
Chinese, are realists. They admit that Britain has 
kept faith with Moscow in delivering supplies over 
the Arctic route, at great risk to its ships and sea- 
men, and that the United States, once it recovered 
from the initial shock of Pearl Harbor, has also en- 
deavored to meet Russia’s wants, often at the ex- 


Page Two 








i 
——— 


pense of other fronts—notably China. They also up.J ; 


derstand that, in order to open a second front jg 
Europe, the Allies might have to divert ships ang 
war material now being used to supply Russia tp 
the need of servicing the second front. But the 
Russians, realistic as they are, have themselves 
transcended many practical difficulties, and have a¢. 
complished not only what seemed practicable, but 
what seemed impossible. They expect no less from 
Britain and the United States. They find it difficult 
to understand that people in this country, and to a 
much lesser extent in Britain, should still be cop. 
cerned with the preservation of a semblance of civil. 
ian life, should still want to obtain consumers’ goods, 
when every ounce of labor and every scrap of raw 
material should, in their opinion, be going into the 
war effort. Having lived for twenty-five years in ap 
atmosphere where the most vital consumers’ needs 
were consciously sacrificed to the need of building an 
industrial plant that could produce armaments for de. 


fense of what was in 1917 a primarily backward ag-} p 


ricultural country whose resources were coveted by 


advanced industrial states, the Russians find it in-}. 


credible that the United States, with its vastly su 
perior industrial resources, should not harness them 
immediately and irrevocably to the common war ma- 
chine. They do not realize the dislocation that a 
sudden curtailment of industries producing consum- 
ers’ goods would create in this country but, like the 
Chinese and the peoples of conquered Europe, they 
are convinced that an Axis victory would make the 
enjoyment of consumers’ goods—and even of the 
minimum necessities of life—impossible for the de. 
feated countries. Hence their urgency in pressing fot 
all-out war now, in 1942, when, they believe, victory 
is not impossible, while defeat would be tantamount 
to slavery. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


thei 
of f 
Rus 
tion 
com 





NAZI ECONOMIC PLANS THWARTED IN RUSSIA 


As the German Army advances deeper into Russia, 
the Nazis find themselves increasingly concerned 
with the problem of reorganizing the vast Russian 
territories they have conquered. These regions, the 
most important of which are White Russia and the 
Ukraine, cover more than 800,000 square miles, or 
a little over one-quarter of European Russia, and 





With the vast international machinery now being 
forged, can we achieve a workable union? For an 
appraisal from the point of view of post-war re- 
construction, read: 

MACHINERY OF COLLABORATION BETWEEN 
THE UNITED NATIONS by Payson S. Wild, Jr. 


25c 


July 1 issue of ForziGN Poticy REPorTS 
REPORTS afe issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 








Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 





sheltered, before the invasion, about 48 million 
people, or 40 per cent of the European population of 
the U.S.S.R. This area is the source of some 60 pet 
cent of the total coal and iron-ore production of the 
whole U.S.S.R., and of 36 per cent of the cereal crops 
grown in European Russia. 

FRUITS OF CONQUEST SMALL. In one te 
spect, however, the invaded section of Russia differs 
from the other countries occupied by Germany. 
While incorporation of the latter into the German 
war economy has already been substantially com 
pleted, Russians still stubbornly refuse their coopera: 
tion. Germany holds cities such as Smolensk, Kiev, 
Kharkov, Odessa and now Sevastopol, scattered in 
an area which normally produce from 30 to 45 pef 
cent of Russia’s industrial output, but is still unable 
to obtain from these regions the large supplies att 
ticipated. Since extensive military operations continue 


qua 
to ] 

loss 
| of 
of 
wa: 
sug 
IS ¢ 
the 


sia! 





ai 
yes 
wa 
su 
th 
be 





t in 
and 
a to 
the 
‘Ives 
> ac. 
but 
rom 
cult 
to a 
con- 
‘ivil- 
ods, 
raw 
the 
1 an 
eeds 
g an 
t de- 


llion 
yn of 
) per 
f the 
“rops 


re 
iffers 
any. 
rman 
com: 
pera: 
Kiev, 


-d in | 


) per 
rable 
S$ all 
tinue 





SS 
-_-— 





in Russia, in contradistinction to the other occupied 
countries, the Germans cannot use the railways— 
the only effective means of transportation in these 
practically roadless areas—for other than purely war 

poses. Moreover, the scorched-earth policy has 
been applied to a much greater extent in Russia 
than in any other theatre of war —a policy which 
has undoubtedly been facilitated by the fact that 
the industrial wealth was State property, so that 
there was no possibility of opposition by private in- 
terests to complete destruction. 

The Russians, however, have not been able to de- 
stroy everything. The coal mines of the Donetz basin, 
for instance, may still be in working order, and im- 

rtant plants, stockpiles and water-power resources 
must have fallen to the invaders. Yet, in view of the 
extent of destruction and the unsettled conditions in 
the occupied areas, the new German managers of 
conquered Soviet mines and factories are facing a 
truly Herculean task in their attempts to reorganize 
production in Russia while the fighting goes on. In 
fact, the negotiations conducted by Nazi officials 
swith German corporations, with a view to their tak- 
ing over Russian enterprises, have so far progressed 
vety slowly. The Party representatives complain that 
most of the plants behind the German lines are still 
inactive, and that the leaders of German industry 
and finance prefer to concentrate on securing ad- 
vantageous positions in other occupied countries, 
where conditions are more stable. 

AGRICULTURE DISORGANIZED. To a lesser 
extent, the Russians have also been able to apply 
their scorched-earth policy to agriculture. The stocks 
of foodstuffs found by fhe invading troops in White 
Russia and the Ukraine have been far below expecta- 
tions. The cereal harvest in the Ukraine was almost 
completed before the invasion of 1941, and large 
quantities of grain were shipped in the nick of time 
to Moscow and the East. The principal agricultural 
loss was probably that of the sugar-beet crop, most 
of which rotted in the ground. Almost nine-tenths 
of the total sugar-beet production of the U.S.S.R. 
was grown in the occupied region. Virtually the only 
sugar Russia will have this year will be that which 
is at present being sent by the United States under 
the lend-lease agreement. 

The evacuation of a substantial part of the Rus- 
sian population at the time of the invasion makes 








| Japan’s campaign in eastern China has raised new 
difficulties for the Chungking government. For five 
years Japan has tried to advance along China's rail- 
Ways, rivers and highways, in order to blockade the 
Surrounding countryside and force it to yield. The 
theory has been that, if the unoccupied areas could 
be throttled economically through the loss of mar- 





Page Three 














it most difficult for.the Germans to sow, tend and 
harvest crops.. According to a Hungarian report, the 
harvest in the German-occupied Ukraine was even 
smaller this year than in 1942, reaching only 40 per 
cent of the 1941 yield. Hoping to obtain the collab- 
oration of those who remained, the German military 
authorities at first announced their intention of abol- 
ishing the collective system introduced by the Krem- 
lin. Nothing, however, has yet been done to transfer 
the land to the peasants. On the contrary, the Reichs- 
Minister for the Occupied Territories of the East, Al- 
fred Rosenberg, issued a decree on February 27, 1942 
purporting to establish a “new” agricultural system 
for all the territories within the 1939 frontiers of 
the Soviet Union, including Eastern Poland and the 
Baltic states. According to this decree, the sovkhozes 
(state farms) will be placed under the administra- 
tion of German experts without any change, and 
the lands of the ko/khozes (collective farms) will 
be rebaptized Landbaugenossenschaften—land culti- 
vation cooperatives. These will also be cultivated 
under the control of German experts. 

The acute shortage of agricultural workers, com- 
bined with the stubborn resistance of the Russian 
people against “collaboration” with the enemy, is 
compelling the Nazis to seek elsewhere the hands 
they need for cultivation of the fields of conquered 
Russia. To solve this difficulty, they are trying to 
draft surplus farmers from the thickly populated 
countries of Western Europe. In the Netherlands, 
especially, great efforts are being made toward this 
end. According to Nazi plans, Holland is to be 
permanently isolated from Great Britain, the West- 
ern Hemisphere and its overseas Empire, and there- 
fore will not be able to sustain its present rural and 
urban population. With the financial assistance of 
the Bank of the Netherlands, headed by a Dutch 
Nazi, Rost van Tonningen, a new corporation called 
the “Netherlands East Company” has recently been 
set up to establish an agricultural colony of some 
three million Dutchmen—over one-third of the total 
population of the country—in Russia. Such plans, 
however, involve great difficulties and may easily 
be upset by future military developments. As long as 
active fighting persists on the Russian front, the 
economic contribution of the Russian “hinterland” 
to the German war machine cannot be of primary 


importance. ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


CAMPAIGN IN CHINA FORESHADOWS NEW JAPANESE FRONT 


kets and sources of supply in the occupied zones, 
the morale and political stability of Free China could 
be undermined. It is well known that this objective 
has remained unrealized and that Japan does not 
control the full communications system of eastern 
China—or the provinces further west. Many villages, 
for example, have remained under Chinese admin- 





























istration although close to Japanese-held centers. 
This has been the case in the eastern provinces of 
Chekiang and Kiangsi, which have recently been 
the scene of heavy fighting. Chekiang, an important 
producer of salt, is a coastal area not far below oc- 
cupied Shanghai; yet its economic and political life 
has been very closely linked to that of Free China. 
Similarly, except for the area about Nanchang in 
the north, the neighboring interior province of 
Kiangsi—a source of tungsten—has been entirely in 
Chinese hands. These two provinces are bound to- 
gether by a railway running southwest from Hang- 
chow to Nanchang. Before the present campaign, this 
line—except for the terminals—was under Chinese 
control and served China’s economic, political and 
military purposes. In the same way, Kiangsi is also 
linked with the neighboring western province of 
Hunan, standing at the gateway of China’s south- 
west, the backbone of the country’s economic power. 


Immediately after General Doolittle’s sweep over 
Tokyo on April 18, the Japanese launched systematic 
reconnaissance and bombing of various cities and air- 
fields in eastern China, especially in Chekiang and 
Kiangsi. A month later, Japanese troops began to 
march down the railway from Hangchow, and other 
forces soon pushed eastward from Nanchang in a 
pincers movement. To date, Japan has taken various 
airfields (such as those at Chuhsien and Lishui in 
Chekiang), the temporary Chekiang capital at Kin- 
hua, and the entire railway. They claim the fall of 
Wenchow, a south Chekiang city, which is described 
as ‘an important secret Chinese supply base.” 


JAPAN'S STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE. What are 
Japan's objectives in this campaign, which has now 
been under way for two months? One commonly 
mentioned motive is the desire to seize various air- 
fields that might be used to bomb Japanese cities. A 
second is a plan to establish through railway com- 
munications from Shanghai to Singapore, a track 
distance of approximately 4,000 miles. Such a route 
would reduce the number of ships exposed to attack 
on the long sea voyage from Japan to Southeast 
Asia. This is important because Japanese losses in 
sending supplies to the newly conquered southern 
areas and in bringing back raw materials have been 
large in relation to Japan’s shipbuilding capacity. 
While the Japanese undoubtedly bear these factors 
in mind, the evidence indicates that they must have a 
more immediate motive for the campaign. Their op- 
erations are on a larger scale than the mere seizure 
of airfields requires, while the Shanghai-Singapore 


Page Four 





Ts 





a 
—— 


plan would demand considerable time for execution, 


The Japanese probably hope to strike a sharp blow 
at China’s power of resistance. Ever since 1937, and 
especially during the past two years, the Chinese 
have been beset by economic difficulties. Prices haye 
ascended at bewildering speed, and many commodity 
shortages have developed through actual scarcity of 
hoarding. If the provinces of Chekiang and Kiangsj 
—and perhaps other areas—can be torn from the 
economic structure of Free China, new problems 
will be created for Chiang Kai-shek. Furthermore, 
the two provinces are the scene of much of the 
smuggling that has occurred between occupied and 
unoccupied China, often through the judicious dis. 
tribution of bribes among Japanese officers. It would 
be a blow to China’s economic and political position 
if the Japanese were now to stop this flow of com. 
modities. 


This is not to say that the Japanese intend to make 
China their main objective this summer. It took 
them over a month to seize the Chekiang-Kiangsi 
railway, in the face of Chinese resistance, and it 
would probably be more difficult to capture lines 
deeper in the interior. Japan can hardly afford to 
consume what may well be the decisive summer of 
the global war in new operations on the Chinese 
front. But Japan would benefit greatly if, by certain 
limited moves, such as the ones already described, 
Chinese opposition could be greatly weakened. This 
would permit the release of many troops for other, 
new fronts—perhaps against the Soviet Far East. 


In all these developments the United States will 
play a very important part. The recent arrival of a 
small number of American bombers in China, to 
supplement fighter planes already there, has pro- 
duced dividends in the form of raids on Hankovw, 
Canton and other Japanese-held centers. If we send 








additional bombers that can be spared from the 
primary European front, the Chinese may be able to 
retard Japan’s advance and make its efforts um 
profitable. China’s Minister of Communications has 
also made the welcome announcement that large 
quantities of supplies are at last being delivered from 
India by transport plane. This indicates that vari 
ous flying problems as well as the difficulties of 
the monsoon season have been surmounted, at least 
in part. It is certainly of the utmost importance 
that China be helped to maintain an active front, s0 
that Japan will have no peace on its vulnerable flank, 
if it strikes in other directions. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 39, Jury 17, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. ¥Y. FRaNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MiICcHELES Dean, Editor; Davo H. 


Popper, Associate Editor. 
Three Dollars a Year. 


is 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., 


under the Act of March 3, 187% 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


[-<} 
& Fog 


vis 
Fie 
wo 
ere 


pr 
Fir 


+ 
Pol, 





