


Sa = 


ate 
tn. 
I's 


5 at 
ate- 





YAR 6 1945 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


PERIGDICAL. ROOM 
GENERAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF MICH 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





You. XXIV, No. 18 


FEBRUARY 16, 1945 





a7 agreements announced on February 12, at 
the conclusion of the 8-day Crimea Conference 
attended by President Roosevelt, Prime Minister 
Churchill and Marshal Stalin, chart a much-needed 
gurse of united Allied action for both the immedi- 
ite and the long-range future. This course will 
doubtless fail to please every one, for it bears the 
stamp of compromise and reflects the process of 
give-and-take that necessarily characterized the 
meeting of the Big Three. But whether or not all 
decisions reached by the conferees are viewed with 
ipproval, it must be admitted that the Allies’ deci- 
son to grapple with the outstanding issues confront- 
ing them is a definite improvement over what ap- 
peared to be their previous deadlock on a number 
of serious issues. 


DRACONIAN TERMS FOR GERMANY. In 


_|ddition to planning final military blows against the 


Nazis, the Conference took action on the three 
major problems associated with the final stage of 
the European war: the future of Germany; the es- 
tblishment of popular governments in the liberated 
juntries; and the creation of machinery for post- 
wat United Nations cooperation. In their program 
for Germany, which is the first Allied effort to go 
kyond the immediate objective of unconditional 
wtrender, the Big Three reiterate their determina- 
tion to prevent Germany from ever again disturb- 
ing the peace of the world. In achieving this end, 
however, the Big Three definitely state that “it is 
tot our purpose to destroy the people of Germany,” 
ind insist only upon the eradication of the Nazis 
ad their militaristic institutions as a prerequisite 
0 restoration to the family of nations. This dis- 
tinction between the German people and their lead- 
tts undoubtedly reflects the fact that the Big Three 
lace the practical consideration that, once Germany 
8 defeated, there will still be approximately 75 or 
80 million Germans living in the center of Europe. 





BIG 3 FORGE OVER-ALL PLANS FOR GERMANY AND LIBERATED EUROPE 


Since these people obviously cannot be punished 
as severely as their leaders, the Allies realize it 
would be wise to stress the continued existence of 
a German state in the propaganda they are now di- 
recting to the Germans as well as in their plans for 
the peace settlement. 

Despite their precise rejection of the thesis that 
the German nation must cease to exist, the Big 
Three’s program for extirpating Nazism and restor- 
ing the Germans to a peaceful way of life is nearly 
as severe as any suggested by proponents of a 
“hard” peace. Not only is Germany to be thoroughly 
disarmed and the General Staff broken up “for all 
time,” but ‘‘all German industry that could be used 
for military production” is to be eliminated or con- 
trolled. In view of the wide range of industries in- 
volved in modern arms production, this provision 
could, if the Allies so desire, be construed to mean 
the deindustrialization of Germany. In addition, it 
is definitely provided that war criminals shall be 
brought to speedy justice and that reparation in kind 
for damage done to Allied countries will be exacted 
by a commission sitting in Moscow. 

Enforcement of these terms will undoubtedly call 
for the military occupation of Germany over a period 
of years, a fact that the Big Three recognize in 
their provision for a central control commission 
consisting of their supreme commanders, with head- 
quarters in Berlin, that will coordinate the various 
armies’ zones of occcupation. Recognizing France's 
keen interest in the prevention of future German 
aggression and de Gaulle’s willingness to have the 
French share in what will be at best an onerous task, 
the Allied leaders invite France to take over a fourth 
zone and to become a member of the control com- 
mission. 

Provisions for a territorial settlement with Ger- 
many are conspicuously absent from the program 
for the defeated enemy. No reference is made to the 


























future of the Rhineland and Ruhr, where General 
de Gaulle has been insisting that French armies 
must take a permanent stand after the war. Simi- 
larly, the western frontier of Poland is not placed 
at the Oder, as the Lublin régime has demanded, but 
is made one of the subjects of the forthcoming peace 
conference. This reference to a post-war peace con- 
ference sounds a most welcome note, for it is the 
first hint that the Allies plan to take an over- 
all and well-considered approach to the problem of 
delimiting Germany's territories instead of relying 
on hasty and piecemeal decisions made in the heat 
of battle. 

FORMULA FOR LIBERATED EUROPE. The 
Big Three's formula for handling the problems of 
liberated Europe is almost as important as their pro- 
posals for Germany since it offers a possible solu- 
tion to questions that have seriously endangered 
United Nations unity. This formula calls for peri- 
odic meetings among the Foreign Ministers of the 
United States, Russia, Britain and France to produce 
concerted action in assisting the liberated peoples 
in solving by democratic means their most pressing 
political and economic problems. Given proper im- 
plementation, this scheme could prevent such mis- 
understandings as have recently arisen in connection 
with Greece and Belgium. 

But it is obvious that this plan alone could not 
cope with such tangled issues as those involved in 
the Polish and Yugoslav questions, and clear-cut 
solutions were finally devised for these two coun- 
tries. The United States registers its public approval, 
for the first time, of Russia’s claim to the Curzon 
Line as the eastern boundary of Poland—a claim 
Prime Minister Churchill had previously recognized 
—and agrees that the Poles shall receive German 
territories to the north and west. On the other 
hand, the Soviet Union recognizes the principle, on 
which President Roosevelt is believed to have laid 
particular emphasis, that a genuinely representative 
government resting on free elections shall be formed 
as soon as possible. Accordingly, the Russians are 
committed to accepting, instead of the Lublin ré- 
gime they now recognize, a revised provisional Po- 


Page Two 








—=} 


lish government that will be formed by adding 
democratic Poles at home and abroad to the e 
isting de facto authority. That the present Polis) 
government in London will be able or willing ty 
merge with the Lublin officials is most unlikely, By 
it is to be hoped that such outstanding individual 
Polish leaders as former Premier Mikolajczyk wijj 
seize this opportunity to bridge the gap that has g 
long divided not only the rival Polish régimes by 
the Western Allies and Russia as well. 


A similar solution has been agreed upon fo, 
Yugoslavia, where Britain and the United State 
have feared that Marshal Tito’s régime indicated 
the establishment of an exclusive Soviet sphere of 
influence. By recommending that Marshal Tito and 
Prime Minister Subasitch of the government-in-exile 
put into immediate effect their agreement, formy. 
lated last June, to form one régime, the Big Three 
attempt to unify their policies toward this leading 
Balkan state. But since Tito’s position in Yugoslavia 
will undoubtedly continue to be predominant, Brit 
ain and the United States apparently requested, and 
Russia agreed, that certain checks should be im. 
posed on the powers of the country’s provisional 
government. In this way all legislative acts now 
passed under Tito’s leadership will ultimately be 
subjected for approval to a popularly elected Con. 
stituent Assembly after the war. 


CONFERENCE ON DUMBARTON OAKS. 
Particular interest attaches to the date and meeting 
place of the United Nations conference the Big 
Three have agreed to call to discuss the Dumbarton 
Oaks plan for peace and security. Since April 24 is 
the date on which the five-year Soviet-Japanese new 
trality pact expires, the question arises whether this 
important meeting would be scheduled to begin the 


following day unless Russia intended to denounce, 


the treaty. Likewise, the choice of a west coast 
American city, where interest in the war against 
Japan has always been especially keen, would bea 
particularly appropriate locale for the sessions if 
Russia plans to take an active role in the Pacific wat 


WHINIFRED N. HADSEL 


ROOSEVELT URGES CONGRESS TO APPROVE WORLD MONETARY PLANS 


Legislation implementing the financial agreements 
drafted by the United Nations at Bretton Woods 
last July will soon be submitted to Congress. Pro- 
posals for the Monetary Fund and the International 
Bank constitute the first concrete arrangements for 
permanent post-war cooperative agencies this na- 
tion has been asked to consider. America’s attitude 
with respect to the adoption of these plans will be 
watched by the world at large, for United States 
action in regard to future financial and economic 
affairs is as important as the decision this nation 


must reach eventually with respect to the world s 
curity organization to be established by the United 
Nations. 

PRESIDENTIAL ENDORSEMENT. This is tit 
burden of President Roosevelt's February 12 meé 
sage to Congress, in which he requested favorable 
and speedy action on the proposed Monetary Fuat 
and World Bank. His approval of the plans fo 
these two financial institutions followed a repot 
issued last week by the American Bankers Associt 
tion and other banking groups, which suggeste! 








a 


that 
Some 
ing 
shou! 
tiona 
Th 
ton 
othet 
are | 
incre 
war | 
State 
eign 
ecutt 
muni 
bring 
our f 
its $ 
be al 
veloy 
tate 
loan: 
TI 
towa 
the | 
be m 
by re 
hibit 
defa 
Presi 
gress 
of tk 
credi 
note 
agret 
ing t 
Expc 
gests 
the [ 
biliti 
ers 
the « 
ticul 
orde 





for 
ates 
ited 


- of 


xile 
mu- 
iree 
ling 
aVia 
Srit- 
and 


onal 
now 
} be 
CON 


\KS, 
ting 
Big 
irton 
24 is 
nev- 
- this 
1 the 


UNCE ¢ 


coast 
inst 
be a 
ns if 
wat. 


SEL 


\NS 


id se 
‘ited 


is the 

mes 
rable 
Fund 
1s for 
report 
0c 
reste 








——— 
an 





that the International Monetary Fund be dropped. 
Some of the Fund’s proposed functions of stabiliz- 
ing world currencies, the ABA report declared, 
should be incorporated with those of the Interna- 
tional Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 

The President’s message indicated that the Bret- 
ton Woods proposals were but the forerunners of 
others that would be presented to Congress. They 
are part of what must be a consistent program to 
increase world trade, stabilize currencies in the post- 
war period, and provide the means whereby United 
States credit is made more easily available to for- 
eign nations. It now appears that Congress, the ex- 
ecutive and a large section of the banking com- 
munity are agreed that American responsibility in 
bringing about such an expansion of trade demands 
our participation in the International Bank. Through 
its $10,000,000,000 fund, member nations would 
be able to finance important reconstruction and de- 
velopment projects, and the Bank would also facili- 
tate and make secure wide private participation in 
loans to foreign countries. 

The Bank may go far, Mr. Roosevelt believes, 
toward providing facilities by which our share of 
the lending requirements of the post-war years may 
be met. Additional facilities would also be provided 
by revoking the Johnson Act, which at present pro- 
hibits private American lending to nations which 
defaulted on debts resulting from World War I. 
President Roosevelt's message intimated that Con- 
gress would soon be called on to increase the funds 
of the Export-Import Bank so that more American 
credit may be made available abroad. It is to be 
noted that the American Bankers Association is in 
agreement with the President with respect to repeal- 
ing the Johnson Act and increasing the funds of the 
Export-Import Bank. Finally, the President sug- 
gests other measures which must be undertaken if 
the United States is to fulfill completely its responsi- 
bilities in international economic life. Trade bar- 
tiers must be reduced, and Congress must consider 
the establishment of a United Nations food and ag- 
ficulture organization, the control of cartels and the 
orderly marketing of world surpluses of certain 
commodities, as well as the questions of post-war 
shipping, aviation and telecommunications. 

CONTROVERSY ON MONETARY FUND. 
Only with regard to the adoption of the Bretton 
Woods plan for the International Monetary Fund 
is Congress likely to have great difficulty in reach- 
ing a decision. In proposing the assignment of the 
Fund’s currency stabilization tasks to the World 


Page Three 














Bank, the American Bankers Association and other 
banking groups contend that the Fund introduces 
novel loan procedures whereby other currencies 
would be made available to member nations in 
practically an automatic manner. The ABA report 
suggests that the Fund would operate on the theory 
that the borrower is entitled to credit unless the 
lender can make out a case to the contrary. It is ar- 
gued further that gold and dollar exchange in for- 
eign hands has increased markedly during the war 
and that no such facilities as the Fund would pro- 
vide are necessary. Rather it is thought that interim 
needs in the reconstruction period can best be ac- 
commodated by increasing the funds of the Export- 
Import Bank and by repealing the Johnson Act. 


Against this attack Administration leaders will 
doubtless follow the President’s argument in his 
February 12 message, favoring both the Fund and 
the Bank in addition to the measures on which the 
Bankers Association and the President agree. Not 
only is currency stabilization an absolute essential 
to orderly trading in the long run, but in the period 
immediately following hostilities member nations 
whose economies have been geared to total war ef- 
fort, or seriously destroyed, must find a way to fi- 
nance speedy recovery. Many countries will need 
American materials and equipment in reconstruction 
work, but the chief problem will be to find the 
means of payment. While noting that we can be 
paid eventually for what we sell abroad chiefly in 
goods and services, the President indicated that un- 
less a method is found now to finance this trade, 
these countries will be unable to restore their econo- 
mies. In desperation, they may be forced to carry 
forward existing discriminatory trade systems, re- 
strictive exchange controls, competitive depreciation 
and other destructive trade practices. 


With these contrasting approaches to the question 
of adopting the Bretton Woods plans, Congress and 
the public generally must now decide the issue in 
view of the broader political and economic consid- 
erations involved. Should Congress reject either of 
the present draft proposals, not the least difficulty 
would be the negotiation of further agreements with 
the 44 nations which participated in the Bretton 
Woods Conference. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 





The War, Fourth Year, by Edgar McInnnis. New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1944. $2.50 
Another in the useful series which combines a chronol- 
ogy with an interesting summarizing text. 





POREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 18, FEBRUARY 16, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lurt, Secretary; Vera Micunres Dran, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Qs: 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











De eee oe se 





Ane Rarpemagt gintominly 


Washington News Letter 











STRESSED BY LONDON CONFERENCE LABOR’S ROLE IN WORLD AFFAIRS 


A unified American labor movement, thoroughly 
conscious of its stake in world peace and in the 
expansion of world trade, could exert a powerful 
influence on the development of foreign policy here 
and elsewhere. Even in its present state (split 
among the American Federation of Labor, the Con- 
gress of Industrial Organizations, the United Mine 
Workers, the Railroad Brotherhoods and others), 
the American labor movement is becoming a factor 
in international relations. The World Trade Union 
Conference, which opened in London on February 
6, has provided a segment of United States labor 
with an opportunity to sharpen its Own awareness 
of the meaning of world events for unions and their 
membership, and to enhance the part it can play in 
the development of official attitudes in this country. 


LABOR’S GROWING INTEREST IN WORLD 
AFFAIRS. The United States government has given 
concrete recognition to the contribution that labor 
unions now make to foreign policy. Assistant Sec- 
retary of State Nelson Rockefeller has invited the 
AFL and CIO to send observers to the Conference 
of the American Republics, opening in Mexico City 
on February 21. The Department of State in its re- 
organization of December 20 expanded the work of 
the Division of International Labor, Social and 
Health Affairs, organized on January 15, 1944; its 
tasks include “analysis and recommendation on the 
effects of labor developments on the foreign policy 
of the United States, on the foreign policy of for- 
eign countries and on international relations.” 

The prospect of a more highly internationalized 
life after the war is stimulating labor to take a 
deeper interest in world affairs—a field in which 
the AFL pioneered, with Robert Watt as vice presi- 
dent in charge of international relations. Now the 


. American Labor Conference is adding to knowledge 


in this field through its quarterly, International Post- 
war Problems. The CIO News is crusading for in- 
ternational monetary agreement, and the issue of 
January 15 urges that Congress “make Bretton 
Woods a reality by voting the full amount needed 
from the U.S. to start it working.” Expansion of 
world trade, the CIO emphasizes, means the expan- 
sion of job opportunities in the United States. 
DISUNITY WEAKENS LABOR INTERNA- 
TIONALLY. Two issues lie before the World 
Trade Union Conference: (1) the policy it will 


FOR VICTORY ° 


adopt toward general international problems; and 
(2) the policy it will adopt toward trade-union ip. 
ternationalism. On point one the Conference agenda 
is a microcosm of the great problems of the day, for 
it includes the attitude of the trade unions toward 
the anticipated peace settlement, general organiza. 
tion of world peace, Allied occupation of ex-enemy 
countries, reparation, and the treatment of Ger 
many. The Polish problem has come before the 
Conference through applications for recognition 
from unions sponsored variously by the London 
exile-régime and by the Warsaw-Lublin govern. 
ment. The Soviet and American representatives 
favored the seating of delegations from ex-enemy 
countries, but Britain finds it hard to forgive so 
soon. Apparently the Conference will not object if 
German forced labor is used in reparation, a posi- 
tion contrary to that taken by William Green, presi- 
dent of the AFL. 

The problem of reaching decisions on point two— 
trade-union internationalism—is highlighted by the 
fact that the CIO is present and the American Feder- 
ation of Labor is not. The AFL has long supported 
the International Federation of Trade Unions which, 
according to Philip Murray in the CIO News of 
January 15, “has for many years been ineffective and 
ceased to function.’” The London Conference agenda 
provides for discussion of a basis for a World Trade 
Union Federation separate from the IFTU. The 
AFL has consistently refused to deal with the 


U.S.S.R. trade unions, on the ground that they were 


not free, but the CIO is meeting with Soviet dele 
gates in London. Russian unions have not been ad- 
mitted to the IFTU, but would be admitted toa 
successor world federation. 

Are labor unions logical in refusing to deal with 
Soviet labor when the United States and Great Brit 
ain welcome the participation of the U.S.S.R. in fat 
reaching military and political decisions? Whatever 
the answer, the role of American labor in world 
affairs will be less than its potential so long as out 
unions disagree fundamentally on world issues. The 
lesson of the World Trade Union Conference sug: 
gests that the American unions should set up ma 
chinery for reaching agreement in advance on for 
eign affairs issues and for sending to international 
conferences mixed delegations prepared to speak 
for a combined point of view. BLA BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 











in the 
Allies 
fightis 
might 
permi 
ent d 
that t 
legrat 
the B: 
lems 

fore 2 
factor 
settlin 
Allies 
comp: 








