4G 


ee 


PARARMOfs 2nd class matter 
YGRESS 
AL RECORD 


9 1946 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIV, No. 12 


JANUARY 5, 1945 


PROBLEM OF SUPPLIES DOMINANT FACTOR ON WESTERN FRONT 


FTER six months’ silence, Adolf Hitler seized 
the occasion of the drive into Belgium to offer 
again to the German people hope that the war would 
certainly end in a Nazi victory. His New Year's 
message was an attempt to exploit on the psycho- 
logical plane the immediate success of the German 
armies in the field. While the main Nazi offensive 
was definitely halted by the first week of January, 
there is no denying that it engendered pessimism 
about the outcome of the war—both with respect to 
its aims and its length. This pessimism may be in- 
creased by the attack launched from the Saar Basin 
on January 2. But just as the political decisions taken 
in some of the liberated countries must eventually be 
related to the European scene as a whole, so also our 
setback in the West must be viewed in relation to the 
efforts of the Russians in Poland and in Hungary, to 
the Italian campaign, and to an understanding of the 
military exigencies preceding or attending the pres- 
ent German diversionary counterattack. 


MILITARY IMPERATIVES. Most observers, in 
viewing the German break-through on December 16, 
have assumed either that Allied intelligence services 
were faulty or that the importance earlier attributed 
to air power must now definitely be discounted. Yet 
the success of the German push may be explained 
by reasons more fundamental than these immediate 
considerations. Factors which date from “D” day 
offer an adequate explanation for what has taken 
place in Belgium. Difficulties of supply—both in 
material and men—which existed since beachheads 
were first established in Normandy, have now be- 
come paramount. The full story of the invasion has 
only recently been released to the public. In large 
part the invasion was accomplished through the use 
of specially constructed floating docks, thereby pre- 
cluding the necessity of seizing all of the Atlantic 
ports so well fortified by the Germans. 

The port of Antwerp, however, was of vital im- 


portance, and has borne the brunt as the supply cen- 
ter for the Allied armies operating below Arnhem 
and Aachen. Although this port suffered less de- 
struction than was first surmised, it has been subject 
to air attack and robot-bombing since its liberation; 
and ship-unloadings have probably been much de- 
layed as a result. Adding to the communications 
problem is the fact that the railway network in west- 
ern France and Belgium was seriously crippled by 
pre-invasion bombings and by German looting of 
much of the rolling stock. Hence it was never pos- 
sible to build up sufficient forward supply reserves, 
or dumps, directly behind the lines at those points 
which the several Allied armies took up on the Ger- 
man border after our break-through in Normandy 
had forced the hurried Nazi retreat. 

So swiftly did the Allied armies push the German 
forces to their own border that it has likewise proved 
impossible to establish reserves of men, equipped 
and organized into army units, for disposal of the 
General Headquarters Staff. And meanwhile it has 
proved necessary to station certain American, French 
and British troops within striking distance of Atlan- 
tic ports still held by the Germans in order to con- 
tain their Nazi garrisons. This lack of reserves in 
men has been borne out by the fact that General 
Patton’s Third Army, which has to date proved the 
most effective against the German salient in Belgium 
and Luxembourg, was forced to shift westward to 
meet the attack. Also, disposition of troops on the 
northern flank of the German thrust shows that Brit- 
ish units have been brought into the battle, units 
which were heretofore operating north of the Amer- 
ican First Army. 

PROBLEMS FACED BY GERMANS. The pres- 
ent German attack, therefore, appears less adverse 
to the United Nations when viewed in the perspec- 
tive of the Allied invasion accomplished so brilliant- 
ly last summer. Due to the speed of the subsequent 


march across France and Belgium, the severe strain 
on supplies and men was inevitable. But, despite 
these conditions, the limited force and slower tempo 
of the German drive are in decided contrast to the 
Germans’ push toward Sedan in 1940. Today, more- 
over, the Germans are faced with continuous pres- 
sure in the East. In view of the Russian attack on 
Budapest, the Germans can gain little comfort from 
relaxation of the drive along the Polish border. Rus- 
sian hesitation in Poland is doubtless dictated by 
conditions similiar to those encountered by the west- 
ern Allies. While exerting steady: pressure around 
Aachen, Britain and the United States could not 
mount a full assault until the supply problem had 
been solved. Similarly, the Russian supply lines are 
now extended, and no move could have been made 
in eastern Poland until the marsh lands there were 
frozen and until the railway gauges were changed. 
Just as the Allied forces are kept from the front to 
contain the German port garrisons, so the Soviet 
armies must also protect their rear from sizable Ger- 
man forces left in the Baltic. 

Despite the current show of energy on the part of 
the Germans, there is much to indicate that the pres- 
ent drive in the West, like that of 1918, may well 
be their last. For problems of supply are also impor- 
tant from the German point of view. Although tem- 
porary gains have been made by shortened lines of 
communication and the withdrawal to defensive 
positions within the Reich, the growing effect of 
strategic bombing will increasingly jeopardize Ger- 
man sources of materials. Also, the Germans are 
undergoing the winter bereft of food supplies for- 
merly drawn from all of Europe. Their own agri- 
cultural situation, although better organized than 
was the case in 1914-18, must have deteriorated since 


CHIANG PROMISES CONSTITUTION 


Generalissimo Chiank Kai-shek’s New Year mes- 
sage to the Chinese people, promising the creation 
of a constitutional government during the war, is a 
significant reflection of the crisis that came to a head 
in China in 1944. The past twelve months witnessed 
dangerous advances by Japanese armies, an upsurge 
of criticism among Chungking’s own supporters, 
and somewhat strained relations with the United 
States. As a result, in November, shortly after the 
Stilwell incident, the Chinese cabinet was reshuffled, 
and the forward-looking General Chen Cheng re- 
placed General Ho Ying-chin as Minister of War. 
This was followed on December 4 by the appoint- 
ment of Foreign Minister T. V. Soong as Acting 
President of the Executive Yuan. The effect of these 
changes was to arouse hopes of further improvement 
without indicating that Chungking was committing 
itself decisively to a new political course which 
would produce greater unity and military effective- 
ness. 


Page Two 


last June when, with pressure from the west, south 
and east, it was no longer possible to release men 
from the armies for plantings or harvests. By all rea- 
sonable calculations the Germans must face their 
supply problem with great uncertainty, whereas the 
Allies have the possibility, however delayed, of re- 
solving their supply difficulties. 


ALLIED UNITY NEEDED. Just as the Nazis 
have been unable fully to exploit their surprise in 
the field, so they will have failed to drive a wedge 
in the military coalition they face if, after this tem- 
porary setback, the Allies redouble their efforts to 
formulate a unified and positive progam for Euro- 
pean reconstruction after the war, including arrange- 
ments for Germany. Although General von Rund- 
stedt's immediate success in no way alters the policy 
of unconditional German surrender, still the need 
persists for Allied agreement with regard to post- 
surrender plans. Many of the existing political prob- 
lems, even on the periphery of Europe, can be solved 
more easily if this central question—the treatment 
of Germany—is determined now by united Allied 
action. 


Decisions will have to be reached with respect to 
German territories and control of German economy, 
but the severity of whatever measures are to be taken 
is less important than Allied agreement about them, 
and especially agreement about their continued en- 
forcement. If such decisions are achieved in unity, 
then—due to their effect on German morale—the 
war may be materially shortened. Such a result would 
in itself answer Hitler's latest boast and compensate 
for Allied losses and delays caused by the German 
counterattack. 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


AS DEMAND FOR REFORM RISES 


The Generalissimo’s statement of December 31 on 
constitutional democracy falls into the same pattern 
of reassuring, but inconclusive, developments. His 
pledge reverses the position taken by the government 
in September 1943: that a constitutional convention 
should be held one year after victory. He now ap- 
pears to have accepted the view of various Chinese 
critics that constitutional rule cannot wait but is 
needed during the war to weld the nation more close- 
ly together for successful military operations. Yet 
his declaration is not entirely clear for, while refer- 
ring to 1945 as the year in which a People’s Congress 
is to be convened, he also makes this meeting con- 
tingent upon the military situation’s becoming “so 
stabilized as to enable us to launch counter-offensives 
with greater assurance of victory.” In view of China’s 
precarious war situation, the question arises whether 
these conditions—which themselves require defini- 
tion—can be met by the end of 1945. 

ENEMY THREAT REMAINS. A lull now pre- 


— 


vails on | 
pulse of 
province 
less than 
ince and 
west Chi 
dangered 
Kunming 
in China 
into Kw 
shaled ag 
in the a 
blockade 
west. Th 
lost its < 
force aft 
boring K 


MILI1 
aid to C 
quantity 
ing, and 
importan 
India to 
the Chin 
heavy gt 
by air. T 
Yunnan 
north Bi 
situation 
major bu 
One of | 
that can 
forces W 
coastal j 
decisive 

Recen 
may for« 
ness tha 
Chungki 
Nelson, 
of wart 
ly maki 


JUST 
C 


REP¢ 


FOREIGN 
Headquarter: 
econd-class 

month | 


ze 181 


vails on Chungking’s land fronts, following the re- 
pulse of Japanese forces which invaded Kweichow 
province in November and approached to within 
less than 70 miles of Kweiyang, capital of the prov- 
ince and a crucial communications center in South- 
west China. The fall of Kweiyang would have en- 
dangered both Chungking, the national capital, and 
Kunming, main base of the United States air forces 
in China. But the enemy failed, for the forces sent 
into Kweichow were small, and Chungking mar- 
shaled against them not only troops already stationed 
in the area, but fresh soldiers removed from the 
blockade of the Communist territories in the North- 
west. The fact remains, however, that Japan has not 
lost its ability to strike and may do so in greater 
force after it has consolidated its positions in neigh- 
boring Kwangsi province. 


MILITARY ASSETS. Certain factors may be of 
aid to China in the coming year. For example, the 
quantity of supplies brought in by air has been grow- 
ing, and a further increase is to be expected. Also 
important is the probability that the Ledo Road from 
India to China will soon be completed, enabling 
the Chinese to secure additional aid, including some 
heavy guns and other equipment not transportable 
by air. The extension and completion of the Calcutta- 
Yunnan pipeline, which already runs’ well into 
north Burma, would greatly improve China's fuel 
situation, relieving the air transport service of the 
major burden of carrying large quantities of gasoline. 
One of the important questions about the new year 
that cannot yet be answered is whether American 
forces will land on the China coast, Opening up a 
coastal port and breaking the Japanese blockade in 
decisive fashion. 

Recent developments in China’s internal policies 
may foreshadow somewhat greater military effective- 
ness than last year. The War Production Board in 
Chungking, organized with the aid of Donald M. 
Nelson, is seeking to increase the domestic output 
of war materials. And General Chen Cheng is clear- 
ly making a genuine effort to improve army condi- 


Page Three 


JUST PUBLISHED— 
CHINA AS A POST-WAR MARKET 


by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25c 


January 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy Reports 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 


Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


tions. It is reported that concrete measures with re- 
spect to food and shoe allowances and vegetable ra- 
tions have been adopted, and that improvements 
have occurred in the collection, storage and distribu- 
tion of ammunition and other supplies. 

RELATIONS WITH U.S. As a result of these 
moves, American-Chinese relations are better than 
they were two months ago. General Chen and Major 
General Albert C. Wedemeyer, General Stilwell’s 
successor, give every sign of getting along well to- 
gether, while American Ambassador Patrick J. Hur- 
ley has stated that the recent cabinet shifts ‘in a large 
measure were responsible for putting the National 
Government, the United States military mission and 
this Embassy in one team.” 

Nevertheless, the basic political issues facing the 
Chinese people—a genuine liberalization of the ré- 
gime and the achievement of a settlement between 
Chungking and the Communists—still await solu- 
tion. Although adjustment of both problems is essen- 
tial to the fullest mobilization of China's resources, 
there is no clear-cut indication at present that the 
necessary changes will take place. In November and 
early December discussions between Chungking and 
Yenan were renewed, but on December 15 Mao 
Tse-tung, Communist leader, declared that negotia- 
tions had not “‘attained the least result.’’ Again on 
New Year's day Mao issued a statement urging the 
formation of a coalition government to ‘‘carry out 
democratic programs and mobilize as well as unite 
all our resources against Japan.” 

To facilitate a compromise in China is plainly an 
important objective of American policy, for Ambas- 
sador Hurley revealed on December 15 that he had 
taken part in the conversations between Chungking 
and the Communists that led to the transfer of 
troops to Kweichow. He also disclosed that he had 
made an inspection trip to Yenan, where American 
military observers have been stationed since last sum- 
mer. Yet it should not be forgotten that, while 
American concern about the military effects of Chi- 
nese conditions is an important factor in the situation, 
there is at the same time very strong pressure for im- 
provement from inside China. The latest evidence of 
this is to be found in a statement of January 1 by 
more than sixty members of the People’s Political 
Council, calling for the immediate legalization of all 
political parties and the assurance of free speech and 
press. In effect, this is a demand that two of the 
important results of constitutional democracy be 
achieved without delay, regardless of the date finally 
set for the adoption of a constitution. 

LAWRENCE K, ROSINGER 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 12, January 5, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


1¢adquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FrRaNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHEeLes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
econd-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


¢ month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
> 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


The nations of Europe, including Russia, still 
doubt whether the United States is ready to practice 
effective and lasting international collaboration. The 
London Times of December 19 noted an official 
“lack of confidence in the ability of the American 
government to overcome the classic isolationism of 
the United States,” and Russia is said to fear that the 
United States may weary of continental commitments 
—if it ever makes them. 

RUSSIA’S FEARS ABOUT SECURITY. So long 
as this uncertainty persists, we must not be surprised 
if Russia takes measures that seem to be at variance 
with our hopes for international action, such as its re- 
fusal to admit UNRRA representatives to Poland 
and Czechoslovakia, disclosed on December 29 by 
UNRRA Director General Herbert H. Lehman. Rus- 
sia’s paramount interest is its own security after the 
war. The strong statement of Marshal Stalin on No- 
vember 6, favoring a system of international coop- 
eration, indicates that Russia’s chief hope still lies 
in collective security. But, lacking full faith in the 
possibility of achieving a system of collective secur- 
ity, Russia will try to bolster itself by such special 
security arangements as its unilateral revision of the 
Russo-Polish frontier. 

Russia’s doubts concerning the likelihood of estab- 
lishing a system of collective security explain its hes- 
itation to give foreigners freedom of action on its 
territory. A factor in Moscow's refusal to attend the 
Chicago aviation conference was Russia’s reluctance 
to open its skies to the planes of other, possibly hos- 
tile, nations. The Soviet government cautiously re- 
stricts the amount of information it permits the 
United States government to distribute in Russia, 
and controls the manner of its distribution. Russia’s 
attitude toward UNRRA is due to Suspicion, ag- 
gravated by memories of the anti-Soviet attitude of 
Herbert Hoover in the years when he supervised dis- 
tribution of relief to Russia after World War I, and 
of the many rebuffs it suffered during the inter-war 
years. Its present policies are also affected by con- 
cern over the Allies’ failure to settle the issue of the 
Polish government. 

During the Dumbarton Oaks conference, Izvestia 
said last September 22 that “Soviet diplomacy does 
not close its eyes to difficulties that arise in organ- 
izing joint action by members of the anti-Hitlerite 
coalition.” Recent weeks have brought more than 
their share of these difficulties. The United States 


FOR VICTORY ° 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


FEAR OF U.S. ISOLATION HAUNTS EUROPE 


has received word that the Russian Army may have 
sent from Rumania to the Soviet Union oil-drilling 
machinery owned by American firms. Newspapers in 
this country have published criticisms of reports that 
Bulgaria includes among the “war criminals’’ it has 
brought to trial Nicolai Mushanoff, a member of the 
short-lived Bulgarian cabinet that opened negotia- 
tions for an armistice with the United States and 
Britain last September. The United States govern- 
ment, however, steadfastly credits Russia with hon- 
est intentions, although some Americans who have 
not considered the security motives of Soviet pol- 
icy are inclined to make hasty criticisms both of the 
Russians, and of Communists in European countries. 

RUSSIA COOPERATES WITH ALLIES. In most 
matters Russia recognizes the combined interests of 
the Allies. Russian generals in charge of armies of 
occupation may sometimes take an uncooperative at- 
titude toward their Allies, but the Moscow govern- 
ment is usually ready to reverse the decisions of its 
own representatives. Thus in September, when the 
Russian Army command in Rumania declined to al- 
low American officers to keep photographs of the 
scenes of destruction wrought at Ploesti by American 
bombers, Moscow ordered release of the photo 
graphs. More recently, the Russian government has 
consented to Allied inquiry into the problem of the 
oil equipment in Rumania, where Germans as well 
as Americans have had petroleum holdings. In ac 
cordance with the Allied policy of joint negotiation 
of armistice terms, the United States, Russia and 
Britain are expected jointly to negotiate an armis- 
tice with the provisional Hungarian government of 
Colonel General Bela Miklos, formed in Debrecen. 
This country is represented in Rumania and Bul- 
garia by diplomats as well as military staffs. 

Many Americans will ask: How can the Soviet 
Union retain any doubts about the future intentions 
of the United States when the chief interest of Pres- 
ident Roosevelt is in the establishment of an interna- 
tional security organization? The answer is that the 
Russians, like the other peoples of Europe, see a 
portent in this country’s failure to show “a willing- 
ness to get down into the dust of the arena” — 
the words of the London Economist on December 29 
—and cooperate actively now in the settlement of 
European problems that cannot wait for the creation 
of an effective international organization. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


‘*F 


VoL. XX] 


HE « 

towa 
the oper 
gress on 
America 
vincing 
nent br 
bombers 
overseas 
D-day. 
concern 
no rease 
responsi 
quences 
yet at th 
Russia f 

END 
off’ pol 
statemet 
ever, ap 
yet aba 
influenc 
velt, ‘tc 
fillment 
We hav 
ities bre 
shrink f 
in the w 
is the v 
sistently 
off the 
from w 
past int 
“the du 
on the 
not onl 
withdra 
ind ove 


lati ns. 


