


con- | 
ed a 
cing. \ 
oops! 
ned, 
time 
well 


acific 
have 
es: al 
con: 
d the 
land! 
ador. 
ritist 
quit! 
ether 
st In} 
Nav2 
aro | 
ed oF 
,800 | 
1 ha | 
nsio# 
e th} 
singe! 
bein; 


nm th 
Asia 
move} 
Naz 
- mill 
Japai 
r wit 
how 
mami’ 
ctabll 
cts of 


SON 





si = 
Entered as 2nd class matter 

Mrs. Charles S$. Hear 
126 Babcock St. “— 


Brookline, Ma 


se 
wwe 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y, 





VoL. XX, No. 19 


FEBRUARY 28, 1941 





JAPAN'S SOUTHWARD DRIVE SLOWS DOWN 


S the ‘‘war of nerves’’ in the Far East entered its 
second week, there were signs that Japan had 

begun to realize more fully the obstacles to a drive 
into southeast Asia. This was particularly apparent 
in the ‘‘mediation-in-Europe” offer extended to Brit- 
ain by Yosuke Matsuoka, the Japanese Foreign Min- 
ister—an offer which Prime Minister Churchill was 
understood to have rejected on February 24. 

MATSUOKA’S “MEDIATION” OFFER. The 
first inkling of the contents of Tokyo’s note to Lon- 
don was given on February 18 by Koh Ishii, chief of 
the Cabinet Information Bureau. The Cabinet spokes- 
man deprecated the “undue anxiety” felt in foreign 
countries over “the alleged tension’ in southeast 
Asia, which he attributed to “warlike preparations” 
of Britain and the United States. He warned that 
“some quarters of Japan’”’—presumably the army ex- 
tremist circles—were contending that no time should 
be lost “in taking the necessary steps to meet the 
worst possible eventualities’ in the south Pacific. 
After stressing Japan’s primary interest in world 
pewce;-he concluded: “Japan is fully prepared to act 
as mediator or take whatever action may be consid- 
ered necessary to restore normal conditions not only 
in Greater East Asia but anywhere in the world.” 

The usual plea of Japan’s “‘moderate’’ statesmen, 
calling for concessions to ward off possible drastic 
acts by the extremists, was evident in this statement. 
It did not seem likely that Japan would seritusly 
offer its services as mediator of the European con- 
flict, especially since it is formally allied to the Axis 
powers. On the same day Sumner Welles, American 
Under-Secretary of State, answered Japan by stat- 
ing at his press conference: “In the very critical 
world situation which exists today, the government 
of the United States is far more interested in the 
deeds of other nations than in the statements which 
some of their spokesmen may make.” 

Reports from London on February 19, however, 


stating that the British government had received a 
“special message’ from Foreign Minister Matsuoka, 
carried the mediation offer into a more formal stage. 
Both the text and details of this message were with- 
held. Mr. R. A. Butler, Under-Secretary for Foreign 
Affairs, merely indicated that it was “courteous” and 
that it followed ‘the same general lines” of the previ- 
ous day’s statement by the Cabinet spokesman at 
Tokyo. His few words to the House strengthened 
the widespread impression that Tokyo’s gesture to- 
ward mediation revealed anxiety and a desire for 
compromise. 

Political repercussions of considerable significance 
immediately followed in Tokyo. The army extremists, 
it was evident, were bringing severe pressure to bear 
on Foreign Minister Matsuoka. The German Ambas- 
sador, Major General Eugen Ott, also lodged a pro- 
test against the mediation offer transmitted to Brit- 
ain. Germany’s concern arose particularly fromthe 
fact that Matsuoka had acted 
issue of such importance. T ressure 
apparently created a minor | 
which the Foreign Minister } 
special interviews with the Ja; btu 
ary 20 and 21 he denied that he de any “‘spe- 
cific’” proposal for mediating the European war; in 
his statement of February 24 to the Diet, he tried to 
satisfy the army by reiterating a broad demand that 
“Oceania” must be ceded to Japan. 

MOVES IN SOUTHEAST ASIA. Behind this 
diplomatic controversy, Britain, the United States 
and Japan continued to strengthen their strategic 
positions in southeast Asia. On February 18 a large 
force of Australian troops, extensively supplied with 
mechanized equipment, debarked at Singapore and 
entrained for prepared defense positions on the 
Malayan peninsula. Additional air squadrons reached 
Singapore on February 19, and previous reports that 
American heavy bombers were crossing the Pacific 


: 
my 


L 

















to Singapore were confirmed. Fighting planes of the 
latest type were sent to the American forces at 
Hawaii, and additional troops and officers landed in 
the Philippines. On February 19 the House of Repre- 
sentatives passed the $12,800,000 appropriation to 
improve the harbors and install defense works at 
Guam and Tutuila. 

From numerous sources came reports that Japan 
was concentrating large military and naval forces in 
southern waters. It was said that 80,000 to 90,000 
Japanese troops had gathered on Formosa and Hai- 
nan islands, and that a fleet of 15 Japanese vessels 
was cruising in the Gulf of Siam. Chinese sources 
asserted that large numbers of Japanese troops were 
being withdrawn from China. Few of these reports 
could be confirmed. 

Tokyo’s réle of “mediator” in the Thailand-Indo- 
» China conflict was proving more difficult than had 

been anticipated. On February 22, according to re- 
ports from Vichy, the French government rejected 
terms sponsored by Japan which would have given 
to Thailand one-third of the Indo-China provinces of 
Laos and Cambodia. At Shanghai it was said that 
Japan’s demands for virtually unlimited military 
facilities both in Thailand and Indo-China “in the 












Page Two — 





—e 


event of necessity’ had paralyzed the conference, 
Japanese charges that Indo-China was obtaining 
military planes from Singapore, and had imported 
100 “Free French” aviators, indicate either that 
Tokyo is facing real resistance or that it is planning 
a wholesale occupation of the French colony. Re. 
ports that three of Indo-China’s naval vessels, in- 
cluding one cruiser, had left Saigon also imply the 
possibility of further conflict before Japan consoli- 
dates its position in Indo-China. 

The establishment of diplomatic and trade rela- 
tions between Thailand and the U.S.S.R. on Febru- 
ary 19, when a Minister from Thailand arrived in 
Moscow, suggests that the Soviet Union is now con- 
cerning itself with events in southeast Asia. Ne- 
gotiations for a trade treaty between Japan, and the 
Soviet Union have also been resumed in Moscow. 
Reports from Tokyo claim that a Soviet-Japanese 
trade treaty—and even a nonaggression pact—will 
soon be concluded, but there is little direct evidence 
to support these claims. For the present, at any rate, 
it would appear that Japan’s uncertain relations with 
the Soviet Union have tended to slow down its ad- 
vance into southeast Asia. 

T. A. Bisson 


AXIS LEADERS WARN OF INTENSIFIED WAR 


While the rest of the world anxiously awaited the 
next move of the Axis, Mussolini and Hitler sought 
to bolster the morale of their followers in speeches 
delivered on February 23 and 24, respectively. 
Despite the fact that the Axis controls virtually the 
entire European continent, the Germans and Italians 
seem far from confident of ultimate victory. Their 
material conditions of life have deteriorated rather 
than improved, for British sea power and the block- 
ade still keep Germany and Italy imprisoned in Eu- 
rope. The Italian people have been depressed by the 
continuous setbacks suffered by the armed forces. Al- 
though Getinan morale is better, the lack of strik- 
ing successes in the campaign against Britain has 
undoubtedly revived to some extent the ever-present 
fear that a prolonged war may yet rob the Reich of 
ihe fruits of victory. 

Of the two speeches, that of Hitler was more 
routine in character. Speaking on the twenty-first 
anniversary of the Nazi party, the Fuehrer boasted 





FOR a survey of the industries most essential to the 
defense program, read: 


DEFENSE ECONOMY OF THE UNITED © 
STATES: INDUSTRIAL CAPACITY 


by J. C. deWilde and George Monson 


25¢ 


February 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 











of the indestructible unity of the German people | 


and promised that developments during the next 
two months would clearly demonstrate the invincible 
power of German arms. Mussolini, on the other 
hand, could not draw on the military accomplish- 
ments of the past to inspire confidence in the future. 
While lauding the fighting qualities of the Italian 
army and holding out the prospect that spring might 
bring victories on the Albanian front, the Duce was 
compelled to stress German assistance as the only 
real cause for hope. To counteract fears of a German 
collapse, Mussolini recited in detail the factors 
which, in his opinion, make the Reich unbeatable 
today. Realizing that the acceptance of German aid 


is humiliating to many Italians, the Duce tried to | 


justify it by pointing to the large British forces in the 
Mediterranean area and by claiming that geographic 
and historic circumstances had reserved for Italy “the 
most difficult and distant theatres of war.’ He 
frankly admitted the disastrous defeats in Libya, but 
rejected Marshal Graziani’s criticism that Rome had 
failed to provide the African forces with sufficient 
motorized equipment. Yet by emphasizing the nu- 
merical strength and armament of Italian troops in 
Libya, Mussolini must have increased the popular 
surprise that such.an army could have been so easily 
defeated. 





















OCCUPATION OF BULGARIA IMPENDING. 
Although the leaders of the Axis did not reveal their 
plans, the Balkans have been momentarily expecting 











I 


ce, 
ng 


ted ° 


lat 
ng 
Xe- 
in- 
the 
li 


‘la- 
ru- 


on- 
Ne- 
the 


Ww. 


vill 
nce 
ite, 


ple 


ext 
ble 
her 
ish- 
ire. 
ian 
ght 
vas 
nly 
lan 
ors 
ble 
aid 

to 
the 
hic 
the 


but 
had 
ent 
nu- 
; in 
ilar 


sily 


NG. 














fee 
gaye 
%. / ra 
Se 


—— 








the Germans to occupy Bulgaria as the prelude to a 
campaign against Greece and the British forces in the 
eastern Mediterranean. The Turks have obviously 
been alarmed by the interpretations placed on their 
nonaggression pact with Bulgaria, and have repudi- 
ated the idea that this agreement was intended to 
sotify Germany in advance of Turkey’s acquiescence 
in an invasion of Bulgaria. In fact, the Turkish For- 
eign Minister, Shukru Saracoglu, declared on Feb- 
marty 23 that “Turkey would be unable to remain 
indifferent to foreign activities that might occur in 
her security zone.’ It now appears that Turkey never 
intended the Bulgarian pact as a blow at Britain. 
Negotiations were originally started with the ap- 
proval of the British, but at a time when there was 
still some hope that a Turkish-Bulgarian agreement 
might actually permit the formation of an anti- 
German Balkan bloc including Yugoslavia and sup- 
ported by Britain. When the pact was finally con- 
duded, circumstances had changed so drastically that 
Germany appeared to be its beneficiary. Regardless 


of this accord, however, Turkey could hardly oppose 


the occupation of Bulgaria by the German troops 
now massed in Rumania. While the Turkish army, 
protected by the Straits and the difficult topography 
of the country, could undoubtedly put up strong re- 


_ sistance to a direct German attack, it would have 



























much greater difficulty in taking the offensive against 
German forces in Bulgaria. Such a campaign might 
merely expose the Turkish army to disaster. 

GERMAN DILEMMA Germany, however, is not 
likely to achieve decisive advantages by occupying 
Bulgaria. It would probably succeed in eliminating 
Greece from the war and subjecting this country 
completely to Axis control. Greece cannot hope to 
wage a victorious war on two fronts, and the British 
do not appear able to land sufficient troops at Salo- 
nika to resist the oncoming Germans. The conquest 
f Greece, however, would leave the Germans the 
dificuit task of destroying British sea power in the 
eastern Mediterranean. Although Germany would 
have air bases from which to harass the British fleet, 
its air forces would still be 500 to 600 miles from 
Alexandria and the Suez Canal. Moreover, the Brit- 
ish have reinforced their position by occupying the 
island of Crete, which they could probably retain 
even if the Greek mainland were conquered. 

The Axis powers may experience considerable dif- 
ficulty even in partially retrieving Italian losses in 
Libya. Britain’s determination to prevent substantial 
feinforcement of the depleted Libyan garrison is re- 
flected in the announcement, issued by the British 





Page Three 














“JAPAN WEIGHS ITS COURSE” is the subject 
of the FPA’s broadcast on March 2; the speaker 
will be T. A. Bisson, expert on Far Eastern affairs. 
These programs are heard every Sunday, from 2:15 
to 2:30 E.S.T., over the blue network of the 
National Broadcasting Company. Does your local 
station carry the FPA broadcasts? 











Admiralty on February 22, declaring that an area of 
150,000 square miles between southern Italy and 
Libya had been rendered dangerous to navigation. 
According to a London report of February 23, Brit- 
ish submarines sank eight enemy supply ships in the 
Mediterranean during recent weeks. Enough sup- 
plies, however, may get through to prevent the 
British from conquering the remainder of Libya. 
The present situation in Europe illustrates the im- 
portant réle still played by British sea power. Al- 


though the British fleet is widely scattered and has 


suffered some serious losses, it has so far been strong 
enough to prevent the Nazis from extending their 
control beyond the European continent. The future 
will no doubt see a determined German attempt to 
break the hold of Anglo-Saxon sea power by simul- 
taneous attacks in the Mediterranean and Atlantic, 
and perhaps by synchronizing this drive with a Jap- 
anese campaign in southeast Asia. In his address on 
February 24 Hitler warned that Germany was launch- 
ing an intensified submarine war with a new type 
U-boat. At the same time he claimed that German 
forces had sunk 215,000 tons of shipping in the last 
two days. JOHN C. DEWILDE 





Heil Hunger! by Martin Gumpert. New York, Alliance 
Book Corporation, 1940. $1.75 
A revealing, but somewhat exaggerated, account of the 
way in which the health of the German people has deteri- 
orated under the Hitler régime. 


Our Future in Asia, by Robert 
The Viking Press, 1940. $3.00 
A provocative analysis of Amer 
in the Far East, with special emr 
and southeast Asia. The author 
of eastern Asia to the United § vocates a 
strong defense of American interests in tnat region. 


The Margary Affair and the Chefoo Agreement, by S. T. 
Wang, New York, Oxford University Press, 1940. $2.50 
A careful study of the first British attempts in 1875 

to open up trade between Burma and southwest China, 

in the area now traversed by the Burma road. 


De Gaulle and the Coming Invasion of Germany, by James 
Marlow. New York, Dutton, 1940. $1.00 
Using newspaper accounts and radio bulletins, the au- 
thor throws some light on the leader of the Free French 
forces. More important is the discussion of the strategy of 
mechanized war of movement, of which de Gaulle was an 
early exponent. 





APB 181 





OREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 19, Fepruary 28, 1941. 
leadquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dean, Editor. 
mtered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Incorporated. National 


Two Dollars a Year. 
















Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Fes. 24.—Now that final passage of the lease-lend 
bill is only a matter of days, the paramount question 
in Washington is how the Administration proposes 
to implement the new working arrangement between 
the United States and the British Commonwealth of 
Nations. 


SHORT-TERM PROBLEMS. For the moment, at- 
tention is still focused almost exclusively on the 
short-term problems of making American aid effec- 
tive in the critical period of the next few months. 
And yet it is now generally realized that legislative 
enactment of the British aid bill will not provide an 
automatic solution of these acute problems. In itself, 
the bill does not remove the industrial bottlenecks 
which have delayed the whole program of defense 
production, nor does it answer the question of how 
to assure safe transport of American materials across 
the Atlantic. 


According to the latest figures made public by the 
OPM, deliveries of military planes to the army, navy 
and the British during January totaled 957, an in- 
crease of nearly 200 over December deliveries, but 
still far short of immediate British and American 
needs. Estimates of future production are somewhat 
more optimistic, with Defense Commission circles 
talking of 1,500 planes a month by May, and per- 
haps 2,000 a month by the end of the year. If cur- 
rent estimates of German air strength are correct, 
however, Anglo-American production is not expected 
to achieve parity in the air until about March 1942. 


The shipping problem is equally acute. On Feb- 
ruary 14 the Maritime Commission signed the last 
of its contracts providing for the immediate construc- 
tion of 51 new shipways, at a cost of $33,374,500, 
for the building of 200 emergency cargo vessels. 
While the first of these ships are expected to be ready 
for trans-Atlantic service before the end of the year, 
the bulk of the new tonnage will not be available 
before the summer of 1942. Furthermore, most of 
the old tonnage available in the United States has 
already been sold to Britain and Canada (approxi- 
mately 755,000 tons had been transferred up to Feb- 
ruary 15) and today only four old ships are left in 
the Maritime Commission’s laid-up fleet. The pur- 
chase or requisitioning of Axis-controlled ships in 
American ports would make available some 79 more 
cargo carriers, but would still leave the critical prob- 


lem of protecting sea-borne commerce from N 
submarine and air attack. 


LONG-TERM RELATIONS WITH BRITAIN. wa 
It is quite apparent that these and other pressing 
short-term problems can only be solved in terms of 
the new political relationship between the United 
States and the British Empire. For the transfer of a|—— 
few more destroyers or the sale of additional bomb. |¥°% 
ing planes belonging to the army and navy will be of 
little avail unless they represent concerted moves in 


a calculated, long-term policy. T 


The foundations for closer association with the 
British Commonwealth were firmly laid by President | des 
Roosevelt last August and September in the destroyer. St* 
naval base deal and the mutual defense agreement #!!i 
with Canada. Congress, although not consulted at|P** 
the time, is giving its tacit approval by authorizing - 
funds for development of the new bases, and the 5 
American people have re-elected Mr. Roosevelt for a’ z 
third term. And now, despite its obvious reluctance to) 
admit the existence of a de facto alliance, Congress| or 
knows that the impending bill gives legislative sanc- 





’ unc 
tion to a national policy predicated on thorough-| , .<: 
going collaboration with Britain. lent 


Recognition of the new relationship, however, has| Asi 
yet to produce a clear statement of long-term objec-| Ax 
tives. In Congress, almost the only mention of a Ma 
positive policy looking beyond the immediate future | 4 
came in the brief exchange provoked by Senator) P° 
Austin of Vermont on February 13. As a Republican * * 
supporter of the lease-lend bill, Mr. Austin made pe 
the mild suggestion that it might be well for United |” 
States Senators to express their views on our peace a 
aims, and for the government to ask Britain for its at 
aims. The suggestion brought no immediate re- pos 
sponse. But the questions and answers brought out wh 
the fact that Congress is still groping for some as} cop 
surance or commitment as to future policy, and still | 
fails to recognize that the real power to determine Th 
future peace aims may rest with the United States. bri 
to 
wh 


rest 


The Administration is obviously conscious of this 
power, and the new weight it will have in all fu 
ture relations with Great Britain and the British os 
Dominions. As yet, however, it has given no official ‘i 
indication of the manner in which it will exercise this} 4 ¢ 


gts W.T.SToNE Oo: 


