— 


fal 
las eae 
par ich 


Venera} fey 


Nivears if 4 


vy 
“~~ 


JUN 26 1943 


* Ulbrary Entered as 2nd class mai 


a ° 
a1 Michigan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 36 


JUNE 25, 1943 


INDIA’S MILITARY NEEDS GIVEN PRIORITY IN WAVELL APPOINTMENT 


HE appointment on June 18 of Field Marshal 

Sir Archibald Wavell as Viceroy and Governor 
General of India to succeed the Marquess of Lin- 
lithgow must be regarded as important in both its 
military and political implications. By placing Brit- 
ain’s top-ranking soldier at the head of the Indian 
government, Prime Minister Churchill has given no- 
tice that the British government still believes military 
considerations to be paramount in India, and con- 
templates no fundamental change in the political sit- 
uation until the Allied offensive against Japan has 
been successfully completed. 

NEW EAST ASIA COMMAND CREATED. 
The new Viceroy, who is expected to assume office 
in October, will be assisted in his task of guiding 
India’s war effort by General Sir Claude Auchinleck, 
his successor as Commander in Chief in India. But 
direct responsibility for the conduct of operations 
against Japan will be placed in the hands of a sep- 
uate East India Command, whose leader is to be 
announced in the near future. When this appoint- 
ment is made, it can be expected that plans for com- 
bined operations against Burma—involving Indian, 
British and Chinese ground forces and American air 
units—will be rushed to completion. 

The initial task of the new East Asia Command 
will be to use the monsoon season which lasts until 
October for gathering sufficient air and sea power to 
wrest control of the Bay of Bengal from the Japanese 
and for preparing the huge amphibious operation 
Which will be necessary to effect major landings in 
the Rangoon area of Burma. Until preparations for 
hese landings and the drive up the Irrawaddy 
and Salween Valleys are complete, there will be 
No possibility of using the large force of Indian and 
British troops built up by Wavell in India during the 
last two years. Whether or not the Allied victory in 
Tunisia and the prospective clearing of the Medi- 
letranean will release the shipping needed for the 


invasion of Burma is not yet apparent, but it seems 
likely that every effort will be made by the Allied 
high command to launch this offensive next Autumn. 

POLITICAL DEADLOCK CONTINUES. AI- 
though Wavell, who as Commander in Chief sat on 
the Viceroy’s Executive Council, is reported to have 
been willing to go further than his predecessor in 
meeting the demands of the Indian nationalists, it 
seems unlikely that the present deadlock between the 
Indian government and the Congress Party will be 
broken by any move on the part of the new Viceroy. 
Present indications are that Mohandas K. Ghandi 
and the other Congress leaders will be kept in con- 
finement until they are ready to repudiate the policy 
embodied in the party’s resolution of August 1942, 
and to give what the government considers appropri- 
ate assurances for the future. This means that the 
Executive Council, which is composed of 4 British 
members, 4 Hindus, 4 Moslems, and one member 
each for the Sikhs and the Depressed Classes, but 
represents neither the Congress Party nor the Moslem 
League, will continue to carry on the government of 
India. 

During the past year the Moslem League appears 
to have gained considerable ground in the struggle 
for political power. Of the ministries now function- 
ing in six of India’s eleven provinces, five are pre- 
dominantly Moslem. At the meetings of the Moslem 
League the last week of April, Ali Jinnah was more 
intransigent than ever in his demands for Pakistan 
—an independent state to be composed of the pre- 
dominantly Moslem regions of India— and made it 
clear that his demand for the partition of India is an 
absolute condition of the League’s participation in 
the Indian government. Congress, on the other hand, 
has not yet regained the influence it lost as a result 
of its defeat in the contest of strength with the 
British Raj, and is no more disposed than it has 
ever been to accept Pakistan. Under these circum- 


——oo I ———_————L——L—_======= Page Two 


stances the British government, rightly or wrongly, 
appears to believe that it would be unwise to reopen 
the discussions undertaken during the Cripps mis- 
sion of April 1942, and that the implementation of 
its pledge to India will have to await the end of the 
war, regardless of the price which may have to be 
paid in terms of Nationalist hostility. 

INDIA’S WAR PRODUCTION INCREASING. 
Notwithstanding the continued deadlock, India’s 
war effort has increased at a rapid pace during the 
past year. India’s defenses, about which there was 
so much concern a year ago, may now be considered 
secure. Although serious food shortages are reported 
in certain areas, particularly Bengal, and war pro- 
duction has been impeded by the political difficulties, 
India’s contribution to the war effort of the United 


POLITICAL STRAWS IN THE WIND 


While the eyes of the world are focused on the 
complex groupings and regroupings of armies, navies 
and air-forces in Europe and Asia, preparatory to 
some kind of a showdown this summer, political 
changes on the margins of the battlefronts bear 
watching. 

In Argentina the military government of President 
Pedro Ramirez has not justified the initial hope that 
it might eventually depart from Castillo’s policy of 
strict neutrality, or prepare the way for democratic 
elections. The banning, on June 10, of radio coded 
messages, through which Axis diplomats in Buenos 
Aires had been communicating with their govern- 
ments, to the detriment of the United Nations, ap- 
peared to herald a change in Argentine policy. The 
ban, however, was then temporarily lifted, thus al- 
lowing the Axis representatives to make new arrange- 
ments by radio for future methods of communication. 
On June 18, moreover, President Ramirez, after hav- 
ing declared that, when the military revolution had 
“cleaned and restored” politics, it would hand the 
country back to “‘its politicians—in the purest sense of 
the word”—announced the postponement of national 
elections. Two days later the pro-Nazi Buenos Aires 
newspaper, E/ Pam pero, in an editorial passed by the 
Argentine censor, declared that General Ramirez had 
organized a national revolution—whose aim is to 
free Argentina from “the dictation of international 


The economic life of Mexico has undergone far- 
reaching changes during World War II. For an 
analysis of their effect on relations between Mexico 
and the United States, READ: 


IMPACT OF WAR ON MEXICO’S ECONOMY 
by Ernest S. Hediger 


25c 


June 15 issue of ForEIGN Poticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5; to FPA members, $3. 


————— 


Nations has been of great importance. Indian py 
duction provides 90 per cent of the needs of th 
Indian army at home, a force of approximate) 
1,500,000. A report issued by the United States Offig 
of War Information on June 7 revealed the extey 
to which war supplies from India—guns, steel sheey 
for anti-tank mines, and camouflage nets, in par 
ticular—aided in the Allied victory in North Africa 
An answer to India’s complex political, econom( 
and social problems still remains to be found, but 
the moment the situation appears to be much more pp. 
pitious for the launching of a large-scale offensiyg 
from the Indian base of operations than at any time 
since the fall of Singapore. 


HowarD P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


bankers and foreign embassies.” This and other ey: 
dence would seem to indicate that the revolution of 
June 4 was chiefly an attempt by the military to re 
assert Argentina’s claim to primacy in South Amer 
ica, now challenged by the growing military powe 
of Brazil, which receives considerable lend-lease aid 
from the United States, as well as of Chile and 
other countries of that continent which are collaborat 
ing with the United Nations. The United State 
recognized the Ramirez government on June 11 fol 
lowing the lead taken by the principal countries 0 
South America, but it is not expected in Washing 
ton that lend-lease aid will be forthcoming for Ar 
gentina until its foreign policy has been furthe 
clarified. The most unfortunate aspect of the Arges 
tine situation is that the practice of military dictator 
ships established by military coups, which seemed tt 
be on the wane in Latin America, has again taken the 
place of elections by the people in Argentina. 

On June 22 Eire’s 1,800,000 voters cast ballots # 
the first wartime elections for the country’s parlie 
ment, the Dail Eireann. Prime Minister Eamon & 
Valera was expected to remain in power with the 
government he had headed since 1932, although the 
Opposition leader, William T. Cosgrave, advocate 
the substitution of a coalition régime. In the lat 
elections, held in 1938, de Valera’s Fianna Ful 
party won seventy-seven seats in the Dail, as agains 
forty-five for Mr. Cosgrave’s Fine Gael party. Tit 
Labor party, led by William Norton, encouraged bj 
recent successes in local elections, has put up a larg 
slate of candidates, although it won only nine seat 


in the Dail in 1938. It is not anticipated that 
elections will alter Eire’s policy of neutrality, whi 
is supported by all parties—James M. Dillon, 
young independent member, being the only candida 
advocating intervention in the war at the side of 
United Nations. 

Some six weeks ago, on May 1, Captain Sir Bad 


—_——_—- 
ee 


Brooke v 
Ireland, 
signed ul 
concernit 
Sir Basil 
stimulati 
Ulster’s 

18,000. 
his form 
duction. 

by incluc 
ley, and 
Moore, < 
Cortey, < 
introduct 
in this r 
the Unit 
bitterly ¢ 
senting a 
000, whi 
land, an 
neutralit 
want cor 
land, ha: 
endanget 
as an im 
can force 


The Nea 
Univers 
The Arab 
versity 
The fir 
of the gr 
short hist 
with emp 


War Disc 
Lippinc 
Alaska U 
millan, 
Two re 
Alaska fr 
most imp 
the Terri 
as its mili 


Soviet R: 
Dallin. 
A clear 

pact witl 

author e 

isolation 

alone as 

Within th 

ern natio: 

eee eee 

FOREIGN I 

Headquarters 


second-class 
one month f 


=} = Page Three 

pro. Brooke was appointed Prime Minister of Northern Meanwhile, on June 17, Prime Minister Slobodan 
f the| Ireland, replacing John M. Andrews who had re- Yovanovitch, head of the Yugoslav government in 
lately signed under criticism from his own Unionist party London, tendered the resignation of his cabinet to 
fig} concerning his government’s unemployment policy. King Peter. An effort is being made to form a cab- 
xten| Sit Basil considers that his two main tasks are the inet that would reflect as closely as possible popular 
heey} stimulation of war production and the reduction of sentiment within Yugoslavia—where it is believed 
- pat Ulster’s high wartime unemployment figure of that the Partisans, backed by Russia, have effected 
fricg} 18,000. In addition to the Premiership, he retains a reconciliation with General Mikhailovitch’s Chet- 
10mix| his former post as Minister of Commerce and Pro- nik guerrillas—and would give fair representation 
ut at} duction. He has broadened the basis of his cabinet to the views of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. Such 
epro.| by including a representative of labor, Harry Midg- advance realignments of governments-in-exile with 
snsive| ley, and two Presbyterian Ministers, the Rev. Mr. rapidly changing conditions in their homelands, if 
time} Moore, an expert on agriculture, and the Rev. Mr. successful, would be of good augury for the time 

Cortey, an expert on education. Sir Basil favors the when the continent can be liberated from Nazi rule. 

introduction of compulsory military service, which VERA MICHELES DEAN 
Jk. | in this respect would align Northern Ireland with 

the United Kingdom. This measure, however, is TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF F.P.A. 

_| bitterly opposed by the Nationalist minority, repre- The Foreign Policy Association, organized in 1918 
E eV) senting about a third of Ulster’s population of 1,250,- shortly before the Armistice, will celebrate its twenty- 
on ot} 900, which wants a union of North and South Ire- fifth anniversary on October 16, when it will re- 
tot! land, and is sympathetic to de Valera’s policy of double its efforts “to aid in the understanding: and 
Ame} neutrality. The British government, much as it might constructive development of American foreign pol- 
pows) want compulsory military service for Northern Ire- icy,” especially with respect to post-war reconstruc- 
S€ aid) land, has no desire to inflame any issues that might tion. We urge all members to save this date for in- 
and endanger the stability of that area, which now serves teresting meetings now being planned, and to con- 
borat} as an important military and naval base for Ameri- sider ways and means of increasing the usefulness of 
—_ can forces in the European theatre of war. the F.P.A. in this anniversary year. 
1 {0b 
ies of THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 
shing The Near East, by Philip W. Ireland, editor. Chicago, Behind Both Lines, by Harold Denny. New York, Viking 
or Ar University of Chicago Press, 1942. $2.50 Press, 1942. $2.50 
urthe The Arabs, by Philip K. Hitti. Princeton, Princeton Uni- “Freely to Pass,” by Edward W. Beattie, Jr. New York 
\rgen} versity Press, 1943. $2.00 ae tga de ’ 

. : Crowell, 1942. $3.00 
ctator} The first volume discusses the present and future role 
ned tt of the great powers in this vital area; the second is a Forgotten Front, by John Lear. New York, Dutton, 1943. 
short history of the dominant native people of the region, $2.50 

en the} with emphasis on their era of conquests. 

i This Is the Enemy, by Frederick Oechsner with Joseph 
lots | War Discovers Alaska, by Joseph Driscoll. Philadelphia, W. Grigg, Jack M. Fleischer, Glen M. Stadler, Clinton 
Ot @! Lippincott, 1943. $3.00 . 42 00 
patlit] slaska Under A a etnes. ‘sicak i B. Conger. Boston, Little, Brown, 1942. $3. 

ca /naer ATMs, DY ean otcver. ew (or ac- —_ ene . . 
: . Examples of the vivid writing good journalists do under 
on dé} millan, 1942. $2.00 ; : ‘ 
th tht} Two reporters’ accounts of the way the war is changing wress. Denny = prison compe, seeing every —— yet 
hh the Alaska from a neglected outlying region into one of the picking out certain decencies in the enemy; Beattie “freely 
B most important crossroads of the world. Both emphasize passing” through gay and bitter days of war’s beginning, 
jocates the Territory’s political and economic problems as well never missing news values; Lear in South America to 
1¢ las} #8 its military preparations. check Nazi activity, passenger on a plane forced down in 
a Ea Soviet Russia’s Foreign Policy 1939-1942, by David J. the desert, making - unforgettable story out of the fight 
igains} Dallin. New Haven, Yale University Press, 1942. $3.75 against thirst and fatigue; Oechsner and his fellow- 
y. Th A clear statement of Russia’s foreign policy from the internees in Germany after America went into the war, 
ged by pact with Germany to the Battle of Stalingrad. The carefully analyzing the Nazi régime out of their accumu- 
> das author emphasizes _the influence that two decades of lated experiences. These correspondents give the kind of 
isolation have had in encouraging the U.S.S.R. to stand information the public wants to read. 
e sea} alone as a “third power” and to wage a separate war 
vat Within the framework of the military alliance with West- (Owing to a typographical error only a part of this book 
will ern nations. Careful and scholarly. note was published in the Bulletin of June 18.) 
i 
Lon, FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 36, Jung 25, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
rdida Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHg.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 
of second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 
d F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 

rB Sw is: Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor 


q 
* 
i. 
‘<= 
te 
mm ¢ 
mi: 
th 
i¢ 
| 
i 
my 
if) 
hi 8 


Washington News Letter 


JUNE 25.—The most constructive recent step to- 
wards placing Congress on record in favor of par- 
ticipation by the United States in an international 
organization for the preservation of peace after the 
war was taken by the House Foreign Affairs Com- 
mittee on June 15 when it unanimously approved a 
declaration of principle in this sense by Representa- 
tive J. William Fulbright. The resolution submitted 
by this 38-year old “freshman” Congressman from 
Arkansas, a former Rhodes scholar and one-time 
president of the University of Arkansas, declares 
with admirable simplicity and directness “that the 
Congress hereby expresses itself as favoring the crea- 
tion of appropriate international machinery with 
power adequate to establish and maintain a just and 
lasting peace and as favoring participation by the 
United States therein.” 

Mr. Fulbright frankly admits that the purpose of 
his resolution is to “needle” the dilatory Senate For- 
eign Relations Committee into taking action. More 
than eleven weeks have now passed since that body 
created a special committee to study and report on 
a number of pending resolutions relating to the part 
to be played by the United States in the post-war 
world. The Senate subcommittee held its first meet- 
ing on March 31 when Senator Connally of Texas, 
its chairman, promised that all the motions before 
it would receive “the very closest and best considera- 
tion.”” Since that time the committee, so far as is 
known, has done nothing about these resolutions. 


RIVAL POST-WAR RESOLUTIONS. At least 
eight resolutions concerning a Congressional declara- 
tion of policy on the responsibilities to be assumed 
by the United States when the war is over now lie 
before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. The 
first proposal, offered by Senator Gillette of Iowa on 
February 4, merely called for putting the Senate on 
record as endorsing the principles of the Atlantic 
Charter. The most ambitious resolution, of course, is 
the one submitted in the names of Senators Ball, 
Burton, Hill and Hatch which was introduced in 
the Senate on March 16. It proposes that the United 
States should at once call a meeting of United Na- 
tions’ delegates at which an organization of “specific 
and limited authority” would be formed with the 
objectives of (a) setting up temporary administra- 
tions for Axis-controlled areas as these are taken 
over, (b) giving economic aid and other relief to 
these areas, (c) establishing permanent machinery 
for the peaceable settlement of international dis- 


putes, and (d) providing a permanent United Ng 
tions’ armed force to keep the peace. 

But the very fact that the Ball resolution is so 
tailed is its chief disadvantage. The Administration j 
loathe to precipitate a bitter debate on the floor of 
the Senate by asking that body to endorse the Ball 
resolution. 

The Fulbright declaration has the virtue of achiev. 
ing the fundamental purpose of putting Congress op 
record in favor of post-war international cooperation 
without provoking factional battles. This is indicated 
by the imposing volume of nonpartisan support it 
has already secured. All 11 Republican members of 
the House committee voted for it, and among its 
earliest advocates in the House itself were Repre 
sentatives Hamilton Fish of New York and John M. 
Vorys of Ohio, both extreme pre-Pearl Harbor iso. 
lationists. In striking contrast, however, to the im 
pressive nonpartisan support for the Fulbright reso- 
lution, an Associated Press poll conducted in April 
showed that 32 Senators were definitely opposed to 
committing the United States to post-war participa 
tion in an international police force at the present 
time, while 24 favored it, and the others were still 
undecided. 


A CONGRESSIONAL DECLARATION NEED. 
ED. A simple declaration of policy, such as the Ful: 
bright resolution, if adopted by both branches of 
Congress with the support of both parties, would 
serve the vital purpose of helping assure our Allies 
that the United States will not, as in 1919 revert to 
isolationism after intervening in a war to decide the 
fate of the world. It is important that, at this time, 
our potential partners in any post-war collective se 
curity system—Britain, Russia, France, and China— 
should know exactly where the United States stands. 
Such an assurance is particularly necessary in the 
case of the U.S.S.R. if the latter is to be persuaded 
to seek its security in some international institution 
to maintain the peace instead of the old-fashioned 
method of annexing neighboring strategic territories. 

The passage of the Fulbright resolution by a de 
cisive majority in the House would probably force 
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to take a¢ 
tion on the post-war policy resolutions now before 
it. Senator Connally, who has called the Fulbright 
motion ‘‘cryptic,” predicts that in the end his com 
mittee would drop all the resolutions in favor of one 
that it would draft itself. 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


Vou. XXII, 


HC 


_ cur 
governt 
experience 
fation. WI 
not exactly 
the same it 
wage-price 
pansion of 
PRICE | 
frst eightec 
a period o! 
In spite of 
limited use 
index— pri 
in non-sub 
inevitable 
this rise. 
ment decic 
amuch gre 
ucts, accou 
which wa 
index ) wel 
bacon, fish 
theese, egs 
0 British | 
output. Th 
resulting f 
ticularly tl 
labor on tt 
took the fe 
Ministry of 
thippers to 
added to 
taken, the 
cent, while 
000,000 ir 
1943—rou 
e&xpenditur 
Subsidie 


