— 


Ons, 
Jers, 
Sup- 


Oita- 
On,” 
Bress 


tain 
ding 
redly 
duce 
30m- 


sury, 
holic 
mise 
vern- 
owth 


EN 


arrTar 


ssary, 
erican 
of the 
utral- 
in the 
e book 
cialist 


York, 


York, 


ions of 
states- 
benkin 
ve way 
people, 
lat re 
world 
f state 
gue of 
contain 
pletely 


s, 1937. 


ique in 
ulty of 
Section 
od data 
64 na- 
race is 


National 
ass mattet 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


— 


UNIV. on Mion, 














Vou. XVII, No. 21 MarcH 18, 1988 





MARIHUANA—Why is it dangerous? 
What is its connection with crime? 
What is being done to curb the traffic in this drug? 


Read 
MARIHUANA—THE NEW DANGEROUS DRUG 


an Opium Research Committee Pamphlet 
15 cents 
Order from Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated 
1200 National Press Building Washington, D. C. 


General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michtizan 











NAZI 


TIDE ENGULFS AUSTRIA 





DOLF HITLER returned to his native country 

on March 12. The man who had left Austria 
as a thwarted youth before the war came back as a 
conqueror, with the German army behind him, but 
without firing a shot. Just across the border—at Linz 
—he proudly proclaimed fulfilment of his “divine” 
mission to restore his “beloved fatherland” to the 
German Reich from which the Austro-Prussian War 
of 1866 had excluded it. In direct violation of the 
treaties of St. Germain and Versailles, this reunion 
was formally consummated by both Austrian and 
German law on March 13. Austria was declared a 
“state of the German Reich,” and a “free and secret 
plebiscite” to ratify this decision was ordered for 
April 10. President Wilhelm Miklas was forced out 
of office and his duties temporarily taken over by the 
Nazi Chancellor, Seyss-Inquart. By decree Hitler, 
now Fuehrer of a new and larger Reich, assumed 
command of Austria’s armed forces and merged them 
with those of Germany. Austria ceased to exist. 


Hitler’s sudden coup, which removed Schuschnigg 
completely from the Austrian political scene, cul- 
minated a series of dramatic developments. The 
Berchtesgaden agreement of February 12 failed to 
bring about any real reconciliation between the Nazis 
and the Austrian government. The Austrian Nazis, 
supported by the Reich, interpreted the accord as 
tarte blanche to turn the country into a National So- 
cialist state. Long deprived of freedom of agitation, 
they saw victory within their grasp. In Graz the 
Nazis practically took control of the city; elsewhere 
they staged turbulent, enthusiastic demonstrations 
and clashed with supporters of Chancellor Schusch- 
nigg. The public appearance of Nazi troop forma- 
tions—storm troops and the Elite Guard—testified 
to their unwillingness to confine their activities 


Within the only legalized political organization, the 
Fatherland Front. 





The Chancellor took alarm at these growing mani- 
festations of Nazi independence. Recovering from 
the “brow-beating” received in his interview with 
Hitler at Berchtesgaden, he set about mobilizing 
popular support for his régime. His firm declaration 
before the Federal Diet on February 24 that “Austria 
must remain Austria” struck a responsive chord in 
the hearts of many people. He warned his Minister 
of Interior, Seyss-Inquart, to curb Nazi agitation. In 
conferences with workers’ representatives the Chan- 
cellor sought, with partial success, to overcome the 
hostility of the laboring class—which had been 
smoldering ever since February 1934 when the So- 
cialists were ruthlessly crushed by the Heimwehr. 
Finally, as a last resort, he determined on a plebiscite 
which he thought would convincingly demonstrate 
to the outside world that his government rested se- 
curely on the will of the majority of the Austrian 
people. On March 9 Schuschnigg called on all 
Austrians over 24 years old to go to the polls the 
following Sunday and vote “for a free, independent 
and social, for a Christian and united Austria.” 


To the German government, and particularly to 
the Austrian-born Fuehrer, this call for a plebiscite 
was an open provocation. German authorities were 
aware that the Austrian Nazis, although strong out- 
side Vienna, could never muster a majority. The 
terms of the plebiscite, excluding the younger Aus- 
trians from voting and making no provision for a 
secret ballot, aroused the indignation of a govern- 
ment which had repeatedly utilized similar devices 
to mobilize “popular” support for its own régime. 
Schuschnigg was accused of engineering a plebiscite 
simply to obtain a mandate to outlaw the Nazis. 
Hitler would not be thwarted in his heart’s desire 
to bring about Austro-German union. With his sup- 
port, Seyss-Inquart and Glaise-Horstenau, two pro- 
Nazi Ministers in the Austrian government, de- 


























manded on March 11 that Schuschnigg immediately 
abandon the proposed plebiscite. After considerable 
hesitation, the Chancellor gave in, only to be con- 
fronted with a German ultimatum threatening in- 
vasion of Austria unless he resigned by 6:30 p.m. 
and permitted the formation of a government 
composed two-thirds of National Socialists. Ger- 
man troops were mobilized on the frontier. Failing 
to secure help from Paris, London or Rome, Schusch- 
nigg had no alternative but to yield to force. Seyss- 
Inquart took over control at the head of a new gov- 
ernment of Nazis and pan-Germans. Immediately 
he invited German troops into Austria to assist in 
the “restoration and maintenance of law and order.” 
Early on March 12 some 50,000 of the Reich’s armed 
forces began pouring across the border. People of 
Leftist sympathies, prominent leaders of the Father- 
land Front, and Monarchists were rounded up and 
placed under arrest. And the 200,000 Austrian Jews 
trembled in anticipation of their fate. 


In the capitals of Europe these moves aroused no 
little consternation. Immediately after hearing of the 
ultimatum, the British government protested strongly 
in Berlin “against such use of coercion” which, it 
declared was “bound to produce the gravest reac- 
tions.”” France, caught in the midst of a cabinet crisis, 
joined in this protest and tried in vain to enlist Italy 
in some common action to save Austrian independ- 
ence. Both in Paris and London the conviction 
soon prevailed that nothing could be done to arrest 
the Nazification of Austria. Once more the two pow- 
ers reaped the harvest of neglected opportunities. 
Restoration of German arms equality, abolition of 
unilateral demilitarization of the Rhineland, Austro- 
German Anschluss—all these might have been con- 
ducive to peace had they been conceded voluntarily 
to the Weimar Republic. But, when consummated 
by a strong and aggressive Germany, they simply 
serve to establish the thesis that only force avails in 
international relations. 


Rome was hardly less disturbed by the Austrian 
coup than Paris and London. Preoccupied in Spain 
and Ethiopia and at odds with Britain, the Italian 
government was compelled to witness the creation 
of a common frontier on the Brenner pass between 
Italy and Germany. Only at the very last moment 
did Hitler inform Mussolini of his intentions in a 
personal letter. In this missive he presented the bill 
for Germany’s benevolent neutrality in the Italo- 
Ethiopian conflict. He sought to convince I/ Duce that 
his course in Austria represented only “an act of 
legitimate national defense” and to set at rest Italian 
fears that Germany would now lay claim to the 
200,000 Austrian Germans in the Italian Tyrol. 
Germany's definitive frontier with Italy, the Fuehrer 
wrote, would be the Brenner. After Anschluss had 
been formally proclaimed, Hitler wired Mussolini that 


Page Two 











a 
——— 


“he would never forget” Italy’s refusal to intervene. 
Despite these assurances and the tendency of both 
government and press to make the best of events in 
Austria, the Rome-Berlin axis has undoubtedly been 
strained nearly to the breaking point. 

Germany’s hegemony on the European continent| ~ 
now seems almost assured. With Austria, it forms a 
nation of 72,000,000 people, situated in the heart of 
Europe and at the gateway of the Balkans. Past ex. 
perience has convinced it of the efficacy of force), | 
With Czechoslovakia held in a vise, it may now—| 
as a first step—exert pressure on Prague to grant the $1 
3,250,000 Sudeten Germans in Bohemia administra- the 
tive and cultural autonomy. Czechoslovakia, how-| ™ 
ever, will not be as easily coerced as Austria. Unlike os 
Vienna, Prague will resist with armed force any at.) 
tack on its independence. The success of its resistance! 
will depend on the assistance of outside powers a 

The time which Hitler will require to diges 
Austria will give France and Britain one more oppor- | 
tunity to organize a united front against German 
aggression. Will they utilize this opportunity? Cer- dc 
tainly Prime Minister Chamberlain must be thor-| ™ 
oughly disillusioned with the results of his efforts iv 
for Anglo-German understanding. Perhaps Britain ‘ 
can now be persuaded to join France in an unequivo- | 
cal warning to Germany that any advance at the ex- 
pense of Czechoslovakia, or any other country, will 
meet with their united resistance. At the same time, gt 
Hitler’s coup in Austria will probably hasten the con- in 
clusion of negotiations for an Anglo-Italian under- m 
standing begun in Rome on March 8. by 

JOHN C. DEWILDE = m 
FRANCE STRUGGLES TOWARD UNITY | © 
After a three-day interregnum during which the 


fate of Austria was sealed, the fourth Popular Front 
government—composed of Socialists and Radical So 





cialists and supported by the Communists—was om} “ 
ganized under Léon Blum on March 13. The new) , 
Premier had first attempted to form a cabinet of na} ~ 
tional union representing the Center as well as the ° 


Left but, despite the gravity of the international situ] | 
ation, the former refused to cooperate in a gov 
ernment with the Communists. Nevertheless, the 
composition of the new government marks a definite) 
step toward the concentration of power with which) ¢ 
democracies today are wont to meet crises. Blum’s| 
assumption of the Finance Ministry is reminiscent) 4; 
of Poincaré’s tactics in saving the franc in 1926, jf 
Edouard Daladier’s retention of the Defense Mit y 
istry and the appointment of Joseph Paul-Boncout, F 
once France’s delegate at the League of Nations, a y 
Foreign Minister, seem to foreshadow a some j 
what stronger foreign policy under Blum’s guidance) g 
For the first time, a Minister of Propaganda appeats) jj 
in France—an innovation which may indicate a grow) } 





(Continued on Page 4) Z 








eE= 


Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


MARCH 14—Washington’s answer—“armed iso- 
lation”?—Prompt passage of the Administration’s 
$1,121,000,000 naval expansion bill appeared to be 
the first and only certain result in Washington of the 
momentous events which culminated last week in 
the collapse of independent Austria and the tri- 
umphal entry of Hitler into Vienna. But sentiment 





ILDE 


TY 
ich the 
r Front 
ical So- 
Vas Of- 
1é new 
Ot na- 


as the ! 


al situ- 
a gov- 
SS, the 
definite 
1 which 
Blum’s 
iniscent 
1 1926. 
e Min 
oncour, 
ions, as 

some: 
ridance. 
appeats 
a grow: 


in Congress, after developments of the week-end, 
seemed to point toward a policy of “armed isolation” 
rather than a program of concerted action against 
continued aggression in Europe and the Far East. 
The opening round of the naval debate left little 
doubt that even the strongest supporters of the arma- 
ment bill were as much opposed to active interven- 
tion in Europe or Asia as were the minority members 
of the House Naval Affairs Committee who had 
branded the measure a. “diplomatic manoeuvre” and 





_ “not a national defense bill.” 


In countering the charge that the expansion pro- 
gram is designed to support an interventionist policy 


- inthe Far East, it is possible that Chairman Vinson 
. may be forced to accept an amendment— introduced 


by Representative Kniffen and backed by many Ad- 
ministration Democrats—which seeks to define a line 
of defense in the Pacific beyond which the Ameri- 
can navy shall not operate. Addressing the House 
on March 14, Mr. Vinson said that the defensive line 


of the LInited States in the Pacific extends from the 
Aleutian Islands to Hawaii, and thence to Samoa and 
the Panama Canal. With or without any formal legis- 


lative limitations, however, the naval program can 
only be sold to Congress on the basis of a continental 
policy based on unilateral defense of the Western 
Hemisphere. 


Far Eastern developments. While the Adminis- 
tration maintained complete silence over the week- 
end, State Department experts continued to study the 
effect on the Far East of events in Europe. The ques- 
tion uppermost in many minds was whether Britain, 
if forced to take a stronger stand in Central Europe, 
would come to terms with Japan in the Far East. 
Even before the Hitler coup there were reports in 
Washington that the British Foreign Office had been 
in close touch with Tokyo and had actually reached 
a tentative understanding affecting British interests 
in Hongkong and South China. The fact that Japan 
has abandoned or postponed its military campaign 
in South China gave some credence to these reports, 





even though they could not be confirmed in official 
quarters. In view of these rumors, added significance 
was given to the statement of Representative Vinson 
in the House naval debate that “there existed for a 
great many years an offensive and defensive Anglo- 
Japanese alliance and we may soon witness history 
repeating itself.” Whatever the truth may be, the 
suspicion that Britain is again seeking political settle- 
ment with Japan is being used to support the Ad- 
ministration’s case for a strong navy capable of de- 
fending American interests by single-handed action. 


Meanwhile, intimations came from both Tokyo 
and Washington that a satisfactory settlement had 
been reached in the Alaskan salmon fishing contro- 
versy which had led to threats of violence or boycott 
from American fishermen and the Pacific Coast Mari- 
time Federation. While State Department officials 
refused to discuss the terms of settlement, Foreign 
Minister Hirota revealed on March 7 that the Ja 
anese fishing vessels which last summer “invaded” 
Bristol Bay, off the coast of Alaska, would not return 
this spring. This gentlemen’s agreement, if con- 
firmed, will leave unsettled the legal aspects of a 
controversy which may be revived if bills now pend- 
ing before Congress are enacted into law. At the 
height of the controversy last summer Senator 
Schwellenbach of Washington and Anthony J. Di- 
mond, Delegate from Alaska, introduced identical 
bills to extend the jurisdiction of the United States 
far beyond the existing 3-mile limit. These measures, 
together with another bill introduced by Senator 
Bone of Washington, declare that all salmon “which 
are spawned and hatched in the waters of Alaska 
are hereby declared to be the property of the United 
States” and assert the jurisdiction of the United States 
for the protection and preservation of the salmon 
fishery over “all the waters adjacent to the coast of 
Alaska east of the international boundary in the Ber- 
ing Sea.”’ Following the assertion last week of Ameri- 
can sovereignty over Canton and Enderbury Islands 
in the Pacific, Senator Copeland urged support of 
the Bone and Dimond bills, and voiced the opinion 
that we should claim the Bering sea “by right of pos- 
session. 


Trade agreements program. There is no evidence 
that political developments in Europe will affect in 
any way Secretary Hull’s determination to continue 
with his trade agreements program. On March 7 the 
State Department announced the signing of its agree- 
ment with Czechoslovakia, the seventeenth recipro- 
cal trade pact since 1934. While the agreement re- 





SS GS 


Se ne a 


Oat ese Te . 


ee ee eile 

















duces the duty on shoes, despite vehement protests 
of the American shoe industry, the United States re- 
serves the right to revise the tariff when imports 
exceed 1.25 per cent of domestic production. This 
provision will enable the Czechs to sell about 600,000 
additional pairs of shoes annually to the United 
States, in comparison with a domestic production of 
more than 400 million pair. In return, Czechoslo- 
vakia agrees to modify its exchange control to the 
advantage of American exporters, and to grant 
tariff benefits on 76.7 per cent of its imports 
from the United States. There was evidence here 
that final negotiations were hastened by the mutual 
desire to conclude the treaty before Czechoslovakia’s 
position became more critical. Mr. Hull is now press- 
ing negotiations with Britain as rapidly as possible. 
The opening of public hearings before the Com- 
mittee on Reciprocity Information on March 14 coin- 


~cided with a warning by the Secretary that suspension 


or nullification of the trade agreements program 
would be a “tragic blunder” which would further 
aggravate political tension throughout the world. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 


FRANCE STRUGGLES TOWARD UNITY 
(Continued from Page 2) 


ing determination to fight the fascist states with their 
own weapons, wielded by a disciplined Left-wing 
democracy. 


The resignation of the Chautemps government on 
March 10, after only fifty-one days in office, came 
because the Socialists and Communists refused to 
grant it extraordinary decree powers to deal with the 
chronically serious financial situation. These parties 
were suspicious lest a Radical Socialist Cabinet use 
such powers to placate business interests by undoing 
Popular Front social measures. Even during its brief 
tenure of office, however, the widespread pressure 
for a greater measure of political unity in the face of 
developments abroad was utilized by Chautemps to 
achiéve notable progress in three respects. 


First, the government succeeded in formulating a 
modern labor code, designed to extend public control 
over the vexing problems raised by the acute conflict 
of capital and labor in France. The proposed legis- 


Page Four 








— 
—— 


lation, presented in six measures, provides for con. 
ciliation of labor disputes and obligatory arbitration 
if this fails; for compulsory collective labor contracts 
covering wages and working conditions; for a virtual 
state monopoly of employment agencies; for restric. 
tions on the employer's freedom to “hire and fire”; 
for definition of the rdle of the labor union delegate 
in the shop; and for a secret ballot of workers when 
a strike is declared, with state enforcement of a fac. 
tory shut-down if the strike is approved, or of the 
resumption of work by willing laborers if it is not, 
Despite the tenacious opposition of the Senate, repre. 
senting conservative interests, the Chautemps govern- 
ment forced the first of these bills through Parlia- 
ment on March 4. The new law includes a bitterly 
contested provision for adjustment of wages to meet 
variations in living costs. 

As its second contribution to a strong, united coun- 
try, the Chautemps government, in a move to increase 
military efficiency, coordinated the three war min- 
istries and services—army, navy and air—under a 
single political and a single military chief. And 
finally, despite Britain’s approaches to the fascist 
powers, the government on February 26 obtained 
overwhelming parliamentary approval for a fairly 
strong foreign policy based on the system of collec- 
tive security. If Foreign Minister Delbos’ statement 
that “the independence of Austria is an indispensable 
element in European equilibrium’ now has a hollow 
ring, his unequivocal support of French obligations 
toward Czechoslovakia and of the Franco-Soviet 
pact indicate that France will still essay a prominent 
role in Eastern Europe. The alternative policy, an 
agreement with dictators and limitation of French 
political activity to Western Europe, was scornfully 
rejected by Premier Chautemps. 

There seems little doubt that these steps toward 
unity and strength within, and firmness abroad, will 


continue under the new government. It remains un- | 
certain, however, whether they can be consummated | 


in time to serve their purpose. If they cannot, France 
will be in the position of locking the barn door after 
the horse is stolen—of playing a game in which the 
high cards have already been seized by its opponents. 


Davin H. Popper 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


La Réforme de l’Etat. Brussels, Centre d’Etudes pour la 
Réforme de |’Etat, 1937. 
A searching inquiry into Belgian Parliamentary govern- 
ment with a view to readapting it to modern conditions, 
by eight committees of eminent Belgians. 


Ireland and the British Empire, 1937, by Henry Harrison. 
London, Hale and Co., 1937. 10/6 
An emotional and confused account of Anglo-Irish re- 
lations, presenting many important facts in a jumbled 
manner. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 21, Marcu 18, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasiig Busi, President; Vera MicHeres Dean, Editor. 


National 
Entered as second-class matter 


December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


a 


“oy 





{i 


AL 
0 








