Lee 





BPS BREF Lel 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


8 West 40th Street, New Yor ¥- 
oat 








Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Pose 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














ei” gr ar® 
oe op wie™ 


Vout. XVIII, No. 24 


—_ 


APRIL 7, 1939 








A timely study of the historic struggle between the 
President and Congress for predominance in the 
conduct of our foreign relations.... 


THE PRESIDENT’S CONTROL OF FOREIGN POLICY 
by James Frederick Green 


April 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 


General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











~ CHAMBERLAIN SPEEDS STOP-HITLER COALITION 





RITAIN and France, which at Munich appeared 
to have given Hitler a free hand in Eastern 
Europe, have sharply reversed their course by rapid- 
fire negotiations with Poland, Rumania and the Soviet 
Union, designed to check Germany's eastward drive. 
In these efforts to form a coalition Britain, with the 
utmost reluctance but with new-found determina- 
tion, has assumed a leading réle, as it did when it 
led other coalitions to prevent the hegemony of 
Louis XIV, Napoleon and Wihelm II. 

What has Britain promised? When the now 
familiar reports of German troop movements and 
press attacks on Poland reached London, Mr. Cham- 
berlain told a cheering House of Commons on 
March 31 that the British government saw “‘no justi- 
fication for the substitution of force or threats of 
force for the method of negotiation.” Referring to 
pending consultations with other governments he 
said that, “during that period, in the event of any 
action which clearly threatened Polish independence 
and which the Polish Government accordingly con- 
sidered it vital to resist with their national forces, 
His Majesty's Government would feel themselves 
bound at once to lend the Polish Government all 
support in their power.” He added that France — 


| which already has a military alliance with Poland— 


took the same position as Britain; and that the prin- 
ciples on which the British government was acting 
were “fully understood and appreciated” by the So- 
viet Union. 

Mr. Chamberlain’s pledge, immediately qualified 
by a London Times editorial which stated that it did 
not “bind Britain to defend every inch of the present 
frontiers of Poland’ (intimating that it might ex- 
clude former German territories like Danzig, the 


| Polish Corridor and Upper Silesia), was reaffirmed 


in still stronger terms by a semi-official British com- 
muniqué of April 1. This communiqué declared 


that, “with respect to Danzig and the Corridor, it is 
held in London, it is up to Poland to decide if at any 
moment it feels its independence threatened.” Britain 
thus apparently leaves in Poland’s hands the crucial 
decision whether German action against Danzig or 
the Corridor calls for Polish armed resistance, which 
Britain and France are pledged to support. The 
British government, however, did not exclude the 
possibility of a Polish-German settlement regarding 
these issues—provided Germany does not impose 
such a settlement on Warsaw by force or threat of 
force. This loophole created the uneasy suspicion in 
Poland that Mr. Chamberlain might have another 
Runciman mission up his sleeve. 

Significance of British pledge. Except for the 
abortive British guarantee of Czechoslovakia’s fron- 
tiers after Munich, this is the second time in its his- 
tory (the first being its centuries-old alliance with 
Portugal) that Britain, single-handed, has guaran- 
teed another country’s independence—as distin- 
guished from collective guarantees like the League 
Covenant and the 1839 treaty underwriting the neu- 
trality of Belgium. What is even more remarkable, 
this is the first time that Britain has given such a 
pledge to a country lying outside its Western Euro- 
pean sphere of interest. 

As indicated in Mr. Chamberlain’s speech of 
April 3, his pledge to Poland is only one link in a 
chain of similar promises to be given to all countries 
that are “unhappy, anxious and uncertain about Ger- 
many’s future intentions.” British military assistance 
to Eastern Europe, which will probably take the form 
of ‘defense’ loans, is synchronized with concrete 
economic measures which France has belatedly 
adopted to checkmate German domination of the 
Danubian region. On March 31 France concluded 
a commercial treaty with Rumania by which it agreed 
to purchase 500,000 tons of oil, doubling its last 




















year’s purchases, and to slash its duties on Rumanian 
wheat by 60 per cent. A treaty granting similar trade 
concessions to Yugoslavia is to go into force in the 
near future. 


What will be the effect of this new policy? 
The unex Anglo-French counter-offensive in 
Eastern Europe brought an immediate reply from 
Hitler. In his Wilhelmshaven speech on April 1 the 
Fuehrer reiterated his grievances against the Ver- 
sailles Diktat; warned the Western powers not to 
meddle in Germany's “living’’ room; asserted that 
the Reich had no intention to wage war on other 
peoples; denounced the new “encirclement” of Ger- 
many; threatened to terminate the Anglo-German 
naval treaty of 1935; expressed the conviction that 
the world “will defend itself against the most severe 
Bolshevistic threat that exists’; but added that ‘‘a 
final understanding between nations will come 
sooner or later.” 


Hitler's speech did not dispel the inherent con- 
tradiction between his avowed desire to wipe out 
the “‘shame”’ of Versailles, and his obvious intention 
to make a bid for German hegemony not only in 
Europe, but in other parts of the world. By his own 
process of “peaceful change’ Hitler has already al- 
tered the principal territorial provisions of the Ver- 
sailles treaty. While many people in the democra- 
cies sympathize with Germany's objections to the 
peace settlement, their sympathy does not extend to 
regions outside pre-war Germany, such as Czecho- 
Slovakia. Wherever Hitler oversteps pre-war boun- 
daries he increases the prospects of a coalition against 
the Reich which, viewed from Germany, may seem 
like ‘“‘encirclement’” but, viewed from outside, has 
the appearance of self-defense. What is unfortunate 
is that Britain and France, which had a good legal 
case for defending Czecho-Slovakia, should have 





Page Two — 





——— 


been maneuvered into a position where they may 
have to resist, by force, the- return to Germany of 
Danzig and the Corridor. 

Yet the Anglo-French decision, however question- 
able its immediate premises, has had an electrify. 
ing effect on the small European states which for 
years have been waiting for some sign of leader. 
ship by the great democracies. The Belgian elections 
of April 2 brought a severe setback for the Rexists 
in favor of center parties, and registered the narrow 
defeat in Eupen and Malmédy of the Heimattreue 
party, which favored return of these districts to the 
Reich. The Danish Socialist-Radical government 
ejected several agitators sent into North Schleswig 
by Germany for the obvious purpose of preparing 
for the surrender of that territory by Denmark — 
but could not prevent the election of three Nazis to 
Parliament on April 3. And on April 2 the Belgrade 
dictatorship finally decided to come to grips with the 


demands of the Croats whose leader, Matchek, simul- | 


taneously displayed a more conciliatory attitude. 
Whether Europe’s disorderly retreat can now be 
checked depends on the future course of Anglo- 
French diplomacy. After what happened in Munich, 
and more recently in Prague, it is natural that Po- 
land should suspect British pledges. This is even 
more true of the Soviet Union, whose assistance is as 
much feared as it is desired by Poland and Rumania. 
The elements of suspicion and disunity in the Euro- 
pean coalition now in the process of gestation still 
outweigh the elements of confidence and ready col- 
laboration. This balance can yet be righted provided 
Britain does not again allow itself to be lulled by 
Hitler into a false sense of security, and provided also 
that the forces it aligns against Germany are eventu- 
ally directed toward a more constructive objective 
than mere maintenance of the territorial status quo. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


THE END OF THE SPANISH REPUBLIC 


With the surrender of Madrid on March 28 the 
resistance of the Spanish Loyalists crumbled rapidly, 
and by April 1, after thirty-two months of sanguinary 
conflict, the civil war in Spain was brought to a close. 
Even after years of semi-starvation, bombardment 
from the air, and resistance against heavy odds, the 
submission of the Loyalists did not take place with- 
out a struggle. On March 5 the Republican govern- 
ment of Premier Juan Negrin was ousted by a Na- 
tional Defense Council which elected General José 
Miaja as its president and Colonel Segismundo 
Casado, who had executed the cop, as its minister 
of defense. No Corhmunists were included in the 
Council, which immediately sought to secure “peace, 
but a worthy peace.” Before this could be achieved 
a Communist revolt broke out on March 7, and was 





suppressed only after six days of fighting. Whether 
the Communists, trapped in Spain and having noth- 
ing to lose, refused to support overtures for peace, 
or whether they were offered up as a sacrifice pet- 
mitting Franco to negotiate with a régime purged 
of the elements most objectionable to him, is still 
not known. 

At any rate, during the following fortnight the 
National Defense Council made vain efforts to reach 
agreement with the Nationalists on the terms of an 
“honorable” peace. Victorious in the field, General 
Franco evidently saw no reason why he should ac 
cept self-denying stipulations regarding the integrity 
of Spanish territory or the extent of reprisals against 
his defeated opponents. A Nationalist offensive on 
the southwestern front, begun on March 26, met 











\\ 


capi 
nize 
the 5 


indi 
ists 

repr 
Und 
byt 
obst 
com 
cou 
ban: 
mer 


esti 
they 
at 2 
tior 


ince 
era 
tall 


the 
anc 
res 


Mt 
pe: 
cul 
inc 





nay 
of 


On- 
ify. 
for 
Jer. 
ons 
‘ists 
rOW 
eue 
the 
ent 
wig 
‘ing 


$ to 
ade 


nul- 


glo- 
ich, 


ven 
S as 
nia, 
uro- 
still 
col- 
ded 
| by 
also 
ntu- 
‘tive 
qU0. 
N 


ther 
oth- 
ace, 


pet: 





ged | 


still 


the 
each 
f an 
eral 
| ace 
grity 
Linst 
> on 








—— 
eV—7_™ 





with little resistance and was followed by complete 
capitulation. On April 1 the United States recog- 
nized the Franco régime and lifted its embargo on 
the shipment of arms and munitions to Spain. 

Reprisals and reconstruction. Unless advance 
indications prove incorrect, the victorious National- 
iss will probably add another chapter of harsh 
reprisal to the long history of cruel Spanish revolts. 
Under the “Law of Political Responsibility” adopted 
by the new régime on February 13, those guilty of 
obstructing the Nationalist movement, by acts of 
commission or omission, are subject to trial by special 
courts and to penalties including loss of civil rights, 
banishment, confiscation of property and imprison- 
ment, up to a maximum of fifteen years. The num- 
ber of prisoners taken by the victors is already 
estimated at 650,000. Their property is forfeit, and 
they will be forced to work on reconstruction projects 
at a daily wage of approximately 50 cents in addi- 
tion to their food and shelter. 

The political course of the new Spain remains 
incalculable, save for the virtual certainty that Gen- 
eral Franco will not relinquish command of his to- 
talitarian state. Already Nationalist censorship and 
Nationalist labor regulations have replaced those of 
the Loyalists. The diplomatic advances of the British 
and the French have not as yet secured an open 
response from Franco comparable to the glowing 
messages his representatives have exchanged with 
Mussolini and Hitler. Instead of depreciating the 
peseta to encourage exports and attempting to se- 
cure a long-term loan in London—steps which would 
indicate a return to liberal economic policies — the 
new régime has fixed the exchange rate at 9 to 10 
to the dollar. It will apparently undertake the task 
of reconstruction with cheap Spanish labor and con- 
trolled barter trade, largely with Germany and Italy. 


Page Three 














Such a program will not be palatable to Franco's 
conservative and royalist supporters, who would 
prefer a return to the status existing before 1931. 
The relations of these elements with the fascist 
Falangists—who support such radical reforms as 
land redistribution, nationalization of banks and 
public utilities, the syndicalist organization of Span- 
ish labor, and restriction of the activities of the 
Church—remains uncertain, and may provoke severe 
crises in the future. 


France defies Il Duce. The question of foreign 
influence in Spain is intimately bound up with the 
fate of the Italian demands on France, discussed by 
Premier Daladier on March 29. Stressing French 
unity in the face of external aggression, M. Daladier 
identified his cause with that’ of all pacific, demo- 
cratic governments. In a reasonable tone which con- 
trasted with the blustering emotionalism of I/ Duce, 
he cited the Italian note of December 17, 1938 — 
whose text was simultaneously published by the 
French government—to prove that no definite de- 
mands had yet been made by the Italians. He refused 
to accept Mussolini's thesis that the conquest of 
Ethiopia created new rights for Italy—a thesis 
which would mean that each new concession would 
give rise to new rights. The French Premier also 
repeated his refusal to cede “a foot of our land” or 
“one of our rights,” and paid Mussolini back in his 
own coin by virtually inviting Italian proposals in 
the spirit of the 1935 accords. Forced to take the 
initiative, the Italians are thus placed in a difficult 
position in which they can gain little unless the 
French decide to make voluntary concessions to wean 
Mussolini away from the Rome-Berlin axis. 


Davip H. Popper 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Union Now, by Clarence K. Streit. New York, Harpers, 

1939. $3.00 

A thoughtful and persuasive argument for immediate 
federation of fifteen countries—the United States, Great 
Britain, the Dominions, and the smaller European de- 
mocracies—under a common constitution and govern- 
ment, and with a single citizenship, currency, tariff, and 
military force. Although Mr. Streit underestimates the re- 
fractoriness of modern nationalism, state sovereignty, and 
economic rivalry, he utilizes effectively both the logic 
of The Federalist and the challenge of Mein Kampf. Hav- 
ing served for ten years as Geneva correspondent of the 
New York Times, he discusses in unusually accurate and 
suggestive fashion the fatal weaknesses of the League of 
Nations. 


Rats in the Larder: The Story of Nazi Influence in Den- 
mark, by Joachim Joesten. New York, Putnam, 1939. 
$2.50 


The author exposes the remarkable degree to which 
Nazi infiltration and intimidation in Denmark has pro- 
ceeded, and calls for an alliance of rearmed Scandinavian 
nations to preserve their democracy and national integrity 
in the face of the German menace. 


Political Handbook of the World, edited by Walter H. Mal- 
lory. New York, Harpers, for the Council on Foreign 
Relations, 1939. $2.50 
Absolutely indispensable for quick, accurate information 

on the annual state of parliaments, parties and the repre- 

sentative press of all countries. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 24, Aprit 7, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaYMOND Lasime BugELt, President; Dororuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera Micheres Dgan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Ew 181 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Two Dollars a Year. 








Washington News Letter 





sibben, 








WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


ApriL 4.—With Senate hearings on the question 
of neutrality occupying the center of the stage, 
Washington correspondents have paid relatively little 
attention to the battle of conflicting economic in- 
terests over the future of the Hull trade program. 
Last week, however, two developments revealed a 
growing inconsistency in Administration policy 
which seemed to suggest that the State Department 
and the President may be taking opposite sides in 
this undercover but vitally important conflict. On 
April 1 the State Department signed its twenty-first 
reciprocal trade agreement, reducing duties on 
American trade with Turkey. Almost simultaneously, 
the President published and endorsed a plan for an 
export subsidy for cotton, which is diametrically op- 
posed to the underlying principle of Secretary Hull's 
trade program. 


The Turkish agreement. The agreement with 
Turkey represents a distinct if minor triumph for 
the Administration’s policies in the international 
commercial field. Without departing from the most- 
favored-nation principle of equal treatment for all 
countries, the United States has secured tariff con- 
cessions for over 40 per cent of its exports to Turkey, 
and has given undertakings with regard to 97 per 
cent of its imports from that country. The items in- 
volved in the agreement are almost exclusively na- 
tional specialties, whose interchange will not 
seriously affect domestic industries. The agreement 
is particularly significant because it demonstrates the 
possibility. of negotiations, on an equitable basis, be- 
tween countries which have adopted a controlled 
foreign trade régime and countries which still cling 
to relatively liberal economic practices. 


The cotton emergency. This success is offset by 
a resounding defeat for the Hull trade program, 
with indications of more to come as agricultural 
pressure groups in Washington desperately seek 
methods to reduce surpluses piled up on farms and 
in warehouses. In particular, the Administration's 
cotton program has reached an apparent impasse, 
with the domestic price pegged far above the world 
level by a loan program, and more than 11,000,000 
bales — roughly one year’s supply — hanging over 
the market. The President now proposes a payment 
to producers who release their loan cotton to the 
market, and a cash subsidy to exporters enabling 
them to sell their stocks abroad well below the do- 





ed 


mestic price. Such a two-price arrangement may wel] 
constitute the entering wedge for an expanding sys. 
tem of foreign trade controls. Imports of foreign 
textiles produced from cheap cotton may have to be 
regulated by quotas, while compensating payments 
must be made to American textile exporters to per. 
mit them to compete in world markets. 


With considerable justification, the German prey 
immediately denounced the proposed plan on the 
ground that the United States was adopting prac. 
tices essentially similar to the Nazi subsidy scheme 
which had caused the State Department to impose 
a 25 per cent countervailing duty on German imports 
to this country. Some economists feel, moreover, that 
the American move, if approved by Congress and 
put into execution, cannot fail to lower world cotton 
prices. These would, of course, prove of the greatest 
benefit to Germany and Japan—nations highly de. 
pendent on imports of the staple—and would rup 
counter to the Roosevelt policy of withholding eco- 
nomic aid from aggressor states. Moreover, the new 
program is certain to have unfavorable repercussions 
in Brazil, with unfortunate consequences for the 
future of the Good Neighbor program. 


Official defense of this proposal is not entirely 
convincing. It is stated that, since cotton is on the 
free list in almost all countries, lower world prices 
will be welcomed; and that it is high time the United 
States ceased boosting cotton prices to a level per- 
mitting profitable production in much less suitable 
areas. The hope is also expressed that the threat of 
renewed American competition in world markets will 
make other producers more amenable to the idea of 
a world cotton compact stabilizing the output of all 
major producing countries. The American wheat 
subsidy program, it is argued, has already done much 
to bring a world wheat agreement nearer. 


The evidence indicates that pressures for new 


subsidies and export aids will become more rather | 


than jess forcible in the future. Already a powerful 
attempt is being made to impose new taxes on the 
importation of foreign vegetable oils—a move which, 
if successful, will seriously jeopardize several im- 
portant trade agreements in which these taxes are 
bound against increase. Under the circumstances 
Secretary Hull’s reply of April 3 to statements made 
by German officials, in which Mr. Hull steadfastly 
defended his foreign trade policies, may prove less 
important than the economic necessities of a stag- 
nant American economy. 





An 


| 


VOL. 


| 


For 
Wa 


eve 


| 


bar 
foc 
Po 
arr 
pre 
wi 
the 
El 


~~ 


—_ =—-©® es = = QD = “TR 








