


trength 


nts will 
a limit 
of the 


erations 





nced by 
10 to at ' 
ion has } 
utlying, 

nemy at | 


7 ithout | 
€ plo) 
h more | 
sed ns 
e have 
vy maj 
quired 
or evel 
> strain 
nereas 
would 
under 
across 
ceep il 
might 
> Presi 
re, fur 
to the 
rs. 


PPER 
{arch 21 


Contro 
el Max 





General Library Entered as 2nd class matter 
University of Nichigan 


wine Ann Arbor, Nich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XX, No. 24 Apri 4, 1941 


ANTI-AXIS FRONT LOOMS IN BALKANS 


eu crushing defeat administered to the Italian but not at the cost of abetting an attack on Greece 





navy and the revolt of Yugoslavia against Axis or sacrificing their own independence. 
domination may mark a turning point in the war. GERMANY’S DILEMMA. The dramatic turn of 
For the first time since the collapse of the Low Coun- _— events in Yugoslavia has confronted the Germans 
tries and France the British, together with the Yugo- with a serious dilemma. To countenance Yugoslavia’s 
slavs, Turks and Greeks, apparently have an excel- —_ defiance would be a blow to Nazi prestige through- 
lent chance to challenge Axis control of part of the out Europe, and to delay military reprisals might give 
European continent and to engage Germany in a the anti-German forces the long-sought opportunity 


war on two fronts which Nazi military leaders have —_ to form a strong Balkan front stretching from the 
long been anxious to avoid. Presumably these Axis Adriatic to the Dardanelles and the Bosporus. Yet 


reverses have also left their impression on Yosuke the alternative—an immediate attack on Yugoslavia 
Matsuoka, the Japanese Foreign Minister, who has —is no more palatable. The Germans seem to have 
just been visiting Germany and Italy in order to —_ been unprepared for this development. A consider- 
gauge the strength of Nippon’s allies. able army would be needed for a successful invasion 


The bloodless coup d'état, which overthrew the of Yugoslavia. With large Nazi forces immobilized 
regency of Prince Paul and the timid government of in the occupied countries of Western Europe, along 
Premier Dragisha Cvetkovitch on March 27, brought __ the Russian frontier and in Rumania, Germany's re- 
to power a new régime determined to preserve Yugo- sources of military man power are already severely 
slavia’s independence against all encroachments by taxed. The task of supplying German armies in 
the Axis. The Serb people have rallied with enthusi- Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Rumania would be ex- 
asm about 17-year-old King Peter II, who was for- tremely difficult in view of the inadequate railways 
mally enthroned on March 28, and the new Prime _and roads of the Balkans. While the Yugoslav army, 


Minister, General Dusan Simovitch, who, as com- which numbers about 1,000,000 men, could not pre- 
mander of the Air Force, led the successful revolt. vent the occupation of Belgrade and the northern 
Only the Croats, whose territory would be first to be part of the country, it would undoubtedly give a 
overrun by an invading German army, have reserved good account of itself in the rugged mountains of 
their attitude. Although General Simovitch invited western and southern Serbia. There its inferior equip- 
Dr. Vladimir Matchek to continue as Vice-Premier ment might not even constitute a serious handicap, 


in the interest of national unity, the Croatian peasant since the Germans would be unable to capitalize 
leader has apparently withheld his acceptance in the fully on their superiority in aircraft, tanks and trucks. 
hope of obtaining a re-affirmation of the Axis pact To meet a German march down the Morava and 
by Belgrade. The departure of the German Minister Vardar river valleys from the north, the Yugoslavs 
and the withdrawal of German and Italian nationals have two strong, natural defense positions—the first 
from all of Yugoslavia indicate, however, that the at Nish, and the second, farther south, at Skolpje. 
Simovitch government will not yield to this demand And the mountains to the east stand guard against a 


or the German war of nerves. In a proclamation of | German thrust from Bulgaria, particularly in the 
March 31 General Simovitch called on all Yugoslavs spring when the thaw converts the Balkan mountain 
to stand fast and, if necessary, to “give their lives” valleys into virtually impassable marshes. 


for their country. The Serbs want to remain neutral, ITALIAN NAVY DEFEATED. Meanwhile, the 

















prospects of successful resistance to German aggres- 
sion in the Balkans have been measurably enhanced 
by Britain’s great naval victory in the Ionian Sea, 
about 150 miles west of Crete. On the night of 
March 28-29 a large Italian naval force, apparently 
planning to attack the British convoys which have 

pouring men and supplies into Greece, was in- 
tercepted and decisively defeated by the British Medi- 
terranean fleet. Three heavy 10,000-ton cruisers, and 
two destroyers were sunk, one battleship damaged, 
and another light cruiser and destroyer are also be- 
lieved lost. According to British sources, Italy's naval 
losses since the beginning of the war now total one 
battleship (three more have been damaged), six 
cruisers, 12 destroyers and about 25 submarines — 
which would represent about a fifth of the tonnage 
of its pre-war fleet. Its striking power, which depends 
on battleships and heavy cruisers, has probably been 
halved. While Rome has not admitted all these 
losses, there can be no doubt that the Italian navy 
has received such a series of crippling blows as to 
prevent it from challenging British supremacy again. 
Britain's task of supplying and reinforcing its Balkan 
allies has thus been greatly facilitated. The collapse 
of Italian resistance in East Africa, brought closer 
by the fall of Cheren, gateway to Asmara, on March 
26, and the capture of Diredawa in Ethiopia three 
days later, may also release about 40,000 troops for 
reinforcement of the Balkan front. British and 
Greek forces may even take advantage of the predica- 





Page Two —.. 





—— 


ment of the Axis to launch an offensive in Albania 

These favorable prospects were somewhat djs. 
turbed by a renewed clash between French and Brit. 
ish forces on March 30, when Algerian shore bat. 
teries opened fire on a British naval squadron whic 
sought to stop four French merchant vessels proceed. 
ing to the Algerian port of Oran escorted by one 
warship. Although the British ships withdrew afte, 
an exchange of shots, this attempted interfereng 
with French shipping has once more aroused the jn. 


dignation of the Vichy government. The incident te. | 


called the recent threat of Admiral Darlan that the 
French navy might forcibly convoy all French ships 
in order to insure the provisioning of the country 
It seems likely, however, that Marshal Pétain will 
restrain Darlan from carrying out any reprisals 


against the British. The policy of the French goy. | 


ernment is primarily influenced by the course of the 
war. Like all the conquered peoples of Europe, the 
French still pin their hopes on a British victory. Now 
that the fortunes of war appear to be favoring Brit- 
ain, the French government will hardly take advan. 
tage of this naval incident to throw in its lot com 
pletely with the Germans. On the contrary, the vey 
fact that the United States has, with British con 
sent, furnished unoccupied France with a few ship. 
ments of the most urgently needed civilian supplies 
indicates that the French government has given defi 
nite assurances it will do its best to steer a course 
independent of Germany. JOHN C. DEWILDE 


BRITISH AND AMERICANS OUTLINE POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION 


While the military and diplomatic situation in 
Europe reached a new climax last week, a significant 
discussion of war aims and peace plans began in 
North America. Lord Halifax, British Ambassador 
to Washington, Mr. Wendell L. Willkie, and for- 
mer President Hoover undertook almost simultane- 
ously, and in somewhat similar fashion, to outline 
several of the conditions essential for a durable 
peace. All three speakers stressed the need of avoid- 
ing a vindictive settlement and of freeing interna- 
tional trade from restrictions and barriers, and Mr. 
Willkie went much further to advocate that the Brit- 
ish Empire and the United States should “remain 
joined tomorrow” in order to create a better world. 


LORD HALIFAX’S SPEECH. In his first address 





How closely is the Navy approaching a full war 
footing? What is the present status? What are the 
additions contemplated in the near future? READ: 
AMERICA’S NAVAL PREPAREDNESS 
by David H. Popper 


25¢ 


April 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 











since his arrival in January, Lord Halifax, speaking 
in New York on March 25, emphasized that “the 
world must be treated in future as a single whole,” 
especially with regard to economic relations. Point 
ing out that since the World War “we have seen an 
increasing difficulty in securing the distribution of 
the world’s abundance both within and across n 
tional frontiers,’ Lord Halifax asserted that ‘‘it must 
be our aim to promote the greatest possible inter 
change of goods and of services.” He declared that 
Britain was already “making plans to remedy the 
impoverishment which must follow in the train of 
war,” by arranging to establish stocks of food and 
raw materials which can be released after the com 
clusion of hostilities. 


By developing the concept of “four basic free 
doms’’ contained in President Roosevelt's address to 
Congress on January 6, Lord Halifax made an elo 
quent appeal for four principles “that are essential 
to life as we wish to live it and see it lived.”’ He out 
lined the religious principle “of the absolute worth 
of every soul” ; the moral principle of respect for pet 
sonality; the social principle, combining political lib 
erty and economic security; and the domestic prit 














—. | ——— Page Three 











bania | ciple of “the sanctity and solidarity of the family.” 
t dis | Throughout his address and subsequent interviews 
1 Brit. | in New York, Lord Halifax skillfully appealed to 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: BRITAIN’S NEW EASTERN FRONT 
Speaker: James Frederick Green 





e bat.| both liberals and conservatives in America, and — Date: Sunday, April 6, 1941 

whic) | while admitting that vast social changes were under Time: 2:15 p.m., E.S.T. 

oceed. } way in Britain—denied that socialism or any form of Station: NBC, blue network 

y one | dictatorship would arrive there after the war. Does your local station carry this program? 








after} Mr, Willkie, speaking in Toronto on March 24, 
“tence | jyid similar stress on the necessity for post-war eco- 
he in- | omic recovery, and warned against a peace “written 
Mt te | in hate or reprisal or in terms of territorial ag- 
at the grandisement or imperialistic designs.” He argued 


to outline specific aims, because of the inherent com- 
plexity of the international situation, its preoccupa- 
tion with immediate problems of war, and its fear 
of alienating potential friends in Europe. 


ships that the basic principles of a peace settlement should Perhaps the most hopeful development in this re- 
untty. | be worked out now, because later on “some men will cent discussion of war aims is the general desire to 
1 will | feel the gloat of victory, and others the bitterness of avoid the mistakes of the Versailles Treaty and to 
mrisals | defeat.” While advocating the defeat of Nazism, place economic questions first on the agenda of an- 


| 80 | Mr. Willkie insisted that “‘we must not again lock other peace conference. So far, at least, the English- 
of the | 39,000,000 people in a prison wall of trade limits speaking world has sought to avoid the bitter re- 


€, the | and economic degradation to spawn brutality, racial crimination and desire for revenge. that proved fatal 
Now | intolerance and war.” Mr. Hoover, in an address at at the Paris Peace Conference, and have probably 
; Brit | New Haven, Connecticut, on March 29, stated the already developed on the continent. Even in Britain 
dvan- | case against a vindictive peace even more emphati- itself, where—according to an official announcement 


com | cally and expressed a belief that the United States, on March 27—Nazi air attacks since the outbreak 
= Vey | if it avoids participation in hostilities, will be able of war left 14,281 civilians dead and 20,325 injured, 





| Com | to bring a “constructive and warning voice to the — remarkably little hatred and bitterness have yet ap- 
ship peace table.” Mr. Hoover warned, however, against peared. One of the gravest dangers in a long stale- 
plies | the imminent growth of socialism and fascism in the mate of attrition and devastation would be the 


1 def} United States, especially if we enter the war. Both growth in the British Isles and North America of 
Ours’ } Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh and President Robert such emotional deterrents to a constructive peace. 

LDE | M. Hutchins, of the University of Chicago, recently JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 

| pointed out even more forcefully the dangers of war 








| | : 
| to the United States. 

akia Ambassador Dodd’s Diary, ed. by W. E. Dodd, Jr., and 
' “a SIMILARITY TO WORLD WAR. In many ways, Martha Dodd. New York, Harcourt, Brace, 1941. $3.50 
, this di . = ims” is simil devel The diary of an unconventional diplomat who, as Amer- 
ee OS War Aas 61S SHREAL to HeVeLOp- ican Ambassador to Germany, foresaw the cataclysm and 
Point. | ments during the World War, when many individ- repeatedly warned that only the closest cooperation of 
en il uals and organizations were studying and promoting France, Russia, Britain and the United States could pre- 
} é : t , 
on of | Plans for a new world order. President Roosevelt, in a 

‘ . Test Tubes and Dragon Scales, by George C. Basil, M.D., 

a 

SS na merting sad February 25 that ead lans could wait in collaboration with Elizabeth Foreman Lewis. Phila- 
an until ““victory,’’ followed the precedent of Woodrow delphia, John C. Winston Co., 1940. $2.50 
inter: Wilson, who declined to commit himself publicly Experiences of an American doctor at Chungking, giv- 
1 that during the first years of the war. It was not ing a many-sided picture of life in China’s interior during 


recent decades. The artistry of the anecdotes is matched 


ly the until May 1916 that President Wilson consented to by the unique illustrative sketches, placing the book in 


: 
i 
| 
: 
: 
: 
; 
4 
. 


rin of address the League to Enforce Peace, the largest and the category of literature even more than biography or 
41 and| 0st influential organization of its kind; and it was history. 
» con | Mly in January 1918—nine months after the United The Changing Pattern of International Economic Affairs, 
States entered the war—that he formulated his Four- by Herbert Feis. New York, Harpers, 1940. $2.00 
teen Points. As in the World War, many exceedingly The Economic Adviser to the State Department traces 
free: detailed aia Salty desieal : the evolution of international economic relations from the 
o<s th tailed proposals and carefully dratted constitu- régime of relative freedom, or laissez faire, to the existing 
“7 tions are emerging for “Union Now” and other types system of close government regulation and control. Un- 
n €0} of international reconstruction. The British govern- fortunately, his official position has precluded him from 
ential : : examining more thoroughly possible ways and means of 
- ol ment, moreover, is as reluctant now as in 1914-18 adapting our own policies to the changing conditions. 
e out 





worth } FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 24, Aprit 4, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
\r Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Leer, Secretary; .VeRA Micue.es Dean, Béitor. 
lib Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
I ’ - ‘ j 
ab | isi Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
prin F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 





sitbes, 


ped dbsagy 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Mar. 31.—Plans for increasing food shipments 
to Britain and cautious arrangements for delivery of 
two shiploads of flour to France may seem relatively 
minor matters when compared to other measures 
projected as part of Washington’s fixed policy of 
supporting opponents of the Axis powers. For the 
moment, they are overshadowed the forcible 
seizure of 69 German, Italian and Danish vessels in 
American ports, carried out by the Coast Guard last 
weekend, and by the urgent shipping crisis which 
may soon call for further drastic action. Yet each of 
these moves must be considered in relation to the 
larger strategy which now governs all decisions in 
foreign and domestic policy. 


NEW INSTRUMENTS OF DIPLOMACY. Since 
the passage of the Lease-Lend Act and the opening 
phase of the battle for the Atlantic, the primary ob- 
jective of American policy has been to keep open the 
vital supply lines to Britain and to strengthen the 
resistance of every other nation capable of opposing 
Germany, Italy and Japan. This means that strategic 
considerations necessarily override legal technicali- 
ties. It also means that virtually all things, from food 
to ships and munitions of war, assume potential im- 
portance as instruments of diplomacy. 


In the case of the ship seizures, Washington of- 
ficials have not yet revealed whether the government 
plans to operate the foreign vessels or turn them over 
to Britain. The action was described as a “protec- 
tive” measure designed to prevent further sabotage 
or damage in American waters. Authority for the 
move was based on the Espionage Act of 1917 which 
empowers the Secretary of the Treasury to “take full 
possession and control” of foreign vessels “in order 
to secure such vessels from damage or injury or to 
prevent damage or injury to any harbor or waters of 
the United States.” But regardless of legal defini- 
tions, it is apparent that strategic necessity will be 
the controlling factor in the ultimate disposition of 
all available tonnage in American territorial waters. 


In much the same way, strategic and political con- 
siderations inevitably govern the policy with respect 
to food shipments. Until quite recently the Adminis- 
tration resisted strong pressure from the Vichy gov- 
ernment to permit shipments of foodstuffs to unoc- 
cupied France. For several months M. Henry-Haye, 
the French Ambassador, was forced to cool his heels 


ed 


in Washington without any sign of encouragemg 
from the State Department. In the face of Britaigy 
steadfast refusal to relax its blockade of the Cop. 
tinent, Washington administered a similar rebuff tp 
Mr. Hoover's plan for feeding the civilian populy 
tion of Belgium and other occupied countries. 


During the past few weeks, however, the Stat 
Department has relaxed its opposition to the exten, 
of permitting fairly substantial food shipments tp 
unoccupied France. On March 22 Acting Secretary 
of State Sumner Welles announced that arrange 
ments had been made, with the approval of Britaig, 
to send two shiploads of flour to unoccupied Franc 
under supervision of the American Red Cross. Mr. 
Welles emphasized that the food would be distrib 
uted under strict control in the Free Zone, and tha! 
the government of Marshal Pétain had given satis | 
factory assurances that “not a pound of similar o 
equivalent foodstuffs will be permitted to pass from 
unoccupied France to occupied France.” 





The present policy is purely experimental ani 
tentative, and does not extend to any territories unde | 
German control. Whether it will be continued in the | 
case of France depends on the manner in which the 
French government lives up to its assurances, as wel 
as on future relations between Vichy and Berlin. 


On the latter point, Washington appears some 
what more optimistic than London, although the 
two governments have been in full accord on step 
taken to date. Should investigation by American Em 
bassy officials in Vichy confirm reports of a barter 
agreement for exchange of foodstuffs between 0 
cupied and unoccupied France, it is most unlikel 
that Washington will feel justified in approving 
further shipments. Nor will Britain be likely to grant 
navicerts for American supplies which merely 
strengthen Germany’s position on the continent. Or 
the other hand, should the Vichy government be able 
to carry out its obligations, the experimental food 
program might be extended with far-reaching im) 
plications. | 


Now that the United States has made its commit 
ment to support the opponents of the Axis, howevet, 
it is impossible to divorce food policy from diplomag 
and military strategy. Used as an instrument 0 
diplomacy, food may serve to advance political ob 
jectives as effectively as ships or munitions. 


W. T. STONE 








Vol 


| 


