— 


‘ork, 
view 
ayler 


1943. 


arine 
auni- 


PSERIGDIGAL ROG. 
@BNERAL LIBRARY 


NIV. OF MICH Unity 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 42 


Aucust 6, 1948 


END OF FASCISM ENHANCES PRESTIGE OF DEMOCRACY 


HE resumption of Allied air raids on Italian cities 

on August 2, after Marshal Badoglio had indi- 
cated that, far from contemplating “unconditional 
surrender,” he would try to preserve for Italy some 
of the spoils of war and would permit German oc- 
cupation of northern Italy and of Italian ports on 
the Adriatic, throws into sharp focus the political 
problems created by deterioration of the Axis’ mili- 
tary position. There seems to be no doubt that the 
Italian people are weary of war, and unwilling to 
make further sacrifices for the sake of defending 
Hitler's “fortress of Europe.” But Badoglio and 
presumably King Victor Emmanuel, to whom the 
Marshal is personally devoted, while recognizing 
Italy's weakness as against the Allies, are not yet 
prepared to face the consequences of defeat, nor 
are they ready to break with Germany. It is true that, 
should a break be made, the Germans would be in 
a position to wreak havoc on Italy. The rulers of 
Italy are thus faced with a choice between evils— 
with this qualification that, while the Germans have 
made it clear they cannot or will not save Italy from 
the United Nations, the Allies are promising to lib- 
erate Italy, with honor, from the Germans. 

WILL BADOGLIO SURRENDER? The reluc- 
tance of the new Italian government to wrench Italy 
out of Hitler’s grasp is being taken by Britain and 
the United States as the test of its intentions. As in- 


: dicated in Mr. Churchill’s speech to the House of 


Commons on July 26 and President Roosevelt's 
broadcast on July 28, any government that repudi- 
ated Fascism, preserved order, and dissociated itself 
from Germany, would have received a hearing from 
the Allied military chief in that theatre of operations. 

On this point there appears to have been some 
misunderstanding in this country and in Britain. The 
acceptance, by General Eisenhower, of ‘‘uncondition- 
al surrender” on the part of the King or Marshal 
Badoglio would not necessarily have had the effect, 


—S ee . a 


or carried the intent, of recognizing either of these 
men as the future government of Italy. In fact, there 
is much to be said, psychologically, for having the 
King and Badoglio accept, publicly, the onus of sur- 
render, instead of insisting, as some observers have ™ 
done, that Eisenhower should deal only with an antt- 
Fascist régime. One of the arguments used by Hitler 
against the Weimar Republic was that it was re- 
publican representatives who signed the “shameful” 
Treaty of Versailles. Let us not make the mistake 
this time of saddling surrender on the very people 
who opposed Fascism and the war. It would have 
been better if Mussolini, himself, had had to sue 
for peace. But now that he has been deposed, those 
who were, with him, responsible, actively or pas- 
sively, for Italy’s entrance into the war—and not 
Mussolini’s opponents—should be the ones to ask for 
“unconditional surrender.’ At the time this is done, 
however, the Allies should make it perfectly clear 
that the Italian people will have an opportunity to 
elect a government of their own choice within a 
specified period after surrender, and decide for them- 
selves whether they want to perpetuate the monarchy, 
establish a republic, or devise some other form of 
administration. 

DEMOCRACY CANNOT BE IMPOSED. Mean- 
while, the Allies could make no greater mistake than 
to assume that, the moment Fascist institutions have 
been abolished, the Italian people will adopt a demo- 
cratic pattern similar to that of Britain, Western 
Europe and the United States. The Italians have 
demonstrated again and again their love of liberty— 
but when they think of liberty, it is more in terms of 
the individual’s life than of freedom achieved 
through mutual accommodation within a close-knit 
political and economic community. Civilian courage 
in opposing encroachments on individual liberty is 
essential for the successful functioning of demo- 
cratic institutions. The Germans, and to a lesser 


degree the Italians, have shown themselves lacking 
in this quality. Defeat alone, however, will not 
produce civilian courage overnight. The most the 
Allies can do is to create, within Italy, conditions 
under which the Italians can develop democratic 
practices of their own. And for this AMGOT is in 
a position to set a valuable example by the use of 
fair methods in the treatment of the population, and 
in its readaptation to peacetime living. 

THE LIMITS OF INTERVENTION. But Allied 
assistance to the Italians—and this will be even more 
true when the time comes for liberating the con- 
quered peoples of Europe—cannot take the form of 
intervention in internal affairs. Such intervention, no 
matter how benevolent in intent or beneficent in 
effect, would eventually provoke an anti-foreign re- 
action among the liberated peoples—and first of all 
among anti-Fascists who now urge Anglo-American 
intervention on their behalf. The extent to which 
intervention is a matter of subjective judgment—or 
rather emotion—has been strikingly demonstrated by 
events in North Africa and Italy. Some Americans 
who, in the past, had vigorously opposed interven- 
tion by the United States in Nicaragua and Haiti, on 
the ground that it constituted infringement on the 
liberties of those countries, seem to find nothing para- 
doxical in demanding that London and Washington 
intervene in the affairs of European countries, and 
dictate the kind of government or economic system 
they should have after the war. This demand is based 
on the assumption that it will be “good” for these 
countries to adopt democratic institutions—which 
might be true. But in countries where the soil has 
not been fertilized by history for the growth of such 
institutions, it is worse than foolish to insist that 
they should be planted forthwith—for without 


“BATTLE OF THE TROPICS” HELPS ALLIED WAR EFFORT 


The months that have passed since the Japanese 
attack on Pearl Harbor have witnessed a series of 
significant changes in the economic life of the West- 
ern Hemisphere. America’s tropical lands, hitherto 
practically neglected by man, have become the scene 
of a number of new and far-reaching activities. From 
the forests of southeastern Mexico to the jungles of 
the vast Amazon basin, men are now battling their 
way forward—building roads, fighting tropical dis- 
eases, developing river traffic—to secure access to the 
wealth of these previously untapped regions. 

PIONEERING ON A NEW FRONTIER. This 
new activity is, for the most part, directly a result 
of the Japanese conquest of southeastern Asia, which 
suddenly deprived the Allies of their main — and 
sometimes only — source of certain tropical prod- 
ucts indispensable for war. To make up for this loss, 
the Allies have had to introduce or intensify by all 
means available the production of these or similar 


Page Two 


—— 
—— 


proper nourishment they will wither away, thys 
merely creating fresh doubts about the vigor of de. 
mocracy. 

Yet this is the very moment when there should 
be least room for such doubts. The most importan, 
aspect of Mussolini's downfall is not that Italy has 
begun to yield to superior military force, lout that 
Il Duce and his followers recogiized the defeat of 
Fascism before Italy itself had been overrun. It js 
essential for sound post-war reconstruction not only 
that the United Nations should achieve milita 
victory over the Axis, but that the Axis leaders should 
confess their own failure. Future German and Italian 
historians could still argue that the Allies won be. 
cause of the superior force at their command. But it 
would be difficult for them to deny that it was faith 
in a cause, combined with force, which finally sealed 
Allied victory. Why did small, isolated Malta, sub. 
jected to thousands of air raids, refuse to give up, 
while Sicily staggered at the first blow? Peoples of 
the same origin inhabit both places. Yet the people 
who were free preferred death to loss of freedom, 
while those who were unfree considered loss of life 
too high a price to pay for servitude. This is a lesson 
worth pondering in the United States, as political 
controversies and race riots tend to obscure the chal- 
lenge to democratic statesmanship we are meeting 
on the battlefronts. We are all bearing common 
burdens, sharing a common tragedy. Our capacity to 
see the world struggle as a task we have in common 
with each other, and with other peoples around the 
globe, will determine our capacity to preserve and ad- 
vance human freedom, whose indestructible value is 
being vindicated by the self-destruction of Fascism. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


products in the lands of the Western Hemisphere, 
where natural conditions most closely duplicate those 
of the territories temporarily lost to the enemy. 

Quite naturally, the United States took the lead in 
this pioneering work. With the approval and active 
cooperation of the governments of all Latin Ameti 
can countries concerned, it sent scores of specialists 
to tropical America, developed new botanical varie 
ties, introduced drastic sanitary measures, and 
shipped food and other supplies, often by air, t0 
create bearable living conditions in hitherto inhos 
pitable regions. This gigantic effort is considered by 
many as a second, if minor, campaign fought along 
side the main conflict, a war of man and scienct 
against nature: This campaign is currently changing 
the economic pattern of many parts of the Westeti 
Hemisphere. 

QUEST FOR RUBBER BLAZES TRAIL. Fits 
in importance among the tropical products lost 


——— 
the Allie 
eastern A 
tically all 
—represe 
came frot 
Indies. \ 
trol, the 
cessible t 
where th 
In order 
rubber sc 
to South 
tically ov 
trees gro’ 
of the As 
The ta 
in hot, t: 
lowlands 
ever, no 
culties of 
(the Bra: 
times as 
450,000) 
sanitatiot 
fore pro 
rendered 
the thou: 
latex mu 
The gi 
the Ame 
1942, w 
headed | 
Washing 
rived in 
authoriti 
wild rub 
since bee 
taries by 
it is exp 
chain of 
health ce 
The se 
is also v 
may reac 
or the ez 
all surrc 
lands, he 


JUST 


REPO! 


— 


thus 


de. 


— 


the Allies with the Japanese conquest of south- 
eastern Asia is rubber. Before Pearl Harbor, prac- 
tically all the natural rubber used in the United States 
—representing a value of some $3,000,000 a year— 
came from British Malaya and the Netherlands East 
Indies. With these territories now under enemy con- 
trol, the largest source of natural rubber still ac- 
cessible to the United Nations is the Amazon basin, 
where the rubber-gathering industry first originated. 
In order to make up for the sudden loss of Asiatic 
rubber sources, the United States decided to revert 
to South American production and to resume, prac- 
tically overnight, tapping of the millions of rubber 
trees growing wild in the Amazon and in other parts 
of the American tropics. 

The tapping of wild rubber trees growing sparsely 
in hot, tropical areas of dense forests and flooded 
lowlands infected with dangerous diseases is, how- 
ever, no mean problem. Aside from all other diffi- 
culties of opening up previously unsettled territories 
(the Brazilian state of Amazonas, for instance, three 
times as big as Texas, has a population of only 
450,000), two indispensable and gigantic tasks — 
sanitation and settlement—must be accomplished be- 
fore production can begin. The new areas must be 
rendered as safe as possible for the human race, and 
the thousands of men needed to collect the precious 
latex must be found and transported to the spot. 

The greatest battle so far waged by science against 
the American tropics had its start in the spring of 
1942, when a North American health mission, 
headed by Dr. George M. Saunders, member of the 
Washington Institute of Inter-American Affairs, ar- 
tived in the Amazon to collaborate with Brazilian 
authorities in the opening of the world’s greatest 
wild rubber region. Some twenty medical posts have 
since been opened along the Amazon and its tribu- 
taries by Dr. Saunders and his health mission, and 
it is expected that by the end of 1943 a complete 
chain of hospitals, floating dispensaries and other 
health centers will be in operation there. 

The second part of this huge colonization program 
is also well under way. An army of workers, which 
may reach some 100,000 men toward the end of 1943 
or the early part of next year, is being recruited from 
all surrounding regions, transported to the rubber 
lands, housed in newly built cities, and fed and cared 


JUST PUBLISHED— 
CAN EUROPE’S REFUGEES FIND 
NEW HOMES? 
by Winifred N. Hadsel 


25c 


August 1 issue of FoREIGN Policy REPORTS 
Reports are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members $3. 


Page Three 


cara 


— 


for through the cooperative effort of United States 
and Brazilian authorities. The Amazon jungle is be- 
ing slowly mastered, and from 1944 on it is ex- 
pected that it will yield some 70,000 tons of natural 
rubber annually. This quantity, although represent- 
ing only about 10 per cent of the needs of the United 
States, is considered vital, principally for war uses 
in which synthetic rubber alone is not satisfactory. 

The program developed for Brazil is comple- 
mented by many similar, smaller-scale projects now 
under way in all tropical countries of America. Wild 
rubber trees are being tapped wherever they can be 
reached. Plantations of abaca, the source of Manila 
hemp, and of similar fiber plants, are being set up in 
the Caribbean islands; derris and other roots con- 
taining rotenone, one of the most powerful insec- 
ticides, are being grown on experimental farms from 
Costa Rica to Brazil; and cinchona’ trees are~being 
planted in the highlands of Central America for the 
extraction of quinine—to mention only a few devel- 
opments. 

Some of these new projects will probably be aban- 
doned when the war is over. But the pioneering work 
undertaken to meet war needs will not have been 
in vain, since scores of valuable tropical products 
from hardwoods to drugs and insecticides will, for 
the first time, have been made accessible to man in 
the Americas. ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


SOUTH AFRICA SUPPORTS SMUTS 

The decisive 107 to 43 victory of Field Marshal 
Jan Christian Smuts in the South African general 
elections, reported in London on July 30, has been 
welcomed in Britain and the whole Allied world. It 
represents a parliamentary majority of 64 in support 
of the war today, compared with the narrow margin 
of 13 when the Union of South Africa declared war 
in September 1939. Fears that Dr. D. F. Malan’s 
opposition party might be able to obtain enough seats 
to impede the South African war effort, or even to 
take the Dominion out of the war and break its 
Commonwealth ties, have been definitely dispelled. 
Moreover, it seems clear that Field Marshal Smuts 
will now have a much freer land, not only to plan a 
reconstruction program for his own country, but also 
to share in the formulation of Allied plans for the 
post-war world. This victory for an outstanding dem- 
ocratic statesman, coinciding as it did with Musso- 
lini’s downfall, has strikingly demonstrated that de- 
mocracy is rapidly gaining strength as the war 
proceeds. H. P. W. 


PITTSBURGH BRANCH TO BROADCAST 
On Saturday, August 7, members of the Pittsburgh 
Branch of the FPA will participate in a 30-minute 
radio program — ‘The Editors’ Round Table” — 
broadcast over Station KQV from 10:15 to 10:45 p.m. 
The subject will be “Winning the Peace.” 


SSS ~=Page For 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The Guilt of the German Army, by Hans Ernest Fried. Why a Jewish State? by Leon I. Feuer. New York, Richard 

New York, Macmillan, 1942. $3.50 R. Smith, 1942. $1.00 
A well documented book on German militarism and the A clear presentation of the Zionist view that only q uN 
part played by the Imperial officers’ caste in the develop- Jewish state with complete control over the immigration 
ment of national socialism. and land policies of Palestine can solve Europe’s Jewish 7 
problem. 


Inter-American Statistical Yearbook 1942, by Raul C. 
Migone (ed.). El Atenco, Buenos Aires, and Macmillan, 
New York. $10.00 


The Making of Modern Britain, by J. B. Brebner anj_ 
Allan Nevins. New York, W. W. Norton, 1943. $2.59 7 


This 1,000-page book of statistical tables on Latin Amer- A vigorous description and interpretation for American 
ica with explanatory text in four languages is a unique readers of the moving forces and outstanding leaders ip 
compilation of data touching a large number of economic British history from the Roman conquest to the outbreak 
and social factors. Most of the tables are complete up to of World War II. 
1940, and sometimes to 1941. 
Men in Motion, by Henry J. Taylor. New York, Doubleday, 
The Transition from War to Peace Economy, League of 1943. $3.00 
Nations, Geneva and Princeton, 1943. Paper, $1.00; A plea for limited post-war commitments by the United | —-_ 
Cloth, $1.50 States based on the thesis that Europeans will not help | Vou. XXII 
This report of the League of Nations Committee on Eco- themselves if the United States makes it easy for them to 
nomic Depression, is the first detailed study on the subject turn to us. The author despairs of Europe—“a pauperized 
by an official international body. It examines the effects of and congested appendage of Asia”—unless large-scale 
war economy and the domestic and national problems of emigration takes place, but the U.S., he contends, must not 
transition from war to peace. open its doors. HE fi 
marke 
The Wind that Swept Mexico: The History of the Mexican The Struggle for Airways in Latin America, by W. A, M. isis in tk 
Revolution 1910-1942, by Anita Brenner. New York, Burden. New York, Council on Foreign Relations, 1943. | 
Harper, 1943. $3.75 $5.00 in Russia 
The first part of this book is a short and vivid story of A valuable survey of the whole Latin American air pic- | but impen 
Mexican politics from the reign of Diaz to our days; the ture, with an interesting account of the break-up of Ger- | , crop of 
second, a unique collection of 148 historical photographs. man and Italian air lines during 1940-41. The maps, charts, Ryo: 
Both very sympathetically portray the aspirations of the illustrations and tables add greatly to the usefulness of | *QU4Y Sis 
Mexican people and the highlights of the Mexican revolu- this attractive volume. ALLIEI 
a. tary sphe: 
England’s Road to Social Security, by Karl de Schweinitz, and Belgo 
The Chilean Popular Front, by John Reese Stevenson. Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1943, >, 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1942. $3.00 against th 
$1.50 A timely study of England’s efforts during six centuries Kharkov, 
A good study of Chile’s significant political development —from the Statute of Laborers in 1349 to the Beveridge | and serve 
from 1920 to date, preceded by a short outline of Chilean Report of 1942—to provide social security for its people. | qWH44 wy 
history down to 1920. - 
Don’t Blame the Generals, by Alan Moorehead. New York, | “Pture of 
Ecuador, by Albert Franklin. New York, Doubleday Harper, 1943. $3.50 flanking « 
Doran, 1943. $3.50 A vivid story by an Australian newspaperman of the | American 
In this informative and entertaining book, Mr. Franklin North African theatre from August 1941 to August 1942 | ginrice A 
vividly describes the topography, people, local customs, Although Moorehead’s account covers the Middle East and P 
politics and personalities of one of the least known South even reaches India, the fall of Tobruk and the final des- the north, 
American countries. perate defense of Egypt are the highlights of this book. | Sicilian c: 
The English title, A Year of Battle, however, is MOP) German . 
Japan and the Opium Menace, by Frederick T. Merrill. descriptive of the contents of the book than the American, bl; 
New York, published jointly by the Institute of Pacific 6 
Relations and the Foreign Policy Association, 1942. International Air Transport and National Policy, by Oliver Allies ma 
$1.50 J. Lissitzyn. New York, Council on Foreign Relations, | fore launx 
Interesting, authoritative account of the opium problem, 1942. $5.00 Italy or Sc 
with special emphasis on Japan’s encouragement of opium This book is a notable contribution to the history of air the ris; 
production and addiction in Chinese territory. transport up to Pearl Harbor, particularly in its political | “* "Sing 
aspects. Although now out of date in certain reaps . is | Should the 
The Government of French North Africa, by Herbert J. indispensable to a knowledge of the complex problem§} plementec 
Liebesny. Phibetsiohin Guten of ences facing the United Nations as they plan the air transport " Weste, 
Press, 1943. $1.50 policies of the future. , 
This first of a series of African Handbooks, edited by : 2 oe conf 
H. A. Wieschhoff, summarizes the complex legal and ad- War without Inflation, by George Katona. New York, military 1 
ministrative organization of the French possessions. It Columbia University Press, 1942. $2.50 POLIT! 
helps one to understand some of the political problems of A timely study of inflation, price-fixing, rationing, ©) Tp. po.4, 
the American and British invading forces. ation and saving in wartime. ; i 
quickly fe 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 42, Aucust 6, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National} Cat, perl 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. ¥Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micueies Dgan, Editor. Entered as August 5 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least G 
one month for change of address on membership publications. ermany, 
F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year Materials 
oa 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. Way to or 


