


rane 





are 


ons 
The 


use 


hat 
nds 
ted 
her 
tic, 
At- 
, to 


ing 
s01- 
ery 
the 
ent 
ase 
ded 

of 
ore 
om 


{in- 
dis- 
1eS. 
po- 
eby 














SERIAL — 
MAY o- 
Gp, 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





VoL. XXIV, No. 11 


DECEMBER 29, 1944 





EUROPE’S POLITICAL PROBLEMS CALL FOR SPIRIT OF COMPROMISE 


IN these harrowing days, when the rising tide of 

battle on the Western front brings to every Amer- 
ican home the anxiety experienced for years by the 
peoples of Europe and Asia, those who have suffered 
irreparable losses and those, still untouched, who 
want to help others bear the burden of sorrow, ask 
themselves what they can do to prevent such catas- 
trophe in the future. As Pope Pius XII said in his 
Christmas message, at the very moment when the 
bitterness of war “bids to reach the limits of par- 
oxysm,’” mankind’s age-long aspirations for lasting 
peace are also approaching a climax. Men and women 
who face death every day on battlefields or under the 
terror of Nazi rule have a passionate desire to make 
sure that their sacrifice of all the joys and satisfac- 
tions of life, and life itself, will at least assure to 
others the peaceful pursuit of happiness. It is the 
duty of all of us who, through these sacrifices are still 
alive and free, to work without respite, with what the 
Pope describes as “holy obstinacy,” for the realiza- 
tion of this desire, left to us by our dead in irrev- 
ocable trust. 


GROWING SCRUTINY OF WAR AIMS. It 
would be a violation of truth to pretend that any 
one of the United Nations entered this conflict in the 
spirit of a crusade to abolish war and create an effec- 
tive system of collective security against future ag- 
gression. All of the United Nations were drawn into 
the vortex through the stark necessity of a struggle 
for survival. But, as the struggle proceeds, its very 
ferocity and destructiveness cause people everywhere 
to demand that it should have as its aim something 
higher, more noble than mere physical success. This 
demand becomes all the more urgent as we realize 
that, judged solely by the standard of military power 
and skill, Germany still constitutes a serious threat 
to the Allies. Our greatest hope of ultimate victory 
stems not only from the superiority in industrial po- 
tential and available armaments we can display, but 


from the use we and our allies plan to make of 
victory. 

It is this growing concern with the ends, as well 
as means, of the war that accounts for the controversy 
in Britain and the United States over the question 
whether the Atlantic Charter has or has not been be- 
trayed in Poland and Greece. To place this question 
in focus, we must recall that the “common principles” 
enunciated in the Charter on August 14, 1941 were 
declared to be principles “in the national policies” 
of Britain and the United States, on which these two 
countries “base their hopes for a better future for the 
world.” The Charter can be taken to represent the 
ideals toward which President Roosevelt and Prime 
Minister Churchill believed their countrymen aspire 
—qualified by the knowledge that, in relations be- 
tween human beings, ideals all too often fail of com- 
plete realization. Of the eight principles set forth in 
the Charter, the first three are now particularly under 
discussion. Britain and the United States declared, 
first, that “their countries seek no aggrandizement, 
territorial or other’’; second, that ‘they desire to see 
no territorial changes that do not accord with the 
freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned” ; 
and third, that “they respect the right of all peoples 
to choose the form of government under which they 
will live; and they wish to see sovereign rights and 
self-government restored to those who have been 
forcibly deprived of them.” 

STATUS OF ATLANTIC CHARTER. To say 
that developments in Poland and Greece have made 
a mockery of the Atlantic Charter would be just as 
defeatist as to say that, because human beings do not 
live up in daily practice to the noblest tenets of their 
religious faiths, therefore these faiths have been con- 
signed to the scrap-heap. Nations, being composed 
of fallible human beings, find many reasons to excuse 
their failings. Russia, which was not originally a 
party to the Atlantic Charter, but did sign the United 








Nations Declaration of January 1, 1942 affirming the 
principles of the earlief document, can say in justi- 
fication of its policy oe had incorporated the Bal- 
tic states and eastern“Poland into the U.S.S.R. in 
1939-40, before the Charter had even been thought 
of, and that the Charter therefore does not cover 
these territories—any more than it appears to cover 
the colonial possessions of Britain, France or Holland 
in Asia. The British government, whose repression of 
armed resistance by the EAM forces in Greece has 
been denounced in this country and in Britain as 
contrary to the third principle of the Atlantic Charter, 
can argue that its measures are intended to give the 
Greek people ultimately the right ‘to choose the 
form of government under which they will live’ —a 
right which, according to Mr. Churchill, is threatened 
by the very existence of armed political groups. On 
Poland, on Greece, on any issue that arises among 
the United Nations, arguments can be cogently pre- 
sented by every party to the controversy. The task of 
statesmanship is to find a workable compromise be- 
tween the contending elements—a compromise that, 
obviously, will not suit everybody, but may make it 
possible for people to resume something approaching 
peaceable relations with each other. 

THE VIRTUE OF DEMOCRACY. The greatest 
virtue of democracy is that it permits and fosters 
compromise. Democracy can never develop the 


streamlined efficiency of arbitrary dictatorship, 
achieved at the point of the gun or whip; but, if kept 
reasonably free of selfish group interests, it can make 


Page Two 








it possible for people diverse in color, race, creed, and 
tradition to learn to work together for common ends. 
By affirming his faith in the democratic process, the 
Pope has made a signal contribution to clarifica- 
tion of the world-wide controversy over the rela- 
tive merits of democracy and totalitarianism. At 
the same time the Pope emphasized what so many 
advocates of democracy forget—that it is by far the 
most difficult way of life, imposing the sternest obli- 
gations for self-control both on the citizens of a truly 
democratic state, and on those among them who ac- 
cept the risks and privileges of leadership. The Pope 
made a sound distinction between “the people,” po- 
litically articulate and responsible, and inchoate 
“masses” that can become all too easily the prey of 
irresponsible dictators. The trouble is that in many 
countries lack of vision and courage on the part of 
those who claimed leadership has in the past made it 
impossible for ‘‘masses’’ to achieve, by the orderly 
process of reform, the maturity of “peoples,” and for 
nations to effect orderly territorial changes. These 
past failures cannot be erased merely by expressions 
of high-minded principles, as in the Atlantic Charter. 
They can eventually be corrected only if we all de- 
vote ourselves unremittingly to the primary task of 
our times—the creation of an international organiza- 
tion within whose framework all peoples would feel 
sufficiently secure from aggression to face the risks 
of change both at home and abroad. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BRITAIN RE-EXAMINES ISSUES IN GREEK CRISIS 


A special British communique dated Christmas 
Day 1944, declaring that Prime Minister Churchill 
and Foreign Secretary Eden had arrived in Athens to 
convene a conference representative of Greek poli- 
tical opinion, was one of the few heartening an- 
nouncements the Allies have received from Europe 
during this holiday season. Subsequent events have 
not, however, been equally encouraging, for on De- 
cember 27 fighting between British and Greek EAM 
forces again broke out following an EAM artillery 
attack on the Anglo-Greek naval headquarters. 

Although Prime Minister Churchill has not yet 
achieved the compromise he hoped to win through 
his personal intervention in the Greek civil war, 
he continues to hold out the promise that, if 
agreement can be reached, a regency will be es- 
tablished under the sole control of Archbishop 
Damaskinos, who has the reputation of being a 
fair-minded man unswayed by political considera- 
tions. Under this arrangement, King George II will 
not be permitted to return from exile in London un- 
less a free plebiscite on the form of Greece's post- 
war government reveals a demand for restoration of 
the monarchy. In the proposed plebiscite more than 
the constitutional issue will be at stake, however, 


for the monarchy has become the symbol of differ- 
ences that divide Left and Right in Greece. If, there- 
fore, EAM and its sympathizers win, their victory 
will probably result not only in the establishment of 
a republic, but also.in the adoption of a number of 
socialist measures. In the field of foreign affairs this 
group might be expected to retain its close wartime 
ties with the Partisans of Yugoslavia, and thus in- 
directly with Russia, instead of adopting the predom- 
inantly pro-British orientation that King George was 
expected to favor. 

WHY BRITAIN’S POLICY CHANGED. The 
main reasons for Prime Minister Churchill's decision 
to reconsider his government's attitude toward the 
EAM forces are worth noting, for they may occur 
elsewhere in Europe as other nations are freed of 
Nazi rule and insist on genuine independence. The 
relative weight of the considerations involved can 
only be guessed at, but one of the most important 
among them was unquestionably the British public's 
opposition to the use of British forces against the 
Greeks. Although the Labor party, as the spearhead 
of the opposition, was not inclined to force the issue 
at this time because of the necessity for preserving 
wartime unity, its leaders frankly declared that the 








> it 


for 
ese 
ns 
fer. 
de- 

of 
Za- 
eel 


sks 


fer- 
-re- 
ory 
of 
of 
this 
ime 


2m- 
was 


[he 
ion 
the 
cur 
of 
The 
can 
fant 
lic’s 
the 
ead 
ssue 
ing 
the 





; 








Prime Minister would have to give a reckoning when 
general elections are held following the defeat of 
Germany. And if periodicals and mass meetings fur- 
nish a fair test of opinion, the British were so greatly 
disturbed by the Greek crisis that the government 
began to fear the effects of this state of mind on the 
war effort. 

Another consideration that affected London's de- 
cision to abandon its original plan to disarm the 
EAM and refuse to deal with it politically was the 
unexpected strength displayed by these partisan 
forces. The British had apparently thought that their 
guerrilla opponents would be obliged to sue for an 
armistice not only because of their inability to com- 
bat superior armed units and air power but because of 
their need for food, which was promised to all Greeks 
as soon as the return of peace made relief work pos- 
sible. What the British did not anticipate was that 
the number of EAM troops would grow, despite 
heavy casualties, thanks to heavy desertions from the 
EDES, their British-supported opponents, and that 
the prospect of food relief would not bring the guer- 
rillas to terms. It would be rash to assume from the 
Greek example that food will not prove an effective 
means of restoring “order” in other liberated areas 
on subsequent occasions—as it was in various parts of 
eastern Europe at the close of World War I—but to 
the EAM, at least, relief was considered an inade- 
quate price for the acceptance of political institutions 
they opposed. After more than three years of acute 
food shortages under German rule, the EAM and its 
supporters apparently preferred a few more weeks 
or months of deprivation to defeat of their political 
aims. 


PRESSURE FROM THE UNITED STATES. 
THE F.P.A. 


The Making of Modern Holland, by A. J. Barnouw. New 
York, W. W. Norton, 1944. $2.75 


Interesting historical background on a country soon to 
resume its rightful place in world affairs. 


Page Three 





JUST PUBLISHED— 
ANGLO-AMERICAN CARIBBEAN COM- 
MISSION—Pattern for Colonial Cooperation 
by Olive Holmes 


25c 


December 15 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















Pressure exerted by the United States, in the form of 
the note issued by Secretary of State Stettinius on 
December 7, calling for complete political freedom 
for the Greek people, also influenced the British gov- 
ernment and may set a precedent for similar Amer- 
ican action in other liberated nations. But it was not 
only on the official level that the British perceived 
danger signals to future Anglo-American coopera- 
tion. Among the most threatening aspects of unofh- 
cial American criticism, as the British saw it, was the 
possibility that former isolationists, who have been 
only half-heartedly converted to the policy of inter- 
national cooperation as the best method of keeping 
peace in the future, would find Britain’s unilateral 
political action in Greece an invitation to revert to 
their original position. But it would be untrue to say 
that all, or most, of the criticisms of Britain’s policy 
in Greece stemmed from former isolationists. The 
fact is that millions of Americans have assumed that 
our armies are fighting in Europe not merely to safe- 
guard this nation’s security, or that of Britain and 
Russia, but also to assure the post-war independence 
of the countries conquered by Germany. Many of us, 
however, have not sufficiently heeded the corollary 
of this view—and that is that Britain and Russia can- 
not be expected to abstain from carving spheres of 
influence for themselves unless there is some alterna- 
tive system through which they can hope to achieve 
security. In the case of Greece the United States can- 
not reasonably expect that the British will surrender 
their influence on this strategically important nation 
at the eastern end of the Mediterranean unless we are 
prepared to give Britain concrete assurances that its 
hopes for future security will not be jeopardized as 


a result. WHNIFRED N. HADSEL 


BOOKSHELF 


Mexico: Magnetic Southland, by Sydney A. Clark. New 
York, Dodd, Mead, 1944. $3.00 


Pleasantly written description with a bit of historic 
background to interest prospective visitors. 


The Gentleman from Massachusetts: Henry Cabot Lodge, 
by Karl Schriftgiesser. Boston, Little, Brown, 1941. $3.00 


In these days, when Dumbarton Oaks is so much in 
people’s minds, it is particularly fitting to refresh mem- 
ories on the brilliant, sharply cynical man who played so 
important a part in keeping the United States out of inter- 
national cooperation after the first World War. 


Germany and Europe: A Spiritual Dissension, by Bene- 
detto Croce. New York, Random House, 1944. $1.25 
The famous Italian anti-Fascist analyzes the forces that 

he believes separate Germany from the mainstream of 

European civilization, and concludes that the defeat of the 

Germans will bring about the necessary change in their 

mentality. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 11, December 29, 1944. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Natiena! 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dornotuy F. Lurt, Secretary; Vara Micunies Daan, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allew at lease 


me month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


ek 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





Washington News Letter 











pred beng 

















The counterattack the Germans launched against 
the American First Army on December 16 has forced 
the Administration to examine soberly all possible 
steps that might be taken at an early date to strength- 
en the United Nations coalition. Only a deterioration 
of Allied unity, already disturbed by disagreement con- 
cerning Greece, Italy and Poland, could turn the Ger- 
man counterattack into a major Nazi accomplishment. 


NEW DIPLOMATIC GOAL. Although military 
unity has not yet suffered from political differences 
between the Allies, these differences and the German 
counteroffensive have combined to change the im- 
mediate goal of Allied diplomacy from a search for 
a formula of post-war cooperation to a search for 
basic principles of immediate common action. The 
Roosevelt Administration has hitherto placed the 
major emphasis of foreign policy on the need for the 
establishment of an international security organiza- 
tion that could preserve the peace after its restoration 
and would maintain the wartime alliance of the 
United Nations in peacetime. On December 23, how- 
ever, Senator Joseph H. Ball, Republican of Minne- 
sota, on leaving the White House after a conference 
with President Roosevelt indicated that he feared 
present disagreement among the Allies might jeop- 
ardize hopes for future cooperation in an interna- 
tional organization. In a joint statement with Senator 
Carl Hatch, Democrat of New Mexico, Senator Ball 
said: “There is no easy solution in sight for the dif- 
ferent problems and _ responsibilities facing the 
United Nations and particularly the United States, 
Great Britain and Russia. So much is at stake that 
we believe this country must make a supreme effort 
to solve these immediate problems, in which we must 
have the cooperation of our Allies.” 

But while President Roosevelt has already, through 
Mr. Byrnes and other officials, taken measures to 
tighten the home front, he is still weighing decisions 
in foreign policy which require a compromise of 
special Russian and British interests in Europe. At his 
press conference on December 22 he had no comment 
on the proposal made by British Foreign Secretary 
Eden the previous day for quarterly meetings of 
United States, British and Russian foreign ministers, 
and dismissed a suggestion for the creation of a 
United Nations political chiefs of staff committee. 
The President may disclose his intentions in his ad- 
dress on the state of the Union to the 79th Congress, 


FOR VICTORY ° 





BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


GERMAN DRIVE HEIGHTENS NEED FOR GREATER ALLIED UNITY 


which convenes on January 3. 

Stern political and military realities have in any 
event dissipated the airy confidence created here by 
Anglo-American conferences, and have focused at- 
tention on the need to broaden agreement among the 
United Nations. At the close of their conference in 
Quebec, on September 16, President Roosevelt 
and Prime Minister Churchill said that they had 
“reached decisions on all points . . . with regard to 
the completion of the war in Europe.’’ On October 
27, however, Mr. Churchill, on returning to London 
from his conference in Moscow with Marshal Stalin, 
expressed concern that ‘‘no final result’ in full agree- 
ment on political problems before the alliance ‘can 
be obtained until the heads of the three governments 
have met again together.” This emphasis on the need 
for a three-power conference strengthens the view in 
Washington that President Roosevelt has Russia fore- 
most in mind in his careful scrutiny of future foreign 
policy. In this connection it should be noted that on 
December 20 Secretary of State Stettinius announced 
Charles E. Bohlen, former chief of the State Depart- 
ment’s Near Eastern Division and the Department's 
leading expert on Russia, was being assigned to 
liaison work between the Department and the White 
House. 


HOW STRONG IS GERMANY? The defeat of 
Germany remains the greatest task of the United 
Nations coalition and its greatest test. Officials here 
find it impossible to assess the military effects of the 
German counterattack. It may shorten the war, as 
Secretary of War Stimson suggested on December 21, 
if it should turn out that Field Marshal General Kar! 
von Rundstedt has opened his offensive too soon for 
it to achieve its maximum effect. But it may prolong 
the war by preventing the Western allies from press- 
ing their offensive on the Rhine front when the Rus- 
sians open their anticipated offensive in the east. 
The Nazis, however, have done two things for the 
Allies: they have aroused them to the danger of re- 
laxing their efforts until the German armies have 
ceased firing, and have killed the feeling of optim- 
ism that marked the Quebec Conference, after which 
Mr. Roosevelt said he hoped the surrender of Ger- 
many might come soon, and the Moscow Conference. 
after which Mr. Churchill said he believed the Allies 
were ‘in the last lap” of the war against Germany. 


BLair BOLLES 


