— 


‘Df 
yn- 
ich 
he 
at- 
1al 


an 
de- 
jis- 
it 
re- 
red 
nal 
ind 
lic 
on- 
the 
nal 
ho- 
erg 


the 

on 
ery 
ro- 
itu- 
on- 
of 
an- 
olic 
ver 


reh 
dis- 
rom 


ned | 


lice 
and 
the 
1, a 
Ling 
t of 


the | 


all 
rian 
t to 


JE 


ational 
Editor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














Vou. XVI, No. 37 


JULY 9, 1937 





THE BUENOS AIRES CONFERENCE: 1936 
by Charles G. Fenwick 


This study appraises the results of the Inter-American 
Peace Conference and analyzes the terms of the more im- 
portant treaties negotiated, including the Consultative Pact, 
the Convention on Treaty Coordination and Neutrality 
and the Non-Intervention Protocol, to all of which the 
United States Senate has just given its approval. 


July 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Dr. William W. Bishop 
% University of Michigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











FRANCE DEVALUES ONCE MORE 





NFLUENCED by the tense international situa- 
tion, the French have again taken last-minute 

measures to meet a serious threat to internal 
political and financial stability. On June 30 the 
French Chamber of Deputies and the Senate—by 
votes of 380 to 228 and 167 to 82 respectively— 
accorded the Chautemps government full powers 
until August 31 to deal with the financial crisis. 
The gravity of this crisis was frankly revealed 
by M. Bonnet, the new Finance Minister. The 
Treasury balance had sunk as low as 20 million 
francs and only an emergency advance of 400 
million by the savings banks had staved off bank- 
ruptcy. The budget for 1937 would have an esti- 
mated deficit in excess of 6.5 billion francs, and 
the Treasury faced the well-nigh impossible task 
of borrowing about 25 billion for the balance of 
the year in a market which simply refused to ab- 
sorb any more government paper. About 7.7 
billion francs in gold had fled the country during 
June; and the gold of the equalization fund to- 
talling 10 billion francs had been exhausted. 

Immediately after obtaining the special powers 
the government promulgated a decree once more 
devaluing the currency and permitting it to seek 
its own level. On July 1 the franc plunged to a 
ten-year low of 3.83 American cents, as compared 
with the minimum of 4.35 cents fixed by the mone- 
tary law of October 1, 1936. In order to satisfy 
the urgent needs of the Treasury the cabinet also 
decreed an increase of 15 billion francs in 
the legal amount of advances which may be made 
to the state by the Bank of France. Borrowing 
requirements are expected to be reduced by other 
decrees, now under preparation, raising railway 
fares, increasing direct and indirect taxation, and 
instituting certain economies. 

While these emergency measures will tide over 
the French Treasury for some months, the finan- 
cial problem has by no means been solved. Re- 
newed borrowing from the Bank of France is but 


ill-disguised inflation. Resort te it can hardly be 
avoided as long as the French capital which has 
sought refuge abroad is not repatriated in a wave 
of renewed confidence. Althongh the franc seems 
unlikely to fall lower than the present level of 
about 3.84 cents, confidence in the French cur- 
rency has on the whole scarcely been enhanced by 
this new devaluation—the third since the war and 
the second within nine months. Nor does the 
political situation give much reason for optimism. 
The Popular Front is holding together precari- 
ously. The Communists are chafing at the bit and 
may withdraw their support from the Chautemps 
cabinet on the slightest provocation. Many of 
the Socialists are bitter against the Radical So- 
cialist majority in the Senate which gave M. Chau- 
temps even more extended powers than those for 
which the Socialist Léon Blum had pleaded in 
vain. They are convinced that the Blum govern- 
ment was torpedoed by the financial interests and 
may try to get the Socialist Congress, which meets 
from July 10 to July 13, to chart a much more 
radical course leading to union with the Com- 
munists and severance of ties with the Radical 
Socialists. The latter, at the same time, are 
equally determined to have the Popular Front 
adhere to conservative economic and social poli- 
cies. In particular, M. Chautemps will need all 
his ingenuity to secure unanimous consent for the 
contemplated taxation and economy measures. 


The new devaluation of the franc has not abro- 
gated the tripartite monetary understanding of 
September 26, 1936 by which the United States, 
Britain and France undertook “to maintain the 
greatest possible equilibrium in the system of in- 
ternational exchanges.” This engagement was 
specifically reaffirmed in British and American 
notes to the French Finance Minister which were 
made public on July 1. Both London and Wash- 
ington realize that the value of the franc fixed 
last October was too high to allow for the 





ag 3 AGERE 


oo 
HFS 


eae ea ee ee ee ey 


Se Aaa PENG ca nee OE 


re 


Fkatide Pn mig ht 


So POTS i bea si 


eee _— 


5. ae 


i} 


“eke 








past and future appreciation of French prices. 
Even at the present exchange rate the franc will 
not be undervalued unless the further expected 
increase in the French price level does not ma- 
terialize. Nor is there any occasion for the Neth- 
erlands or Switzerland, which also devalued last 
fall, to embark on further depreciation of their 
currencies. In sharp contrast to France, these 
countries have, with the aid of more orthodox 
policies, experienced considerable economic recov- 
ery and a substantial repatriation of capital. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 
TENSION ON THE AMUR 


The rapid subsidence of tension over recent 
military incidents on the Soviet-Manchoukuoan 
border, after withdrawal of Soviet troops from 
disputed territory on July 4, affords clear indi- 
cation of the distaste for foreign adventure felt 
at the moment by political leaders in both Japan 
and the U.S.S.R. At the same time the intensity 
of the brief crisis and the complete lack of agree- 
ment on measures for a comprehensive frontier 
settlement constitute evidence that the Amur 
River will be a focal point for international con- 
flict in the future. 

According to Japanese reports, the dispute re- 
garding sovereignty over the small, sandy islands 
of Sennufa and Bolshoi, 62 miles southeast of 
Blagovestchensk, was precipitated when they 
were occupied by Soviet troops on June 19. Soviet 
dispatches ascribed the friction to seizure of the 
islands by Japanese forces on June 20. Moscow 
bases its claim to the territory on a map attached 
to a treaty signed with China in 1860, while Tokyo 
maintains that the boundary follows the middle 
of the main channel, north of the islands, and 
points out that since the Russian-Manchoukuoan 
waterways agreement of 1934 Manchoukuo has 
maintained beacons on both Sennufa and Bolshoi. 
After long discussions between Maxim Litvinov, 
Soviet Commissar of Foreign Affairs, and Mamo- 
ru Shigemitsu, Japanese Ambassador at Moscow, 
the U.S.S.R. apparently agreed to withdraw its 
forces. 


The situation again became acute, however, 
when on June 29 or 30—the reports vary—Soviet 
gunboats were apparently sunk in an artillery 
duel with Japanese forces in the river channel 
south of the islands in dispute. Military positions 
in the neighborhood were reinforced, and both 
sides adopted a belligerent attitude. A new na- 
tional defense loan of $800,000,000 was announced 
at Moscow. In Hsinking, Manchoukuo reported 
the completion of two more strategic railways 
facilitating the transport of troops to the fron- 
tier, while the Japanese government invoked its 


Page Two 








mutual assistance pact with Manchoukuo, bing 
ing Tokyo to aid in the defense of Manchoukuos 
territory. ; 

Meanwhile, negotiations proceeded in Moscow, 
where Litvinov proposed restoration of the staty 
quo ante by mutual withdrawal of troops and gun. 
boats, to be followed by negotiations for rede. 
marcation of the frontier. This plan was accepted 
by the Japanese after a meeting of importan} 
cabinet officials on July 2. The Soviet forces were 
ordered to evacuate the islands on the following 
day, and both sides agreed to leave the matter of! 
sovereignty for determination by the proposed 
border commission. 

Despite the relatively amicable outcome of thij 
incident, it would be surprising if border dispute 
of similar scope did not occur in the future. Hot 
headed nationalists in the Japanese Kwantun 
army and the Soviet Far Eastern forces will b 
tempted by the strained status of Soviet-Japanes 
relations to provoke disorders along the Amur 
Border disturbances may further aggravate th: 
diplomatic struggle—intensified since conclusion 
of the German-Japanese anti-Communist pact— 
between Japan and the Soviet Union. Under thes: 
circumstances redemarcation of the frontier is im 
probable. With its strengthened autonomous Far 
Eastern army, Moscow is not likely to yield to the 
Japanese demand that Manchoukuo have the cast 
ing vote in a three-man border commission. Som: 
observers have suggested that the recent crisij 
on the Amur is a Japanese move to determine th 
extent to which the U.S.S.R. has been immobilize/ 
by Stalin’s drastic purges among the Soviet hier 
archy, particularly among top-ranking military 
officers. Internal difficulties in Japan, however 
are equally important as a temporary deterren! 


to war. DAVID H. POPPER 



















Which Way France? by Alexander Werth. New York 
Harper, 1937. $3.00 
Few foreign observers have such an intelligent grasp @ 
French politics as the correspondent in Paris of th 
Manchester Guardian. 


Diplomacy and Peace, by R. B. Mowat. 
McBride, 1936. $2.50 


New York 


An intelligent and interesting survey of the réle ani 


character of diplomacy in the modern world. 


Asia’s Good Neighbor: We Were Once—Can We Bi 
Again? by Walter Karig. Indianapolis, Bobbs-Merrill 
1937. $2.50 
The author urges a reversion to our early non-inter 

vention policy in the Far East, but seems rather obliviow 

of the new factors in world politics which make such ! 
course difficult to follow today. 


Polities and Political Parties in Rowmania. London, Inter 
national Reference Library Publishing Co., 1936. $3.0! 
An invaluable reference work, containing the constitu 

tion, programs of all political parties, and an extensiv' 

“Who’s Who” of Rumanian political leaders. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 37, Juty 9, 1937. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 0 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lgsiig BuBLL, President; EstHer G. Oven, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES Dean, Béito 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


Nationi 











