wt 


X)—1946 gerbes nice 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Genera] Library 


JAN 2 3 1948 
Ualverstty 


Sity of Nichigan 


Ann Arbor, Nich, 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


OPS Op- 
rotested 
ince. 

the Na- 
> in the 
1ard the 
well as 
he line. 
le to re 
rom. the 
Var to a 
é urged 
ts in all 
a cessa- 


=d States 
attempt 
rvals of 
tion has 
which a 
mic and 
yn, such 
\ dminis- 
ai-shek, 
‘be fully 
mn inter: 
ithin. 

OLLES 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 14 


JANUARY 18, 1946 


DEMOBILIZATION PROTESTS RAISE G2JESTIONS ON FOREIGN POLICY 


— demonstrations by American troops in 
such widely separated areas as the Philippines, 
Guam, Japan, China, India, Germany and France 
have raised some crucial questions about the nature 
of our foreign policy and its understanding by the 
public. It would be easy to interpret these demon- 
strations, and the parallel home-front sentiment for 
demobilization, as merely reflecting the natural de- 
sire of the nation to return completely to civilian life 
now that the enemy’s forces have been beaten. Or 
to attribute recent events to the fact that many 
soldiers and civilians question the methods actu- 
ally followed in demobilization. But there is more 
to the situation than this, for it is evident that 
an important section of the American people 
either does not understand the aims of American 
policy abroad, distrusts those aims as reflected in par- 
ticular areas, or is not sure that clear aims exist. 
Consequently, the present period of readjusting our 
policies on demobilization might well be used to 
consider anew how the public and the government 
can be brought into a larger measure of agreement 
on the nature of America’s commitments abroad. 


DO WE NEED TROOPS OVERSEAS? It is diffi- 


_ qult to say whether a majority of the American 


people are opposed in principle to the presence of 
American troops abroad in peacetime. But the coun- 
tty unquestionably expects to be shown why troops 
are actually necessary in any specific area in which 
the government desires to keep them. Perhaps the 


) simplest approach to the problem, then, is to recog- 


hize that there are only two territories in which such 
a necessity exists on a significant scale, namely Ger- 
many and Japan. For if we are to avert a third world 
war and make certain that the military defeat of the 
Nazis and Japanese militarists is followed by a 
change in the national mentality of the German and 


Japanese peoples, it will clearly be essential to main- 
tain American troops in both countries for a consid- 
erable period. It is unfortunate in the highest degree 
that recent demonstrations in Berlin and Tokyo have 
given the forces of the old order in both areas rea- 
son to hope that the occupation is foredoomed to 
failure and that a resurgence of military power may 
be possible at a later date. 


There has never been any lack of sound and per- 
suasive arguments to present to the public and armed 
forces in explaining why an extended occupation of 
Germany and Japan is important. In the eight 
months since the defeat of Germany and the five 
months since Japan surrendered there have been in- 
numerable opportunities for the White House and 
State Department to drive the point home. But there 
is no evidence that American forces in the former 
enemy countries have received anything that could 
properly be called “orientation” on this subject, or 
that the people at home have had the matter present- 
ed to them. On the contrary, there has been a strik- 
ing absence of leadership from those who are in 
positions of authority. It is true, of course, that po- 
litical risks are involved in telling the public that 
troops are required to prevent Germany and Japan 
from again becoming military threats, but it is the 
function of leaders to assume such risks if the ob- 
jective is sound. 

The record shows that not long after the defeat 
of Germany the military government of the Amer- 
ican zone became increasingly hampered by the with- 
drawal of high-point men who knew their occupa- 
tion jobs, and by the shortage as well as the inade- 
quacy of replacements. Most striking, however, were 
the statements made by high military chiefs in con- 
nection with Japan. On September 15, when our 
troops had been in Japan two weeks, Lieutenant Gen- 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


eral Robert L. Eichelberger, commander of the oc- 
cupying Eighth Army, declared: “If the Japs con- 
tinue acting as they are now, within a year this thing 
should be washed up.” Soon afterward, while not 
taking the position that the occupation would be 
short, General MacArthur forecast the probability 
of a sharp cut in the occupation forces within six 
months and their replacement by regular Army men. 


These statements inevitably encouraged a general 
expectation that our troops would soon return from 
Japan and also had repercussions among the forces 
in Germany. In fact, one of the significant aspects of 
the recent demonstrations is the way in which, as a 
result of newspaper and radio reports, a protest in 
one center, for example Manila, soon aroused a re- 
sponse thousands of miles away in Berlin. This sug- 
gests the importance of withdrawing soldiers as 
speedily as possible from countries in which they are 
not essential, so that the expression of their griev- 
ances may not hamper our occupation of Germany 
and Japan. There are at the present moment some 
thousands of troops in France, China, India, the 
Philippines, Korea, the Pacific islands and other 
areas. In most of those places that are not under 
American political control—e.g. France and India— 
the maintenance of a handful of troops to care for 
the winding up of our obligations would seem ade- 
quate. In the Philippines and the Pacific islands, 
where we have an interest in military bases, no more 
than small forces should be required to maintain 
these interests. In Korea, which at present does not 
possess a government of its own and in which we 
have undertaken trusteeship responsibilities, troops 


will obviously be required until these obligations 
have been met. 


RECALLING MARINES FROM CHINA. The 
question of China falls into a separate category be- 
cause the maintenance of some 50,000 Marines in 
the north and roughly 10,000 Army men elsewhere 
has been explained officially on the ground that they 
are needed to disarm and evacuate the defeated Jap- 
anese armies. It has been apparent, however, that 
the Marines played a political role last fall in en- 
abling the Chungking government to reestablish its 
authority in areas that would otherwise have been 
closed to it by the Chinese Communists. Although 
for a time the danger existed that American troops 
would become actively involved in a Chinese civil 
war, their position has become less precarious since 
the dispatch of General Marshall to China and the 
enunciation of a policy somewhat different from that 
carried out by former Ambassador Hurley. And to- 
day, as a result of the cease-fire order agreed to by 
the Central government and the Chinese Com- 
munists on January 10, North China seems likely to 
enter a period of relative quiet, while fundamental 
discussions take place in Chungking. 


Page Two 


—— 
et 


Since there are more than enough Chinese troops 
in North China to receive and enforce the Japanese 
surrender in that region, the presence of large forces 
of Marines seems unnecessary. This is particularly 
true because, under the terms of the Chinese truce, 
a three-man military commission, consisting of one 
American, one representative of the Central govern. 
ment, and one Chinese Communist, is being set up in 
Peiping to take care of such questions as the disarm. 
ament of remaining Japanese forces. Moreover, the 
policy of conciliation linked with General Marshall's 
name should not require, and might even be impeded 
by, the maintenance of American divisions op 
Chinese soil. 


There are some Americans who fear that the with. 
drawal of troops from foreign areas would be 
synonymous with the abandonment of American re. 
sponsibilities in world affairs. This would certainly 
be true in the case of Germany and Japan, but it 
would be unfortunate if we should come to regard 
armed force as a leading instrument of long-term 
policy in Allied areas. On the contrary, general ex. 
perience shows that the presence of foreign troops 
is resented even by close allies and is frequently pro- 
ductive of bad feeling between the home population 
and the foreign forces. It might well be argued, for 
example, that the effectiveness of American policy 
toward France could only benefit from the with 
drawal of our troops, in view of the many instances 
of friction between them and the French people. 


The determination of the exact number of troops 


to be maintained in a particular area, the rate of | 


withdrawal, and other technical matters cannot be 
made without full possession of the details affecting 
each area. But since the over-all decisions are polit: 
ical rather than military, a restatement of govern- 
ment policy on demobilization would seem to involve 
the following: (1) a clear-cut declaration that the 
United States intends to occupy Germany and Japan 


as long as necessary, with an explanation of the rea: | 
sons for this position; (2) a pledge of early and | 
rapid withdrawal of all, or the main body of, our | 
troops from various other areas, with the exception | 
of Korea; and (3) the alteration of demobiliza- | 


tion practices, so that the bulk of soldiers and 
civilians will feel that a fair and consistent course 
is being followed in determining occupation pet: 
sonnel. Such a policy would bring thousands of 


soldiers home and speed to completion the immediate , 


post-war task of demobilization which the armed 
forces have been carrying out for some months. At 
the same time it would constitute a guarantee to out 
Allies that we recognize the job that remains to be 
done in Germany and Japan and mean to see it 
through. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


— 


Four 
A Ye 
Lucid 2 
erning | 
Francisco 
ments. 


The Chal 
Whittle 
A well 

munist a: 

ist, who ° 

munists’ 

tory, arr 

New Der 

and solve 


Japan a 
York, 
In thi: 

peror, a 

Japan ir 

eratic g' 

peror in 


Map of 
Wash: 


A col 
Korean. 


Japanes 
) jonger i 


The Jer 
Adain 
Rabb 

faith st 

instead 


United 
and | 
Simp 

founda 


Journe 
Dutt 
A yo 

ences ¢ 

| The G 

Far} 
Prec 
| feated 

Japan 

have r 


A Nat 
194! 
Sup 

“the 

terest 

every 


| 


FOREI 
Headqu 
second- 
one mc 


@ 


—<—<—$—$—$$— 


se troops 
Japanese 
ge forces 
rticularly 
Se truce, 
g of one 
| govern. 
Set up in 
> disarm. 
Over, the 
farshall’s 
impeded 


10NS ON 


the with. 
Ould be 
‘rican re. 
certainly 
n, but it 
O regard 
ong-term 
neral ex. 
n troops 
ntly pro- 
ypulation 
yued, for 
in policy 
he with- 
instances 
sople. 


»f troops 
» rate of 
annot be 
affecting 
ire polit. 
- govern- 
> involve 
that the 
nd Japan 
* the rea- 
arly and 
r of, our 
~xception 
mobiliza- 
iers and 
it course 
ion per: 
sands of 


nmediate | 


e armed 
mnths. At 
2e to our 
ins to be 
‘0 see it 


INGER 


——— 
_ 


Page Three 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The Four Cornerstones of Peace, by Vera Micheles Dean. 
New York, Whittlesey House, McGraw-Hill, 1946. $2.50 
Lucid analysis of the things readers want to know con- 

grning Dumbarton Oaks, Chapultepec, Yalta, and San 

francisco accomplishments. Includes texts of the agree- 
ments. 


The Challenge of Red China, by Gunther Stein. New York, 
Whittlesey House, 1945. $3.50 


A well-written, highly informative report on the Com- 
munist areas in China by a skilled economist and journal- 
jst, who visited the Northwest. He concludes that the Com- 
munists’ “fundamental strength lies not so much in terri- 
tory, arms, and outside supplies as in the fact that the 
New Democracy answers the needs of the Chinese people 
‘and solves their basic problems.” 


Japan and the Son of Heaven, by Willard Price. New 
York, Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1945. $2.75 


In this discussion of the problem of the Japanese Em- 
peror, as well as the social system linked with imperial 
Japan in the past, Mr. Price argues that a genuinely demo- 
cratic government is possible in Japan, but that the Em- 
peror institution must give way to a republic. 


Map of Korea, 1945. Issued by Korean Affairs Institute, 
Washington, D.C., 1945. $2.00 
A collection of maps with place names in romanized 
Korean. Should prove particularly valuable now that the 
Japanese names found on most maps of Korea are no 
jonger in use. 


The Jewish Dilemma, by Elmer Berger. New York, Devin- 
Adair, 1945. $38.00 


Rabbi Berger explains his belief that people of Jewish 
faith should be able to live free lives in their own nations 
instead of seeking a National Homeland in Palestine. 


United Nations Primer, by Sigrid Arne. New York, Farrar 
and Rinehart, 1945. $1.25 
Simplified explanation of fifteen meetings which laid 
foundations for a world peace; includes documents. 


Journey Underground, by David G. Prosser. New York, 
Dutton, 1945. $2.75 
A young Flight Officer tells the vivid story of his experi- 
ences after being forced down in occupied France. 


The German Record, by William Ebenstein. New York, 
Farrar and Rinehart, 1945. $3.00 
Predicts no immediate democratic development in a de- 
feated Germany, making the statement that Germany and 
Japan are the only major countries of the world which 
have never had successful democratic revolutions. 


A Nation of Nations, by Louis Adamic. New York, Harper, 
1945. $3.50 
Supporting his thesis that American history has taught 
“the Anglo-Saxon myth,” Adamic piles up masses of in- 
teresting information about the part played by people from 
every section of the world in building the country. 


Italy and the Coming World, by Don Luigi Sturzo. New 
York, Roy Publishers, 1945. $3.50 


A patriotic version of his country’s past and its future 
prospects by a distinguished Italian exile. He appeals for 
an Italian republic with a progressive social and economic 
policy resting on the moral basis of a Christian democracy. 


Dilemma in Japan, by Andrew Roth. Boston, Little, Brown, 
1945. $2.50 


A vigorous, penetrating survey of the issues involved in 
dealing with a defeated Japan. The author particularly 
stresses the need for economic reforms, if Japan is to de- 
velop a peaceful society. 


Woodrow Wilson and the People, by H. C. F. Bell. Garden 
City, N. Y., Doubleday, Doran, 1945. $3.00 


Rather distinctive in the mass of Wilson biographies be- 
cause it represents the author’s attempt to do the sort of 
book that Wilson would have felt would make all kinds of 
people understand him. 


A Catholic Looks at the World, by Francis E. McMahon. 
New York, Vanguard Press, 1945. $2.75 
Presents the point of view of a well-known layman on 
many important issues of the present day. 


Brazil: An Interpretation, by Gilberto Freyre. New York, 
Knopf, 1945, $2.00 


In this collection of lectures, the Brazilian sociologist’s 
penetrating analysis of the ethnic and social climate of his 
country is for the first time made available to American 
readers. A chapter on foreign policy is included which 
should be required reading for students of the Good Neigh- 
bor Policy. 


Brazil on the March—A Study in International Coopera- 
tion, by Morris Llewelyn Cooke. New York, Whittlesey 
House, 1944. $3.00 


The Chief of the American Technical Mission to Brazil 
(1943) advocates, as being mutually advantageous, close 
United States cooperation with an industrializing Brazil. 


The Cossacks, by Maurice Hindus. Garden City, N. Y., 
Doubleday, Doran, 1945. $3.00 


Out of his love for Russia Hindus has written a fasci- 
nating story of the famous warrior group, tying it up to 
present-day developments. 


Soldier of Democracy, by Kenneth S. Davis. Garden City, 
N. Y., Doubleday, Doran, 1945. $3.50 


To be a biographer of a living celebrity is hard, but the 
author has done a creditable piece of work in sketching 
Eisenhower’s background, personality and war service. 


Cooperative Communities at Work, by Henrik F. Infield. 
New York, Dryden Press, 1945. $3.00 


Summarizes the history and workings of some of the 
most noted examples both in the United States and other 
countries, including the Mexican Ejido and the Russian 
Kolkhoz. 


Armament and History, by John F. C. Fuller. New York, 
Scribners, 1945. $2.50 


An authoritative writer on things military, Mr. Fuller 
in this small book encompasses war’s history from the stone 
age to today’s atomic bomb. The thesis he develops is that 
the restriction of war is a pathological problem, and that 
to know the influence of armament may be of some value 
in treating that problem. 


Inside Rome with the Germans, by Jane Scrivener. New 
York, Macmillan, 1945. $2.50 


The pseudonymous diary of an American who saw many 
interesting things in the course of her work at the Vatican, 
where she was collecting and sending news of prisoners 
of war to their relatives. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 14, January 18, 1946. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRaNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Be 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


WILL U.S. PARTY RIVALRY IMPAIR UNO’s EFFECTIVENESS? 


When the United Nations Organization moves to 
this country permanently in the spring, primary elec- 
tions for the Congressional campaign of 1946 will 
already have begun. Party rivalry in those elections 
will affect United States policy in the United Nations 
Organization. Republicans, hopeful that the elec- 
tions will give them a majority in the House or 
Senate, or perhaps in both, for the first time in 16 
years, already are attempting to put their stamp on 
foreign policy in order to weaken Democratic efforts 
to take all the credit for it. Arthur Vandenberg, Sen- 
ator from Michigan and a delegate to the United Na- 
tions Organization, disclosed that Republican objec- 
tive when, on landing in England on January 6 to 
attend the first General Assembly of the UNO, he 
announced that he could not accept the agreement 
on atomic energy reached at Moscow in December. 

SOURCES OF AMERICAN POLICY. One prob- 
lem confronting President Truman is to see to it that 
the ro of elections in this country does not 
immobilize the United Nations as in the past it has 
so often immobilized the Federal government, whose 
officials customarily fear boldness, candor and even 
action at such a time. Unless some system is devised 
that enables Congress and the minority party to 
share openly each step of the way in the evolution 
of foreign policy, disagreement crippling to both the 
United States and the UNO will continue to arise 
at critical moments. Truman, who knew Vandenberg 
well when they both were Senators, is said to be con- 
fident that the latter wants to further the United 
Nations Organization, not disrupt it, so long as the 
Administration takes into account his point of view 
on specific details. The minority party inevitably has 
a potent weapon in its ability to embarrass the Ad- 
ministration by blocking its program in Congress. 

Nobody in Washington has proposed a method 
that will enable Congress to share directly in the 
making of foreign policy and at the same time pre- 
vent it from exercising a sort of veto over the deci- 
sions of the UNO. Until the dilemma is resolved, 
the United Nations Organization will be restrained 
by uncertainty over the ultimate attitude of this coun- 
try on each major question. Secretary Byrnes acknow]- 
edged the veto power of Congress on January 7, 
when he announced that it will have the final say 
on American acceptance or rejection of the Moscow 
atomic agreement, which deals with the most acute 
issue now affecting international relations. 

The attitude Congress displays toward the atomic 
agreement will disclose whether this country, with 


its political system of checks and balances, can take 
part constructively in any international body through 
representatives chosen by the President. At the same 
time, Congress can exert a good influence on the de. 
liberations of the UNO if it discourages the inter. 
national organization from conducting its business ip 
excessive secrecy. Congressional examination of the 
Moscow accord could be valuable if it clarified the 
true nature of the agreement without insisting on 
changes unacceptable to other nations. The agree. 
ment paves the way for a prohibition against manu. 
facture of the atomic bomb and, while it establishes 
no international system of industrial inspection that 
could determine whether United Nations members 
were honoring the prohibition, its signers assumed 
that the UNO will work out safeguarding controls, 

GOOD START FOR UNO. Byrnes went to Lon. 
don hopeful that the United Nations would mini- 
mize the atomic issue during the opening session of 
the General Assembly, which, however, is to selec 
the atomic commission proposed in the Moscow 
agreement. Looking forward to a long life for the 
United Nations Organization, Washington wants it 
to avoid certain issues at this time. To this end, the 
United States is enlisting the cooperation of Iran and 
Turkey, neither of which is expected to protest at 
this session of the General Assembly or at the first 
meeting of the Security Council against what they 
consider Russian aggression respecting Azerbaijan in 
Iran and threats against Kars in Turkey. The Gen- 


eral Assembly will satisfy Byrnes thoroughly if it 
organizes the various constituent bodies of UNO and 


then adjourns until the second meeting, to be held | 


in the United States. 

The atomic agreement, which will be the first 
great problem of the United Nations, has a special 
value in that it makes it necessary for all the great 
powers to take a serious interest in the UNO. When 
Byrnes went to Moscow in December for conversa- 
tions with Bevin and Molotov, he feared that in the 
absence of any agreement with Russia for interna- 
tional treatment of the atomic issue, the U.S.S.R. 
would give only perfunctory recognition to the Gen- 
eral Assembly meeting and designate Ambassador 
Gusev, already in London, as chief of the Russian 
delegation. The designation after the Moscow meet: 
ing of Vice Foreign Commissar Andrei Y. Vishinsky 
revealed that the Russians intended to cooperate, for 
Molotov in the past has intrusted to Vishinsky many 
assignments of first importance to Russia in foreign 
affairs. BLAIR BOLLES 


Vou. X2 


eS 


MES 
iy hi 
un 
man tc 
trys p 
since h 
he poi 
done | 
States 
be full 
clared, 
Now i 
to all 
measu 
return 
war. 


MAN 
conce! 
poirit 
Octob 
portas 
need 

stricti 
minis 
be tra 
milite 
termi 
in Ge 
peop! 
and 1 
may 

who. 
Gern 
State: 
as SO 


