A 


for an 
‘ace of 
orce is 
of air. 
lack of 
entum, 
{inister 
1S ago, 
orth of 
> been 
irplane 
produc- 
eration 
easures 
he gov- 
ave al- 
od con- 
ion im- 


re these 
visit of 
-organi- 
and the 
o reach 
slater. 
parable. 
e of ac- 
ye more 
Forces in 


‘rsations 
s of the 


SPPER 


. Boston, 


and eco- 
ear focus 
alistic ii- 
istic drive 
traces the 
nsible for 
ft toward 
y a timely 
nflict and 


he author 
in Japan } 


eck. New| 


‘aiser was 
| a faulty 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
. Y., under act 


Vou. XVII, No. 8 


DECEMBER 17, 1937 


— 


DECEMBER 15 ISSUE OF FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS 


FASCISM AND COMMUNISM IN SOUTH AMERICA 
by Stephen Naft 


The establishment of a semi-fascist dictatorship in 
Brazil has focused world attention on South America, 
and the question is immediately asked whether the three- 
cornered struggle among Europe’s political philosophies 
—democracy, fascism and communism—now threatens 
to extend into the Western Hemisphere. 


25 cents a copy 


—_- 


U.S. TAKES FIRM STAND ON “PANAY” INCIDENT 


NATE attacks on all Yangtze river 
traffic above Nanking, in an effort to cut off the 
escape of fleeing Chinese troops, have been respon- 
sible for what may prove to be the most serious 
incidents affecting third parties since the beginning 
of the Sino-Japanese war. On December 12 two were 
killed and many reported missing when the United 
States Navy gunboat Panay, used as a floating refuge 
for American diplomatic officials and civilians from 
the capital, was sunk by a Japanese airplane. Three 
vessels of the Standard Oil Company harboring 
refugees were also destroyed, and two naval and 
two commercial ships of British registry were shelled 
by the Japanese at Wuhu on the same day. A sharp 
British protest and a strong demand for satisfaction 
by President Roosevelt, on December 13, evoked 
profuse Japanese apologies at Tokyo, Washington 
and Shanghai. On December 14 the Foreign Office 
signified its readiness to pay compensation and give 
guarantees against recurrence of such incidents, but 
it was embarrassed by the President's attempt to draw 
the Emperor, who ordinarily stands aloof from the 
political arena, into active diplomatic discussion. 
The success of this manoeuvre would strike a heavy 
blow at the freedom of action of the Japanese mili- 
tary and might curb their disregard for pledges 
made by civilian officials. It was apparent that 
Japan, confronted with the prospect of continued 
hostilities in China and an acute diplomatic dispute 
with the U.S.S.R. over the use of Siberian fisheries, 
had no stomach for a simultaneous tilt with two 
other potential opponents. 


Meanwhile a chapter in the history of the Sino- 
Japanese war neared conclusion on December 13, 
when a victorious Japanese army burst through the 


| walled defenses of Nanking and fought its way 


into the Chinese capital. Investment of the city 
marked the culmination of a rapid advance along the 


Yangtze in the one-month period since the fall of 
Shanghai, and put the rich provinces of Kiangsu, 
Chekiang and Anhwei, with an area of some 20,000 
Square miles and a population of 16,000,000, under 
the virtual control of the Japanese army. Despite 
a serious shortage of food, equipment and trained 
troops the Chinese, under General Tang Sheng-chi, 
offered stiff resistance as the Japanese neared the 
city. A Japanese ultimatum, calling for surrender of 
the garrison—which would have secured safety for 
perhaps 300,000 civilians huddled in a neutral zone 
officially unrecognized by the Japanese—was an- 
swered only by continued combat. Chiang Kai-shek 
himself deferred his departure for Hankow until 
the enemy vanguard reached the gates of the capital. 
The retreating Chinese have carried out a policy of 
systematic devastation in evacuated territories, leav- 
ing only charred ruins for the invaders even at 
Chingkiang, a city of 150,000. 


In Shanghai, moreover, the Japanese occupation 
has disturbed the intricate balance between acquired 
foreign privileges and Chinese sovereign authority 
which had long obtained in the International Settle- 
ment and the French Concession. An already con- 
fused situation has been further complicated by the 
action of Japanese authorities, participants in the 
government of the Settlement, who asserted rights of 
conquest over an area in which war does not legally 
exist. On November 27 they assumed formal con- 
trol and supervision of Chinese postal and communi- 
cations organizations in the city—a move which may 
facilitate Japanese censorship in the greatest Chinese 
news center. At the same time it was announced that 
Japanese customs officials would be stationed in the 
Shanghai customs area, where over half the Chinese 
government’s tariff revenues are normally collected. 
Diplomatic representations initiated by Britain, 
France and the United States appear to have won 


Se ge se a ae 2. <— 


Swe an ES NEE 


a eee eeRaEEE — 
nea: 


ST 


assurances that the service of foreign loans for 
which these funds are pledged will not be inter- 
rupted. The appointment of 20 new Japanese em- 
ployees to the customs office on December 11, how- 
ever, indicates that Japan will not relinquish control 
of revenues which would ordinarily be turned over 
to the Chinese government, and that the reduction 
of tariff rates on Japanese imports may be in prospect. 

An early test of strength between Settlement off- 
cials and Japanese military authorities occurred on 
December 3, when 5,000 Japanese troops marched 
through the city in a provocative victory parade. 
Following a bomb explosion which injured three 
soldiers participating in the procession, an attempt 
was made to extend Japanese military control over a 
section of the Settlement patrolled by American 
marines. The vigorous reaction of foreign officials 
impelled the Japanese to withdraw their forces, but 


ae “the situation remains delicate. 


Despite the plethora of reports concerning the 
terms of peace allegedly proffered by Japan, it is 
still impossible to determine the strength or duration 
of future Chinese resistance. The Chinese Central 
government, which had laboriously completed the 
task of national unification immediately before the 
outbreak of hostilities, has now practically ceased to 
exercise authority in the peripheral provinces of the 
country. Japan is organizing provisional puppet 
régimes in areas under its control; one at Peiping was 
designated as ‘Provisional Government of the Re- 
public of China” on December 14. Japan’s armies may 
be expected to pause for breath while they combat 
guerrilla attacks of Communists and irregulars in 
the north; its naval forces may strengthen their grip 
on strategic islands along the southern China coast. 
Authorities of moderate views in Tokyo are said to 
be seeking to conclude an armistice with a new 
Chinese junta in which Wang Ching-wei, Chang 
Chun and Ho Ying-chin—all relatively pro-Japanese 
—might hold the positions of power. Thus far, 
however, these politicians have not dared to flout 
Chinese nationalist sentiment by assuming power 
and concluding a peace treaty. Tokyo has conse- 
quently veered toward a stronger policy involving 
extensive military operations north, south, and west 
of Nanking with the avowed purpose of wiping out 
every possible vestige of effective Chinese resistance. 
Should this plan of campaign be adopted, the war 
would rapidly take on the character of an endurance 
contest to which only exhaustion would call a halt. 


Davi H. PopPEer 


ITALY QUITS THE LEAGUE 
Italy’s withdrawal from the League of Nations on 
December 11, more than two years after the first 
application of sanctions in League history, was in 
the nature of an anti-climax. Mussolini told a not 


PageTuwo = 


es 
—— 


over-enthusiastic crowd in Rome that Italy was 
leaving “without any regrets the tottering temple 
where they are not working for peace but are pay. 
ing the way for war.” While asserting that Ital 
would not abandon its fundamental political ob. 
jectives—peace and collaboration—he announced 
that it had arms “in great numbers and tempered 
by two victorious wars.” In an official communiqué 
of December 12 the German government said it 
shares Italy’s view that “‘the Geneva political system 
is not only futile but pernicious,” and asserted that 
Germany's return to the League ‘“‘will never again 
be considered.” 


Italy's decision to join its anti-communist partners, 
Germany and Japan, in boycotting the League, is a 
direct result of the League's failure to make “a ges. 
ture of reparation” by recognizing the conquest of 
Ethiopia. It had been hoped in Rome that Prime 
Minister Neville Chamberlain, who in July had ex. 
changed personal letters with Mussolini, would ad- 
vise the League to take this step in September, 
Britain’s reluctance to make Ethiopian recognition 
part of an Anglo-Italian settlement has rankled in 
the minds of Italians who had hoped to obtain Brit. 
ish financial assistance for exploitation of their new 
empire. The expense of maintaining League mem- 
bership at the cost of $500,000 a year was doubtless 
also an important consideration, at a time when the 
Fascist government has imposed extraordinary levies 
to finance its program of expansion and self-suf- 
ficiency—although withdrawal does not become ef- 
fective for two years. Most important of all, Musso- 
lini probably hoped by this gesture to bring pressure 
on Britain, whose flirtations with Germany have 
aroused uneasiness in Rome. 


Il Duce may be disappointed in this expectation. 
Viewed from London, Paris and Geneva, Italy's 
withdrawal merely formalizes a situation which has 
existed since October 1935, when the League named 
Italy the aggressor in its conflict with Ethiopia. 


lL 


a 


DEC 
the bo 
ing rez 
of the 
marke 
Easter 
by Fos 
dor Sé 
tion 1 
the aff 
to as 
and it 
ernme 
The 
incide 
positi 
speect 
indica 
While 
certec 
passe 
flects 
discri 
vessel 
defen 
There 
prepa 
stron 
Di 
majo 
know 
nifica 


the ! 


Some friends of the League have felt that it could 
not function effectively as long as the democracies 
had to consult the wishes of totalitarian dictator- 
ships. The departure of the dictators, in their opin- 
ion, will strengthen rather than weaken the League. 
This argument, however, cannot be pressed too fat. 
It is difficult to imagine, in the near future, the 
emergence of a world community composed of states 
with similar political and economic systems. Di- 
versity there will always be, as there will always be 
need for accommodation and compromise. To de- 
mand complete uniformity in international affairs is 
to predicate the millenium. But if it is true that 
democracy has proved most workable in countries 
where the majority of the people agree on basic is- 
sues of policy, then it may be equally true that a 
(Continued on Page 4) 


the a 
the | 
Bing 
R. V 
Will 
expe 
\ week 
impc 
| fepo 
Mos 
Brus 
to S 
pear 

TI 
State 
Serv; 


—<——<— 


ly was 
temple 
ie pay. 
at Italy 
ical ob. 
nounced 
-mpered 
nuniqué 
Said it 
| system 
ted that 
“Cf again 


artners, 
rue, is a 
: a ges. 
quest of 
t Prime 
had ex- 
ould ad- 
ptember, 
ognition 
nkled in 
ain Brit- 
neir new 
1e mem- 
loubtless 
vhen the 
ry levies 
self-suf- 
come ef- 
, Musso- 
pressure 
ny have 


ectation. 
, Italy's 
‘hich has 
e named 
Ethiopia. 
it could 
nocracies 
dictator- 
eir Opin- 
- League. 


Washington News Letter 


= 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Dec. 14—Whatever the ultimate consequences of 
the bombing of the U.S. gunboat Panay, the prevail- 
ing reaction in Washington within twenty-four hours 
of the bombing is that the incident will produce a 
marked stiffening in American policy in the Far 
Eastern conflict. Despite the hurried apologies made 
by Foreign Minister Hirota in Tokyo and Ambassa- 
dor Saito in Washington, the Roosevelt administra- 
tion is losing no opportunity to make it clear that 
the affair will not be dismissed lightly, and will lead 
to a stronger stand in defense of American rights 
and interests in China than any taken by this gov- 
ernment since the outbreak of hostilities. 

There are already tentative indications that the 
incident may lead to a revival of the campaign for a 
positive policy urged in the President’s Chicago 
speech, but abandoned when Congressional opinion 
indicated its unwillingness to run the risk of war. 
While it is admitted that the opportunity for “con- 
certed action” to preserve the integrity of China has 
passed, the attitude of State Department officials re- 
flects a hope that public opinion, shocked by the in- 
discriminate bombing of American and other foreign 
vessels, will now permit the President a free hand in 
defending the Open Door and other treaty rights. 
There is little indication, however, that Congress is 
prepared at this time to permit anything more than 
strong diplomatic protests. 


Diplomatic shift. The impending changes in 
major European diplomatic posts which became 
known here last week are likely to prove more sig- 
nificant than the usual foreign service shifts. While 
the State Department has not officially confirmed 
the appointment of Joseph P. Kennedy, chairman of 
the Maritime Commission, to succeed Robert W. 
Bingham as Ambassador to Great Britain, or Hugh 


| too far. 


ture, the | 


of states 
ems. Di- 
ways be 
. To de- 
affairs is 
true that 
countries 
basic is- 
1e that a 


R. Wilson, Assistant Secretary of State, to replace 
William E. Dodd at Berlin, both assignments are 
expected to be finally approved within the next few 
\weeks, and the belief persists that several other 
important changes will follow. According to some 
feports, Joseph E. Davies will be transferred from 
Moscow to Brussels, while Hugh Gibson, now at 
Brussels, will replace Claude Bowers as Ambassador 
to Spain. Moscow, and perhaps one other key Euro- 
pean post, may be filled by a career diplomat. 

These changes reflect not only the desire of the 
State Department to strengthen American foreign 
service in Europe, but also the increasing strength of 


that section of opinion here which hopes to avoid the 
alignment of Europe into ideological blocs, with the 
democracies arrayed against the dictatorships. In se- 
lecting Mr. Wilson for the Berlin post, President 
Roosevelt is acting on the advice of those who be- 
lieve that the Halifax visit and the Anglo-French 
conversations have opened the door to a political 
and economic settlement with Germany. While the 
United States cannot play an important rdle in Euro- 
pean affairs, it is felt that the critical Berlin post 
should be in the hands of an experienced profes- 
sional diplomat with wide European experience. Mr. 
Kennedy, while not a career diplomat, will carry 
authority as one of the President's most intimate 


and trusted advisers. WILLIAM T. STONE 


State Department discounts Brazilian “Fascism.” 
Under-Secretary Welles’ address of December 7 was 
the first declaration on Latin American policy from 
a high official since Brazil’s recent revolution raised 
the question of extension of the “anti-communist”’ 
front into Latin-America. This speech was criticized 
by some commentators as implying sympathy for the 
“semi-fascism’”” set up by Vargas in Brazil. Others 
hailed it for its declarations against the invasion of 
Latin America by “alien” influences, a reference 
thought to be directed at German and Italian ac- 
tivities. 

Mr. Welles made it clear that Washington sees 
no reason why the Vargas coup should affect friendly 
relations with Brazil—traditionally more close than 
those with any other South American state. He 
criticized the press for its alleged assumption that 
the Vargas move represented a break with “the 
democratic traditions of the Western Hemisphere 
and an assimilation of ideologies which have been 
recently developed in other portions of the world.” 
These assumptions, the Under-Secretary, declared, 
had been “unfounded on fact.” While some ob- 
servers held that the factual foundations of his judg- 
ment were themselves open to question, Mr. Welles 
was widely supported in his view that it is not the 
business of the government or the people of the 
United States to interfere in the internal affairs of 
other American countries. 

Less publicized than the discussion of Brazil was 
Mr. Welles’ reference to Mexico and its program of 
land distribution, which has affected the properties 
of some United States citizens. Indirectly the Under- 
Secretary discouraged reports of growing friction 
with Mexico. He pictured the position of the State 
Department toward land seizures as based on two 


= 2 


ee 


Page Four —_ FO 


principles of international law: first “that an alien _— the mle: ors of democratic forces, as opposed} Ap #1 
residing in a foreign country is subject to the laws _to those of dictatorship? If so, to what degree cap 

of the country where he lives to the same extent as _— this be done without conflicting with the principle 
are the nationals of that country”; and second, that = of non-interference? Observers here believe these 
in the event of expropriation of property legitimately questions are likely to exert decisive influence on the 
acquired, “such aliens are entitled to equitable com- _— future development of the Good Neighbor program, F 


pensation therefor.” The practical difficulty in the Cuanies A. THomsoe 

present controversy with Mexico is that while our CA 

southern neighbor does not impugn the validity of ITALY QUITS THE LEAGUE : 

the second principle, it takes few steps to make it (Continued from Page 2) 

effective by see om adequate compensation to dis- league of nations operating on democratic principles 
landowners. presupposes a certain community of views among 

The principle of non-interference in the affairs of | itsmembers. ae 
other American republics, despite its importance in At the same time—and this is where Italy and 


the Good Neighbor policy, may apparently have its Germany have a legitimate grievance against Ge. 
limits if European influences threaten to enter the neva—no international organization can survive by Decem 
picture. The Under-Secretary referred to the wave of merely adhering to the letter of the law, without) == 
German and Italian propaganda which has recently regard for the dynamic processes of national devel- 
inundated Latin America. He declared that “any opment. The possibility of change by peaceful means} —— 


attempt on the part of non-American powers to —indicated in Article XIX of the League Covenant y 
exert through force their political or material influ- —has been unrealized so far as territorial, raw ma- 
ence on the American Continent would be immedi- terial and population problems are concerned. The ‘2 
ately a matter of the gravest concern not only to the danger today is that a League of Nations consisting a 
United States but to every other American republic only of the three great status quo. powers of Europe nia 
as well,” adding that “appropriate action would un- —France, Britain and the U.S.S.R.—and of small . a 
doubtedly at once be determined upon as the result states many of which have régimes no less dictatorial _— 
Seasons consultation herwetn them.” than those of Hitler and Mussolini, will merely act “a 
Forthright as was this reaffirmation of the Monroe as an alliance to freeze the status quo. Such a coutse In , 
Doctrine in the face of the new Holy Alliance of would prove suicidal for the League, which might a 


the Fascist powers, it did not cover the most prob- _ then be threatened with the defection of neutrals pac 
able Pe of foreign activity—interference falling like Switzerland, the Netherlands and the Scandi} ““*™ 
of fo 


short rce. What, for example, would be the po- navian countries. True, the Fascist dictatorships have while 

sition of the United States if Vargas, menaced by a _— done everything in their power to destroy the basis a 

democratic revolt against his autocracy, dubbed the for international cooperation. Yet mere intransigence} . 
movement “communist” and crushed it with the aid on the part of the Western democracies would end — 

iti “ ” sevi : : aca 

of munitions and perhaps “volunteers” from Italy all hope of achieving collective security on a new P “ 

and Germany? What should the United States do basis. The policies of the dictators, for all their . 

about the “cultural offensive” of these two powers __ blustering, reveal a defiance born of weakness rather _— 
in’ Latin America? Mr. Welles declared that “our than self-confidence. Holding force in reserve as a wd 

democratic civilization of the Americas represents last card, the democracies must continue to negotiate a 
effectively . . . the bulwark of our independent inter- with the dictatorships, in an effort to reach a settle Pri 

American life.” If this is true, is it to the interest ment before retreat from war has become impossible. . a . 

. . . . é 

of the United States to encourage in Latin America VERA MICHELES DEAN | ..:. 

suran 

The F.P.A. Bookshelf — 

ecel 

Counter-Attack in Spain, by Ramon Sender. Translated International Monetary Issues, by Charles R. Whittlesey. weve 

from the Spanish by Sir Peter Chalmers Mitchell. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1937. $2.50 | pressi 

Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1937. $3.00 In this thoughtful analysis of current monetary prob- | In th: 
The personal narrative of a Spanish intellectual fighting lems, the author concludes that restoration of the old gold { ment 

in the Loyalist army. His powerful prose, which spares standard is not only improbable, but incompatible with | make 
no gruesome details, creates a terrifying picture of civil policies directed toward domestic economic stability. He ie 
war. The unnerving effect of aerial bombardment on both apparently favors a planned system of exchange rates, ant 
soldier and civilian is unforgettably described. free from any predetermined ratio to gold. port 
Rear 

naval 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 8, Decempsr 17, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nation’) ~~ 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasiis Bust, President; Vera Micue es Dagan, Editer. Entered as second-class matte! his Cc 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. Th 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year Unite 


. ———— 


