General Library 


University of Michiheiped ss 2nd clase mamaes 


rehGd ADR se Bich ’ 


SENBRAL LIBRARY 
GUY. OF Migx 


SEP 16 1944 


inent and 


hina, the) 


ey, a dis 


olume the} 2 ; _ : : 
| whether a victorious Russia will dominate post-war 
that givey 


, based of 


e, Brown 


yperative 
1e conflid 


nall book 


1s, 
q. Chang: 


rely from 
ls reflect 
r pictures 
n the im 
the social 


>rinceton, 


relations 


or wisely 
t he does; 
es of the 
'y despite | 


ow York 


laid for 
rustrated 


, Random 


»mpetent, 
of Sicily 
. of how 


National 
. Entered # 
low at least 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


SEPTEMBER 15, 1944 


NATIONAL SECURITY KEY TO RUSSIA’S FOREIGN POLICY 


[HE occupation by Russian forces of key points in 

Bulgaria which were being used by Germany 
gives a new fillip to the discussion aroused by some 
observers who, while opposing Nazism, are asking 


Europe. Since their fears, as noted last week, could 
affect the character of the peace the Allies make with 
Germany, it is essential to scrutinize them frankly. 


RUSSIA’S AIMS IN EUROPE. Recent military 


idevelopments on. the eastern front—Russia’s inva- 


sion of Rumania, Finland’s withdrawal from the war, 
and now the surrender of Bulgaria—do not portend 
any fundamental change in earlier estimates of Mos- 
cow's aims in Europe. So far as the official record 
indicates, the U.S.S.R. does not seek to acquire new 
territory on the continent. Its announced territorial 
claims remain limited to the Baltic states, eastern Po- 
land, and the section of Finland it obtained under the 
Moscow treaty of 1940 that terminated the first 
Russo-Finnish war—all areas which were part of the 
Tsarist Empire before its break-up in 1917. Nor has 
the Soviet government yet indicated that it intends 
to extract the last pound of flesh from such German 
satellites as Finland and Rumania. On the contrary, 
the impression of foreign representatives in Moscow 
is that the demands of the Russians fall considerably 
short of ‘‘unconditional surrender.”’ And the treat- 
ment of areas so far liberated by the Russian Army— 
notably in Poland and Rumania—is, according to 
the reports of American correspondents on the spot, 
of a character to assure the population that their re- 
ligious beliefs and economic practices will not be 
disturbed by the occupying forces. 

Does this mean that the Russians are not con- 
cerned about the internal situation of the liberated 
countries, and will withdraw unconditionally once 

;ermany has been defeated? No, it does not—any 
more than it could be said that Britain and the United 
States have no concern about the internal situation in 


Italy, or even that of our allies, Belgium, France, the 
Netherlands and Norway. London and Washington 
have displayed a lively interest in the future political 
development of France, and have taken an active 
part—in the opinion of some, an unsatisfactory part 
—in the affairs of Italy. It is doubtful that they 
would feel compensated for the military and eco- 
nomic effort they are now making for the liberation 
of Europe, or would feel reassured about post-war 
prospects, if governments inimical to them should 
suddenly emerge in Paris or Rome. The Russians, for 
their part, are determined that, when they do transfer 
to native régimes the administration of areas where 
they are now fighting the Germans, these régimes 
will not be hostile either to Russia as a nation or to 
its political, economic and social institutions. 

It does not follow that governments in each of the 
countries bordering on Russia are to be composed 
solely of Communists or fellow-travelers, The Rus- 
sians have not opposed the agreement concluded by 
Marshal Tito with Yugoslav Prime Minister Dr. 
Subashitch, appointed by King Peter of Yugoslavia, 
and have not rejected the aid given to their cause by 
King Michael of Rumania, whose peace emissaries 
are now in Moscow. What the Russians have firmly 
opposed has been any attempt by the satellite coun- 
tries to masquerade as friends of the United Nations 
while retaining their ties with Germany and con- 
tinuing, sab rosa, to inflict loss of life and matériel 
on Russia. A policy of double-talk on the part of Axis 
satellites would presumably be just as objectionable 
to Britain and the United States as to Russia. 


DOES MOSCOW CLAIM ITS OWN “ORBIT”? 
Does this mean that Russia claims an exclusive sphere 
of influence over Eastern Europe and the Balkans? 
Are we on the point of witnessing the formation of 
what Walter Lippmann calls “orbits,” with Russia 
in full control of areas east of Germany, leaving the 
“Atlantic Community” to its Western Allies, and the 


F 
f 
Lb 
t ‘ 
j * 


cS wit ete: 


Ce 


ene 


FS at 


Far East to China? Current developments give no 
evidence of such a trend, which in any case is im- 
practicable in an air-minded world. Russia, it is true, 
has a special interest in Eastern Europe and the Bal- 
kans, just as the United States has in Latin America, 
and Britain in France and the Low Countries. But 
Moscow does not appear to be excluding its Allies 
from participation in the affairs of states bordering 
on the U.S.S.R., and is meanwhile taking an interest 
in other areas of the world. Although in the Polish- 
Russian controversy, as yet unsettled, Moscow at first 
played a lone hand, more recently it has consulted 
Britain and the United States concerning the terms 
of its truce with Finland and its declaration of war 
on Bulgaria (which up to September 5 had been at 
war with Western powers but not with Russia). 
While there is no doubt that the Soviet government 
considers Eastern Europe and the Balkans as an area 
where its future security is particularly at stake, it 
has shown itself ready to consider measures of world 
security now under discussion at Dumbarton Oaks. 
The greater the degree of confidence that can be 
established between Russia and the other United 
Nations—and this can be done only by day to day 
dealings, not merely by documents—the more prom- 
ising will be the prospect of post-war collaboration in 
Europe. The more we hesitate, on the other hand, to 
support a security organization that would require us 
to take military action outside the Western Hemi- 
sphere, the more we actually encourage Russia to rely 
on its own strength and on special arrangements with 
border states to protect itself against future aggres- 
sion by Germany. 

WILL RUSSIA PROMOTE COMMUNISM? Is 
Russia, however, promoting Communist doctrines in 
the liberated areas, and will it use its influence to 
spread Communism beyond its security zone? In 1940 
the Russians gravely miscalculated the temper of the 
Finns. Today, they are showing far more penetrating 
understanding of border countries, conditions in 
which may differ from those existing in Russia in 
1917. The respect for religion and private property 
expressed by the groups in Poland and Yugoslavia 


TITO’S SUCCESS FORESHADOWS POLITICAL ROLE OF UNDERGROUND 


The Red Army's long-anticipated arrival in the 
Balkans and its junction with the Yugoslav Par- 
tisans on September 7 reinforces with military 
cooperation the close political tie between Moscow 
and Marshal Tito. This cooperation will undoubt- 
edly play an important part in speeding the defeat of 
the Nazis in southeastern Europe. By reaching across 
Yugoslavia to meet the Russians at the Bulgarian 
frontier, the Partisans destroyed the only important 
railroad running north and south in the Balkans and 
trapped an estimated 250,000 Germans in the south- 
ern part of the peninsula and the Adriatic and 
Aegean islands. But serious as the defeat of these 


Page Two — 


ee 


that have collaborated with Russia, and the. comport. 
ment of the Russians in Rumania would indicate 
that Moscow is inclined to adapt its policy to circum. 
stances, provided always the fundamental condition 
is fulfilled that the governments of border countries 
maintain genuinely friendly relations with Russia, 


But, quite aside from any positive action Russia 
might take on behalf of its own doctrines, we cannot 
escape the fact that political and economic conditions 
in the wake of war may well encourage the most 
radical tendencies among peoples who, having lost 
all but life, now have nothing to lose except a life 
of hardship and uncertainty. This is particularly true 
of most of the countries of Eastern Europe, where 
people lived close to the margin even before the war; 
but reports from Italy indicate that conditions border- 
ing on chaos, always conducive to revolution, may 
not be restricted to any geographic area. It is entirely 
credible that native Communists will take advantage 
of existing unrest to assume greater power and influ 
ence—but, if they do, it will be because the removal 
of Nazi rule will have left a vacuum of authority. 

Today, in spite of many disillusionments, it is still 
to Britain and the United States, but especially to this 
country, that the peoples of Europe are looking fot 
leadership as they face, with the gravest anxiety, the 
manifold problems of the post-war period. If we fail 
to fulfill the expectations we have aroused by our 
condemnation and defeat of armed totalitarianism, 
we shall have to blame not Russia, but our own in- 
capacity to assume moral leadership. We have con 
vinced the world that we possess unrivaled talents 
for industrial production and military organization 
in time of war. What do we and the British intend 
to do to demonstrate that we also command sufficient 
talents to carry forward the tasks of reconstruction? 
It is none too early to answer this question, which 
one must hope is on the agenda of the Roosevelt 
Churchill conference in Quebec. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The second in a series on Europe's problems as seen 
from the United States.) 


Balkan forces will be for Germany, the strategic loss 
of Bulgaria may be felt even more keenly in the 
Reich since the Red Army is already using this former 
Axis satellite as a base for its attack on Hungary, the 
last remaining part of the German system of outef 
defenses. Thus Germany faces invasion over the tra- 
ditional Danubian route at the very moment when 
the Western Allies are attacking the Siegfried Line. 
Moreover, as the Russians move toward Germany 
from the southeast, their progress may be hastened 
by the fact that the route for American lend-lease sup- 
plies has been shortened as a result of the Red Army's 
occupation of Bulgaria’s Black Sea bases. 


| 


TY 

Litic 
ise B 
media 
this 1 
Burof 
comp 
Russi 
ued Ff 
quart 
Tito | 
easte! 
Russi 
that 
polic 


Th 
throu 
clear 
polit; 
nizec 
gove 
Suba 
ensu: 
cance 
mark 
exile 
Parti 
unde 
com} 
the $ 
tion 
“hig 
on a 
the \ 
area: 
war. 
posi 
that 
post 
elec: 


J 


=e 
comport. 
indicate 
O circum. 
condition 
countries 
Russia. 


} TITO WINS RECOGNITION. The long-range 
Jpolitical consequences of the Red Army’s arrival in 
the Balkans promise to be as important as the im- 
Wmediate military results. It is worth noting that in 
this region, long the scene of conflict among the 
_PBuropean powers, Britain—now the only possible 
mn Russ competitor for prestige—has given full approval to 
ve CannotiRussia’s new position. This is indicated by the contin- 
onditionsfyed presence of Randolph Churchill at Tito’s head- 
the mostfquarters and Prime Minister Churchill's meeting with 
ving lost#Tito in Rome on August 13. As the battle for south- 
pt a lifefeastern Europe moves into its final stage, therefore, 
larly true}Russia is playing the uncontested role in the Balkans 
e, wherefthat has traditionally been the goal of its foreign 


the wary policy regardless of the régime in power. 
is border. 


ion, mayf_ Lhe precise form Russia’s post-war influence 
s entirelypintoughout the Balkans will take is not yet entirely 
dvantaoegecat. But in Yugoslavia the shape of the nation’s 
ind inflyppolitical future has emerged and been officially recog- 
. removalguized in the agreement reached on June 16 by the 
authority, government-in-exile under its new Premier, Dr. Ivan 
it is still Subashitch, and Marshal Tito and supplemented by 
ly to this ensuing declarations from both parties. The signifi- 
king fae of these statements lies in the fact that they 
xiety. mark Tito’s complete victory over the government-in- 
ff we a exile, which had formerly publicly condemned the 
d by of Partisans and supported | their Chetnik opponents 

under General Mikhailovitch. In what amounts to a 
complete reversal of policy for the exiled régime, 
the Subashitch cabinet on August 8 issued a declara- 
tion declaring that it recognized Tito’s army as the 
“highest expression” of the nation’s resistance, called 
on all Yugoslavs to join these forces, and expressed 
the view that Tito’s political organization in liberated 
tructione of Yugoslavia is essential in carrying on the 
a. which 2": The government also abandoned its intransigent 
cosevelty Position with respect to the monarchy, and agreed 

that the question of the future of the king should be 
Hpostponed until it could be submitted to a post-war 
election. 


arianism, 
r own if 
lave con 
d talents 
anization 
sh intend 
sufficien 


DEAN 


5 seen 


JUST PUBLISHED— 
U.S. FOREIGN POLICY AND THE VOTER 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


September 15 issue of FoREIGN Po.icy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


UND 
tegic loss 
ly in the 
is formef 
igary, the 
of outef 
¢ the tra- 
ent whe 


ried Line. 


Page Three — 


As a result of this agreement, the Partisans have 
registered a triumph for another of Europe's resist- 
ance movements as opposed to exiled régimes. There 
can be little doubt that the government formed in 
Yugoslavia after the Germans are expelled will fol- 
low the pattern being set in France, where exiles— 
regardless of the conscientiousness and skill with 
which they have performed their duties—are being 
replaced by men who lived through the years of 
enemy occupation and are intimately acquainted with 
the temper of the people. It can be expected, thete- 
fore, that post-war Yugoslavia will be shaped along 
lines desired by the Partisans rather than by the pres- 
ent exiled government, despite the latter’s belated 
efforts to win the confidence of the resistance move- 
ment. Under Partisan leadership the nation’s political 
structure will undoubtedly be federal, with Croats 
and Slovenes assigned more important roles than im 
pre-war Yugoslavia, and the régime in power will 
stand for a high degree of nationalization of com- 
mercial and industrial property. Moreover, the 
Yugoslav Communist party, enjoying the new pres- 
tige won through its important position in the 
war, can be expected to be a major political force. 
In foreign affairs, this new Yugoslavia will be closely 
linked to the U.S.S.R., and will demand rectifications 
of its northern border with Italy. 


POLITICAL SETTLEMENT NOT ENOUGH. 
But no political and territorial settlement alone will 
be capable of solving the great problems Yugoslavia 
will face at the end of the war. It is estimated that 
the Yugoslavs have suffered proportionately higher 
casualties and property loss than any other people in- 
volved in the war as the price of their guerrilla war- 
fare against the Axis, civil war, and the Germans’ 
determination to leave the South Slavs permanently 
weakened. It is, therefore, the question of food, re- 
lief and economic rehabilitation that will have prior- 
ity among the Yugoslavs once the Germans are 
driven out. Under these circumstances, it is not sur- 
prising that the government-in-exile has promised 
Tito it will pay particular attention to preparations 
for the reconstruction of the country after the war 
“in harmony and collaboration with competent insti- 
tutions and organizations of the United Nations.” 
During the period of relief and reconstruction Yugo- 
slavia will turn to UNRRA and private American 
relief projects, for Russia—despite its great prestige 
in the Balkans—will be able to offer little economic 
aid to its neighbors. 


WHINIFRED N. HADSEL 


Germany FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 48, SEPTEMBER 15, 1944, Published weekly by the Foreign P 


olicy Association, Incorporated. National 


hastene Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


lease sup One month for change of address on membership publications. 


ed Army’ 


QB 181 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


a | 


? eae 


J w 


Washington News Letter Rx 


setter, 


art 


Whatever decision is reached at Dumbarton Oaks, 
and at the subsequent conference of the United Na- 
tions which is to produce a final draft agreement for 
a world security organization, will peste receive 
the approval of the governments of Britain, Russia 
and China, despite fundamental differences in their 
political structure. The United States government, 
however, can accept the decision only after the Senate 
has approved it according to regular constitutional 
procedure under which, if the President submits the 
draft agreement as a treaty, a two-thirds supporting 
vote would be required. For this reason, the Senate 
is an absent but powerful partner in the present dis- 
cussions. The State Department drafted the plan sub- 
mitted at Dumbarton Oaks only after it had sought 
to ascertain what measures the Senate would support. 
For that reason, the visiting delegations have been 
inclined to accept, in the main, the plan presented 
by this country. 


SENATE'S ATTITUDE UNCERTAIN. Debate 
in the Senate on September 5 indicated that some Re- 
publicans oppose American participation in a secur- 
ity Organization that would command the use of 
force to keep international law and order. Senator 
Harlan J. Bushfield, Republican, of North Dakota 
said that the present plan would give the President 
the power to declare war, and make him “the abso- 
lute despot of the American people, a true dictator 
in all sense [sic] of the word.” 

While probably few Senators would take this op- 
positionist attitude, the nature of the Senate’s vote 
on the Dumbarton Oaks program is unpredictable. 
There are already indications that debate will center 
on a side issue, as it did in the case of the ‘Versailles 
Treaty—not on whether the United States is to col- 
laborate after the war with its present partners, but 
whether the Senate is to be a party to every decision 
made under the prospective system of collaboration. 
In scouting Bushfield’s fears, Senator Vandenberg, 
Republican, of Michigan said the Senate would have 
an opportunity to determine in advance the instruc- 
tions given the United States delegate with regard 
to voting on questions relating to the use of force. 
Yet the American plan submitted when the Dum- 
barton conference opened on August 22 did not 
specifically call for Senate ratification of each vote 
cast by the American member of the Council. During 
August Wendell Willkie advised a number of Con- 
gressmen that the President should have power to 


FOR VICTORY ° 


SENATE ATTITUDE IMPORTANT FACTOR AT DUMBARTON OAKS 


use the military forces of the United States in ful 
fillment of this country’s obligations to presery¢ 
peace through a system of collective security. 
NEED FOR QUICK ACTION. On the issue 

continuing Senate participation in the world organ 
ization, our traditional domestic concerns collide with 
our world interests. Throughout the history of the 
Republic, the Senate has sought to dominate the goy. 
ernment’s foreign policy decisions, considering this 
procedure in harmony with the democratic process 
Yet, to Ve effective, a security organization must be 
able to act quickly, and Senatorial review is oftey 
slow. Moreover, the program now being assiduously 
and sincerely formulated by United Nations diple 
mats could be defeated by a combination of 33 Sena 
tors (two-thirds of the Senate plus one) opposing the 
Dumbarton Oaks plan either because they object ti 
collective security—as Senator Burton K. Wheeleg 
Democrat, of Montana stated in a radio debate of 
September 7—or because they object to lack of pro 
vision for continuing Senate participation. With 
this possibility in mind, Secretary Hull last week at 
ranged to confer with a group of Senators on the re 
sults achieved at Dumbarton Oaks. 


g 


Sy 
er 
not b 
milit 
the jc 
as we 
apart 
Euro 
regat 
Pacif 
the d 
sible 
decl. 


The attitude of Republican Senators when the vott 
is taken will provide in some measure a test of tht 
strength of Governor Dewey's party leadership. Os 
August 23 and 24 Mr. Hull conferred on the Dum 
barton Oaks plan with John Foster Dulles, Mr 
Dewey's representative on international affairs, ané 
Mr. Dulles gave his general approval to the pro 
posals. In an address on foreign policy in Louisville 
on September 8, Mr. Dewey said that a specific tash 
for this country is to help “establish a world orgat 
ization in which all nations may share as sovereign 
equals, to deal with future threats to the peace of the 


Quel 
mars 
each 
fo e 
dott 
port 
to k 
| then 
rest 


sO 
Paci 


world from whatever source, and on a permanent} )**! 


basis.” He made no reference to the question of com 
tinuing Senatorial participation, and confined his ob 
jections to the Administration’s foreign policy, the 
secrecy which surrounds the negotiations at Dun 
barton Oaks, and the possibility that small nations 
may be denied a voice in the security organization’ 
decisions. In regard to the latter point, it was 1 
ported on September 11 that a clause to grant small 


nect 
Teh 
sult 
ine 
Brit 
east 
wh 
) sitic 


powers the right to be consulted whenever theif Chi 
forces were to be used to put down aggression i, " 


now understood to be in the joint security plan. 
BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


