ort 


wn 
ich 


ous 
aco 


ally 
lich 
sa 
dis- 
NOs 
fice 


hess 
lure 
tia- 
ized 
F an 
ter- 
» Te- 
; as 
2ady 
; in- 
ions 
utile 


\N 


lated 
oran, 


pT) t TO- 
thods | 
‘ulers | 
lism, 
party 


David 
Press, 


| 
ations | 


orton, 


uff by 
ly one 


— 
National 
Editor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














Vout. XVI, No. 36 


JULY 2, 1937 





Announcing the latess HEADLINE BOOK 
CHURCH AND STATE 


New forms of government have profoundly changed old 
relationships between Church and State. In dictatorships 
and even in democracies, there are signs of struggle between 
religious authority and increasingly centralized government. 
This book examines the conflict in the Soviet Union, Ger- 
many, Italy, Spain and Mexico, as well as the United States. 


Single copies—25 cents in paper, 35 cents in boards 


wie 


® University of Michigan Library 


2. + 
Ann Arbor, Mich 











NEW ALARMS OVER SPAIN 





NCE more the international situation has 

taken a turn for the worse. Following Gen- 
eral Franco’s capture of Bilbao on June 19, both 
Germany and Italy made it clear that they would 
accept no compromise in Spain. In an article 
presumably written by Mussolini, Jl Popolo d’Italia 
said: “Italy has not been neutral in this conflict, 
but has fought, and victory will therefore be 
hers.” Hitler declared on June 27 that Germany 
wished to see a Nationalist government in Spain. 
Both dictators now virtually admit that they are 
allies of General Franco. 


This determination to push intervention in 
Spain seems to have been due in part to events 
in the Soviet Union and France. On June 13 Mos- 
cow laconically announced that after a secret trial 
eight leading generals of the Red army, including 
Marshal Tukhachevsky, one of the best-known 
figures in the country, had been shot. They had 
been accused of plotting with Germany to bring 
about the dismemberment of the Soviet Union. 
Even though the outside world had become accus- 
tomed to wholesale Soviet executions—a total of 
168 alleged Trotskyists had been shot since the Zin- 
ovieff trials— the fate of these generals produced a 
widespread shock. The Russian army was the one 
Soviet institution generally regarded as stable, 
efficient and well-disciplined. While few be- 
lieve that these generals were guilty of treason, 
it is possible that they had continued the close re- 
lationship established with the German Reichs- 
wehr at the end of the World War and resented 
Communist interference with the administration 
of the army. These executions, together with the 
disorganization of agricultural and industrial 
production, have gravely impaired Russia’s value 
as an ally of France and the position of Moscow 
in Spain. 

France, in turn, has been greatly weakened by a 
serious financial crisis. On June 29 the new 
Popular Front government headed by M. Chau- 


temps, who succeeded M. Blum, was compelled to 
suspend dealings in gold and foreign exchange, 
and to close the Paris Bourse. At the same time it 
decided to request Parliament for emergency 
financial powers. Only time will tell whether M. 
Georges Bonnet, the new Finance Minister, will 
be more successful in inspiring confidence than his 
predecessor. 


In Berlin the German moderates apparently 
wished to take advantage of the developments in 
the Soviet Union and France to come to an under- 
standing with Britain. On June 15 it was an- 
nounced that Baron von Neurath, German For- 
eign Minister, would visit London to explore the 
international situation. Hitler could contend that 
events in the Soviet Union had proved the Nazi 
thesis of the “diabolical” nature of Bolshevism 
and that Britain should give Berlin a free hand in 
the East in return for withdrawal from Spain. 
The way was paved for some such development by 
the return on June 16 of Germany and Italy to the 
Spanish naval patrol on condition that the four 
control powers would immediately confer on “the 
joint steps to be taken” in the event of any new 
attack on patrolling vessels. 


The hopes aroused by this agreement were 
rudely dashed when Germany charged that a Loy- 
alist submarine had attacked the cruiser Leipzig 
on June 15 and 18, and demanded that the four 
control powers engage in a naval demonstration 
against the Valencia government. While it is 
possible that the Soviet Union had induced 
Valencia to precipitate such incidents to prevent 
an Anglo-German understanding, neither France 
nor Britain was satisfied that the Leipzig had 
been deliberately attacked; nor were they willing 
to engage in a naval demonstration. Conse- 
quently Hitler charged that they lacked the neces- 
sary “spirit of solidarity,” and the two Fascist 
powers again withdrew from the naval patrol on 





ee tenes 0) ae Seer 


scien lpeaas AA tht 


a ae Ree ae Lg aS 


: | 


ee ee 


“Wweer ye: a ter 


eee Me a 


a 
rpsve od 








June 23, indicating that they would defend their 
interests independently. 

On the same day, in the House of Commons, 
Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain warned that 
if any country should intervene “beyond a certain 
point in Spain” a general war might be precipi- 
tated. He added, however, that “there is not a 
European country or government that wants to 
see a European war. Since that is so, let us try 
to keep cool heads.” Despite Chamberlain’s ap- 
peal for moderation, the remarks of Opposition 
leaders in the British Parliament seem to have 
angered Hitler. After attacking “speakers in 
Parliament,” he declared at Wuerzburg that 
France and Britain had refused to pay any atten- 
tion to the “moderate German demands” in the 
Leipzig affair and this treatment “merely showed 
what we Germans might expect if we were to leave 
the fate of the German Reich to international 
institutions for deliberation.” Baron von Neurath 
cancelled his visit to London, and both Germany 
and Italy indicated that they would reject the 
proposal that the gap left by withdrawal of 
Fascist war vessels be filled by French and British 
ships. Meanwhile, German and Italian warships 
remain in Spanish waters, where it is feared they 
may establish a blockade or even openly attack 
the Valencia government. The one hopeful ele- 
ment is that neither Berlin nor Rome has with- 
drawn from the London Non-intervention Com- 
mittee. 

In the United States a number of Congressmen 
demand the imposition of an arms embargo 
against Germany and Italy, since both are com- 
mitting acts of war in Spain. While these Fascist 
dictatorships may freely buy arms in this coun- 
try, the Valencia government is unable to do so 
because of an existing embargo. Although this 
policy is obviously unjust, the State Department 
cannot lift the embargo against the Valencia gov- 
ernment or extend it to Germany and Italy, with- 
out intensifying the present crisis and further 
embroiling the United States. The adoption of 
either alternative would be tantamount to a moral 
judgment on Germany and Italy. Had the United 
States joined the London committee last fall and 
assisted in enforcing the non-intervention agree- 
ment, the Spanish civil war might really have 
been localized. The only logical escape from the 
present impasse still lies in a positive policy of 
cooperation or mediation with other like-minded 
powers. Today, occupied by acute domestic is- 
sues, the Roosevelt administration lends its sup- 
port to policies initiated by France or Britain, 
without exercising any control over the nature or 
direction of such policies. Unaccompanied by a 
policy of positive cooperation, the new “neutral- 


Page Two —=— 








——— 


ity” of the United States has merely increased 
the international dangers to which this country is 


exposed. RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


NAZIS WAR ON CHURCH 

During the past month the Hitler government 
has become engaged in a virtual Kulturkampf 
against both the Catholic and the Protestant Con- 
fessional Churches. Relations between the Reich 
and the Vatican are practically suspended, and the 
government has apparently abandoned all at. 
tempts to compromise with the Confessional] 
Church. 

Following the Vatican’s refusal to disavow an 
“insulting” attack on Hitler by Cardinal Munde- 
lein of Chicago, the German Foreign Office dis- 
patched a note to Rome on May 29 in which it 
frankly declared that the Papacy’s “incompre- 
hensible attitude in this matter” had “destroyed 
the prerequisites for the continuation of normal 
relations between the German Government and 
the Holy See.” Relations with the Catholic 
Church have been further strained by the con- 
tinuation of the “immorality trials” and the 
state’s determined campaign against confessional 
school education. On June 4 the remaining Catho- 
lic grammar schools in the state of Wuerttemberg 
were closed, ostensibly owing to insufficient at- 
tendance. In Bavaria, where 70 per cent of the 
population is Catholic, a decree made public on 
June 20 ordered the closing of 11 monastery 
schools and the transformation of all 966 paro- 
chial schools into non-confessional public institu- 
tions. This was in direct violation of the Con- 
cordat. A week later the Bavarian Minister of 
Interior announced that all voluntary state finan- 
cial assistance to the Protestant and Catholic 
Churches would be progressively eliminated over 
a three-year period. 

Meanwhile, the struggle between the govern- 
ment and the Confessional Church opposition has 
become increasingly bitter. All but one of the 


members of the Prussian Confessional Church | 


Council have been arrested and charged with dis- 


obeying an order forbidding pastors to read from | 
the pulpit lists of people who have resigned | 


Church membership. On June 17 secret police 
raided the Prussian synod headquarters and 
sealed the offices. In an effort to undermine the 
financial support of the Confessional Church, a 





special ordinance has been issued prohibiting 


special church collections without the consent of | 
the government. Apparently convinced that the | 


Church has become the rallying ground for all 
the forces opposed to the state’s totalitarian 
philosophy, Nazi officials are determined not to 
tolerate this challenge to its authority. 

JOHN C. DEWILDE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 36, Jury 2, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lasiip Bugit, President; EstHer G. Ocpgn, Secretary; Vara Micueres Dean, Eiéiter. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











