FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XIX, No. 15 FEBRUARY 2, 1940 


ANNOUNCING the first issue of ... 
PAN AMERICAN NEWS 


A new F.P.A. service, devoted to current developments 
ral.” in Latin America, background information and comment on 
a the significance of the news—together with a special section 
that on trade and finance. Published every other Thursday, 
must beginning February Ist. 


FERS 1949 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 


PERIGBIGAL RO” 2, 1921, at the Post 
GENERAL LIBRA‘ Office at New York, 
UNTV, OF Mich N. Y., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 


me 


ding Subscription: $3.00 

land, | —— 

?«| GERMAN WAR MACHINE RUNS INTO OBSTACLES 
void} 


— 


rably a pronouncements on both sides have 

revived rumors of impending offensives in the 
Western European war. On January 24 the Com- 
mander-in-Chief of the German Army, Colonel Gen- 
eal von Brauchitsch, took the occasion afforded by 


e as- ; 

" the 228th birthday of Frederick the Great to laud 
is of ’ Ww, a 
eeks | Me tactical genius of that Prussian King who always 


fol. preferred to attack, employing “speed of movement, 
dif surprise, concentration of forces at a decisive point 
and thrust into flank and rear.” Three days later 
Winston Churchill, in a speech delivered at Man- 
abled chester, indicated that Britain was tired of a passive 
y this | War of economic attrition and would not continue 
tostay on the defensive. 

n of | GERMAN OIL SUPPLIES PRECARIOUS. What- 
nded | eer the intentions of the belligerents, Germany 
might be greatly handicapped by large-scale hostili- 
€ the | ues: An almost unprecedented cold wave and the 
iding attendant stoppage of shipping on the Danube have 
and | increased the difficulties of supply created by the 
infor- | Allied blockade. Particularly, the transportation 
mm of | of oil from Rumania is meeting with serious ob- 
stacles. Early last December an accord was reached 
to resume traffic on the railway running from the 
Rumanian town of Cernauti to Germany via Lem- 


y 19, | berg in Russian Poland. At the same time the U.S.S.R. 
abber | agreed not to increase the gauge on the 200-mile 
od to | stretch extending across its territory. The Germans 
cove’ | hoped that the reopening of this railroad would re- 
other | ,. ; ; 

| lieve the congestion on the other German-Rumanian 
ill line through Hungary. They calculated that ship- 


Con. | ments of 200 tank cars daily would enable them to 
obtain a million tons of oil per year by this route. 
while Actually only about half that number of cars appear 
to have moved. The Rumanian government, which 
had great difficulty last December in persuading the 
Reich to release 2,800 Rumanian tank cars, is re- 
NE | ported to be unwilling to allow more than 300 cars 


to leave the country. In addition, Germany has had 
to contend with inefficient railway operation and 
sabotage in the Russian section of Poland. 

To overcome the latter obstacle, the Germans are 
rumored to have obtained permission from Moscow 
to send a number of railway guards and technicians 
into Galicia. German experts are also said to be as- 
sisting in the exploitation of Poland's oil wells. The 
bulk of these wells, which produced 507,253 metric 
tons of petroleum in 1938, came under the juris- 
diction of the Soviet Union last September. The 
U.S.S.R., preoccupied with its campaign in Finland, 
has apparently been unable to resist German de- 
mands. Yet both Moscow and Berlin deny that 
German troops have entered Galicia or that the 
Reich has taken over the operation of the railway 
and oil fields in this area. 

The shortage of tank cars, however, persists. Nor 
is it even certain that Germany will be able to buy 
the quantity of oil—1,820,000 metric tons—which 
the Rumanian government agreed to export to the 
Reich during 1940. English and French interests 
produce the bulk of the Rumanian oil output, the 
British alone controlling over 60 per cent of the 
refining capacity of the oil industry. Thus far they 
have refused to sell to Germany. Under German 
pressure, the Bucharest government on January 17 
issued a decree establishing a commission to organ- 
ize and control the entire industry. Fearful that this 
measure would divert a larger share of Rumania’s 
production to Germany, France and Britain promptly 
protested. The outcome of the tug of war now going 
on in Bucharest is difficult to foresee. 

THE GERMAN COAL SHORTAGE. Germany 
is also experiencing an acute shortage of coal. Al- 
though the acquisition of the Polish coal fields has 
made it the largest coal producer in Europe, de- 
mands on the available supply are enormous. Large 


quantities are used for the manufacture of synthetic 
gasoline which the Reich is increasing as rapidly as 
possible; and even more is needed to pay for indis- 
pensable imports of raw materials and foodstuffs. 
Here, too, the chief difficulty seems to be the lack 
of transportation facilities. The rolling stock of the 
Reich railways is not sufficient to handle the large 
volume of traffic. Re-equipment of the railways was 
long deferred in the interest of rearmament. In the 
fall of 1938 the Reichsbahn had 4,000 locomotives 
and 80,000 freight cars less than in 1929; and the 
situation appears to have deteriorated since that 
time. German efforts to buy or rent 10,000 cars in 
Belgium have proved unsuccessful. The Belgian 
railways were unable to spare such a large amount 
of rolling stock, and France apparently threatened, 
in the event of Belgium’s compliance, to cut off the 
shipment of French iron ore from the Briey basin. 
In November the Reichsbahn floated a loan of 500 
million marks to obtain funds for equipment, but 
it is doubtful that German plants can turn out 
enough cars and locomotives to meet both the do- 
mestic and export demand. 


While these difficulties are serious, they are un- 
likely to become critical as long as Germany engages 
in war on a modest scale. Graver dangers, however, 
might be entailed by extensive hostilities which 
would increase the Reich’s consumption of oil and 
other raw materials substantially above pre-war 
levels. Under these circumstances Winston Churchill’s 


CANADA FACES A 

On January 25, following the shortest and per- 
haps the bitterest parliamentary session in Canadian 
history, the Liberal government of Prime Minister 
W. L. Mackenzie King called a general election. 
The plan to dissolve Parliament and appeal to the 
country was kept a complete secret until the Gov- 
ernor-General, Lord Tweedsmuir, opened the ses- 
sion with the conventional address from the throne. 
After less than four hours of acrimonious debate, 
the Governor-General complied with Mr. Mackenzie 
King’s request for a dissolution. The election of the 
new House of Commons will take place on March 
26. The Government is making elaborate plans for 
counting the ballots of the armed forces, both in 
Canada and overseas. 

Mr. Mackenzie King’s decision to call an election 
was prompted both by issues concerning Canada’s 
role in the European war and by party politics. 
Critics of the Mackenzie King government have ac- 
cused it of inefficiency and apathy in its preparations 
for war. Many elements in the country, especially 
in Ontario, have charged that the Cabinet is not 
providing ample support for Great Britain, on the 
scale of Canada’s contributions in the World War. 
They have expressed disappointment that only one 


Page Two 


WARTIME ELECTION 


— 


threat to carry the war to the Reich becomes partic, 
larly significant. Yet the Allies may not find it easy, 
compel the Germans to fight on a larger scale, despit 
the tendency of certain elements in the Nazi party jy 
urge a “dynamic, forward policy.’ An Allied attag, 
on the Westwall might only result in a useless sa. 
rifice of men and material; and it remains to be see 
whether an aerial offensive can really prove effective 


NEW THEATRES OF WAR? To open up othe 
theatres of war is equally difficult. The Scandinavia, 
countries are still pursuing a cautious policy de 
signed to avoid war with either the Soviet Union q 
Germany. The Balkan states are also extremely wary 
To prevent the extension of hostilities to south 
eastern Europe, Hungary and Bulgaria have appar 
ently agreed not to enforce their claims agains 
Rumania for the duration of the war. While ther 
is still a danger that the U.S.S.R. may precipitar 
war by seizing Bessarabia, such a diversion seem 
unlikely until the Finnish campaign is brought w 
a close. Meanwhile, representatives of the Balkay| 
bloc—Rumania, Turkey, Yugoslavia and Greece~| 
are meeting in Belgrade on February 2 to discus! 
additional ways and means of maintaining peace 
Germany does not want the Balkan Entente to dé 
velop into an iron-clad alliance, but it does fear tha 
war in southeastern Europe would interfere with is! 
supplies. In this respect its interests coincide no 
only with those of the Balkan countries, but of 
Italy as well. JOHN C. DEWILDE 


division has reached England, and have claimed tha 
it was poorly clothed and equipped. Business me 
and farmers, moreover, have protested against the 


relatively small purchases being made by both the 
Canadian and British governments, even though the| 
War Supply Board claims that it is spending «| 
average of $4,000,000 weekly on behalf of th! 
Dominion and the Allies. The British government 
meanwhile, has hesitated to place large orders unt, 
it knew the extent of its needs in Europe, or the 
availability of airplanes and other products in the 
United States. It has also preferred to purchase wheat 
at cheaper prices in Australia, Argentina and else) 
where. 

THE POLITICAL FRONT. Party politics, how 
ever, played an even larger part in the dissolution 
of Parliament. As the term of the House of Com 
mons, which was elected in 1935, would normally 
have expired next October, the Conservatives e 
pected and desired a general election in the summet| 
They were preparing to secure ammunition for tht 
campaign during parliamentary debates and ques 
tion periods this winter. By his surprise maneuve 
last week, Mr. Mackenzie King has forced the Cor 
servatives to forgo this opportunity and to fight # 


—————_ 
c— 


a great ( 
placed M 
July 1938 
had hope 
ganizing 
While 
edly wel 
Conserva 
mined tc 
own part 
major p% 
machine: 
contradic 
tended t 
national: 
two pari 
tional a 
Conserv: 
“New | 
Prime } 
a strong 
tradition 
Canadia 
inces. I 
Ontario 
QUE 
King’s 
been to 
Quebec 
a large 


Bulgari 
1939. 
An E 

Bulgari: 

account 


Hitler’s 
Loew 
An a 

ideas a 


Reich. 


You M 
Man, 
1939. 


The « 


Docume 
1918, 
of Ji 
1939. 
A us 


The D. 
Stac 
A r: 

stresse 

1917 a 

isolatic 


FOREIG 
Headqua 


Entered ; 


a 


—. 


articy. 
easy ty 
lespite 
ALY to 
attack 
SS Sac. 
YE Seen 
ective 
» Othe 
Navian 
cy de. 
L1ON oF 
r Waty 
south 
appar. 
A gains 
> there 
‘1pitate 
seem 
ght to 
Balkan| 
eece—| 
discuss 
peace 
to de 
ar tha 
vith its 
de not 
but of 


ILDE 


ed that 
ss men 
nst the 
th the 


gh the| 
ing an} 
of the| 
nment 
rs until| 
or the| 
in the 
» wheat 


d else} 
| 


, how 
olution 
Com 
yrmally| 
yes ek 
immer 
for the 
1 ques 
neuvel 
e Cor: 
ight a 


— Page Three 


a great disadvantage. Dr. R. J. Manion, who re- 
laced Mr. R. B. Bennett as Conservative leader in 
July 1938, lacks extensive political experience, and 
had hoped to use the parliamentary session for or- 
ganizing his forces and planning his campaign. 

While Prime Minister Mackenzie King undoubt- 
edly welcomed this opportunity to embarrass his 
Conservative opponents, he was even more deter- 
mined to head off an incipient rebellion within his 
own party. As in the United States, both of Canada’s 
major parties are amalgamations of local political 
machines and combinations of diverse and often 
contradictory views. Although the Liberals have 
tended to favor lower tariffs and to adopt a more 
nationalistic attitude on Commonwealth affairs, the 
two parties ordinarily have differed as little on na- 
tional affairs as their American counterparts. The 
Conservative party, in fact, enacted considerable 
“New Deal’ legislation while Mr. Bennett was 
Prime Minister in 1930- 1935, and it still contains 
a strongly ‘‘progressive’” wing. The Liberals have 
traditionally drawn their support from the French- 
Canadians in Quebec, and from the western prov- 
inces. The Conservatives have been predominant in 
Ontario and the Maritime Provinces. 

QUEBEC AND ONTARIO. Mr. Mackenzie 
King’s chief political problem in recent years has 
been to keep control of the Liberal machines in both 
Quebec and Ontario. These two provinces command 
a large majority of the House of Commons, since 


THE F.P.A. 


Bulgarian Conspiracy, by J. Swire. London, Robert Hale, 
1939. 12s 6d 
An English newspaperman with a remarkable grasp of 
Bulgarian politics has written a fascinating and revealing 
account of Bulgaria’s post-war history. 


Hitler’s Germany: The Nazi Background to War, by Karl 
Loewenstein. New York, Macmillan, 1939. $1.25 
An able description and analysis of the institutions, 
ideas and plain power-politics which make up the Third 
Reich. 


You Might Like Socialism: A Way of Life for Modern 
Man, by Corliss Lamont. New York, Modern Age Books, 
1939. 95 cents 


The case for socialism here and elsewhere. 


Documents and Readings in the History of Europe since 
1918, by Walter Consuelo Langsam, with the assistance 


of James Michael Egan. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott, 


1939. $3.75 
A useful collection, arranged topically. 


The Deadly Parallel, by C. Hartley Grattan. New York, 
Stackpole, 1939. $2.00 
A rather loosely written, pamphleteering tract which 
stresses the similarity between America’s position in 1914- 
1917 and 1939, and advocates a “continental”—or moderate 
isolationist—foreign policy for the United States. 


Quebec elects 65 and Ontario 82 of the 245 mem- 
bers. In 1936 the Quebec Liberals—after 40 years of 
power—lost the Provincial legislature to Maurice 
Duplessis, leader of a coalition called Union 
Nationale. In 1937, however, the Liberals carried 
the Ontario provincial election for the first time in 
a generation. Mr. Mitchell Hepburn, the new On- 
tario Premier, immediately became a strong con- 
tender for leadership of the national Liberal party 
and allied himself with Premier Duplessis to oppose 
numerous measures—such as development of the St. 
Lawrence waterway—advocated by the Mackenzie 
King régime in Ottawa. In an election held on Oc- 
tober 25, the Liberals defeated M. Duplessis and re- 
gained control of Quebec, thus assuring Mr. Macken- 
zie King of French-Canadian support. The opposi- 
tion of the Hepburn group in Ontario remained, 
however, and culminated on January 18 in a reso- 
lution of the Provincial legislature condemning the — 
war policies of the Mackenzie King government. 
The Mackenzie King Liberals obviously hope that 
this election will consolidate their strength in the 
two vital provinces. By continuing to promise that 
conscription will not be imposed, they can keep the 
Quebec vote; by proving that their prosecution of 
the war is honest and efficient, they can enhance 
their position in Ontario. Their main objective, 
therefore, is to compel Premier Hepburn to support 
the national ticket and to end his opposition to the 


Ottawa government. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


BOOKSHELF 


Chaos in Asia, by Hallett Abend. New York, Ives Wash- 

burn, 1939. $3.00 

A ruthless exposé of Japan’s “new order” in East Asia 
by the Shanghai correspondent of The New York Times. 
The results of Japanese rule in occupied China, both for 
Chinese civilians and foreign nationals, are here summar- 
ized in graphic detail by an observer who has always 
been willing to give Japan the benefit of the doubt. 


Farmward March: Chemurgy Takes Command, by William 
J. Hale. New York, Coward-McCann, 1939. $2.00 
The pseudo-scientific, super-isolationist doctrine that by 
chemical processing of American farm products we can 
eliminate foreign trade and build a better social order in 
the United States. 


Road to War: America, 1914-1917, by Walter Millis. Bos- 
ton, Houghton Mifflin, 1935. $1.45 
A moderate-priced re-issue of a book most apropos at 
this time of crisis. 


China at War, by Freda Utley. New York, John Day, 1939. 
$3.75 
In its earlier sections, this book gives a well-written 
account of a visit to China during the summer of 1938, 
before Hankow was evacuated by the Chinese forces. The 
latter chapters represent a much more weighty analysis 
of the socio-political forces at work in present-day China. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 15, FEepruARY 2, 1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHBLES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


“E> 181 F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

JAN. 29.—Now that the United States has placed 
itself in a position to act decisively in the Far East, 
by terminating the commercial treaty with Japan, 
the question uppermost in Washington is how this 
new freedom of action will be used. The answer will 
depend in large part on the course of events in Asia, 
but also to some extent on the relations between the 
State Department and the two committees of Con- 
gress which deal with foreign affairs. 

NO MODUS VIVENDI. Three days before the 
commercial treaty expired on January 26, the State 
Department clarified its position in an oral state- 
ment made to Ambassador Horinouchi by Assistant 
Secretary Adolf A. Berle, Jr. The Japanese Ambas- 
sador was told, first, that termination of the treaty 
would not in itself bring about any changes in im- 
port duties or tonnage rates, but that future com- 
mercial relations would depend entirely on develop- 
ments. Secondly, Japanese merchants who have been 
allowed to reside in the United States for indefinite 
periods, would be permitted to enter as alien visitors 
but would be required to apply for renewals each 
year under the immigration laws. Thirdly, the United 
States did not see any immediate possibility of an 
exchange of notes between the two governments 
defining the status of trade relations. This matter, 
the Department explained, would have to be held 
open, and presumably form a part of the discussions 
that have been taking place in Tokyo between Am- 
bassador Grew and the Japanese Foreign Minister. 

The clear meaning of this refusal to consider a 
temporary agreement is that the State Department 
intends to use its freedom of action as a diplomatic 
lever to secure recognition of the larger issues in- 
volved in Japanese-American relations. It is not 
opposed to further negotiations with Tokyo, pro- 
vided that these include not only the specific issue of 


_ American rights in China, but also the broad ques- 
tions of equal opportunity, the Open Door and the 


integrity of China, which are challenged by Japan's 
new order in Asia. 

For the present, the Department appears to be 
content to employ the threat of economic pressure 
without resort to direct retaliation or overt acts. 
Having served notice on Japan, Mr. Hull and his 
Far Eastern advisers are proceeding cautiously. They 
have quietly used the “moral embargo” to prevent 
Japan from securing certain American processes for 
the manufacture of high-test octane gas, and have 
actually induced American oil companies to cancel 


orders for plant equipment valued at several million 
dollars. At the same time, they have made no effort 
as yet to stop the export of gasoline, including octane 
gas, which is being sold in considerable quantities, 
There is some talk of extending further financial 
aid to China (which would be possible if Congress 
should increase the capital of the Export-Impor 
Bank), but apparently no immediate plan for im. 
posing countervailing duties or import restrictions 
against Japan under existing tariff laws. 

EMBARGO ACTION UNCERTAIN. This atti- 
tude on the part of the State Department is taken 
to mean that the Administration will not press for 
immediate action on the embargo resolutions now 
pending in Congress. Senator Pittman, chairman of 
the Foreign Relations Committee, however, may be 
expected to keep the threat of embargo action alive 
by urging full consideration of the two measures 
now before his Committee. He and other Congres. 
sional leaders may also be expected to facilitate 
passage of the measure increasing the capital of the 
Export-Import Bank by $100,000,000. While the 
latter measure is ostensibly designed to permit ad- 
ditional credits to Finland, several members of the 
Foreign Relations Committee have indicated that 
they will press for amendments to permit further 
loans to China. Without amendment the Bank bill 
would be of little aid to China, as that country has 
already borrowed $25,000,000 and the bill fixes a 
top limit of $30,000,000 to any one country. 

Of the two embargo measures before the Senate 
Committee, there is little doubt that the State De- 
partment would prefer the Pittman Resolution to 
that sponsored by Senator Schwellenbach. The for- 


mer is a discretionary measure authorizing the Presi- | 


dent to forbid the export of arms and ammunition, 
and certain other specified war materials, such as 
iron, steel, oil, gasoline and scrap metals, whenevet 
the President finds that any party to the Nine Power 
Treaty “is endangering the lives of citizens of the 
United States or depriving such citizens of their 
legal rights and privileges.” The Schwellenbach 
Resolution, on the other hand, calls for a mandatory 
embargo authorizing the President to withhold ex- 
ports of any article or materials (except agricultural 
products) which “there is reason to believe’ will 
be used in violation of the Nine Power Treaty. The 
Administration’s caution in withholding its formal 
endorsement of either measure may be traced to the 
fact that Congressional leaders are not yet certain of 
sufficient votes to assure passage without prolonged 
and embittered debate. W. T. STONE 


(ORE 


An inter pret. 


FO) 


Fel 


| 


_— 
piratiot 
shifted la: 
at Tokyo 
scattered 

Japan's re 
arisen fre 
China rai’ 
lives of 

French n 
that the | 
bombing 
both in 

dangers | 
on the F 


THE | 
thrown 1 
Saito, a | 
lenged tl 
in China 
the pros| 
| Asia,” h 
ceived in 
| Attackin 
China a: 
in name. 


unify th 
| gations | 
Even mc 
authorit: 
China’s 
whether 
gime. Sz 
a holy » 
already 

As a 
Which \ 


tecord, 


