— | FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


f An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 


rit N. Y., under the act 
a FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated < hon Ce 
New 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
of tei —“y 
usual . Vou. XVI, No. 51 OcToBER 15, 1937 
ms F.P.A. STUDENT MEMBERSHIP 

$1 Academic Year 60¢ Semester 
slated Student Membership includes the new Foreign Policy 
York, Bulletin, one Headline Book a semester, and special 

admission to meetings at National Headquarters and 
Jaesar the Branches. 
actual oo 
time. 
: Offered only to High School Students, and College Students 
1enow. who are taking at least 10 credit hours a week. 
f mer- 

ROOSEVELT ABANDONS ISOLATION 

ed, by } 


— PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT'S speech of October 5, 

repudiating the isolationist philosophy embodied 
in the Neutrality Act, has created a world sensa- 
tion. Whether it will assist in checking world 
e posi: | anarchy will depend on whether the speech was in- 
Orien- } tended merely as another “moral gesture” or will be 
by an} backed by a positive foreign policy. 


Jiking, 


dy was 

‘and. “The people of the United States,” the President said, 

, New | must “give thought to the rest of the world. . . . The pres- 
ent reign of terror and lawlessness . . . has now reached a 

stem of stage where the very foundations of civilization are seriously 

ational 7 threatened. . . . Without a declaration of war and without 


a prob- | warning or justification of any kind, civilians, including 
women and children, are being ruthlessly murdered with 
smond, | bombs from the air. In times of so-called peace, ships are 
being attacked and sunk by submarines without cause or 
vork of | B%tice. Nations are fomenting and taking sides in civil 
foreign | Warfare in nations that have never done them any harm.” 

If these aggressions and inhumanities increase, “let no one 
| imagine that America will escape, that it may expect mercy, 
that this Western Hemisphere will not be attacked and that 

it will continue tranquilly and peacefully to carry on the 
_ ethics and arts of civilization. . . . The peace-loving nations 
nortgages, | Must make a concerted effort in opposition to those viola- 
tions of treaties and those ignorings of humane instincts 
e ownen which today are creating a state of international anarchy 
company, | afd instability from which there is no escape to mere isola- 


upon the ° ° ” 
upon im {| tion or neutrality. 


wens pe While recognizing “the importance of removing injustices 
jer which | aNd well-founded grievances,” the sanctity of treaties and 
ks of thé | respect of the rights of liberties of others must be restored. 
any othet | But it seems ‘‘to be unfortunately true that the epidemic of 
ct, in he | world lawlessness is spreading.” When an epidemic of 


porated. physical disease starts, the community joins in a “quaran- 


, N. Y,; 


N, oan tine” of the patient. For the very reason that “America 
3 . ah 
ty Public hates war, ... there must be positive endeavors to preserve 


-9-M-270, | Peace.” 


Encouraged by this speech, the League’s Far East- 
National ) "2 Advisory Committee on the same day declared 
ass mattet that Japan had violated its treaty obligations by in- 
vading China and that the Assembly should invite 
League members who are signatories of the Nine- 


Se . > ee 


Power Treaty to consult with each other and addi- 
tional states having special interests in the Orient in 
an effort to secure peaceful settlement. It recom- 
mended that, meanwhile, the Assembly should not 
close its session; and League members were urged to 
“refrain from taking any action which might have 
the effect of weakening China’s power of resistance,” 
and to ‘‘consider how far they can individually extend 
aid to China.” 

On October 6 the League Assembly, with the sig- 
nificant abstention of Poland and Siam, adopted this 
report—again demonstrating the value of the League 
mechanism for focusing world opinion. Immediately 
the Aga Khan, president of the Assembly, invited 
the 17 League members who had signed or adhered 
to the Nine-Power Treaty to initiate the consultations 
authorized by Article 7 of that Pact. The states thus 
invited include Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Canada, 
China, Denmark, France, India, Italy, Mexico, the 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Swe- 
den, Britain and the Union of South Africa. 

On the 6th, also, the State Department issued a 
formal statement which, after referring to the report 
adopted by the League, declared that in “the light 
of the unfolding developments in the Far East, the 
government of the United States has been forced to 
the conclusion that the action of Japan in China is 

. . contrary to the provisions” of the Nine-Power 
Treaty and the Anti-War Pact—a statement more 
categorical than any issued by the State Department 
during the Manchuria crisis of 1931-1932. Mr. Hull 
ended by stating that “the conclusions” of the United 
States are “in general accord with those of the As- 
sembly of the League of Nations.” Subsequently the 
United States announced that it would accept an in- 
vitation to participate in the Nine-Power conference. 

Former Secretary of State Stimson, in a long letter 
to the New York Times on the 6th, condemned the 


— 


= Page Two 


Neutrality Act and intimated that the United States 
and Britain should boycott essential Japanese exports 
and imports; while Senator Key Pittman, chairman 
of the Committee on Foreign Relations, declared that 
an embargo against Japan would stop an invasion of 
China within thirty days, and advanced the startling 
doctrine that, as a result of the Supreme Court de- 
cision in the Curtiss-Wright case, the President al- 
ready has power to impose such a boycott. 

In the countries belonging to the democratic bloc, 
the President’s speech was received with intense 
gratification tempered by skepticism, while the dic- 
tatorships expressed indignation. Although Prime 
Minister Neville Chamberlain termed the address a 
“clarion call,” British opinion asked whether the 
United States was willing to assume the risks involved 
in checking further aggressions in the Orient. China, 
too, was gratified by the President’s speech, but in a 
radio broadcast of October 9 General Chiang Kai- 
shek declared “international sympathies, though a 
source of greatest encouragement, should not be per- 
mitted to awaken false or ill-grounded hopes.” 


In Japan the President’s speech and, even more, 
Secretary Hull’s pronouncement that Japan in effect 
was the aggressor, at first aroused intense anger, and 
it was reported that Tokyo would refuse to recognize 
the existence of the Nine-Power Pact or to attend 
the proposed conference. On further reflection, how- 
ever, the Japanese Foreign Office issued a statement 
on October 9 merely expressing regret that the 
League and the United States had condemned Japan 
as a treaty violator and insisting that its action in 
China constituted legitimate self-defense. At the 
same time there were reports that Foreign Minister 
Hirota had informed the Cabinet that Japan would 
attend the Nine-Power Conference, “if. justly and 
lawfully called.” But, ‘‘to denounce Japan as an 
aggressor,” he added, “then invite her to attend the 
conference would not be just.” 

Until the European situation clears up, it is im- 
probable that the Nine-Power conference will do 
more than offer mediation to the two parties. In 
view of the present unwillingness of any great power 
to take the risks involved in full economic sanctions, 
Tokyo doubtless hopes that the conference will 
merely put pressure on Nanking to accept Japanese 
demands in North China as the price of stopping the 
war, thus leading to another Hoare-Laval deal. 

Meanwhile, the Neutrality Act continues to plague 
the State Department. Since this Act requires the 
imposition of an arms embargo against belligerents 
only on the existence of a “state of war’—as dis- 
tinguished from the outbreak of hostilities—the Presi- 
dent can legally justify his failure to apply the Act so 
far. But should Japan declare war, he would prob- 
ably have to impose the embargo on both parties— 
despite the doctrine of Presidential prerogative re- 


cently advanced by Senator Pittman. Even if the 
President invoked the cash-and-carry provisions of y 
the law, it is believed, China would be far more seri. 
ously affected than Japan, which has undoubtedly 
accumulated large supplies both of munitions and 
raw materials. By contrast, it is estimated that Nan. | 
king has military supplies which can last only six 
months unless they are replenished by imports. Some 
arms are now reaching China via Hongkong and Oct 
Mongolia without encountering the Japanese block} observ: 
ade. But should these supplies be cut off, China} velt’s ¢ 
might succumb and Japan would triumph over the ; not fot 
President’s pronouncement. only in 
Under the principles enumerated in the President's} Washi 
speech, the United States should refrain from im-} aounce 
posing the Neutrality Act so long as this is legally! cervers 
possible. But assuming that an amendment of this! certed 
law is unlikely in the next few months, the remain.) what 
ing alternative is to prepare for a Japanese declara-! i mea 
tion of war by attempting to coordinate the provi-} tions ¢ 
sions of the Neutrality Act with the action of the stage ( 
League powers, so as to produce an international} f,jals 
shipping embargo proposed here several weeks ago,*} o¢ any 
It is only by fitting the Neutrality Act into a system) fast 
of international “quarantine” that the United States} estore 
can escape from becoming a virtual ally of Japan} con, 
RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL visions 
DEMOCRACIES CAUGHT SHORT ON SPAIN } PO" 
In the fast poker game now being played by Eu a of 
ropean chancelleries, Mussolini has once more called} [pite< 
his opponents’ bluff. His answer to the Franco} eyeal 
British note of October 2, delivered on October 9} contra 
after considerable prodding by the British Ambassa- To 
dor and the French chargé d'affaires in Rome, showed Depar 
no signs of retreat from the stiffer position on Spain impor 
assumed on his return from Germany. The Fascist depart 
government, after echoing the hope of the two retary 
democracies that “the internal struggles of Spain} the m 
may cease to be a cause of suspicion and friction be} tional 
tween other nations,” declined their invitation t0 4} actual 
three-power conference. It suggested, instead, that} vince 
the vexing question of foreign volunteers in Spait\ tionis, 
should “continue to be dealt with” by the Londos it, an 
Non-Intervention Committee, whose action, accotd} the-ro 
ing to the Franco-British note, has been “paralyzed’} wrash 
by the difficulties of the situation; and stated that speect 
Italy will not participate in any conversations Of COM} cation 
ferences to which Germany has not been formally on the 
invited. and ¢ 
The Italian note coincided with reports that l) mesej 
Duce’s son, Bruno, accompanied by a crack squadron Th 
of 23 Italian bombers, had flown to Rebel territory good 
for active service; that additional Italian troops and havin 
war material had been landed in Rebel ports; ant) and ' 
***American Policy in the Far East," Foreign Policy Bulletin, August 2) but h; 
—_ (Continued on Page 4) for a 


ident's 
m im- 
legally 


of this! 
emain- 


eclara- 
provi- 
of the 
ational 
; ago.* 
system 


- States | 


Japan. 
JELL 


PAIN 
by Ev 
> called 
Franco 
rober 9 
nbassa- 
showed 
n Spain 
Fascist 
he two 
F Spain 
tion be 
On tO 4 
id, that 
n Spait 
London 
accord: 
ralyzed” 
‘ed that 
Or Com 


‘ormally| 


| 


that I) 
quadron 
territory 
Ops and 
rts; and 


August 21, 


, 


| 


) 


W ashington News Letter 


, es 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 13—A Speech or a Program? The astute 
observation of the London Times that Mr. Roose- 
yelt’s Chicago speech had voiced an “attitude” and 
not formulated a program is confirmed in part, but 
only in part, by developments of the past few days in 
Washington. Within 24 hours of the Chicago pro- 
nouncement, it became apparent to Washington ob- 
servers that the President’s clarion call for “con- 
cetted action” to “quarantine” war did not mean 
what many Americans hoped, and others feared, 
it meant: immediate application of economic sanc- 
tions to curb Japanese aggression in Asia. At this 
stage of the game responsible State Department of- 
ficials are not thinking about boycotts or embargoes 
or any other kind of strong-arm action in the Far 
East. What they are thinking about is a program to 
restore peace, through mediation rather than coer- 
cion, within the framework of the consultation pro- 
visions of the Nine Power Treaty. That pact, it is 
important to remember, contains no provisions for 
punishing violators of its terms. At the same time, 
the official statement of October 6 associating the 
United States with the views of the League Assembly 
reveals a tentative program of cooperation in sharp 
contrast to the philosophy of rigid isolation. 

To evaluate the President’s speech and the State 
Department’s cautious condemnation of Japan, it is 
important to note that the groundwork for this new 
departure had been laid down in advance by Sec- 
retary Hull in a series of public statements beginning 
the middle of September. In his speech to the Na- 
tional Peace Conference on September 19, Mr. Hull 
actually launched a program of education to con- 
vince the American people of the futility of “isola- 
tionism,” or ‘‘storm-cellarism” as he sometimes calls 
it, and the need for a positive, but still middle-of- 
the-road, policy of cooperation to preserve peace. 
Washington observers are aware that the Chicago 
speech was primarily designed as a part of this edu- 
cational campaign. Obviously it was not tossed off 
on the spur of the moment, but was carefully planned 
and expertly timed to fit the necessities of the do- 
mestic as well as the international situation. 

The response from abroad is generally considered 
good here. Prime Minister Chamberlain, who is 
having his own troubles with Mussolini, has publicly 
and privately expressed his thanks to the President, 
but has advised Washington that Britain is not ready 
for any punitive measures in Asia. France, while 


perhaps reading too much into the Roosevelt speech, 
has welcomed the new turn in American policy for 
its ultimate if not immediate effect on Europe. Rome 
and Berlin, despite inspired press comments to the 
contrary, are disturbed by the spectre of a new front 
in the West. 


The American reaction. The domestic reaction, 
however, is of greater and more immediate concern 
to Washington. The first chorus of editorial ap- 
proval is discounted by experienced State Depart- 
ment officials who detect a strong undertone of criti- 
cism, based (erroneously, they believe) on the con- 
viction that Mr. Roosevelt is about to embark on a 
Wilsonian program to police the world. Already, 
newspaper polls are showing the strength of Con- 
gressional opposition to sanctions against aggressor 
nations, and popular support of stronger neutrality 
to keep the nation out of foreign wars. Now that the 
President has called a special session of Congress 
for November 15, he is quite likely to face an 
embarrassing debate on the whole basis of American 
foreign policy, with the lines drawn on the old issue 
of isolation vs. cooperation. This Mr. Roosevelt's 
closest advisers want to avoid at all cost, and they 
had privately urged him to abandon his special 
session. In line with this advice, the State Depart- 
ment is striving to combat the notion that the Chi- 
cago speech constituted a complete reversal of policy, 
and a negation of the principles laid down by Con- 
gress in the Neutrality Act. Thus, they explain, we 
are still adhering to Mr. Hull’s middle-of-the-road, 
and are not adventuring into new fields. For the 
next week or so, all statements emanating from the 
Department are likely to be quiet and reassuring. 


Next steps. If the moves of the past few days do 
not, in fact, point to a new road, what practical pro- 
gram has the Administration to offer to implement 
the call for positive action? The answer is found, 
in part, between the lines of the official statement 
of October 6. In this document State Department 
draftsmen were careful not to slam the door on 
Japan. They avoided use of the word “aggressor” 
and contented themselves with merely stating that 
Japan’s action in China “is contrary to the provisions 
of the Nine-Power Treaty” and the Kellogg Pact. 
The League likewise has kept the door open to 
mediation, urging the members of the Nine-Power 
Pact to “seek a method of putting an end to the con- 
flict by agreement.”” With this pacific purpose, the 
State Department is in complete accord. The United 


States will accept the invitation to sit with the other 
signatories and adherents of the Nine-Power Pact, 
but will not take the lead in a drive to impose pen- 
alties which raise the dangerous question of retalia- 
tion. The chances of mediation may be almost nil, 
but in the Washington view they are worth trying, 
and they will be tried for a time at least. If there 
is any element in Japan which has the intelligence 
to propose a peace settlement, there are people here 
who would help it find a face-saving formula for 
retreat. That may even be a Hoare-Laval deal. If 
it fails, no one can predict the next step. 

During these past few weeks Washington ob- 
servers have detected a new atmosphere in the State 
Department. For the first time since the war, the 
Department is taking on the character of a Foreign 
Office—a real Foreign Office dealing with real prob- 
lems. In the past, there has always been an air of 
unreality, a pleasant complacency, as though we lived 
in a quaint Alice-in-Wonderland world. But those 
days are gone, and the hard world of reality seems 
to have broken through. We are in the game of 
Power Politics. From now on, whether we like it or 
not, we will be compelled to play the game. The 
American people have an important stake in whether 
it is played well, or badly. 


DEMOCRACIES CAUGHT SHORT ON SPAIN 
(Continued from Page 2) 

that General Franco, who on October 4 had received 
Mussolini’s “most fervent wishes” for the triumph 
of the Rebel cause, was preparing to launch a de- 
cisive drive on the basis of a plan drafted by Marshal 
Badoglio, hero of the Ethiopian campaign. Simul- 
taneously, Virginio Gayda, Fascist spokesman on 
foreign affairs, charged that France and the Soviet 
Union were shipping war material to Valencia, and 
it was announced that 50,000 Italian troops had 
been sent to reinforce the garrisons of Libya “owing 
to necessities of an international character.” 

Italy's intensified intervention in Spain and its 
refusal to negotiate directly regarding withdrawal 
of foreign “volunteers” confront France and Britain 
with grave decisions. Only last week France seemed 
determined, in case of Italian refusal, to open its 
Pyrenees frontier which, according to neutral ob- 
servers, has been strictly closed to men and arms 
destined for either side in Spain. On October 7, 
however, Premier Chautemps told the American 
Club in Paris that France “rejects any war of ide- 
ology from whichever side it may come,” and For- 
eign Minister Delbos, while declaring on October 9 


“we must act,” added that “as far as France is con- 


Page Four 


cerned, there is no question of preference for ide. 
ology of any sort.” It would appear that the Chay. 
temps government, although strengthened by the 
cantonal elections of October 10, which showed no 
decline in the influence of the Popular Front, intends 
to steer a middle course and avoid precipitate action, 

The guarded character of Franco-British negotia. 
tions on Spain makes it difficult to learn the extent 
to which French policy is determined by the views 
of Prime Minister Chamberlain, who believes that 


Spain is not worth the bones of a single British 
soldier. On October 8, when the main outlines of 
the Italian reply had already been foreshadowed by 
the Fascist press, Mr. Chamberlain, addressing the | 
Conservative party conference at Scarborough, ex. 
pressed the hope that this reply “may prove to be 
of such a character as will bring us all into greater 
harmony,” and open the way for a general Anglo. 
Italian settlement. 

From the point of view of the Spanish Loyalists, 
the withdrawal of Italian troops—which probably 
could not be effected without threat of force—is far 
less urgent than the opening of the Franco-Spanish 
frontier. The Loyalists have plenty of men and, in 
fifteen months of strenuous fighting, have ac 


FO! 


An int 


——— 
Vou. X 
—— 


V 
stat 
stat 
lem 
witl 
ing 
eco} 


October 


E 


b ire 
des 
France 
volunte 


quired the discipline and organization woefully lack. P'°°"** 


ing in the early days of the civil war. What they 
need is not foreign volunteers but arms, for which 
they are in a position to pay. Yet the French gov- 
ernment apparently fears that re-opening of the 
frontier would bring on that collision between for-| 
eign powers on Spanish soi! which the finespun non- 
intervention procedure has sought to avoid. It is 
reluctant, moreover, to antagonize Franco, on the 
theory that if the General wins he will bite the 
Fascist hands that fed him, and turn to France and 
Britain for financial assistance. The Western de- 
mocracies apparently believe that Italy is dissipating 
its military and economic resources by far-flung ex 
peditions, and prefer to let the Spanish fire burn 
itself out rather than risk the danger of general con 
flagration by trying to quench it. The Spanish crisis 
—like that in the Far East—shows that resistance 
to aggression which comes not before the coup but 
after the aggressor has already acquired a vested 
interest in his venture, is apt to prove futile, unless 
the protesting nations are ready to back up theif 
protests by the threat of force. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


The Spirit and Structure of German Fascism, by Robert 
A. Brady. New York, Viking, 1937. $3.00 

Although good in some respects, this book suffers from 
an oversimplified Marxist interpretation. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 51, Ocrosmr 15, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationd 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasiig Bug, President; Vera MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Entered as second-class mattel 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


faced 


naval | 
non-int 
howeve 
plan c 
teers fi 
by Ger 
tain nu 
Italian 
for “‘s 
for ex: 
men fr 
tional 
countri 
leave, 
mated 
fetain | 
which 
offers 
trovers 
solidat 
It is 
now p 


Londo: 


lon the 


