



m. the 
ation, 
n Na- 
body, 
in any 
If the 
settle. 
s lead- 
ild be 


$ iS i- 
ecause 
a cam: 
failure 
> been, 
lat set- 
e pres- 
out-of- 
ties by 
es spe 
- might 
nerican 
scribed 
f good 
play a 
Ities in 
i’s fast 
ly been 
ure the 
M arises 
ight not 


oach in} 


red hete 
close fe 
n North 


[INGER 





National 
, Entered & 
low at least 








PERIODICAL ROOM 
@BNERAL LIBRARY 
UnIY. OF MICH. 


AUG 3 Was 
Genera] Library Entered as 2nd class matter 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan - 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 41 


Juny 30, 1943 





UNITED NATIONS FACE CRUCIAL DECISIONS AS AXIS WEAKENS 


. See downfall of Mussolini, whose twenty-one year 
dictatorship ends in ruin and disaster for Italy, 
not only opens a new military phase of the war, but 
brings to a head the many complex problems of the 
Allies’ relations with the Axis powers. While King 
Victor Emmanuel proclaimed on July 25 that Italy 
would continue the war, and Marshal Badoglio, his 
new Premier, mentioned Italy’s resolution to abide 
by its obligations to Germany, it is difficult to believe 
that, with the administrative structure of Fascism in 
process of disintegration, Italy, already suffering from 
shortages of war material, can long continue the 
struggle against superior force. 


WHAT NEXT IN ITALY? But if “unconditional 
surrender’ should be sought by the Italians, with 
whom will the Allies deal? Will they demand the 
abdication of Victor Emmanuel, on the ground that 
for twenty-one years the King has been Mussolini’s 
collaborator, and acquiesced, willingly or unwilling- 
ly, in the series of acts that finally led to Italy's en- 
trance into the war on June 10, 1940? Or will they 
bolster up the position of the House of Savoy, on the 
assumption that it is a symbol around which Italians 
of all shades of opinion could rally in the hour of 
crisis? Will they deal with the army, as represented 
by Badoglio who, although then not a member of the 
Fascist party, served Mussolini well during the Ethi- 
Opian campaign, and was ousted only because he 
found it impossible to retrieve the disasters suffered 
by Italians in Greece? Will they negotiate with 
Italian industrialists, who collaborated, freely or un- 
der pressure, with the Fascist régime? Will they call 
back from exile those who left Italy during the past 
two decades by compulsion or because of their ab- 
horrence of Fascism? Or will they seek, within Italy, 
new leaders who, unknown to the outside world, may 
have been agitating against Fascism underground at 
the risk of their lives ? 

AMGOT DEVELOPS POLICIES. To some of 


these questions the proclamation issued on July 18 
by General Alexander, Military Governor of Sicily, 
and the subsequent activities of AMGOT in that 
area, furnish certain clues. The Allies have indicated, 
in Sicily, their determination to oust all Fascist lead- 
ers, while maintaining local authorities in office. Un- 
der AMGOT’s rule the position of the Roman Cath- 
olic Church will be respected, freedom of religious 
worship will be upheld, and anti-Semitic measures 
will be annulled. No law discriminating on the basis 
of race, creed or color will be tolerated. Fascist militia 
and Fascist youth organizations will be abolished. But 
there will be no negotiations with exiles or refugees. 
Presumably—as has been the case in Sicily—the Allies 
will accept unconditional surrender from Italian com- 
manders in the field, not from political authorities. 


The restriction on negotiations with exiles or refu- 
gees has already created considerable concern abroad, 
particularly among Italians in the United States who 
fear that the Allies are planning to make a deal with 
some Italian Darlan. Yet it must be recognized that, 
until far more is known than at present about existing 
conditions in Italy, it is difficult to predict how refu- 
gees, especially those long out of touch with their 
country, would be greeted on their return. The very 
fact that some of the exiles were once associated with 
a régime which proved unable to prevent the rise of 
Fascism may prove an obstacle to their participation 
in the reconstruction of Italy. The Allies have given 
no indication that they will not deal with anti-Fascist 
elements they may find within Italy itself—and in 
Italy, as in other liberated countries, those who have 
borne the brunt of war and alien occupation will ex- 
pect to have a voice in deciding the nation’s future. 
There is undoubtedly a danger that some of the 
AMGOT leaders, especially those who have had offi- 
cial connections in Italy, may tend to deal only with 
the people they once knew, or the social groups with 
which they were formerly associated. This criticism 


a ae 
aie 


— 


= ee te gt 


Le | 2 


Psi 


SATs oS 
ae ep ae 
OSS TET 


atm wt Net 


——ooI SS Page Two — 


has already been brought in Britain against the ap- 
intment of Lord Rennell of Rodd, whose father 

d been British Ambassador to Rome, as chief civil 
affairs officer of AMGOT in Sicily. 

IS RUSSIA AT ODDS WITH ALLIES? It is on 
this issue—the issue of defining who are the “nice” 
or “respectable” people with whom the United Na- 
tions can deal once Nazism and Fascism have been 
overthrown—that a cleavage threatens to develop 
between Russia, on the one hand, and the Western 
powers on the other. The establishment on July 21 
of an anti-Nazi German National Committee in 
Moscow composed of German exiles and war pris- 
oners, which is urging the Germans, by radio and leaf- 
lets, to revolt and destroy Nazism, has aroused suspi- 
cions latent in this country concerning Russia’s plans 
for the future of Europe. Some commentators jumped 
to the conclusion that Russia was offering to negotiate 
a separate peace with Germany at the expense of the 
Allies, in disregard of the formula of unconditional 
surrender laid down by Mr. Churchill and President 
Roosevelt, and to set up a Communist régime in the 
heart of Europe. 

Misunderstandings between the Allies on this basic 
issue bode ill for post-war reconstruction if they are 
not promptly dispelled. The moot question whether 
the Soviet government did or did not inform Britain 
and the United States of its plans for the establish- 
ment of a German anti-Nazi committee might be 
more cogently answered if we knew whether Britain 
and the United States had informed Russia in ad- 
vance about the establishment of AMGOT in Sicily. 
Anglo-American governments of occupation on Euro- 
pean soil may be as disturbing to Russia as pro- 
Russian committees of Poles and Germans are to 
some people in Britain and the United States. Yet 
actually there is little fundamental divergence in the 
aims of the three great powers. Russia’s main purpose 
is to shorten the war as much as possible. That, sure- 
ly, is also the purpose of the Allies. If revolution in 
Germany can help to shorten the war in Germany, 
just as the downfall of Mussolini may help to shorten 
the war in Italy, there is no reason to believe that such 
revolution would not be welcome to the Allies. It 
would be preferable, from the British and American 


HOW LONG WILL IT TAKE TO BEAT JAPAN? 


Recently two answers have been given to this ques- 
tion: one by an American Admiral, and the other 
by the head of the Chinese government. On July 7, 
the sixth anniversary of China’s war of resistance, 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek declared that the ag- 
gressor had lost the initiative both in Europe and 
Asia and expressed the opinion that “the time limit 
of his utter defeat cannot exceed two years.” But less 
than two weeks later, on July 20, Vice Admiral Fred- 
erick J. Horne, Vice Chief of Naval Operations, 








es 
——, 


point of view, if such a revolution were in the dire. 
tion of ending totalitarianism and creating condj. 
tions favorable to the growth of democratic inst. 


tutions. But if that is the kind of change we want | 


in Germany, then we ought to encourage it by every 
propaganda device at our disposal, instead of merely 
criticizing Russia's appeals to the Germans. 


The strength of Russia’s appeals lies in the policy 
enunciated by Stalin, who has repeatedly stated that 
Russia seeks, not the destruction of “e German 
people, but the downfall of Hitler, the collapse of 
his “‘new order in Europe,” and the end of Nazi mil- 
itary power. Are these aims radically different from 
those of Britain and the United States? No realistic 
observer in Western countries can believe that the un- 
conditional surrender of Germany is synonymous 
with destruction of the German people. To take, and 
publicize, such a view would be to guarantee prolon- 
gation of the war, since the Germans might under. 
standably prefer destruction through war to the bitter 
end to slow strangulation in peacetime. Where the 
Russians have shown a better grasp of German psy- 
chology than the British and Americans is by hold- 
ing out the hope to the Germans that, if they now 
overthrow their government, they can look, not for 
mercy—the Russians have far fewer illusions than the 
Western powers about the brutality of the Germans— 
but the possibility of redeeming themselves by the es- 
tablishment of a régime described in the German 
manifesto from Moscow as “democratic.” Russia has 
no more interest than Britain and the United States 
in the survival of a strong Germany, militarily cap- 
able of resuming expansion to the East. What the 
Russians are interested in is in having a change of 
the German social and economic structure profound 
enough to destroy the roots of Nazism. The immedi- 
ate issue is whether that is also our first concern— 
or whether, for fear of revolution in Europe, we 
might encourage the perpetuation in power of those 
elements in Germany and Italy which fostered or 
tolerated the ideas and practices that have wreaked 
untold suffering on millions of human beings 
throughout the world. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


told a Washington press conference that the U5. 
Navy is planning for a war against Japan that will 
last at least until 1949. He pointed out in this connec 
tion that we have “tremendous distances to go in the 
Pacific and we have to build bases from the ground 
up as we advance.” 

THE NAVY MAY MEAN IT. The idea of the 
war's lasting until 1949 is so completely at variance 
with the expectations of the American people that 
there may be a tendency to overlook the serious 








ces 


vit 
ute 
wa 
tio 
stif 
teg 


lie 
bu' 


wil 








lirec. 
ondi- 
insti- 


want | 


every 
erely 


Olicy 
that 
rman 
¢ of 


from 
Listic 
é un- 
mous 
, and 
olon- 
nder- 
Ditter 
e the 


Psy- 
hold- 
now 
t for 
n the 
ins— 
1€ €5- 
rman 
a has 
states 
"Cap 
t the 
pe of 
ound 
medi- 
-m— 
> we 
those 
sd or 
saked 


eings 


AN 


US. 
t will 
mnnec- 
in the 
round 


»f the 
riance 
> that 
erious 








—— 
—_— 





aspects of Admiral Horne’s statement. It has been 
suggested that he exaggerated the situation knowing- 
ly in order to impress the public with the magnitude 
of the struggle that lies ahead, despite current suc- 
cesses. It is true, of course, that officials are alarmed 
at the recent failure of American factories to meet 
vital production schedules—a failure which is attrib- 
uted in part to a growing popular feeling that the 
war is “in the bag.” Yet Admiral Horne’s declara- 
tion, apart from being a propaganda statement to 
stiffen the home front,’ may also represent the stra- 
tegic outlook of some naval circles. 


The Navy has not stated in detail what calculations 
lie behind the expectation of six more years of war, 
but it is not difficult to imagine upon what actions 
Generalissimo Chiang based his prediction of victory 
within two years. Such a victory can be achieved only 
if the United States and Britain shortly bring Ger- 
many face to face with a second land front on the 
continent; if Allied blows against the Japanese grow 
rapidly in power; and if the defeat of Germany is 
followed by a swift development of Anglo-American- 
Chinese offensives in the Far East. In other words, 
the Chinese hope can be realized only through a fully 
developed strategy of coalition warfare among the 
United Nations. The opposite would be an “isola- 
tionist’” strategy under which, possibly out of over- 
cautiousness, we might let slip the opportunity for 
striking decisive blows at Germany this year and 
might plan to defeat Japan more or less by ourselves. 
We cannot say whether such a view lies behind Ad- 
miral Horne’s words, but both the date he has given 
and his emphasis on bases in the Pacific suggest neg- 
lect of the Chinese front, i.e. of our chief Far Eastern 
ally. 


CHINA IN 1949. Admittedly the naval aspects of 
war against Japan are extremely important, but the 
objectives of - pe at sea ought to include the 
festoration and strengthening of China’s armies as 
well as the seizure of islands. In six years of war 
China’s military power has deteriorated in many re- 
spects, but fleet movements, appropriately combined 
with land and air actions, could reestablish China’s 
links with the outside world and enable Chungking 
to secure needed supplies. It is, however, very diffi- 


| cult, if not impossible, to incorporate China adequate- 


ly in Asiatic war strategy if our purpose is “victory 
in 1949.”" Even though it is common to refer to 





To F.P.A. Members— 


Please allow at least one month for 
change of address on membership 
publications. 





Page Three 

















TT 


China’s protracted resistance as a “miracle,” no one 
should count on China’s being present as an ally at 
the finish if 1943 is to be considered only the half- 
way mark in its struggle against the Japanese. But if 
China were to fall by the wayside, depriving us of a 
continental base against Japan—unless Soviet Siberia 
becomes a fighting front—what would happen to 
our war strategy? Then, indeed, the problems of 
the Pacific would be serious, and 1949 might even 
prove a rather conservative date. 


JAPAN WITHOUT GERMANY. The fight be- 
fore us is certain to be hard, but if we do not under- 
estimate our own possibilities of action, a tough war 
need not be synonymous with a long war. We are 
still in the habit of thinking of Japan’s position after 
the war in Europe as if Germany would still be in the 
battle. We find it difficult to realize that, once Ger- 
many is defeated, Japan will stand completely alone 
face to face with the combined forces of the United 
States, Britain, China and other Pacific allies—pro- 
vided that the United Nations remain united and that 
we do not take so long to beat Germany that China 
will have dropped out of the war. The prospect of an 
insular Japan trying to protect its overseas empire 
and home territory against combined enemy fleets and 
air and land forces is indeed an awesome one for 
the Japanese. Exactly how they would react no one 
can say, but that they could stand it for long is doubt- 
ful, since they would be outnumbered in every war 
category—men, planes, ships, artillery, and tanks. 
Perhaps it was this, as well as forthcoming plans for 
offensives in the Pacific, that lay behind the declara- 
tion of Australian Minister for External Affairs Evatt 
on June 17 that the defeat of Japan might follow 
very quickly on the downfall of Germany. 


GOOD AND BAD PROPAGANDA. It is doubt- 
ful whether Admiral Horne’s statement will have a 
beneficial effect on American war attitudes, but there 
is no question whatever as to its unfortunate effects 
in Asia. The date 1949 can be used by the Tokyo 
radio to create despondency and defeatism in China 
and to tell the Chinese that, when their Generalissimo 
makes a statement on the length of the war, he really 
does not know what his allies are thinking. And what 
can we anticipate in Southeast Asia where we hope 
that native populations will not cooperate with Japan, 
despite past dissatisfactions with Western rule? It is 
unwise to expect the people of Burma and the Philip- 
pines or the Dutch and Indonesian residents of the 
Indies to wait four, five or six years for us to come 
to their aid. It would be desirable for the government 
to correct the false impression created by this situa- 
tion and to indicate that, although the war will re- 
quire many sacrifices of the American people, we ex- 
pect to secure victory without fighting Japan in- 
definitely. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 




















Page Four 








THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Goodbye Japan, by Joseph Newman. New York, Fischer, 

1942. $2.50 

Japan before Pearl Harbor as observed by a former 
Tokyo correspondent. He concludes: “It is difficult to see 
how there ever can be a genuine basis for peace in the 
Pacific as long as the Japanese are ruled by an unholy 
trinity of a divine emperor, a fanatical group of militarists 
and an equally dangerous number of business clans which 
are prepared to furnish them with the weapons to engage 
in their divine mission of conquest.” 


Postmortem on Malaya, by Virginia Thompson. New York, 
Macmillan, 1943. $3.00 
Useful analysis of pre-war Malaya, designed to explain 
why this important Far Eastern colony, containing the 


Singapore naval base, fell so quickly to the advancing 
Japanese. 


Journey Among Warriors, by Eve Curie. New York, 
Doubleday, 1943. $3.50 


An able correspondent’s intimate picture of men and 
women on the civilian and military fronts in Libya, the 
Middle East, Russia, India and China. Especially close 
attention is given to the living conditions and attitudes 
of ordinary citizens. 


A Nation Rebuilds: The Story of the Chinese Industrial 
Cooperatives. New York, Indusco, Inc., 425 Fourth 
Avenue, 1943. 10 cents. 

An interesting, useful pamphlet which will introduce 
the reader to China’s cooperative movement, as well as to 
that country’s wartime economic problems. 


Dynamite Cargo, by Fred Herman. New York, Vanguard 
Press, 1943. $2.00 
A merchant seaman’s dramatic tale of the courage of 
those who sail the Murmansk route. 


Raymond Poincaré and the French Presidency, by Gordon 
Wright. Stanford University, California, Stanford Uni- 
versity Press, 1942. $3.50 
A careful evaluation of Poincaré’s work in an office 

with peculiar limitations. 


The War and the Jew, by Vladimir Jabotinsky. New York, 
Dial Press, 1942. $2.50 
A leading Jewish nationalist’s case for the establish- 


ment of a Jewish army and state that would join the 
ranks of the Allied Nations. 


Half a Hemisphere: The Story of Latin America, by Delia 
Goetz. New York, Harcourt, Brace, 19438. $2.50 
Vividly lucid writing makes Latin America’s rich back- 
ground and busy present very real. Black and white 
drawings add interest to the text. 


Relief Deliveries and Relief Loans, 1919-1928, by the 
Economic, Financial and Transit Department of the 
League of Nations. Geneva, The League, 1943. $1.00 
This brief study of relief after the first World War, 


1914-1918, should be useful to those planning for post-war 
times. 


Marco Polo’s Precursors, by Leonardo Olschki. Baltimore, 
The Johns Hopkins Press, 1943. $1.50 


This rather delightful little book attempts to describe 


the intellectual conquest of Asia by thirteenth century 
missionaries and merchants. 


Diplomatic Documents Relating to Italy’s Aggression 
against Greece: The Greek White Book, issued in e. 
operation with the Greek Office of Information. Wagh. 
ington, D. C., American Council on Public Affairs, 1 
$2.00, paper $1.50 
This official publication describes the forcing of 


upon a nation which has stood bravely through uns 
able suffering. 


Modern Japan and Shinto Nationalism: A Study of 
Present-Day Trends in Japanese Religions, by D. ¢. 
a Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1943. 

00 
A scholarly discussion of the Japanese government's 
shrewd policy of identifying ancient religious attitudes 
and practices with the doctrines of aggressive nationalism, 

Throws considerable light on one aspect of Tokyo’s in- 

ternal propaganda for war. The author concludes that 

“a cultural reformation, not to say a political revolution, 

is long overdue in Japan.” 


In Peace Japan Breeds War, by Gustav Eckstein. New 
York, Harper, 1943. $2.50 
A series of sketches of Japanese history and present-day 
life, designed to help explain that country’s politics, 


From Perry to Pearl Harbor: The Struggle for Supremacy 
in the Pacific, by Edwin A. Falk. New York, Doubleday, 
Doran, 1943. $3.00 


A popular account of Japanese-American relations in 
terms of the naval power and activities of both countries. 


I’ve Come a Long Way, by Helena Kuo. New York, 
Appleton-Century, 1942. $3.00 


Personal history of a Chinese woman journalist and 
her experiences at home and abroad. 


Squadron 303, by Arkady Fiedler. New York, Roy Pub- 
lishers, 1943. $2.00 
The story of the Polish squadron’s gallant aid to the 
R.A.F. in the dark days of 1940. 


Out of Debt, Out of Danger: Proposals for War Finance 
and Tomorrow’s Money, by Jerry Voorhis. New York, 
Devin-Adair, 1943. $3.00 


The Representative from California advances the view 
that a solution of our debt problem is essential for win- 
ning the peace. 


Last Man Off Wake Island, by Lt. Col. Walter L. J. Bayler 
and Cecil: Carnes. Indianapolis, Bobbs-Merrill, 1943. 
$2.75 


With the help of a good collaborator, a fighting marine 
tells the dramatic story of his eleven months as commuti- 
cations officer and radio expert during the hellish bom- 
bardment of Wake, Midway and Guadalcanal. 


German Psychological Warfare, edited by Ladislas Farag. 
New York, Putnam, 1942. $3.00 


This volume answers 97 questions relating to the mobil- 
ization by the Nazis of scientific and popular psychology 
for total war—not only propaganda, but also the psychol- 
ogy of military life. An interesting appendix gives the de 
tails of examinations for commissions in the Reichsweht. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vo!. XXII, No. 41, Jury 30, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lggt, Secretary; VERA MicHELes Dgan, Editor. Entered a 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Be 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


—» 





=—4 & & 5 


