ry 
wal 


cially 
gram. 
iment 
iS has 
© past 
d 129 
esent- 
ement 
© con- 
f $1, 
, has 
ships 
s. 
ogram 
S dut- 
ement 
Senate 
secret 
riginal 
inciple 
icy of 
y ships 
ful fu- 
m. the 
e “dis. 
how: 


ade no | 


Anction 
nerican 
of the 
otaling 
egistry. 
ers, if- 
| Com: 
manian 
ssion in 
ity Act. 


govern: 
vational 
1g met 
der the 
erest 15 
combat 
allowed 
ikely to 
utrality 


TONE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 


i939 2, 1921, at the Post 
= Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 


ERAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF Mich, 


Vou. XIX, No. 5 


NOVEMBER 24, 1939 


——— 


Will the Western powers be able to keep their colonies 


in the Far East? Read: 


THE OUTLOOK IN SOUTHEAST ASIA 


by Rupert Emerson 
Associate Professor of Government at Harvard 


November 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


——— 


2 28 @ Sree" 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


meet 


PEACE OR A SWORD IN THE FAR EAST? 


N intense diplomatic struggle in the Far East, 

foreshadowed by Ambassador Grew’s speech in 
Tokyo on October 19, is now in full swing. The 
declaration of Acting Secretary of State Sumner 
Welles on November 17, stating that the United 
States reserves its full treaty rights in China—as out- 
lined in the American note of December 31, 1938— 
indicates that this country still refuses to accept 
Japan’s “new order” in Asia. The eventual outcome 
of current diplomatic activity in the Far East, how- 
ever, is shrouded in uncertainty. Nelson T. Johnson, 
Ambassador to China, flew to Hongkong on Novem- 
ber 17, and then left for Shanghai where he con- 
ferred with Admiral Thomas C. Hart, commander of 
the Asiatic Fleet, and Clarence E. Gauss, Consul-Gen- 
eral in Shanghai. Admiral Hart and Consul-General 
Gauss will immediately proceed to the Philippines, 
where they are expected to consult with the High 
Commissioner, Francis B. Sayre. The British Ambassa- 
dor to China, Sir Archibald Clark Kerr, has also left 
Chungking for consultations at Shanghai. Meanwhile, 
after an 18 months’ interval, a Soviet Ambassador, 
Constantin Smetanin, has again taken up residence at 
Tokyo, and immediately entered into conversations 
with the Japanese Foreign Minister. In Moscow, also, 
Molotov, Soviet Premier and Foreign Commissar, has 
been conferring with the Japanese Ambassador. On 
November 19 they were reported to have reached a 
‘common agreement” on the ‘fundamental prin- 
ciples” of a Soviet-Japanese trade agreement. 


LOCAL MOVES IN CHINA. This diplomatic 
tug-of-war is being waged against a background of 
important local developments in China. In Shanghai 
and other cities in “occupied’’ China, Japanese off- 
dials are actively participating in a round of confer- 
ences designed to remove the obstacles to early in- 
auguration of a centralized puppet régime under 
Wang Ching-wei. No date for the launching of the 


new régime has yet been set. On November 15 Jap- 
anese military-naval forces effected a landing near 
Pakhoi, a port city in southern Kwangtung province 
less than 100 miles from the French Indo-China bor- 
der, and started an advance inland toward Nanning, 
former capital of Kwangsi province. If the Japanese 
forces cover the 130 miles to Nanning, they would be 
able to cut feeder railways from Indo-China into 
Kwangsi; the main Indo-China railway into Yunnan 
province, however, is at least 800 miles further inland. 

A minor, but perhaps significant, move also oc- 
curred on November 12, when it was announced that 
the bulk of the British troops stationed in North 
China were being withdrawn for reasons connected 
with the European conflict. Two days later the French 
authorities announced that they were taking similar 
action. As the number of troops thus affected totals 
barely 2,000, this measure can hardly be interpreted 
as other than a pronounced gesture of good will to- 
ward Japan. The State Department denied reports 
from London and Paris that it had been asked to 
protect Anglo-French interests in North China, but 
continues to insist on maintenance of American rights 
at Tientsin. The basic issue, however, is whether the 
Anglo-French action constitutes an invitation to the 
United States to exert its influence in the direction of 
achieving a compromise arrangement with Japan. 
Here, too, the statement by Sumner Welles, it would 
seem, precludes American cooperation with Britain 
and France along such lines. This issue has been 
brought more prominently to the fore in recent weeks, 
as it has become obvious that Japan was threatening 
to reach an agreement with the Soviet Union unless 
its terms were met by the Western powers. 


SOVIET-JAPANESE NEGOTIATIONS. Brief 
references to Japan in Premier V. M. Molotov’s ad- 
dress to the Supreme Soviet on October 31, as well 
as the presence of a new Soviet Ambassador in 


Tokyo, suggests that the U.S.S.R. is prepared to im- 
prove its relations with Japan. In Europe the Soviet 
Union feared, above all, the possibility of collabora- 
tion between the Western powers and Germany in an 
anti-Soviet crusade; in the Far East, it would similar- 
ly view collaboration of these powers with Japan as 
a threat to its security. For this reason, the U.S.S.R. 
would undoubtedly seek to forestall any such ar- 
rangement by coming to terms with Tokyo. 

An important quéstion immediately arises. Would 
the Soviet Union be willing to give up its aid to 
China in order to reach an agreement with Japan? 
Its present relations with China are exceedingly close. 
As a sequel to the Sino-Soviet non-aggression pact, 
concluded at the outset of Japan’s invasion of China 
in August 1937, a series of barter-and-loan contracts 
have been arranged between the U.S.S.R. and China. 
The last of these, for 140 million American dollars, 
was announced in August 1939. It is estimated that 
the Soviet Union is today supplying approximately 
two-thirds of China’s imports of war materials. It 
may be doubted whether the U.S.S.R. will sacrifice 
the Chinese good will thus built up by ending such aid 
to China. In other fields, however, it could make 
fairly important concessions to Japan. The fact that 
the new Soviet Ambassador to Tokyo is a fisheries 
expert suggests that the Soviet Union might be will- 
ing to offer Japan a long-term fisheries agreement. 
Similar concessions might be made with respect to 
the coal and oil concessions on Sakhalin Island. 
Trade relations might be improved; in 1936 the total 
Soviet-Japanese trade turnover amounted to ¥53 mil- 
lion, but during the first eight months of 1939 to only 
¥381 thousand. If it makes such offers, the U.S.S.R. 
would have a strong bargaining position, second only 
to that of the United States. 


BASES FOR A FAR EASTERN PEACE. Is there 


any means by which this apparent competition be- 
tween the Western powers and the Soviet Union for 
Japan's favor might be avoided? Close alignment 
of either side with Japan might conceivably lead to a 
spread of the European conflagration to the Far East. 
The United States could hardly hope to stand aloof 
from such a world-wide conflict. These dangers, it 


would seem, can only be averted by a resolute refusal 


Page Two ———— = 


<a 


— 
——<——— 


of the Western powers to conclude a patched-up 
“peace” with Japan that would sacrifice China's jg. 
terests. It is essential that Japan’s current interna. 
tional isolation be maintained until the bases of , 
fundamental settlement can be laid in the Far Eag 
To attain this end, Japan must be brought to the 
point where it becomes willing to renounce its ainy 
of conquest in China. Today this result could be 
achieved, but it requires the cooperation of the major 
Far Eastern powers, especially the United States and 
the Soviet Union. Under present conditions, Greg 
Britain could hardly interpose effective opposition to 
an American lead in the Far East. As for the Sovie 
Union, it should be noted that only effective action op 
behalf of China by the Western powers could dimip. 
ish its suspicion that a Far Eastern Munich is now 
being prepared. Instead of driving Japan into the 
arms of the U.S.S.R., such action might lay the basis 
for ‘‘parallel” moves by the Western powers and the 
Soviet Union looking toward a genuine Far Eastern 
peace settlement. | 


To this settlement, the United States and the other 
powers would have to make important contributions, 
Establishment of a free China and the open door 
would be the cornerstone. Beyond this, however, the 
Western powers would have to withdraw their troops 
and gunboats from China, relinquish the extraterti. 
torial system and their concessions in China, liberalize 
their trade relations with Japan, extend financial aid 
to Japan so that it might readjust its wartime indus 
try to production for export, assist China financially 
in order to overcome the devastation caused by the| 
war, and help China and Japan to negotiate a mu-| 
tually satisfactory trade pact. If the American Con-| 
gress imposes a trade embargo on Japan, it might be) 
helpful to couple such action with a statement of this) 
country’s aims, including the main items listed above 
The price of this settlement may seem high, but any| 
less comprehensive approach to the Far Eastern prob-| 
lem is unlikely to hold out the promise of stability | 
and peace. Competition for Japan’s favor by the| 
major Far Eastern powers bids fair to lead not toa} 
peace settlement, but to war. The costs of a wat 
would be immeasurably greater for all concerned, | 
and the results far less fruitful. T. A. BISsoN 


ALLIES UNIFY ECONOMIC CONTROL 


In effecting an economic accord in London on No- 
vember 17, Great Britain and France launched one 
of the most important developments of the war. At 
the third meeting of the Supreme War Council 
Prime Minister Chamberlain and Premier Daladier, 
assisted by numerous military and civilian representa- 
tives, established six Anglo-French executive commit- 
tees—under a coordinating committee—to provide 
common action regarding aviation and munitions, 
raw materials, oil, food, shipping, and economic war- 


fare. These committees will coordinate industrial pro-| 
duction and use of raw materials in the two countries, | 
provide for equalization of any hardships caused by| 
reduction of imports, and avoid competition in pur | 
chases abroad. 


IMPORTANCE OF ECONOMIC UNITY. The 
immediate effect of this agreement is to strengthen 
the unity of the Allies, whom Germany has pet 
sistently sought to separate in recent months. The Al 
lies have thus far maintained a cohesive diplomatit 


— 


front, h 
forces U 
under E 
accord, 
“By thi 
effect t\ 
for the 
countri¢ 
at the e 
eign pu 
their pre 
needs f 
countric 
ably be 
chases < 

More 
quence: 
for Eur 
Secreta 
tions uf 
tive ex 
tees, SU 
It is p 
particu 
may pt 
constru 
tion to 
might , 
“feder: 


REC 
preme 
the Al 
mediat 
and F 
and fi 
days, 1 
on wh 
thoriti 
ing mi 
lies clz 


Poland 
Kno} 
In t 

econon 

factua 

that 1 

While 

régime 

before 
posses: 


racy o 


FOREIC 
Headqu: 
Entered 


Se 


= Page Three 
hed-up | front, however, and have already placed their land so successfully, through the convoy system and de- 
1a’s in| forces under French command and their naval forces stroyer patrols, that Germany in desperation is turning 
nterng.| ynder British control. Regarding the new economic to the even more ruthless method of floating mines. 
°s of a} accord, the Allied communiqué pointedly concludes: They take comfort, however, in the fact that the air- 
ut East, | “By this means arrangements have been carried into plane, once feared as a potential commerce raider, 
to the} effect two months after the beginning of hostilities has been utilized very little in this conflict, and that 
ts aims} for the organization of common action by the two Germany's surface vessels have done less damage 
uld be} countries which was achieved during the last conflict than in the World War. 
> major | at the end of the third year.”’ The unification of for- While Germany pursued its war at sea and con- 
tes and} eign purchases will allow the two countries to plan tinued reconnaissance flights over British naval and 
| Great} their production schedules and meet foreign exchange industrial centers, it was compelled to deal with dis- 
ition t)| needs far more satisfactorily. Producers in neutral orders in Prague. Following riots on Czechoslovakia’s 
Soviet countries, especially in the United States, will prob- “Independence Day,” October 28, the Protectorate 
tion on} ably benefit from the coordination of Allied pur- —_ government executed nine Czech students and closed 
dimin. | chases and shipping. the University of Prague for three years. Martial law 
1s NOW} More interesting, perhaps, are the long-term conse- was promptly imposed on Prague, accompanied by 
ito the} quences which this undertaking may possibly have the execution of three more Czechs and the arrest of 
1¢ basis} for Europe. After the World War, the newly formed hundreds of others. As the Nazi régime threatened 
and the} Secretariat and technical bodies of the League of Na- further punishment and alteration of the “protec- 
Eastem | tions utilized much of the personnel and administra- torate’’ status, the Czechs abandoned plans for pro- 
tive experience of the Allied coordinating commit- test strikes. Because of the overwhelming force which 
ie other} tees, such as the Allied Maritime Transport Council. the German authorities can bring to bear upon Czech 
yutions,} It is possible that this new economic collaboration, insurgents, it is doubtful that any such revolt can suc- 
n door} particularly if expanded as the conflict progresses, ceed at this time unless the Reich encounters serious 
ver, the} may prove to be the basis for similar work in the re- military and economic reversals. 
‘ troops} construction of Europe. Extension of Allied coopera- JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 
‘raterti-| tion to tariff and currency problems, for example, 
eralize} might give substance to the still nebulous concepts of . PUBLIC RESPONDS TO F.P.A. RADIO PROGRAM 
cial aid} “federation” and “European union.” On the first two F.P.A. broadcasts, given by Gen- 
> indus} RECENT SHIPPING LOSSES. While the Su- eral McCoy and William T. Stone, 527 replies have 
ancially preme War Council was preparing these larger plans, been received, with every state in the Union repre- 
by the} the Allied naval forces were confronted with the im- sented except South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, 
- @ mur} mediate task of protecting commerce near the British North Dakota, Vermont, Utah, Nevada and Okla- 
in Con} and French coasts. At least ten ships—five Allied homa. New York leads with 95 returns, followed by 
ight be} and five neutral—have been sunk in the past few California with 65, and Montana with 43; 4 replies 
of this days, including the Netherlands liner Simén Bolivar, have come in from Canada, and 15 comments from 
| above} on which almost a hundred lives were lost. Nazi au- Great Britain. 
but at}! thorities denied the British charge that German float- Mrs. Dean will speak on Sunday, November 26— 
n prob- ing mines were responsible for these sinkings. The Al- at 3:15 p. m. E.S.T. over the blue network of NBC— 
pee lies claim that they have met the submarine challenge with Mr. Green following on Sunday, December 3. 
or a THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 
a wat| Poland: Key to Europe, by Raymond L. Buell. New York, soldier at the front in China, bearing comparison with the 
cerned Knopf, 1939. 3rd edition. $3.00 great Western war novels by authors such as Remarque. 
In this thorough and painstaking analysis of Poland’s While not minimizing the horrors of war, it tends to pre- 
SSON | economic and political problems, Mr. Buell provides the sent Japan’s invasion of China in a favorable light. For a 
| factual background against which the fourth partition of complete picture, it should be read in conjunction with 
| that unhappy country can be more easily understood. Timperley’s Japanese Terror in China. 
, While frankly admitting the shortcomings of the Polish The War Behind the War, 1914-1918: A History of the 
‘ial pfo-} regime, he maintains that Poland would have gone down Political and Civilian Fronts, by F. P. Chambers. New 
untries. before the German and Russian onslaught even had it York, Harcourt Brace, 1939. $3.75 
possessed “the social virtues of Czechoslovakia, the democ- ; ; : Pa . 
used by racy of Switzerland, and the traditions of England.” A detailed analysis—with maps, bibliography, and index 
in pul} Wheat and Soldiers, by Corporal Ashihei Hino, translated Be pp hey age - ype pte sey 
’ , ile condensing a wealth of material and providing a 
by Baroness Ishimoto. New York, Farrar & Rinehart, comprehensive view of wartime organization, the study is 
Y. The 1939. $2.00 often superficial and omits any mention of financial prob- 
A gripping narration of the experiences of a Japanese lems. 
engthen 
as pet FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 5, NovemMBER 24, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
The AL Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
Lomatic fg 181 F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Nov. 20.—The President's request last week for a 
deficiency appropriation of $272,000,000 to cover 
military expenses arising out of the European war is 
only the first of a series of demands for larger de- 
fense expenditures. Over half the sum asked by the 
President—about $146,000,000—goes to the Navy 
for the neutrality patrol, for which seventy old 
World War destroyers are being recommissioned. The 
$120,000,000 for the Army will be used to increase 
Regular Army enlisted personnel to 227,000 and the 
National Guard to 235,000, pursuant to the Pres- 
ident’s proclamation of limited national emergency 
on September 8. It will also help to finance the mo- 
torization and intensive training of the Army’s new 
“streamlined” divisions. Four of these will maneuver 
in the south for several months this winter. 

ARMY EXPANSION PLANS. The war appears 
to have made Congress and the public more receptive 
than ever to greater military efforts in this country. 
Both services are responding with new expansion 
programs. The augmentation plans of the War De- 
partment, now being whipped into shape for sub- 
mission to Congress in January, are still based on the 
Protective Mobilization Plan of 1937 stressing na- 
tional defense by a relatively small, highly trained 
and mobile force. But the number of troops involved 
in this plan appears to be moving upward. 

Until very recently the strength of the Initial Pro- 
tective Force, which the Army hoped might be ready 
for combat almost immediately in an emergency, was 
fixed at about 400,000 men—the total personnel of 
the Regular Army and the National Guard. This 
month Chairman May of the House Military Affairs 
Committee revealed that the War Department was 
planning to ask for full modern equipment and train- 
ing for 600,000. The new level would be reached by 
bringing the Regular Army to its peace-time author- 
ized limit of 280,000 under the National Defense 
Act of 1920 and by increasing the citizen soldiery of 
the National Guard to 320,000. Some Congressmen 
would like to recruit the Guard to its maximum au- 
thorized strength of 425,000 under the 1920 Act, 
giving the Initial Protective Force a total of over 
700,000 enlisted men. Others talk of acquiring new 
material for 1,000,000. 

Secretary of War Woodring has declared that the 
size of the Protective Force—400,000 to 600,000 men 
—is a matter for Congress to determine, but he has 
placed greater emphasis on the need for adequate 
weapons and training for the entire personnel. The 


War Department asserts that its modern, mobile 
units are organized for hemispheric defense, with 
an increasing number of troops stationed in outlying F. 
American territories, and not for overseas warfare . 
on the 1917-1918 pattern. Yet some unofficial ob. 
servers feel that, whatever the Department's inten- 
tions, the new military machine can be transported 
overseas if necessary. The high quality of its equip. 
ment would only enhance its value. 


THE NAVY GROWS. Working closely with 
ranking naval officers, Representative Vinson of | === 
Georgia, chairman of the House Naval Affairs Com. 
mittee, has prepared an authorization bill which pro- 
vides for 95 new fighting ships totaling 400,000 tons, | 
and 125,000 tons of auxiliary vessels. The bill makes | 5G 
no provision for additional battleships, presumably * 
because the 8 already authorized cannot be com | the W4!; 
pleted for several years to come. But it does authorize | bet 26, 
3 more aircraft carriers, 8 cruisers, 52 destroyers and | sttuggle 
32 submarines; and proposes to double the maximum | without 
authorized strength of the naval air force, raising it | “lity W 
to 6,000 planes. peoples 

The Administration has not yet given explicit sup- break of 
port to this program. If the funds are appropriated, | of the / 
the new construction would ultimately cost upwards | their ult 
of $1,300,000,000 and would represent a 25 per cent | BRIT 
increase in tonnage, the second on this scale since | aims, he 
May 1938. On completion of the vessels now planned | possible 
it would be possible to maintain a large scouting and | chinery 
defensive force of carriers, cruisers, destroyers and | opment 
submarines on both coasts, shuttling the battleship | principl 
strength back and forth through the Panama Canal | ciples w 
as conditions may dictate. Whether the new plan isa | ments b 
substitute for a gigantic “two-ocean navy” or a step- | “with t 
ping-stone toward it cannot yet be foreseen. were SO 

Because of the size of the new Army and Navy } stant fle 
projects, some Congressional sources have predicted } with cc 
a doubled defense budget totaling $3,000,000,000 | living; 
for the fiscal year 1941, of which $1,400,000,000 or | country 
more would go to the Army. On November 10 | ment “: 
Budget Director H. D. Smith called these estimates } externa 
“wild,” and appealed for “common sense” in f¢ | gradual 
sisting “extravagant” appropriations motivated by | pense, 
war hysteria. His sharp statement indicates that 4 | presery 
hotter fight than usual is in prospect between the | lishmer 
Services and the Bureau of the Budget in drawing up | lain ad 
the annual estimates for presentation to Congress. | months 
Washington now believes that Army and Navy ex: | develo) 
penditures of $1,700,000,000 to $2,000,000,000 of } “accor: 
more will eventually be voted. The exact total will be } spirit” 
determined by Congress, the President, and the | their ¢ 
course of events in Europe. Davin H. Popper ance,” 


