







Ram: 
Nazi 
com- 
gov- 
Opin- 
liplo. 
eeled 


tunes | 


‘ainst 
losed 
Fin- 


-Lin 
nion, 
that 
stub 
ling 
land 
rl on 
pro- 
- and 
h of 
The 
yptic 
\quet 
ever, 
> On 
back 
blem 
Man- 
ast a 





nd’s | 
srofit 
ider- 
o fit 
gan- 
orld 
ests. 
nany 
pol- 
- the 





! gust 


ES 


S 





—1944 


LIB 
UsLY, OF ro a 


ea 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vor. XXIII, No. 44 


Avucust 18, 1944 





ROOSEVELT DEFINES U.S. SECURITY NEEDS IN PACIFIC 


HE invasion of southern France by Allied forces 

on August 15 represents a further unfolding of 
the Teheran strategy of waging war against Germany 
on many land fronts. But the success of this sum- 
mer’s operations against the Nazis will be felt in 
areas far beyond the European theatre. This, in fact, 
is the meaning of President Roosevelt's trip to the 
west coast, Hawaii and the Aleutian islands in July 
and August. His journey constitutes a declaration to 
the American people that major attention can now 
be given to the strategy of defeating Japan, as well 
as to the clarification of our political objectives in 
the Pacific area. 

PLANNING AT PEARL HARBOR. The times 
were therefore propitious for the President to dis- 
cuss the long-term strategy of the Pacific war with 
the two top American commanders in that area, Gen- 
eral MacArthur and Admiral Nimitz. Moreover, as 
Germany moves toward certain defeat, however 
bloody the process, the American high command is 
inevitably in an increasingly favorable position to 
estimate the number of ships, planes and men that 
can be moved to the Far East when the European 
war is over and the approximate dates for which 
particular actions against Japan can be planned. The 
President suggested something of this in a press con- 
ference at Pearl Harbor on July 29, when he re- 
marked that any operation planned on the great scale 
required by Pacific distances had to be charted far 
ahead of time. One type of operation he probably 
had in mind was indicated by Admiral Nimitz on 
August 13 when he declared that the United States 
would be prepared to invade the Japanese home 
islands, but he was not certain this would actually 
be required to bring about Japan’s defeat. 

The President’s trip will have useful results be- 
yond the solution of strategic questions. He was able 
by his very presence to give encouragement to the 
officers and men in the Pacific area and to secure 


first-hand information that will help him in reach- 
ing future decisions about the war with Japan. The 
opportunity to meet General MacArthur whom he 
had not seen in seven years may also serve to cement 
personal relations. But not least significant is the 
fact that the President secured an effective platform 
from which to clarify both for the American public 
and our Allies the views of the United States on vati- 
ous problems of the Pacific. 

In an address at the Puget Sound Navy Yard on 
August 12 Mr. Roosevelt left no doubt about this 
country’s intention to take all steps necessary to pre- 
vent a recurrence of Japanese aggression. Disclaim- 
ing any American ambition to acquire land on the 
Asiatic continent, he declared-that the sea and air 
navigation route, which passes close to the Alaskan 
coast and through the Aleutians on the way to Siberia 
and China, must be under “undisputed” American 
control. Without naming particular islands, he said 
it was essential for the United States to have “for- 
ward bases nearer to Japan than Hawaii lies.” But 
he made it clear that “we have no desire to ask for 
any possessions of the United Nations” in the Pacific. 

POLICY TOWARD JAPAN. The President also 
explored briefly some problems of dealing with a de- 
feated Japan, declaring: “The word and honor of 
Japan cannot be trusted. . . . It is an unfortunate fact 
that years of proof must pass by before we can trust 
Japan and before we can classify Japan as a member 
of the society of nations which seeks permanent” 
peace and whose word we can take.” He also con- 
demned Japan’s “war lords and home lords” and 
referred to the responsibility of the Japanese people 
who, whether or not they know and approve of what 
their leaders have done for almost a century, “seem 
to be giving hearty approval to the Japanese policy 
of acquisition of their neighbors and their neighbors’ 
lands.” 

These statements will have to be amplified before 





















we can know their full significance, but they seem to 
differ from views sometimes attributed to the State 
Department. In the President's remarks, for example, 
there is no reference to the possibility of “moderate” 
civilian elements or a “peace-seeking” emperor tak- 
ing the reins in Japan. On the contrary, the linking 
of “war lords and home lords’ cuts cleanly across 
any distinction between the Japanese militarists and 
their supposedly unwilling civilian accomplices. 
What the President seems to have done is to recog- 
nize that any Japanese elements which abhor their 
country’s policies have been unable to make them- 
selves felt so far and that it is up to the Japanese 
nation to prove to us that it can be trusted. 

MR. ROOSEVELT AND MR. WALLACE. 
When Vice-President Wallace visited Siberia and 
China last May and June, it was widely suggested 
that he was seeking to improve his chances of renom- 
ination by the Democratic party or, alternatively, 
that the President wanted to dispose of Mr. Wallace 
by having him out of the country at the time of the 
Democratic National Convention. Similarly, some 
Republican newspapers have now declared that the 
President's Pacific trip was designed to improve his 
voting strength in November. An earlier Bulletin 
article has indicated that the Vice-President actually 


Page Two 





eee 
———ey 





had important official business to perform in the 
Far East,* and the present article should make it 
clear that Mr. Roosevelt’s trip also served many use 
ful purposes. 


But what does not appear to have been noted in 
the press is that it can hardly be fortuitous that the 
two highest officials of the United States government 
have given so much attention to the Pacific area in 
recent months. Mr. Wallace’s departure for the 
Orient was announced on May 20, and on July 10 
he conferred with the President in Washington after 
returning from China. Three days later the President 
left Washington eri route to the west coast and the 
Pacific. From the timing of the two journeys it is 
difficult to escape the impression that Mr. Wallace's 


=——— 


sition 
taken, 
port i 
jong } 
alloca 
The 
outset 
conce: 
ployn 
will | 
ment 
capita 
privat 
incre 
priva 





discussions in Siberia and China dovetailed in some 


locati 


important way with the President's activities in the | fashic 


eastern half of the Pacific war theatre. At the very 
least the trips indicate that the United States govert- 
ment has been engaged in far-reaching preparations 
for speeding up the war against Japan and laying a 
sound basis for peace in the Far East. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


***Wallace Outlines Basis for Post-War Harmony in Far East,’’ Foreign 
Policy Bulletin, June 30, 1944. 


FULL EMPLOYMENT—MAJOR BRITISH POST-WAR AIM 


Action by the United States Congress on legisla- 
tion for unemployment insurance and the reconver- 
sion of industry to a peacetime basis suggests a com- 
parison with similar British plans that stem from the 
White Paper on “Employment Policy’ published on 
May 27. The proposals of the White Paper were ap- 
proved after a 3-day debate in Parliament during the 
last week in June. The constantly improving military 
situation in Europe has added a note of urgency to 
such legislation, while the necessity of achieving the 
domestic goal of stable employment and a high in- 
come level in the chief industrial nations has become 
the first requisite for much of the planning in the 
international sphere. 

BRITAIN IN THE WORLD ECONOMY. No- 
where are the disastrous international economic con- 
sequences of failure to achieve full employment 
more clearly understood than in Britain. In the 
United States less emphasis has been given to the 
relationship between foreign and domestic policy, 
but it is now generally recognized in England that 
achievement of full employment will ultimately rest 
on an increase in the export trade. Britain’s prospec- 
tive adverse balance of payments position gives 
ample evidence of this. Always a large importer of 
food and raw materials, Britain will need a substan- 
tial incréase of exports hereafter to pay for those im- 
ports, since it will now be necessary to make up for 
the heavy loss of foreign investments and shipping 


receipts occasioned by the war and to offset the huge 
increase in external debt. As Lord Keynes, head of 
the British delegation at the recent Bretton Woods 
Monetary Conference pointed out, Britain has ac 
quired $12 billion of external debt during the war, 
and has at the same time liquidated $4 billion of its 
credits abroad. 

The Employment White Paper only briefly indi 
cates the importance of an increase in export trade 
and suggests that this could be assured through inter- 
national collaboration. This underlying assumption, 
however, has provided one of the chief criticisms of 
the Paper. There is concern that the new doctrine of 
full employment may be incompatible with some of 
the ideas advanced in international discussions con- 
cerning the future of trade, and it is suggested that, 
in order to maintain such a policy, Britain may be 
forced to resort to exchange controls, bilateral trade 
agreements, the formation of cartels and the like— 
all practices which led to restriction of world trade 
in the thirties. Yet it is certain that the British pub- 
lic, having experienced full employment as a by- 
product of the war, will not willingly return to pre- 
war conditions of recurrent unemployment. 

WHITE PAPER PROPOSALS. No acute unem- 
ployment problem is anticipated in Britain immedi- 
ately following cessation of the conflict, but the con- 
trols imposed during the war, including the rationing 
of consumers’ goods, are to be continued in the traft- 


hithe 
ity of 
and t 
Exar 





need: 
plan 
tions 
econ 
emp! 
prese 
posa 
etids 
and « 
ing < 
Bi 
is to 
and 
plan 
tion: 
; nent 
tren. 
on 
Wh. 
is tc 
Bud 
fina: 
stud 


V 
of f 
by 2 
witl 
ish 
the 
pol 


FOR! 
Head 
secon 
one | 


<= 








— 


—_ 








the} sition period. This particular measure will be under- 


> it 


156. 


| in 
the 
ent 
| in 
the 
10 
ter 
lent 
the 
t is 
ce’s 
me 
the 
ety 
> (Ti 
ons 
ga 


reign 


uge 
of 


ods 


vat, 
"its 


idi- 
ade 
ter- 
on, 
; of 
> of 
- of 


nat, 
ade 


ade 


ub- 
yre- 


em- 
odi- 
On- 
ing 
-an- 








ken, in the main, for the purpose of aiding the ex- 

rt industries, on which so much depends in the 
jong run. They are to be given high priority in the 
jllocation of raw materials, labor and factory space. 


The aim of future policy will be to detect at the 
gutset the beginning of a slump and, by a series of 
concerted measures, to counteract the ensuing unem- 
ployment as quickly as possible. Unbalanced budgets 
will be employed in case of need, and the govern- 
ment will accept the responsibility of influencing 
apital expenditures at the right time, both public or 
tivate and national or local. Under the new policy, 
increased public investments will be made when 
private investments are beginning to fall off. The 
location of industry is to be planned in an orderly 
fashion, and a policy of diversified industries in the 
hitherto depressed areas will be undertaken. Mobil- 
ity of labor will be sought through training programs 
and the cooperation of collective labor organizations. 
Examination of the tax system in the light of the 
needs of full employment is proposed, and a novel 
plan is suggested whereby social security contribu- 
tions may be varied in accordance with the prevailing 
economic situation. So basic is the problem of full 
employment, that the government has issued the 
present White Paper before offering detailed pro- 
posals for social security, although the earlier Bev- 
etidge Report outlined future schemes in that field 
and other plans now exist for education, health, hous- 
ing and land use. 

Britain’s attack on the question of full employment 
is to be on a broad scale, not unlike that of 4 great 
and sustained military operation, in which a central 
planning and statistical agency will perform func- 
tions similar to those of a general staff. This perma- 


;nent central staff will measure and analyze economic 


trends on the basis of full information, and report 
on them to the Ministry concerned. The annual 


White Paper on National Income and Expenditure 


is to be extended until it becomes a virtual Capital 
Budget of the Nation’s Wealth, and this central 
financial analysis will be supplemented by manpower 
studies undertaken by the Ministry of Labor. 


WAR ON UNEMPLOYMENT. The statement 
of policy embodied in the White Paper was produced 
by an all-party government, and the general approval 
with which the plans were greeted emphasizes Brit- 
ish insistance on achieving full employment—even at 
the expense of older or more orthodox economic 
policies. The sweeping nature of British proposa!s 


Page Three 


















































— 
——— 








may be contrasted with the limited measures en- 
visaged under the George bill—framed as an amend- 
ment to the Social Security Act—now before the 
United States Congress following defeat of the 
broader Murray-Kilgore bill. 


The opening words of the White Paper illustrate 
the remarkable degree to which British opinion ac- 
cepts the necessity of state intervention in economic 
affairs: “The Government accept as one of their 
primary aims and responsibilities the maintenance 
of a high and stable level of employment after 
the war,” and it continues, “the conception of an 
expansionist economy . . . here proposed [has} never 
yet been systematically applied as part of the eco- 
nomic policy of any Government. In these matters 
we shall be pioneers.” The tenor of the Parliamen- 
tary debate, however, indicated that the issue of 
private versus public ownership still persists. Al- 
though several Labor members expressed a belief 
that no such policy was feasible unless greater na- 
tionalization of industry was undertaken, the coali- 
tion government has urged that the proposals of the 
White Paper would operate, whatever the ownership 
of industry might be. 


The White Paper emphasizes that the full support 
of industry and labor will be no less important than 
government action, but in general the statement in- 
dicates that the government will henceforth provide 
a framework within which the national economy in 
Britain will function. Speaking in the House of Com- 
mons debate, Mr. Ernest Bevin, Minister of Labor, 
made the challenging statement that “the main pur- 
pose of the White Paper was to declare war on un- 
employment.” Every measure, the Minister added, 
concerning the monetary system, commercial agree- 
ments, industrial practices or the whole economy 
will be judged against the acid test—do they pro- 
duce employment or unemployment ? 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 





The Rest of Your Life, by Leo Cherne. Garden City, 
Doubleday, Doran and Company, 1944. $2.75 


The Executive Secretary of the Research Institute of 
America sketches the many problems facing America in 
the postwar world in such diverse fields as production, 
aviation, medicine and psychiatry. No solutions are offered, 
but the author insists upon the basic requirement of full 
employment. 


Middle America, by Charles Morrow Wilson. New York, 
W. W. Norton and Company, 1944. $3.50 


Detailed factual description with interesting half-tone 
illustrations. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 44, Aucust 18, 1944. 
Headquarters, 
second-class matter December 2, 
One month for change of address on membership publications. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. National 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


eae - 


= SSS 






Washington News Letter 











1191. 





pred btng a 








U.S. AND BRITAIN REACH ACCORD ON OIL PROBLEMS 


The petroleum agreement signed on August 8 in 
Washington between the United Kingdom and the 
United States is a landmark in international coopera- 
tion, although it does not go into force until each 
government has notified the other that it is ready. 
Upon the United States’ insistence, the principle of 
equal opportunity in the acquisition of oil conces- 
sions is improved. Also, non-discrimination and a 
fair price level in distribution to all buyers are in- 
sured. These purposes were originally embodied in 
the fourth paragraph of the Atlantic Charter, signed 
by President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill 
on August 14, 1941, almost three years to the day 
before the petroleum agreement was reached. Both 
principles are included in Article I of the agree- 
ment. In a talk at the University of Virginia on July 
6, 1942, Dean Acheson, Assistant Secretary of State, 
stressed the importance these principles will assume 
at the time of the lend-lease settlement—stating that 
the settlement would embody the Atlantic Charter 
principles “that there shall be equal access to the 
trade of the world and to its raw materials for all 
nations.” 

U.K. ASKS EMPIRE PREFERENCE. The equal 
access and non-discriminatory principles provoked 
the only major dispute during the conversations, 
which opened on July 25 and led to agreement two 
weeks later. The British delegation, headed by Lord 
Beaverbrook, Lord Privy Seal, requested the United 
States delegation, headed by Secretary of State Hull, 
to modify its stand for absolute equal access and 
non-discrimination by authorizing Britain to sell 
petroleum on the imperial preference basis. This 
would have given a lower price to British oil moving 
to India, members of the British Commonwealth and 
British colonies than to oil sold elsewhere. The re- 
quest was in keeping with the Atlantic Charter corol- 


lary enunciated by Prime Minister Churchill on © 


April 21, 1944 when he said that the Charter 
did not exclude imperial preference. By declin- 
ing to accept the argument of the British delegation 
that problems of foreign exchange which would 
exist after the war made imperial preference advis- 
able, the United States secured its exclusion from the 
compact. As a concession, the United States agreed 
that the period of notice of termination from either 
patty would be reduced from six months to three 
months. 

The petroleum agreement's genesis lies in in- 





formal conversations between the two countries ig ] 
1943. Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes prodded 
both governments toward action by his announce 
ment on February 6 that the United States in 
tended to finance construction of a pipeline to camry 
oil from petroleum fields owned by American con 
cerns in Saudi Arabia and the Sheikhdom of Kuwait 
to an outlet on the Mediterranean Sea. Preliminary} You. 
understanding on the nature of the agreement the|~ 
two governments would reach came during conver} }} 
sations in Washington among technicians from April 
19 to May 3. The agreement provides for the estab. : 
lishment of an interim International Petroleum Com.} ~ i 
mission, to be made up of four United States and} beg: 
four United Kingdom members, and ultimately for} tow: 
a permanent International Petroleum Council. The} hop 
dual agreement pledges its signatories to plan for ag} be 
international conference among all countries inter} Uni 
ested in the petroleum trade, “whether as producer} aulr 
or consumers,” which would set up the council. whi 
GREATER TEST AHEAD. The United States has} Fou 
yet to learn whether Congress will demand the priy- | soo 
ilege of approving the dual agreement. Assuming j Ch: 
that this hurd'e is surmounted, the real test of the} Cor 
two governments’ willingness and ability to work} cre 
together on a commodity problem about which each 
has different views will come when the International } an« 
Commission meets. Article III, paragraph 2, of the} me 
agreement directs the commission “to suggest the} tio 
manner in which, over the long term, the estimated! po 
demand may best be satisfied by production equitably} pr 
distributed among the various producing countries,” } ot 
and one of the first problems the body will deal with} m« 
is whether to assign maximum quotas for petroleum} the 
in international commerce to the various producing , ot! 
areas in the Middle East where British and United 
States interests compete. by 
Another problem will arise out of the two com] of 
mercial restrictive agreements which British-dom-} of 
inated companies have sponsored in the Middle East} ar 
—the Red Line Agreement and the Kuwait Market | is 
ing Agreement. Both safeguard British petroleum } Vi 
interests, but the new agreement provides for free} ti 
ing the production and distribution of petroleum] th 
“from unnecessary restrictions.’ Whatever it de} p' 
cides, the commission will have no enforcing author tl 
ity of its own; the two governments will rely on each 
other to act on commission recommendations. 
BLAIR BOLLES 





FOR VICTORY * BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS |" 








