











































ave 


ere 
Ov- 

he 
ort 


ion 
Ity 

It 
eat 
ire 


; it 
ral 


rol 


oel- 
3.75 
the 
na- 


rk, 


7m- 


911 | 


ask 
her 


ac- 


di- 


onal 
itor. 


ICAL Room Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
DAR 
RAL. LIB 


» ov “iC BOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 





Entered as second- 

PR 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














Vou. XVI, No. 29 


May 14, 1937 





THE GERMAN ECONOMIC DILEMMA 
SOCIAL TRENDS IN THE THIRD REICH 
by John C. deWilde 


Two reports presenting a complete picture of present-day 
Germany: the first, a survey of the immediate economic and 
financial problems confronting Germany; and the second, 
an analysis of the effect of the National Socialist régime on 
farmers, entrepreneurs and workmen. 


25 cents each 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 











OILING THE ROME-BERLIN AXIS 





USSOLINI’S decision on May 8—four days 
before the coronation of George VI—to re- 
call Italian correspondents from Britain and to ban 
all but three British newspapers was in retaliation 
for British press criticism of Fascist policy in 
Ethiopia and Spain. The next day the diplomatic 
representatives of League powers in Rome, follow- 
ing the lead of the British Embassy, abstained 
from attending a military review celebrating the 
first anniversary of the founding of the Italian 
empire. This recrudescence of Anglo-Italian 
tension reveals the extent to which Italy is dis- 
turbed by Britain’s opposition to its aspirations in 
the Mediterranean. 


Il Duce attempted to strengthen his bargaining 
position in Europe by cementing Italy’s ties with 
Germany during the visit paid to Rome on May 4-5 
by Baron von Neurath, German Foreign Minister. 
Italy apparently promised not to oppose Nazi 
penetration of Austria, provided Germany con- 
tinues to respect Austria’s formal independence. 
As the price of its withdrawal from Vienna, Italy 
hopes to obtain sufficient German assistance to 
assure the victory of General Franco, whose cause 
has been steadily losing ground in Germany. 


The Rome negotiations were also intended to 
hasten the process of bringing the small powers of 
Eastern and Southeastern Europe within range 
of the Rome-Berlin axis and isolating Czechoslo- 
vakia, chief target of German and Hungarian 
revisionist aspirations. Italy has already sought 
to detach Yugoslavia and Rumania from the Little 
Entente, and to block a political understanding 
between Vienna and Prague. In this task it has 
been seconded by Poland which, while still on the 
fence, fears German-Soviet rapprochement and is 
unfriendly to Czechoslovakia. Both German and 
Italian influences have been at work in Hungary 
which, although distrustful of Nazi designs in 
Eastern Europe, is not yet ready to accept Chan- 
cellor Schuschnigg’s proposal for closer collabora- 





tion between the Danubian countries—Austria, 
Hungary and the three Little Entente states. 
Neither Rumania nor Yugoslavia—both of which 
have been subjected to strong pressure from 
France—has as yet displayed any eagerness to 
break up the Little Entente. The dominant desire 
of each small country is not to become a cog in 
alliances organized by the great powers, but to 
retain its freedom to strike a bargain with what- 
ever combination can best serve its interests. 
Italo-German negotiations hold little promise of 
European appeasement. The two Fascist powers 
regard their collaboration as a bulwark against 
Bolshevism and an inevitable response to the re- 
armament of the Western democracies. Yet their 
interests continue to clash in the Balkans; Ger- 
man expansion, in the long run, can only weaken 
Italy’s position; neither seems ready for a hard 
and fast alliance; and each remains anxious to use 
its friendship with the other to extract concessions 


from Britain. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


INTERNATIONAL SUGAR ACCORD 

While the five-year sugar convention concluded 
by 22 countries in London on May 6 is an encour- 
aging sign of international cooperation, its pro- 
visions do little except stabilize a situation which 
itself is the result of intensely nationalistic poli- 
cies. The agreement contains no specific pledges 
to lower tariffs and subsidies, but may indirectly 
make such reductions possible by curbing compe- 
tition. The convention assumes that the free 
world market will absorb 3,620,000 metric tons of 
sugar as compared with about 6,000,000 tons in 
1929, and allots this amount among thirteen ex- 
porting countries, some of which, such as the 
Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, obtained exces- 
sively large quotas as the price of their participa- 
tion. Further restriction of the export market is 
prevented most of all by the undertaking of the 
United Kingdom, one of the largest sugar im- 
porters, to limit its annual production to 618,000 












iy 














tons, and by quotas on the exports of Australia, 
the Union of South Africa and British colonies. 
The United States will not reduce the small amount 
it imports at present from the world market, and 
the Philippines will confine its exports to the 
United States under the terms of the Independence 
Act. The agreement also provides for an inter- 
national council to study sugar problems and ad- 
just quotas to changes in consumption. 


In signing the convention, Norman H. Davis, 
the American representative, assured the confer- 
ence that the United States would retain the re- 
duced sugar tariff now in force even if it should 
abandon the quota system which at present divides 
the American market among domestic producers, 
our insular possessions, Cuba and other foreign 


MILDRED S. WERTHEIMER 


Dr. Mildred S. Wertheimer, a member of the 
research staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
since 1924, died in San Diego, California, on 
May 6 afier a long illness. For the scientific study 
of international relations her death represents a 
serious loss, surpassed only by the grief of those 
who worked with her in the F. P. A. and that host 


of others who were privileged to count her as a 
friend. 


Following her graduation from Vassar College 
in 1917, Miss Wertheimer became a member of 
the International Law Division of the Colonel 
House Commission of Inquiry, with which she 
worked until 1919. She carried on graduate study 
at the University of Berlin in 1921, and in 1924 
received her doctorate at Columbia University 
under Professor Carlton J. H. Hayes. Her thesis, 
The Pan-German League, published by the Colum- 
bia University Press, was a distinct contribution 
to diplomatic history. 


Joining the Foreign Policy Association on the 
establishment of its research department, Miss 
Wertheimer soon became widely known as an 
expert on Germany and Central Europe. In con- 
nection with her work she made frequent trips 
abroad, spending considerable time in Geneva. 
She periodically visited the countries whose prob- 
lems she studied, and attended many international 
conferences as representative of the Foreign Pol- 
icy Association, notably the First Hague Repara- 
tion Conference in 1929 and the London Confer- 
ence of the Locarno Powers in 1936. In 1933 she 
cooperated with Mr. James G. McDonald in or- 
ganizing the work of the High Commission for 
German Refugees. 


Miss Wertheimer prepared some 40 FOREIGN 
PoLicy REPORTS, a pamphlet on “Germany Under 


Page Two 








countries. This pledge is particularly important 
because a subcommittee of the House of Repre-| 
sentatives’ Committee on Agriculture has intro. 
duced rather drastic changes in the administra. 
tion bill providing for continuation of existing 
quotas. The subcommittee has raised the allot- 
ment of Louisiana and Florida cane growers by 
about 100,000 tons and made a corresponding cut 
in the Cuban quota. In addition, it would reduce 
imports of “direct-consumption sugar” (largely 
refined sugar) from Cuba by about 30 per cent, 
President Roosevelt has already indicated that he 
will abandon the whole quota plan and expose 
domestic producers to unrestricted foreign com- 
petition unless Congress returns to his origina] 


recommendations. JOHN C. DEWILDE 


Hitler,” innumerable NEws BULLETIN articles, 
and was co-author of two books published by the 
Association — Europe: A History of Ten Years, 
and New Governments in Europe. in addition to 
her mastery of documents and foreign languages 
Miss Wertheimer had sound judgment, a keen 
sense for news, a warm interest in people and a 
generous capacity for friendship. She made many 
personal contacts among leading European states- 
men and was well known in diplomatic and journal- 
istic circles in London, Paris, Berlin, Washing- 
ton and Geneva. Among her closest friends were 
distinguished foreign correspondents who valued 
her expert knowledge, enjoyed her vivacity as a 
raconteur, and benefited by her assistance in 
digging up “scoops.” 

A person of sensitive feelings, Miss Wertheimer 
was deeply disturbed by the overthrow of the 
German Republic, whose problems she had studied 
more sympathetically and thoroughly perhaps 
than any other American. It is a tribute to her 
intellectual integrity that, after the rise of the 


Nazi régime, she continued to publish objectiv: 


authoritative studies dealing with Germany under 
the Third Reich. As a well-known Sucdenoes cor- 
respondent writes: “Miss Wertheimer was the 
most objective, logical woman I have ever 


known. . . . She approached every task without 
prejudice, and accomplished it without being 
moved by her personal likes or dislikes.” 

While scholarship marked everything she did, 
Miss Wertheimer was dominated by a desire to 
assist in the making of a better world. She did 
not live to see this desire realized, but she made 
an important contribution to the understanding 
of international problems. Her studies for the 
Foreign Policy Association will remain a monu- 
ment to her memory. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 29, May 14, 1937. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lesiig BuBLt, President; EstHer G. Ocpgn, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Pose Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 





An is 


reve 
Spa: 
Lar; 
sinc 
day: 
+ Juar 
in t 
His 
Con 
incl 
the 
all 
exc 
fen 
Soc 
7 
of ' 
bac 
ist: 
wa 
elit 
suc 
cel 
otl 
the 











