







































F IGN POLICY BULLETIN Entered as second- 
; etation of current international events by the Research Staff pg — 
vy Subscription, Two Dollars a Year Office at New York, 
vy N. Y., under the act 
Ag $ FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3, 1879. 
BPAY 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
e 
— | Vou. XVIII, No. 34 JUNE 16, 1939 
om 
is | JAPAN’S ECONOMIC OUTLOOK by T. A. Bisson General Library 
ch ' 
xtent has the war with Chin ; 
nt nels arene ote its ea po iar University of Michigan 
he major war? This report analyzes Japan’s internal and 
external economic position in the light of a possible Ann Arbor, Michigan 
“ general conflict. 
. June 15 issue of FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS .. . 25 cents 
at | 
its 
me ANGLO-SOVIET PACT HANGS FIRE 
—_ 
ith HILE public attention in the United States that there are “many delicate problems in Europe 
as was monopolized by the visit of King George which are only too likely to lead to war if roughly 
for } and Queen Elizabeth, European developments indi- handled.” Similar sentiments were voiced by Mr. 
ing | cated the possibility of another British attempt to Chamberlain on June 9, when he told his constitu- 
ald | reach a settlement with Germany. Since March 15 ents in Birmingham that he was trying to insure the 
icy | when Hitler, by occupying the non-German prov- safety of Britain by removing the causes of war and, 
im- | inces of Bohemia and Moravia, shook Mr. Chamber- at the same time, strengthening British defenses to 
lain’s confidence in his pledged word, Britain has the point where “no country would be able to force 
of | displayed the same energy in forging armaments us, out of our weakness, to accept terms that would 
wt. | and alliances that it had previously shown in its be dishonorable or disastrous to our vital interests.” 
om | efforts to appease Germany. The two principal prob- Britain, he said, was still ready to discuss the claims 
to | lems of British foreign policy were, on the one hand, of Germany or any other country, provided there 
‘to | that Hitler, like the Kaiser, might remain under the was a reasonable prospect of a real settlement, and 
om | illusion that Britain would let Germany have its provided such a settlement were obtainable by nego- 
ion | Way in Europe; and, on the other, that once Hitler tiation, not force. 
ro. | had become convinced of Britain’s determination to Meanwhile, Anglo-Soviet parleys: hung fire as 
ess | tesist, he might then invoke the slogan of ‘‘encircle- William Strang, Central European ‘expert of the 
to | ment’ to rally the German people in favor of war. British Foreign Office who had accompanied Mr. 
ly. | The double-edged task of the British government has Chamberlain to Munich in September, prepared to 
cy. | been to prove that it meant business, yet not to leave for Moscow. While some members of the 
nly frighten the Germans into believing they had no es- British Cabinet had apparently decided last week 
rity | “pe from the present impasse except war. that the Soviet Union—like Poland 'dAY Rutnatiia— 
s To dispel this fear of ‘“‘encirclement,” Lord Hali- should be free to decide when its interests were suf- 
| fax, British Foreign Secretary, told the House of ficiently endangered to call for Anglo-French as- 
olu- Lords on June 7 that, “if there is one thing certain sistance, others—notably Mr. Chamberlain, Sir Sam- 
108 | in this uncertain world, it is that Britain and France uel Hoare and Sir John Simon—were reluctant to 
‘até | —and also the countries with which they have been give Moscow a “blank check.”” At the same time Sir 
8} in consultation—will never commit any act of ag- Francis Lindley, former Ambassador to Tokyo and 
- gression or attempt by indirect means to undermine an outspoken critic of the U.S.S.R., who had enter- 
vee the independence and security of other states.’ Pro- tained the Prime Minister over the Whitsuntide holi- 
tee viding the independence of other nations is recog- day, told the Foreign Affairs Committee of the 
ext } nized, he said, “the British government is not only House of Commons on June 9 that British prestige 
use willing but anxious to explore the whole problem of would suffer less if the Anglo-Soviet negotiations 
© F economic Lebensraum not only for Germany but for failed than if it were thought Britain had been forced 
vill all European nations.” Britain, Lord Halifax de- to accept an alliance on Russia’s terms. 
ate | clared, “most certainly” wishes ‘‘to reach the point at VATICAN OPPOSITION TO SOVIET PACT. 
which international differences can be made the sub- The Soviet pact also met with opposition on the part 
E ject of calm, unprejudiced negotiation,” but warned of the Vatican, which has been sounding out Britain, 








agree 





France, Germany, Italy and Poland since early May 
regarding the possibility of a five-power conference 
which might consider settlement of the Danzig prob- 
lem, Italy's African claims against France, and Ger- 
many’s demand for return of its colonies. Such a 
program, which would exclude the Soviet Union 
from European negotiations, might well appeal to 
Hitler and Mussolini, who face increasing difficul- 
ties in achieving Lebensraum without risk of war— 
especially at a moment when Czech passive resis- 
tance exacerbates German relations with the Bo- 
hemia-Moravia protectorate. 


No responsible statesman could neglect any op- 
portunity of reaching a peaceful settlement of issues, 
none of which, it is admitted even in Germany and 
Italy, are worth a war. Nor can one doubt the 
genuine desire of Pope Pius XII to prevent a general 
conflict. But the Pope is concerned not only to assure 
peace in Europe, but also to achieve the “triumph of 
the Christian ideal.’’ Such a triumph, he told Ramén 
Serrano Sufier, brother-in-law of General Franco, 
on June 11 when Sufier and 3,000 Spanish troops 
were visiting Rome, was achieved by the Franco 


FASCISTS REVEAL AID TO FRANCO SPAIN 


Impressive victory parades by German and Italian 
troops who returned from Spain during the past 
fortnight have been accompanied, in the press of 
the axis powers, by accounts of their achievements 
since the outbreak of the Spanish civil war. The 
detailed information embodied in official and semi- 
official reports is of great historical value, and gen- 
erally substantiates Spanish Loyalist claims that 
fascist assistance to the former Rebel cause was de- 
cisive from the outset. 

GERMANY FETES ITS “VOLUNTEERS.” In 
Germany the round of festivities for those who had 
fought in Spain culminated in Berlin on June 6, when 
15,000 German veterans of the Condor Legion, in 
uniforms of Spanish cut, and 2,500 German sailors 
passed before Chancellor Hitler and received his 
praise for their work. It is now openly admitted that 
German troops—not volunteers, but regular mem- 
bers of the armed forces—were sent to Spain for 
varying periods of training in actual warfare. A 
speech by Air Marshal Hermann Goering on May 31 
and an article in his newspaper, the Essener National 
Zeitung, conclusively demonstrate that assurances of 
German aid must have been given to General Franco 
before the outbreak of his revolt, which began in 
Morocco on June 17, 1936 and spread to Spain on 
the following day. 

By July 20 some twenty German Lufthansa trans- 
port planes had begun to ferry 15,000 Moorish 
troops to the Spanish mainland. On July 31 the first 
group of German aviation personnel, disguised as 


Page Two 














—— | 
a 


forces, which defended “God and religion.” Yet no 
one familiar with the facts of the Spanish civil war 
—now officially confirmed by Germany and Italy— 
can believe that Italo-German intervention in Spaig 
was motivated solely by hatred of ‘“‘bolshevism’’ and 
“atheism.” Here, as elsewhere in power politics, cop. 
siderations of strategy, markets and raw materials 
were far more important than considerations of ide. 
ology. To view the conflict in Europe in purely ide. 
ological terms, and on such terms to exclude the | 
Soviet Union from participation in European poli. | 
tics, would be to disregard the forces of social revo. | 
lution now at work throughout the world, - whic 

can as easily take the form of Nazism as of Com. | 
munism. Nor is it by any means clear that a settle. | 
ment intended to quarantine Russia would really | 
offer any hope of appeasement—unless, of course, | 
Mr. Chamberlain still hopes to divert Nazi expan. | 
sion toward Soviet territory. But at this point the | 
Soviet government might well disappoint the e&. 

pectations of British Tories and the Vatican by com 

ing to terms with Nazi Germany. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





civilian tourists, left Hamburg for Spain in a Ger- 
man vessel carrying military planes, bombs and anti- 
aircraft guns. In September 1936 pursuit and ob 
servation squadrons, a battery of heavy anti-aircraft 
artillery and two tank companies were added to the 
German forces; and late in October a complete ait 
force corps of 6,500 men and materiel was sent to 
Spain. Under the command of regular German off 
cers, Nazi forces on land, on sea and in the air not 
only saw action on every front in Spain but con 
ducted a training school for 56,000 Spanish officers, 
as well as tank, anti-tank, flame-thrower and com-| 
munication troops. 





While these revelations were being made in Ger | 
many, 20,000 Italian troops and 3,000 Spaniards 
arrived in Italy, paraded in Naples and Rome on| 
June 6 and 7, and provided the occasion for a simi 
lar glorification of Italian accomplishments during 
the Spanish civil war. An article in the official Forz 
Armate has disclosed that, in the four months De 
cember 1936-April 1937 alone, the Italian nay! 
transported 100,000 men, 4,370 motor vehicles 
40,000 tons of munitions and 750 cannon to Spait 
After November 1, 1936 Italian submarines tor 
pedoed commercial shipping bound for Loyalist 
ports, creating the mysterious piracy menace deali 
with by the Nyon Conference in September 1937. 
Count Galeazzo Ciano, Italian Foreign Ministet, 
states in the fascist periodical, Gerarchia, that Italy’ 
intervention in Spain began on July 25, 1936, when 
the Italian government sent its first nine bombing 





Tt 


— 


plan 
tary 

saw | 
is gi 
attac 
and 

Alth 
draw 
May 


tion¢ 


thei 
their 
Irali 
virtu 
the | 
ing 

have 
that 
turb 
Stal: 
writ 
viet 


befc 


and 
Ital 
alist 
ene 
now 
con: 
clar 
gov 
raci 
the 
fou 


the 


doe 


tior 
the 


Jur 





:Re u 





me 
— 
— 


raft 


t t0 











ng 





EEE 


planes to Spanish Morocco. Over 6,000 Italian mili- 
tary aviators operating Italian machines eventually 
saw service in Spain. To Italian air and naval forces 
is given the credit for repulsing a surprise Loyalist 
attack on Majorca, largest of the Balearic Islands 
and a highly strategic base in the Mediterranean. 
Although Rome had announced its intention to with- 
draw all Italian forces from Spain by the end of 
May, it is reported that fascist troops are still sta- 
tioned in that country. 


WHY FASCIST POWERS INTERVENED. By 
their own words fascist leaders have thus invalidated 
their oft-repeated assertions that Germans and 
Italians in Spain were merely volunteers, and have 
virtually admitted that their agents conspired with 
the Rebels before the outbreak of hostilities. In dat- 
ing their military intervention from July 1936 they 
have destroyed the effectiveness of their argument 
that they were mefely redressing the balance dis- 
turbed by prior Soviet intervention. Even anti- 
Stalinist sources, such as General W. G. Krivitsky 
writing in the Saturday Evening Post, assert that So- 
viet shipments of war materials did not reach Spain 
before mid-October 1936; that these supplies were 
to be paid for by Spanish government gold reserves; 
and that no expeditionary force comparable to the 
Italo-German contingents was sent to assist the Loy- 
alists. Realizing that their own evidence had weak- 
ened their anti-Communist thesis, fascist spokesmen 
now cite a new basis for their participation in the 
conflict. On June 8 the Vélkischer Beobachter de- 
clared that the very existence of a popular front 
government enjoying the sympathy of liberal democ- 
tacies like France justified fascist intervention. In 
the Spanish arena, the Nazi organ declared, was 
fought ‘‘the decisive battle of the democracies against 
the authoritarian states.” 





The historical significance of the fascist exposé 
does not lie in the duplicity of German and Italian 
officials, which was easily matched by the equivoca- 
tion of British and French authorities maintaining 
the fiction of ‘“non-intervention.” Speaking on 
June 6, Hitler himself described the efforts of the 


Page Three 














German legionaries as “‘a lesson to our enemies and 
therewith also a war for Germany.” Viewed in per- 
spective, the Spanish episode thus represents one 
phase in the attempt of the fascist powers to obtain 
strategic domination and political influence in Eu- 
rope and elsewhere — an undertaking they appear 
ready to pursue by any means at their disposal. The 
Spain which German and Italian troops have left is 
not neutral. It is a signatory of the anti-Cominitern 
pact. It has sent important military and naval missions 
to Germany and Italy, while the Italian press already 
foreshadows conclusion of a military pact binding 
Franco to the axis. It commands large quantities of 
Italian and German war materials—apparently left 
behind as a gift—so that its armament, like its mili- 
tary doctrine, is largely coordinate’ with that of the 
fascist powers. Its bases and fi rtified iti 
athwart the South Atlantic and ‘Western Mediter- 
ranean sea routes, may be used py fascist planes, 
ships and men when the opportun#fy arises. German 
and Italian services have not been fendered to Spain 
for nothing. The Western powers rhust now consider 
what is to be done to meet the existing situation, and 
how creation of similar spheres of influences in other 
strategic areas may be avoided. DPavip H. PopPER 


PROF. CHAMBERLAIN ACCEPTS OXFORD POST 

The appointment of Professor Joseph P. Chamber- 
lain to the George Eastman Visiting Professorship 
at Oxford University for the academic year 1939- 
1940 has necessitated his resignation as Chairman of 
the Board of Directors of the Foreign Policy Asso- 
ciation. Professor Chamberlain was one of the 
founders of the Foreign Policy Association, and his 
service on the Board extends over the two decades 
of the Association’s history. He is succeeded by Mr. 
Ralph S. Rounds, an outstanding member of the 
New York Bar, a member of the Board, and one of 
the Committee of Nineteen from which the Foreign 
Policy Association originated in 1918. 

In accepting Professor Chamberlain's resignation, 
the Board paid tribute to his many years of devoted 
service to the F.P.A. and his creative work in the 
field of international education. | 





THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF | 


Bombs Bursting in Air: The Influence of Air Power on 
International Relations, by George Fielding Eliot. New 
York, Reynal and Hitchcock, 1939. $1.75 


The role of air power in European crises and a possible 
European war is lucidly discussed, and America’s aviation 
requirements for continental defense are analyzed. A sound 
study, devoid of hysteria. 


The World Over, 1938: A Chronologicil and Interpretative 
Survey and Commentary of the Yeer of Tension, edited 
by Joseph Hilton Smyth and Charle*; Angoff. New York, 
Harrison-Hilton Books, Inc., 1939. $4.00 


A well-arranged, accurate time-saver for any one pick- 
ing a way in the record of a year crowded with memorable 
happenings. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 34, Jung 16, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lgsiig BugELL, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHELes DgaNn, Béitor. 
Entered as second-class matter Decembe2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


G> 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


vom = 


ee Redes 


Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 

National Press Building 

JUNE 12.—While Washington was extending its 

historic welcome to King George and Queen Eliza- 

beth last week, officials of the two governments were 

quietly coming to terms on the proposed barter 

agreement, which will bring the United States sub- 

stantial war reserves of rubber and tin in return for 
surplus cotton and wheat. 


BARTER ACCORD MAKING PROGRESS. It 
would be a mistake to exaggerate the scope of the 
impending accord or to accept premature reports 
from London that the agreement will be ready for 
signature within the next few days. Several obstacles, 
including the important matter of price, remain to 
be resolved. Nevertheless, it is now evident that the 
chief difficulties are being removed and that the ne- 
gotiations are reaching a point where both sides seem 
confident of concluding an agreement which will 
have an important bearing on the security and de- 
fense of the two countries. 


The scope of the agreement is limited primarily 
by the fact that the British government, unlike that 
of the United States, is compelled to meet the cost 
of this transaction from its Treasury. Whereas the 
American government has very large quantities of 
surplus cotton and wheat in government warehouses, 
the British are compelled to buy rubber and tin from 
private producers at the prevailing market price. 
Theoretically, it would be possible for the United 
States to secure a full one-year reserve supply of 
rubber and tin, as desired by the War Department, in 
exchange for about 5,000,000 bales of cotton, or 
440,000,000 bushels of wheat. At current world 
prices, however, a transaction of this magnitude 
would cost the British government approximately 
$280,600,000—a figure far beyond anything which 
has yet been mentioned. During the past two years 
the British government has spent about £13,000,000 
($60,800,000) for storage of food and raw ma- 
terials, or less than one-fourth of the amount which 
would be required to cover American reserves for 
one year. 


When the agreement is finally concluded, the total 
amount involved is likely to fall somewhere between 
fifty and seventy-five million dollars. This will have 
relatively little effect on the huge cotton and wheat 
surpluses in the United States, but will represent a 
substantial step toward the accumulation of essential 
wartime reserves in both countries. 


STRATEGIC MATERIALS. Another important 
step, supplementing the barter agreement with 
Britain, was taken last week when Congress author. 
ized the expenditure of $100,500,000 during the 
next four years to finance the purchase of “‘essential 
war materials” which may be stored for use either 
in military or industrial fields should any future war 
contingency cut off normal supplies. 


The bill, signed by the President on June 9, does 
not specify the strategic and critical materials, but ; 
vests the authority for determining the quality and | 
quantities of such materials with the Secretaries of 
War, Navy and Interior, acting jointly with the Army | 
and Navy Munitions Board in cooperation with 
representatives of the State, Treasury and Commerce 
Departments. The funds may be spent either for | 
the purchase of materials abroad or for the develop. | 
ment of mines and deposits within the United States. | 
They may be used only upon the order of the Presi- 
dent in time of war or “national emergency,” except 
for rotation to prevent deterioration. 


Despite the fact that this measure was designed 
primarily to aid the government in building up re. 
serves of materials not produced effectively or in 
sufficient quantities in the United States, domestic 
producers managed to secure several important con- 
cessions which may limit the effectiveness of the Act. 


The chief controversy in Congress centered around 
Section 5, which requires all purchases to be made in | 
accordance with the so-called “Buy-American Act’ | 
of March 3, 1933. Under this clause, the government 
procurement agents will be required to allow a rea- | 
sonable time (not to exceed one year) for production 
and delivery from domestic sources, wherever avail- | 
able. Moreover, if they find that production of do- | 
mestic materials is economically feasible, they are | 
required to direct the purchase of such materials, 
without requiring the domestic producers to give 
the customary bond. This remarkable provision, | 








which is said to have been sponsored by the domestic 


manganese interests, leaves some discretion with the 
War and Navy Departments, but clearly seeks to 


protect and encourage inefficient production in the | 


United States. 


How much will actually be expended under this 
Act during the next twelve months is problematical. 
If purchases of strategic materials are to be made 
during the fiscal year 1940, a special appropriation 
will be necessary before Congress adjourns. 


W. T. STONE 








FO 


Ani 


Jun 
= 
JA 
S* 

t 
as a 
not é 
natic 
inter 
State 
conc 
sequ 
cour 
ance 
phra 
wari 
by J 
offic 
clan 
at I 
virti 
and 
fam 
imp 

Chi 

tion 

tior 
of ( 
not 
and 

7 
fou 
ces: 
age 
ren 
evi 
sist 

" 

by 

the 


far 





