


3 de. 
e of 
ma- 
Alli. 
ne a 
. the 
relp- 
‘rom 
Hull 
with 
nem: 
eady 
cept 


‘pan, 


ister 
rited 

Tri- 
“ived 


Thile 
void 

that 
ught 
id be 


as at 


rests 
Wat 
ather 
e at- 
view 
rents 
now 
, the 
with 





General Libra» 


Unive . 
Mav Ors. fe 
~" eh OF ¥ 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 8 


Dacumpmr 7, 1945 





BIG-THREE UNITY JEOPARDIZED BY CONFLICT IN IRAN 


HE revolt in northern Iran, which has led in 

recent weeks to demands for autonomy of Azer- 
baijan Province lying next to the southern Soviet 
Republic of the same name, forms another test of 
Big-Three relations. After Angio-Russian military 
forces occupied Iran in January 1942, Iranian sov- 
ereignty was guaranteed by treaty. Following the 
entry of American troops and establishment of the 
Persian Gulf Command for delivery of lend-lease 
supplies to Russia, Iranian independence was re- 
afirmed at the Teheran Conference in 1943. But, 
as in October 1944, disturbances in Iran’s northern 
provinces have again developed into a controversy 
between the U.S.S.R. and the Anglo-American pow- 
ers. For following the present outbreaks on Novem- 
ber 23, the Iranian government charged the Soviet 
Union with fomenting the revolt, which is headed 
by the Democratic party, successor to the former 
Communist Tudeh party. Thus far, Russian military 
forces in Azerbaijan have not allowed Iranian troops 
to enter the area. And it was announced on Decem- 
ber 3 that Moscow had rejected the proposal of Sec- 
tetary of State Byrnes that the date for withdrawal of 
all Allied forces from Iran be advanced to January 1, 
tather than March 2, as had been determined earlier. 

THE BIG THREE IN IRAN. Most observers have 
seen in the recent outbreaks another instance of the 
new Soviet expansion, similar to the action taken in 
Fastern Europe by the U.S.S.R. within the past six 
years, to insure friendly governments along its west- 
ern frontier. Nor is the parallel with Soviet aims 
along its China border lost on those who view the 
Kremlin’s policies as a continuation in modern dress 
of the program followed by successive Czarist ré- 
gimes. This type of action by the Soviet Union may 

viewed in two ways. Those who fear the emer- 
gence of the Soviet régime as a world power—but 
insist that the Western nations continue their his- 


toric role of dominance in such dependent areas as 
the Middle East or various parts of Asia—view the 
present action of the Russian government with great 
alarm. Quite naturally, they are now as fearful of 
Moscow’s drive for influence abroad as were states- 
men twenty-five years ago or during the Crimean 
war. Present Soviet policy is also alarming to a sec- 
ond group, who sincerely believe in the necessity of 
Anglo-American-Russian cooperation. To this group, 
however, each of the Big Three is currently follow- 
ing alarming unilateral policies in many of the most 
troubled areas of Europe, the Middle East and Asia. 
The Soviet Union’s resumption of many Russian 
policies laid down before World War I constitutes 
a historical lag, but hardly cause for criticism by the 
Western powers, who have consistently sought simi- 
lar aims in these areas. 

In Iran it is significant that there is a very real 
possibility the revolt will lead to creation of a new 
government at Teheran, which may allow secession 
of Azerbaijan Province. Russia may then achieve 
the emergence of a friendly government along its 
southern border, and in due course Azerbaijan may 
be incorporated in the U.S.S.R. Yet what must not 
be overlooked in the present great-power conflict in 
Iran is the fact that Britain and, more recently, the 
United States have already staked out their claims 
in that country. With a population of 15,000,000 
and an area of 628,000 square miles, Iran would 
hardly figure as a major pawn in the world power 
struggle were it not that it lies between Russia and the 
Persian Gulf, and its oil resources, now largely con- 
trolled by American and British companies, are the 
second largest in the world. Because of its strategic 
position and its mineral and oil wealth, the United 
States and Britain would naturally be greatly con- 
cerned if northern Iran, now or in the future, were 
to merge with the Soviet Republic of Azerbaijan, 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 























regardless of Russia’s immediate action with refer- 
ence to the Teheran agreement. 

COOPERATION OR CONFLICT? But in Iran, 
as in the Far East, there is no possibility that all or 
any one of the great powers can withdraw from par- 
ticipation in the internal affairs of such areas before 
they have evolved into truly independent states. 
What is needed is not a decision as to whether in- 
tervention shall be pursued or abandoned. It exists 
in fact, for good or ill. Concrete progressive measures 
for liberalizing the political régimes in Iran and 
other similar dependent areas are needed, following 
. Which large-scale economic development must be 
planned and inaugurated. If this is impracticable 
from the point of view of domestic politics, especial- 
ly in the United States where Congress is loath to 
undertake any such foreign economic ventures, then 
America should either cease prescribing long-term, 
highly moralistic policies—by which it also judges 
other nations’ activities abroad without following 
them itself—or it should pursue with greater fore- 
sight and more candor such economic and political 
penetration throughout the world as is deemed de- 
sirable for its security in modern terms and with 
modern techniques. 

In Iran, for example, Russia’s historic southern 
drive may be aided by appeals to the local populace 
that Soviet dominance will bring a substantial in- 
crease in the general standard of living, now woe- 
fully low as in most mid-eastern countries. But the 
present British Labor government has only begun to 


WORLD COOPERATION—REALITY OR MYTH TO AMERICANS? 


In two plays now running concurrently in Paris— 
Antigone and La Sauvage—a young French play- 
wright, Jean Anouilh, probes a fundamental moral 
question of our times. This question is whether, in 
an admittedly horrible and confused world, we as 
individuals have the right to seek escape from re- 
sponsibility in personal happiness, or must accept the 
burden of responsibility, no matter what it costs us, 
even if it is life itself. 

Millions of Europeans have had to answer this 
question under harrowing circumstances—and the 
way in which they have answered it has in each case 
proved the most crucial test of their convictions that 
human beings can possibly undergo. Both in Anti- 
gone, drawn from classic tragedy and played with 
the dignity of the ancient world, although in mod- 
ern dress and with modern tenseness, and in La 
Sauvage, laid in a sordid contemporary setting, the 
conclusion is the same: the individual, if he or she 
is at all sensitive to human suffering, cannot find 
satisfaction in personal happiness in a period of uni- 
versal crisis. However insignificant the contribution 
the individual can make, responsibility cannot be 
avoided. When taunted by her worldly dictator-uncle, 


Page Two 








_— 





study plans for general economic cooperation with 
Iran and other Arab states, while the United States 
thus far has hardly approached the problem from this 
point of view. Yet only common state action 
America and Britain with Russia—which conces. 
sionaires like the private oil interests of the Westem 
powers are at present not willing or organized ty 
give—will offer sufficient counterweight to the de. 
mands or plans of Iran’s northern neighbor. 

If, however, America and Britain choose to cop. 
tinue the power struggle on effective terms in de. 
pendent areas such as Iran, the full consequences of 
such action should be brought home to the public. 
For, lacking Big-Three cooperative endeavor to ease 
tensions in Iran and elsewhere, war will ultimately 
result. And while there is no thought at present that 
the Iranian crisis will move beyond the stage of 
straining for advantage by each of the great powers 
vitally interested, there is no hope that clear-cut de. 
cisions which will avoid violent conflicts later can be 
made so long as each nation jockeys for position in 
either an economic or political sense. Larger issues, 
which have up to the moment defied resolution 
among the Big Three, will not be solved unless Brit- 
ain, Russia and the United States are prepared to 
deal cooperatively with the less universal, but oner- 
ous, tasks of improving conditions in areas where 
their interests now collide so that tensions both 
among the local inhabitants and themselves may be 
alleviated. 


GRANT S. McCLELLAN 


Creon, concerning the limitations of her accomplish- 
ment, undertaken at terrible risk, Antigone retorts 
with the unforgettable phrase: On doit faire ce que 
l’on peut. (One must do what one can.) 

“ONE MUST DO WHAT ONE CAN.” Not 
only every individual, but every nation, could well 
be guided by this precept. No one expects miracles, 
or even selflessness, from any nation. But surely every 
nation which, in this time of agonizing crisis, fails 
to do what it can, is guilty of a great betrayal. We 
in the United States have demonstrated during the 
war that we are capable of united and energetic 
action in building a vast industrial machine capable 
of serving the needs not only of our own enormous 
armed forces, but also those of our allies. Yet be- 
cause we have experienced so little of the moral 
self-searching undergone by the peoples of Europe, 
we now appear tragically inadequate to the tasks 
of reconstruction. 

OUR THREE MAJOR ERRORS. Our persistent 
tradition of subordinating foreign policy to domes- 
tic political considerations has led us to commit, 
since V-J Day, at least three major errors whose 
repercussions on Europe it will be difficult, perhaps 


—_— 


impos! 
food £ 
that th 


by Actual 


during 
control 

le 
be AC 
jssue € 
enthus: 
surplus 
had to 
otherw 
heartle 
relief 1 


Secc 
sion tl 
secret 
fact, i 
tists © 
this s¢ 
worse. 
temeri 
Ameri 
a rem 
have | 
can p 
the ri 
Admi 
comm 
repres 
The 

offere 
nal d 
bomb 
perm 
majo! 
officic 
many 


Fa 


tic 





PORE] 
Headq: 
second 





‘ith 
tes 
his 


ern 
de. 


On 
de. 


lic. 


ely 
nat 


sh- 
rts 
ue 


Jot 
ell 


ery 
ils 
We 
the 
tic 
ble 
us 
be- 
ral 


pe, 
sks 


ent 


ut, 
ose 


Lps 











ew" a 
2 —_ 





impossible, to correct. First, we promptly removed 
food rationing controls, apparently on the theory 
that this was a politically desirable thing to do. 
Actually, the American people had been prepared, 
during the war, to accept the continuance of these 
controls in order to alleviate the sufferings of other 

ples, and there is good reason to believe that, had 
the Administration had the courage to explain the 
issue clearly to the public, there would have been 
enthusiastic response to a program of sharing our 
surpluses with the rest of the world, even if these 
had to be given away in the form of gifts. To think 
otherwise is to assume that we are both stupid and 
heartless, which our previous response to appeals for 
relief would certainly refute. 


Second, the Administration conveyed the impres- 
sion that the United States, proud possessor of the 
secret of the atomic bomb (which, as a matter of 
fact, it shares with Britain, Canada, and the scien- 
tists of several other nations), would hold on to 
this secret either as a bargaining weapon or, even 
worse, aS a threat to nations that might have the 
temerity to oppose us. The courageous stand of 
American scientists, who on this occasion displayed 
a remarkable sense of social responsibility, would 
have been loudly echoed by large sections of Ameri- 
can public opinion had our political leaders taken 
the risk of consulting the public. But here again the 
Administration acted on the belief that the lowest 
common denominator of judgment and conscience is 
representative of the American people as a whole. 
The Attlee-Truman-Mackenzie King conversations 
offered an opportunity to alter somewhat our origi- 
nal dogmatic decision about control of the atomic 
bomb, but the ill-effects of that decision had already 
permeated the international atmosphere. Our third 
major error is the Administration’s failure to declare 
oficially that the United States will remain in Ger- 
many as long as this may prove necessary—although 





For background on Brazil’s first Presidential elec- 
tions in 15 years, read: 
BRAZIL: RISING POWER IN THE 
AMERICAS 
by Olive Holmes 


25¢c 


October 15 issue of FoREIGN Poticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











eS 





a 





Page Three — 


it becomes daily more obvious that lack of such as- 
surance keeps Europe in a state of dangerous wnease, 
and impedes stabilization of the continent, which 
should be one of our primary concerns. 


LACK OF CONSTRUCTIVE LEADERSHIP. To 
one returning from Europe it is not the Europeans— 
cold, hungry and miserable as they are in the wake 
of the six years’ war—who are most to be pitied, 
but ourselves. We are to be pitied because we are 
displaying less courage, less stamina, less capacity 
to take great risks for great ends than some of the 
peoples of a war-ravaged continent. What is most 
alarming is not only the lack of constructive leader- 
ship on the part of the Executive, but the disturbing 
silence of members of Congress on controversial is- 
sues. Why do we hear so little from the Fulbrights 
and the Balls, the Saltonstalls and the Morses, about 
Anglo-American economic relations, about food ra- 
tioning controls, about our future policy in Ger- 
many? Is it possible that all we can do is to orate 
eloquently about international cooperation in gen- 
eral, only to evade responsibility when we must pass 
from the general to the particular? There is always 
danger of apathy after the strain of a prolonged war 
effort. But surely we are not as weary as the British 
and the Russians, the French and the Norwegians— 
yet the tone of our discussions of world affairs is 
disturbingly frivolous and adolescent. 

It sometimes does seem as if men had lost control 
of events. Panic fear stalks the world—fear of known 
dangers, but even more of those unknown yet dimly 
apprehended. We have every reason to despair; but 
none of us has the right to do so. The one thing we 
must refuse to do is to remain indifferent to the 
crisis that is shaking the foundations of our world. 
We cannot all perform heroic deeds. But as Antigone 
says with classic simplicity: One must do what one 
can. 


We are a great nation—great not only in wealth 
and technical genius, but also in compassion and 
sense of comradeship. We must act greatly. Nothing 
less is worthy of us. We must act so as to give 
others the assurance that all hope is not lost. Only by 
thus reassuring others can we reassure ourselves. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(Mrs. Dean has just returned from a two months’ trip to Europe 
undertaken at the invitation of the Office of War Information. She 
was the guest in Britain of the Royal Institute of International 
Affairs, and lectured at Chatham House in London, and at the 
branches of the Institute in Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow and 
Manchester. In Paris she addressed the Centre d'Etudes de Politique 
Etrangére and the Centre d'Etudes des Cadres. She also visited 
Germany at the invitation of the State Department.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 8, Dscemper 7, 1945. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incerporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lert, Secretary; VERA MicHeLes Dsan, Eéitor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921; at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





oe ae a aa a eral eae eae 








Washington News Letter 








a TIT — 








WILL HURLEY RESIGNATION AFFECT U.S. INTERVENTION IN CHINA? 


During the 1944 Presidential campaign the two 
major political parties agreed not to make an issue 
of foreign policy. This truce helped to unite the 
country behind the Dumbarton Oaks proposals and 
the San Francisco charter but, at the same time, weak- 
ened United States foreign policy by removing the 
invigorating criticism and enlightening publicity that 
go with constant political debate. That the truce is 
crumbling is indicated by Maj. Gen. Patrick J. Hur- 
ley’s censure of our China policy on November 27, 
when he resigned as Ambassador to China. Foreign 
policy once more is openly a political issue in the 
United States, and discussion of it probably will in- 
crease as the 1946 Congressional elections near. 

EFFECT OF HURLEY’S STATEMENT. The 
Hurley statement made it clear that China today is a 
composite of all the problems in foreign policy facing 
the United States. The foremost question raised by 
China is whether we shall put our whole hope for 
security in the United Nations Organization, whose 
General Assembly is to meet in January for the first 
time, or rely also on force of arms and unilateral 
political decisions. Ambassador Hurley followed the 
latter policy by arming and transporting troops of the 
recognized government of Generalissimo Chiang 
Kai-shek to North China, where they confront the 
rebel forces of the unrecognized Communist régime. 
Political experts on the Far East in the State Depart- 
ment opposed this military assistance as intervention 
in a civil war which we might not be able to carry 
through to conclusion should internal strife result 
in an international war. Hurley resigned after Repre- 
sentative de Lacy, Democrat of Washington, criti- 
cized him on the basis of arguments which Hurley 
thought de Lacy obtained from the State Department. 

China also poses two main problems that arise in 
connection with United States relations with Russia. 
In the field of military security, the question arises 
whether our goal should be to maintain Chinese 
unity through help to Chiang Kai-shek, in order to 
prevent Russia from possibly manipulating a Com- 
munist government of North China if the country 
were divided under two régimes. In the field of ide- 
ology a problem of principle is involved, centering 
on whether we should intervene abroad in order to 
protect our “free enterprise system.” 

Senator Kenneth S. Wherry, Republican of Ne- 
braska, who on November 29 asked that a special 
Senate committee be appointed to investigate the 
State Department, proposed specifically that the com- 


mittee inquire whether employees of the Departmen, 
were encouraging the establishment of Communi 
forms of government abroad. The House Committe 
on un-American Affairs, which focuses its attentigg 
on Communist activities in the United States, invited 
Hurley to appear before it. The issue of free ente. 
prise, as it applies to China, is not a clear-cut debate 
between communism and American democracy, hoy. 
ever, for the Chiang Kai-shek government whic 
Hurley supports is tyrannical and oppressive. 
Furthermore, the China question directs public at 
tention to the way in which foreign policy is con 
ceived and carried out by the United States. The ad 
ministration of foreign affairs is confused today be 
cause its control is divided. Maintaining that Ambas 
sadors should set policy (within the limits of thei 
instructions from the President), Hurley protested 
in his statement of resignation that career officers in 
the State Department opposed his policy and resorted 
to “leaking” to the press and Congress in order to 
gain support for their view. While Ambassadon 
were not considered independent agents in the past 
the State Department—behind the screen of the po 
litical truce—has become less and less efficient both 
in making foreign policy and in asserting its leader 
ship respecting foreign affairs within the executive 
branch of the federal government. Below the Presi 
dency, the leadership has passed in many instances to 
the War Department. Foreign policy today is made 
by whatever official happens to be on the scene. 


PRESIDENT TRUMAN’S PREDICAMENT. As 
far as China is concerned, President Truman is said 
to regard his appointment of General George C 
Marshall, former Army Chief of Staff, to the tem 
porary post of special envoy as the first step toward 
adoption of a policy that will serve our interests and 
be acceptable to the public. But the questions raised 
by Hurley transcend China and reach all around the 
world. They go to the heart of the developing issut 
over our international position. Whereas a few yeats 
ago the dispute lay between isolation and interns 
tionalism, the issue now is between a nationalist & 
pansion of United States interests overseas and 0 
operative internationalism. Hurley leans toward the 
former, while Truman continues to believe in coop 
eration. On November 28 he restated his faith in the 
United Nations Organization and expressed his hope 
that his country and the U.S.S.R. could work together. 


BLam BOLLES 








