


re 


an. 
slo- 


ble 


Jew 


eri- 
lave 
ities 
ome 
very 


‘ork, 


han- 
thin 
e of 
steps 
2SSes 
vent 
atti- 
-ated 
diate 
»peal 
ental 
ange. 
- and 
must 


— 
‘ational 


Editor. 





"EOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An inter pretation. of current tmternational events by the Research Staff 
@ .P-Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 
AS 


.. 
mo” BOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
real 3? 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVIII, No. 17 FEBRUARY 17, 1939 


—_—_—_ 





Recent Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents each 


SOVIET-JAPANESE RELATIONS: 1931-1938 

by T. A. Bisson 
INTERNATIONAL AID TO GERMAN REFUGEES 

by David H. Popper 
DIPLOMATIC BACKGROUND OF MUNICH ACCORD 

by Vera Micheles Dean 








Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











St Pe 
ican 


JAPAN TAKES HAINAN—-AND MOVES SOUTH 





IMED to coincide with German-Italian pressure 

on the French and British positions in the Mediter- 
ranean, the sudden landing on Hainan Island effect- 
ed by Japanese military-naval forces on February 10 
holds far-reaching implications for the future of the 
Western powers in the Pacific. Less than four months 
after the seizure of Canton, Japan has taken its sec- 
ond decisive stride in the long-projected drive for 
“southward expansion.” Japanese air and fleet bases 
on Hainan would threaten the security of French 
Indo-China, sever British naval communications be- 
tween Hongkong and Singapore, and—in conjunc- 
tion with the Japanese mandated islands—isolate the 
Philippines. 

Confronted with a new fait accompli, the French 
and British governments are in a peculiarly disadvan- 
tageous position to exert effective pressure on Japan. 
Last June London and Paris warned Japan that they 
would “act together” in handling the “undesirable 
complications” which would result from a Japanese 
landing on Hainan. In view of the present delicate sit- 
uation in the Mediterranean, France and Britain have 
thus far restricted their threatened action to presenta- 
tion of identical notes at Tokyo. These notes, while 
not fully revealed, seem to be limited to a request for 
information as to the “nature and duration” of the 
Hainan occupation. In response, Foreign Minister 
Arita has assured the French and British envoys that 
the move was dictated by the “strategic necessities” 
of the war in China and would “not go beyond mili- 
tary necessity,” and that Japan’s repeated disavowal 


of “territorial designs” in China also held true for 
Hainan. 

It is clear from this interchange that Japan is firm- 
ly maintaining its ground. The phrasing of the dis- 
claimer suggests that the Japanese authorities are 
placing the occupation of Hainan on exactly the same 
plane as the occupation of other areas of China. In- 


dications that a puppet régime under Japanese aus- 
pices will shortly be established on the island lend 
further support to this assumption. The argument re- 
garding “military necessity” will not bear scrutiny. 
Japanese airplane carriers now anchored off Pakhoi 
are roughly 100 miles closer to the strategic centers 
of China’s southwest than aviation bases on Hainan, 
while Chinese vessels already meet with great diffi- 
culties in carrying munitions into Kwangtung—where 
there is neither an entrepdét nor rail communication 
with the interior. The occupation of Hainan, in fact, 
will afford Japan no real assistance in overcoming 
Chinese resistance or ending the war. At Tokyo, nev- 
ertheless, the fait accompli has been sanctioned by 
the Diet, which enthusiastically applauded War Min- 
ister Itagaki’s report on February 13 and voted a res- 
olution stating that the occupation of Hainan was 
“bound to exercise a far-reaching effect upon the wat 
situation.” 

An interesting sidelight on current Japanese policy 
is reflected in the recent Soviet-Japanese incidents on 
the Manchoukuo border. These incidents, together 
with the exaggerated report by Hallett Abend that 
600,000 Japanese troops are being concentrated in 
Manchuria to attack the Soviet Union, have obvious- 
ly been designed to distract the attention of the 
Western powers from Japan’s advance toward the 
south. At the present time the interests of the West- 
ern powers in the Far East seem to be rather more 
seriously jeopardized than those of the U.S.S.R. The 
occupation of Hainan directly challenges France's po- 
sition in Indo-China. It was undertaken despite the 
restrictions imposed by the Indo-China authorities on 
munitions shipments to China, and in defiance of the 
Franco- Japanese treaty of 1907 by which both powers 
engaged to “support each other’ in maintaining the 
peace and security of regions of China “adjacent to 
the territories where they have rights of sovereignty, 























protection or occupation.”” British, Dutch and Amer- 
ican interests are affected to an almost equal degree. 
In coping with this threat, action by the Western 
powers might well prove more effective than reliance 
on the theoretical possibility of a Japanese attack on 
the Soviet Union. T. A. Bisson 


SPANISH WAR ENTERS A NEW PHASE 

The decision of Premier Negrin and his com- 
mander-in-chief, General Miaja, to fight the Rebels 
“to the end” from Central Spain, where the Loyalists 
still control Madrid and Valencia, upset the cal- 
culations of France and Britain, which had hoped 
that Franco’s occupation of Catalonia would term- 
inate the civil war and restore the status guo in 
the western Mediterranean. In an attempt to concili- 
ate the Rebels and thus hasten the withdrawal of 
Italian forces from Spain, the French government, 
on February 2, had sent Senator Léon Bérard on an 
unofficial mission to Burgos. And on February 9 the 
British cruiser Devonshire carried a Franco emissary 
to the island of Minorca—fortified by the British 
firm of Vickers—to arrange for the surrender of its 
Loyalist garrison. The only condition imposed by 
Britain was that this strategic island, unlike its sister 
island of Majorca, should be kept free of Italians. It 
was also reported that France and Britain had offered 
Franco a loan for the reconstruction of devastated 
Spain, and might even recognize his régime without 
preliminary fulfilment of their original demand for 
the withdrawal of Italian troops. 

These diplomatic ‘“‘mopping-up” operations met 
with two immediate obstacles: the determination of 
Loyalist leaders to carry on the struggle for Spanish 
independence, thus balking recognition of the Franco 
régime; and the hostility aroused in Germany and 
Italy by this obvious attempt on the part of the West- 
ern powers to profit by the Rebels’ victory. In the 
course of the peace negotiations reported to have be- 
gun under Anglo-French auspices after the fall of 
Barcelona, Premier Negrin had insisted on three con- 
ditions: a guarantee of Spanish independence from 
foreign influence; a plebiscite to determine the form 
of government desired by the people; liquidation of 
the civil war without persecution, and with freedom 
for all Spaniards to join in the country’s reconstruc- 
tion. While Franco was ready to underwrite the first 
condition, he rejected the other two, and insisted on 
“unconditional surrender’’ by the Loyalists. 

Meanwhile, on February 5, Virginio Gayda, Fas- 
cist spokesman on foreign policy, declared that Ital- 
ian troops would not be withdrawn from Spain until 
Franco had achieved not only a military, but “a full 
political victory”; and “until every other unlawful in- 
tervention having any degree of political usefulness 
has ceased””—including the presence on French soil 
of 200,000 Spanish refugees. This statement, togeth- 





Page Two — 





— 


er with reiterated hints that Italy expected fulfilment 
of its “natural aspirations,” still officially undefined, 
indicated that Mussolini would use his strategic posi- 
tion in Spain and the Balearic Islands to drive as hard 
a bargain as he can with the Western powers. 

In reply M. Bonnet, French Foreign Minister, told 
the French Senate on February 7 that the government 
would not allow “any foreign state to menace the in- 
tegrity of Spain and thus the security of France,” and 
was determined to safeguard “our territory and our 
empire.”’ On the preceding day Prime Minister Cham- 
berlain, in the most unequivocal pledge Britain has 
yet given France, assured the House of Commons 
that “‘any threat to the vital interests of France, from 
whatever quarter it came, must evoke the immediate 
cooperation of this country.” Thus at the very mo- 
ment when the Loyalists were making their last stand 
against the fascist-minded Rebels, the Western pow: 
ers faced in Spain the possibility of that very struggle 
with the Rome-Berlin axis which their non-interven- 
tion policy had been designed to avert. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


GERMANY EASES PRESSURE ON JEWS 

Publication of an important German proposal 
to assist Jewish emigration from the Reich—re- 
vealed on February 13 at a meeting of the Intergov- 
ernmental Committee for aid to German refugees— 
has aroused new hopes for the salvation of Ger- 
many’s persecuted minorities. In its present form the 
plan is the outgrowth of extended conversations con- 
ducted by George Rublee, director of the Committee, 
and Nazi officials at London and Berlin. Approved 
by the most important German authorities, it envi- 
sages the emigration of about 150,000 wage earners 
in annual contingents of fixed size during the next 
three to five years, with their dependents—estimated 
at 250,000 in number—to follow after they are es- 
tablished in new homes. No provision is made for 
the egress of about 200,000 elderly or infirm indi- 
viduals, who will sojourn peaceably in the Reich but 
may some day be treated as hostages if “something 
extraordinary occurs.” Pending their emigration, 
those fit for work may seek employment to provide 
for their own sustenance; but they are to be segre- 
gated in some undisclosed manner from non-Jews 
working in the same establishments. This arrange- 
ment is apparently intended to facilitate the reopen- 
ing of certain Jewish businesses abruptly liquidated at 
the end of last year. Emigration will be financed in 
part by a trust fund composed of a proportion of the 
remaining Jewish wealth in Germany, which will be 
used to buy equipment and capital goods for emi- 
grants to take with them. On February 14 the Evian 
Committee, meeting in London, endorsed a proposal 
to form a private international corporation which 

(Continued on Page 4) 








it | 


tak 
pir 
the 
box 
the 
Ph 
of 

siO 
rec 


the 





Id 


Nt 


sal 


2€, 


sal 
ich 





Washin gton News Letter 

















———— 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Fes. 14.—During the last ten days, the furor in 
Washington caused by the debate over the Presi- 
dent’s tactics in European affairs has temporarily ob- 
scured the equally significant trend in the Adminis- 
tration’s Far Eastern Policy. Although the issue of 
securing the Open Door in China is quiescent for the 
moment, there are several indications that the State 
Department is cautiously advancing a policy designed 
to block eventual Japanese expansion into the South 
Pacific and to bolster its diplomatic protests on acts 
of discrimination against American trade in China. 

The proposed fortification of Guam, even though 
the current appropriation of $5,000,000 allows only 
for harbor improvements, is a small but revealing 
straw in the wind. The dispatch of a United States 
destroyer to Hainan, to investigate Japanese activi- 
ties which might be inimical to American interests 
in that strategic locale, is another. Most important, 
however, is the bill to amend the Philippine Inde- 
pendence Act, hearings on which will commence this 
week before the Committee of Territories and Insu- 
lar Affairs. 

The fortification of Guam and the implementation 
and extension of our ties with the Philippines are 
integral parts of the Administration’s whole Far 
Eastern policy. Since the outbreak of hostilities in 
China eighteen months ago, three alternatives have 
been possible: 

1. 2 withdraw entirely from participation in Far Eastern 
affairs. 


2. To remain in the Far East (at least until 1946), but to 
take no effective steps to resist Japanese expansion into 
spheres of essential American interest. 


3. To prepare to resist Japanese expansion by making the 
Philippine sector of the Pacific, which includes Guam, 
impregnable against Japanese attack. 

While the Administration has made it clear that 
it does not intend to withdraw from Asia, it has 
taken no formal step to indicate a shift in its Philip- 
pine policy. On the surface, the recommendations of 
the Joint Preparatory Committee, which are em- 
bodied in the bill before the Senate, are designed for 
the sole purpose of aiding the sound development of 
Philippine economy, without regard to the question 
of independence. Actually, however, Japan’s expan- 
sion in Asia has forced State Department officials to 
reconsider the advisability of casting the Islands 
adrift in 1946 without an anchor to windward. In 
the eyes of some officials, the program of the Joint 


Committee may be used as such an anchor by serv- 
ing to create a unified and financially sound Philip- 
pine nation. A strong Philippine Commonwealth is 
an essential corollary to any attempt on the part of 
the United States to resist Japanese expansion south 
of Formosa. Moreover, extension of the economic 
ties until 1961 will serve to prolong the sentimental 
attachment which most Americans feel towards their 
Filipino wards. The bill thus implies that we are not 
only to retain our interests in the Far East but are 
taking steps to protect them. Unless that is the in- 
tention, there appears to be no reason to fortify 
Guam. 


The shadow of partisan politics, however, has now 
arisen to plague the Administration and others who 
had hoped for a speedy passage of the Philippine 
measure. Because of the suspicion in Congress as to 
the general direction of the Administration’s foreign 
policy, and because the Philippine issue does imply 
certain important commitments, an extensive debate 
on the larger issues of foreign affairs is liable to 
arise upon the introduction of the measure. The bill 
now stands a chance of defeat should it become em- 
broiled among the larger issues of foreign policy in a 
politically minded Congress, in which the gulf be- 
tween New Dealers and anti-New Dealers is becom- 
ing daily more pronounced. 


Consequently, the President was advised against 
sending a special message to Congress urging the 
passage of the bill, as had been previously planned. 
Political lines have not as yet been formed in favor 
or in opposition to the measure. According to recent 
polls and editorial comment, sentiment is becoming 
much more sympathetic to the retention of ties with 
the Philippines. Administration wheelhorses would 
support the bill, while no great opposition is expected 
this time from the agricultural lobbies. On the other 
hand, the isolationists who might attack the proposed 
amendments number such strange bedfellows as 
Left-wing New Dealers and conservative Republi- 
cans. 

A speech by Senator Gibson on February 9, which 
was generally overlooked in the press, also aroused 
concern in Administration quarters. Mr. Gibson 
pointed out that the bill does not legally commit 
the United States to conclude an agreement in 1946 
but only sets forth a plan of economic relations for 
the period 1946-1960. Therefore he proposed for 
consideration a substitute program calling for im- 
mediate repeal of the export tax provisions of the 

















Independence Act. Should other Senators support the 
Gibson proposal, it might well provoke the very con- 
troversy State Department officials have been striv- 
new ent. FREDERICK T. MERRILL 


GERMANY EASES PRESSURE ON JEWS 
(Continued from Page 2) 
would raise additional finances and facilitate resettle- 
ment. 


Although many aspects of the plan are sufficiently 
vague to inspire grave doubts regarding its practica- 
bility, it does mark a distinct triumph for the Evian 
committee, which has sought to substitute orderly 
and humane emigration for the pitifully inadequate 
and chaotic exodus of refugees from Germany today. 
German officials, apparently concerned at the sharp 
decline in Germany's sales abroad since the anti- 
Semitic excesses of November 1938, have dropped 
their original demands for a ransom in foreign cur- 
rencies in order to mollify foreign sentiment. Yet it 
must be remembered that some of the greatest 
obstacles to settlement of the German refugee 
problem remain unaltered. The plan does not cover 
non-Jewish refugees. Nor does it provide the ad- 
ditional funds for large-scale colonization that will 
doubtless be necessary because of the rapid decline 
in Jewish resources in Germany. More important 
still is the need for finding lands where refugees 
may settle in large numbers. While 50,000 to 60,000 
refugees may find permanent sanctuary each year un- 
der present conditions, new prospects for mass settle- 
ment are far from encouraging. Projects for the ad- 
mission of 100,000 emigrants to the Dominican Re- 
public and of 1,000 refugees annually to the island 
of Mindanao, in the Philippines, are still in a prelim- 
inary stage. Hitherto there has been Little serious con- 





Page Four —. 





——— 


sideration of the practicability of these schemes, or of 
the British government's proposal for mass settle. 
ment in British Guiana, where a commission of ex- 
perts is now surveying immigration possibilities. The 
major tasks of preparation for overseas settlement in 
numbers still remain to be accomplished. 
Meanwhile the fate of Palestine—which, accord- 
ing to the Zionists, could immediately shelter 100,000 
refugees—hangs in the balance at London, where a 
tripartite conference of British, Jews and Arabs 
opened on February 7. There the British representa- 
tives are striving to achieve a “compromise on a basis 
of justice’’ intended to satisfy all groups with claims 
to the Holy Land. Separate meetings have thus far 
been held with the Jewish and Arab delegations, the 
former including both Zionist and non-Zionist repre- 
sentatives and the latter, delegates from five Arab 
states as well as Palestine. Both groups refuse to re- 
cede from their conflicting demands, which clash 
most sharply on the issue of the continuance of Jew- 
ish immigration. Despite the moderating influence of 
non-Zionists and non-Palestinian Arabs, there is little 
hope of agreement at the conference. The British 
government has asserted that breakdown of the nego- 
tiations will be followed by imposition of a settle. 
ment of its own. Such a settlement might revive the 
cantonization scheme for Palestine considered by the 
Palestine Royal Commission in July 1937, which 
relegated the Jews to an extremely small autono- 
mous area along the coast where immigration would 
be unrestricted. This entity would presumably be 
linked to a federation of Arab states throughout 
which Jews might eventually settle in limited num- 
bers. Neither Jews nor Arabs are likely to welcome 
this highly suppositive plan. Peace remains as distant 


as ever in the Holy Land. Deve H. Posra 





The F.D.A. Bookshelf 


The United States and World Organization, 1920-1933, 
by Denna F. Fleming. New York, Columbia University 
Press, 1938. $4.00 


Valuable study of important world events centering 
around the League of Nations and the United States dur- 
ing a period of strain and crisis. 


The Mediterranean in Politics, by Elizabeth Monroe. New 
York, Oxford University Press, 1939. $2.50 


This chatty survey of the manifestations of nationalism 
and imperialism in the Middle Sea contains valuable back- 
ground material on the trouble areas, present and poten- 
tial, of this vital region. But in her casual discussion of 
the clash between the fascist powers and the democracies, 
the author appears to underestimate the significance of 
the conflict between rival alignments, for purposes of 
power politics, in the Mediterranean area. 


French Indo-China, by Virginia Thompson. New York, 
Macmillan, 1937. $5.00 


A scholarly and informing study of the various native 
cultures of Indo-China, the background and development 
of French administration, and the current political and 
economic problems of this little-known dependency. The 
contemporary importance of this comprehensive volume is 
enhanced by the threat of Japanese expansion into south- 
eastern Asia, with French Indo-China standing first on 
the line of march. 


Foreign Affairs 1919-1937, by E. L. Hasluck. New York, 
Macmillan, 1938. $2.50 
A country-by-country survey of world history since the 
war. Although it is uneven in quality and contains a few 
misstatements, it should prove a useful compendium for 
students of international affairs. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 17, Fesruary 17, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Leste Buett, President; Dororuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHeLes Dgan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Eo 81 








F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








FC 


An | 


——— 
VoL. 
—_—_—_ 


Italy 
the 

noe 
wer 
Ital: 
ing 

mor 
are 

and 
mer 
pect 


and 
Fre: 
the 


Yer 


wit 


. $€C! 





