atical 
Imost 
rines. 
luate, 
elec- 
from 


t, the 
From 
ebru- 
sland 
pular 
were 
death 
stting 
3sina- 
le ne- 
States 
lonia! 
peace 
rela- 
t was 
rer of 
» face 
nalist 
“good 
in in- 
; of a 
| gov- 
r $1,- 


voted 


)pula- 
inde- 
a fair 

The 
ll un- 
) View 
ection 
nomic 
r cent 
losing 
than 
or the 
3 fail- 
xcept 
lism.” 
s for 
t the 
> sup- 
e law 
ration 


SON 


National 
. Editor. 
ar. 


PE PRION DEAE a IG A 8 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


VoL. XV, No. 31 


May 29, 1936 


n> 


THE NAZIFICATION OF DANZIG 
by Mildred S. Wertheimer 


The situation in the Free City of Danzig offers a sig- 
nificant test case of Nazi policy concerning Germans 
outside the Reich. 


June 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, ac the Post 
Office ac New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


yy er, — 
Lorary oi VOngress, 


‘'ashineton, D. C. 


“ee 


TARIFF SEE-SAW 


IN WASHINGTON 


| RIVING steadily toward completion of the 

eighteen trade agreements for which it had 
opened negotiations, the Roosevelt administration 
in the last three months has signed pacts with 
Nicaragua, Guatemala, France and Finland. The 
effect of Secretary Hull’s vigorous campaign for 
lower trade barriers has been partially offset, 
however, by the economic nationalism exhibited 
in recent tariff increases designed to bar Japanese 
textiles. 

The conclusion of agreements with France, on 
May 6, and Finland, on May 13, 1936, bring the 
roster of completed trade pacts to fourteen. The 
French agreement ranks among the most impor- 
tant of our trade arrangements and is our first 
comprehensive commercial treaty with France in 
overacentury. Its conclusion marks the culmina- 
tion of long and difficult negotiations directed at 
reconciling two widely different commercial sys- 
tems. In recent years American exports to 
France have suffered more from the application 
of discriminatory quotas than from high or in- 
equitable tariff rates, while French exports have 
been severely affected by heavy American duties. 
The chief concessions made by the United States, 
therefore, consist of reduced tariffs, while France, 
in return, substantially ends anti-American dis- 
crimination in quotas and customs duties. 

France’s concessions affect American exports 
valued at about $24,500,000 in 1935. Among the 
articles on which French quotas are enlarged, 
tariffs reduced, or existing rates guaranteed are 
passenger automobiles and chassis, certain fresh 
and dried fruits, machinery, fish and crustacea, 
rubber manufactures, silk hosiery, lumber, and 
certain paper products, textiles and chemicals. 
In addition, certain assurances are given with 
regard to purchases of American leaf tobacco, 
equitable treatment of American motion picture 
films, and reduction of an “import turnover tax” 
on American products to the rate applied on do- 
mestic sales of similar French products. The 


United States, for its part, grants concessions on 
French imports worth $19,070,000 in 1935. The 
most impcrtant duty reductions are those on per- 
fumes, vanilla beans, tinsel products, Roquefort 
cheese, brandy, champagne, still wines and ver- 
muth, broadsilks, lace and cigarette paper. On 
the whole duties are altered on limited varieties 
of products which are characteristically French, 
sell for high prices in the American market and 
hence are supplementary to the bulk of domestic 
production. For this reason the French agree- 
ment has aroused practically no protest in Wash- 
ington. 

In the trade agreement with Finland, American 
lard, fruits and vegetables, tires, cotton, and vari- 
ous manufactures receive advantages in return 
for concessions on granite, small cream separa- 
tors, and Finnish wood and cheese products. The 
increasing scope of the Hull trade agreements 
program is illustrated by the fact that more than 
90 per cent of our imports from Finland—chiefly 
newsprint and wood pulp—had already received 
concessions in prior agreements, notably those 
with Sweden and Canada. Finland is now guaran- 
teed these concessions, which it had been enjoying 
under our most-favored-nation policy; and in ad- 
dition certain American rates already reduced in 
earlier pacts have been further lowered in the 
Finnish agreement. By extending the benefits 
of these reductions to all nations which do not 
discriminate against American products, the 
United States demands and receives equivalent 
benefits under trade treaties negotiated between 
foreign nations. 

Observers who had regarded these trade agree- 
ments as evidence that the Roosevelt administra- 
tion wholeheartedly supports liberal interna- 
tional economic policies were startled by the sud- 
den announcement, on May 21, of duty increases 
of 42 per cent on items comprising nine-tenths of 
Japanese cotton cloth imports in 1935. While 
Japanese imports of bleached printcloths were 


about 13 per cent of domestic production in this 
sub-category, imports of all countable cotton 
cloths from Japan during 1935 were only one half 
of one per cent of domestic production. Obviously 
Japanese competition is confined to a small por- 
tion of the American textile industry. This tariff 
increase may have the effect of strengthening the 
administration’s political influence in textile states, 
such as Massachusetts and Rhode Island. At a 
press conference on May 22, President Roosevelt is 
reported to have said that the increase in these 
duties was not inconsistent with the reciprocal 
trade program, since the latter was intended to 
lower tariffs without hurting domestic interests. 


The reciprocal trade program is directed at re- 
ducing trade barriers so that each nation may 
concentrate on production of the type for which 
it is best suited. If this program must give way 
each time a minor domestic interest is injured, 
the prospects for economic cooperation based on 
interchange of efficiently produced goods may be- 
come remote. It remains to be seen with what 
success the United States can urge foreign coun- 
tries, including Japan, to lower barriers against 
its agricultural surplus when it is unwilling to 
dispense with tariff subsidies for relatively in- 
efficient American industries. Moreover, little 
progress can be made in developing international 
trade so long as the United States and other 
countries fail to re-establish political confidence. 


D. H. PorpPper 


CUBAN PRESIDENT INAUGURATED 


With the inauguration on May 20 of Miguel 
Mariano Gémez as Cuba’s sixth constitutional 
President, the series of provisional administra- 
tions which have governed since the fall of 
Machado in August 1933 came to an end. The new 
executive—son of Cuba’s second President—is a 
politician of practical experience, who holds mod- 
erate views on social and economic questions. 


In the array of problems confronting the in- 
coming régime, the most urgent is posed by the 
“Batista dictatorship,” which forced Mendieta and 
Barnet to rule practically as puppet Presidents. 
Batista now commands an army almost twice 
the size of that under Machado. His influence 
has extended octopus-like into Congress and all 
government offices. Within recent months so 
many army opponents have been arrested and then 
“shot while attempting to escape” that the Su- 
preme Court and both houses of Congress have 
demanded that justice be meted out to those guilty 
of ‘acts of bloodshed.” Is Gémez strong enough 
to subordinate the military to civil authority? In 


Page Two 


the past Batista has enjoyed the evident favor of 
United States Ambassador Caffery. Informed 
Cubans assert that G6mez must have firm support 
from Washington if he is successfully to challenge 
army dominance. 

To restore the prestige of the civil arm, Presi- 
dent Gémez may also need to broaden the base of 
his political support. He owes his election to a 
coalition, in which the Liberals outweigh in im- 
portance his own Republicans and the National- 
ists. Dissension over patronage has already 
weakened this alliance, which has only a small 
majority in Congress over the powerful Menocal 
Democrats. The left-wing parties—the Grau 
auténticos, Young Cuba and others—stand at pres- 
ent outside politics. With their leaders in exile, 
their hopes for fundamental reform frustrated, 
they have turned to plots of armed insurrection. 
G6émez’ position would be materially strengthened 
if he could win to some degree the support of 
those groups. He has already announced plans 
for a general amnesty, which would free political 
prisoners and permit the return of exiles. Should 
this step be followed by fair elections for a consti- 
tutional convention with plenary powers, pros- 
pects for political tranquillity would be brighter. 
Such a development would facilitate the reopen- 
ing of the National University and the island’s 
high schools which have been closed since Feb- 
ruary 1935. 

Despite general economic improvement in the 
island, the new administration inherits a budget 
deficit approaching $10,000,000. This is attrib- 
uted in part to the demands of the army, which 
is reported to consume a third of the total budget 
of $65,000,000. Another economic problem is that 
of the republic’s credit abroad. If credit is to be 
restored, President Gémez must face resumption 
of payments on $60,000,000 of public works loans, 
defaulted by previous administrations. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


Peace or War: The American Struggle, 1626-1936, by 
Merle Curti. New York, W. W. Norton, 1936. $3.00 
A useful and interesting history of the American paci- 

fist movement. 

A Constitutional History of the United States, by Andrew 
C. McLaughlin. New York, Appleton-Century, 1935. 
$5.00 
Useful and pertinent in the present pother about the 

Constitution. 


Canadian-American Industry, by Herbert Marshall, Frank 
A. Southard, Jr., and Kenneth W. Taylor. New Haven, 
Yale University Press; Toronto, Ryerson Press, 1936. 

.00 
= first detailed survey of American investments in 

Canada, and the initial volume in a series on Canadian- 

American relations. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 31, May 29, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasurg Bumit, President; EstHar G. Ocpun, Secretary; Vera MIicHELRs Dagan, Eéitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


———. 
——__ 


yr of 
‘med 
port 
enge 


resi- 
se of 
to a 

im- 
onal- 
eady 
mal] 
10¢al 
rau 
ores- 
xile, 
ated, 
tion. 
ened 
t of 
ylans 
‘tical 
ould 
nsti- 
oros- 
hter. 
ypen- 
ind’s 
Feb- 


1 the 
idget 
trib- 
thich 
idget 
that 
to be 
otion 
oans, 


ON 


National 


Editor. 


ELECTION TO NATIONAL BOARD 


At the regular meeting of the Board 
Directors of the Foreign Policy 
sociation, Incorporated, held in the 


ty of New York May 20, 1936, Mrs. 


.yard James of New York was elected 
Jirector to fill an unexpired term in 


. Class of 1937. 


NEW BRANCH CHAIRMEN 


Mr. Peter A. Karl has been elected 
irman of the Utica Branch to suc- 
J Mr. Arthur N. Gleason, and Mr. 
rold Chapman Bailey has been 
ted chairman of the Hartford 
nch to succeed Mr. Berkeley Cox. 


MEETINGS IN THE BRANCHES 


Attendance in several branches, 

re figures for the season are now 
e T 

mplete, show a marked rise. The 


total for Minneapolis soared from 


389 to 3,053, while Boston increased 


from 2,841 a year ago to 4,903. Sig- 
nificant changes in the average at- 
tendance per meeting are also to be 
found in the increase over the previous 
year of 67 per cent in Baltimore, 37 
per cent in Philadelphia, 36 per cent 
n Buffalo, 32 per cent in Worcester 
snd 19 per cent in Cincinnati. 


CAMP ON INTERNATIONAL 
RELATIONS 


The F.P.A., together with the New 
srsey Joint Council on International 


Relations, is again sponsoring the 


"amp on International Relations which 
roved so interesting to young people 
ist summer. It will be held for the 


week of August 22 to 29 at Camp 


hawnee in the heart of the Pocono 


Mountains, at Shawnee-on-Delaware, 
Pennsylvania. The general subject of 
the conference will be The United 


tates and the World Crisis, and a 
timulating program of lectures and 
round table discussions will be pleas- 
intly intermingled with sports and 
tunts. All young people between the 
iges of fitteen and twenty-five are 
welcome to attend and we especially 
irge that our student members uid 
sons and daughters of F.P.A. members 
will take advantage of this opportu- 
nity for prolonged discussion on 
nternational problems. Some of our 
branches may wish to provide one of 
their student members with a scholar- 
ship for the camp. The total expense 
will be $20. As only a limited number 
can be accommodated, reservations 
should be made early. 


F.P.A. NOTES 


RADIO BROADCAST 
June |, 1936—10:30 p.m. E.S.T. 


The Foreign Policy Association and 
the National Broadcasting Company 
are cooperating in a round table dis- 
cussion over WJZ and the Blue Net 
work of the National Broadcasting 
Company on the subject "What Do 
the Dictators Want?" The speakers 
are Mrs. Anne O'Hare McCormick, 
Miss Dorothy Thompson, Princess 
Helga von Loewenstein, and Mrs. 
Vera Micheles Dean. Mr. 


Raymond 
Leslie Buell will preside. 


POPULAR EDUCATION 
DEPARTMENT ACTIVITIES 


The Headline Book Clubs now num- 
ber 160 in twenty-seven states and 
Alaska. The Chautauqua Home Read- 
ing Circles have decided to use the 
first four Headline Books in their study 
course next fall, and have placed an 
order for a minimum of |,000 paper 
copies of each book. The publication 
date of the next Headline Book, Clash 
in the Pacific, is June 21. Two more 
books are promised by September 15 
—(l) Threats to World Peace; (2) 
American Foreign Policy. 


F.P.A. Sponsors Conference 


A Joint Conference on Interna- 
tional Relations was held May 8 and 9 
at the Central Branch of the Y.W.C.A. 
in the city of New York. This confer- 
ence was sponsored by the Foreign 
Policy Association, the Emergency 
Peace Campaign and the New York 
Federation of Churches. It was at- 
tended by representatives of church, 
labor and youth groups, women's clubs 
and cooperatives. The program aimed 
to provide clinical demonstrations of 
new methods for presenting ideas in 
the field of international relations, in- 
cluding the forum technique, discus- 


sion, the radio and visual education. 
The principal speaker at the first eve- 
ning meeting was Mr. James G. 


McDonald. 


F.P.A. Exhibits Available 


Exhibits of Foreign Policy publica- 
tions and study material have been 
arranged for the spring and summer 
conferences and conventions of the 
women's organizations, the Friends In- 
stitutes, the Emergency Peace Cam- 
paign, and others. For the most part a 
standard exhibit is sent, consisting of 


} 


wo posters and a set of Headline 


Books with leaflets for distribution; 


r 
} 


amphlets are sent on consignment 


where facilities for sale are provided. 


F 


PLA. material was on sale at the 


Conference of the Progressive Edu- 
cation Association in Detroit and at 


the Conference 


l 


t 


of the American 
ibrary Association in Richmond, Vir- 
sinia. Both conferences were attended 
y Mr. Goslin. Mrs. Stewart attended 
Education Association 
e in Buffalo, New York, and 
k advantage of this opportunity to 
nfer with some of the branch officers 
ncerning plans for next winter. 


ha Proar ssive 


nfe ren 


Miss Gilfillan, who is doing inten- 
ive work with women’s organizations, 
finds that almost no committee re- 

rts are given by club members with- 
ut frequent reference to the work of 
the F.P.A. research staff and the De- 
partment of Popular Education. 


FROM A 
FOREIGN CORRESPONDENT 


The F.P.A. recently asked a group 
of American correspondents abroad 
who have been receiving FOREIGN 
POLICY REPORTS whether they 
wished to be continued on the mailing 
list. Their replies were uniformly en- 
thusiastic. The most striking of these 
letters said: 

“Everybody in a_ dictatorshi 
country, where there is no wes 
thing as freedom of the press or 
information on world policies, must 
needs be sketchily nlsanal unless 
institutions like yours help to fill us 
in on necessary facts." 


HEADLINE HISTORY CONTEST 


The following are the first prize 
winners in the Headline History Con- 
test which the F.P.A. sponsored in 
Scholastic magazine for high school 
students: 

Class A (cities less than 10,000); 
first prize ($25) Helen Hansen, Laurel 
High School, Laurel, Nebraska. 

Class B (cities from 10,000 to 100,- 
000); first prize ($25) Louise Ann Ben- 
nett, Cheyenne High School, Chey- 
enne, Wyoming. 

Class C (cities over 100,000): first 
prize ($25) Jane Greenwell, High 
School of Commerce, Portland, Ore- 
gon. 

. The judges for the contest were: 
Mr. Walter Millis, New York Herald 
Tribune staff; Dr. Mary Woolley, 
President, Mt. Holyoke College; Pro- 
fessor Carlton Hayes, Columbia Uni- 
versity. 


“erty 


BOOK 


THE U. S. AND NEUTRALITY 


American Neutrality, 1914-1917, by Charles Seymour. 
New Haven, Yale University Press, 1935. $2.00 
An argument that Germany’s submarine policy, rather 

than American war profits, took the United States into 

the war. 

Can We Stay Out of War? by Phillips Bradley. 
York, W. W. Norton, 1936. $2.75 
Favors a system of licensed trade in war necessities and 

an agreement providing for concerted action against an 

aggressor state. 

Can We Be Neutral? by A. W. Dulles and H. F. Arm- 
strong. Published for the Council on Foreign Relations. 
New York, Harper, 1936. $1.50 
Excellent guide to American neutrality policies. 

Neutrality: lis History, Economics and Law. New York, 
Columbia University Press. 

Vol. I. The Origins, by P. C. Jessup and Francis Déak, 
1935. $3.75 


Vol. II. The Napoleonic Period, by W. A. Phillips and 
A. H. Reede, 1936. $3.75 


Vol. III. The World War Period, by Edgar Turlington, 


New 


1936. $3.75 
Vol. IV. Today and Tomorrow, by P. C. Jessup, 1936. 
$2.75 


The most comprehensive discussion of neutrality, ending 
with a plea for the establishment of a League of Neutrals. 


SOVIET UNION 


Marxism and the National and Colonial Question, by 
Joseph Stalin. New York, International Publishers, 
1936. $2.00 
A valuable collection of articles and speeches. 

Handbook of the Soviet Union, compiled by the American- 
Russian Chamber of Commerce. New York, Day, 1936. 
$3.00 
A very useful, up-to-date reference work on economic 

and social developments in the U.S.S.R., containing maps, 

charts and a wealth of statistical material. 

Soviet Union, 1935: A Symposium by Soviet Leaders. New 
York, International Publishers, 1936. $1.25 
A collection of outstanding speeches delivered in 1935 by 

leading Soviet officials, including Stalin and Molotov, which 

cover various aspects of the country’s economic and social 
development, as well as foreign policy and foreign trade. 


LATIN AMERICA 


Brazil, A Study of Economic Types, by J. F. Normano. 
Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina Press, 1935. 
$3.00 
A topical treatment of Brazilian economic history, val- 

uable in assessing the significance of present-day devel- 

opments. 

The Mexican Claims Commissions, 19238-1984, by A. H. 
Feller. New York, Macmillan, 1935. $7.00 
A scholarly investigation of a little explored field. 

Cuba and the United States, 1900-1935, by Russell H. Fitz- 
gibbon. Menasha, Wisconsin, The Collegiate Press, 1935. 
A factual review of political and economic relations. 

Black Democracy, by H. P. Davis. New York, Dodge, 
1936. $2.50 
A new edition brings up to date the best general ac- 

count of Haiti’s dramatic history. 

Religion in the Republic of Mexico, by G. Baez Camargo 
and Kenneth G. Grubb. New York, World Dominion 
Press, 1935. $2.00 


A brief survey, centering on the growth and present 
status of the Protestant movement in Mexico. 


NOTES 


FAR EAST 


Japan Must Fight Britain, by Lieut.-Commander Tota 
Ishimaru. New York, Telegraph Press, 1936. $3.00 
A Japanese naval officer argues that the most rewarding 

field of expansion lies in the southeastern Pacific, necessi- 

tating a war with Britain. 


The Problem of the Far East, by Sobei Mogi and H. Vere 
Redman. Philadelphia, J. B. Lippincott, 1935. $2.00 
The chapters on the functioning of Japan’s political in- 

stitutions constitute a notable contribution. 

Eastern Industrialization and its Effect on the West, by 
G. E. Hubbard. New York, Oxford University Press, 
1935. $7.00 
An excellent detailed study of industrialization in Japan, 

China and India, with special reference to the effects on 

Great Britain. 

Togo and the Rise of Japanese Sea Power, by Edwin A. 
Falk. New York, Longmans Green, 1936. $4.00 
Fascinating biographical study of Togo, combined with 

an expert analysis of the naval aspects of Japan’s first two 

wars with China and Russia. 

When Japan Goes to War, by E. Yohan and O. Tanin. New 
York, Vanguard Press, 1936. $3.00 
An attempt to determine Japan’s ability to withstand the 

strain of a major war through an analysis of Japanese 

industrial and financial strength. 

Diplomatic Commentaries, by Viscount Kikujiro Ishii. 
Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1936. $3.25 
An English translation by William R. Langdon of the 

mature reflections of one of Japan’s senior diplomats. 


EUROPE 


The Eve of 1914, by Theodor Wolff. New York, Knopf, 
1936. $4.50 
A brilliant, penetrating analysis of pre-war European 
diplomacy by the former editor-in-chief of the Berliner 
Tageblatt. Indispensable for an understanding of present- 
day developments in Europe. 
Sawdust Caesar, by George Seldes. 
1935. $3.00 
Blistering indictment of Mussolini by a _ well-known 
journalist. Copious quotations from Il Duce’s writings, 
but little attempt at documentation. 
The British Year Book of International Law, 1935. New 
York, Oxford University Press, 1935. $6.00 
The sixteenth issue of this excellent annual compendium 
of articles on international law. 
Government in the Third Reich, by Fritz Morstein Marx. 
New York, McGraw-Hill, 1936. $1.50 
A valuable analysis of the process of government in 
Nazi Germany. 
That Blue Danube, by J. D. E. Evans. 
1935. 7/6. 
A useful study of the Succession States, including the 
distribution and treatment of minorities, and the political, 
social and economic systems in these new states. 


ECONOMIC 


New York, Harper, 


London, Archer, 


_ Our Silver Debacle, by Ray B. Westerfield. New York, 


Ronald Press, 1936. $2.50 

A critical summary of the American silver purchase 
policy and its domestic and international effects. 
Cartel Problems, by Karl Pribram. Washington, Brook- 

ings, 1935. $2.50 

A penetrating analysis of a modern form of industrial 
organization. 
100% Money, by Irving Fisher. 

$2.50 

Professor Fisher’s plan to substitute government-issued 
currency for “check-book” money seems impractical and 
exaggerates the importance of money as a determining 
factor in our economic life. 


New York, Adelphi, 1935. 


- 


OL 


| 


