ee 7 


Can take 

through 
the same 
n the de. 
he inter. 
isiness in 
m of the 
ified the 
sting on 
e agree. 
st manv- 
tablishes 
tion that 
members 
assumed 
controls, 
t to Lon. 
ld mini- 
ession of 
to select 
Moscow 
> for the 
wants it 
end, the 
Iran and 
rotest at 
the first 
hat they 
baijan in 
“he Gen- 
hly if it 
JNO and 
| be held 


the first 
a special 
the great 


>). When | 


conversa- 
at in the 
- interna- 
U.S.S.R. 
the Gen- 
bassador 
- Russian 
ow meet- 
/ishinsky 
erate, for 
sky many 
1 foreign 
SOLLES 


FEB 4 =: 1946 
* Genera) Library Entered as 2nd class matter 
1918— - 
d é( VOrsiteyy ne 
xy —1946 eee. 7 Of Michtean 
J Se Qn Arb, , 
we. rbor, Michigan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 15 


JANUARY 25, 1946 


MESSAGE SHOWS TRUMAN'S LACK OF LEADERSHIP IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


iy his message to Congress on the state of the 
union, delivered on January 21, President Tru- 
man took legitimate pride in reviewing this coun- 
try's principal achievements in international affairs 
since he assumed office last April. At the same time 
he pointed out some of the tasks which remain to be 
done if the undertakings accepted by the United 
States at a series of international conferences are to 
be fulfilled. The American nation, the President de- 
clared, has always been a land of great opportunities. 
Now it must become “a land of great responsibilities 
to all the people of all the world.” Nor shall we 
measure up to our responsibilities by “the simple 
return to ‘normalcy’ that was tried after the last 
war.” The United Nations Organization represents 
"a minimum essential beginning’’; it ‘must be de- 
veloped rapidly and steadily.” 

TOWARD CIVILIAN CONTROL OF GER- 
MANY. So far as detailed plans for the future are 
concerned, the President added little to the twelve- 
poitit program he had announced on Navy Day, 
October 27, 1945, in New York, except on two im- 
portant issues: the occupation of Germany, and the 
need for all-round reduction of tariffs and other re- 
strictions on trade. After having declared that ad- 
ministration of the American zone in Germany will 
be transferred “‘at the earliest practicable date” from 
military to civilian personnel, he said: “We are de- 
termined that effective control shall be maintained 
in Germany until we are satisfied that the German 


| people have regained the right to a place of honor 


and respect.”” While this statement is still vague, it 
may help to assuage the fears of European nations 
who, after watching our rapid demobilization in 
Germany, had come to the conclusion that the United 
States was planning to withdraw from the continent 
as soon as possible. At the same time, there is as yet 


no indication that a civilian administration has been 
organized in Washington. 

The President did not take the risk of arousing 
opposition in Congress by directly referring to the 
need for tariff adjustments by the United States. But 
he said that the credit the United States plans to ex- 
tend to Britain would be sufficiently justified by the 
fact that it permits the British to avoid discrimina- 
tory trade arrangements; and added: “The view of 
this government is that, in the longer run, our eco- 
nomic prosperity and the prosperity of the whole 
world are best served by the elimination of artificial 
barriers to international trade, whether in the form 
of unreasonable tariffs or tariff preferences or com- 
mercial quotas or embargoes or the restrictive prac- 
tices of cartels.” 

NEED FOR FORCES ABROAD EXPLAINED. 
On the hotly debated question of demobilization, the 
President belatedly explained the connection be- 
tween this country’s commitments to occupy, disarm, 
and administer occupied territories and the need for 
armed forces adequate to perform these tasks. He did 
not tackle the issue of whether or not the country 
will have to consider adopting compulsory military 
service. But he agreed with the estimate of the War 
and Navy Departments that by 1947 we shall still 
need a strength of about two million men, including 
officers, and said that if the campaign for volunteers 
does not produce that number, it will be necessary, 
by additional legislation, to extend the Selective 
Service Act beyond May 16, when the existing law 
expires. He pointed out, moreover, that action along 
this line should not be postponed beyond March, “in 
order to avoid uncertainty and disruption.” 

That considerable progress has been made by this 
country during the past eight months in clarifying 
the scope of its international obligations is a matter 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


a Page Two —= | —— 
of record. The real tests of our willingness to partici-- | way minimizing voter participation in the making of | tion. In t 
pate in international organization on a permanent foreign policy, two important points must be borne | jent spo 
basis, however, lie ahead. Some of these, like the in mind. Political leaders, and this means the exegy. | seither b 
preparation of peace treaties in Europe, the Presi- tive as well as Congress, cannot shuffle off their | she comp 
dent mentioned. Others he refrained from mention- responsibilities on to the voters. They must have the | eship 
ing, notably the policy we shall adopt toward the courage to submit their convictions and proposals ty | shought 
bases we claim in the Pacific, both Japanese-owned public scrutiny, criticism and discussion, instead of | experts ¢ 
and Japanese mandates; the extent to which we shall taking the easiest way out, as has been done too | peen bet 
be prepared to supplement our emotional concern often in recent months, when most officials, whether | nferen 
about Palestine with more liberal provisions for im- elected or appointed, have thought more about the | qucial ir 
| migration from Europe; the vexed question of inter- coming 1946 elections than about the welfare of | Althoug 
| vention versus non-intervention in Argentina, closely either the nation or the world. Second, while it is} |gter_ iss 
. linked with the decline in our relations with several useful to make our views known to our Congress. | ments, i 
c) other countries of Latin America, now that the ur- men, voters cannot hope to obtain constructive action | ganounc 
: gency for giving thern wartime economic aid has from those Congressmen who owe their election to} The FP 
Pr passed; the use of atomic energy for constructive the very fact that they had originally opposed such | trol” an 
e peacetime purposes, as distinguished from control of action. The time for the voters to bring pressure for | tended | 
, the atomic bomb; the form that civilian administra- intelligent Congressional decisions is not when Con- | all capt 
tion will take in Germany and Japan; and the extent gressmen are already in office, or even when they are } under tl 
to which the United States will be able to maintain running for office, but long before that when the | sate cer 
a delicate balance in the Near and Middle East be- machines of both principal political parties are en. | trust by 
tween Britain and Russia. On several of these issues, gaged in making nominations for primaries. to have 
as well as on the problem of tariff adjustments, al- The worst thing that could befall American de. | powers 
ready mentioned, opposition can be expected both in mocracy would be for the people to lose confidence | The 
and out of Congress. in the judgment and conscience of political leaders. | Fulbrig 
THE PUBLIC AND FOREIGN POLICY. In That is the way that democracy has been brought | Senator 
his radio address of January 3 President Truman, low in other countries. Brilliance is not always at- | and Re’ 
discussing domestic legislation, had appealed to tainable. But honest attempts to discuss international | land ex 
the voters to put pressure on their Congress- problems in the light of the interests of the nation | form o 
men for passage of a number of important con- as a whole, and not of narrow local or sectional pre- | “very t 
troversial measures. He may make a similar appeal judices, can and should be expected, both at the | of thes: 
when controversial international projects come up White House and on Capitol Hill. before 
for Congressional discussion. But, without in any VERA MICHELES DEAN | Naval 
the Sar 
TRUSTEE SYSTEM NO THREAT TO U.S. INTERESTS IN PACIFIC 
The opening meetings of the United Nations Or- Francisco. More perplexing was the position adopted | | In p 
ganization have brought to light the complexities of by France. Numerous contradictory reports in the | | to be 
the trusteeship problem, which was found so delicate past two weeks indicate division of opinion in Paris | | Poli 
at Dumbarton Oaks that it was referred at that time as to whether the French mandates of Togoland | | Fore 
to the draftsmen of the UNO Charter. When the and Cameroons should be placed under trusteeship. 
question came up for discussion at the San Francisco Foreign Minister Bidault, in his speech to the As 
Conference, sharp divergences of view were com- sembly on January 19, said France was ready to study 
promised only by leaving a number of significant the terms of trusteeship, but at the first business 
loopholes in the Charter’s trusteeship provisions, and meeting of the trusteeship committee two days later | 
the efforts of the UNO Preparatory Commission to French representative, M. G. Monnerville, is te 
close these loopholes last autumn proved unsuc- ported to have presented a plan to make the man- 
cessful. dates an integral part of the French state. 
Under the circumstances, it is of particular im- TRUMAN'S STATEMENT ON BASES. In view 
portance that Great Britain, Belgium, New Zealand of the initiative previously taken by the United States 
and Australia have assumed leadership in announc- in developing the trusteeship role of the United Na | | *™ 
ing on January 17 their intentions to place under tions, President Truman’s press conference statement 
UNO trusteeship the mandates of Tanganyika, Cam- on January 15, that this country intends to place | ___ 
eroons, Togoland and Ruanda-Urundi in Africa, and under trusteeship Japanese islands it has seized, | 2250 
Samoa, New Guinea and Nauru in the Pacific sounded inadequate. Secretary of State Byrnes, | Headqua 
islands. South Africa’s failure to follow this lead prompted by growing criticism of American silence, | “"*< 
was not surprising, in view of the stand taken by is reported to have cabled the President from Lon- 
General Smuts in 1919 and reiterated by him at San don requesting him to announce this country’s post } <i! 


——= 
aking of 
be borne 
1€ exeq. 
off theig 
have the 
posals to 
stead of 
lone too 
whether 
bout the 
Ifare of 
hile it is 
On gress. 
ve action 
ection to 
sed such 
ssure for 
1en Con- 
they are 
rhen the 
; are en 


ican de. 
n fidence 
leaders. 
brought 
ways at- 
national 
e nation 
nal pre- 
1 at the 


DEAN 


’ 


adopted 
; in the 


in Paris } 


ogoland 
steeship. 
the As- 
to study 
business 


ays later | 


, 1s fe 
he man- 


In view 
d States 


ted Na- | 


atement 
o place 
seized, 
Byrnes, 
silence, 
m Lon- 


rs post- 


—_—_—— 
— 


ion. In his news conference, consequently, the Pres- 
ident spoke on the subject, and it is not surprising if 
geither he nor the reporters present fully discussed 
the complexities and subtleties of the Charter’s trus- 
«eship provisions. Considerable confusion — of 
thought resulted. A carefully prepared statement by 

rts of the State Department would clearly have 
been better than the off-hand informality of a news 
conference for an announcement on a matter of such 
qucial importance as the future of the Pacific islands. 
Although State Department officials in Washington 
later issued explanations of the President’s com- 
ments, it is reported that they were surprised by his 
announcement. 

The President spoke interchangeably of sole “‘con- 
tol” and sole “trusteeship,” but he apparently in- 
tended to say that the United States (1) would put 
all captured Japanese mandates and other islands 
under the trusteeship system; (2) would later desig- 
nate certain “‘strategic’’ islands to be administered in 
trust by the United States; and (3) would be willing 
to have the United Nations Organization name the 

wers to administer the remaining islands. 

The President’s statement, defended by Senator 
Fulbright, was vigorously condemned by a group of 
Senators including Democrats Byrd and Eastland, 
and Republicans Tobey and Capehart. Senator East- 
land expressed the belief that a treaty conceding any 
form of UNO control over the islands would face 
“very tough sledding” in the Senate. The objections 
of these four opponents of the plan had been voiced 
before when, as a special subcommittee of the Senate 
Naval Affairs Committee, they had paid a visit to 
the San Francisco Conference. 


In preparation for the European Peace Conference, 
to be held not later than May 1, 1946, the Foreign 
Policy Association is publishing the following 
Foreign Policy Reports: 
THE FUTURE OF ITALY’S COLONIES 
by Vernon McKay 


U.S. POLICY IN EUROPE 
by Vera M. Dean 


AXIS SATELLITES IN EASTERN EUROPE 
by Cyril E. Black 


THE PROBLEM OF TRIESTE 
by C. Grove Haines 


THE ATOMIC BOMB AND WORLD 
ORGANIZATION 
by Harold C. Urey 


25c each 


ForEIGN Po.icy REPoRTS are published on the 1st and 15th 
of each month. 
Subscription, $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


Page Three 


IS U.S. SECURITY ENDANGERED? The re- 
marks of the Senators have obscured the fact that 
the loopholes in the Charter were designed to pro- 
tect just such special interests as we have in the Pa- 
cific islands. It is true that we are not legally bound 
to place any territory under trusteeship, but our 
moral obligation is difficult to deny, and it was Pres- 
ident Roosevelt’s intention to fulfill that obligation. 
If the United States does take this step, the territories 
must be placed under trusteeship by a special agree- 
ment among the "states directly concerned.” This 
phrase in the Charter, which has not been as yet de- 
fined, has already aroused debate. However, irrespec- 
tive of who the “‘states directly concerned” are even- 
tually determined to be, the significant fact is that 
the United States is completely free to specify, for 
example, that the nature and extent of fortifications 
in “strategic” islands in which this country is sole 
trustee must at all time be a matter purely for United 
States decision. The Security Council, according to 
the Charter, can only approve or disapprove such a 
special agreement. If it disapproves the agreement, 
the United States is still free to annex the islands 
outright; if it approves the agreement, it is bound 
not to interfere at any time with the nature and 
extent of our fortifications. If we insist on such 
conditions, however, we must be prepared to ex- 
tend the same rights to other powers in the “stra- 
tegic” areas under their trusteeship. 

Senator Byrd has objected that, if the Security 
Council should reject our special agreement, we 
would be in the unfortunate position of having to 
take the islands arbitrarily “in defiance of UNO dis- 
approval.” Therefore, he maintains, we should keep 
the islands as our ‘exclusive property’’ and not even 
“submit the question.” This logic is doubly ques- 
tionable for it assumes that the Security Council 
would veto the agreement, and implies that we will 
avoid UNO disapproval if we withhold the islands 
from trusteeship. On the contrary, if Senator Byrd's 
proposal is adopted we not only would be taking a 
position comparable to that of France and South 
Africa, but would set a dangerous precedent for 
other powers by repudiating our opposition to terri- 
torial aggrandizement as a war aim. Our legitimate 
concern in the future of islands won at such a ter- 
rible cost in lives and money gives us good reason 
for careful deliberation, but the small potential dis- 
advantage of trusteeship does not seem sufficient to 
outweigh the advantages of the fullest possible con- 
formity with the spirit as well as the letter of the 
United Nations Charter. VERNON McKay 


Ss 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 15, JaNuary 25, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incerporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dornoruy F. Lunt, Secretary; Vma Micuzizs Dan, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
} me month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dellars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News L ettec 


POLITICS OUTWEIGHS EXPERIENCE IN TOP U.S. APPOINTMENTS ABROAD 


The United States has long suffered in its interna- 
tional relations from the presidential custom of 
choosing ambassadors and ministers from among re- 
tired politicians who are thought to deserve some 
sort of job, wealthy contributors of money to the 
political party of the President, and office-holders 
who can be quietly replaced only by transfer to a 
more dignified position. Apparently the Administra- 
tion intends to carry on this tradition in its appoint- 
ments to the United Nations Organization. 

RECENT NOMINATIONS FOR UNO. Among 
the alternate delegates President Truman nominated 
to represent the United States at the first meeting of 
the General Assembly in London were included 
two elderly men with no experience in international 
affairs—Frank Walker, former chairman of the 
Democratic National Committee, and John G. Town- 
send, Republican Senator from Delaware from 1929 
to 1941. The United States committee on nomina- 
tions for the judges of the International Court of 
Justice of the United Nations on January 16 sub- 
mitted the name of Green Haywood Hackworth, 
Legal Adviser to the State Department, as its candi- 
date from the United States. His work has dealt for 
thirty years with narrow legalistic routine that has 
made it impossible for him to develop the breadth 
of views and imagination which the new court will 
require of its judges. 

The number of capable officials handling foreign 
affairs for the United States outside the bounds of 
the United Nations Organization remains relatively 
small. No satisfactory basis for the selection of am- 
bassadors has yet been established. Some, like Rich- 
ard C. Patterson, Jr., Ambassador to Yugoslavia, 
have apparently been chosen because their lack of 
knowledge about the issues at stake in the countries 
to which they are assigned will enable them, the Pres- 
ident hopes, to reach disinterested decisions concern- 
ing the comparative strength of rival political fac- 
tions. The United States has a few ambassadors who 
have served as chiefs of missions in so many posts 
that they might be considered professional envoys, 
like Laurence A. Steinhardt, once a lawyer, who has 
been Minister to Sweden and Ambassador to Peru, 
Russia, Turkey, and now Czechoslovakia. Such ap- 
pointments are so rare, however, as to lead to the 
conclusion that experience is seldom a requirement 
for elevation to the highest offices dealing with for- 
eign affairs. In April 1945 President Truman chose 
as the United States Commissioner on Reparations, 


with the rank of ambassador, Edwin W. Pauley, who 
was unfamiliar with international problems, but had 
been treasurer of the Democratic National Committee 
Many positions of the first importance in the cop. 
duct of United States foreign policy will shortly be 
vacant. One of the six assistant secretaryships in the 
State Department has been unfilled for three months, 
and James Clement Dunn, a career diplomat since 
1919, is expected soon to resign as Assistant Sec. 
retary of State for European, Far Eastern, Near 
Eastern and African Affairs. John G. Winant in. 
tends to resign from his post as Ambassador to 
Britain, and W. Averell Harriman would like to 
retire as Ambassador to the U.S.S.R. When Gen. 
eral George C. Marshall has completed his delicate 
assignment as special envoy in China, Mr. Truman 
will have to find a permanent ambassador to repre. 
sent him in that troubled and unstable country. The 
signing of a peace treaty with Italy later in the year 
will probably be followed by the withdrawal of 
Alexander C. Kirk as Ambassador to Italy. If the 
United States should modify its policy toward Spain, 
or if the Spanish situation should change, a successor 
for Norman Armour, who has returned to the United 
States from his embassy in Madrid, will have to 
be appointed. This country now is indicating its dis- 
approval of the government of General Franco by 
leaving the ambassadorship vacant. 
IMPROVEMENT IN RANKS NEEDED. The 
fact that persons of first-rank ability occupy only a 
relatively small number of the topmost foreign policy 
posts adds to the need for attracting able men and 
women to the Foreign Service and State Department. 
Last year, the Foreign Service prepared a confidential 
report for the Secretary of State, criticizing its own 
work and advocating an increase in the size of the 
service to meet the demands of our post-war foreign 
policy, an increase in the pay of ambassadors, and an 
increase in the allowances granted diplomats above 
their pay. The new federal budget which President 
Truman submitted to Congress on January 21 makes 
no allowances for such efforts to recruit the best 
young persons in the country for lifetime work in for- 
eign affairs. The appropriations for the Foreign Serv- 
ice in the current fiscal year amount to $61,438,800, 
but the budget proposes a reduction to $53,177,300 
for the next fiscal year. At the same time, the budget 
proposes a slight increase in the expenditure of the 
State Department as a whole from $90,139,314 to 
$91,705,100. BLaiR BOLLES 


brous 
osten 
port 
move 
cupie 
Irani 
deep. 
cerni 
rich 
midc 
that 
tion 
and 
try { 
thro 
over 


