


7 ww s 


vegies 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











‘ AF; g i349 





You. XIX, No. 24 Apri 5, 1940 





For an appraisal of the position of American shipping 
in the present European conflict, as compared with 
1914, read: 


THE WAR AND AMERICAN SHIPPING 
by John C. deWilde 


25¢ 


April 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


Dr. William W. Bishop 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











ALLIED BLOCKADE GAINS MOMENTUM 





— the details of the Anglo-French Supreme 
War Council meeting in London on March 28 
were withheld pending the reassembling of the 
French and British Parliaments on April 2, the 
main lines of the policy formulated at that meeting 
have already been revealed. The Allies apparently 
decided not only to cement the political, economic, 
financial and colonial ties they have been developing 
since the outbreak of war, but also to prosecute the 
wat with greater vigor, as demanded by public 
opinion in both countries. At the same time, they 
sem to have agreed that military adventures in- 
volving great loss of life should be avoided, and 
that instead every effort should be made to plug 
leaks in the Allied blockade. Rigid enforcement of 
the blockade inevitably creates the possibility of 
dashes between the Allies and neutral or “‘non- 
belligerent’ countries, as well as the prospect— 
not unwelcome to France and Britain—that Ger- 


' many will punish neutrals which acquiesce in Allied 


interference with shipments to the Reich. 

WILL SCANDINAVIA BECOME A THEATRE 
OF WAR? Among the principal commodities that 
the Allies are determined to deny Germany are iron 
ore and oil. Of Germany's total iron ore imports 
in 1938, estimated at 24,000,000 tons, nearly 11,- 
000,000 tons came from Sweden. Of these, 6,500,000 
tons were shipped through Norway's warm-water 
port of Narvik, over 3,000,000 from the Swedish 
port of Lulea on the Gulf of Bothnia, ice-bound dur- 
ing the winter months, and the balance from other 
Baltic and Bothnian ports. By establishing a close 
naval watch over Norway's territorial waters, the 
Allies could conceivably stop all iron ore shipments 
through Narvik, although not without infringing on 
Norwegian neutrality. This they are prepared to 
do, as Mr. Churchill indicated in his radio speech 
of March 30, when he said that “there could be no 
justice if in a moral struggle the aggressor tramples 





down every sentiment of humanity, and if those who 
resist him remain entangled in the tatters of violated 
legal conventions.” 

But even if the Allies succeed in blockading 
Narvik—and thus perhaps subjecting Norway to 
German retaliation—they are still faced with the 
possibility that, with the coming of spring, Germany 
may afrange to receive all its ore imports through 
Baltic or Bothnian ports. To cut off these shipments, 
the Allies would have to carry the war against 
Germany into the Baltic, preferably from bases in 
the Scandinavian countries. This prospect continues 
to alarm Sweden and Norway. In his speech to the 
Supreme Soviet on March 29, Premier and Foreign 
Commissar Molotov expressed a desire for friend- 
ship with the Scandinavian countries, but warned 
them that the military defense pact discussed by 
Norway, Sweden and Finland would be contrary to 
the Moscow peace treaty, and would be regarded 
by the Kremlin as an unfriendly act. It is reported 
that Soviet opposition has already caused Sweden to 
abandon plans for such a pact. 

ALLIED DRIVE IN THE BALKANS. An even 
more important leak in the Allied blockade is repre- 
sented by overland shipments of foodstuffs and raw 
materials from the Balkan countries, and prospec- 
tive shipments of Soviet products, principally oil, 
through the Black Sea and up the Danube, traffic 
on which has been resumed after an unusually hard 
winter. Here the Allies contemplate the use of two 
methods: first, they plan to purchase all available 
products over and above the minimum needed for 
local consumption; and second, they are preparing 
for possible military operations either in the Balkans 
or the Near East. The first method has the immedi- 
ate advantage, from the point of view of the Balkan 
countries, of reducing their dependence on Ger- 
many. In the long run, however, these countries 
must face the fact that, unless France and Britain 








% University of Michigan Libre ql 


| 





a eed 


et med teat ata ene dat 


i 








drastically alter their economic structure, they can- 
not provide permanent markets for Balkan products; 
and that Germany, geographically closer to them 
than France and Britain, is in a position to penalize 
them for any favoritism toward the Western powers. 
Should the Balkan countries yield to German 
pressure for more, and still more, of their exports, 
the Allies may consider the use of force. So far as 
can be determined from conflicting reports, the 
British are less eager than the French to develop a 
theatre of war in the Balkans and the Near East, 
where they might have to face both Italian opposi- 
tion and Turkish reluctance to engage in an expedi- 
tion that might lead to war with Russia. Here, as in 
Scandinavia, the course of events may be profoundly 
affected by Moscow’s action or inaction. In his s 
of March 29 Molotov specifically referred to the 
absence of a non-aggression pact between Russia 
and Rumania (although such a pact did not prevent 
the Russo-Finnish war), and said this was due to 
the unsettled dispute over Bessarabia, seized by 
Rumania in 1918. He added, however, that Mos- 
cow “has never raised the question of recovering 
Bessarabia by military means.” Should Russia at- 
tempt to seize Bessarabia, which at the moment 
seems unlikely, it would give the Allies a legitimate 
reason to intervene in Rumania, whose independence 
Britain guaranteed in April 1939. Moreover, Soviet 
intervention in the Balkans would be contrary to the 
interests of Germany and Italy, both of which desire 
preservation of the status quo in this region for the 
duration of the war. As a matter of fact, reports 
fostered by German sources after the Brennero con- 
ference of March 18 regarding the impending crea- 
tion of a German-Soviet-Italian bloc have proved 
premature. And Molotov went out of his way on 


JAPAN SETS UP 

After months of hesitation on the part of Tokyo, 
the new “Chinese national government’ under 
Wang Ching-wei was finally inaugurated at Nanking 
on March 30. The military stalemate in China, em- 
phasizing Japan’s inability to obtain a decisive vic- 
tory, augurs ill for the success of Wang’s govern- 
ment. Its unrepresentative character, and its de- 
pendence on Japanese bayonets for support, is even 
more glaring than in the case of Manchoukuo. 
It is evident, however, that Japan hopes to use the 
new régime as a bargaining counter both with 
Chungking and foreign powers. 

THE WANG CHING-WEI REGIME. Despite 
the fanfare attending Wang Ching-wei’s inaugura- 
tion, certain features of the new government suggest 
that its Japanese sponsors recognize its tentative and 
provisional character. The northern provinces of 
Hopei, Shansi and Shantung have been detached 
from Nanking’s control and given a semi-inde- 


Page Two 


NANKING REGIME 








—— 


March 29 to spike these reports by referring to th 
military assistance Italy had given Finland. 


TO FIGHT OR NOT TO FIGHT RUSSIA) 
The crucial question confronting the Allies is how j 
stop leaks in their blockade of Germany withoy 
becoming involved in war with the principal ney. 
trals and “non-belligerents,” notably the Sovig 
Union. The request of the French government 
March 18 for the recall of M. Suritz, Soviet Ap. 
bassador in Paris, was a concession to the demand 
of Rightist elements for a showdown with Moscoy 
rather than an indication of the direction of Allied 
policy. France, which until the outbreak of war had 
been more favorable than Britain to the U.SSR, 
hoping to find in Moscow a bulwark against Ge. 
many’s eastward expansion, is now more anxious 
than Britain to come to grips with Russia, which i 
regards as Hitler's accomplice and the instigator 6f 
defeatist Communist propaganda. Neither Frang 
nor Britain, however, appears to want war with the 
U.S.S.R. On the contrary, Mr. Churchill said m 
March 30: “It is no part of our policy to seek war 
with Russia.” This statement constituted a direct re 
ply to Molotov’s declaration, on March 29, that 
Russia “must maintain the position of neutrality and 
refrain from participation in the war between the big 
European powers.” Paradoxical as it may seem, noth. 
ing would be so effective in altering Soviet opinion 
regarding the Allies as a show of force by France and 
Britain in prosecuting the war against Germany. Such 
a course might weaken the conviction, firmly held so 
far by the Kremlin, that the French and British gov- 
ernments, while officially denouncing the Nazis, 
were secretly plotting a settlement with Hitler a 
Russia's expense. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


pendent position under a special Political Affair 
Commission. The Inner Mongolian puppet régime, 
dominated by the Kwantung Army, also retains its 
independent status. Instead of a single centralized 


government, there are thus three separate Japanese | 


sponsored régimes in the occupied territories of 
China, aside from Manchoukuo itself. The terms 
on which Wang Ching-wei has been induced to ac 
cept his new position, moreover, have not been re 


vealed, and the Japanese authorities have refrained | 


from extending formal recognition. 

The ten-point program announced by Wang 
Ching-wei specifically includes as one of its objec 
tives the “establishment of a new order in East 
Asia.” A veiled threat is contained in the statement 
that the Nanking government will respect the legiti 
mate rights and interests of “friendly powers.’ This 
threat was made much more explicit in a broadcast 
to Japan by Wang Ching-wei, during which he de 





— 


dared | 
require 
abolitic 
foreign 
foreign 
force t 
Moreo 
new ! 
“frienc 
frictior 
At’ 
mal d 
tion a! 
natura 
show | 
ment < 
has n 
activit 
situati 
AM 
Marct 
ert Le 
tory < 
gathe 
for h 
Societ 
befor 
stron; 
in a’ 
and 
the ; 
prese 
subve 
powe 
aims 
Duri 
basse 
Apri 
4p 
on | 
D 
0 t 
cate 
acte 
expe 
The 
so t 
coul 
COU! 
not 
in , 
on 
Lor 


FOR! 
Head 
Entes 


< 








| 


it 


RBRz2aB7 SRE RS 


tes 


BSFsaeaRsesSrre Qn & BR 


2 2 


zits 


it 


-ast 
de- 








en 
—_ 





dared that Tokyo would assist China “to fulfill the 
requirements of an independent state, such as the 
abolition of extraterritoriality and the rendition of 
foreign concessions.” Japanese officials can now refer 
foreign protests to Nanking, and thus indirectly 
force the powers to deal with it on a de facto basis. 
Moreover, should Italy or other states recognize the 
new régime, discrimination in favor of such 
“friendly” powers would undoubtedly create serious 
friction with states which refuse recognition. 

At Tokyo the Japanese government issued a for- 
mal declaration pledging ‘‘whole-hearted coopera- 
tion and support” to Wang Ching-wei. It is “only 
natural,” the statement asserted, that “Japan should 
show a special concern and desire for the develop- 
ment and utilization of the resources of China. Japan 
has no intention of excluding peaceful economic 
activities of third powers that conform with the new 
situation in East Asia.” 


AMBASSADOR CRAIGIE’S ADDRESS. On 
March 28 the British Ambassador to Japan, Sir Rob- 
ett Leslie Craigie, delivered an unusually concilia- 
tory address on Anglo-Japanese relations before a 
gathering of Japanese notables at Tokyo. Choosing 
for his platform a meeting of the Japan-British 
Society, analogous to the America-Japan Society 
before which the American Ambassador gave his 
strong warning in October, Sir Robert Craigie spoke 
in a very different vein from Mr. Grew. Both Japan 
and Britain, he said, “ultimately are striving for 
the same objective, namely, a lasting peace and 
preservation of our institutions from extraneous, 
subversive influences. It is surely not beyond the 
powers of constructive statesmanship to bring the 
aims of their national policies into full harmony.” 
During the course of this address, the British Am- 
bassador announced that he was leaving in mid- 
April for a ten weeks’ visit to the United States on 
a “private holiday.” Ambassador Grew will also be 
on leave in the United States during this period. 

Diplomatic circles in London asserted on March 
30 that Ambassador Craigie’s remarks did not indi- 


_ cate any change in Britain’s Far Eastern policy, char- 


acterized as ‘‘friendship with Japan, but not at the 
expense of any other nation, particularly China.” 
The British Ambassador’s statement, however, was 
so timed—and on an issue of such importance this 
could be hardly accidental—as to offer direct en- 
couragement to the Wang Ching-wei régime. It is 
not easy to see how “full harmony” can be achieved 
in Anglo-Japanese relations without an agreement 
on matters affecting China. Neutral observers in 
London were reported to believe that a “Far Eastern 


Page Three 














Munich” was under preparation. In an editorial of 
March 30 entitled “No Deal With Japan,” the 
London News-Chronicle declared: “We do not at 
all like the way British policy is developing toward 
Japan. All signs seem to point the same way, and it 
is the wrong way.” Reference in a London Times 
dispatch from Tokyo to Japan’s “great experiment” 
in China was also singled out for acid comment by 
the News-Chronicle, which warned of the “appall- 
ing’ effect on neutrals, and particularly on the United 
States, of an appeasement policy in the Far East. 
POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES. In a 
forthright statement issued on March 30, Secretary 
Hull reaffirmed the previous attitude of the United 
States on “the situation in the Far East,” as ex- 
pressed “on numerous occasions,” and made full 
reservation of American rights. Establishment of 
Wang Ching-wei’s régime was characterized -as an- 
other step “in a program of one country by armed 
force to impose its will upon a neighboring country 
and to block off a large area of the world from 
normal political and economic relationships with the 
rest of the world.” After referring to American rec- 
ognition of China’s national government in 1928, 
Secretary Hull concluded: ‘“The Government of the 
United States has ample reason for believing that 
that government, with capital now at Chungking, 
has had and still has the allegiance and support of 
the majority of the Chinese people. The Government 
of the United States of course continues to recog- 
nize that government as the Government of China.” 
The clarity and vigor of this statement do not 
alter the fact that establishment of Wang Ching- 
wei's régime by Japan has brought closer the neces- 
sity for a showdown on issues in the Far East. Am- 
bassador Craigie’s conciliatory speech at Tokyo is 
not likely to be followed by immediate British rec- 
ognition of the new Nanking government, but the 
exigencies of the European conflict are pressing 
Britain to reach a modus vivendi of some kind with 
Japan. Unless the United States is prepared to sup- 
port its protests to Tokyo by firmer action, the possi- 
bility of an Anglo-Japanese rapprochement at China’s 
expense, will continue to exist. Today the United 
States is more than ever the main supplier of Japan’s 
imports of war materials. Withdrawal of this sup- 
port is required if Japan is to be placed in a position 
where it can menace neither American—nor British 
—-interests. If, however, the United States is not pre- 
pared to initiate and sustain such a policy, then it 
will have to recognize that Britain may feel impelled 
to pursue a policy of compromise and agreement 
with Japan. T. A. Bisson 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 24, APprit 5, 


1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera Micuetes DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Bis 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Lee oe en RE re Es Oe 


Sata ee ge 


/ Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Apr. 1.—This week-end Washington was weigh- 
ing the probable effect of two events which may 
have a bearing on the course of American policy 
in relation to the war. The first was the return of 
Under-Secretary Sumner Welles, who reported to 
President Roosevelt and Secretary Hull at two long 
White House conferences last Thursday on the re- 
sults of his fact-finding mission to Europe. The sec- 
ond was the publication in Berlin on March 29 of 
a German White Paper containing sixteen docu- 
ments said to have been taken from the archives of 
the Polish Foreign Office and purporting to show the 
part played by American diplomacy in “bringing 
about the war.” 

“SCANT IMMEDIATE PROSPECT.” While the 
details of Mr. Welles’ report continue to be a closely 
guarded secret, little ground for optimism was 
found in the formal statement issued by the Presi- 
dent at his press conference on March 29. Mr. Roose- 
velt observed that the ‘‘personal contacts” and “con- 
versations” made possible by the Welles trip had 
resulted in “a clarification of the relations between 
the United. States and the countries he visited,’ and 
might assist “in certain instances in the development 
of better understanding and more friendly rela- 
tions.” The President, however, found “scant im- 
mediate prospect for the establishment of any just, 
stable and lasting peace in Europe,” although the 
information made available to this government “will 
undoubtedly be of the greatest value when the time 
comes for the establishment of such a peace.” Mr. 
Roosevelt cautioned correspondents against specu- 
lating about future moves, and warned that his own 
words should not be interpreted as a prognostica- 
tion of the future. Beyond this, he declined to com- 
ment; and beyond this, no one in Washington (ex- 
cept Messrs. Hull and Welles) is yet in a position 
to give any “authoritative” account of the results. 

Speculation about the German White Paper, how- 
ever, has not been entirely checked by official denials 
or the Washington reply that its publication repre- 
sented nothing more than Nazi propaganda. The 
alleged documents covered the period from Novem- 
ber 1938 to March 1939, focusing on the German oc- 
cupation of Czechoslovakia and the British pledge to 
defend Poland. They were said to contain reports 
from the Polish Ambassadors in Washington, Paris 
and London quoting opinions expressed by two 
American envoys, William C. Bullitt, Ambassador 


to France, and Joseph P. Kennedy, Ambassador tp 
Great Britain. These opinions, particularly those 
attributed to Mr. Bullitt, were personal expressions 
to the effect that the United States would suppor 
Britain and France in the event of war, and would 
eventually enter the war on the side of the Allies. 
EFFECT OF WHITE PAPER. It is still too soon 
to judge the effect of these charges—and possibly 
further “revelations” which are promised from Ber. 
lin. On Friday, immediately after publication of the 
White Paper, President Roosevelt declared that the 
German statement should be taken with several 
grains of salt. Secretary Hull in a formal statement 
denied that he or any of his associates at the State 
Department had “ever heard of any such conversa. 
tions .. . nor do we give them the slightest 
credence.” Mr. Bullitt and Count Potocki, the Polish 
Ambassador in Washington, declared that the docu. 
ments were obviously designed for propaganda pur 
poses and denied the allegations attributed to them. 
These disclaimers, however, failed to satisfy a 
number of Congressional critics and Washington 
correspondents who have heard similar opinions 
expressed in many after-dinner conversations on 
American foreign policy. The published excerpts, 
moreover, sounded plausible to those who knew the 
personal views of Mr. Bullitt and certain other non- 
career diplomats who have interpreted the Presi 
dent’s views. Thus, while no one questions the truth 
of Secretary Hull’s disclaimer, the suspicion remains 
that some spokesmen for the President have talked 
too freely about “the Administration’s” foreign pol- 
icy. Nevertheless, except for a few impetuous iso 
lationists, Congressional opponents of Americat 
intervention have been wary of using the German 
documents for political purposes. If the object of 
the Nazis was to divide American opinion in ao 
election year, they seem unlikely to succeed. 
Whatever the truth or falsity of these particular 
documents, the timing of the German disclosures 
may have an important bearing on the results of the 
Welles mission. If the Nazis had believed that Mr. 
Welles was bringing back a proposal for mediation 
on terms acceptable to them, they would scarcely 
have chosen this moment to link the United States 
with the “plutocratic’” Western powers which they 
charge with responsibility for provoking the wat. 
The conclusion drawn from this propaganda manev 
ver is that the Nazis are now convinced there is n0 
prospect of a negotiated settlement in the near future. 
W. T. STONE 









Vou. 2 


FOR 
will | 


WA 


——— 


7 H 
m 
on A 
Gern 
Milit 
cisive 
Brita 
Scans 
and 

many 
ship 
Apri 
terri 
orde 
iron 
actic 
weg: 
war! 
com 
neut 
war. 


Ger 








