- Act not 
ariff struc. 
tunity for 
the prac- 
affairs by 
ce, which 
ncial shar. 
nerce, and 
ious coun- 
*s in Obvi- 


Mr. Roose- 
itions well 
litical pol- 
ntries and 
lear. Pres- 
rticipating 
policy to- 
sue in the 
nt and the 
| the Near 
osevelt in 
with King 
same time, 
is in Pales- 
td Europe, 
British and 
ist grapple 
ower. 
; of policy 
ited States 
ars of his 
erned him- 
rs. In 1933 
ric Confer- 
1935 and 
1. But with 
gan to put 


nd prepare | 


rld conflict 
community 
ss in 1939 
1 1941, by 
Lease Act; 
Nations al- 
‘ity of the 
our neigh- 
e. 
BOLLES 


NDS 


on International Organization which opens in San 


| Vyacheslaff M. Molotoff in Washington on April 22, 


30 1945 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


aon 
mY Genera) Lites. 
ié as y 
Un: 
“wt SiS) te » 
¥ Ol “lohts 
, a ath 


— - 
OF, Mio 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIV, No. 28 


—_—_~ 


Apri, 27, 1945 


COMPROMISE ON POLAND SOUGHT AT SAN FRANCISCO 


WASHINGTON, April 23 — Poland is the key to 
success or failure at the United Nations Conference 


accused the Poles of having ‘adopted a hostile atti- 
tude toward the Soviet Union.” 

In the Warsaw régime, in which Edward Osubka- 
Morawski is Prime Minister, the Soviet Union sees 
the sort of government it wants in Poland, and the 
core of the present disagreement among the powers 
lies in the Soviet Union’s concern lest replacement 
of that government might result in the introduction 
of elements unfriendly to Russian interests. This con- 
cern has animated the Soviet Union with respect to 
Poland since the conference in Yalta, at which it was 
announced that President Roosevelt, Prime Minister 
Churchill and Marshal Stalin had agreed to the crea- 
tion of a commission which would bring into being 
a Polish Government of National Unity. 

But the Yalta decision has been fruitless. Britain 
and the United States maintained that its purpose 
was to create a wholly new government in which 
some members of the Warsaw group would partici- 
pate; the Soviet Union held that its purpose was to 
add new members to the existing Warsaw régime. 
The Soviet attitude was fortified by the development 
of doubts about Stanislaw Mikolajczyk, formerly 
Prime Minister in the London government. Britain 
and the United States hoped that the revised régime 
would include him. On February 16 the Soviet paper, 
Red Star, referred to Mikolajczyk in friendly fashion 
as a prospective candidate for membership in the 
new government. But on that same day he wrote in 
London an article urging the inclusion of Galicia 
and Lwow in the future Poland—a proposal which 
was taken as an implied criticism of the Polish terri- 
torial settlement reached at Yalta. As a result, Pravda 
on February 18 listed Mikolajczyk among the “Polish 
reactionaries."” In an effort to improve the pros- 
pects for creation of a compromise government, 
Mikolajczyk on April 18 announced his unequivocal 
approval of the Yalta decision. 


Francisco on April 25. So long as the United States, 
Britain and the Soviet Union disagree over the Polish 
government, they will be unable to agree to cooper- 
ate fully for the maintenance of peace. For that 
reason the arrival of Soviet Foreign Commissar 


for conversations on the Polish question, is an event 
of monumental importance. 


The outlook for agreement was poor when Com- 
missar Molotoff reached Washington, however, and 
early understanding could come only as a result of 
masterful diplomacy. For the issues in the Polish 
question are today exactly what they were a year ago, 
and efforts during the past year to solve the problem 
have failed. The United States and Britain continue 
to recognize the Polish government-in-exile, with 
which Russia broke off relations on April 25, 1943; 
while the Soviet Union recognizes the Polish régime 
in Warsaw. The disagreement on the make-up of the 
Polish government reveals a fundamental difference 
of view among the United States, Britain and Russia 
about Poland’s place in the world. 


SOVIET CONCERN FOR SECURITY. While 
the Poles are a distinct nation, the land they inhabit 
has as much meaning for Soviet security as Cuba, 
Canada, Mexico and the Pacific islands have for 
United States security. Accordingly, the purpose of 
Russian policy is to insure the existence of a Polish 
government that will be ever appreciative of the 
Soviet Union’s interest in international relations, a 
government in other words that will be satisfactory 
to both Poland and Russia. The wording of the note 
by which Molotoff severed relations with the London 
government emphasized this point of view, for it 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


POLAND AT SAN FRANCISCO. Soviet sup- 
port of the Warsaw régime has been repeatedly in- 
dicated since Yalta. In March the Soviet Union asked 
that the Warsaw government be invited to the San 
Francisco Conference. On April 1 Britain and the 
United States refused this request. Boleslaw Bierut, 
president of the Warsaw government, on March 3 
argued thus in behalf of the invitation: ‘Poland is 
not to be among the nations that will debate the 
future of the world. The Polish nation cannot let 
this pass. Our honor is at stake, and the dignity of 
the Polish nation, and this state of affairs must be 
changed as soon as possible.” On April 17 the Soviet 
Union renewed its request for an invitation for 
Warsaw. A day later Britain and the United States 
again refused, on the ground that if Poland were to 
be represented at San Francisco, it should be repre- 
sented by a combined government set up in satisfac- 
tion of the Yalta agreement. On April 21 the Soviet 
Union and the Warsaw government concluded a 
treaty of ‘friendship and mutual assistance.” It was 
signed by Stalin, Osubka-Morawski and Bierut. 

The signing of this treaty does not give the War- 
saw government perpetual status, although any suc- 


—$—_—$—$—$——————— — Page Two 


—e 
————e 


cessor could adopt the treaty as a solemn Polish ob. 
ligation. But there is small likelihood of revision of 
the Soviet attitude unless the United States ang 
Britain can persuade Molotoff that Russia’s interests 
will be completely safeguarded by an expanded goy. 
ernment. A major difficulty in the way of earlier 
agreement among the three powers has been ignor. 
ance of the wishes of the Polish people in the matter, 
Most of the personnel of the two rival governments 
spent a considerable portion of the war outside 
Poland and for that reason lack a full understanding 
of tendencies within the country. As an important 
preliminary to final agreement on the Polish gover. 
ment, the three powers might well appoint a com. 
mission empowered to ascertain the state of opinion 
among Poles who remained in Poland. Otherwise a 
Polish settlement can be made only in a vacuum, or 
simply to satisfy the requirements of non-Polish 

litical interests. What is known about Polish popular 
desires comes primarily from reports issued by the 


two régimes, which cannot have an objective attitude | 


in their estimates of the public opinion on which 
they report. 


BLarR BOLLEs 


GERMAN BRUTALITIES STRESS NEED FOR ACTION ON WAR CRIMES 


EN Route To SAN Francisco. A cold rain is 
beating against the window panes as the train speeds 
through the green Ohio countryside. Fruit trees are in 
tender bloom. But in spite of the throbbing hope of 
an end to war in Europe, this spring of 1945 will 
always be remembered as a sad spring. It is over- 
shadowed by the death of a United Nations leader 
who more than any other man had come to symbolize 
the post-war aspirations of humanity. It is tragically 
darkened by irrefutable testimony from Germany 
that we are fighting not only German soldiers and 
weapons of war, but an evil spirit so cruel and so 
deep-seated that minds untouched by it recoil- even 
now from crediting its manifestations. 

THE UNSEEN DELEGATES. It is absorbing 
to speculate as to the character the San Francisco 
Conference might assume if most of the delegates, 
and the innumerable others who swarm around inter- 
national conferences, were men and women who had 
seen active service on the world’s fighting fronts, had 
struggled against the Nazis in resistance movements, 
or had lived through the horrors of imprisonment in 
Germany. With a few exceptions these men and 
women will not be present at the Conference. Would 
they be troubled, as some of us are, by procedural 
matters, such as the number of votes in the General 
Assembly or the categories of countries to be repre- 
sented on the Security Council? Would they be pri- 
marily concerned with the prestige of their respec- 
tive nations, or would they be angrily determined to 
safeguard the rights of all human beings, irrespective 


of nation, race and creed, against such indignities as 
were inflicted on them by the Nazis? Would they be 
satisfied with the admittedly compromise machinery 
of international cooperation for security proposed at 
Dumbarton Oaks, or would they demand the ac 
ceptance by their countries of much more far-reach- 
ing obligations to check any incipient threat to peace, 
and self-denying commitments to abstain from ac- 
tions conducive to war? 

WE MUST NOT BECOME LIKE NAZIS. Only 
to the extent that the political and civic leaders and 
the diplomats who will be drafting the charter of 
the United Nations represent the views of these un- 
seen delegates, as well as their own, will they be 
building machinery for a world of stark realities, not 
of wishful thinking. The San Francisco Conference, 
it cannot be said too often, is not a peace confer- 
ence. But it cannot be insulated from the problems 
of the peace. And international machinery to prevent 


war, no matter how elaborate, cannot of itself pro | 


tect us against the evil spirit that permeates Ger 
many and Japan like a poisonous miasma unless— 
and this is a fundamental condition—we unremit- 
tingly assert and practice a diametrically opposite 
way of life. The moment we slip, however uncon 
sciously, into some of the practices we denounce on 
the part of our enemies, we diminish ourselves 4s 
human beings. 

The need to maintain, and constantly improve, out 
own standards of how man should deal with man 
raises acute problems at this moment, when a legiti 


——— 


mate de 
the very 
science | 
crimina 
“war cI 
as Hitle 
for the 
that no 
diplom: 
crimina 
of us, e 
to prev 
we adh 
it. If th 
it is ob 
man’s f 
destroy 
not eve 
having 


Whe 
corded 
govern 
chapte: 
which 
ment \ 
mate v 
power 
punctu 
the Ax 
Argen: 
deter 
ing A: 
moves 
fense. 
Minist 
ward 
tine | 
given 
trality 
streng 
other 
hemis 
until ; 
active 
assistz 


comp 
visite 
the S 
It is 


Polish ob. 
revision of 
States and 
'S interests 
anded Zov- 

of earlier 
een ignot- 
the matter, 
»vernments 
‘far Outside 
lerstanding 

important 
ish g£Overn- 
int a com. 
of opinion 
)therwise a 
vacuum, or 
-Polish po- 
ish popular 
ued by the 
ive attitude 
1 on which 


. BOLLES 
RIMES 


dignities as 
ld they be 
> machinery 
proposed at 
ind the ac 
e far-reach- 
at to peace, 
in from ac 


AZIS. Only 
leaders and 
: charter of 
of these un- 
vill they be 
ealities, not 
Conference, 
sace confer- 
1e problems 
y to prevent 
f itself pro- 
neates Get- 
na unless— 
we unremit- 
lly opposite 
ever uncon 
Jenounce on 
ourselves as 


improve, out 
il with man 
hen a legitr 


 —— 


mate desire for revenge may cause us to perpetuate 
the very horrors we would like to avenge. The con- 
science of mankind calls for the punishment of “war 
criminals.’’ Yet we may ask what is our definition of 
“war crimes’? Are von Papen and Krupp as guilty 
as Hitler and Himmler? A strong case could be made 
for the affirmative. But then we would have to say 
that not only the brutalities of the Gestapo, but the 
diplomatic and industrial activities that abet war are 
criminal: in short, that war is a crime. Hitherto most 
of us, except outright pacifists, have allowed the idea 
to prevail that war can somehow be humanized if 
we adhere to some rules and regulations in waging 
it. If this was possibly true in the days of knighthood, 
it is obviously untrue now, when the pressure of a 
man’s finger can release a load of bombs capable of 
destroying hundreds of people the bombardier does 
not even see. All Germans who can be identified as 
having ordered or condoned acts of brutality toward 


Page Three 


their own people and those of conquered countries 
should be eliminated as a matter of military necessity 
—not in courts, for there is no international law in 
existence under which most of them could be brought 
to trial. Beyond this category of indisputable “war 
criminals” we enter a debatable sphere. 


But whatever decision is made about the von 
Papens and Krupps, let us not indulge the illusion 
that by eliminating a group of men who were will- 
ing to work with Hitler (as they had once done 
with the Kaiser), we shall prevent the resurgence of 
militarism in Germany. Many Germans who were 
not Nazis, or Junkers, or diplomats, or industrialists, 
hoped to benefit by Germany's conquests. If they are 
to change their attitude, if they are to be reintegrated 
into Europe, they must learn to hate the crimes that 
were committed in their name. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


U.S. RECOGNITION LEAVES ARGENTINE ISSUES UNRESOLVED 


When, on April 9, the United States formally ac- 
corded diplomatic recognition to the Farrell-Perén 
government of Argentina, it wrote finis to a curious 
chapter in inter-American relations. The manner in 
which the two countries terminated their estrange- 
ment was itself an appropriate ending to the stale- 
mate which had existed since the military group took 
power on February 28, 1944. After many months, 
punctuated by quite undiplomatic strictures against 
the Axis sympathies and totalitarian practices of the 
Argentine régime, the State Department suddenly 
determined to assume an optimistic attitude regard- 
ing Argentina’s declaration of war and the future 
moves of Buenos Aires in support of continental de- 
fense. On the other hand, President Farrell and War 
Minister Perén dramatically shifted their policy to- 
ward the United States. For although these Argen- 
tine leaders had previously claimed they had been 
given no motive for abandoning the traditional neu- 
trality of their country, they declared war on the 
strength of a politely worded invitation from the 
other American countries to adhere to now-familiar 
hemisphere defense measures. The two countries— 
until a few weeks ago so bitterly opposed—are now 
actively engaged in concerting measures of mutual 
assistance against an enemy which no longer has the 
power to attack. 


THE PRICE OF BELLIGERENCY. Some time, 
of course, must elapse before this cordial understand- 
ing can be translated into close diplomatic and com- 
mercial relations. To the end of easing Argentina 
over this awkward period, a United States mission 
compsed of high officials of the State Department 
Visitea Buenos Aires last week—while the flagship of 
the South Atlantic squadron stood by in the harbor. 
It is to be assumed that the Buenos Aires govern- 


ment thoroughly acquainted the mission with its 
pressing production and transport needs. A recent 
Argentine study estimated that country’s import defi- 
cits as amounting to $825 million in iron, steel, coal, 
lumber and rubber, and in machinery, motors and 
building materials. It is true that sizeable shortages 
have accumulated through 1944 and 1945, although 
such deficits are probably not more acute proportion- 
ately than in many other Latin American countries. 
These shortages must continue through the better 
part of 1945, since allocations for the third quarter 
of the year have already been drawn up, and ship- 
ping is scarce. But now that Argentina has become 
one of the “associated nations’ cooperating in the 
war effort, there does not seem to be any reason why 
it should not have access to existing surpluses, to be 
shipped whenever the transportation situation is al- 
leviated. 

In exchange for release of surplus materials, how- 
ever, this country, as a partner to the United Nations 
meat contract, would expect a compensatory increase 
of Argentine beef shipments, which in the first two 
months of 1945 had fallen 50 per cent below the 
amounts sent abroad during the corresponding peti- 
od in 1944, and had recently been virtually suspended 
owing to a strike of meat-packers in protest against 
an attempt to lay off 12,500 workers. Whatever the 
explanations advanced for the local and export 
meat shortage, it cannot be denied that there is 
an ample supply on the Argentine plains which could 
be shipped to Europe for military and civilian use if 
the government, cattlemen and consumer public 
were so inclined. In view of the commercial gains 
that Buenos Aires will now make, this should not be 
too great a concession. 

After the mission’s visit, Argentines were con- 


{ 


AS EST LOTTE 


ersene eo 


: ae 
ES ESET ETE. 


a 


SSS 


———_—_—_—_—_ — 
ES 


fident that another dividend of the recent declaration 
of war would be an invitation to participate in the 
San Francisco Conference. The chain of events which 
began at Mexico City may have given them certain 
grounds for this assumption. But the United States 
would hardly have it in its power to take Argentina 
to San Francisco without the full concurrence of 
Russia. If Argentina were invited to San Francisco, 
too, this would raise anew the question of the partici- 
pation of neutral states which, unlike Argentina, did 
not belatedly align themselves with the United Na- 
tions. These states might claim the right to similar 
representation, on the ground that, while they had 
not complied with the formality of declaring war, 
their treatment of the Allies had variously been more 
benevolent or less obstructive than that of Argentina. 

END OF AN EPISODE? On his arrival at San 
Francisco, Mexican Foreign Minister Ezequiel Padilla 
voiced the wish of Latin Americans that Argentina 
be present. Whether at the last moment an invitation 
will be forthcoming depends, to some extent at least, 
on how desirous Washington is of presenting to the 
world security conference the example of a strongly 
unified hemispheric body. In recognizing that govern- 
ment, Washington elected to overlook certain short- 
comings in both its external and internal policies. 
Opening the way for Argentina to go to San Fran- 
cisco may, in its opinion, be the final measure re- 
quired by the Mexico City resolution. 

It now appears evident that the State Department 
has abandoned former Secretary Cordell Hull’s 
policy of employing nonrecognition as a weapon 
to bring about desired changes in an unrecognized 
government's foreign policies. It has returned, in- 
stead to the traditional principle of automatic recog- 
nition, provided the minimum essentials of legality 
and order are present. The Department might argue, 


Page Four 


—— 
——ae 


indeed, that it has merely rectified the previous con. 
duct of Latin American affairs in the interest of con. 
sistency, so that Argentina might receive equal treat. 
ment with other Latin American dictatorships which, 
because they pursued foreign policy objectives sim- 
ilar to those of the United States, received recogni- 
tion. Finally, Washington may justify its recognition 
of the military régime as a return to a strict interpre. 
tation of the principle of nonintervention, long the 
aim of American states in their dealings with one 
another. In a recent broadcast, Assistant Secretary 
Nelson Rockefeller claimed that democracy cannot 
be superimposed by force from the outside. It must 
grow up from the people; and economic and social 
conditions must be present which encourage and per- 
mit its growth. 


If, as it now appears, some aspects of the Hull 
policy represented a temporary departure from our 
long-term objectives, there is no question but that, 
inconsistent and fumbling though it may have been, 
it did give those Latin Americans at variance with 
their dictatorial governments some hope that the 
United States—together with other American repub- 
lics or alone, if necessary—would require as a cti- 
terion for recognition the existence of internal de- 
mocracy. The recent wave of demonstrations and 
strikes in Argentina—which culminated on April 23 
in the arrest of 400 persons and the imposition of 
even stricter censorship—testifies to their disappoint: 
ment that this is not to be the case. Like many ob- 
servers in this country, they first erred in interpreting 
Secretary Hull's statements too broadly. As long as 
Argentine liberals believe the United States has “let 
down the good friends of democracy,” however, the 
incident cannot be regarded as closed. 


OLIVE HOLMES 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Mr. Roosevelt, by Compton Mackenzie. New York, E. P. 
Dutton, 1944. $3.75 
Despite interesting details and attractive illustrations, 
this biography has a feeling of unreality, probably because 
the well-known novelist’s point of view is British rather 
than American. 


Justice and World Society, by Laurence Stapleton. Chapel 
Hill, University of North Carolina Press, 1944. $2.00 
Discusses the universal ideal of justice, long known as 

“Law of Nature,” suggesting a modern interpretation for 

real democracy. 

Compass of the World: A Symposium on Political Geogra- 
phy, edited by Hans W. Weigert and Vilhjalmur Stef- 
ansson. New York, Macmillan, 1944. $3.50 
The editors and other geographers have done much to 


show the false conclusions that advocates of geopolitics 
have drawn from the earth’s configuration and to bring 
out the importance of air transport to political geography. 


What the Negro Wants, edited by Rayford W. Logan. 
Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina Press, 1944. 
$3.50 


Since race relations are indubitably among the impor- 
tant questions for post-war democracies, this thoughtfully 
written symposium by representative Negroes is of great 
value. 


Twenty-five Troubled Years, 1918-1943, by F. H. Soward. 
New York, Oxford University Press, 1944. $3.00 
Useful outline of this era presented with simplicity and 

clarity in an expanded outline of courses for Canadian 

service men. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 28, Aprit 27, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 Ease 38th Sereer, New York 16, N. Y. Prank Ross McCoy, President; Dornorny F. Lust, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dzan, Editor. Entered # 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Pose Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act ef March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at leat 


one moath for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


>- 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


1918- 


against | 
British | 
that ‘‘th 

The a 
machine 
dertaker 
terminat 
dramatic 
and bre: 
been en 
lacking 
Wilsons 
no Roos 

GRE/ 
great px 
United | 
with ea 


\Stinted « 


national 
Attlee a 
negative 
task of 
tions th: 
ations i 
the Big 
ing the 
stressed 
force e: 


