





h its 
gard 
Mar- 
eral 
1 au- 
ould 
The 
ratic 
have 
Their 
nm in 
usly, 


gime } 


| de 
tated 
rated 
tants 
fron- 
re to 
lorth 
ion” 
>d in 
sions 
may 
1. 
duce 
does 
| the 
sued 
1 the 
| de 
irred 
isen- 
can 
ainst 
their 
iting 
s of 
TT 


§ 








PERIVVICAL ROOM 
@BNERAL LIBRARY 


GNIV. OF Mice. University of Wi 


Fre 15 43 


Entered as 2nd class matter 





&nn Arbor, Mich. 


FOREIGN 


POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vo. XXII, No. 17 


FEBRUARY 12, 1943 





PUBLIC OPINION MUST BE HEARD ON POST-WAR POLICY 


he Italian Cabinet shake-up of February 6— 
one of whose results was the appointment of 
Count Ciano, Mussolini’s son-in-law and Foreign 
Minister, to the presumably far safer post of Italian 
Ambassador to the Vatican—not only indicates pos- 
sible rifts within the ruling Fascist group, but also 
raises the question of who, in Italy, might be avail- 
able to deal with the Allies in case of Mussolini's 
political demise. Reports from Switzerland hint that 
Count Ciano hopes, with the aid of the Vatican, to 
put out feelers for peace negotiations with the Allies. 
While he and other Fascists dropped in the Cabinet 
shake-up may think that their eleventh-hour with- 
drawal entitles them to a hearing in Allied circles, 
it would seem incredible that the United Nations 
should even consider negotiations with a man who 
has been so intimately connected with the Fascist 
régime. 

WHOM COULD WE DEAL WITH IN ITALY ? 
The political situation in Italy, however, is bound 
to create for the Allies many of the problems which 
have confronted Britain and the United States in 
North Africa. Should the Allies deal with King 
Victor Emmanuel, on whose personal invitation Mus- 
solini assumed power in 1922? Or with Italian Army 
leaders who, willingly or unwillingly, accepted 
Fascist leadership? Or with the industrialists, many 
of whom welcomed some of Mussolini’s measures, 
such as the outlawing of strikes, in the hope that 
they would crush “communism,” only to discover 
eventually that their own freedom was more and 
more circumscribed by the demands of Italian war 
economy? Or will new elements, held in leash by 
Fascist police measures, come to the surface once 
Mussolini, and the Germans, have left the scene— 


| elements bent on effecting a thoroughgoing revolu- 


tion that would sweep out King, Army and_indus- 
trialists along with the Fascists? Would such new 
elements look for leadership to Italian.exiles now 


living abroad, or would they, in the years of trial 
and hardship, have found their own leaders, whose 
names are as yet unknown to us? And is it in the 
interest of the United Nations to insist on the prin- 
ciple of legitimacy so eloquently urged by the Italian 
anti-Fascist historian Ferrero, irrespective of who 
might be regarded as legitimate; or is it more im- 
portant that those who gain authority after the war 
in Europe should be substantially in accord with 
the fundamental ideas for which the United Nations 
believe they are fighting, whether or not they have 
any claim to legitimacy in the legal sense? 
EVOLUTION IN NORTH AFRICA. Events in 
North Africa have amply demonstrated both the 
importance of agreement among the Allies regard- 
ing the general lines of the policy they intend to 
pursue in countries reconquered from the Axis, and 
at the same time the difficulties raised by drawing 
up rigid blueprints in advance which might not 
make sufficient allowance for the variability and 
instability of human nature. Public criticism of the 
policy followed by the United States in North Africa, 
although sometimes irresponsible, has had the good 
effect of emphasizing the disturbing long-range im- 
plications of the Darlan-Giraud régime, and has 
helped to speed up changes in that régime which 
may gradually bring it into closer conformity with 
the popular impression of United Nations war aims. 
Such measures as the release of 27 Communist depu- 
ties imprisoned in North Africa, the liberation of 
900 out of 5,000 political prisoners, and the partial 
relaxation of anti-Semitic and anti-Masonic restric- 
tions have elicited commendation, although by no 
means entire satisfaction, in Fighting French circles. 
It is not yet clear whether the transformation of the 
Imperial Council into a ‘““war committee,” announced 
on February 5, with a change in General Giraud’s 
title from High Commissioner to Civil and Military 
Commander-in-Chief, will open the way to partici- 


<emeen e AE ae 

















pation by de Gaullists in French North Africa. A 
basic divergence persists between General Giraud, 
who believes that the weaknesses of the Third Re- 
public—synonymous, in his opinion, with democ- 
facy—were responsible for France’s military col- 
lapse, and many of the Fighting French, who insist 


‘on return to democratic principles after the war, al- 


though they are far from being of one mind as to the 
form the post-war institutions of France should take. 

NEED FOR CLARIFYING ALLIED OPINION. 
It would be impossible—it would, in fact, be un- 
fortunate—for Britain and the United States to 
prejudge the kind of government that the French, or 
any other people in Europe, may want once they are 
free to make a choice. The fact remains, however, 
that by dealing with one individual or group, and 
not with others—or with a number of them, but on 
different levels of cordiality—Britain and the United 
States weight the balance in favor of this or that 
trend of opinion which may still be in the process 
of crystallization. The crucial difficulty, and one that 
must be faced frankly, is that the same ambiguity 
which has appeared to mark American policy in 
North Africa also characterizes public opinion in 
Britain and the United States, as well as the views 
of the Allied governments in London. The United 
Nations are united in their struggle against Germany 
—and so are Giraud and de Gaulle. But the United 
Nations are no more clearly united than the two 
French Generals regarding the kind of political and 


WHAT KIND OF RECONSTRUCTION FOR THE FAR EAST? 


Since Americans until recently have given little 
thought to the problems of the post-war Far East, dis- 
cussion of the future of this area, containing half the 
human race, still lags far behind consideration of 
the European shape of things to come. In a sense, 
this neglect is natural, for Americans know much 
less about Asia than about Europe. Moreover, the 
military strategy of concentrating on Germany, the 
heart of the Axis, makes it likely that the United 
Nations will face their first tasks of peace and re- 





Can decisive victory be achieved? Should Germany 
be dismembered—disarmed—de prived of territories 
in Europe? Should Allies establish military admin- 
istration? Will Russia share in administration? 
Should Allies countenance German revolution—are 
Germans capable of revolt? What kind of peace 
with non-Nazi Germany? READ 


What Future For Germany? 


by Vera Micheles Dean 


25¢ 


February 1 issue of FoREIGN Po.icy REPORTS 


REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5; to FPA members, $3. 





Page Two 











—— 


economic system they hope will emerge from the war, 

It becomes more and more apparent that we need 
to clarify our own views on the character of the way 
and its aftermath before we can advise others what } 
to do or not to do. But of equal importance is the 
procedure by which the public opinion of the United 
Nations, once clarified, can be brought to bear op 
their political leaders and on the government agen. 
cies which act on their behalf. Few things seem 
essentially undemocratic in democratic countries as 
the conduct of foreign affairs, which is seldom sub. 
jected to direct scrutiny by the people and remains, 
for the most part, in the hands of Foreign Offices 
and State Departments which are not directly te. 
sponsible—or responsive—to the public. This makes 
it more essential than ever that the President, who in 
the United States is the principal official concerned 
with foreign policy also responsible to the people, 
should be in a position to communicate as closely 
and as continuously with the people as Churchill, 
for example, is able to do through his frequent te. 
ports to members of Parliament. Otherwise there is 
always a danger that, as happened in 1919, a divorce 
will occur between the government and the people 
on crucial issues of foreign policy. A war proclaimed 
as a war to make the world better for ‘the common 
man” must take into consideration ‘the common , 
man’s” opinion. 





} 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


construction in the West. Yet, from another point of | 


view, ignorance of the Far East renders study of that 
region all the more important, while the possibility 5 
that a longer time will be available for reflection and 
debate represents an opportunity not to be lost. 


ASIA’S PROBLEMS AS THORNY AS EU- 
ROPE’S. The statement is sometimes made that the 
future of the Far East will be easier to settle than 
that of Europe. Advocates of this theory argue that, 
because Asia has not been torn by hundreds of years 
of national antagonism, the slate is cleaner, so to 
speak, and less of a terrible past will have to be 
erased in order to write the future. Unfortunately, 
this is an illusion. It is true that the nationalism of 
Asia’s colonies and semi-colonies is forward-looking | 
in character — reminiscent of the movement that 
raised the hopes of Europe in the days of Mazzini 
and Kossuth—and that, except for Japan, Far East 
ern patriotism has not assumed the form of chauvit- 
ism. Yet it must be recognized that there are certain | 
counterbalancing problems in the East which ate | 
likely to provide as serious a test of statesmanship 4s 
was ever furnished by the Balkans. 

Not only will there be the difficulty of dealing with 
a defeated Japan, but from Manchuria to Java, and 











fro 
tha 
an 
pla 
the 
div 
th 
of 

its 

the 
tro 
the 
tio 


int 





S as 
sub- 
ains, 
Tices 
r fe. 
akes 
10 in 
rned 
Ople, 
dsely 
hill, 
t re 
re is 
roree 
ople 
imed 
mon 


mon ; 


nt of 
that 
>ility 
| and 


EU- 
t the 
than 
that, 
years 
0 to 
O be 
itely, 


, 


m ol 


king | 


that 
Zzini 
East- 
uvin- 
rtain 
are 
ip as 


a 





with | 


, and 





——— 
—_—_— 





from Indo-China to India there is an agrarian crisis 
that must be met in adequate fashion, if the political 
and economic modernization of the Orient is to take 
place. The complexity of this situation, involving 
the antagonism of landlords and peasants and of 
divergent political groups, is indicated by the fact 
that in five and a half years of war the government 
of fighting China has hardly touched the fringes of 
its own rural question. Nor is it wise to forget that 
the difficulties of loosening the grip of foreign con- 
trol over the peoples of Asia are at least as great as 
those to be faced in developing a constructive na- 
tionalism among the nations of Europe and America. 

ORDER IN EUROPE VITAL TO FAR EAST. 
The work of Asiatic reconstruction cannot be car- 
ried forward in isolation, but will be related most 
intimately to developments in the rest of the world. 
In fact, just as the military defeat of Japan will be- 
come possible only on the defeat of Germany, so the 
orderly solution of Eastern questions will depend 
first of all on the establishment of peaceful, demo- 
cratic conditions in the West. If Europe is divided 
by widespread, prolonged civil war after the defeat 
of Germany, if the partnership of the United States, 
Britain and the Soviet Union is not maintained and 
strengthened, there will be no basis for an interna- 
tional approach to conditions in Asia. 

This does not mean that there will then be no 
reconstruction in the Orient, but it will be recon- 
struction of the traditional type, with each power 
holding its own as much as possible, and with each 
colony or semi-colony waging a desperate struggle 
for freedom from overlordship—all amid the acute 
international friction characteristic of outright bal- 
ance-of-power politics. In view of the past history 
of human progress, it would be unwise to say that 
nothing good could emerge from such a situation, 
but it would be a minimum of good, paid for with 
a maximum of blood. It would not be the intelligent 
type of growth inherent in the concept of the United 
Nations. 

SOME CRUCIAL ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT 
ASIA. Since no one can foretell accurately the con- 
ditions that will prevail in the world at large, or the 
Far East in particular, after the defeat of the Axis, 
suggestions about reconstruction necessarily rest on 
certain assumptions concerning the future. In East 
Asia there would appear to be three prerequisites for 
peaceful, progressive development. First of all, 
Japan, as well as Germany, must be utterly defeated. 
Secondly, China must continue its resistance until 
victory and must remain united in peace. Finally, 


Page Three 














the United Nations must preserve and extend their 
wartime cooperation. 

On this basis it is possible to arrive at certain - 
minimum principles of a more or less broad charac- 
ter, failing which there will be nothing that can 
properly be described as orderly reconstruction. 
These minima include: measures to prevent Japan 
from waging future wars; complete Chinese sover- 
eignty over all Chinese territory; the independence 
of India; and a sincere, well-planned effort to es- 
tablish self-government in the various colonial areas 
at the earliest practicable moment. 


APPLYING THE PRINCIPLES. While it is easy 
to give verbal expression to principles, application 
in practice is quite another matter—a fact which is 
keenly appreciated among the peoples of Asia. Will 
China, for example, receive complete control over 
Manchuria and Formosa, or will successful argu- 
ments be heard for international, i.e., not Chinese, 
administration of Formosa and for the maintenance 
of a special Japanese position in Manchuria, as a 
means of making Japan a ‘bulwark’ against China 
and the U.S.S.R.? In dealing with a defeated Japan, 
will an agreement be made with some of the danger- 
ous elements that were responsible for war against 
us, or will the United Nations do everything in their 
power to encourage the rise of a new nonmilitaristic 
Japan? Will the independence of India be granted 
as soon as hostilities cease, or will internal problems 
characteristic of all nations in the process of de- 
velopment be used to justify delay? And will the 
previous rulers of colonies seized by Japan insist ° 
on the outright return of these areas to their own 
sovereignty or, where independence does not appear 
immediately feasible, will they agree to some form 
of international control during the minimum period 
necessary for self-government? 

These questions cannot be answered at present, 
but by their actions now the major powers can in- 
dicate their intention to choose the forward-looking 
instead of the backward path. If the United States 
should take steps to repeal the Chinese Exclusion 
Act and place Chinese immigration on a quota basis, 
if Britain should move to resume discussions with 
the Indian nationalists, if the Netherlands should 
declare their willingness to join in international prep- 
aration of the Indies for self-government, then the 
omens for the future of Asia would be favorable 
indeed. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(Thi the last of a ses of four articles 


reconstruction in the Far East.) 


on war and 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 17, Fespruary 12, 1943. 


second-class matter December 2, 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNKk Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


National 
Entered as 
Please allow at least 


Incorporated. 


Three Dollars a Year. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Bois: 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





Washington News LE etter 




















1) ORI ET ae pr way 


Fes. 8.—In his radio address of December 9, 
1941, two days after Pearl Harbor, President Roose- 
velt promised the American people that “we are 
going to win the war and we are going to win the 
peace that follows.” As current military develop- 
ments show that the United Nations are passing 
from defense to offense on all fronts, Congress is 
almost as keenly interested in the future peace settle- 
ment as in the war itself. 

Although the State Department has been very 
quiet about it, it is known that it has held from time 
to time a sort of “seminar” for the benefit of influ- 
ential Senators and Representatives on the peace that 
is to conclude the present war and on the economic 
rehabilitation of the world of tomorrow. At these 
meetings experts who are studying various phases 
of the situation have appeared to answer the ques- 
tions of Congressmen in a frank and informal man- 
ner, to keep them abreast of the progress made in 
working out suggestions for a permanent peace. 
Sumner Welles has presided at some of these 
seminars, which have been attended by such promi- 
nent Congressmen as Senators Tom Connally of 
Texas, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee, Walter F. George of Georgia, a former 
chairman of that body, Senator Warren R. Austin 
of Vermont, minority member of the committee, and 
Representative Sol Bloom of New York, chairman 
of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. 

Another sign of the times is a resolution that has 
been introduced in the House by Representative 
Karl Mundt, Republican, of South Dakota, a strong 
pre-war isolationist and critic of President Roose- 
velt's foreign policies. His resolution calls for the 
creation of a 32-man bi-partisan commission to study 
peace plans. As Representative Mundt’s resolution 
completely ignores President Roosevelt and provides 
that the peace-planning commission be appointed by 
Secretary of State Cordell Hull and former President 
Hoover, it has but small chance of passing. 

SENATOR GILLETTE'S PROPOSAL. Much 
more significant politically was the resolution spon- 
sored by Senator Guy M. Gillette, Democrat, of 
Iowa, on February 4. His resolution would put the 
Senate on record as approving the basic principles 
of the Atlantic Charter, and advises President Roose- 
velt to negotiate immediately a “post-war peace 
charter” with the other United Nations. According 
to Senator Gillette, the Atlantic Charter is simply an 
agreement between two heads of government. It is 


FOR VICTORY ° 


not an instrument of national policy, since it has not” 
been formally endorsed by Congress or by the repre.” 


sentative bodies of any of the other signatory states,” 


The Atlantic Charter has come to fill, in this con.” 
flict, the role played by Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen 
Points in World War I—a program of principles 
for the Allies. The other United Nations subscribed 
to the program embodied in the Atlantic Charter in 
the joint declaration signed by them at Washington 
on January 1, 1942. Brazil is the latest country to 
adhere to the declaration, having signed it on Feb- 
ruary 6, 1942. 

EBB OF ISOLATIONISM. Senator Gillette said 
that, if a treaty were signed, it would thwart Jap- 
anese propaganda that the Atlantic Charter declara- 
tion extended only to the Atlantic and not the 
Pacific area. 

Recently, for instance, Japanese propaganda has 
made much of the fact that Britain’s decision to 
abandon its extraterritorial rights in China was not 
accompanied by any action on Hongkong. And 
the Nazis have been busy telling the Finns that 
their territorial integrity will not be respected by the 
Russians when the war ends, despite the fact that in 
Article I of the Atlantic Charter Britain and the 
United States declared that they are not seeking ter- 
ritorial aggrandizement. 

Senator Gillette’s resolution, if carried out, would 
give the Atlantic Charter what Wilson's Fourteen 
Points never had—the endorsement of the United 
States Senate. It would serve as a clear and unmis- 
takable notification to foreign countries that the full 
authority of the United States government, includ- 
ing both its Executive and Legislative branches, 
stood behind the Atlantic Charter. This might avoid 
repetition of the tragedy of the Treaty of Versailles, 
which received the signature of an American Presi- 
dent but failed to obtain the ratification of the 
United States Senate. 

These developments in Congress indicate how 
much isolationist sentiment has ebbed since Pearl 
Harbor. They reflect a growing realization through- 
out the country of what Under Secretary of State 


Sumner Welles, in his address to the graduating class | 


of the University of Maryland on February 4, called 

“the basic fact” that “in the world of today not even 
a hemisphere can live in peace and enjoy its liberty, | 
much less achieve prosperity, if the rest of the world 
is going up in flames.” 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





Vol 





Ss 


9 
| sc 
iN 





