


ial 
rds 
the 
ple 
ike 
ak. 


gle 


ion 


ute 
On- 
ng 


C0- 
ted 
rest 
ally 
ion 
mic 
t is 
cies 
10n 


ional 
BLES 
Yeat. 








— ett 


1946 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


OCI 2 


a 
—1946 PBNERAL LIBRARY 


ONI¥Y oF mice 





Vasversity of Michigan 


Ann Arhor, Michican 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 














An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 49 


SEPTEMBER 20, 1946 





CONTRADICTIONS WEAKEN WALLACE’S PLEA FOR NEW FOREIGN POLICY 


ng questions about Germany's future position 
in Europe, as affected by and, in turn, affectin 
the relations of the United States with Russia, which 
had been raised by the Stuttgart speech of Secretary 
of State Byrnes, have been thrown into new focus 
as a result of the controversy aroused by Secretary 
of Commerce Wallace when he addressed the PAC 
tally in Madison Square Garden on September 12. 
The two speeches reveal a divergence concerning 
the objectives of United States foreign policy which 
cannot fail to trouble European countries at a time 
when Mr. Byrnes is trying to convince them that the 
American people have reached fundamental agree- 
ment on this nation’s rdle in world affairs. 


It is both a quality and a weakness of democracy 
that, except in time of critical emergency, it speaks 
with many voices, expressing widely differing opin- 
ions on public questions. Whether or not it is proper 
for one member of the cabinet to state publicly views 
that contradict the policy ostensibly being followed, 
with the avowed support and approval of the Presi- 
dent, by the Secretary of State is a debatable ques- 
tion under our form of government. The danger 
is that, under these circumstances, foreign policy may 
become a political football—as has been surmised 
in this instance by some observers who believe Mr. 
Wallace may have been hoping to recapture for the 
Democratic party voters who have been alienated by 
Washington's stiffened attitude toward Russia. 

From the point of view of foreign policy tactics, 
some government advisers had begun to feel that, 
in an understandable and necessary endeavor to 
clarify its own position in Europe, the United States 
had recently become inclined to oppose Russia on 
one minor point after another, instead of grappling 
with the larger political and economic issues at stake 
in our relations with that country. There was also 


growing danger that some Americans—more numer- 
ous than is generally realized—who with frivolous 
cynicism have been ‘saying that, since war with 
Russia was inevitable sooner or later, the United 
States should get the job over with by dropping a 
few atomic bombs on the U.S.S.R., might create the 
impression abroad that we were getting ready for 
World War III. Some corrective of these trends was 
needed—but it is doubtful that the corrective pro- 
vided by Mr. Wallace was expressed in the con- 
structive terms at this time. 


IMPERIALISM FOR WHOM? To denounce 
Britain for imperialism in the Near and Middle East 
at a time when the British are making a genuine 
attempt to terminate their principal commitments in 
India and Egypt, is not only to rehash outworn 
clichés; it is also to overlook the fact that, even if 
Britain did not exist, the United States, as a result 
of World War II, has interests of its own in that 
area, interests concerned, like those of Britain, with 
strategic bases and oil. Moreover, if we accept Mr. 
Wallace's division of the world into spheres of in- 
fluence—with Russia enjoying a dominant position 
in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, and the United 
States in Latin America—why refuse to let Britain 
have its own sphere in the eastern Mediterranean 
and the Near and Middle East? Had Mr. Wallace 
taken his stand on the high ground of moral prin- 
ciples in international relations, he might have been 
able to make a cogent argument against the perpetu- 
ation of British imperial interests where they con- 
tinue to exist. Instead, he definitely aligned himself 
with the hard-boiled school of thought which favors 
division of the world into orbits, arguing that the 
United States has no more right to interfere in Rus- 
sia’s orbit than Russia has co interfere in ours. Why, 
then, should either we or the Russians claim the 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 





~ 


ret ete Fn RUN MRED seaptote AES ¥ 
> avers =: 8) 0 es Pa eas a ae Ao 
BPE ot 9S SSS Pree oe et ee $a FIG Sibee a 5 5 4 - 

orem ss era Pea PK pw ~ 4 i ~ 


= 


2 


Tk Ps SS TE 


gts 





8: 
uf 
a 
Oh] 
f 
¥, 
in 
bk 
: 
1 
{F4 
<n} 


st Sak (ee GERD 


Sto” 














right to interfere in Britain’s orbit? 


TWO ORBITS OR ONE WORLD? The fallacy 
of a system of self-contained orbits has in any case 
been demonstrated by events since the end of hos- 
tilities, for the simple reason that no dynamic na- 
tion stops at a given geographic boundary of its 
own free will, and none can be effectively prevented 
from taking an interest in the affairs of others un- 
less we resort to a really impenetrable “iron cur- 
tain” between orbits through censorship, repression 
of opposition views, and so on. Mr. Wallace’s con- 
cept of the world could easily be interpreted abroad 
as a new form of isolationism—although that is un- 
doubtedly contrary to his personal philosophy. For 
what he proposes is the isolation of the United States 
and Russia, each in its own sphere of influence, the 
exact limits of which he does not undertake to define; 
and he strengthens this impression by declaring that 
the United States has no right to concern itself with 
developments in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, 
and presumably also in Russia’s zone of Germany, 
on the assumption that the situation of that area is 
comparable to that of Latin America. Yet Mr. Wal- 
lace, a close adviser of President Roosevelt through- 
out the war years, must be aware that at Yalta Stalin 
accepted, for better or worse, certain joint commit- 
ments concerning the political future of Poland and 
the Axis satellites, and therefore the United States 
and Britain have the right to inquire into the fulfil- 


WHAT CONSTRUCTIVE STEPS CAN U.S. TAKE IN CHINA? 


Despite almost daily reports of Chinese govern- 
ment advances in current offensives against the 
Communist areas, it is far too early to draw conclu- 
sions about the campaign. The main feature of op- 
erations in the past few weeks is that, pressed by 
Central forces possessing superior American equip- 
ment and American airplanes, the Communist 
armies have evacuated with little resistance a num- 
ber of points in the North China regions. Their 
retreating forces, however, remain intact for pos- 
sible future operations on battlefields adapted to 
their own strength and strategy. 

WHAT PATH FOR USS.? So far the fighting 
conforms to the pattern indicated by interviews in 
Nanking in June, before the beginning of the gov- 
ernment’s campaign. One well-informed official, 
who was out of sympathy with the policies of the 
dominant political and military leaders, declared 
privately at that time: “We can drive the Com- 
munists back from the railways and out of certain 
areas. But what then? Conditions will be worse than 
before! And this will be only the beginning of the 
military struggle!’ It is necessary to emphasize 
these points now, because some of the recent dis- 
patches from China suggest a dangerously incor- 
rect conclusion—that Nanking’s successes are likely 
in some way to be decisive. From this it would only 


Page Two 














— 


ment of these commitments, even though the map. 
ner and object of their inquiries may be open ty 
criticism on the part of Moscow. Most astonish 
of all is Mr. Wallace’s remark that, once the Ameri. 
can and Russian spheres of influence have bee 
mutually recognized, “the United Nations should 
have a really great power in those areas which are 
truly international and not regional.’’ What “‘inter. 
national” areas would be left after this arbitrary dj. 
vision of the world between the two great powers? 
And what réle would the United Nations play any. 
where if it can operate only within limits laid dows 
by the United States and Russia? 

Mr. Wallace’s speech reveals the confusion of 
thought that has been caused in this country by up 
reasoning fear of Russia on one side, and equally 
unreasoning adulation of everything Russia does on 
the other. One does not have to look to Moscow 
for an explanation of strikes in this country in 4 
period of mounting prices. Neither is it necessary 
to blacken the reputation of other nations in order 
to enhance that of Russia or to facilitate our rela 
tions with that country. If we can keep our feet on 
solid ground, we shall find that on some matters we 
agree with Russia, on others with Britain, and ona 
whole range of still others with neither of them. For 
revealing examples of this situation we need only 
to turn again to Germany. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


be a step to the view that the problems of Ameti- 





can policy in China may soon be resolved on the 
field of battle. Actually, the situation in China is 


— 


tion wl 
munist 


hing } that it 


troops 
tinue t 
of the 
have b 
would 
chance 
Mo: 
up sin 
Go th 
by the 
last Ja 
Comm 
mal cc 
by its 
last a 
coaliti 
of an 
enabl. 
be sai 
of a 
with | 
gress! 
portu 
RE 
long 
first | 
State: 
or m 
a go 


be tc 


likely to become more critical, and reconsideration of oppo 


American policy is more pressing than ever. 

It is interesting, on returning to this country after 
an absence of several months, to read newspaper 
editorials on China. Some publications support our 
recent policy to the full and urge maximum aid to 
Chiang Kai-shek; others call sharply for an end to 
American intervention on the government side; and 
still others recognize the inadequacy of American 
policy without knowing what to do beyond deplor 
ing the way in which our golden opportunity of the 
past year to promote peace and reconstruction in 
China has been lost. 

WOULD COMMUNISTS RULE COALITION? 
One crucial question constantly asked is this: Ifa 
genuine coalition government were formed, would 
it not soon be dominated by the Communists be 
cause of the weakness of the liberals and other non- 
Communist forward-looking elements in China? lt 
is true that the Chinese middle class is weak and 
that the non-Communist progressives are in a pre 
carious position—in part because both historically 
and today they have received little encouragement 
from the Western powers. Nevertheless, the ques 


prop 
be tc 
of tl 
and 

A 
can 
thou 
on t 
teria 
pres 
lic « 
thou 





som 


| Rus: 


R 
tura 


At | 


PORE 
Head. 
DEAN 
Pleas 





| 
i 
|< 





to s 2? i 


BeaB F 


a: 


S32 


eri 
the 
a is 
1 of 





fter | 


iper 
our 
1 to 
1 to 
and 
ican 
lor: 
the 
1 in 


YN? 





if a | 


yuld 
be- 
10N- 
? It 
and 
re- 
ally 
rent 


ues | Bris 





Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Six Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





a 








tion underestimates the strength of the non-Com- 
munist, non-reactionary groups. It should be noted 
that in any coalition régime the non-Communist 
troops of the present Central government would con- 
tinue to form a majority of the total armed forces 
of the country. The liberals and conservatives who 
have been out of sympathy with government policy 
would also for the first time in many years have a 
chance to develop and increase their strength. 


Moreover, a coalition régime would not be set 
up simply along lines desired by the Communists. 
On the contrary, the form of government agreed to 
by the Communists and the Central representatives 
last January favors the Kuomintang and other non- 
Communist groups in important respects. The for- 
mal composition of a government cannot, of course, 
by itself determine questions of power, but in the 
last analysis no constitutional arrangements for a 
coalition administration can guarantee the survival 
of any elements which do not develop a program 
enabling them to secure popular support. What can 
be said at this point, however, is that the initiation 
of a genuine coalition government, in accordance 
with the January arrangements, would give the pro- 
gressive non-Communist members an excellent op- 
portunity for survival and expansion. 


REVISING OUR POLICY. Today China is a 
long way from having a coalition régime, but the 
first step in bringing it about, as far as the United 
States is concerned, is to withhold further economic 
ot military assistance, except for relief, until such 
a government is formed. A corollary move would 
be to make it absolutely clear to Nanking that we 
oppose the use of American lend-lease and surplus 
property in civil war operations. A third step would 
be to reaffirm our confidence in the basic soundness 
of the Political Consultative Conference decisions 
and the Government-Communist military pact. 

A fourth, overdue step is to withdraw all Ameri- 
can marines from China by a fixed, early date. Al- 
though not numerous enough to have a crucial effect 
on the Chinese situation, they are of moral and ma- 
terial value to Nanking in the civil war, and their 
presence irritates significant sections of Chinese pub- 
lic opinion. On the other hand, these twenty-odd 
thousand men certainly do not have the effect, as 
some American circles suppose, of “keeping the 
Russians out of China.” 


RUSSIA’S INTENTIONS. This discussion na- 
turally raises the question: What will Russia do? 
At the moment, beyond maintaining some troops in 


Page Three 








South Manchuria—apparently in accordance with 
the Sino-Soviet pact of 1945—-Moscow seems to 
be playing a watching rdle. It is true that last winter 
the Russians placed obstacles in the way of the 
Central government’s entering Manchuria and that 
their presence made it easier for the Chinese Com- 
munists to take over the weapons of defeated Jap- 
anese troops than if a hostile power had been in 
occupation. But it is likely that if no foreign mili- 
tary activity—Russian or American—had occurred 
in China after V-J Day the Communists would have 
done at least as well in Manchuria, and perhaps 
even better. Unquestionably the Russians are deeply 
interested in China and are following American 
policy closely. But there is no evidence that they are 
giving material assistance to the Communists or 
that anything constituting Russian intervention in 
the civil war situation exists at this moment. There 
can be no guarantee, however, that such interven- 
tion will not develop in the future, if the Kuomin- 
tang-Communist conflict remains unadjusted, while 
the United States continues to pour out assistance to 
the Chinese government. 


It is plainly of key importance to reach an under- 
standing with the U.S.S.R. on China policy—an un- 
derstanding which would extend the general agree- 
ment concluded with Russia and Britain at Moscow 
last November on the need for a peaceful, demo- 
cratic China. Joint action would not only have a 
highly beneficial effect inside China, but would con- 
tribute to breaking the log-jam in world affairs. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 

(The second of two articles on American policy in China.) 


NEW FPA EXECUTIVE SECRETARY 


Miss Helen M. Daggett has been appointed Ex- 
ecutive Secretary of the Association. During the 
past four years Miss Daggett was in close touch with 
the activities of a number of government agencies. 
She joined the War Production Board in 1942 as 
Senior Administrative Analyst, and her work in the 
Personnel Division involved personal contacts with 
hundreds of WPB employees. She also acted as 
WPB representative in committee work with other 
government and civilian agencies and groups. Before 
going to Washington, Miss Daggett was associated 
for several years with the Bigelow Sanford Com- 
pany, traveling from coast to coast in connection 
with lectures and public relations work. She has had 
wide experience in addressing many organizations, 
including clubs, schools, labor groups, industrialists, 
and others. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 49, SEPTEMBER 20, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; HELEN M. Daccett, Executive Secretary; VERA MICHBLES 
FAN, Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Four Dollars a Year. 








+ 
H 
| 


= 


Phil 


Oye tue Bee 


ri 


rt We. vey 
a 


= WEES 


nthe RD th crepe ee eee 


Seedy ara ok 


hr 


fe es 


eer: SAPS 


bs 
ha base 


re 


ee me 


od en ig ee. 5a TS 29 


_— 
s 





Washington News Letter tae. satire 

















U.S. BACKS YUGOSLAV RELIEF DESPITE PLANE INCIDENT 


The United States will continue to send UNRRA 
aid to Yugoslavia despite strong opposition from the 
International Longshoremen’s Association (AFL), 
which is refusing to load ships for Yugoslav ports, 
and from Senator Styles Bridges of New Hampshire, 
who protested to the State Department on Septem- 
ber 9 against shipments of goods of any kind to 
Marshal Tito. William L. Clayton, Acting Secretary 
of State, declared on September 12 that the United 
States refuses to halt UNRRA supplies in retaliation 
against Yugoslavia for the shooting down of un- 
armed American transport planes last month, be- 
cause such action would violate the obligations this 
country assumed when it agreed to participate in 
the international relief organization. As Mr. Clayton 
pointed out, UNRRA is operated by 48 nations and 
cannot be regarded as an instrument of American 
foreign policy, although the United States contributes 
72 per cent of its total funds. 


CONSIDERATIONS SHAPING POLICY. Mr. 
Clayton based his statement of policy primarily on 
the view that the United States should strongly sup- 
port the principle of faithful fulfilment of interna- 
tional obligations. During the present period of seri- 
ous tensions in the eastern Mediterranean and other 
parts of the world, the Acting Secretary is convinced 
that the United States will best serve its fundamental 
national interests if it champions the view that all 
changes in the status quo must be made by means 
of negotiations rather than by unilateral action. 


While chiefly concerned with maintaining the 
principle of honoring treaty obligations the State 
Department might nevertheless have found it dif- 
ficult to approve continued relief shipments to 
Yugoslavia if its experts on UNRRA affairs had 
felt that this decision would undermine Washing- 
ton’s present firm policy toward Belgrade. In their 
opinion, however, the 88 or 90,000,000 dollars 
worth of supplies scheduled for delivery to Yugo- 
slavia before UNRRA completes its work at the 
end of this year could make only a very indirect 
contribution, if any, to the country’s present military 
strength. According to present plans, Yugoslavia 
will receive principally food, clothing, shoes, seeds, 
fertilizers and agricultural implements, and only 
small quantities of railroad equipment, trucks and 
tractors. Because of the current drought in some of 
the most productive farm areas of the country, Bel- 


* 


grade may be obliged to order additional food at the 


expense of such equipment. 


The State Department also found that Yugoslayig 
is not, as reported in some quarters, obtaining sup 
plies at the expense of other nations in whose re 
construction the United States is deeply interested 
Although the Yugoslav government was recently 
assigned a quantity of steel rails originally ea 
marked for China, the State Department announced 
on September 9 that the rails in question had bee 
diverted to Belgrade because Chinese ports were a 
present unable to receive them, and that UNRRA 
has an additional supply of rails on hand for Chin 
as soon as it is able to handle them. Moreover, 
the United States, which issues licenses for the ship 
ment of all UNRRA goods from this country, did 
not permit UNRRA to reassign scarce and vital rail 
accessories and is now holding them in reserve for 


China. 


RECORD GENERALLY SATISFACTORY. The 
belief that the United States enjoys the good will 
of large numbers of Yugoslavs through continued 
support of UNRRA, together with the conviction 
that the bulk of the organization’s supplies is being 
fairly distributed by Marshal Tito’s government, 
have also influenced Washington’s determination to 
continue relief shipments. According to American 
officials of UNRRA who have just returned to 
Washington after a six-weeks inspection tour of 
areas receiving UNRRA aid, at least those Yugo 
slavs who live in towns and cities are informed by 
large posters of the source of UNRRA’s income and 
are thus made aware of the rdle of the United States 
in providing relief. While conceding that some of 
UNRRA’s supplies have found their way into the 
hands of the military, these officials believe that 
the amounts are small. In their opinion the casual 
observers who have charged that UNRRA supplies 
are being diverted to the army are unaware that 
Yugoslavia—lacking an adequate number of skilled 
workmen—is obliged to employ its military per 
sonnel in reconstruction. In the light of all these 
considerations, the State Department sees no com 
tradiction in its determination to continue approval 
of UNRRA aid to the Yugoslav people and at the 
same time maintain an inflexible attitude towatd 


Marshal Tito’s government on other issues. 


WHINIFRED N. HADSEL 











| tha 


Car 


De 


for 


