, bind 
uku 02 


Loscow, 
» Status 
id gun. 
r rede. 
ccepted 
portant 
eS were 
llowing 
atter of 
roposed 


of this 
lispute; 
Hot. 
vantung 
will b 
Apanes¢ 
Amur, 
rate the 
clusion 
pact— 
er thes: 
ar is im 
ous Far 
d to the 
he cast 
. Some 
it cris: 
nine the 
\obilized 
iet hier: 
military 
lowever, 
eterren! 


OPPER 


ew York 


, grasp d 
is of th 


ow York, 


| We B 
»s-Merrill, 


non-inter- 
- oblivious 
ke such ! 


lon, Inter 
136. $3.01 
. constitu 
extensivt 


d. Nationi 
RAN, Editon 
Year. 


réle anil relations. 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Vou. XVI, No. 38 


JULY 16, 1937 


10 DYNAMIC POSTERS 


Enlarged reproductions of the most telling illustra- 
tions from Headline Books. Pictured lessons on vital 
issues—Cost of the World War, Defense Expenditures, 
Comparative Wealth—make a compelling display in 
summer schools, libraries and camps. 


Complete set 


50 cents 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Dr. William W. Bishop 
% University of Michigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


BRITAIN PROPOSES DIVISION OF PALESTINE 


ETERMINED to end by a bold stroke the 

“irrepressible conflict” between the Arabs 
and Jews in Palestine, the British government 
has quickly approved the recommendations of its 
Royal Commission, published on July 8, urging 
partition of the Holy Land. The Commission’s 
suggestions will be considered by the Permanent 
Mandates Commission at Geneva on July 30 and 
later by the Council of the League of Nations, 
whose assent is necessary for alteration of the 
terms of the mandate. Meanwhile the British 
have emphasized their intention to carry out 
the terms of the report and quell all violent 
demonstrations by force. 

The Commission’s report is an exhaustive sur- 
vey of a problem rooted in history. The prom- 
ises made to Jews and Arabs to enlist their 
support during the World War have, it is ad- 
mitted, “proved irreconcilable.” Two inimical 
national communities have grown up within the 
narrow confines of one small country. Neither 
impartial government of the 400,000 Jews and 
950,000 Arabs, nor a policy of conciliation toward 
the latter has succeeded in improving interracial 
While prospects for amelioration of 
the situation under the present mandate are fully 
explored—notably by restriction of Jewish immi- 
gration and repression of Arab outbreaks—the 
Commission believes the existing deadlock is in- 
soluble through such measures alone. It there- 
fore recommends that the area be divided into 
three portions, including two nominally inde- 
pendent states, Jewish and Arab. To the Jews 
would go a coastal strip covering roughly one- 
third of Palestine, including much of the more fer- 
tile area. Trans-Jordan, Jaffa, and the Palestinian 


_ hinterland would be incorporated in an Arab state, 


set up with financial assistance from the Jews 
and the British. Under a new, permanent man- 
date, Britain would govern Jerusalem and Beth- 
lehem, with a corridor to the sea near Jaffa. It 


would also administer Haifa and other centers of 
Arab population within the Jewish area for an 
indefinite period. The Commission urges that 
minority populations created by the new fron- 
tiers be transferred to the communities to which 
they belong. This operation would cause no 
great difficulty in the case of the 1,250 Jews in 
the Arab area, but it would involve the execution 
of an extensive land development scheme at 
British expense for accommodation of the 225,000 
Arabs who would have to be moved. Moreover, 
the presence of 125,000 Jews and 85,000 Arabs 
in Jerusalem and Haifa, under British control, 
might give rise to serious problems. 

These proposals obviously represent an attempt 
at drastic but impartial compromise designed to 
separate, as far as possible, the two groups whose 
exacerbated relations have resulted in five seri- 
ous outbreaks since 1920. Much of the friction 
may be traced to the repercussions of external de- 
velopments. The sufferings of the Jews in Europe 
have led to a rapid increase in immigration, 
which reached a peak figure of 60,000 in 1935, 
and have given a new and poignant meaning to 
the concept of the Jewish National Home. Thus 
the Arabs, at the very moment when their breth- 
ren in Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Syria were 
attaining independence, have been confronted 
with the spectre of eventual submergence under 
a rapidly increasing immigrant population pos- 
sessing superior material resources. 

The Commission, in a strong bid for support, 
points out that the solution it advocates offers 
both parties freedom and security. The Arabs 
receive independence on an equal footing with 
other Arab states, protection against ultimate 
subjection to Jewish rule, a guarantee of the 
preservation of their holy places, and financial 
aid for the development of their new nation. 
Zionists will achieve realization of their dream 
of an independent Jewish state free of irksome 


Se ee sa et a et Ne 
ane £ : Nea 


Se. ee) * See ne eee a 
= = —— ~ = 


limitations on immigration. Nevertheless, neither 
side is satisfied with the recommendations. The 
Jews challenge the underlying assumption that 
the mandate is unworkable. They state that the 
yielding policy of the British administration has 
encouraged Arab politicians to incite the fellaheen 
against the National Home, which has raised the 
standard of life of all inhabitants of the country. 
On the other hand, the Arabs protest against 
relegation to the rocky hill country and reiterate 
their desire to control the whole of what they 
regard as their territory. 

Certain groups on both sides, however, have 
intimated willingness to accept the proposed 
settlement. Some moderate Zionists are believed 
ready to cooperate, provided the frontier is recti- 
fied to include the new, Jewish section of Jeru- 
salem and more undeveloped land for settlement. 
Among the Arabs the British proposals have 
caused a split between two important parties 
formerly associated in the Arab Higher Com- 
mittee. The National Defense party, headed by 
Ragheb bey Nashashibi, was at first believed to 
favor the plan because it expected the fruits of 
political office under the new régime of the Emir 
Abdullah of Trans-Jordan. It has, however, been 
forced to condemn the scheme as a result of the 
clever maneuvering of Haj Amin el Husseini, 
Mufti of Jerusalem, who has mobilized Arab na- 
tionalist sentiment against the partition plan. 

While Britain may be able to translate the 
Royal Commission’s report into actuality, the 
future under the complex scheme is not bright. 
It is feared that the new Jewish state will be- 
come terra irredenta for the Arab world—a de- 
velopment which might lead to an Arab-Jewish 
war when Britain is occupied elsewhere. Yet if 
the present mandate is unworkable, as the Com- 
mission argues with great force, it is difficult to 
conceive of an alternative, practicable solution. 
It: remains to be pointed out that the establish- 
ment of small client states in this area is in accord 
with British imperial interests. Both the new gov- 
ernments will sign treaties similar to those of 
Iraq and Syria, giving Britain sufficient control 
over their foreign affairs and defense to safe- 
guard Palestine as a key point on its sea, land, 
and air routes to the East. 

Some American Zionists have urged that the 
United States intercede with the British on their 
behalf, basing their demand on the Anglo-Ameri- 
can convention of 1924 safeguarding American 
rights and interests in Palestine. While Ameri- 
can consent will be necessary, under this conven- 
tion, for changes affecting American rights, it 
would appear that the United States’ legal claim 
to any further voice in the alteration of the man- 


Page Two 


date is exceedingly weak. As a matter of policy 
Great Britain and the League Council might wel- 
come American participation in the forthcoming 
discussion over the British plan. It is highly 
doubtful, however, that this government’s na. 
tional interests would be served by active inter. 
vention in a troubled situation for which Great 
Britain is responsible. DAvip H. Poprrr 


A NEW CONSTITUTION FOR IRELAND 

After an exciting election campaign the Irish 
Free State on July 1 adopted a new constitution, 
describing Ireland as a “sovereign independent 
democratic state,” and making no mention of the 
British King or Commonwealth. The electorate 
also returned President Eamon de Valera’s Fianna 
Fail party to power, although without the sweep- 
ing victory expected by its adherents. The party 
was left dependent on the thirteen Labor depu- 
ties for a working majority in the Dail Fireann, 
the Irish Chamber of Deputies, against the forty- 
eight followers of former President William 
Cosgrave and a scattering of Independents. De 
Valera is expected to call a new election in 1938, 
as he did under similar circumstances in 1933, to 
ensure a clear majority for his policies. 

The new constitution, based on the Christian- 
democratic philosophy of its author, Eamon de 
Valera, makes little change in the present politi- 
cal status of Ireland. Despite its failure to men- 
tion Great Britain and its assumption of moral 
authority over the whole of Ireland, including 
the “loyal north,” which is determined to remain 
in its present position as an autonomous sector 
of the United Kingdom, the document leaves the 
way open for compromise. “Pending the rein- 
tegration of the national territory,” Irish juris- 
diction is to apply only to the present territory 
of the Irish Free State, and the government is 
empowered to join certain international organ- 
izations, including by implication the British 
Commonwealth of Nations. Ireland has thus 
made itself independent in internal affairs, while | 
continuing to enjoy the benefits of membership 
in the British Commonwealth in its external re- | 
lations. | 

The new constitution, which goes into effect 
January 1, 1938, provides for a bicameral parlia- | 
ment, composed of a powerful House of Repre- | 
sentatives elected by proportional representation | 
and a small Senate, with jealously restricted pow- | 
ers, elected on the corporative principle. The 
Roman Catholic Church is recognized as the lead- 
ing Irish church, although complete religious 
freedom, as well as freedom of speech, of the 
press, and of association, is guaranteed. 


HELEN FISHER (| 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 38, Jury 16, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lgsiig Bugit, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; VERA MicHELES Dean, Béitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


An it 


