OREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


CAL ROOMS West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
AL LIBS 4 

















OL. ‘Xvi, No. 4 NOVEMBER 19, 1937 





ish(— 


nit. 
ter- 


ion 
Far 





U.S. NEUTRALITY IN THE SPANISH CONFLICT 
by Raymond Leslie Buell 


The Spanish conflict graphically illustrates the difficulty of im- 
posing “neutrality” on American opinion without destroying free- 
dom of speech. This report surveys the attempt of Congress to fol- 
low a neutral policy by imposing an arms embargo on both sides, 
prohibiting contributions and limiting passports to Spain. Despite 
neutrality legislation, meetings were held, funds collected, and 
several thousand Americans volunteered to fight for the Loyalists. 


November 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











HAS BRAZIL GONE FASCIST? 





nost 
lfe’s 


937 


- 





t P 


ON November 10 President Getulio Vargas of 
Brazil assumed sweeping dictatorial powers, 
dissolved both federal and state legislatures, and 
oclaimed a new constitution with corporative fea- 


"}mres. These steps aroused apprehension that fascism 


thefmight spread to South America, with a resulting 


onal 
10) 


imulus to German and Italian influence in the 
estern Hemisphere. 


Whether the Brazilian coup points toward estab- 


dard jlishment of genuine fascism or reversion to the per- 


al caudillo dictatorship, so frequent a phenomenon 


rter.tin Latin-American countries, remains to be deter- 


1936, 
‘riple 


P. EB 
$2.50 
rican 
enda- 
‘or 


y W. 
1 and 
50 


inter- 
y-felt 


1 cul- 
litical 


é, 


ty of 
aused 


eo 


National 


ined. The answer depends in part on interpretation 
what constitutes the essential characteristics of 
ascism. President Vargas has been at pains to deny 
that the new constitution is “fascist.’” But the author 
of the document, Minister of Justice Campos, hailed 
its most striking achievement the creation of a 
ational Economic Council, embodying the prin- 
iple of corporative organization. This body is to be 
mposed of representatives of agriculture, industry, 
ansportation, commerce and banking. One-half of 
e members in each group will be chosen by em- 
loyers, one-half by workers. The new council, how- 
et, is assigned merely consultative functions, while 
w-making continues to be the responsibility of a 
icameral legislature chosen on the basis of geo- 
phic areas. 


The most significant feature of the new constitu- 
ion relates to the absolute dictatorial powers con- 
trated in the hands of the President, who is de- 
ed to be the “supreme authority in the state.” 
fess summaries indicate that he, not congress, is to 
itiate legislation. He has power to suspend con- 
s and dictate laws by decree. He commands ma- 
inery to veto unfavorable rulings of the Supreme 
tt. He may intervene in state governments, dis- 
lving legislatures and governing through federal 


commissioners. He may run for re-election as many 
times as he wishes, and is authorized to nominate 
a candidate to succeed himself. Latin-American dic- 
tators in the past—no matter how absolute their 
rule—have usually continued to pay lip-service to 
the democratic precepts enshrined in national con- 
stitutions. The legal and permanent status which 
the new Brazilian charter accords the caudillo, or 
Latin-American “Leader,” may prove in practice a 
more important adaptation from fascism than the 
corporative principle. 


The fundamental purpose of the coup of Novem- 
ber 10, in which the President drew more tangible 
support from the army than from the fascist In- 
tegralists, was apparently the continuance in office 
of Vargas, ruler of Brazil since 1930, whose re- 
election was prohibited by the 1934 constitution. 
Elections had been scheduled for January 3, 1938, 
and during the campaign three leading candidates 
had emerged. The rich and influential southern 
states of Sio Paulo and Rio Grande do Sul united 
in support of Armando Salles Oliveira, regarded 
as the representative of big business. The governors 
of the eighteen other states joined in backing the 
more liberal José Américo, formerly Minister of 
Communications in the Vargas cabinet, who ran 
nominally as the “official” candidate. The third con- 
tender was Plinio Salgado, leader of the Integralist 
party, whose membership is variously estimated from 
200,000 to a million or more. But allegedly “dema- 
gogic” speeches by Américo were reported to have 
alarmed army leaders, who found in President 
Vargas a receptive listener to their pleas that his 
continuance in power alone could assure peace and 
order. The convenient discovery by military officials 
of a nation-wide “communist” plot interrupted the 
campaign by the imposition on October 2 of a “state 
of war,” or modified martial law. Unrest was tfe- 

















ported among the followers of Salles Oliveira, par- 
ticularly on the part of Governor Flores da Cunha 
of Rio Grande do Sul, and rumors of revolt began 
to gain currency. The Vargas coup followed. The 
move was accompanied by suspension of payments 
on the foreign debt, and by ratification of an earlier 
move to abandon the price-control program for 
coffee production, reduce the export tax by three- 
fourths and initiate a policy of open competition. 

In the Integralists, Brazil can boast of South 
America’s largest fascist movement. Although the 
political section of the organization was dissolved on 
November 12, its propaganda and other activities 
are to be continued. The Integralists are reported to 
be financed with the aid of German money. This 
fact, together with the presence of large colonies of 
Germans and Italians, and recent campaigns by these 
two nations to intensify trade and propaganda in 
Brazil, has fostered the expectation that the new 
régime might soon link the country with the “anti- 
communist” front of Germany, Italy and Japan. 
President Vargas has repeatedly in the past made 
political capital out of “‘anti-communism.” On No- 
vember 13, however, he declared that Brazil would 
not join European alignments and instead would 
develop its “traditional relations of friendship’ with 
the United States. 

Even if President Vargas should declare himself a 
fascist, it may be doubted that he will prove more 
orthodox in his attachment to fascism than he has 
previously been in his professions of democracy. 
None the less, for dictators eager to “rationalize” 
their autocracy, fascism provides a perfect formula. 
Although the economic and social bases for fascism 
in its European form are largely lacking in Latin 
America, many of the continent's present rulers are 
psychologically receptive to the dogmas preached 
from Rome and Berlin. While the countries of Latin 
America vitally need the trade and the capital which 
Britain and the United States are better equipped 
than the dictatorships to supply, it is now evident 
that the possibility of rapprochement between 
Latin American and European dictators is not to be 


lightly dismissed. CHARLES A. THOMSON 


TORIES ADVANCE SOCIALISM 


Only two days after Ramsay MacDonald, Prime 
Minister in two Labor cabinets, had died aboard a 
liner crossing the Atlantic, the Conservative govern- 
ment of Neville Chamberlain announced on No- 
vember 11 an undertaking more socialist in character 
than anything attempted by the Socialists. According 
to a bill prepared for Parliament, nationalization of 
all coal-mines in the United Kingdom will be car- 
ried out within five years under a Coal Commission 
composed of persons not members of either Parlia- 
ment or the mining industry. The Commissioners 


Page Two 











will spend several years in assessing the amounts y 
be paid to each of four or five thousand mine own 
the total purchase price not to exceed $332,250,09 
—less than half the amount demanded by ty 
owners, the greatest of whom are the Church ¢ 
England and several wealthy nobles. Until 194 
when all sub-surface rights vest in the state, 
owners will receive their present royalties. 
Commission, moreover, will seek to reduce the nup 
ber of mines in operation by closing all unprofitabi 
undertakings, if necessary by compulsory amalgam 
tions approved by Parliament. Under this gigantif 
experiment in “Tory Socialism’ the Governm 
hopes to revive one of Britain’s most depressed j 
dustries, which has long suffered from uneconom 
practices, falling prices, and the competition 
petroleum. 

Although still overwhelmingly inferior in ¢ 
national arena to the Conservatives, who contin 
to steal their thunder, the Labor party has made co 
siderable headway in local politics. By gaining 3 
new seats in the municipal elections held throu 
out England and Wales on November 1, the Labor 
ites increased their control from 15 to 17 of the 
boroughs in London and gained power in oth 
areas. More radical policy in the Labor party leade 
ship was presaged at the annual Bournemouth co 
ference in October, when Sir Stafford Cripps a 
Professor Harold Laski were elected to the executi 
committee —a victory of the left-wing Sociali 
groups over the more conservative trade unio 
The fascist party was as severely beaten at tk 
municipal polls as its leader, Sir Oswald Mosl 
had been by rocks thrown at him in Liverpool 
October 10. The frequent clash of fascists and co 
munists has created a violence rarely known i 
British politics, and has compelled the Governme 
to ban the wearing of party uniforms and restr 
the area of demonstrations. 


















In contrast to its prestige in home affairs, bul 


warked by a widespread prosperity for which 
takes full credit, the National Government 
gained a reputation for wavering and ineffectual fo 
eign policy. Its failure to conclude a trade agreement 
with the United States is blamed by many critics 0 
the protectionist leanings of the Cabinet lead 
hard pressed by vested interests, rather than on th 
reported reluctance of the Dominions to modify th 
Ottawa agreements. The uncertainty of British fo 
eign policy has been aggravated by the annount 
ment that Viscount Halifax would soon dep 
for a hunting trip in Germany, an arrangem 
manoeuvred by a Cabinet “cabal’— including 
John Simon and Sir Samuel Hoare—against 
wishes of Foreign Minister Eden, who was repot 
near resignation over this pro-German trend. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 








~ cc 


rv" Io Jao of a oO 


a oo. 


ee ee ee | ee. ee. ee ~~ | 


“=. lc SC 





nts ty 
vn 

0,00 
) the 





We ashington News Letter 


a 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 15—Although the Maritime Commission’s 
report, which was released here last week, has been 
generally greeted as a refreshingly candid docu- 
ment, criticism is heard in some circles that the 
Commission has not squarely faced all the issues. 
Thus, it has failed to point out the many contra- 
dictions inherent in our policies affecting shipping 


quate merchant marine in order to prevent a shortage 
of shipping facilities in time of foreign wars, yet 
we have adopted neutrality legislation the object of 
which is to prohibit American vessels from carry- 
ing a considerable portion of our trade in such an 
event. Our navy exists at least in part to protect the 
merchant marine; yet if the United States were in- 
volved in war, many of our commerce-carriers 
would be mobilized to assist the war fleet. Accord- 
ing to the Navy Department's present plans, which 
are apparently posited on the need for naval opera- 
tions far from home bases, the navy would require 
about 1000 merchant vessels aggregating 6,000,000 
gross tons in the early stages of the conflict. In other 
words, practically the entire merchant marine would 
be enlisted for service as auxiliary cruisers, trans- 
ports, airplane carriers and supply ships, just when 
wartime requirements of imports and exports would 
greatly increase the demand for shipping facilities. 
To satisfy these diverse needs we would have to 
build a substantial amount of surplus tonnage in 
time of peace. 

Washington knows from past experience that 
such a program entails repeated and costly raids on 
the public treasury. During and immediately after 
the World War, the United States spent well over 
$3,000,000,000 in the construction and operation of 
a huge merchant marine. Although in the last fifteen 
years an additional subsidy of over a quarter of a 
billion dollars has been expended to keep the Ameri- 
can flag on the seas, almost the entire fleet is ap- 
proaching obsolescence today. Ninety-two per cent 
of our ocean-going vessels and 88 per cent of the 
total tonnage will become 20 years old in the next 
five years. To replace all these ships would cost 
$2,500,000,000—an obvious impossibility. 

Prospects for new construction, the Commission 
concedes, are “exceedingly vague.” Only nine ship- 
ping companies are assured continued operation un- 
der the Merchant Marine Act of 1936, which pledges 
the government to pay the difference between do- 


mestic and foreign building and operating costs. A 
number of companies have promised to start con- 
struction of 65 ships costing $137,000,000 in the 
next five years, but even this modest program is con- 
tingent on economic conditions and further liber- 
alization of government aid. According to the Com- 
mission the crux of the problem lies in the difficulty 
of attracting sufficient private capital to an industry 
which is so completely dependent on continued gov- 
ernment support as shipping. The Commission sug- 
gests that steps be taken to protect shipping interests 
against sudden withdrawal or. curtailment of sub- 
sidies, yet it frankly recognizes that the government 
may ultimately have to shoulder the entire expense 
of rebuilding the merchant marine. Under such cir- 
cumstances, public ownership and even operation 
may become inevitable. 


Some of the more internationally minded people 
in Washington prefer an entirely different approach 
to the merchant marine question. They see a funda- 
mental contradiction between our nationalist ship- 
ping policy and the liberal trade program now fol- 
lowed by our State Department. Subsidies call forth 
counter-subsidies and, in the end, we may again 
suffer from a world-wide surplus of shipping ton- 
nage. Is it not desirable to halt nationalist shipping 
competition by international action? Some here 
would answer this question in the affirmative, but 
few believe such a solution possible. 


Navy Report stresses new construction. Couched 
in unimaginative phrases and distinctly unrevealing 
in substance, the annual report of the Secretary of 
the Navy for the fiscal year 1937 strikes a general 
note of satisfaction. Construction is going forward 
rapidly under the terms of the Vinson-Trammell 
Act of 1934 providing for a “treaty-strength” navy 
—still officially our goal despite the expiration of 
the pacts concerned—and personnel and material 
have reached a high degree of efficiency. There are 
relatively few demands for increased appropriations. 
In the main these are requested for new auxiliary 
vessels to maintain and supply the fighting fleet in 
wars waged far from our shores, and for additional 
trained personnel in all grades, active and reserve, 
to man the ever-increasing number of ships. 


Observers who oppose the Navy’s tendency to be- 
come a policy-making body rather than an executor 
of the policy of civilian authorities have shown some 
concern because of one section of the report. 
Under the heading “Operations,” maintenance of 























the naval establishment “in sufficient strength to 
support the national a and commerce and to 
guard the continental and overseas possessions of 
the United States” is termed “the established and 
— naval policy.” To the knowledge of such 
rvers this creed, which is expanded to include 

the protection of “American lives and interests in 
disturbed areas,” has not been approved by any of- 
ficial body except the General Board of the Navy 
itself. It is believed that no policy which might con- 
ceivably involve armed support of the open door in 
China, and naval protection of American shipping 
attempting to run a Japanese blockade, or of Ameri- 
can citizens and property situated in war zones can 
be properly termed “established and approved.” 
Such a conception, it is asserted, runs distinctly 
counter to the spirit underlying the Neutrality Act. 
Fortified by the strong support it has received 
from the Roosevelt Administration, the Navy is 


Page Four 





— 
—— 





now said to be considering plans for further expan- 
sion. The forthcoming session of Congress will be 
asked to provide not only for construction author- 
ized under the Vinson Act and for two more replace- 
ment battleships, but also, it appears likely, for a 
new authorization act permitting the fleet to surpass 
the limits set by the defunct naval treaties. This 
legislation would permit the United States to retain 
its relative position in the current naval race, par- 
ticularly with reference to Japan—the sole power 
which the Navy appears to regard as a potential 
opponent at the present time. With Congress in an 
“economy mood,” the Navy Department is expected 
to repeat the time-honored tactics of the services: 
urging passage of an authorization bill with the 
argument that it involves no immediate appropria- 
tion; and then—later—demanding appropriations on 
the ground that they are necessary to fulfil the con- 
struction policy to which Congress is committed. 


¢ 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


The Final Choice: America Between Europe and Asia, by 
Stephen and Joan Raushenbush. New York, Reynal 
and Hitchcock, 1937. $2.50 


A penetrating analysis of the choice confronting Demo- 
cratic America in its effort to avoid war, by two former 
investigators for the Senate Munitions Committee. 


Japan in American Public Opinion, by Eleanor Tupper 
and George E. McReynolds. New York, Macmillan, 
1937. $3.75 


Utilizing statements of the press, politicians, publicists 
and academicians, two scholars vividly depict America’s 
gradual shift from Japanophilism to Japanophobia since 
1905. This exhaustive and well-balanced piece of research 
should be required reading in the study of Japanese- 
American relations. 


If War Comes, by R. Ernest Dupuy and George Fielding 
Eliot. New York, Macmillan, 1937. $3.00 


Two U.S. Army officers present a balanced military 
analysis of the character of modern war, with special 
reference to the new instruments with which it is fought 
and the strategic situation confronting the major powers. 
The authors occupy a position midway between the post- 
war mechanization enthusiasts and the professional con- 
servatives of the old school. They strive to be rational 
and almost succeed. 


The House in Antigua, by Louis Adamic. 
Harper & Bros., 1937. $3.00 


A sensitive story of a historic old mansion in Guate- 
mala, its ruin and restoration. 


Commercial Banks. Geneva, League of Nations, 1937. 
Distributed by Columbia University Press, New York. 
$1.50 
A companion volume to the League’s Monetary Review 

which brings much useful data on banking in every 

country of the world. 


New York, 


The British Betrayal of the Assyrians, by Yusuf Malek. 
Chicago, Assyrian National League of America, 1936. 
$3.00 


An Assyro-Chaldean indicts Britain for its failure to 
protect the persecuted Assyrian minority in Iraq. 


Western Civilization in the Near East, by Hans Kohn. 
New York, Columbia University Press, 1936. $3.50 


A very thoughtful and interesting account of the gen- 
eral impact of Western civilization on the countries of 
the Near East. The author is a well-known historian 
who has specialized on nationalism. 


Economic Development of Germany under National So- 
cialism, by Vaso Trivanovitch. New York, National In- 
dustrial Conference Board, 1937. $3.50 


This well-balanced and objective picture of economic 
conditions in the Third Reich can be recommended. The 
section on public finance, however, is rather unsatisfac- 
tory, and the book omits all discussion of the very impor- 
tant Estate for Agriculture. 


World Finance, 1935-1937, by Paul Einzig. New York, 
Macmillan, 1937. $3.00 


An interesting volume dealing with the collapse of the 
gold bloc, measures for reflation, the failure of economic 
sanctions, rearmament, and the sterling-dollar-franc nex- 
us. Its value is reduced by the author’s exaggerated faith 
in currency depreciation as a panacea for both economic 
and political ills. 


Public Enterprise, by William A. Robson. London, George 
Allen and Unwin, 1937. Distributed in the United 
States by the University of Chicago Press. $3.00 


This pioneering book, analyzing the work of the Lon- 
don transport system, the central electricity authority and 
other similar bodies, should be read by all those interested 
in the changing relationship of government and business. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 4, NovemBer 19, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lusiig Bust, President; Vera Micuetes Daan, Editor. Entered as second-class matter 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 














