livision 
eS Was 
. None 
ity, and 


ommit- 
” until 


| 


> Com- | 
ion has | 


still at 
ry. It is 
t advo- 
t John- 
all ex- 
nterna- 
O unite 
its Op- 
1 to all 
appar- 


osal or 


yr until 
its own 
dminis- 
moral” 
aterials 
so far 
tervene 


"ONE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
ubscription, Two Dollars a Year 


gf PoLicy ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
1 gees 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


V TII, No. 31 May 26, 1939 


— 


F. P. A. MEMBERS 


We hope very much that you will drop in to see us 
at National Headquarters if you are in New York this 
summer for the World’s Fair. We shall have on 
hand information about discussions of international af- 
fairs taking place during your visit. 


We offer you a warm welcome and look forward 
with pleasure to seeing you. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


General Library 
Michigan 


lIniwwarvaetity ~ 
UNiIVErsgitcLy Oa 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


| 


WESTERN POWERS STIFFEN IN FAR EAST 


_ line with their efforts to form a stop-Hitler 

coalition in Europe, the Western powers now 
seem prepared to adopt a stronger stand in the Far 
East. Vigorous steps taken at Amoy and Shanghai 
on May 17-18, as well as firm notes by the American 
and British governments, have apparently fore- 
stalled threatened seizure of the foreign settlements 
by Japanese military forces. Japan’s drive against the 
settlements brought to a climax a series of increas- 
ingly overt encroachments on Western interests 
which began with the occupation of Canton last Oc- 
tober. Hainan Island was seized in February, and 
the Spratly Islands were occupied a month later. 
Since these moves affected either Chinese territory or 
areas to which title was in doubt, the Japanese For- 
eign Office was able to disregard foreign protests. 
But on the issue of the settlements and concessions 


| in China, where the legal position is clear, the West- 


ern powers evidently decided that the time had come 
to call a halt. 


DRIVE ON FOREIGN SETTLEMENTS. For 
several months local Japanese authorities in China, 
as well as responsible officials at Tokyo, have been 
conducting a campaign designed to establish Ja- 
pan’s control over the foreign settlements. The most 
important of these foreign-controlled districts, es- 
tablished in a number of Chinese cities over the past 
century, are located in Shanghai, Tientsin and 
Hankow. In Tientsin Japanese nationals demon- 
stratively moved out of the British and French con- 


} cessions several months ago, and an attempt was 


made to surround the foreign-administered area with 
an electrified wire barricade. At Shanghai, after a 
tense situation created by Japanese demands on the 
Municipal Council of the International Settlement 
in February, a modus vivendi which did not essen- 
tially alter the existing status was reached on 
March 3. Several weeks later agitation was renewed 


at Shanghai, and on May 3 the Tokyo Foreign Office 
handed notes to the British and American Ambassa- 
dors formally requesting certain changes in the ad- 
ministrative status of the International Settlement. 
On the following day the Japanese Consul-General 
presented similar demands to the local Shanghai 
authorities, while declaring to the Japanese press 
that “the so-called Settlement question has entered 
its last stage.” On May 6 Japanese army headquarters 
at Tientsin issued a statement presaging “suitable 
measures for self-protection and the maintenance of 
peace and order.” 

On May 12 Japanese marines were landed at 
Kulangsu, island center of the International Settle- 
ment at Amoy. This occupation, ostensibly motivated 
by the shooting of a local Chinese puppet official, 
was followed by demands for revision of the Kulang- 
su administration. Events at Kulangsu, it was im- 
mediately recognized, provided a test case for the 
larger issues at stake in Shanghai and Tientsin. While 
the authorities of the Kulangsu Settlement resisted 
the Japanese demands, several Western naval ves- 
sels were concentrated at the island, and on May 17- 
18 American, British and French patrols, each equal 
to the Japanese occupationary force, were landed. 
In Shanghai, on May 21, the foreign authorities of 
the International Settlement and the French Con- 
cession had meanwhile proclaimed a strict ban on 
political activity—-a measure directed primarily 
against Chinese groups. The local Japanese com- 
munity, however, launched a campaign of mass 
meetings and demonstrations for revision of the 
Settlement’s administrative status, and a Japanese 
naval spokesman threatened action similar to that 
taken at Kulangsu. On May 19 both foreign areas at 
Shanghai mustered an impressive display of all avail- 
able military, naval and police forces, which under- 
took an extended search for terrorists and concealed 


~—_—>——anDnaa@=]E[==a2a==SSSS=—=- Page Two 


arms. As at Kulangsu, this display of force was ob- 
viously designed to check the possibility of a Jap- 
anese military coup. For the present, the firm meas- 
ures taken by the Western powers seem to have at- 
tained their object. 

U.S. REJECTS TOKYO’S DEMANDS. At Tokyo, 
on May 17, the American Ambassador delivered 
a reply to the Japanese aide-mémoire of May 3, re- 
lating to demands affecting the Shanghai Settlement. 
The American government, in its reply, declared 
itself ready to participate in “friendly and orderly 
negotiations properly instituted and conducted” for 
any needed revision of the Settlement’s land regu- 
lations. Present abnormal conditions, however, of- 
fered no basis for “an orderly settlement of the com- 
plicated problems involved which would be reason- 
ably fair to all concerned.” The United States re- 
jected Tokyo’s demand for revision of the voting 
system, on the ground that the Japanese community 
already enjoys a proportionately greater vote than 
that to which it is entitled by virtue of the munici- 
pal rates and land taxes it pays. Adjustments of the 
Settlement’s administrative practice had been made 
in the past, and the American government felt that 
similar attempts to meet “any reasonable requests” 
would continue. The efforts of the Settlement of- 
ficials to perform their normal functions, how- 
ever, had been “seriously handicapped” by “lawless 
activities in areas contiguous to the International 
Settlement and by refusal on the part of the Japanese 


—— 
—— 


military forces to return the Settlement area lying 
north of Soochow Creek to the effective control of 
the authorities of the International Settlement,” 
Smooth functioning of the Settlement’s administra. 
tive machinery would be promoted by a “frank tee. 
ognition” on Japan’s part of the excellent work of 
the Settlement authorities and ‘by the prompt restora. 
tion to those authorities of complete control over 
the Settlement area extending north of Soochow 
Creek.” On May 19 the British reply, presented at 
Tokyo by Sir Robert Leslie Craigie, also rejected 
Japan’s demands regarding the Shanghai Settlement, 


During recent weeks, an intense struggle has been | 
proceeding within Tokyo government circles over 
the attitude to be adopted toward the European situ. 
ation. Pressed by Germany and Italy to join in a full. | 
fledged military alliance, the Japanese authorities | 
have thus far refrained from making any definite 
commitments. Except for Generals Itagaki and | 
Koiso, the War and Overseas Ministers, the Cabinet | 
seems to be united in opposing commitments which 
would automatically carry Japan into a European | 
conflict. A new anti-Comintern pact with Germany | 
and Italy has apparently been drafted along the lines | 
necessitated by this cautious attitude, but the mili- | 
tary extremists are still pressing for an outright alli- _ 
ance. It remains to be seen whether the Hiranuma | 
Cabinet can overcome the army opposition and en- | 
force acceptance of the new pact. 


T. A. Bisson 


BRITAIN OUTLINES PALESTINE “INDEPENDENCE” PLAN 


The latest British statement of policy on Palestine, 
published on May 17 and debated in Parliament on 
May 22 and 23, contains no surprises. Blaming the 
ambiguity of earlier pronouncements and pledges 
for much of the strife between Arabs and Jews, the 
new White Paper unequivocally declares that “‘it is 
not part of” British policy that ‘Palestine should 
become a Jewish state’; denies that wartime prom- 
ises to the Arabs justify the claim that Palestine 
should be converted into an Arab state; and describes 
the British objective as self-government in an inde- 
pendent Palestine, in which Arabs and Jews shall 
share authority in such a way that the essential in- 
terests of each are assured. 

Despite its recognition of the need for clarity, the 
White Paper is itself vague and replete with qualifi- 
cations regarding the increasing degrees of authority 
to be delegated to Palestine’s inhabitants—perhaps 
unavoidably so. Two points only are unmistakably 
clear. First, the admission of not more than 75,000 
Jewish immigrants during the next five years will be 
followed by establishment of an Arab veto over im- 
migration which should cement the Arab’s numerical 
and political dominance over the Zionists. Second, 


—— 


tion 0: 
give tl 
omy 
the cc 
consis 
be fa 
High 
land f 
Lik 
Arab 
predic 
repres 
Mufti 
Palest 
dition 
contir 
Egypt 
Britis 
onus | 
borne 
ernm< 
estine 
in wi 
one | 
meas 
contis 
aratic 
the m 


W 
tions 
illust 


| of uf 


the insistence of the British that the constitu- 
tion of the new state and its fundamental treaty | 
with London protect British strategic interests, minot- 
ity rights in Palestine, and the holy places, fore- | 
shadows long-continued British control in the man- | 
dated area. 
TRANSITION TO INDEPENDENCE. Evol: | 
tion toward self-government in the Holy Land may 
be checked at any moment at Britain’s discretion. 
Once peace and order have been sufficiently restored, | 
a transitional period will begin, during which Arabs | 
and Jews will be invited to serve as heads of execu- | 
tive departments, with administrative and advisory | 
functions, in the two-to-one proportion of their re | 
spective populations. Eventually their powers would | 
be extended by formation of a council of ministers, 
while an elective legislature might also be estab | 
lished. After five years of the transitional régime 4 
representative body would be set up, with British 
participation, to make more definite recommenda- 
tions regarding the country’s future. This body would 
presumably implement Britain’s ‘objective’ for Pal- 
estine—an independent government within ten 
years. Nothing in the White Paper precludes crea- 


ernm 
natio 


The 1 
Mo 
A ‘ 

ticula 

provi 
tratic 
mend 


Ame? 
Ho 


Se 
lent : 
ninet 


Unec 
19 
A 

Japa 

brok 

he r¢ 
mea! 

FORE 

Headc 

Enter 


—= | — Page Three SSS 


a lying | tion of a federal system of government which would _ been narrowed. In evaluating the Palestinian conflict 
trol of | give the Jewish community a degree of local auton- _the verdict of the disinterested observer must depend 
ment.” | omy in the regions where it is now concentrated. On entirely on the standards he adopts. Both Arabs and 
unistfa- | the contrary, such a development, which has been —_— Zionists can cite historical claims to the Holy Land. 


nk rec. | consistently advocated in some British circles, may If those who bring material wealth and physical im- 
vork of | be facilitated by new powers granted the British provement to all the inhabitants of an undeveloped 
restora. | High Commissioner to restrict or prohibit Jewish country are justified in settling there and governing 
ol over | jand purchases in certain areas. themselves, then the Zionist position is well found- 
20chow Like the White Paper itself, the reactions of the ed—particularly since Jews see no other immediately 
nted at Arab and Jewish communities have followed the available haven for their persecuted brethren. If the 


rejected | predicted course. Although it was reported that the doctrine of national self-determination, now so fash- 
lement, representatives of other Arab states had urged the _—ionable in Europe, is the paramount consideration, 
as been | Mufti of Jerusalem to accept the British terms, the | then the Arabs may undeniably demand immediate 


2S Over | Palestine Arabs have apparently decided to seek ad- self-government—without British interference of any 
an situ- | ditional concessions from London. Arab violence has sort. But if preservation of the communications and 
1 a full | continued, if on a diminished scale, and both the strategic interests of a great empire is believed to be 


horities | Egyptian and Iraqi governments have informed the all-important, both these claims must be subordinated 
definite | British of their disapproval of the White Paper. The to the maintenance of British authority. 


ki and | onus of resistance to the new plan, however, is being Even more than in the past, it would appear that 
Cabinet | borne by the Zionists, who have flooded British gov- the imperialistic factor is now the basis on which 
s which | ernment offices with world-wide protests. In Pal- decisions regarding Palestine are being made in 
iropean | estine there were large demonstrations on May 18, London. The British are apparently willing to yield 
ermany | in which a British policeman was killed and over some measure of autonomy to the Arabs in order to 


he lines | one hundred Jews were wounded. While violent end the three-year revolt which has irritated other 
ie mili | measures have since been abandoned, symbolic strikes Arab governments and threatened Britain’s prestige 


sht alli | continued for several days, and Zionists made prep- and ascendancy throughout the Arab world. The 
ranuma | arations for a long period of non-cooperation with Arabs, courted by the fascist powers, are in a position 
and en- | the mandatory government. to drive a hard bargain with Britain for their support. 
WHOSE RIGHT IS SUPREME? These manifesta- The Zionists, on the other hand, have no choice but 
SSON | ‘tions on the part of both Palestinian communities 0 cast their lot with the opponents of fascism. More 
illustrate the absolute impossibility, at the moment, than ever before, the fate of Palestine during the 
of uniting their leaders in a common national gov- next ten years of uncertainty will be inextricably 
onstitu- | ernment. There is no sign that the gulf between two bound up with political developments on the world 
| treaty | nationalities striving to live in the same territory has  S€@8°- Davy H. PopPpER 
munot- 
ie man- , » ‘ . 
The Dragon Wakes, by Edgar Ansel Mowrer. New York, the Eighth Route Army in Shansi. An effective piece of 
Morrow, 1939. $2.00 writing, done with style, insight and imagination. 
Evolu- A “report from China” on the first year of the war, par- : 
nd ma ticularly valuable for its information on the southwestern The Japanese Canadians, by Charles H. Young and Helen 
Nay | provinces and the Chinese central government’s adminis- R. Y. Reid. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1938. 
cretion. | tration and personnel. Its brevity and clarity should com- $2.25 
estored, | mend it to the lay reader. A balanced, factual survey of the status of Japanese 
ie r _ in Canada, supplying a mass of illuminating information 
Arabs oe age by — Rhea Dulles. Boston, on their economic, cultural and social adjustments. Part 
' execu- oug so a ee 1938. $3.50 II deals with Oriental living standards in Canada, includ- 
dvisory Second edition, with a revised introduction, of an excel- ing both Chinese and Japanese. 
f lent study of America’s expansion across the Pacific in the 
heir f@ | nineteenth century. Inside Red China, by Nym Wales. New York, Doubleday, 
— Doran, 1939. $3.00 


Unconquered, by James Bertram. New York, John Day, A first-hand account of the Chinese Soviets in the sum- 


in iSters, 1939. $3.00 mer of 1937, when Japan was launching its invasion and 
> estab- A vivid, personal narrative of the first year of the Sino- the Kuomintang-Communist “united front” was being 
‘gime a | Japanese conflict. The author was in Japan when the war formed. Indispensable companion volume to Edgar Snow’s 
British — out, and in Peiping when it fell to Japanese forces; Red Star over China, both for its mass of supplementary 
e revisited both Japan and North China a year later, and information on the Chinese Communist movement and its 

menda- meanwhile had spent four months with fighting units of narrative interest. 


y would 
for Pal- FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 31, May 26, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lgsimm BUELL, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dgan, Editor. 
in ten Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


CS Cfed- | i 181 F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


a a 


x 
5 SS ee eae aS ee 


J aa 
al 
Py 
iy. 
ra 
[it 
‘\t 
3 7 


Washington News Letter 


predbtnny 


: 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


May 22.—Almost three weeks have passed since 
the conclusion of the public hearings on proposed 
amendments to the Neutrality Act without any move 
on the part of the Administration to break the ap- 
parent deadlock on this central issue of American 
foreign policy. While the House Foreign Affairs 
Committee has voted unanimously to invite the Sec- 
retaries of State, War, Navy and Commerce to ap- 
pear as witnesses, not a single Cabinet officer has 
testified and no authoritative statement of the Ad- 
ministration’s desires has been forthcoming from 
any source. 


TWO NEW FORMULAS FOR NEUTRALITY. 
The only development last week was the introduc- 
tion of two new ‘“‘compromise” proposals, neither of 
which seems likely to resolve the present contro- 
versy. One of these, sponsored by Senator Gillette, 
a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, pro- 
poses a partial return to the traditional rules of in- 
ternational law by repealing most of the existing 
law. It seeks to accomplish the same purpose as the 
Pittman Resolution by eliminating the arms embargo, 
but in place of the cash-and-carry formula, Senator 
Gillette would substitute a less rigid “trade at your 
own risk” clause. Whenever the President, or Con- 
gress, declares that a state of war exists, the Presi- 
dent shall, by proclamation, “define the area of com- 
bat operations . . . and thereafter any citizen of the 
United States or any American vessel that enters or 
proceeds through any area shall do so at his own 
risk.’" The Gillette proposal retains the existing pro- 
hibition on loans and credits and continues the 
functions of the Munitions Control Board. Other 
provisions of the present law are repealed. 


The second new proposal, drafted by Representa- 
tive Bloom, acting chairman of the House Foreign 
Affairs Committee, embodies the same principle of 
“trade at your own risk.” It would also omit the arms 
embargo and authorize the President to define com- 
bat areas through which American vessels should 
pass at their own risk. In addition, however, it would 
retain certain other features of the existing law, such 
as restriction of travel by American citizens on bel- 
ligerent vessels, and exemption of all American Re- 
publics from the provisions of the statute. 

From the Administration point of view, this new 
formula would seem to represent a substantial ad- 


vance over the Pittman bill and other pending pro. 
posals. In the event of a general war in Europe, j 
would not only open the American market to Britaip 
and France, but would permit American vessels tp 
engage in wartime trade, provided they did so 4 
their own risk. While it makes no further conces. 
sions to those who advocate economic sanction; | 
against aggressor nations, it would confer greater | 
freedom of action on the Executive and restore, t | 
some extent, the traditional neutral rights claimed | 
by the United States in the past. 


In Congress it is possible that the “trade at your | 
own risk” policy may prove to have more Support | 
than the Pittman cash-and-carry formula. It is op. | 
posed by Senator Borah and the isolationist block, 
who hold the balance of power in the Senate, and for 
the moment it seems to have little chance of passage. 
Nevertheless, it comes closer to the views of isola. 
tionists like Senator Johnson, who favor a return tw 
international law as the best means of keeping out 
of war. Without some leadership or initiative from 
the Administration, however, no compromise of any 
kind will be possible during the present session of 
Congress. 


In searching for a solution, the State Department 
would be well advised to analyze more carefully the 
testimony at the recent hearings, and to explore the 
possibility of other methods of dealing with the 
problem. The hearings demonstrated conclusively 
that Congress is still opposed to granting the Presi- 
dent discretion to embargo aggressors or to take sides | 
openly in Europe or the Far East. But they also | 
demonstrated that Congress is not at all anxious to| 
“legislate” a foreign policy to meet all future con- 
tingencies. One approach open to the Administra 
tion is to clearly reassert the primary objectives of | 
American foreign policy, and to suggest a practical } 
alternative to the present law. Such an alternative | 
might be found in legislation entirely divorced from | 
the existing Neutrality Act, and based solely on con- 
siderations of the ‘‘national interest’’ and the ‘‘com- | 
mon welfare.” The present law regulating the ex 
port of tin plate scrap falls into this category and ' 
might conceivably be extended to cover other basic | 
commodities, such as petroleum, scrap iron and steel. 
While this would not resolve all the issues in con- 
flict between Congress and the Executive, it would, 
in the opinion of many observers, offer new possibili- 
ties for constructive action. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 


An in 


4 
B 
inten 
resist 
tion 
Trip! 
Hun; 
Italy 
the r 
ing 
just 
partt 
man’ 
in th 
whos 
pres: 
S¢ 
ance 
ests 
mor 
wart 
case 
a se 
read 
Gert 
cal ; 
ized 
pare 
war 


| copy 


ship 
elec 
ficie 


