


FPA 


Hon- 
f the 
\ and 
t over 


r Lord 


single 
traces 
of his 
ir and 


>», New 


ulgaria 
is some 
ny, and 
ought 


143 





ep 3 1943 
Eni as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Yo. XXII, No. 46 


SEPTEMBER 8, 1943 





A the fourth year of World War II came to an 
end, new signs of weakness appeared in Hitler's 
furopean fortress. The success of the Russian sum- 
mer offensive, the devastation wrought by Anglo- 
American bombing, Nazi efforts to bolster morale on 
the German home front, and dramatic developments 
in Bulgaria and Denmark all attested to the difficul- 
ties Hitler must contend with now that he is on the 
defensive. 


“NEW ORDER” IN TROUBLE. The open re- 
bellion of the Danes on August 29, when they 
suttled some units of their fleet and moved others 
to Sweden, was both the answer to the Nazi imposi- 
tion of martial law and the culmination of re- 
cent anti-German demonstrations, strikes and sabo- 
tage. According to Stockholm reports, it has already 
‘led to the resignation and arrest of the Danish 
Premier, Erik Scavenius, and his Cabinet, and to the 
internment of King Christian X. But in assuming 
wntrol of the government and inaugurating a reign of 
terror intended to ‘‘discipline’’ the Danes, the Nazis 
have placed an added strain on their military re- 
\serves. Moreover, this outburst of popular hostility 
on the part of the best-treated of the occupied coun- 
ties is undoubtedly a fatal blow to whatever moral 
prestige the “New Order’’ still possesses in Europe. 

The death on August 28 of King Boris of Bul- 
gatia—one of the leading Axis henchmen in the 
) Balkans—may have even wider significance. Whether 
Boris was poisoned by the Nazis for refusing to ac- 
pt Hitler's demands at a recent meeting, was shot 
ty one of his own bodyguard because of his pro- 
German policy, or died of heart attack is still ob- 
sure. But whatever its cause, the Bulgarian mon- 
atch’s death quickly led to anti-Nazi riots in Sofia 
and a popular demand that the country withdraw 
ftom the Axis. Rumors that continued unrest in Bul- 
garia might lead to Turkey's entry into the war may 
be discounted, but the United Nations can count the 





MOUNTING NAZI DIFFICULTIES DO NOT HERALD EARLY COLLAPSE 


removal of Boris from the Balkan scene as a distinct 
blow to Nazi power in that region. 

Meanwhile, the problem of maintaining morale 
on the German home front, in the face of the de- 
struction of Hamburg and Nazi reverses on the 
Russian front, was highlighted on August 24 by the 
appointment of Heinrich Himmler, Gestapo leader, 
as Minister of the Interior and Chief of Reich Ad- 
ministration. In making the hated Himmler master 
of the home front—with the exception of labor, 
which was put under Hitler's personal direction— 
and raising him to No. 3 man in the Nazi hierarchy, 
the Fuehrer seems to have played one of his last 
trumps. The move will probably prove successful, at 
least in the short run, for no matter how widely the 
appointment may be resented by the German people, 
or how much they dislike the increased coercion 
which Propaganda Minister Goebbels promised them 
on August 25, there will be even less opportunity for 
opposition to the sacrifices which a total war has 
now brought to their doorstep. Moreover, it should 
not be forgotten that the assumption of control over 
air-raid defenses by the Nazi party last winter led 
to increased efficiency and at that time added to the 
prestige of the party. But, if Himmler fails to check 
the wave of defeatism which will inevitably gain 
momentum in Germany, it is difficult to see where 
Hitler can turn. 


Nazi efforts to bolster morale by the Himmler ap- 

intment, and by constant repetition of the warn- 
ing that the whole of Germany will be devastated if 
the United Nations are victorious, have been met by 
the Western Allies with both reassurances and 
threats. In his quarterly lend-lease report of August 
25, President Roosevelt made it clear that the Allied 
unconditional-surrender policy did not mean that 
Axis peoples must trade “Axis despotism for ruin 
under the United Nations. . . . The goal of the United 
Nations is to pérmit liberated peoples to create a 

















free political life of their own choosing and to attain 
economic security.” On August 29 the United States 
and Britain also reaffirmed their promise that the 
instigators and perpetrators of crimes in the occupied 
countries would be brought to justice, thus drawing 
more clearly the distinction made in Washington and 
London between the leaders and the peoples of the 
Axis nations. 

NEED FOR WESTERN FRONT STILL ACUTE. 
But such political warfare can hardly be expected to 
bring decisive results until the military pressure 
against Germany has reached greater proportions. 
The “softening up” of Italy is already in progress 
and may be followed any day by Allied landings on 
the mainland. Allied bombing raids on key cities and 
production centers, especially if they are on the scale 
of the Hamburg and Berlin attacks, will undoubtedly 
continue to reduce the Reich’s war potential and 
weaken civilian morale. The Soviet summer offensive 
which forced the Germans to withdraw from Tagan- 
rog on August 30, thus threatening their whole posi- 


KUOMINTANG-COMMUNIST FRICTION HAMPERS CHINA’S RESISTANCE 


The creation of a Southeast Asia Command under 
Lord Louis Mountbatten, hitherto Britain’s Chief of 
Combined Operations, undoubtedly points to am- 
phibious actions in the Indian Ocean area, even 
though major drives may not soon be forthcoming. 
. This new step toward an all-out offensive in Asia, 
announced from Quebec on August 25, will encour- 
age China in its determination to continue resistance 
in the face of difficult war conditions and Japanese 
efforts to divide the United Nations. In fact, two 
weeks before, on August 11, dispatches from Chung- 
king had already reported the rejection of three 
separate Japanese peace feelers within two months. 
One of these offers allegedly promised a return to 
the status quo of July 7, 1937, when China began its 
national resistance to Japanese aggression. 

RESISTANCE HINGES ON INTERNAL PEACE. 
Significantly, it was asserted at the same time that 
Chungking contemplated no forcible action to dis- 
solve the Chinese Communists, with whom its rela- 
tions have been tense for several years. It had been 
rumored earlier that the Central government might 
initiate a military campaign against the Communist 
region in the northwest. These rumors were linked 
with suggestions that discussions for a settlement 
between the parties had broken down and that the 
Central armies regularly stationed as blockade troops 
on the border of the Communist area had been rein- 
forced by new divisions. The denial that hostili- 
ties impend is all the more important because the 
outbreak of large-scale civil war could only result in 
a condition of peace with the foreign enemy, whether 
or not China and Japan concluded a formal agree- 
ment. The absence of civil conflict is therefore the 
best indicator of continued Chinese resistance. 


Page Two 












— 


tion in the Donets Basin, may soon drive them back jy 
the Dnieper line. But too much importance shoul 
not be attached to evidence of German weg. 
nesses. In spite of the tremendous Russian pressure 
the Nazis are putting up stubborn resistance and 
date have shown no signs of anything approachj 

a rout. As Russian supply lines are lengthened ang 
German lines shortened, the progress of Stalin's 
armies can be expected to slow down. At the same 
time, German fighter planes are taking an increasing. 
ly heavy toll of British and American bombers ig 
the air war over the Reich, while weather condition 
probably prohibit any significant stepping-up of the 
tempo of Allied raids. And finally, however rapid 
and complete an invasion of Italy might prove, it 
could scarcely be more than a diversionary campaign, 
not a direct blow at the heart of German power, 
Until a major land front is opened in Western Ey. 
rope and makes successful headway, it seems unlikely 
that the Nazi régime will be broken either at home 
or in the occupied countries. H. P. WHIDDEN, JR 


BawmMoOoaern ee’ Ss. 


ww fe Se. or.CoS 


Relations between Chungking and the Communists 
are highly complicated, but the salient facts appear to 
be these. In 1935 the Communists, who a short time 
before had been forced out of south-central China| 
by the national armies, established a Soviet govern- 
ment on the borders of the northwest provinces of 
Shensi, Kansu and Ninghsia. In September 1937, 
after the outbreak of resistance to Japan, a formal 
rapprochement between the Communists and the Cen- 
tral government was announced. The Communists 
abandoned the Soviet form of organization, and re 
nounced the policies of overthrowing the Kuomintang 
and confiscating land. Previously, the Central av- 
thorities, with Communist approval, had renamed the 
Chinese Red Army the Eighth Route Army (later), 
changed to Eighteenth Group Army) and had rec], 
ognized its commander and vice-commander by for-| ; 

: 
: 








faa ke kre Rm tse ret Se OClUrmmelcaRmrlCUCC CUS! hlUrlhlCUCUC TUCO 


mally appointing them to their existing posts. These 
troops were also promised aid in the form of sup 
plies and money. The Communists, in turn, declared 
that the Eighth Route Army would be under the 
control of the National Military Council. | 
SOURCES OF FRICTION. No other terms wert 
announced, but foreign observers generally assumed} 
that the northwest Border Region would gradually 
be incorporated in the national territory, ant 
that the Communists would be recognized as a legal 
political party. During the first two years of wil 
Kuomintang-Communist relations were correct, an 
the Eighth Route Army received Central governmett 
aid in waging guerrilla warfare behind the Jape 
lines. After the fighting with Japan reached a deat 
lock, Free China’s internal economic problems be)’ 
came more serious, and friction began to develop 
Under the stress of critical conditions and the proH 








—= 


back ty 
should 
Weak. 
ressure, 
and ty 
_ 
ed and 
Stalin's 
1€ Same 
reasing. 
bers ip 
nditions 
> of the 
ft fapid 
rove, it 
mpaign, 
power, 
rern Ev. 
unlikely 
at home 
DEN, Jk. 


imunists 
ppear to 





—_—_ 





pect of prolonged war, differences stemming from 
the previous period of civil conflict began to over- 
shadow the more recent unity. The low point was 
seached at the beginning of 1941 when Central 
troops in the Yangtze valley sought to break up the 
Communist-led New Fourth Army, a guerrilla force. 
Since then there has been an uneasy political stale- 
mate. 


Many groups within the Kuomintang and the 
government distrust the Communists and their war- 
time activities. This is in part the result of the guer- 
ila social program which is a far-reaching one, 
wen though it is based on private property and profit. 
Pethaps more disturbing to the Central authorities 
s the fear that during the war the Communists will 
gtablish the basis for a powerful position in post- 
wat China. The most frequently advanced Kuomin- 
ng charge is that the Communists, in effect, have 
heir own army, currency, taxes and system of govern- 
ment. This, it is said, makes cooperation with them 
inpossible. The Communists reply that their meas- 
wes are essential to mobilization of the people for 
military activities against the Japanese. It is also 
suggested that the full incorporation of their area 








ort time 
1 China 
govern. 
inces of 
sr 1937, 
. formal 
the Cen- 
ymunists 
and re- 
mintang 
tral au- 
med the 
ry (later 
had rec 
t by for 
‘s. These 
of sup 
declared 
nder the 


‘ms were 
assumed 
rradually 
ry, and 
Sa legal 


; of wal 
rect, and 
vernment 
apanes 
f Peal 
lems be 
develop. 
the pros 


in the rest of China depends upon their recognition 
as a legal group and the development of national 
institutions in which all parts of the country can 


j 


| participate. The seriousness of the impasse is obvious 


even from this brief statement of differences. 


AMERICA’S INTEREST. The solution of China’s 
internal problems is basically a Chinese affair. Yet 
itis apparent that the United States is watching the 


By granting recognition to the French Committee 
of National Liberation on August 26, the United 
States and Britain have taken another step toward 
restoring France to the position it lost with the de- 
feat of 1940. But to the Committee, whose major 
tbjective since its formation by de Gaulle and 
Giraud on June 3 has been securing recognition by 


PageThree 





For an analysis of the United Nations’ position in 
the Pacific area, READ: 


STRATEGY OF THE WAR IN ASIA 
by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25c 


FOREIGN Po icy Reports, Vol. XIX, No. 3 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 














—————=—= 





situation with concern. The continued unity of our 
Far Eastern ally is clearly essential not only to vic- 
tory over Japan, but also to the development of a 
stable, post-war China that can make its full con- 
tribution to peace in the Pacific. This was indicated 
almost a year ago, on October 12, 1942, in a state- 
ment by Sumner Welles, then Under Secretary of 
State. According to Mr. Welles, it was the view of 
the United States that “the Chinese Government 
should try to maintain peace by processes of concilia- 
tion between and among ali groups and factions in 
China . . . . this Government desires Chinese unity 
and deprecates civil strife in China. . . .” 

Although the Under Secretary of State is currently 
reported to have resigned from his post, it does not 
appear that anything has occurred to make his state- 
ment less representative of America’s interests today 
than at the time it was first uttered. It is encouraging 
to note that similar views are apparently held in 
some Chungking quarters. According to a report by 
Brooks Atkinson in the New York Times of August 
17, 1943: “Some members of the Kuomintang and of 
the Government think the differences can be resolved 
by a series of compromises. Since it would be to 
everyone's advantage to remove this flaw in national 
unity, they believe in compromises without violence.” 
Before long the People’s Political Council, China's 
national advisory body, will hold another session. It 
will be interesting to see whether steps are taken at 
that time to ease the internal situation. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(This is the last in a series of four articles on the 
present crisis in China.) 


RECOGNITION LEAVES FRENCH COMMITTEE’S POST-WAR STATUS UNCERTAIN 


the United Nations, the Anglo-American action was 
somewhat disappointing, and it may be expected that 
the French in Algiers will make fresh attempts to 
improve their position. 

QUESTIONS LEFT UNANSWERED. Instead of 
recognizing the Committee as in charge of the ad- 
ministration and defense of a// French interests— 
in accordance with de Gaulle’s and Giraud’s request 
—the British and American governments insisted on 
several restrictions and left unanswered important 
questions concerning the future of the organization. 
In the military field, the statement that the French 
must continue to be subject to the requirements of 
the Allied commanders can have been no surprise to 
de Gaulle or Giraud, for it has been the consistent 
policy of both Britain and the United States to give 
General Eisenhower as free a hand as possible in the 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 46, SEPTEMBER 3, 1943. 


One month for change of address on membership publications. 


Be 181 





Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Legr, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 
&cond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Incorporated. National 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











North African theatre. Less expected, in all proba- 
bility, were the limitations Prime Minister Churchill 
and President Roosevelt imposed when they specifi- 
cally recognized the Committee only “until French 
soil is freed from its invaders,” and as ‘“‘administer- 
ing those French overseas territories which acknowl- 
edge its authority.” Both governments thereby failed 
to indicate acceptance of the Committee as spokes- 
man for the underground or the attitude they expect 
to take toward the Committee after the Nazis have 
been forced out of France and before a Republic is 
established. 


Although de Gaulle and Giraud have constantly 
maintained that they do not aspire to establish a 
“government” and that the people must elect their 
own representatives as soon as possible after libera- 
tion, both men are eager to have their Committee 
and its anti-Vichy supporters at home play an im- 
portant role during those months when the economic 
and social structure of the restored Republic is be- 
ing formed. As the London Economist has observed: 
“The crisis through which the French have passed 
makes it possible for them to strike out on a new 
road. Unhappily, it gives them no guarantee that the 
road will be the right one.” The French Committee 
feels this challenge is one it can and should meet 
lest France fall into the hands of local fascists. As 
invasion of Europe approaches, the British and 
Americans will be obliged to decide on the merits of 
the Committee’s case, and it is to be hoped that their 
forthcoming discussions will be facilitated by the 
improved status of the French body. 


U.S.S.R. TAKES DIFFERENT VIEW. The Anglo- 
American notes different only in tone—the American 
stressings its reservations more bluntly—but So- 
viet recognition, accorded on August 26, was much 
broader than that of the Western powers. In the 
words of Foreign Commissar Molotov, the French 
Committee is “the representative of the State inter- 
ests of the French Republic and leader of all French 
patriots fighting against the Hitlerite tyranny.” By 
accepting the Committee on these terms, the U.S.S.R. 
emphasized its close relations with the French, who 
have had political and military missions in Moscow 
and a Normandie Aviation Squadron on the eastern 
front for more than a year. Additional notes of recog- 
nition have been sent to Algiers by the governments- 
in-exile during the past three months. Although the 
representatives in London of these occupied coun- 
tries—unlike the French Committee—have constitu- 
tional ties with elected pre-war régimes and the full 
recognition of Britain and the United States, some 
of them apparently tend to judge their own future 
treatment by that accorded the French in Algiers. 


A NEW COLONIAL POLICY. Since the United 


PPR _ ——K—K—_K_KF_7C**#]]]]]]]]]]== 


States, Britain, the U.S.S.R. and the 11 other United 
Nations which have recognized the French Commit. 
tee all agree in accepting it as the administrator of 
those large sections of the Empire which recognize 
its control, it may be worth while to point out some 
of the reforms which have characterized de Gaulle’s 
colonial policy. Instead of subscribing to the old 
ideal of a highly centralized administration with 
real power resting entirely in the hands of the Min. 
ister of Colonies, de Gaulle has favored giving more 
responsibility to native chiefs and local administrators 
and referring only questions of over-all policy to the 
central authority. 


The new program has been carried out most com- | 


pletely in French Equatorial Africa, where the Gov- 
ernor General is an outstanding Negro administrator 
who was influential in 1940 in preventing the region 


from accepting the armistice with Germany—as | 


North Africa did. In this area, which is nearly four 
times as large as Texas and has a population of ap- 
proximately 3,500,000, Governor Eboué has given 
unprecedented encouragement to tribal self-rule and 
the authority of native chiefs, partly because he be- 
lieves it impossible to make Africans into French- 
men, and also because he has been faced with the 
practical necessity of making decisions under condi- 
tions of war-imposed isolation. In addition to the 
principle of decentralization in relations between 
colonal administration and native populations, much 
larger local autonomy in financial matters has been 
granted. Whereas the old system permitted expendi- 
tures only for specific items listed in the budget, the 
new practice allows the governor of a territory to 
exercise judgment concerning the best use of the 
money allotted him. After three years of this kind 
of emphasis on the personal initiative of local ad- 
ministrators and the shaping of regulations to fit a 
particular area’s needs, it seems unlikely that the 
pattern of the pre-war French Empire can or will be 
restored by the new Republic. Wuoareep N. Hanae 


CHANGE IN TITLE OF F.P.A. PUBLICATION 

With the August issue—The Changing Far East, 
by William C. Johnstone—the title of the F.P.A. 
publication formerly called HEADLINE Books has 
been changed to HEADLINE SERIES. 





Falange, by Allan Chase. New York, Putnam, 1943. $3.00 


Exposé of the Nazi-inspired Falangist underground in , 


the Americas. Probably a valuable source of information, 
but marred by oversureness and an emotional approach. 


The Fighting French, by Raoul Aglion. New York, Henry 
Holt, 1943. $3.00 
The New York representative of the French National 
Committee presents the first book-length account of the 
Fighting French from 1940 to the Casablanca Conference. 
Contains important information on the colonies, de 
Gaulle, and the underground. 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 

















i on | 


a ee” hl lO ee, AlCl | OCU O 


