mm 
——$———— 


the ex. 
Major. 
lain in 


e army 
which 


e mod. 


ime the 
ip first 
f nego- 


al to aff 


tments. 
ropped 
“oreign 
ter ac- 
e army 
to man 
; finally 
aucrat. 
t holds 
as does 
e resig- 
2 Privy 
f Baron 
le most 
n—also 
sts. In 
er, the 
the ap- 
id Mat- 
isehold. 


‘om the 
il situa- 
hen the 
s. The 
inly by 
finister, 
held by 
rarding 
relief,” 
ble for 
; circles 
million 
cchange 

Taka- 
demand 
mount- 
is now 
r on in- 
as well 
ill have 
ch con- 
-onflicts 


ISSON 


National 
AN, Easter. 
Year. 


Leeks ik 


Bian aoe Aelia it 


PAREN Rs S95 


spite t9 U8 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


VoL. XV, No. 23 


APRIL 3, 1936 


WHAT WILL THE ELECTIONS BRING TO FRANCE? 


On the answer to this question hinges the future of demo- 
cratic government in the French republic. 


POLITICAL CONFLICT IN FRANCE 
by John C. deWilde 


April 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


GERMANY’S 


“PEACE” 


PLEBISCITE 


URING the past week the two Fascist states in 

Europe have exhibited feverish activity, off- 
set to a certain extent by a House of Commons de- 
bate in Britain marked by firmness and modera- 
tion. As had been predicted, Hitler rejected on 
March 24 the offer made by the four Locarno 
powers, on the ground that it was “primarily 
based on new discriminations intolerable for a 
great nation.” Germany, however, agreed to ad- 
vance new proposals after Hitler’s peace plebis- 
cite. On Sunday, March 29, nearly 45,000,000 
Germans participated in this plebiscite, which was 
hailed as the greatest internal triumph of the 
régime: 99 per cent of the votes cast endorsed 
Hitler’s foreign policy, and 98.5 per cent of the 
eligible voters went to the polls. Germans who 
showed any reluctance to cast ballots were routed 
out by energetic Storm Troopers, and virtually the 
only way a voter could express a negative vote was 
to spoil his ballot or cast a blank; even so, many 
blanks were counted in support of Hitler. 


Mussolini Moves toward Socialism 


In Italy Fascism is girding itself for new 
struggles. On March 22 Italy signed an agree- 
ment with Austria and Hungary, supplementing 


| the Rome protocols of January 1934. This agree- 


| 23. Mussolini 
} Chamber of Deputies in favor of a National Coun- 
| cil of Corporations representing economic inter- 
/ ests, and the nationalization of large industries 
| needed for war purposes. 
| inated by one premise—the inevitability of the 


' When? How? Nobody can tell. 
) of destiny run fast.” 


ment provides for Austrian independence and for 
mutual consultation between the parties regarding 
political and economic matters. It strengthens 
Italy’s position in the negotiations for Central 
European reconstruction which the Little Entente 
states hope to start in the near future. On March 
announced the abolition of the 


“This plan is dom- 


nation’s being called on to face another war. 
But the wheels 
Under the impetus of belli- 


cose nationalism, Fascist Italy is rapidly moving 
toward state socialism, the benefits of which are 
accruing not to the workers but to militarism. 

In a desperate new effort to bring the Negus 
to terms, Italian airplanes on March 29 destroyed 
the unfortified and demilitarized city of Harrar, 
in violation of international law. Far from being 
of military value, this destruction undoubtedly 
will antagonize the local tribes which Italy has 
wished to win over. Despite recent communiqués 
painting glowing victories, well-informed observ- 
ers remain skeptical as to Italy’s military pro- 
gress. One correspondent who just returned from 
the front writes: “It has taken six months to 
penetrate less than 115 miles into Ethiopia, and 
this was the easiest part of the campaign in the 
north.. . The rains are starting and Mussolini’s 
armies are nowhere.’’* It is difficult to see how 
the League members can lift sanctions against 
Italy before fighting ceases. Despite outside pres- 
sure, the Negus seems no more willing to sur- 
render to Mussolini than at the beginning of the 
campaign. 
Britain and Collective Security 

That Britain is conscious of its grave responsi- 
bility in the present crisis was indicated in the 
House of Commons debate of March 27. Ina 
statesmanlike address Foreign Secretary Eden, 
while stressing the gravity of the present situa- 
tion, defended the commitments towards France 
assumed by Britain in the four-power declaration 
of March 20. The military conversations soon to 
take place, he said, were purely for the purpose of 
carrying out existing political obligations; they 
corresponded to the naval conversations last fall 
regarding fulfillment of the League Covenant in 
the Mediterranean. The Locarno agreement mere- 
ly carried “a stage further the commitments” al- 
ready undertaken in the Covenant. It was conse- 
quently fantastic, Mr. Eden declared, to suggest 


*Fay G. Wells, New York Herald Tribune, March 29, 1936. 


Periodical Division, 
tibrary of Congress, »% . 
10 cae 
‘ Wop 
t D C . ™ a) 
' shin Lon, © . X 9 
“Sa wat 


or that foreign country. I should like to say to 
France that we cannot insure peace unless the 
French Government is ready to approach with an 
open mind the problems which still separate it 
from Germany. And I should like to say to Ger- 
many how can we ever hope to enter negotiations 
with any prospect of success unless you are pre- 
pared to allay the anxieties in Europe you have 
created?” Speaking for the Labor opposition, 
Hugh Dalton criticized the government on the 
ground that it had abandoned a League policy in 
favor of an Anglo-French alliance. According to 
the Labor party, Locarno is not enough. Its prin- 
ciples should be extended to the whole European 
continent, including the Soviet Union. If Ger- 
many refuses to return to the League, the other 
countries must “organize peace without her and 
Britain must make it clear that Germany is to 
have no free hand to attack Poland, Czechoslo- 
vakia, Austria or Russia.” Neville Chamberlain, 
Chancellor of the Exchequer, declared that “un- 
provoked aggression by Germany against Czecho- 
slovakia or any other power in Eastern Europe 
would immediately come under the notice of the 
League, and we would be bound by our obligations 
to the League, which we would be ready to fulfill 
in common with other members.” Evidently 
Britain is not willing to give the Fascist states a 
free hand either in Central Europe or in Africa. 
Although the British are still denounced in France 
for not applying sanctions against Hitler, the 
French public is on the whole gratified by Brit- 
ain’s unconditional pledge to defend it against at- 
tack; and in an election speech of March 29 For- 
eign Minister Flandin, although questioning the 
value of Germany’s signature, did not exclude the 
possibility of negotiations, “provided the basis of 
such negotiations is precise and serious.” 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


THREE POWERS SIGN NAVAL TREATY 


In a final effort to preserve the principle of 
naval limitation during a period of uncontrolled 
armament competition, Britain, the United States 
and France signed a new naval treaty in London 
on March 25. This treaty, which abandons the 
ratio and tonnage system of the Washington-Lon- 
don agreements, embodies two main features: 

1. A system of “qualitative limitation” which 
seeks to prevent competition in new types by de- 
fining the maximum size and armament of vessels 
to be constructed by the three signatories during 
the next six years. These provisions fix the top 
limit for capital ships at 35,000 tons; aircraft 


Page Two 
that Britain was “tied to the chariot wheels of this 


carriers, 23,000 tons; cruisers, 10,000 tons; de- 
stroyers, 3,000 tons; and submarines, 2,000 tons. 


2. A provision for “advance notice” of all war. F 


ship construction during the life of the treaty, 
with elaborate stipulations for exchange of in- 
formation on building programs. Each power is 
required to inform the others of its contemplated 
program during the first four months of every 
year. 

Under the terms of this flexible agreement the 
three powers will be free to build as many ships 
as their “national defense requirements” dictate 
or their budgets permit. The treaty makes no pro- 


visions for scrapping over-age vessels, and the fF 
parties apparently contemplate retaining many > 
old ships in all categories while proceeding with | 
new construction. The United States voluntarily : 


agrees to a holiday in construction of 10,000-ton 


cruisers, but is free to proceed with the building 


of new 35,000-ton capital ships, and the comple- 


tion of its present building program. Britain is | 


free to lay down the 25 small cruisers necessary 
to bring its fleet up to the 70 ships desired by the 
Admiralty for nearly ten years. The text of the 
treaties, moreover, is studded with 
clauses” which permit the signatories to lay aside 
hampering restrictions whenever their “require- 
ments of national security” are threatened by the 
building programs of other states. 


The value of any naval “agreement” which does 
not include Italy and Japan is problematical, and 
the carefully worded escape clauses emphasize the 


United States regard the future. In view of Japan’s 
continued advance on the Asiatic mainland, the 
notes exchanged by Norman Davis and Anthony 
Eden reaffirming the principle of “parity” be- 
tween the United States and Britain assume 
greater significance than the treaty itself. Al- 
though there is no tangible evidence to support 


uncertainty with which Britain, France and the | 


the rumors of a new Anglo-American understand- 4 
ing, it is apparent that Japan’s activities in China | 


and its denunciation of the Washington-London 
agreements have brought Britain and the United 
States closer than at any time since the Washing- 


ton conference. WILLIAM T. STONE 


Our Enemy, the State, by A. J. Nock. New York, William 
Morrow & Co., 1935. $2.25 
Interesting discussion of the process by which the state 

gains power at the individual’s expense. 

Cuban Sideshow, by R. Hart Phillips. Havana, Cuban 
Press, 1935. Distributed by Baker and Taylor, New 
York. $2.25. 

A vivid and caustic diary of revolutionary days (1933- 

1984), by the wife of the New York Times correspondent. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 23, APRIL 3, 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesige Busi, President; EstHen G. Ocpan, Secretary; Vera Micuetes Daan, Heiter. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


Nationa! 


TT rete Oe 


“escape F 


