


not 


The 
tlee 
ead- 
the 
it is 
rce- 
con- 
1 of 
nay 
e in 
the 
rity 
uate 
eace 
The 
mis- 
nbat 
» an 
The 
as a 
n is 
nted 
and 
ES 





DEC 8 1945 
Entered as 2nd class matter 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 7 


NovemBsr 30, 1945 





CHINA'S INTERNAL STRUGGLE FOCUSES ON MANCHURIA 


Sa struggle for control of North China and 
Manchuria now developing between Chungking 
and the Chinese Communists is still in an early 
phase, whether the contending parties continue their 
hostilities or at some point reach a political work- 
ing agreement. By the middle of November United 
States warships had moved over 100,000 Central 
Government troops to North China and landed them 
at such key points as Tientsin, Tsingtao and Chin- 
wangtao. From the last-named port Chiang Kai- 
shek’s forces, armed with lend-lease materials, have 
pushed their way into southern Manchuria with the 
ultimate objective of taking the rail hub of Mukden 
and the regional capital of Changchun. Although 
the Communists have strengthened themselves in re- 
cent months through the seizure of Japanese arms, 
technical superiority is clearly on the Central Gov- 
emment’s side. This superiority is reinforced by the 
presence in North China of over 50,000 United 
States marines, who have made possible the entrance 
of Chungking divisions by holding certain cities for 
them until their arrival, jointly patrolling these cen- 
ters with the Central troops thereafter, and guarding 
stretches of railway in the Peiping-Tientsin area. 
NO QUICK DECISION. Despite the advantages 
accruing to Chungking because of current American 
aid, there is no reason to suppose that a military solu- 
tion of China’s political differences could be reached 
within a brief period. An all-out civil war would 
almost inevitably be a prolonged and unpredictable 
struggle—a fact which reinforces the suggestion made 
by Under Secretary of the Navy Artemus L. Gates 
at Tsingtao on November 18 that the American pub- 
lic ought to be more fully aware of the seriousness 
of the China problem. It is worth recalling that, dur- 
ing the last period of Kuomintang-Communist civil 
strife, fighting lasted almost ten years (1927-36). 
Today, it is true, the Central forces are better 


trained and equipped than before the war with Japan, 
but this is also true of their opponents. The Commu- 
nists, who had less than 100,000 troops in 1937 and 
occupied a small, lightly populated region in the 
Northwest, now have many times that number of 
men and exercise political authority of varying 
strength in a large section of North China, as well 
as in parts of Central China and Manchuria. 

BIG STAKES IN MANCHURIA. The magnitude 
of the military and political issues involved is indi- 
cated by the very size of Manchuria, which is almost 
as large as France, Italy and pre-1938 Germany 
combined and has a total population of over 40,- 
000,000 people (of whom more than nine-tenths are 
Chinese). It is a territory of great natural re- 
sources and fertile soil, and its leading products in- 
clude soy beans, wheat, coal, iron ore and shale oil. 
At the same time it has a more highly developed rail- 
way system than any other Chinese area of equal size 
and, as a result of having been harnessed to the Jap- 
anese war machine, is the outstanding industrial 
region of the country. (Manchuria’s industrial power 
may, however, be reduced, if recent allegations of 
Russian removal of machinery prove correct.) 

At no time in recent centuries has Manchuria been 
fully integrated politically with the rest of China. 
Under the Manchu Empire, it was administered se 
arately as the ancestral home of the ruling Manchus 
and immigration from other parts of the country was 
restricted. With the founding of the Republic in 
1912 Manchuria passed under the rule of local war- 
lords, culminating in the ““Old Marshal,” Chang Tso- 
lin, and his son, “Young Marshal” Chang Hsueh- 
liang, who succeeded him in 1928. Chang Hsueh-liang 
was attracted toward the idea of Chinese unity on a 
nationalist basis, but the Japanese took over his em- 
pire in 1931, and for the next fourteen years Man- 
churia experienced a separate type of economic and 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 








—_————— 


political development under Japanese control. 

All these factors suggest that the forces making 
for Manchurian regional sentiment are likely to be 
strong, and that incorporation of the area into the 
pattern of a united China will not prove an easy task. 
In the months since the Japanese surrender no clear- 
cut information has been available concerning Man- 
churian political sentiment, but it will be important 
to see whether the name of Chang still carries any 
—— magic. Chang Hsueh-liang himself has been 

ept in custody by the Central Government ever since 
he was involved in the seizure of Chiang Kai-shek 
at Sian in December 1936. But two of his younger 
brothers, Chang Hsueh-shih and Chang Hsueh-ming, 
are reported to be generals in the Communist forces 
in Manchuria. 

MOSCOW’S STAND. The key position in Man- 
churia is now held by the Russians, who occupied the 
region after entering the war with Japan and, under 
the terms of the recent Chinese-Soviet pact, are to 
have special rights in certain Manchurian railways as 








DAILY CONTACTS IN EUROPE AID RUSSO-WESTERN UNDERSTANDING 


LoNnDON.—Can the Western world find a basis for 
a workable understanding with Russia, or is a con- 
flict between them inevitable? This is the urgent 
question that haunts a continent freshly ravaged by 
war yet already living in dread of a still more devas- 
tating struggle. To this question there are two pos- 
sible answers. The Western powers could act on the 
assumption that an understanding with Russia is im- 
possible. Then Britain and the United States should 
do everything in their power to pool their resources 
of money, goods, shipping and aviation, instead of 
competing with each other for possession of these 
sinews of modern war as they are doing today. They 
should also seek to obtain the support of the coun- 
tries of western Europe—from Norway to France and 
Italy—and organize the resources and manpower of 
their zones in Germany into a front-line bulwark 
against Russia. Such a policy might prove in many 
respects feasible, but we must recognize that it is 
the policy advocated by Hitler and propagated by 
Goebbels, of girding Europe for a war on Russia. 
The alternative is for the Western powers to act on 
the assumption that, arduous as negotiations with 
Moscow. will continue to be, it is essential for the 
security and stability of Europe that they should 
keep on trying to reach an understanding with Russia. 

IMPACT OF WEST ON EAST. Actually, this 
would be the worst possible moment at which to 
isolate Russia or permit Russia to withdraw into it- 
self, as it has shown signs of doing, for at this very 
moment the Russians, through force of circumstances, 
have had to come into much closer contact with the 
Western world than they had done since 1917. And, 
at the same time, the Western world, seeing Russians 


Page Two 








—S 


well as in Port Arthur and Dairen. Chungking ha 
been anxious to secure Soviet backing for the ep. 
trance of Central troops into Manchuria by air ang 
sea, since the land route now being used is not satis. 
factory for the movement of large forces. The course 
of the discussions has been unclear, but the Russians 
apparently are carefully fulfilling their agreement 
with Chungking under a policy of not giving aid tp 
the Communists and of withdrawing Soviet troops 
from Manchuria. Chiang Kai-shek has found, hoy. 
ever, that the latter arrangement, which seemed 
desirable at the time of treaty negotiations as a safe 
guard against prolonged Russian control, no longer 
serves Central purposes. For under existing circum. 
stances the Communists, who are close to key Man. 
churian centers, are in a position to take over man 
important points evacuated by the Russians. Chung. 
king has therefore been seeking to induce Moscow to 
abandon its policy of neutrality and instead actively 
facilitate Central operations. 
LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


at first hand, has had a better opportunity than since 
1917 to appraise Russian ideas and practices by the 
harsh light of every-day life instead of the rosy glow 
of Utopian hopes. Not only in Germany and Austria, 
where the Russians must work directly with the 
Americans, British and French in Allied control 
councils, but also in eastern Europe and the Balkans, 
thousands of Russian soldiers have experienced a 
shock on coming into contact with peoples whose 
standards of living, while low compared to our own, 
are infinitely higher than those of Russia, especially 
now that its most advanced industrial areas have been 
devastated by the Germans. Returning soldiers bring 
back tales of their experiences, and their newly 
aroused aspirations for a fuller life may prove as 
explosive in the Russia of today as the new ideas 
brought back by the officers of Alexander I from the 
Napoleonic campaigns. 

TREND TOWARD MODERATION. But just as 
the Russians are learning that the rest of the world 
is not living, as they had been taught, exclusively 
like the characters of “The Grapes of Wrath,” so 
Westerners are learning that Russia is not the para- 
dise some of them had believed it to be. One reason 
for this is that the flower of the Russian armies per- 
ished on battlefields from Moscow to Stalingrad. The 
soldiers now seen in Europe often lack training and 
discipline. In a sense, it would have been better for 
the Communists if Russia’s armed forces had nevet 
appeared in the flesh and if Russia had remained 4 
myth. Now Westerners who might have been 
tempted to turn to communism have been disheatt- 
ened to discover what they should have known: 
that the Russians are still a relatively backward 





ple 
for thi 


social 

their ¢ 
prover 
differe 
pifican 
Russia 
the s 
régime 


tional 
where 
Demo 
in ine 


Y | Nove 


especi 
alone 
preset 
pressi 
anti-S 
conce 
freest 
peop! 
or no 
politi 
condi 
answ' 








PERS R*RSBREREF RSE Il 


2 


ng- 
rely 


FR 


low 


RSE E 


da 
10Se 


ally 


‘ing 
wly 
as 
leas 


it as 
orld 
vely 


afa- 
son 
per 
The 
and 
for 
ver 
da 


art- 
wn! 
ard 








—s 
——— 





ple, dazzled by Western civilization and often, 
for that reason, hostile to it; and that the political, 
social and economic system they developed out of 
their own needs and traditions, effective as it has 
proved in the U.S.S.R., is not applicable to the vastly 
different conditions of the Western world. It is sig- 
nificant that the countries of Europe closest to 
Russia geographically are the ones which have shown 
the strongest trend toward moderate political 
régimes, as in Hungary where the Small Landholders’ 
won nearly 60 per cent of the votes in the na- 
tional elections of November 4, and in Austria, 
where the moderate People’s Party and the Social 
Democrats decisively defeated the Communists even 
in industrial centers in the national elections of 
November 25. At the same time these elections, 
especially those held in Hungary, where the Russians 
alone are in control, offer striking evidence that the 
presence of Russian troops did not prevent free ex- 
pression of public opinion. On the contrary, even 
anti-Soviet Hungarians outside the country readily 
concede that the elections of November 4 were the 
freest and most indicative of the true temper of the 
people to be held in Hungary since 1919. Whether 
or not Hungary and Austria can work out moderate 
political régimes in the midst of parlous economic 
conditions is a question the Big Three will have to 
answer through joint action. 


8 


Christmas Gifts 


As another Christmas approaches, we remind 
FPA members and subscribers to give friends a 
membership in the Association or a Headline 
Series subscription. During this significant post- 
war period, your gift will be read and re-read and 
will be an invaluable aid in interpreting the rap- 


idly changing events. 
REGULAR MEMBERSHIP*...... . $5.00 
ASSOCIATE MEMBERSHIP* (open to 


teachers, librarians, social workers, and 
DNS 60 0 6 6 0.000 ao & 0D $3.00 
*Includes weekly Foreign Policy Bulletin and 
Headline Series. 
SPECIAL HEADLINE SERIES SUB- 
SCRIPTION (10 issues) ........ $2.00 


If you act promptly, we shall do our part to see 
that your Christmas gifts and announcement 
catds are taken care of in good time. 


Page Three 





nd 


BRIDGING THE GAP. The gap between Russia 
and the West can be bridged if both we and the 
Russians succeed in rising above our respective fears 
and prejudices. Russia, following the example of the 
United States and Britain, is asserting itself in all 
continents, determined to act like a great power. It is 
just as idle for Mr. Attlee to call on Russia to pre- 
sent its final demands as it is for a man of mature 
years to ask an exuberant youth to formulate his final 
life plans. There is no finality in life; nor is there any 
reason to believe that the Western powers themselves 
want to stand still. The world is capable of effecting 
progressive reforms without aping Russia. Foreign 
Commissar Molotov acknowledged this in his refer- 
ences to Europe on the anniversary of the Russian rev- 
olution. The Western powers, for their part, should 
recognize that Russia has a contribution to make 
without necessarily adopting our political and eco- 
nomic institutions, which are alien to its experience. 





We and the British cannot keep on asking Russia 
to clarify its intentions in Europe unless we clarify 
our own. We cannot keep on being merely against 
everything Russia wants in Europe. We must make 
up our minds what we are for. The British Labor 
party’s victory has immeasureably strengthened the 
Social Democratic groups on the continent at the 
very moment when the appeal of communism is 
being weakened by Europe's direct contact with Rus- 
sia’s armed forces. This is the strategic moment for 
the United States to sustain the groups in Europe 
which share our ideas, instead of worrying about 
their tendency to control certain forms of private en- 
terprise. At the same time, we should assure Russia 
that we are ready to aid its internal reconstruction 
and work with it in strengthening the economies of 
its neighbors in eastern Europe and the Balkans as 
the best assurance against the military resurgence of 
Germany. And we must give convincing evidence, as 
Secretary of State Byrnes said on October 31, that 
“America will never join any groups in those coun- 
tries [adjoining Russia} in hostile intrigue against 
the Soviet Union.” Such assurance is essential, be- 
cause many groups in Europe remain convinced 
that the next war is just around the corner, and that 
it will be a war between Russia and the United 
States. Our political leaders should miss no oppor- 
tunity to dispel this impression, which for some Euro- 
peans is a matter of deep anxiety, but for others a 
matter of alarmingly eager hope. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 7, NovEmBER 30, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Screet, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lzer, Secretary; Vera MicHeLes Dgan, Editer. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Be 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











Washington News Letter 

















ISOLATIONISTS USE PEARL HARBOR TO ATTACK F.D.R. POLICIES 


The special Congressional committee, which on 
November 15 began a public investigation of the Jap- 
anese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, 
could seriously harm the country by creating the im- 
pression that a simple explanation can be found for 
that catastrophe and the war which it started. Ten 
years ago another Congressional inquiry, the Nye 
Senate investigation of the munitions industry, weak- 
ened the nation by popularizing the false, sensational 
idea that extraneous considerations, such as bankers’ 
desires to recover their loans and munitions makers’ 
interest in promoting widespread consumption of 
their merchandise, sent us to war in 1917. By 
strengthening isolationist sentiment and inspiring 
the policy of statutory neutrality, the munitions in- 
vestigation encouraged the Japanese to pursue the 
Asiatic adventure which led inevitably to Pearl Har- 
bor and conflict with the United States. 


ISSUE OF INVESTIGATION. The current in- 
quiry has turned into an investigation of United 
States foreign policy in 1939, 1940 and 1941. Repub- 
lican members seem to have been attracted by the 
false interpretation of pre-Pearl Harbor events, 
which holds that President Roosevelt, by truculent 
diplomacy, goaded the Japanese into attacking us. 
The special Army Board on Pearl Harbor provided 
some foundation for that thesis by stating on August 
29 that the memorandum which Cordell Hull, then 
Secretary of State, handed to Japanese Ambassador 
Kichisaburo Nomura and special envoy Saburo 
Kurusu on November 26, 1941 “hastened” the attack 
on Pearl Harbor. “It is possible that Hull pulled 
the trigger,” Senator Ralph O. Brewster of Maine, 
one of the Republican members of the special Con- 
gressional committee, said on November 16. 


Opposed to this greatly oversimplified explana- 
tion is the theory that the Pearl Harbor attack was 
the culmination of an aggressive policy undertaken 
by Japan at least ten years earlier with its invasion of 
Manchuria, and that the United States could have 
averted the attack only by sacrificing basic principles 
and interests. This is the contention of former Secre- 
tary Hull, who told the committee on November 23 
that Kurusu had handed him an “ultimatum” on 
November 20, 1941, which required the United 
States, in order to settle Japanese-American differ- 
ences, to give Japan a free hand in China and to 
supply Japan with whatever amount of oil it needed 
for the conduct of war. Acceptance of the Japanese 


——d 


proposal “would have made the United States an ally 
of Japan,” Mr. Hull said to the committee. “It would 
have meant yielding to the Japanese demand that the 
United States abandon its principles and policies,” 


The history of the period 1937-41 discloses tha 
the United States maintained a temperate and r 
strained attitude toward Japan until the Japaneg 
threat to fundamental American interests in Asia, de. 
veloped over many years, became obvious; and that 
American public opinion, which insisted on mildnes 
in 1937 when Japan attacked China, by 1939 was de 
manding that the United States stop its practice of 
selling scrap iron, copper and oil—essential war ma. 
terials—to Japan. By signing the Tripartite Axis Alli 
ance Treaty on September 27, 1940 Japan became a 
diplomatic partner of Germany at a time when the 
United States was developing a policy aimed at help 
ing Britain “short of war” to defeat Germany. From 
April through September 1941, Roosevelt and Hull 
explored American-Japanese relations in talks with 
Ambassador Nomura. Two months before the mem 
orandum of November 26, these talks had already 
made clear that the United States would not accept 
the policy Japan was pursuing in Asia and that Japan, 
for its part, would not abandon that policy. 


As early as March 1941 Japanese Foreign Minister 
Yosuke Matsuoka considered war with the United 
States a certainty. The International Military Ti 
bunal at Nuremberg on November 23, 1945 received 
copies of a report on a secret discussion between Hit 
ler and Matsuoka in Berlin on April 4, 1941. While 
stating that “Japan would do her utmost to avoid 
war with the United States,’ Matsuoka added that 
“he had always declared in his country he thought 
sooner or later a war with the United States would be 
unavoidable if Japan continued to drift along as at 
present.” 


Although United States foreign policy now rests 
on commitments that completely repudiate pre-wat 
isolationism, the suggestion that American rathef 
than Japanese foreign policy brought about the at 
tack on Pearl Harbor epitomizes the isolationist view 
that the United States can safely ignore developments 
on the other side of the oceans. Should that view now 
attract many who rejected it after Pearl Harbor, the 
authoritativeness of this country in its relations with 
other nations would be severely limited. 


BLair BOLLES 





191 


