ji 


It 4 


COM: 


Dio 
Ont. 
Lists 

the 
> he 
nite 


> be 
On 
rom 
rity 
> in 
orm, 
COn- 
nder 
1 its 
[exi- 
dent 
and 
Va: 
had 
3. In 


| are 


de} 


gain 
with 
ratic 


New 


yy an 
f re 
par- 
3 ex 
tains 
*jods. 


ational / 


Lest, 
York, 


—_— 





Dr. Willian Ww. p _ Entered as 2nd class matter 
PHO) De 
* Univ ity a an I ary 
ity of Chiga brary 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 5 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vor. XXI, No. 17 


FEBRUARY 18, 1942 





JAPANESE ADVANCE IMPERILS ALLIED SUPPLY ROUTES 


 elemetatpen efforts on the part of British, Aus- 
tralian and Indian troops to maintain a pre- 
carious last-ditch position in Singapore have only 
served to emphasize the extent to which Japanese 
numerical superiority in men and equipment, boldly 
and resourcefully employed, has been able to dom- 
inate or immobilize the main strongholds of the 
United Nations’ naval power in the Far East. The 
mighty naval base at Singapore has been evacuated 
and rendered useless as a center for British striking 
power. Following closely on the loss of Hongkong, 
Cavite in the Philippines, Balikpapan in Borneo, and 
Amboina in the Dutch Moluccas, the virtual neutral- 
ization of Singapore is a blow which has critical con- 
sequences for the first stage of the Pacific war. The 
only remaining Allied naval bases in the Far East 
and south Pacific area are Surabaya, Java, which has 
suffered a series of heavy bombardments, and the 
Australian harbors—Port Darwin, dangerously ex- 
posed in the north, and Sydney and Melbourne in the 
southeast. Airports are still available at a number of 
points, but ships bearing crates have to be docked and 
equipment and supplies assembled in localities not 
subject to harassing Japanese air and sea raids. 
COUNTER-OFFENSIVE FROM AUSTRALIA? 
All signs point to the probability that Australia will 
become a major base from which to direct Allied 
operations in the drive to hold remaining positions in 
the Dutch East Indies and to strike hard at Japanese 
supply lines and points of military, naval and air 
concentrations. Centers of Australian industry and 
military preparations are located along the populous 
southeastern fringe of the continent. Brisbane, well 
up the eastern coast, is about 1,500 miles by sea from 
the nearest Japanese-held position in the Bismarck 
archipelago. Sydney and Melbourne lie 515 and 1,110 
nautical miles, respectively, south of Brisbane. From 
Melbourne, a railroad runs to Perth on the southwest 
coast; another joins a highway-railroad link to Port 


Darwin in the north. If the seas and straits lying be- 
tween Australia and the East Indies become too dan- 
gerous for shipping as a result of Japanese successes 
in Amboina and Celebes, American reinforcements 
of men, fighter planes and supplies might have to be 
routed to the Sydney-Melbourne area, and then moved 
across the Australian continent. Distances and vaty- 
ing railroad gauges make the transportation problem 
exceedingly difficult. 

PACIFIC PASSAGE. Supply lines from San Fran- 
cisco to Melbourne are nearly 7,000 nautical miles in 
length. Beyond Honolulu, the route traverses a region 
studded with American, British and Free French 
islands. A number of these, such as Johnston, Pal- 
myra, Canton, Samoa and Fiji, are capable of offering 
naval and aerial protection to ships in passage. Flank- 
ing this route on the northwest, however, is a series 
of Japanese outposts at Jaluit and Wotje, in the man- 
dated Marshall Islands; at Makin, in the British Gil- 
bert Islands; and at Rabaul, New Britain, in the Aus- 
tralian mandate. The forward thrust of the Jap- 
anese offensive into the south Pacific archipelagos has 
temporarily slackened but, if it should develop new 
momentum, American-Australian shipping lanes 
might be in danger of even more direct exposure to 
attack than they are at present. A long, circuitous 
southern sea lane would then have to be followed, 
and precious time consumed thereby. Also, if heavy 
bombers are to be flown in numbers to Australia, al- 
ternative routes would have to be prepared. From a 
purely geographical point of view, it is conceivable 
that such transit lines might be developed by way of 
uninhabited Clipperton Island, about 800 miles off 
the Mexican coast, and the Marquesas, under the Free 
French; or westward from Lima, Peru, through Easter 
and Pitcairn Islands. No aerial hop along either of 
these routes would exceed appreciably that between 
San Francisco and Honolulu. 

Since Japan’s communication lines are already 























lengthy, however, further advances into the south 
Pacific and Australian regions may become less feas- 
ible. Fighting is now in progress on a dozen fronts, 
over an immense area reaching from Moulmein and 
Singapore in the west to New Guinea and New Brit- 
ain in the east. The lines of communication which 
converge toward Japan from these points (like the 
sides of an isosceles triangle toward its tip) are al- 
ready 3,000 miles and more in length. Constant 
streams of supplies must be maintained to these 
places, and to many others in between; Japan’s ship- 
ping facilities (as well as war equipment) are not 
indefinitely expansible. 

BY WAY OF CAPETOWN. Since the Mikado’s 
warriors have reached the eastern shores of the In- 
dian Ocean in Burma and Malaya, and have now at- 
tained sea and aerial supremacy in the Singapore- 
Sumatra area, the Indian Ocean may become another 
crucial zone of conflict. If, in their anticipated spring 
offensive, the Nazis stage an all-out drive for Suez 
and the Near and Middle East, they might have 
among other objectives the establishment of direct 





Page Two — 





=| = 
from Britain and the United States to Eritrea (as.| year I 
sembly depot for Suez and Libya), Iran and Iraq} ocent 
move across the Atlantic, around Capetown and) joybte 
through the Indian Ocean. These lines must be held try by 
to serve the present fronts. In addition, they are es. | pyssei 
sential for building up an offensive force in India| was fc 
and Ceylon, to be directed against the Japanese in the | .9.Nal 
east. Here again, the question of bases assumes tran- | i) the 
scendent importance. On the British Imperial side, | \kew: 
headquarters of the Royal Indian Navy are main. | ympa 
tained at Bombay. Closer to the Far Eastern battle ‘explice 
zone is Trincomalee, on the east coast of Ceylon, | of the 
where dockyards, armament depots, and a naval base ing Op 
are maintained. Colombo, on the west coast, is a de. therm¢ 
fended port, but does not possess repair or dockyard tional: 
facilities. Farther south lie naval stations on the Egypt. 
islands of Seychelles and Mauritius, and a base at in Cai 
Simonstown in South Africa. A non-British base in the Now 
Indian Ocean is at Diego Suarez, on the northern tip /arges 
of French Madagascar. Once more, the course of thrust 
Vichy’s policies may carry compelling weight in cal- Nal 








contact with their Far Eastern partners across the ey Rerernene © Seen Sale ae SY hich 

Indian Ocean. At present, the main supply routes WILLIAM P. MADDOX | ities ¢ 

AXIS OFFENSIVE AGAIN THREATENS SUEZ 

The Axis counter-offensive in Libya, launched from by tanks, and superiority in numbers and fire power of | am | 
the swampy ground around El Agheila on January 22, these desert ships is a decisive factor. Above all, suc-| 

has reached within 60 miles of Tobruk and threatens _cess in attack depends on the preservation and exten-|_ AL 

to continue eastward to the borders of Egypt. Com- sion of lines of supply to the advanced fighting units | North 


ing at a time when Allied shipping to the Near East 
is endangered by a marked increase in Nazi sub- 
marine warfare in the Atlantic and when most of the 
available forces of the United Nations are being 
rushed to southeast Asia, the recent Nazi successes 
in North Africa must be viewed as a serious menace 
to the Allied position in the Near East. 

DESERT WAR. The bewildering speed with 
which British Armies have twice swept halfway across 
Libya, only to retreat at an even faster pace, may be 
explained by the peculiar nature of combat in the 
North Africa theater, which is roughly comparable 
to sea warfare. Since the land is barren and provides 
little food or water, it is useless merely to occupy and 
impossible to hold territory as long as the enemy's 
forces are intact in the zone beyond. There are few 
fixed points which can be utilized as strong defensive 
positions. The weight of the battle is carried largely 





New edition... 


WAR ATLAS 


42 maps bd 25c¢ 


Strategic distances in Pacific; Philippines, Malay Peninsula; 
Netherlands Indies; Hawaii; Panama Canal; Russian and 
Libyan Fronts; Strategy in the Mediterranean, etc., etc. 


Order from FPA, 22 East 38th St., New York 














from bases far in the rear. | Minis 
When the British Eighth Army struck westward | 4 J 
from Egypt in November, it enjoyed at the outset the | Ste! 
advantages of local superiority in tanks and planes, therel 
and short transportation lines on land, supplemented sult 
by shipping on the Mediterranean. Moreover the com- front: 
bined action of the R.A.F. and Royal Navy in the the A 
waters between Italy and Africa substantially reduced | ¥* 
the volume of Axis supplies reaching Field Marshal less 
Rommel by the “Libyan ferry route.” Recently, how: | trol 0 
ever, additional Luftwaffe units and German sub-| P*Pé 
marines have been transferred to the Mediterranean | Medi 
where they have not only lowered the British toll of | 
Axis shipping, but inflicted damaging blows on Brit 
ish naval and merchant vessels and desert supply con Th 
voys. The shifting tide of battle, then, is determined 
by developments occurring in many instances far be: | “"?°' 
hind the actual front. The Allies apparently lacked | PO! 
the planes and ships required to safeguard their com-} 4” 


munications and had to retreat, often without actually 
joining battle with the Nazis. “4 
publi 


Rommel’s forces, moreover, appear to have fe 


—_ 


ceived critical supplies from France and Tunisia, Caf} pope 
ried in French ships. This development threatens t0} Headqu 
break the tenuous ties still existing between the Vichy 7 
government and the United States. 


EGYPT RESTIVE. The British position in the 











— | = 





as-] Near East has become more precarious as a result of 
faq} recent internal developments in Egypt, which un- 
ind | Joubtedly reflect the apprehension felt in that coun- 
eld | try by the new German drive. On February 2 Premier 
€s-| Hussein Sirry Pasha, known as a friend of Britain, 
dia | yas forced to resign and was succeeded by Mustafa 
the | on-Nahas Pasha. British sources attribute the change 
aN- | io the influence of King Farouk, who is considered 
de, | jykewarm to the Allied cause, if not an active Axis 
lin- | sympathizer. Farouk’s choice of Nahas Pasha is in- 
ttle explicable on any other ground, for Nahas, as head 
On, lof the proletarian Wafd party, has been the outstand- 
ase | ing opponent of the King and the Palace clique. Fur- 
de. thermore, his party represents the more militantly na- 
ard tionalistic, and therefore anti-British, elements in 
the | Egypt. When wartime coalition cabinets were formed 
at in Cairo, the Wafd steadily refused to participate. 
the Now its leaders, generally admitted to have the 
tip largest popular following in Egypt, are suddenly 
of | thrust into seats of power. 

-a|.| Nahas has declared his intention to carry out the 
‘terms of the Anglo-Egyptian alliance of 1936, by 
which Egypt is pledged to provide all available facil- 
ities to the British Army in time of war. The new 
Premier added, however, that he will endeavor to 
‘spare Egypt the horrors of war,” a phrase which may 
have wide interpretations. 


ALLIES IN DANGER. The Allied set-backs in 
North Africa are extremely discouraging. As Prime 
Minister Winston Churchill stated on December 26 
ard | and January 27, the British strengthened their Near 
the | Eastern forces in late 1941 to the limit of their ability, 
nes, | thereby weakening their Far Eastern defenses. The re- 
ted | Sult now appears to be defeat not on one, but two, 
ym-| fronts. After expending precious lives and matériel, 
the | the Allies are in no better strategic position than they 
ced | Were at the start of the November offensive and, un- 
hal | less reinforcements are rushed to Egypt, Allied con- 
ow. | tol of the vital Suez artery will be threatened, thereby 
ub- | Preparing the ground for major Axis moves in the 
ean | Mediterranean, North Africa and the Middle East. 





5 


x 


r of 
SUC: 
ten- 
nits 





| of | Louis E. FRECHTLING 
rit: F.P.A. ANNOUNCEMENTS 
"On- 


ned| Lhe Foreign Policy Association takes pleasure in 
be. | atnouncing that John I. B. McCulloch has been ap- 
ked | Pointed Acting Director of the Washington Office. 
aint Pan-American News, an F.P.A. publication formerly 
ally edited by Mr. McCulloch, is to be incorporated in a 
new, illustrated monthly magazine which he will 


il publish. The first issue will appear in April. 


? Page Three 








David H. Popper, research associate who has just 
returned from an eight months’ study of Latin Amer- 
ica, has been appointed Associate Editor of research 
publications. William P. Maddox, newly appointed 
Assistant to the President of the F.P.A., will edit 
Headline Books. 





Allenby: A Study in Greatness, by General Sir Archibald 
Wavell. New York, Oxford University Press, 1941. $3.00 
A biography of the prominent British soldier who saw 

service in the Boer War, commanded an army in France in 

1914-17, and directed the successful Palestinian campaign 

against the Turks in 1917-18. The author, now commander- 

in-chief in Southeast Asia, gives special attention to 

Allenby’s desert warfare strategy, which has influenced 

recent campaigns in the Near East. 


Latin America: A Descriptive Survey, by William Lytle 
Schurz. New York, Dutton, 1941. $3.75 
An amazingly successful tour de force, this volume pre- 
sents a wealth of accurate material on Latin America— 
the land, the people, and their social, political and economic 
organization. It is a valuable, and readable, handbook for 
the student of Latin American affairs. 


Introducing Australia, by C. Hartley Grattan. New York, 
John Day, 1942. $3.00 
A thoughtful, pertinent, and readable survey of con- 
temporary Australia, with emphasis on its social structure 
and its place in the Far Eastern conflict. 


Japan Strikes South, by Andrew Roth. 25 cents 
Philippine Emergency, by Catherine Porter. 15 cents 


Showdown at Singapore? by W. W. Lockwood and Michael 

Greenberg. 15 cents 

New York, American Council, Institute of Pacific Rela- 

tions, 1941. 

These three valuable pamphlets cover the situation 
which existed in Indo-China, the Philippines, and Malaya 
on the eve of the outbreak of war in the Pacific. Both in 
fact and interpretation, they point a revealing background 
to the startling events now occurring in Southeast Asia. 


I Paid Hitler, by Fritz Thyssen. New York, Farrar and 
Rinehart, 1941. $2.75 


The deluded industrialist’s penitent explanation does 
much to clarify the characteristics which have made the 
Nazi stranglehold on Germany so terribly complete. 


Conversational Spanish for Army Air Forces of the 
United States, by Solomon Lipp and H. V. Basso of the 
Air Corps Spanish Project, Works Progress Adminis- 
tration. New York, Hastings House, 1941. 75 cents 
Just as useful for laymen is this practical handbook, 

enlivened by amusing cartoons. 





F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: WAR ON THE ECONOMIC FRONT 
Speaker: Louis E. Frechtling 
Date: Sunday, February 15 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 


For station, please consult your local newspaper 














caf: FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 17, Fesruary 13, 1942. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


$ tO} Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Wittiam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lust, 
ch Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor; Davin H. Poppgr, Associate Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 
| y N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Swiss Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
the F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 














Washington News Letter 

















Fes. 9.—Members of the American delegation to 
the meeting of Foreign Ministers at Rio de Janeiro 
have returned to this city generally pleased with the 
work of the conference. They are inclined to be criti- 
cal of those who maintain that, because the maximum 
objective of a unanimous rupture of relations with the 
Axis powers was not achieved, the meeting was a 
failure. On the contrary, they were impressed with 
the underlying spirit of unity exhibited by the vast 
majority of the delegates. Although it was necessary 
to weaken the phraseology of the resolution on politi- 
cal relations with the Axis in order to secure unani- 
mous approval, nothing would have been gained by 
forcing Chile and Argentina into open opposition to 
the nineteen other countries represented. As matters 
stand, the executive branches of both governments are 
bound to some degree by the declarations approved 
by their Foreign Ministers. Officials in Washington 
are hopeful that Argentina as well as Chile will 
break off relations within the next six months. 


In any case, our record two months after the out- 
break of war is already better than it was in the first 
World War, when seven American republics re- 
mained technically neutral throughout the conflict. 
The plans to implement the Rio resolutions, more- 
over, go far beyond anything conceived at that time. 
Already Brazil’s Finance Minister, A. de Souza Costa, 
is in Washington to negotiate the details of eco- 
nomic collaboration; and visits from other Latin 
American leaders will follow. 


THE ARGENTINE ATTITUDE. During the con- 
ference Argentine observers at Rio de Janeiro took 
great pains to point out that their country’s attitude 
was not one of opposition to the United States. In 
1917, they recalled, Argentina preserved its neutral- 
ity despite considerable German provocation, but 
nevertheless aided the Allies by granting loans to 
Britain and France for the purchase of Argentine 
cereals and other products. Today, the Argentine gov- 
ernment has gone much further. It is treating the 
United States as a non-belligerent; subjecting to gov- 
ernment license all remittances of funds to non- 
American countries and related domestic financial 
transactions of non-American enterprises; and taking 
some steps to control subversive Axis activities within 
its territory. Argentines maintain that the enforce- 
ment of these measures by their well-developed ad- 
ministrative system will prove more effective than the 
incompletely executed though theoretically drastic 
regulations of many other Latin American countries. 
This view is sufficiently appreciated in Washington 









to have prevented open retaliation against Argenti 
for its failure to sever diplomatic relations with 
Axis. But if the Argentine position is not modi 
within the next few months, gradually increasj 
pressure will doubtless be applied to the Casa Rosada, 
particularly in the economic sphere. 

Dispatches from Chile indicate that this policy may 
already be in operation there, for at least one Chileay 
importer has complained that Brazilian needs have re.| —— 
ceived priority in the United States over those of = 
Chile. If this is so, it probably reflects the irritation 
of a number of countries because of the Chilean tac. 
tics at Rio de Janeiro. Although Chile’s Foreign Min , ¢ , 
ister initiated the call for convocation of the confer. fc 
ence, he vacillated on the question of breaking rela. 
tions. While it is true that the country’s Pacific coast 
line is exposed to Japanese raids, it is not believed 
that Chile’s danger will be materially increased by 
taking this step in conjunction with the other Amer 
ican states. 

BOUNDARY DISPUTE SETTLED. One notable 
success gained at the meeting was the settlement of 
the boundary dispute between Peru and Ecuador, 
which had been endemic for 120 years. The basis of 
settlement appears to have been the status of 1936, a = 
date when Peruvian outposts had already been pushed ‘i a. 
some distance into territory Ecuador had long re 
garded as its own. As a result, Peruvian sources clai 
that with final demarcation of the border they wi 
have added 7,700 square miles to what had formerly 
been considered indubitably their own territory. Ecua- 
doreans assert that they are making a great sacrifice} ‘ 
for Pan-American unity, and students at Quito have 
demonstrated against the settlement. In fact, however, 
the Peruvian Army—which is incomparably stronger 
than its opponent but which has been ravaged by 
hardships and disease in the occupied territory—is ST 
being withdrawn from its advanced positions. | Singa 

Two salient points may be noted in connection with| Brest, 
the dispute. In the first place, the real stakes were| chara 
not the coastal areas occupied by the Peruvians, but cemb: 
the headwater regions of the Amazon to the east, Germ 
where oil, gold and other minerals may be plentiful.) P™™ 
This area is divided by the border points fixed at Rio had | 
de Janeiro. Second, the solution of this problem has becor 
removed the only immediate threat to stable, pacific) (U" 
Inter-American relations. Stability is necessary if} %4S- 
Peru's Japanese minority is to be controlled and if} @® 
Latin America is to devote itself wholeheartedly to evide 
the production of strategic materials. aot 


EF 


Pacific, 
Americ 
sible p 
countn 
litical, 
of ide: 
comm 
Ameri 
tied, b 
until 











Davip H. POPPER TI 








