Loh hoe 


Entered yond class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


a 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


VoL. XXIV, No. 13 


JANUARY 12, 1945 


PRESIDENT SUGGESTS INTERIM FORMULA FOR EUROPE 


‘| HE current discussion about this country’s policy 

toward Europe has been officially brought into 
the open by President Roosevelt's message to Con- 
gress on January 6. The mere fact that thousands of 
Americans are fighting on European soil offers con- 
vincing proof that our security is linked to a conti- 
nent brought close to our shores by long-range 
bombers, robot bombs, and the practicability of 
overseas invasion we ourselves demonstrated on 
D-day. But many people who recognize our direct 
concern with the military situation in Europe still see 
no reason why the United States should take any 
responsibility for the political and economic conse- 
quences of the Allies’ combined military operations; 
yet at the same time feel free to admonish Britain or 
Russia for doing so. 

END OF “HANDS-OFF” POLICY ? The “hands- 
off” policy which was expressed in Mr. Stettinius’ 
statement of December 5 on Greece and Italy, how- 
ever, appears on the point of being qualified, if not 
yet abandoned. ‘We shall not hesitate to use our 
influence—and to use it now,” said President Roose- 
velt, “to secure so far as is humanly possible the ful- 
fillment of the principles of the Atlantic Charter. 
We have not shrunk from the military responsibil- 
ities brought on by this war. We cannot and will not 
shrink from the political responsibilities which follow 
in the wake of battle.” If this proposed course, which 
is the very opposite of the hands-off policy, is con- 
sistently followed, the United States will at last step 
off the pedestal of toplofty, self-assured idealism 
from which it has often addressed the world in the 
past into what an English periodical has described as 
‘the dust of the arena.” In the political sphere, as 
on the field of battle, we shall have to be prepared 
not only for advances and victories, but also for 
withdrawals and setbacks. We have expressed over 
ind over again the highest ideals in international re- 
lations. But ideals that are not put to work are like 


idle capital: they bring no benefit to any one. What 
we need, above all, is to relate the use of our mili- 
tary and economic power, greatly enhanced in the 
course of the war, to the political ideals we profess. 


U.S. TO ASSUME RESPONSIBILITIES. In 
this spirit of practical politics rather than intransi- 
gent idealism, the President approached the much- 
controverted question of how liberated nations, 
many of whose citizens are prisoners of war or 
forced laborers in Germany, can democratically 
choose their governments in accordance with the 
Atlantic Charter while the war is still in progress. 
During this interim period—which may be consid- 
erably prolonged as a result of the German coun- 
teroffensive in the West—the President said: “We 
and our Allies have a duty which we cannot ignore 
to use our influence to the end that no temporary 
or provisional authorities in the liberated countries 
block the eventual exercise of the people's right 
freely to choose the government and institutions un- 
der which, as free men, they are to live.” 

This formula would require a firm and lasting 
guarantee by the United States if it is to reassure 
and pacify those groups in Greece, for example, 
which fear that the British government is still intent 
on restoring some form of Rightist régime, even 
though shorn of the King; or those Poles in whose 
opinion the Lublin Committee, recognized by Mos- 
cow on January 5 as the Provisional Government of 
Poland, is an interloper Quisling régime. Whatever 
guarantees the United States may decide to give on 
this point should be made within the framework of 
the United Nations organization proposed at Dum- 
barton Oaks. For it is obvious that this country by its 
own unilateral action cannot achieve its objectives 
in Europe. It will have to enlist the voluntary col- 
laboration of Britain, Russia and the liberated coun- 
tries if the interim program proposed by President 
Roosevelt is to be carried out. And the very necessity 


of long-term collaboration with other nations will 
make it necessary for us to accept political responsi- 
bilities beyond the interim period. 

‘POLISH BORDER ISSUE. The same thing would 
be true of proposed frontier readjustments. Secretary 
of State Stettinius indicated this in his statement of 
December 18 on Poland, when he said concerning 
the Russo-Polish frontier that, “if a mutual agree- 
ment is reached by the United Nations directly con- 
cerned, this Government would have no objection 
to such an agreement.”” Shortly after, C. L. Sulz- 
berger—in a detailed dispatch to the New York 
Times from Cairo which purported to sum up State 
Department views on a number of controversial 
boundary questions in Europe—declared that the 
United States hoped that, as a result of negotiations 
between Russia and Poland, the frontier between 
the two countries would be fixed at the Curzon Line 
(which, it will be recalled, was proposed by the 
Soviet government in January 1944). This statement 
has not been officially confirmed, but neither has it 
been denied. If it should prove true that the United 
States government is not opposed to the Curzon 
Line, then it may well be asked whether much of the 
fruitless controversy between Russia and the Polish 
government-in-exile during the past year might not 
have been averted by earlier clarification of Ameri- 


Page Two 


can policy on this point. 

Much has been said by the American press about 
the unilateral character of Russia’s decisions on Po- 
land. But if one bears in mind the fact that Russia 
has the physical power to impose any decision it 
may choose on Poland, which it alone can liberate, 
one can see that Moscow has not remained unaffected 
by the questioning attitude of the United States. This 
country is in a position to exercise a constructive influ- 
ence on the decisions now being forged in the heat 
of battle. It is in our direct interest that these <eci- 
sions should produce neither a continent divided be- 
tween Britain and Russia, one of whom would sooner 
or later seek the support of Germany; nor a coalition 
of Rightist régimes intended to counterbalance Rus- 
sia, with the indirect appoval of the Vatican 
Thoughtful Europeans realize that Britain alone will 
not be able to give them security after the war; and 
at the same time they have no desire to become mere 
yes-men for Russia. This is our opportunity to press 
with utmost vigor for the establishment of the 
United Nations organization and, in the meantime, 
for an Interim Council to consider the problems of 
Europe which for us are no longer academic ques- 
tions but national responsibilities. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


U.S. ILLUSION OF SECURITY AT ROOT OF ANGLO-AMERICAN TENSION 


At a moment when bitter attacks on the United 
States by large sections of the British press made it 
appear that Anglo-American relations had reached 
their lowest point during the war, President Roose- 
velt and Marshal Montgomery intervened to relieve 
the tension. Injecting a note of sound good sense 
into the discussion of inter-Allied differences, the 
President pointed out in his annual message to Con- 
gress that nations, like individuals, do not always 
think alike. And the Allies’ disagreements, he 
said, must not obscure their ‘more important com- 
mon and continued interests in winning the war and 
building the peace.” In a similar tone Marshal 
Montgomery told his press conference on January 7 
of his high regard for American soldiers and his 
efforts to identify himself so completely with the 
Americans under his command on the western front 
that he would not offend them in any way. When 
one recalls the care Allied generals in World War I 
felt obliged to exercise in keeping the various na- 
tional armies strictly separate, Montgomery's atti- 
tude marks a definite advance toward Anglo-Amer- 
ican unity on a practical plane. 

DIFFERENT WARTIME EXPERIENCES. AI- 
though the recent British outbursts against the 
United States for its alleged misunderstanding of 
Britain's policies in Europe have had their purely 
negative aspects, they may yet serve a constructive 


purpose if they help Americans realize how differ- 
ently the war has affected Britain and this coun- 
try. For the British people the war has spelled, 
more than anything else, almost constant physical 
danger. While V-1's and V-2’s are still holding a 
large part of the British population in the grip of 
fear, Americans at home have been relieved not only 
of actual danger but even of the inconveniences of 
blackouts and air-raid drills. 


To survive, Britain has been forced to use prac- 
tically all its manpower for strictly military and war- 
production purposes, and the nation has spent most 
of its savings and resources in financing the great 
struggle. The United States, on the other hand, with 
its larger population and incomparably greater re- 
sources, has enjoyed a consumers’ boom and a peti- 
od of tremendous industrial expansion while turning 
out enormous quantities of war materials. Under the 
circumstances, the British would be more than hu- 
man if they did not feel their relatively greater sacri- 
fices reveal moral superiority and entitle them to 
certain post-war trade advantages needed to speed 
their recovery. But it must also be admitted that 
Americans would be superhuman if they accepted 
the drastic reductions in civilian standards of liv- 
ing that characterize wartime Britain, for it is obvi- 
ously necessity rather than virtue that has shaped the 
war efforts of the two nations. 


TES 
econo!r 
icans € 
motene 
toward 
that th 
no mer 
closely 
1919 a 
were / 
finds it 
Russia 
taining 
regard 
able th 
find it 
on alli 
they re 
for an 
paper 
the wa 
faced | 
busine 
weak 
pared 
feel, tl 
ing wl 
to saly 
possib 
materi 
friend 
lifelin 

BRI 
ings © 
call F. 
men « 
from 
failure 
simila 
dresse 
Confe 


a —— 


JUS 


—_—_—_— 


FOREIG 
Headqua 
second-c 
one mon 


“i 


TESTED FORMS OF SECURITY. The greater 
economic power and security from attack that Amer- 
icans enjoy have fostered not only a sense of re- 
moteness from the war but a certain detachment 
toward the problem of achieving the future peace 
that the British view with extreme impatience. It is 
no mere historical accident that the two leaders most 
closely associated with the League of Nations in 
1919 and the Dumbarton Oaks Conference in 1944 
were American Presidents, for the United States 
finds itself under less pressure than either Britain or 
Russia to adhere to the traditional means of main- 
taining security. This does not mean that the British 
regard international organization as any less desir- 
able than do Americans. But Britishers today do not 
find it easy to give up tested forms of security based 
on alliances and spheres of influence, even though 
they realize these methods have frequently failed, 
for an international organization that is as yet only a 
paper plan. As a nation Britain will emerge from 
the war “broke,” as Ernest Bevin has bluntly stated, 
faced by the prospect of competition with American 
businessmen at a heavy initial disadvantage, and 
weak in political and diplomatic strength as com- 
pared with its two major allies. The British naturally 
feel, therefore, that they can take no chances of los- 
ing what economic and political power they manage 
to salvage from the war, but must reckon with the 
possibility that the new Security Council may fail to 
materialize. That is why they seek to construct a 
friendly western European bloc and maintain the 
lifelines of the Empire. 

BRITAIN A PART OF EUROPE. Britain's feel- 
ings on the subject of post-war security vividly re- 
call France's attitude in 1919, when French spokes- 
men demanded territorial and military guarantees 
from their allies as insurance against the possible 
failure of the League of Nations. In words strikingly 
similar to those British writers have recently ad- 
dressed to Americans, French delegates to the Peace 
Conference declared that the British did not under- 


JUST PUBLISHED— 


CHINA AS A POST-WAR MARKET 
by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25c 


January 1 issue of FoREIGN Poticy REPorTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


Page Three ven 


stand France’s security needs because the Channel 
separated England from the continent and gave the 
British a form of protection France did not enjoy. 
Today Britain finds itself almost as much a part 
of Europe as France, due to the fact that powerful 
armies have now successfully crossed the Channel 
in the face of strong defenses. Americans, however, 

still share the illusion of physical security that Brit- 
ain had at the close of World War I. And although 
the Atlantic would probably offer us little more 
protection in a war twenty-five years hence than the 
Channel does to the British under present conditions 
of warfare, many Americans now tend to regard 
Britain's emphasis on security with the same lack of 
sympathy that the British displ: iyed toward France 
in 1919. 

STRATEGY CALLED INTO QUESTION. Less 
understandable than Britain’s hesitation in reject- 
ing the “old diplomacy” for a virtually untried “new 
diplomacy,” are the charges the British press has 
been hurling at the grand strategy of the war. On 
January 5 The Economist continued its criticisms of 
the United States by declaring that the time had 
come for Britain to serve notice that full-scale 
war against Japan must wait until Germany is de- 
feated. By calling into question the Anglo-American 
decision to direct heavy blows at the Japanese while 
conducting a full-scale invasion of Europe, The 
Economist clearly overlooked both the need to pre- 
vent Japan from further exploiting the great re- 
sources of its conquests and the military and political 
necessity of keeping China in the war. That a care- 
ful British observer should have reached these con- 
clusions is all the more surprising in view of the 
probability that Japan, if unchecked, might have 
invaded India successfully and dug in more deeply in 
Burma and Malaya. After five years of danger from 
the Nazis, however, the British had a natural need 

to release their pent-up emotions, especially since 
many sections of American opinion have freely and 
continuously censured Britain. 


WHINIFRED N. HADSEL 


ZONE NUMBERING 
If your zone number does not appear in your ad- 
dress, please send it to us. This will facilitate prompt 
delivery of your BULLETIN. 


The Future of South-East Asia: An Indian View, by K. M. 
Panikkar. New York, Macmillan, 1943. $1.75. 


A stimulating, brief analysis of the future of the most 
important of the world’s colonial regions. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 


13, JANUARY 12, 1945. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dornotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micueces Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


='™ P 


oduced under union conditions 


and composed and printed by union labor. 


re, 


Washington News Letter 


peed benny 


PRESIDENT SEEKS SENATE BACKING ON SECURITY TREATY 


The impression here is that a period of cautious 
political steering in foreign affairs lies ahead for the 
United States. The main objective of President 
Roosevelt is the early establishment of an inter- 
national organization to maintain the peace. To 
achieve that goal he proposes to refrain from official 
steps that would aggravate differences beween the 
Allies, and to persuade this country that it would be 
folly to let disillusionment over divergences be- 
tween the Allies cause us to reject international co- 
operation. The possibility of another war is too great 
a price to pay for unwillingness to associate our- 
selves with other powers. 


WIN THE SENATE, ROOSEVELT’S AIM. This 
is the course on which the President embarked on 
January 6, when he sent to Congress his annual 
message on the state of the union. “We must be on 
our guard not to exploit and exaggerate the differ- 
ences between us and our allies, particularly with 
reference to the peoples who have been liberated 
from the fascist tyranny,” he said. ‘“Perfectionism, 
no less than isolationism or imperialism or power 
politics, may obstruct the paths to international 
peace’; whereas international machinery ‘‘can rectify 
mistakes which may be made,” but only if interna- 
tional machinery exists. 


To search for a common ground of policy among 
the major Allies, President Roosevelt intends to 
meet sometime after Inauguration Day, January 20, 
with Prime Minister Churchill and Marshal Stalin. 
The next step toward the goal of an international 
organization is the convening of a United Nations 
conference to embody the Dumbarton Oaks pro- 
posals in a definitive charter. The third step, so far 
as the United States is concerned, is submission of 
the charter as a treaty to the Senate. It is of para- 
mount importance to keep two-thirds of the Senate 
friendly toward international organization to assure 
acceptance of that treaty. All strategy in foreign 
relations is planned at the White House with this 
in mind. 

This domestic political problem explains the 
vagueness of the foreign policy section of the Pres- 
ident’s message. “We cannot and will not shrink 
from the political responsibilities which follow in 
the wake of battle,’ he said, but did not indicate 
whether “wake of battle’” meant today or after the 
war, and he said nothing respecting the establish- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


ment of an interim United Nations political council 
to deal with current political responsibilities behind 
the battle lines. 

“We shall not hesitate to use our influence—and 
to use it now—to secure so far as is humanly pos- 
sible the fulfillment of the principles of the Atlantic 
Charter,” he said, but did not refer to the fact that 
the United States government has been using its 
influence in behalf of the Atlantic Charter principles 
all along. However, the sentiments he expressed are 
bound to be pleasing to the American people and 
cannot hurt him with the Senate. 


THREE POINTS OF U.S. FOREIGN POLICY. 
Mr. Roosevelt considers it wise to use this strategy 
of vagueness and caution since the broad outline of 
post-war United States foreign policy has been 
drawn, and an active political policy now might only 
disturb the outline. That future foreign policy has 
three facets: international security cooperation; ac- 
ceptance of the political responsibilities resulting 
from our military operations, at least during an un- 
defined interim period; and economic expansionism 
under the banner of ‘the greatest possible freedom 
of trade and commerce.” 

While the President said that the United States 
and its Allies intend “to respect the right of all 
peoples to choose the form of government under 
which they will live and to see sovereign rights and 
self-government restored to those who have been 
forcibly deprived of them,” he added that, “until 
conditions permit a genuine expression of the 
peoples’ will,’ the Allies have the duty to see that 
no provisional régimes block the popular right even- 
tually to choose a government. 


The policy of economic expansionism: hinted at 
by President Roosevelt in the state of the union 
message may cause concern to Britain, whose recent 
outburst of press criticism of the United States re- 
flected anxiety lest this country pursue policies which 
would cost the British their important place in world 
economic life—a place based on empire, shipping, 
banking and raw materials trade cartels. On January 
6 President Roosevelt stressed anew his antipathy 
to restrictive cartels, saying: “We are opposed to 
restrictions, whether by public act or private arrange- 
ments, which distort and impair commerce, transit 
and trade.” 

BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


1918 


HE 

thre 

by crit 
focus ] 
day so 
States, 
did no 
deal w 
cordan 
tantali 
how s 
EX’ 
Germa 
day of 
time ( 
been f 
ain’s § 
and hz 

® but hz 
the Ui 
held tl 
succun 
like a 
shoulc 
Wh 
on Oc 
of Mo 
had w 
and th 
Germ: 
beginr 
Stalin; 


subsec 


SAORI a 


Taira elie hiein, setae eal 


presse 


many 
m their | 
m the b 
which 


posits 


gq 


