ry au- 
in has 
ng the 
, how- 
o base 
sat the 
Should 
Ss and 
dment 
stale- 


, with | 


d and 
 stale- 
lapsed 
~duced 
nt the 
again 
nplete 


alk of 
rtinent 
as not 
ect is 
ice to 
nts of 
ghters 
. Such 
ig the 
gram, 
ttle of 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


you. XIX, No. 49 


SEPTEMBER 27, 1940 


e7_~(™7~E 


[UST OUT! 


INDO-CHINA: SPEARHEAD OF JAPAN’S 
SOUTHWARD DRIVE by T. A. Bisson 


25¢ 


October Ist issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


SECOND CLASS MAIL 


ore h 
~ 
seam wei 


JAPAN WINS AIR BASES 


IN INDO-CHINA 


VENTUAL Japanese domination of Indo-China 

and southeast Asia was brought appreciably 
doser by the agreement of September 22, which con- 
duded three months’ negotiations over the fate of 
the French colony. Signing of the pact did not pre- 
vent local hostilities on the northeastern border at 
Dong Dang and Langson, where French forces re- 
sisted an invasion by Japanese troops whose com- 
mander ignored the. stipulations of the Franco- 
Japanese accord. The possibility of a general uprising 
in Indo-China against the Vichy government's sur- 


itender, however, appeared remote. At Washington, 


ilitary | 


1e€ War 


sphere 
INE 


Whit- 


of the 


on September 23, Secretary Hull noted that ‘the 
status quo is being upset and that this is being 
achieved under duress,”’ and declared that the United 
States had repeatedly stated its position “in disap- 
proval and in deprecation of such procedures.” Sec- 
retary Hull also issued a categorical denial of state- 
ments from Vichy asserting that the American 
government, on August 31, had signified its approval 


| of French concessions to Japan. 


THE FRANCO-JAPANESE PACT. The terms of 
the agreement, according to official sources at Hanoi, 
permit the establishment of three Japanese air bases 
in Tonking, the northernmost division of Indo- 
China. One of these bases is to be located near 
Hanoi, and Japan may bring in not more than 6,000 
troops to garrison the air bases. At Haiphong im- 
mediate landing of a “limited number” of Japanese 
troops is to be made, under provisions allowing the 
maintenance of a “few effectives’ at this port. The 
Indo-China government's proclamation at Hanoi, 
announcing the pact, appealed to the population for 
“understanding, calmness and discipline,” and de- 


| dared that military facilities granted Japan were “in 


exchange for Japanese guarantees to respect the ter- 
fitorial integrity and French sovereignty of the col- 
ony.” Admiral Jean Decoux, the Governor-General, 
said that the agreement represented “one of the 


greatest marks of confidence one country can give 
another,” while General Maurice Martin, com- 
mander of the Indo-China Army, termed it “the first 
manifestation of a durable friendship between 
France and Japan.” 

At first glance it would appear that, in accepting 
this agreement, Tokyo has considerably modified its 
original demands. The limitations on the number 
and location of the Japanese forces permitted en- 
trance into the colony prevent, in effect, the “free 
passage” of troops for which Japan had reportedly 
been pressing. In addition, the air bases are restricted 
to a northern segment of Indo-China, while demands 
for naval bases, which have been occasionally re- 
ported, were apparently dropped. Whether these 
restrictions will prove sufficient to guarantee the 
colony’s integrity, however, is open to serious ques- 
tion. It remains to be seen whether Japan will re- 
spect the limitations agreed upon and, if not, wheth- 
er the French authorities will be able to resist further 
pressure at a later date. The German technique of 
progressive subjugation, which was applied to 
Czechoslovakia, may well be repeated in Indo-China. 
Once Japanese air bases are established in the north- 
ern areas and manned by large fleets of airplanes, 
the possibility of effective French resistance to ad- 
ditional encroachments will be seriously jeopardized. 
In view of Japan’s broader expansionist aims in 
southeast Asia, it may be assumed that Tokyo will 
not long remain content with the present limited 
gains in Indo-China. 

THE CONVERSATIONS AT WASHINGTON. 
Since the warning statement on Indo-China issued 
by Secretary Hull on September 4, which was rein- 
forced by evidence of Anglo-American cooperation,* 
further conversations at the State Department have 
included both Lord Lothian, the British Ambassa- 
dor, and Mr. Richard G. Casey, the Australian Min- 


*Cf. Washington News Letter, Foreign Policy Bulletin, September 13, 1940, 


ister. Reports from Washington have indicated that 
Pacific questions were discussed in these talks, and 
London advices state that they involved considera- 
tion of possible use by the United States of British 
naval and air bases in that area, including Singa- 
pore. These developments were viewed with con- 
cern at Tokyo, where active conferences between 
the nation’s highest leaders eventually culminated 
on September 19 in an Imperial Conference on an 
important “state matter,” obviously the Indo-China 
situation. It is significant that this conference prob- 
ably sanctioned the modification of Japan’s terms 
which enabled agreement to be reached at Hanoi, 
although it may also have decided on an invasion of 
Indo-China if the terms were not met. On Septem- 
ber 20 an Indo-China Purchasing Mission, headed by 
Colonel Jacomy, left Washington after unsuccessful 
efforts to secure airplanes and ammunition for the 
French colonial forces in Hanoi. The mission’s lack 
of success was apparently due not only to the priori- 
ties already established on orders for American 
planes, but also to the ‘‘freezing’’ of French balances 
in American banks. 


JAPAN’S NEXT MOVES. Under the announced 
terms of the Franco-Japanese agreement, Tokyo will 
be unable to utilize the Haiphong-Kunming railway 
as a route of invasion of Yunnan province. The na- 
tural obstacles to such an attempt were in any case 
probably too formidable to be overcome, especially 
since picked Chinese troops have been massed on the 
border, and tunnels and bridges along the railway 


AXIS PLANS PARTITION OF AFRICA 


The British bombardment of Dakar, and the un- 
successful attempt to land at this strategic seaport in 
French West Africa, focused attention on Septem- 
ber 23 on the rapidly spreading struggle between 
Britain and the Axis powers for control of Africa. 
On September 11 the British garrison at Gibraltar 
permitted a French naval squadron of three cruisers 
and three destroyers to pass unmolested on their way 
to Dakar, where France’s new 35,000-ton battleship 
Richelieu is being repaired after being disabled by 
the British in July. On September 21, however, Brit- 
ish warships ordered the six French vessels back to 
Dakar when they attempted to convoy a group of 
merchant ships to France. Two days later, the bom- 
bardment followed a refusal by the French High 
Commissioner at Dakar to permit General Charles 
de Gaulle to land with an expeditionary force of 
British troops and ‘Free Frenchmen,” who favor 
continuing the war against Germany. French Equa- 
torial Africa has already lined up with General de 
Gaulle—as have New Caledonia and the New 
Hebrides in the Pacific—and Britain controls the 
Belgian Congo through a Belgian Committee in 
London. 


Page Two 


——_ 


within Yunnan have been destroyed. Japan's high 
command will be able to use the new bases in Indo. 
China for air offensives in China’s southwest, by 
past experience indicates that such operations are yp, 
likely to prove decisive. 

Disposal of the “China affair’’ still remains th 
paramount issue for Tokyo, which has been using 
every new concession by the Western powers as ; 
means to break down Chinese resistance. Settlemey 
of the war in China would alone release the ¢. 
sources necessary to establish the ‘Greater Fay 
Asia’ which Japan now sees within its grasp. It js 
not easy to determine how far China’s will to resis 
may have been shaken by events of the past fey 
months. During recent weeks a Chinese military of. 
fensive in North China has threatened Japan's hold 
on communication lines in that area, including par. 
ticularly the important east-west railway line cop. 
necting Shansi and Hopei provinces. Yet China‘ 
defense cannot be maintained in full effectivenes 
unless the Western powers halt their retreat in the 
Far East. To achieve this end it would be necessary 
not only to curtail shipment of war supplies ty 
Japan, but also to reopen China’s routes of access ty 
the West. The Burma Road, closed for three months 
on July 18, will again become an important issue 
in mid-October. It is interesting to note that the 
possibility of reopening this highway on October 1 
was canvassed in the course of the recent British 
American conversations at Washington. 


T. A. Bisson 


The series of conversations among Axis diplo-| 
mats, initiated in Berlin on September 16 when 
Spanish Minister of the Interior Serrano Sufer con 
ferred with German Foreign Minister von Ribben 
trop, apparently involve the reorganization of Eu 
rope, Africa and the Near East under Axis super 
vision. While Serrano Sufier remained in Berlin tc 
discuss Spanish foreign policy with leading Naa 
officials, including Chancellor Hitler, von Ribben: 
trop left Berlin on September 18 to confer with 
Premier Mussolini in Rome. The German Foreign 
Minister returned four days later, to report on his 
talks with Mussolini before Serrano Sufier’s sched-| 
uled visit in the Italian capital on September 25. 

THE SPANISH ENIGMA. While details of the 
conversations have not been revealed, it is apparent 
that Spain has been assigned an important rdle in 


Axis plans. At the outbreak of the European conflict 
General Franco announced that Spain would follow | 
a policy of strict neutrality. After Germany's suc | 
cesses in the Low Countries and France, however, 
and Italy’s entrance into the war in June 1940, Spaii 
adopted a policy of non-belligerency favorable to its 
partners in the Axis. On September 16 Serrano Suit 


into 
Pret 
state 
On é 
Ger 
gov 
and 
reaf 
alli: 
cate 
tral 
call 
wec 
tug: 


—= 
N's high 
in Indo. 


vest, but 
S are up. 


ais the 
en Using 
ers as 4 
ttlemen; 
the te. 
ter Eas 
Sp. It is 
to resist 
rast fey 
itary of. 
n’s hold 
ling par: 
ine cop. 
China's 
ctivenes; 
it in the 
1ecessary 
plies to 
ACCESS to 
> months 
int issue 
that the 
tober 18 
British- 


SISSON 


s diplo 
6 when 
her con- 
Ribben- 
of Ev 
S super 
erlin to 
ig Naw 
Ribben:- 
er with 
Foreign 
- on his 
s sched- 
> 
; of the 
pparent 
role in 


conflict 
| follow | 
y's suc | 
owever, 
0, Spais 
le to its 
o Sufiet 


— Page Three 


stated in Berlin that Spain was a non-belligerent 
only temporarily. In Madrid the official Falangist 
party newspaper, Arriba, announced on September 17 
that “one command will decide the action of Spain 
at the proper time.” 


Despite this increasing orientation of Spanish pol- 
icy toward Rome and Berlin, there is as yet no clear 
indication that Spain will enter the war against 
Britain. The country is still very weak economically, 
and wants to avoid the additional strain of a long 
war and blockade. At the same time, influential 
Spanish imperialists hope that, as a result of the 
present war, Spain will recover Gibraltar—taken by 
Britain in 1704—and acquire French Morocco. 

Control over Gibraltar appears to be one of the 
foremost topics discussed in Berlin and Rome. So 
long as the British keep the Italian fleet bottled up 
in the Mediterranean, Britain’s chances of with- 
standing the anticipated German invasion remain 
relatively good. If the Axis powers gain command of 
“The Rock,” however, Italy could not be blockaded, 
and Italian naval vessels would be able to menace 
British shipping and threaten Britain itself with 
blockade. By exerting diplomatic pressure on Spain, 
and at the same time promising colonial prizes after 
an Axis victory, Germany and Italy apparently hope 
to persuade Spain either to enter the war, or at least 
to permit German and Italian troops, airplanes and 
submarines to use Spanish territory for a campaign 
against Gibraltar. In occupied France Germany holds 
a common border with Spain, and it would be im- 
possible for the Spanish government to refuse an 
insistent German demand for transit privileges. 
From the heavy gun emplacements already erected 
on Spanish soil near Gibraltar, the British garrison 
there could be subjected to bombardment and siege. 


PORTUGAL'S POSITION. Portugal was drawn 
into the Axis discussions on September 22, when 
Premier Mussolini's newspaper, Popolo d'Italia, 
stated that Il Duce and von Ribbentrop had agreed 
on a post-war distribution of African colonies among 
Germany, Italy, Spain and Portugal. The Portuguese 
government is actually allied with Great Britain, 
and after the outbreak of war in September 1939 
reafirmed the validity of its obligations under the 
alliance. If the Italian press account is true, it indi- 
cates that Portugal believes it could not remain neu- 
tral in case Spain is dragged into the war. Histori- 
cally, Britain has used this country as an entering 
wedge for military operations in Spain, but now Por- 
tugal would probably form part of any Axis plans 


for a drive on Gibraltar..A few years ago a British 
military mission studied the possibility of develop- 
ing an air and naval base at Faro, on the southern 
coast of Portugal, which would be valuable for de- 
fending the western approaches to the Straits of © 
Gibraltar. Only 20 miles of flat land lie between 
Faro and the Spanish border, connected by a railway 
and a motor road. Military observers believe that 
mechanized units from Spain could occupy Portu- 
gal’s western seaports in about 12 hours. There are 
no fortified lines to stop an invader, and the Portu- 
guese have a trained peace-time army of only 35,000. 
Before Portugal throws in its lot with the Axis, 
however, it would probably have to be assured of 
final victory, for the rich African colonies which 
constitute its chief means of support are held only 
with the assent of Great Britain. 


AFRICAN WAR FRONT. In its far-flung em- 
pire Britain is still very strong, although British 
forces have slowly yielded ground in Africa. On the 
night of September 16 Italian colonial troops occu- 
pied Sidi Barrani, 55 miles inside the Egyptian- 
Libyan frontier and key post of the second British 
defense line in Egypt. The Egyptian government has 
broken off diplomatic relations with Italy and 
warned—prior to the present Italian offensive—that 
it would declare war if Italian troops invaded Egypt, 
but Italy’s successful advance has apparently in- 
duced King Farouk to stand by until the outcome is 
revealed. Despite the physical handicaps to military 
operations in the African desert, the Italians under 
Marshal Graziani seem determined to continue their 
drive through Egypt in an effort to force the British 
out of their bases at Alexandria, Port Said and Suez, 
from which Britain controls the Eastern Mediter- 
ranean. The Italian offensive is along the same route 
—but in the opposite direction—which the Ameri- 
can, William Eaton, followed in 1805 when he led 
an army of 400 men to victory against the Pasha of 


Tripoli in the Tripolitan War. 


Although Britain must conserve its major strength 
for defense of the British Isles themselves, ulti- 
mately victory or defeat may depend on its ability 
to retain its imperial holdings and continue the 
blockade of Germany and Italy. Under these cir- 
cumstances, the British still hope to bolster their 
position in Africa with further man power and ma- 
terial assistance from the Union of South Africa, 
India, Australia and New Zealand. 


A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 


POREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 49, SEPTEMBER 27, 1940. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


claw 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FRANK Ross McCoy, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


National 
Vera MicHELes Dean, Editor. 
Two Dollars a Year. 


President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


| Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


SEPT. 23.—Despite its absorption in European 
affairs, Washington continues to push ahead with 
ere for hemispheric solidarity and defense on 

th the political and economic fronts. Of major 
importance last week was the completion on Sep- 
tember 20 of Congressional action on a bill increas- 
ing the lending authority of the Reconstruction Fi- 
nance Corporation by $1,500,000,000. Two-thirds 
of this sum is to be utilized by the R.F.C. for the 
acquisition of strategic materials and assistance to 
national defense industries. The remaining $500,- 
000,000 goes to the Export-Import Bank for “the 
development of the resources, the stabilization of 
the economies, and the orderly marketing of the 
products of the countries of the Western Hemi- 
sphere.” A minority group in the Senate led by Sena- 
tor Robert A. Taft of Ohio opposed the Bank au- 
thorization as “futile, wasteful and unwise,” argu- 
ing that the proposed loans would never be repaid; 
that ill-feeling would therefore be created between 
the United States and other American nations; and 
that the Bank might subsidize products which com- 
pete with United States exports. These objections, 
however, were overruled by Administration sup- 
porters headed by Senator Wagner of New York, 
who stressed the need for financial assistance to 
Latin American states striving to combat the politico- 
economic pressure of totalitarian countries. 

ARGENTINE IMPORT EMBARGO. To clear 
the ground for the Bank’s new program its presi- 
dent, Warren Lee Pierson, visited Rio de Janeiro on 
September 18 and Buenos Aires on September 23. 
In Brazil, it is understood, long-standing negotia- 
tions for the use of American capital to build a 
steel plant were carried forward. But conditions in 
Argentina proved less propitious. On September 19 
the Argentine Exchange Control Board had peremp- 
torily suspended the issuance of import licenses for 
all United States products. North American ob- 
servers resident in Buenos Aires suspected that the 
move was a maneuver to improve Argentina’s bar- 
gaining position in the discussions with Mr. Pier- 
son, and perhaps in part an expression of pique over 
the injection of the Argentine beef controversy into 
the American political campaign. 

Neither of these interpretations is given much 
weight in official circles, which point out that Ar- 
gentina’s actions may be explained on purely eco- 
nomic grounds. The most recent Argentine trade re- 


ports, for the first eight months of 1940, show that 
the country’s export balance—necessary to meet pay- 
ments falling due on British, American and other 
loans—amounted to only 27,583,000 pesos as against 
187,861,000 pesos in the first eight months of 1939, 
Because of the war, Argentine markets in Europe 
have almost vanished, except for Britain, while the 
United States has in increasing degree become the 
only source of imports indispensable for Argentina’s 
economy. Argentina’s adverse trade balance with the 
United States almost tripled in the first eight months 
of 1940 as compared with the period January-August 
1939, rising from 30,114,000 pesos to 82,063,000. 
The shortage of dollar exchange in Buenos Aires is 
consequently acute, and gold shipments have been 
necessary to meet Argentine obligations in New 
York. The extension of a dollar credit by the Export- 
Import Bank would ease the temporary strain on Ar- 
gentine finances. There are unsubstantiated reports, 
moreover, that American funds may be used to 
finance vast Argentine food exports to Britain. 


MEXICO AND URUGUAY. Meanwhile, Wash- 
ington has followed with approval recent develop- 
ments in two potential Latin American trouble 
centers. In Mexico, a minor rebellion in the state of 
Chihuahua appears to have been quelled with little 
difficulty. Secretary Hull’s statement that General 
Manuel Avila Camacho, who was proclaimed Presi- 
dent-Elect by the Mexican Congress on September 
12, would be welcomed in Washington if he cared 
to visit the city, is generally interpreted as a cautious 
acceptance of the Congressional mandate. A declara- 
tion of policies issued on September 19 by General 
Camacho foreshadows a sharp swing to the right 
under the new Administration. The President-Elect 
professed himself a good Catholic, rejected any 
communist collaboration in the new government, 
termed himself a democrat rather than a socialist, 
and expressed the opinion that adequate guarantees 
must be extended to both Mexican and foreign in- 
vestors. This declaration has already cut the ground 
from under the supporters of General Almazan, and 
may go far to moderate the opposition of United 
States conservatives to the present Mexican régime. 
In Uruguay the arrest of eight Nazi leaders on Sep- 
tember 21 is to be followed promptly by a trial 
which should bring to light significant details on 
undercover German activities in the Americas, as 
well as the alleged plot to seize control in Monte- 
video and transform the country into a German agti- 


cultural colony. Davip H. PopPer 


FO 


An ini 


+ 


bw 
t 
the su 
withst 
The fi 
where 
aband 
ing b 
Gaulle 
days | 
a ten- 
outsid 
Europ 
BRI 
tion t 
revolt 
Africa 
resum 
using 
dertak 
know] 
ony. | 
the V 
the St 
reinfo 
tempt 
Septet 
resista 
with | 
two F 
aband 
cause 
enter 
Frenc 
the V 
Thi 
ain ju 
aged 
were 


