Entered as 2nd class matter... 
hl . ‘ | 
of Michigan ieee § 


Veugral Lib 


brary 
Universty 


se 9-07 


PERRIGDICAL RO® 
IHNERAL LIBRAP 


g 


: OF title 

the war: 
who feel 
*d to sue 
> Current | 
iment of 
sibility 
Ory. c 


| 


from all 
> concern 


pared to 
to Prop- 
> annexa- 
the rest 
£ March 
e to have 
ustries in 
W orks is 
ywners of ¢ 
nworking 
1e former 
tizens of 
ates, and 
zation of 
nal legal 


Dvershad: | 
on is the | 
ty left in 
to be far 
ontinent's 
from the 
, in many 
ble to ob 
ept those 
scution of 
ates gov- 
at part it 
e back on 
Suropeans 
: economy 
- Russians 


P aun OF MiGk. 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 23 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. ¥. 


Vou. XXIII, No. 32 


May 26, 1944 


WHAT ARE OUR OBJECTIVES IN EUROPE? 


(The first of three articles on United States policy in Europe.) 


Te negotiations now being feverishly conducted 
at many widely separated points—by the three- 
wet European Advisory Commission in London, 

by Yugoslav and Polish factions in London, Greek 
factions in Beirut, and by the French and the Allies 
in London and Algiers—reveal the urgent need of 
finding common denominators of political action in 
Europe before that continent is liberated from the 
Nazis. It was divisions within and among the na- 
tions menaced by Hitler that so greatly facilitated 
their conquest in 1939. Many of these divisions per- 
sist and, in some cases, have become further en- 
venomed by the bitter experience of war and civil 
strife. If the military victory so carefully prepared 
by the United Nations is to bear fruit, a preliminary 
understanding as to the uses we shall make of victory 
must be reached before invasion gets under way. 


ALLIANCES VS. WORLD ORGANIZATION. 
It is therefore all the more troubling that, at this 
advanced stage of the war, a fundamental cleavage 
of views has emerged between those who believe that 
decisions about both war and post-war operations in 
Europe should be entrusted to a directorate of the 
three great powers—Britain, the United States and 
Russia— and those who believe that no stability can 
be achieved on the continent or, for that matter, else- 
where unless an international organization is set up 
before the pressures of war have been relaxed. The 
dangers of this cleavage were clearly analyzed by 
former Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles in 


en Stalin- 
d here as 
nation of 
» ashes of 


BOLLES 
NDS 


his New York speech of May 18. Although Mr. 
Welles seemed over-optimistic in dismissing the 
possibility that the United States may, after the war, 
feturn to isolationism, he rightly said that our choice 
will be less between isolation and international col- 
laboration than between “true world organization” 
and “a policy based upon military alliances, the in- 
definite piling up of armaments, and their inevitable 


adjunct, stark imperialism.’ What is worse, this 
choice is already being beclouded for the citizens of 
this country and of other great powers by the argu- 
ment that military alliances are a form of interna- 
tional collaboration, and that in the foreseeable fu- 
ture they alone can assure physical security—at least 
for the great powers. True, no world organization 
can exist without agreement between the great pow- 
ers. But will world organization emerge from a 
great-power military alliance? 


CAN WE HOPE FOR SOMETHING NEW? 
The trend toward Big Four alliances noted by Mr. 
Welles has been, perhaps fortuitously, encouraged 
by the warning of the distinguished historian, Carl 
Becker, that no fundamental changes can be expected 
in the wake of the war, and that the “new world” 
hopefully anticipated by many will not, after all, 
prove particularly new. This warning represents an 
understandable reaction against the starry-eyed ideal- 
ists who have preached that, as we approach the 
post-war period, “all the past we leave behind,” to 
quote Whitman. It is obviously true that certain 
things will remain more or less unchanged, as they 
have throughout the ages—among them some of the 
most precious values of human life which few would 
like to see changed. But to assume that little or 
nothing can be basically altered in relations between 
human beings—and hence in relations between na- 
tions— is not only to adopt a defeatist attitude, but 
to disregard facts with which we are all familiar. 

We have witnessed, in our own lifetime, enough 
profound changes—through revolution in Russia, 
through gradual adjustments in Britain and the 
United States, to cite only a few examples—to con- 
vince us that much that is new can yet be expected in 
the future. If changes can and do take place within 
nations, why are they automatically barred in rela- 
tions between nations—unless, of course, we con- 
sciously bar them? Even this has not proved true 


q 


a: 

a i: 
mi 
« 
8 


le Sa ee ee 


—————————e Page Two 


during the war, for in their effort to defeat the Axis 
the United Nations have succeeded in developing 
effective methods of collaboration which, if adapted 
to peacetime purposes, could profoundly alter the 
international way of life. Nor can we forget that 
even if the great powers should foster the belief that 
things can or should remain more or less unchanged, 
other peoples have not taken that quiescent view— 
as shown by the ruthless determination of the Nazis 
and the Japanese to reshape the world to their own 
advantage, and by the desire of peoples all over the 
globe to alter their present condition. It will always 
be a matter of endless philosophical discussion 
whether change, of itself, constitutes progress—and 
in every age there are millions of human beings who 
honestly believe that all change is fraught with risk 
or impossible of attainment. 

GREAT POWERS MUST BE RESPONSIBLE. 
To those who start from the premise that there is 
little hope of improving relations among nations in 
the visible future, the idea of a four-power or, in 
Europe, a three-power alliance, seems the easiest 
way out of the dilemma created for all nations by 
their demonstrated incapacity to remain permanently 
isolated from the rest of the world. The idea of a 
great-power directorate inevitably appeals to citizens 
of great powers, who cannot but realize that their 
countries must bear the brunt not only of war, but 
of post-war reconstruction. The creation of such a 
directorate is justified on the ground that Britain, the 
United States and Russia, unlike Germany and Japan, 
will exercise their power benevolently, and therefore 
for the ultimate good of all concerned. This argu- 
ment smacks unpleasantly of the traditional “I know 
best what is good for the rest of you” attitude of all 


—— 
——— 


dictators throughout history. In a democratic soci 
a strong executive is not only unobjectionable, byt 
actually, given the complexities of modern life, de. 
sirable—but only because it is responsible to the 
people. To whom would a directorate of the great 
powers be responsible if there is no international 
organization in which small nations, as well as great, 
are represented? Who could check irresponsible of 
socially harmful action on their part, since th 
would presumably control the bulk of the world’s 
industrial and military power? The public opinion 
of their own peoples might conceivably do so, where 
it exists—but we all know how easy it is to represent 
any action by a great power as a security measure, 
In the absence of responsibility to a world orgar 
ization, how would the great-power directorate use 
its military force in Europe? Would it seek to aid 
the efforts of the small nations to advance their polit- 
ical, economic and social development? Or would 
it try to maintain, more or less unchanged, the order 
of things that existed in Europe in 1939, following 


the example of the Holy Alliance of 1815? Assum- | 


ing even that complete harmony is achieved among 
Russia, Britain and the United States concerning 
specific issues on the continent before and after lib- 


eration, can it be taken for granted that the liberated | 


peoples, who rejected Hitler’s Diktat enforced at the 
point of a gun, would supinely accept the dictation, 
however benevolent it might be, of other great 
powers? Any one who takes this for granted is dan- 
gerously ignorant of the state of mind of Europeans. 
That is why it is especially necessary to clarify, and 
keep on clarifying, the objectives the United States— 
in concert with other nations—is pursuing in Europe. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


HULL AND IADC AGREE ON NEED FOR FREER TRADE 


On the occasion of the opening of National For- 
eign Trade Week (May 21-27), Secretary Cordell 
Hull outlined a program which suggests the neces- 
sary adjustments that must be made toward ex- 
pansion of international trade. He emphasized the 
important role the United States will play in the 
future expansion of trade insisting, however, that 
this can only be accomplished through cooperation 
with other nations. Mr. Hull stated that any inter- 
national organization that may be set up to keep and 
enforce the peace must be based on an “international 
arrangement for currency stability as an aid to com- 
merce and the settlement of international financial 
transactions. Through international investment, cap- 
ital must be made available for the sound develop- 
ment of latent natural resources and productive capac- 
ity in relatively undeveloped areas. Above all, pro- 
vision must be made for reduction or removal of un- 
reasonable trade barriers and for the abandonment 
of trade discrimination in all forms.” 

HEMISPHERIC PROPOSALS. Secretary Hull’s 


statement closely parallels the recommendations 
made by the Inter-American Development Commis- 
sion, whose 10-day conference in New York closed 
on May 18. In speaking to the final session of the 
IADC, Nelson A. Rockefeller, the Commission's 


chairman, pointed out that hemispheric economic de- | 


velopment would contribute to the reconstruction of 
trade in general and indicated that no exclusive te- 
gional bloc was intended. The discussions of the De- 
velopment Commission centered on two miaif 
themes: economic development and investments, and 
international trade and transportation. In its final 
resolutions the Commission also called for reduction 
of tariffs and other trade barriers, but more specif- 
cally for industrialization of undeveloped countries 
in Latin America, prevention of inflation, improve 
ment of transportation, and establishment of intef- 
American investment banks in each country. 
Throughout the conference it was emphasized that 
Latin America, with its 130,000,000 inhabitants, 1 
a potential market of great size but, unless the con- 


== 


ic soci 
able, but 
life, de. 
€ to the 
the great 
national 
as great, 
nsible or 
nce they 
> world’s 
> Opinion 
30, where 
represent 
measure, 
ld orgar 
orate use 
=k to aid 
1eir polit- 
Yr would 
the order 
‘ollowing 
? Assum- 
d among 
yncerning 
after lib- 
liberated 
‘ed at the 
dictation, 
1e€r great 
“d is dan- 
uropeans. 
rify, and 
| States— 
n Europe. 
DEAN 


endations 
Commis- 
rk closed 
on of the 
\mission’s 
nomic de- 
‘uction of 
lusive re- 
f the De- 
vo main 
ents, and 

its final 
reduction 


re specifi- 
countries 
improve- 
of inter- 

country. | 
sized that | 
bitants, 1S 
; the con- 


— 
<_< 


tinent is industrialized, the purchasing power of the 
low-income workers will remain small. 

The Inter-American Development Commission, 
organized in June 1940, is one of several inter-Amer- 
ican economic commissions formed by the Financial 
and Economic Advisory Committee, which in turn 
grew out of the Panama Meeting of Foreign Min- 
isters in September 1939. The Commission’s purpose 
is to promote and finance industry and agricultural 
development in the Americas with capital from both 
the United States and Latin America. National Com- 
missions now exist in all of the Latin American coun- 
tries, made up of government, business and financial 


Page Three 


representatives. The present conference adopted two 
resolutions with regard to the organization of the 
Commission. One proposed the creation of a Na- 
tional Commission in Canada, which at this confer- 
ence was represented solely by a government ob- 
server, and the other favored inclusion of labor mem- 
bers in the various national commissions. Both the 
resolutions passed by the IADC and the statement 
by Secretary Hull present in broad outline plans for 
post-war trade and economic development on which 
the United States and the business and government 
leaders of the American Republics can unite. 
GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


BRITISH COMMONWEALTH STAKES FUTURE UNITY ON WORLD ORDER 


The declaration issued on May 17 by the Prime 
Ministers of Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zea- 
land and South Africa after a two-week conference 
in London indicates that the Second World War, 
unlike the First, will bring no significant change in 
the organization of the British Commonwealth. In 
the absence of any reference to new consultative 
machinery, it can be assumed that not only has Vis- 
count Halifax’s suggestion for gradual integration 
of Commonwealth policy been shelved, but also the 
proposal of Australia’s Prime Minister, John Curtin, 
for a permanent secretariat. 

Agreement to eschew greater centralization can be 
explained largely, it seems, by Canada’s opposition 
to any moves in this direction. Prime Minister King 
warned a joint session of the British Parliament on 
May 11 that “we cannot be too careful to see that to 
our peoples new methods will not appear as an at- 
tempt to limit their freedom of decision, or to 
peoples outside the Commonwealth as an attempt 
to establish a separate bloc.” Mr. King argued that 
the present method of consultation, in which the 
Cabinets of the Commonwealth are linked in con- 
tinuing conference through their respective High 
Commissioners, would best achieve the combination 
of unity and freedom of action on which the strength 
of the Commonwealth depends. The weight of this 
argument, coming from the senior Dominion and 
from a nation with peculiarly close ties to the United 
States, appears to have been a major factor in the 
decision that the Commonwealth should remain sub- 
stantially unchanged in spirit and structure. 


COMMONWEALTH AND WORLD ORDER. 
On the question of a more highly integrated world 
system, however, the Conference took a definite 
stand, the Prime Ministers jointly affirming their sup- 
port for the establishment of ‘‘a world organization 


to maintain peace and security . . . endowed with the 
necessary power and authority to prevent aggression 
and violence.” This declaration of purpose marks an 
important step toward creation of a new world order 
by the United Nations. It also indicates willingness 
on the part of the Dominions to forsake the policy 
of aloofness toward Europe’s problems which char- 
acterized their attitude—particulafly that of Canada 
—during the inter-war years. And for Britain, as 
well as the other nations of the Commonwealth, it 
constitutes official recognition of the fact that only 
within a world system can the Commonwealth main- 
tain a unity based on such informal bonds as “inher- 
itance, loyalties and ideals.” 

Some observers have been discouraged by the fact 
that no statement was made with respect to the eco- 
nomic relations of the Commonwealth. This has 
been interpreted, probably rightly, to mean that the 
question of imperial preferences remains substantial- 
ly where Prime Minister Churchill left it in his 
speech of April 21, when he indicated that neither 
Britain nor the Dominions had commitments to 
abolish the Ottawa preferential system. There is rea- 
son to believe, however, that as progress is made 
toward the solution of such problems as currency 
stabilization and international investment, agreement 
can also be reached on removal of trade barriers, 
whether tariffs or preferences. But it would be a 
mistake to expect that the Commonwealth can offer 
the United States an exact quid pro quo by way of 
elimination of preferences in return for reduction of 
tariffs. Both the United States and the Common- 
wealth will have to seek expansion of their foreign 
trade through the larger multilateral approach to 
world commerce and finance recommended by Secre- 
tary of State Hull in his statement of May 20. 


HowaArD P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 32, May 26, 1944. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Laer, Secretary; Vera Micueies Dran, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879, Three Dollars a Year. 


one month for change of address om membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ew 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


i 
a 
at 
4 
“Mg 


= 


eee 


oe 


ast cal ee 


Lee 
ie anes 


_ 


Washington News Letter | 


POLITICAL PREPARATIONS FOR INVASION 


The Allied forces, in their invasion of western 
Europe, will have not only to destroy German mil- 
itary might, but to restore the self-confidence of mil- 
lions of western Europeans who for four years have 
been treated by the Nazis as subject nations. 


WESTERN EUROPEAN PACTS. So far as west- 
ern Europe is concerned political preparations were 
completed in one sector on May 16 by the conclu- 
sion of agreements with three governments-in-exile 
—Norway, the Netherlands and Belgium. These 
agreements cover such points as the way the liberat- 
ing armies will administer civil affairs, the length of 
time they will remain, and the procedure by which 
they will turn the administration over to the govern- 
ment-in-exile. Since occupation administration is rec- 
ognized above all as a military matter, the agree- 
ments reflect the wishes of General Dwight D. 
Eisenhower, Allied Commander-in-Chief in England. 
Civilian foreign affairs officials in Washington, how- 
ever, hope that the Allied armies will resist the 
temptation to extend the term of military administra- 


‘tion in the liberated areas. Over-long military ad- 


ministration might jeopardize the prospects for in- 
ternational post-war collaboration. 

By contrast to the agreements concluded with Nor- 
way, the Netherlands and Belgium, preparations for 
invasion have not been thoroughly worked out with 
the French Committee of National Liberation. For 
lack of an understanding on this crucial subject the 
French Committee’s relations with the United States 
and Britain have once more become tense. Mean- 
while, Washington is cautious in its attitude toward 
the Committee, feeling that the latter is inclined to 
act on its own, without due consideration for Anglo- 
American plans and wishes. 

In keeping with the policy of not recognizing the 
Committee as a government, General Eisenhower has 
been authorized by Washington, following invasion 
of France, to deal as he sees fit, on a day-to-day basis, 
with General Charles de Gaulle, president of the 
Committee (which on May 16 announced in Algiers 
that it would soon proclaim itself the Provisional 
Government of the French Republic), as well as 
with local French elements in establishing a civil ad- 
ministration. General Eisenhower has been conduct- 
ing useful administrative talks in London with the 
head of the French Military Mission, General Joseph 
Pierre Koenig, although the Committee in Algiers 
declared on May 6 that the Koenig-Eisenhower talks 


FOR VICTORY ° 


BUY UNITED 


could serve no purpose so long as the ban on cipher 


messages from Britain continued in effect. It is re. | 


ported that the British government subsequently 
raised the ban temporarily to permit transmission of 
a message from Koenig to de Gaulle, and newspaper 
stories that the talks broke down are incorrect. 


CZECH-RUSSIAN AGREEMENT. The Norwe. , 


gian, Dutch and Belgian agreements, whose texts 
have not yet been released, are said to follow gener. 
ally the agreement signed on May 8 between the 
Czechoslovak government-in-exile and the Soviet 
Union (which joined with Britain and the United 


States in the Norwegian agreement). An important - 


difference, however, marks the agreements for West 
and East. The Czech-Russian document provides that 
the Czechoslovak government is to take into its own 
hands the power of administration in any territory as 
soon as direct warfare in that territory is concluded. 
For Norway, the Netherlands and Belgium, there is 
a looser clause which, as announced by the State De- 
partment, declares: “‘as soon as the military situation 
permits, the government shall resume its full con- 
stitutional responsibility for civil administration, on 
the understanding that such special facilities as the 
Allied forces may continue to require will be made 


available for the prosecution of the war and its final | 
conclusion.” It is possible that the governments-in- | 
exile and the military authorities may differ as to | 


when “the military situation permits” the return of 
the governments, whose temporary capital is London. 
The Norwegian and Belgian governments under- 


take in the agreements to assign a delegate to coop- . 
erate with the Allied armies as they advance. The | 


Netherlands government, however, plans to declare 
a state of siege during military operations on Dutch 
soil and to function under those conditions. 
REASON FOR MILITARY RULE. The chief 
aim of military administration is to assure “the 
prosecution of ‘the war to a successful termination,” 
with due regard first, to military necessity and sec- 
ond, to the welfare of the peoples concerned. Wheth- 
er the invasion will jeopardize future friendship 
among the liberated and the liberators will be deter- 
mined by the measures taken by General Eisenhow- 
er’s staff. Will it enforce a long and rigid censorship? 
Will it respect the sensitiveness of long-suffering 
peoples? The answers to these questions are bound 
to have profound influence on the future evolution 
of Europe. BLAIR BOLLES 


STATES WAR BONDS 


191 


