——| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


d States 
Y limits, 
anchuria 
9, 1934, 
onceded, 
imitation 
he Nine- 
the 5-5-3 
conquer 

its new 
al parity 
e of dis. 
1eSe note 
in order 
Western 
t least in 
d until a 


ched be. 


American 
porate in 
in China 


Act would 
litions of 
ermitting 
tton with 
President 
ss and the 
tion with 
in China. 
that gen: 
ured. The 
which the 
fend both 
4S Our tfa- 
ast. There 
C Can Cf: 
ar Eastern 
; ever. Un- 
id less ex: 
pport the 
to achieve 
Japan. It 
ion would 
or single 
m by Mr 
d hold out 
d toward 
. BIsSON 


iced. Nation# 
ynd-class matte 


RIOGDICAL ROOM Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


INERAL LIBRARY 


IY. OF MA@BREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XVII, No. 18 


FEBRUARY 25, 1938 


— 


EUROPE IN CRISIS, by Vera Micheles Dean 


“A realistic analysis of European democracies and dic- 
tatorships in Europe in 1937. The conclusion is sound: 
such remedies as can ultimately be discovered for the ills 
of the world must be applied collectively if they are to 


bring permanent relief.”—-The Commonweal 


World Affairs Pamphlets 


25 cents a copy 


ify 


©] 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Aan Arbor, Hichigan 


HITLER PROCLAIMS HIS TERMS 


——_— 


RESH from his triumph over Austria, Chancellor 
Hitler went before the Reichstag on February 20 
and delivered a three-hour speech breathing defiance 
and conspicuously lacking in any conciliatory refer- 
ences. Originally scheduled for January 30 but 
delayed by the new domestic “purge” and the need 
for another victory in foreign policy, the Leader's 
address clearly revealed that the restraining influ- 
ence of the Reichswehr and Foreign Office had 
diminished to the vanishing point. Yet he chose this 
opportunity to brand as “the slander of international 
journalism’ all reports that the recent shake-up in 
the army command and the Foreign Office were oc- 
casioned by domestic dissension. 


Much of the Fihrer’s speech was devoted as 
usual to a review of the accomplishments of National 
Socialism at home. He pointed with pride to the 
re-employment of millions of workers and to the 
booming condition of German industry. These 
achievements, he intimated, had aroused the jealousy 
and hatred of other countries unable to deal success- 
fully with their own unemployment problems. Care- 
ful to nurture the illusion that the rest of the world 
begrudged Germany's right to live, Hitler left no 
doubt of his determination to carry through the 
Four-Year Plan as a means of insuring the country’s 
independent economic existence. 

A particularly aggressive tone characterized his 
temarks on foreign policy. “The claim for German 
colonies,” he announced, “will be voiced from year 
to year with increasing vigor.’’ He contemptuously 
rejected all alternative proposals, such as those con- 
tained in the von Zeeland plan, which would make 
Germany dependent on credit or “naive assurances 
that we shall be permitted to buy what we need.” 
Naturally he passed over in silence the obvious fact 
that the return of Germany's colonies could never 
substantially relieve the Reich’s raw material shortage. 


Significantly the Chancellor directed his demand 
for colonies only to Britain and utilized this oppor- 
tunity to launch into a prolonged tirade against the 
“lying” British press. He scarcely veiled his demand 
that the press and public opinion in free countries 
should be coordinated in order to make possible in- 
ternational agreements. Conferences and meetings, 
he declared, were useless “as long as governments 
in general are not in a position to take decisive steps 
irrespective of public opinion.” 


Any suggestion that Germany should likewise 
make concessions in the interest of European peace 
was emphatically rejected by the Fuhrer. “I cannot 
allow our natural claims,” he announced, “to be 
coupled with political business.” While pledging 
that Germany would impose upon itself “wise mod- 
eration in its interests and demands,” he made clear 
that the Reich would be the sole judge of the justice 
of its own claims and would never again subject 
itself to the restraints and direction of an interna- 
tional institution like the League of Nations. Instead 
of the League, the primary instrument of German 
diplomacy will be the Rome-Berlin Axis as fortified 
by the anti-Communist pact to which Japan is also 
a party. The Fuhrer expressed his earnest wish to 
see cooperation with Italy and Japan “more and more 
extended.” Mussolini was praised for his defiance 
of Geneva, and Japan was hailed as the bulwark 
against communism in the Far East. As a further 
gesture toward Tokyo, he specifically disclaimed ter- 
ritorial ambitions in the Far East or any desire to 
re-acquire the former German colonial possessions 
now held under mandate by Japan. 


Turning at last to his dramatic agreement with 
Chancellor Schuschnigg of Austria, the Fiihrer in- 
timated it was based upon the principle of self-de- 
termination of nations which was denied to Germans 


=_—XXXXX—s—sa"*:*:____==anaevrwltn.o —X—"_—__~ 


and Austrians by the peace settlement of 1919. 
While declaring that the new accord was necessitated 
by “difficulties” which had emerged in carrying out 
the earlier agreement of July 11, 1936, he signifi- 
cantly failed to renew pledges to observe Austria’s 
independence. By mentioning with approval condi- 
tions in the Nazified Free City of Danzig, he left 
the impression that ultimately Austria might share 
the fate of Danzig even though retaining an osten- 
sible independence. 


The main outlines of the settlement which Hitler 
imposed on Schuschnigg—apparently under the 
threat to renew terroristic activity and even to inter- 
vene by force of arms—have meanwhile been 
revealed. The Nazi victory is substantial enough to 
enhance Hitler's prestige, but not sufficiently com- 
plete to be called a “capitulation.” On February 17 
an amnesty released all Austrian Nazis who had 
committed political crimes during recent years. 
Ironically enough, Socialist offenders were also 
freed. The Cabinet was reorganized to include a 
leading Austrian Nazi, Dr. Seyss-Inquart, as Minis- 
ter of Interior, and two pro-Germans—Dr. Guido 
Schmidt and Dr. Ludwig Adamowitch—as Minis- 
ters for Foreign Affairs and Justice respectively. In 
addition, Dr. Edmund Glaise-Horstenau, also sym- 
pathetic toward the Third Reich, was made Minister 
without Portfolio. Although the Nazis will not be 
permitted to form a separate party in Austria, they 
will be allowed to enter the Fatherland Front where 
they will presumably carry on their propaganda un- 
der the leadership of Dr. Seyss-Inquart. Moreover, 
the Austrian press will probably be “coordinated” 
more closely with that of Germany; and it is alto- 
gether likely that the propaganda for Hapsburg 
restoration, against which the Reich has vigorously 
protested, will be gradually suppressed. 


Yet these concessions may not prove as substantial 
as they seem. None of the new Ministers can really 
be regarded as a violent Nazi. Dr. Schmidt has for 
some years conducted Austria’s foreign policy under 
Schuschnigg’s guidance; Glaise-Horstenau is only 
mildly sympathetic with National Socialism, and 
Seyss-Inquart’s National Socialism is said to be tem- 
pered by his Catholicism. While the Nazi Minister 
of Interior will have control over the police forces, 
the immediate command of the police and gen- 
darmerie will be exercised by the Secretary of State 
for Public Security, Michael Skubl, who has in the 
past proceeded with great vigor against Nazi ele- 
ments. Command of the army is retained by General 
Wilhelm Zehner, a Legitimist who can scarcely be 
accused of National Socialist leanings. Moreover, 
active leadership of the Fatherland Front has been 
entrusted to Guido Zernatto who also has no love 
lost for the Third Reich. Yet despite these checks, 


there can be no doubt that Hitler has written another 
significant victory into the annals of Nazi diplomacy, 
He will henceforth press his advantage and, unless 
checked by France and Britain, will hardly fail to 
bring about the gradual but relentless political and 
economic coordination of Austria with the Reich. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


BRITAIN YIELDS TO ROME-BERLIN AXIS 


Hitler’s Wagnerian summons for incorporation of 
ten million border-state Germans within the Third 
Reich is apt accompaniment to Britain's retreat from 
Eastern Europe, which has assumed the propor. 
tions of a rout. The Chamberlain Cabinet, which as 
recently as ten days ago had used its influence in 
the Danubian region to encourage resistance to Navi 
pressure, has thrown not only Austria, but Mr. Eden, 
to the dictatorial wolves. Faced with the possibility 
of war on three fronts—Central Europe, the Medi 
terranean and the Far East—Mr. Chamberlain ap- 
parently decided that discretion was the better part 
of valor, and that protection of possessions overseas 
was worth the price of Austrian surrender. By this 
decision Britain may have gained a respite for its 
empire, but it has lost such prestige as it still had 
on the European continent. 


That this British Gotterdammerung in Easter 
Europe offers no assurance of peace in the West is 
made crystal clear by Hitler’s Reichstag speech, 
notable for its vitriolic attack on Britain and the 
British press. Far from rewarding the British for 
their hands-off policy, Hitler demands the return of 
German colonies—with a tantalizing allusion to the 
situation which might arise if the British empire 
should “suddenly dissolve and England become de- 
pendent solely on its own territory’; protests against 
“the utterly unendurable press” campaign which has 
“poisoned” life between the two countries; and 
threatens that this “unbridled slander’ will now be 


answered with ‘National Socialist thoroughness,” | 


urging Britain to “abolish the selling of news- 
papers” critical of Nazi Germany. Coming from one 
who violently objects to interference in the affairs 
of German-speaking peoples, this threat opens inter- 
esting vistas of how Hitler hopes to suppress British 
freedom of speech and of the press—doubtless on 
the ground that these democratic institutions are a 
breeding-ground for communism. 


Not only does Hitler ironically dismiss British 
attempts to justify retention of German colonies, but 
he endeavors to drive a wedge between Britain and 
France by omitting to demand the return of French 
mandates—an omission probably to be corrected on 
a future occasion. Well may Hitler afford to be tol- 
erant with France. Now that Lord Halifax, warm 


(Continued on Page 4) 


sidera 
no se 
in th 
diploi 
beyor 


It 1 
purpt 
and n 
sible 
ment 
prope 
patch 
corre: 
infor 
taker 
celles 
claim 
mats 
thing 
Sout! 
serio’ 
forw 
in Eu 
in pa 
has | 
nom: 
tant 
tena 
signe 
whic 
the 
state 
find: 
tion. 
at tl 
meet 


lence in 
to Nazi 
ir. Eden. 
ssibility 
e Medi- 
lain ap- 
tter part 
overseas 
By this 
> for its 
still had 


Eastern 

West is 

speech, 

and the 
itish for 
return of 
yn to the 
1 empire 
come de- 
'S against 
vhich has 
‘ies; and 
| now be 
ighness,” 
of news 
from one 
re affairs 
ens inter- 
ss British 
btless on 
ons are a 


;s British 
onies, but 
itain and 
of French 
rected on 
to be tol- 


ax, warm 


Wash ington News Letter 


mn 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Fes. 23—While Washington continued to study 
the implications of diplomatic and naval moves in 
Europe and Asia, another facet of American foreign 
policy was exposed last week in the widely publicized 
flight of six giant army bombers from Miami to 
Buenos Aires for the inauguration of President 
Roberto M. Ortiz as President of Argentina. Like the 
recent visit of three American cruisers to Singapore 


to participate in the ceremonies attending the open- 
ing of Britain’s new naval base, the good-will flight 
f the six “flying fortresses” is accepted by foreign 


diplomats and Washington officials alike as con- 


siderably more than a diplomatic courtesy call. It is 
no secret that the conception of the flight originated 
in the State Department and that it is serving a 
diplomatic purpose not unrelated to developments 
beyond the Western Hemisphere. 


It would be premature to say that this diplomatic 
purpose contemplates an inter-American military 
and naval alliance for mutual protection against pos- 
sible European or Asiatic aggression. State Depart- 
ment officials not only deny any knowledge of the 
proposal reported on February 17 in a special dis- 
patch to the New York Times from its Buenos Aires 
correspondent, but insist that they have not been 
informed of diplomatic conversations said to have 
taken place among several South American chan- 
celleries. There is no reason to question these dis- 
claimers, which are echoed by Latin American diplo- 
mats in Washington. Brazil has openly opposed any- 
thing in the nature of a military alliance and other 
South American countries would be likely to raise 
setious objections if such a proposal were brought 
forward. At the same time, it is obvious that events 
in Europe and the Far East have caused apprehension 
in parts of Latin America and that the apprehension 
has been used to advance closer political and eco- 
nomic ties between the American states. An impor- 
tant step was taken in the Convention for the Main- 
tenance, Preservation and Re-establishment of Peace, 
signed at the Buenos Aires Conference in 1936, 
which provided that in the event that the peace of 
the American republics is menaced, all American 
states would consult together “for the purpose of 
finding and adopting methods of peaceful coopera- 
tion.” And further steps will undoubtedly be taken 
at the next Pan American conference scheduled to 
meet at Lima in December of this year. 


In recent weeks Washington observers have noted 
a series of relatively minor developments which, 
taken together, underline the trend toward closer 
economic and cultural ties between the American 
states. Three such developments may be cited: 


1. On February 1 the Federal Communications Com- 
mission, with the approval of President Roosevelt, allo- 
cated four unused short-wave frequencies for broadcasting 
non-commercial radio programs to Latin America. Two of 
the frequencies, or ‘“‘bands,” were given to the General 
Electric Company and two to the World Wide Broadcast- 
ing Corporation of Boston, a non-profit-making educational 
organization. In both cases, however, the 
made on a “'strictly temporary basis 
the government to take over direct control on short notice, 
At about the same time two bills were introduced in Con- 
gress, with the knowledge and approval of the Administra- 
tion, authorizing the construction and operation of a gov- 
ernment-owned radio broadcasting station “designed to 
promote friendly relations among the nations of the West- 
ern Hemisphere.’ Under the Chavez-McAdoo bill, the pro- 
grams would “be selected by the Secretary of State” and 
designed particularly ‘‘to strengthen the spiritual, political 
and historical ties among the United States and such other 
nations of the Western Hemisphere.” 


contracts were 


: umably to permit 


2. On February 18 the Maritime Commission revealed 
that it had under consideration a project to improve trade 
relations with Latin America by establishment of a fast 
luxury-liner service between New York and the east coast 
of South America. The project involves purchase by the 
government of three large ships—the California, Virginia 
and Pennsylvania—now operated by the American Line 
Steamship Corporation on the New York to San Francisco 
run. Because of the loss of its mail subsidy under the 1936 


Maritime Act, the company had announced discontinuance 
of its coast-to-coast service on April 1. In recommending 


government purchase of the ships, Joseph P. Kennedy, just 
before his resignation as chairman of the Maritime Com- 


mission, reported that the commission's findings with re- 
spect to the South American service ‘are in harmony with 
the feeling of other branches of the government, especially 


those of the State Department.” 


3. The House Foreign Affairs Committee, which some 
time ago completed an exhaustive survey of the extent to 
which the United States is dependent on foreign nations 
for its supply of tin, has resumed hearings on the McRey- 
nolds bill designed to provide an adequate supply of tin in 
time of war. The survey showed that this country is entirely 
dependent on foreign sources of supply which are largely 
controlled by an international combine, and that in time of 
war tin would be essential in the manufacture of munitions 
and ordinance for the army and navy. Within the past few 
weeks Bolivia—the second largest producer of tin in the 
world—is understood to have outlined a plan under which 
the United States could secure adequate supplies of this 
strategic metal. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 


oo 


~~ 


> Ge 66 °S emmete 6s M4 a* 


<> 


~ * 


BRITAIN YIELDS TO ROME-BERLIN AXIS 
(Continued from Page 2) 
advocate of Anglo-German rapprochement has suc- 
ceeded the Francophile Anthony Eden, Hitler may 
calmly contemplate the impotence of France, whose 
ability to aid Czechoslovakia is doubly paralyzed by 
German remilitarization of the Rhineland and Brit- 
ain’s reluctance to act east of the Rhine. With Britain 
unwilling to intervene in Eastern Europe, France faces 
a peculiarly difficult choice. Either it must risk war 
on behalf of Czechoslovakia—a course which would 
be unpopular with the French masses—or come to 
terms with the Reich, as advocated by M. Flandin, 
France’s Lord Halifax, fresh from a visit to Berlin. 

Nor can France derive much consolation from Mr. 
Chamberlain’s decision to reach an Anglo-Italian 
agreement without assurances that Italy will with- 
draw its troops from Rebel Spain or stop shipments 
of fresh war material, which made a Rebel victory 
ees at Teruel. During the fateful Grandi-Cham- 

tlain interview of February 18, which apparently 
precipitated Mr. Eden’s resignation, the British Prime 
Minister urged Italian action on Austria, only to find 
that Mussolini had meanwhile raised the ante. It may 
be argued with some cogency that if an Anglo-Italian 
settlement, including recognition of the Ethiopian 
conquest, had been reached in 1936, Italy would not 
have been driven to form the Rome-Berlin axis, and 
Austria’s precarious independence might still find 
a champion in Mussolini. To such a settlement the 
presence in the Cabinet of Mr. Eden—regarded in 
Rome as “public enemy No. 1”—undoubtedly of- 
fered a serious obstacle. Regrettable as Mr. Eden’s 
resignation may be on sentimental grounds, it will 
probably hasten an Anglo-Italian deal. This eleventh- 
hour deal may serve as the prelude for a West- 
ern four-power pact, which would isolate the 
Soviet Union from the Western democracies, and 
leave Central Europe and the Mediterranean within 
the grasp of the two fascist dictatorships. That the 
two Caesars may eventually come to blows over the 
spoils of conquest—with Italy the probable loser— 
is a fairly safe prediction. For in Hitler—who on 
February 20 failed to give the assurances regarding 
Austria's independence he had promised to Rome— 
Mussolini has apparently found his master in the art 
of political outmanoeuvring. 

The leitmotif of Hitler’s speech is that brute force 
—or threat of force, as in the case of Austria—is far 
superior to international negotiations in achieving 
the objectives of the totalitarian state. From whom 
has the Fihrer learned this easily assimilated lesson ? 
From whom but the Western democracies which, 


Page Four 


nateeeeees 
—ee 


when there was yet time, refused to make the cop. 
cessions that might have saved the German Republic: 
and, after straining at the gnat of an Austro-German 
customs union in 1931, are ready today to swallow the 
elephant of Nazi Anschluss. From the democracies 
which failed, abroad, to apply the methods of peace. 
ful change so effectively developed at home, and in 
the international field used methods no less dicta. 
torial, no less rooted in power politics, than the 
dictatorships which today challenge them on their 
own terms. 


Mr. Chamberlain’s policy is predicated on the as. 
sumption that, unless an agreement is promptly 
reached on terms acceptable to Germany and Italy, 
the only alternative is war—an alternative no more 
palatable to the British than to the French or Ameti- 
can people. The correctness of this assumption could 
be proved only by putting it to the fateful test of 
challenging Hitler and Mussolini to carry out their 
threats of force, in the hope of calling their bluff. 
This test Mr. Chamberlain—like Sir Samuel Hoare 
in the Italo-Ethiopian crisis—is unwilling to face, 
Nor is it possible to dismiss without serious consid- 
eration his argument that, unless Britain and France 
—which have received no hope of American assist- 
ance—are ready to fight, they must come to terms 
with the dictatorships. The real question raised by 
this course is whether it will ultimately fulfill its 
purpose of avoiding war. 


This policy, whatever its repercussions in Europe, 
has dealt a serious and possibly irreparable blow to 
British hopes of American cooperation against dic- 
tatorial aggression. It has played directly into the 
hands of American isolationists, only too ready to 
find an excuse for withdrawal from Europe and the 
Far East. After the Austrian episode, the British 
cannot expect assistance from the United States on 
grounds of “forming a democratic front’ or “‘speak- 
ing the same spiritual language.” The language 
spoken by Britain is that of everyone for himself 
and the devil take the hindmost. To their sorrow, 
the British will find that they have apt pupils on this 
side of the Atlantic. Those in Britain, as well as in 
the United States, who have preached isolation and 
torpedoed every attempt at collective action when 
timely concessions might have assured European 
peace, may now view with such satisfaction as they 
can muster the fruits of a policy which not only 
leaves small countries at the mercy of expanding 
dictatorships, but may, within the visible future, en- 
danger the existence of the Western democracies. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 18, Fesruary 25, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasiig BugLL, President; Vera MicHeLes Dgan, Editor. 


Nationa! 
Entered as second-class matter 


December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


FO 


An in 


—— 
Vou. 2 


| 


WAR 


resigi 
situat 
be as 
only 

Mr. | 
crete 
withc 
to ne 
ing n 
tion « 
recrit 
alliar 


