














































Entered as 2nd class matter 


Dr. William ¥. Bishop 
: De 


& Tats, ‘4 . 
; ~~ e ter 2 
é Wie Vero. ey Ol rn 


Ann Arbor, Wich. 5 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vout. XXI, No. 1 


—— 


OcToBER 24, 1941 





ARMY CABINET TAKES OVER IN JAPAN 


yyitH German forces attacking Moscow’s outer 
ring of defenses, a new Japanese Cabinet 
headed by a pro-Axis military leader has taken the 
reins of power in Tokyo. Formal investment of Gen- 
eral Hideki Tojo’s government on October 18 was 
accompanied by the customary vague and unenlight- 
ening “policy statements’ from the Premier and For- 
eign Minister. The personnel of the new Cabinet, 
as well as the international circumstances attending 
its formation, offer better clues as to the course it 
may be expected to follow. 


THE CABINET LINE-UP. By his background 
and record, General Hideki Tojo belongs to the ex- 
tremist wing of the army, which has favored a policy 
of aggressive continental expansion. His last period 
of active service occurred as chief-of-staff of the 
Kwantung Army in Manchuria, where his duties called 
for special knowledge of problems involved in a 
Soviet-Japanese conflict. As Vice-Minister of War 
in 1938, he publicly declared that the Japanese army 
“must be perfectly equipped and fully prepared to 
face a combination of the Chinese and Soviets on 
two fronts.’” He ardently welcomed the tripartite al- 
liance of September 27, 1940, and may be counted 
as a firm supporter of Tokyo's alignment with the 
Axis. 

General Tojo’s position in the new Cabinet, more- 
over, is considerably closer to that of a military dic- 
tator than in any previous instance during the past 
decade. Under normal conditions, General Tojo 
would be placed on the retired list before appoint- 
ment to a political post. Wholly against precedent 
and statutory law, however, the new Premier will 
be permitted to remain in active service, presumably 
under the terms of a special Imperial ordinance. 
Hardly less unusual is the fact that the new Premier 
will act concurrently as Minister of War, and that 
the Home Ministry, which controls Japan’s central- 
ized and extensive police system, will also be under 


his direction. General Tojo’s first act as Home 
Minister was to order various shifts among prefec- 
tural governors and the higher police officials. With 
all three Cabinet posts held by one man, and that a 
vigorous military figure, an unprecedented concen- 
tration of political power is effected. In keeping with 
his responsibilities, the Premier was invested with 
the rank of a full general. 

Shigenori Togo, the new Foreign Minister, brings 
to the Cabinet detailed and expert knowledge of the 
two great protagonists in the Soviet-German con- 
flict. His last term of service, in 1938-40, was as 
Ambassador to Moscow; previously, in 1937-38, he 
had been Ambassador to Germany. The Finance Min- 
ister, Okinobu Kaya, is a bureaucrat who has worked 
closely with the army, notably under the first Konoye 
Cabinet in 1937-38, when he held the same post. 
Naoki Hoshino, one of Manchoukuo’s leading “‘state 
planners” and former chief of the Cabinet Plan- 
ning Board in Konoye’s second Cabinet, returns to 
office in the key position of Cabinet Secretary. With 
another Manchoukuo bureaucrat and “controlled 
economy” advocate, Shinsuke Kishi, as Minister of 
Commerce and Industry, the previous business rep- 
resentatives have been swept from the Cabinet. The 
new Cabinet is thus marked by a strong anti-Russian 
orientation, inclusion of a set of nationalist-minded 
bureaucrats, and the concentration of vast powers in 
the hands of General Tojo. 

THE INTERNATIONAL SETTING. Equally re- 
vealing of the new Cabinet's outlook, especially on 
foreign policy, is the time chosen to make the change. 
Since the eve of the European war, when the 
Hiranuma Cabinet was overthrown by the Soviet- 
German non-aggression pact, government changes in 
Japan have closely followed the shifting fortunes 
of the belligerents. The Cabinets of General Abe 
and Admiral Yonai, who succeeded Hiranuma, 
marked time during the period of stalemate on the 

















European fronts in the winter of 1939-1940. Ad- 
miral Nomura, then Foreign Minister, carried on 
negotiations with Ambassador Grew for several 
months in Tokyo. The third Konoye Cabinet, just 
ousted, also sought to tide over a difficult period by 
negotiations when a German victory in Russia was 
delayed and Anglo-American-Dutch trade sanctions 
countered the advance into southern Indo-China. 
The second Konoye Cabinet, on the other hand, 
was formed in July 1940 on the basis of expectations 
that the collapse of France would speedily lead to 
an Axis victory over England. It forced the closing 
of the Burma Road, moved into northern Indo-China, 
and concluded the Axis-Japan pact. When the hoped- 
for invasion of Britain failed to materialize, how- 
ever, Japan’s southward drive was halted. Consid- 
erable criticism was expressed at that time in the 
more extreme Japanese military-naval circles, which 
felt that Konoye had missed a “golden opportunity” 
by not pushing resolutely forward into Southeast 
Asia while the defenses of Singapore and the Dutch 


Page Two 








East Indies were relatively unprepared. impo 
The Tojo Cabinet has been formed on the as} mari! 
sumption that another great opportunity is at hand \ and 
and that this time it must be exploited to the full per | 
It is clear that the German advance toward Mos} beef 
cow has been the determining factor in bringing to} equi 
power a military leader capable of directing an ip.| cent. 
vasion of Siberia. Despite these calculations, there} ties ‘ 
is room for doubt that Japan is prepared to act in} ona 
the immediate future. A campaign against the Rus.} and 
sian Far East, which would open Japan’s vulnerable | Tl 
cities to attack by Soviet bombers and permit Soviet | 








‘ eer | ber 
submarines to harass Japan’s shipping communica. free 
tions with the mainland, is the most hazardous vep. estal 


ture that could be undertaken by Tokyo. There js} _,:<. 
no certainty that Britain and the United States might) ¢ 4. 
not be quickly drawn into the conflict, and a wam-| _.. 


; . roc 
ing to this effect would act as a strong deterrent a 
Tokyo’s decision, however, is apt to be governed | tern 


more largely by the outcome of the struggle now| 


taking place before Moscow. T A. Beeowee U 


gent 


ARGENTINE TRADE AGREEMENT STRENGTHENS GOOD NEIGHBOR POLICY | !* 


On October 14, after prolonged negotiations, the 
United States and Argentina signed a new trade and 
commercial agreement designed to replace the 1853 
Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation. 
Hailed by President Roosevelt as an “outstanding 
contribution” to the reconstruction of trade, the ac- 
cord should help substantially in cementing politi- 
cal and economic relations with Argentina, the 
country which has remained most skeptical of the 
value of the Good Neighbor policy. 

The successful conclusion of the agreement at 
this time is in sharp contrast to the collapse of previ- 
ous negotiations in January 1940. During the past 
eighteen months United States trade with Argen- 
tina has grown rapidly. Direct and indirect defense 
needs have greatly stimulated purchases of Argen- 
tine hides and skins, wool and other raw materials. 
In addition, the U.S. has bought increased quanti- 
ties of fruit, cheese, wine and casein, some of which 
formerly came from Europe. As a result, U.S. im- 
ports from Argentina rose from $61,914,000 in 
1939 to $83,301,000 in 1940; and in the first seven 
months of 1941 they soared to $96,000,000 as com- 
pared with $51,000,000 in the corresponding period 
of the previous year. Exports to Argentina increased 





SPECIAL OFFER—5 FPR’s for $1.00 


Toward Free Trade with Latin America 
Economic Defense of the Americas 

Raw Material Resources of Latin America 
Export-Import Bank Loans to Latin America 
Resources and | ade of Central America 














from $70,945,000 in 1939 to $106,874,000, but in| js 
the first seven months of 1941 they dropped to} 514, 
$47,000,000, thus giving the Argentines an export) jo, 
surplus in its trade with the U.S. for the first time} ¢... 
since the drought year of 1937, when we purchased | tort 
large quantities of Argentine feedstuffs. The expan-| ,,.. 
sion of trade with the U.S. has enabled Argentina}... 
to compensate largely for the loss of its continental | 


| rate 
European market. Although still saddled with large, | ye 


é onl 
unexportable surpluses of corn, wheat and other 194 
grain, Argentina managed to confine the fall in the; 4. 
global value of its exports to 9.2 per cent in oe pa 


and its total sales in the first eight months of 1941} the 
were actually somewhat higher than in the same} , }, 
period of 1938. Circumstances were therefore more | 


ee ' agt 
favorable to the negotiation of a commercial agree: | eig 
ment with the United States. on 


U.S. CONCESSIONS. In the new accord, which | of 
becomes provisionally effective on November 15,} ri 
the U.S. furnishes Argentina with additional oppor- | has 
tunities to offset its trade losses in the European | liti 
market. This country lowers its duties on items) ¢fs 
which made up 64.2 per cent of our imports from | 4g 
Argentina in 1939 and 44.5 per cent in 1940. The| gf 
most important concessions are the tariff reduction, | 
on flaxseed from 65c. to 32.5c. per bushel; the slash | 
of 50 per cent in the duties on fresh apples, peats, op 
grapes, plums and prunes, which is limited to the sea / 4, 
son when little U.S. produce comes on the market; | _ 
the reduction by one-half of the duties on bovine | ro 
hides and skins, quebracho extract and casein; and; i 
the lowering of rates on Italian-type cheeses, maca- 
roni, noodles and similar alimentary pastes formerly 


me 


I 


as. 
and, 
full, 
Mos. 
g to 
1 in. 
here 
ct in 
Rus- 
‘able 
viet 
nica- 
ven- 
re is 
ight 
farn- 
rent. 
rned 
now 


IN 














—_—_— Page Three 


eV7"_—_— 


imported from Italy. The duty on canned meat, pri- 
marily corned beef, is cut from 6c. to 3c. per pound ; 
and although a minimum ad valorem rate of 20 

r cent is retained, increased imports of canned 
beef should be possible, since the 6c. duty was 

uivalent in 1939 to an ad valorem rate of 60 per 
cent. In addition, the U.S. has agreed to lower du- 
ties on certain coarse wools, to freeze existing rates 
on a number of products including brandy, liqueurs 
and wines, and to maintain others on the free list. 


The U.S. has hedged its concessions with a num- 
ber of safeguards which will enable it to recover its 
freedom when more normal trade has been re- 
established. The flaxseed duty, for example, can be 
raised to 50 cents thirty days after the President 
finds that the “‘abnormal” trade situation in that 
product has ceased to exist. Moreover, after the war 
all concessions will be subject to modification or 
termination by the U.S. on six months’ notice. 


U.S. PRODUCTS BENEFITED. In return, Ar- 
gentina has conferred tariff advantages on a long 
list of agricultural and industrial products account- 
ing for $32,106,000, or 30.2 per cent, of the value of 
U.S. exports to that country in 1940. Reductions are 
granted on goods constituting $19,354,000 of our 
1940 sales, and duties are bound on the remainder. 
Seasonal reductions on fresh fruits and those on 
certain industrial products such as trucks, delivery 
cars and bus chassis are effective immediately. In the 
case of most manufactures, however, the new tariff 
tates will become applicable in whole or in part 
only when Argentina’s customs revenue, which in 
1940 amounted to 230 million pesos, again reaches 


| the level of 270 million per year. Moreover, there is 


no definite assurance that Argentina will set aside 
the necessary foreign exchange for the purchase of 
a larger volume of American goods, although it has 
agreed not to discriminate in the allocation of for- 
eign exchange and has improved its exchange treat- 
ment of imports from the U.S. since last June. Most 
of Argentina’s exports to the sterling area, notably 
Britain, are paid in “blocked sterling.” The US. 
has, therefore, waived the right to insist on the abo- 
lition of preferential exchange allotments to import- 
ers from that area. In addition, this country has 
agreed to forego the benefit of tariff concessions 
granted by Argentina to its neighbors and to Peru. 


The practical economic effect of the new agree- 
ment is difficult to appraise in view of the uncertain 
operation of some of its provisions and the ab- 
normal conditions prevailing in international trade. 





Hl 








F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: THE NAVY AND DEFENSE 
Speaker: William T. Stone 
Date: Sunday, October 26 
Time; 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T. 
Station: NBC, blue network 











While the accord in theory enables Argentina to in- 
crease substantially its sales to the U.S., the shipping 
shortage in the north-bound trades of Latin America 
will seriously limit these possibilities in practice. At 
the same time, our defense program continues to cur- 
tail exports of U.S. machinery, iron and steel and 
other products to Latin America. Undoubtedly the 
political significance of the agreement will far out- 
weigh its economic value. It constitutes a testimonial 
of Washington’s good faith and should reinforce the 
influence of the U.S. in Argentina. Its political ef- 
fect may be transitory, however, if shipping and 
priority difficulties seriously handicap the develop- 
ment of trade relations. Nor does the new agreement 
entirely remove Argentina’s fear that the U.S. may 
again reduce its purchases to previous low levels 


once the war is over. JouN C. pEWILDE 


FPA FORUM ON FOREIGN POLICY 


The program of the Foreign Policy Association’s 
all-day forum on American foreign policy, to be held 
at The Waldorf-Astoria on October 25, is as follows: 


10:00 a.m.—Our First Line of Defense. 

Speakers: The War Department, Lt. Gen. LEsLEy J. 
McNair, Chief of Staff, General Headquarters, U.S. 
Army War College; the Navy Department, Capr. 
W. D. PuLeston, U.S. Navy (Retired) , Aviation, 
EpwArRD P. WARNER, Vice Chairman, Civil Aeronau- 
tics Board; Hemisphere Defense, NELSON A. ROCKE- 
FELLER, Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs. . 


12:45 p.m.—Luncheon: American Foreign Policy Today. 
Speakers; DEAN G. ACHESON, Assistant Secretary of 
State; ELBERT D. THOMAS, member, Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee; THomMAs H. ELiot, member, 
House of Representatives. 


3:00 p.m.—Our Supporting Line of Defense— 
The Home Front. 

Speakers: Civilian Defense, Mrs. FRANKLIN D. 
RoosEVELT, Assistant Director, Office of Civilian De- 
fense; Production Line of Defense, Stacy May, 
Director, Bureau of Research and Statistics, O.P.M.; 
Food and Economic Defense, PAuL H. APPLEBY, 
Under-Secretary of Agriculture; Civil Liberties, WEN- 
DELL BirGE, Assistant Attorney General; United Ser- 
vice Organizations, speaker to be announced. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 1, OctoBEr 24, 1941. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lugr, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York. N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Sp 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 





peed bean 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
Oct. 20.—The recent announcement that the State 
Department has created a Board of Economic Opera- 
tions, composed of ten ranking officials, deserves 
greater attention than it has yet received in the press. 
On the one hand, it affords another example of the 
growing importance of economic warfare as an in- 
strument of national policy. On the other hand, it 
constitutes belated recognition on the part of the 
Department that its own machinery must be over- 
hauled to meet the demands imposed by the war. 


ORGANIZING ECONOMIC DEFE.\SE. The re- 
organization of the State Department carries for- 
ward the broad program outlined three months ago 
when Vice President Wallace was assigned the task 
of coordinating policies and actions of the different 
government agencies working on economic defense. 
As Chairman of the Economic Defense Board, set 
up by Executive Order on July 31,* Mr. Wallace 
was charged with developing “integrated defense 
plans” and assuring that such plans were carried 
out. In line with this assignment, the Economic 
Defense Board has already taken over the functions 
of the Export Control ©:%ce formerly headed by 
Brigadier General Maxwe.., and absorbed the Con- 
trols Division of the State Department, which is now 
placed under the supervision of Milo Perkins, Ex- 
ecutive Director of the Wallace board. 

The efficiency of the State Department should be 
materially improved by the new organization, which 
was announced by Secretary Hull on October 10. 
Henceforth all of the Department's economic func- 
tions will be directed through the Board of Economic 
Operations, headed by Dean Acheson, Assistant 
Secretary of State. Other members of the 10-man 
Board include Adolf Berle, Assistant Secretary of 
State; Herbert Feis, Economic Adviser; Leo Pas- 
volsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State; 
and the Chiefs of six divisions charged with specific 
economic tasks. These tasks are allocated as follows: 
Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements, 
charged with negotiation of commercial agreements; 
Division of Exports and Defense Aid, responsible 
for all matters of foreign policy involved in admin- 
istration of export control 11w5; Division of Defense 
Materials, responsible for matters of policy involved 
in procurement of strategic and critical materials; 
Division of Studies and Statistics, charged with prep- 
aration of statistical data for the Board of Economic 


*See Washington News Letter, Foreign Policy Bulletin, August 8, 1941. 


Operation; Division of World Trade Intelligence | 
responsible for commercial information; Forej 
Funds and Financial Division, responsible for ques. 
tions of policy arising under U.S. control of foreign 
funds. Through the Board of Economic Operations 
each division will maintain close liaison with othe 
Government agencies engaged in economic work. 

Despite this drastic overhauling of State Depart. 
ment machinery, it would be a mistake to assume 
that the Department is adequately equipped to carry } 
its share of the load imposed by the defense pro. 
gram. At best, the new organization merely Creates | 
the framework for a program of expansion which is 
long overdue. The State Department is still operat: | 
ing on a budget of about $22,000,000 which is not 
much larger than the depression budget of 1932, | 
and about the same as that of 1940. It has allowed | 
other government agencies to take the initiative in 
formulating economic policies, and has shown little 
enterprise in recruiting new personnel. As a result, 
important functions involving our foreign relations| 
have been taken over by other departments. 

EXPANDING DEFENSE NEEDS. With the 
rapid expansion of defense production, the task con- 
fronting all of the economic planning agencies has| 
become increasingly more difficult. Defense expendi- | 
tures are now running at the rate of about 18 bil-| 
lion dollars annually, and by the end of this fiscal 
year the outlay is expected to reach an annual rate / 
of 24 billion dollars, or approximately one-third of 
our national income. Last week, however, defense 
officials were reported to be preparing an enormndiag 
new program doubling existing production rates and | 
contemplating an outlay of more than 100 billion | 
dollars by the end of 1943 or 1944. 

While these reports have not been officially con- | 
firmed, they emphasize the need for effective co-| 
ordination and planning, particularly in the alloca- 
tion of raw materials. For example, according to | 
current estimates, armament needs in 1942 will call | 
for about 1,500,000 tons of copper out of an esti- 
mated supply of 1,800,000 tons. Defense require: | 
ments for steel in 1942 are now placed at 35 million 
tons, as compared with a total estimated supply of 
89 million tons. The primary function of the State 
Department is not to pass on the technicalities of 
such defense requirements, but to formulate the | 
strategic plans on which all production schedules | 
should be based. It can only perform the task with 
completely adequate personnel and equipment. 

W. T. STONE 








| 





W 


Ukr: 
endé 
the | 
be te 
forc 
tows 


ernn 
Mos 
the ' 
the 
shal 
able 
the 
ond: 
Vol. 
z 
in tl 
regi 
witl 
plar 
ove: 
by 
Ura 
the 
regi 
and 
Pos: 
tain 
org 
the 
scal 
wil 
Bri 
\ 
aid 
dif 


not 


