ittee, 
velve 
| into 
1940; 
er of 
com: 
s for 
ll for 


effect 
hav: 
scrip 
pared 
prints 
» new 
ns oN 
ly ap. 
state 
‘omes 
com- 
te of 
1 less 
st of 
ad in 
cy at 
anget 
-hines 
yr gan- 
>ER 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An int; tation of current international events by the Research Staff 

et 
y Wi PoREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
ay of 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


Vou. XIX, No. 42 Aucust 9, 1940 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


SECOND CLASS MAIL 


—— 


For the background of current developments in 


the Balkans, read: 


SPOTLIGHT ON THE BALKANS 
by P. B. STOYAN 


25c 


August issue of Headline Books 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 


MOLOTOV PREDICTS SPREAD OF WAR 


nt his speech to the Supreme Soviet on August 1 
M. Molotov, Soviet Premier and Foreign Com- 
missar, summed up the results of the European con- 
flict in terms which held little comfort for any of the 
belligerents. While admitting that the recent appoint- 
ment of Sir Stafford Cripps, prominent Laborite, as 
Ambassador to Moscow, seemed to “‘reflect a desire on 
the part of Britain to improve relations,” M. Molotov 
said that Britain's previous hostile acts against the 
US.S.R. made it “difficult to expect that Soviet- 
British relations would develop favorably”; and at- 
tributed France’s defeat to the fact that “leading 
circles in France treated too lightly the rdéle and 
weight of the Soviet Union in European affairs’ —a 
situation presumably not remedied by the establish- 
ment of the Pétain-Laval régime, whose members in 
the past have shown little sympathy for Communist 
Russia. The Soviet Premier added that Germany, 
thanks to the Russo-German pact, will have a “calm 
feeling of security in the east’; indicated the possi- 
bility of an understanding with Italy; and stated that 
an improvement in relations with Japan “is feasible,” 
although Tokyo’s program for a “new political struc- 
ture” is not yet clear. At the same time, M. Molotov 
tefrained from predicting an early German victory. 
On the contrary, he said that the end of the war “is 
not yet in sight,” and that while Germany has 
“achieved great successes, she has not yet achieved 
her principal objective—termination of the war on 
terms which she considers desirable.” 

MOSCOW DENOUNCES U:S. The Soviet Pre- 
mier reserved his harshest words for the United 
States. He was both bitter and sarcastic in his ref- 
erences to the American declaration of July 23, in 
which Mr. Welles, Under-Secretary of State, had 
condemned Russian absorption of Latvia, Estonia 
and Lithuania, and described as “illegal’’ the de- 
cision of the American government to hold in this 
country the property of the Baltic states, including 


gold which, M. Molotov claimed, had been pur- 
chased by the Soviet State Bank. M. Molotov de- 
clared that the United States has imperialistic de- 
signs on European possessions in the Western Hemi- 
sphere, and predicted that existing conflicts would 
be fanned into a second imperialistic world war, in 
which the United States would aid Britain against 
Germany. Judging by M. Molotov’s speech, the So- 
viet Union still hopes that the wars of Europe and 
Asia will be directed not against its territory but 
against the British Empire and, should the Empire 
collapse, against the United States. It has conse- 
quently no desire to antagonize Germany. At the 
same time, it does not anticipate a clear-cut German 
victory, and plans to improve its strategic position 
without actually becoming involved in a war, through 
which, with a minimum of sacrifice it has already 
obtained Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, Bessarabia, 
Northern Bukovina and a part of Finland. 


GERMANY SEEKS RUMANIAN OIL. While 
Russia, like the rest of the world, waits for the out- 
come of the Battle of Britain, German and Italian 
spokesmen have warned their peoples not to expect 
another Blitzkrieg. Now that Britain has been cut 
off from the European continent, which in normal 
times furnished one-third of its imports and, in 
turn, is blockading the continent, the European con- 
flict has once more assumed the form of an economic 
as well as a military endurance test. Germany and 
Italy, excluded from the markets of the Western 
Hemisphere and Asia except for what they may ob- 
tain by way of the Soviet Union, are concentrating 
their efforts on development of war materials avail- 
able in Europe. Germany already has access to the 
iron ore of Sweden, Spain and France. In the Bal- 
kans, where France and Britain have lost their in- 
fluence, Germany is rapidly obtaining control of 
industrial enterprises formerly owned by French, 
British, Dutch and Czech capital. Among these are 


ee 


iron mines in Rumania and copper mines in Yugo- 
slavia. But the most important of these enterprises 
are the Rumanian oil wells. Yielding to German 
pressure, the Bucharest government, on July 24, 
confiscated the British-controlled firm, Astra Ro- 
mana, expelled British oil technicians on the ground 
that they had been plotting to damage the wells, and 
seized British oil barges on the Danube. In January, 
French and British concerns in Rumania had refused 
to let any of their oil go to the Nazis; and while 
Rumania, under its trade treaty with Germany, had 
promised to deliver half of its oil exports to the 
Reich, actually only a small quantity had been 
shipped during recent months. Now, if transporta- 
tion difficulties can be solved, Germany will prob- 
ably be able to obtain the bulk of Rumania’s oil 
exports, which totaled four million tons in 1939. It 
must be remembered, however, that European coun- 
tries under German control have been cut off by the 


JAPAN TESTS BRITISH RESISTANCE 


While Great Britain last week exchanged air 
bombardments with Germany and prepared for the 
long-expected invasion, it found itself once again 
embroiled with Japan. Britain's attempt to appease 
Japan by closing the Burma road for three months 
beginning July 18, as the first step in promoting a 
Sino-Japanese peace settlement,* was regarded in 
Tokyo as a gesture of weakness. The new “totali- 
tarian” cabinet of Prince Konoye not only promptly 
proclaimed a “Greater East Asia” policy, but of- 
fered another direct challenge to Britain. On July 27, 
Japanese police arrested a dozen or more British 
businessmen and journalists on charges of espionage. 
One of the prisoners, according to Japanese reports, 
committed suicide during the questioning. 

In response to this action, the British government 
on August 2 interned the London representatives of 
Japan’s two great industrial syndicates, the Mitsu- 
bishi and Mitsui interests. To the repeated protests 
of the Japanese Ambassador, Mamoru Shigemitsu, 
Foreign Secretary Halifax is said to have replied 
that these two internments were a “regrettable coin- 
cidence” and not a reprisal for the Tokyo arrests. 
It was announced in London, moreover, that two 
other persons, a representative of the Bank of For- 
mosa and the German wife of a Japanese artist, had 
been arrested in July for deportation. On August 4, 
five more Japanese—two in Singapore, one in 
Hongkong and one in Rangoon—were arrested by 
British officials. While the British government will 
probably continue to regard such actions as a “re- 
grettable coincidence,” it is obviously seeking to 
strengthen its bargaining position by replying to 
Japan in its own terms. On August 5, Britain released 


*““Britain Closes Burma Road,”’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, July 26, 1940. 


Page Two 


es 
— 


British blockade from their overseas supplies of ojj 
in the Near East, the Far East and the Westem 
Hemisphere. Even if Germany obtains the entire 
output of Rumania and other oil-producing Euro. 
pean countries, estimated at ten million tons, it wil] 
be unable to supply the continent’s oil requirements, 
which normally amounted to 19 million tony 
This situation leads to the belief that Germany 
and Italy, while seeking to wear Britain down by 
repeated bombings and threats, may attempt to seize 
the oil resources of the Near East in Iraq and Iran, 
and may demand oil exports from the Soviet Union, 
which might thus be called on to play a more active 
role in the European struggle. Otherwise, now that 
the United States has placed an embargo on exports of 
oil and aviation gasoline, Europe may have to re. 
vert to an economy in which no oil will be used 
except for immediate war purposes. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


the Mitsubishi agent in London, after Japan had 
freed five of its prisoners. 


The Konoye government by both words and deeds 
has indicated that it intends to utilize this ‘golden 
opportunity” for consolidating Japan’s position in 
eastern Asia. It was reported on August 4 from both 
Shanghai and Vichy—though denied in Tokyo—that 
Japan had made secret demands on French Indo- 
China for extending its military and economic con- 
trol. The Japanese were said to have demanded the 
right to move their troops across French Indo-China 
and to use the French railway into Yunnan province, 
as well as the right to establish naval and air bases, 
and closer economic relations. Japan, under an agree: 
ment signed on June 20, two days before the Franco- 
German armistice, had already checked the flow of 
war materials through Indo-China and stationed its | 
own inspectors at Hanoi and other points. rule 
ment of the new secret demands would give Japan 
virtual sovereignty over the whole country, as well as 
a strategic foothold for a drive either north or south. 
Since an economic mission, headed by General 
Kuniaki Koiso, a leading imperialist and member | 
of the preceding cabinet, is preparing to leave for 
the Netherlands Indies, Japan is apparently launch- 


ing its “Greater East Asia” policy in earnest. Japaa } 


is thus able not only to advance its own imperialist 
ambitions in southeastern Asia, but to assist the 
Axis powers by diverting British and American at 
tention. In view of Britain’s preoccupation in Eu 


rope, moreover, the Japanese — barring America | 


naval intervention—can now move southward step 
by step without opposition. 


THE “LULL” IN EUROPE. As Anglo-Japanese 
relations reached a showdown, Prime Ministet 


———— 


Churchil. 
the dang 
away, 
mors tha 
governm 
in milita 
security 

defense 

raids OV! 
estimate 
German 
made re 


Shangha 
tion by 
Institu 
A care 

major fc 

legal ste 

Japanese 


| Sources 


New 
A top’ 
the Leas 
plicity a 
The Cru 
Haver 
The f 
German 
an Aust: 
A Doc 
Llewe 
hart, 
Usefu 
tions. 


Mineral 
of the 
gist. | 
Show 

the pro} 

duce. S 

reserve: 

nomic f 


origina 
nationa 
traces | 
defends 
peace i 


The Mi 
Dout 
A vi 

der Ge 

Middle 

Some ] 
Yor} 
A br 

settlen 


FOREIG 
Headqua 
Entered 


=> 


Japan 
-rialist 
st the 
an at- 
n Eu 
erican 


1 step 


yanese 
inistet 


eae 
—_* 


Churchill warned the British public on August 3 that 
the danger of a Blitzkrieg “by no means has passed 
away,’ and urged suspicion regarding German ru- 
mors that no invasion is now intended. The British 
government, apparently alarmed lest the present lull 
in military activities should create a false sense of 
security and curtail industrial production, continued 
defense precautions at home and extended its air 
raids over western Europe. Since it is impossible to 
estimate the effect of the incessant raids by both 
German and British forces, no prediction can be 
made regarding Germany's plans for invasion, the 


Page Three 


success of which depends largely upon the prelimi- 
nary bombing of British shipping, ports, railways, 
and factories. British officials still insist, however, 
that if Britain can stave off invasion until next 
winter, it can successfully utilize the superior eco- 
nomic resources of the Empire and the United States, 
as well as tighten its blockade of the continent. The 
conflict would then become once again one of block- 
ade and attrition, in which economic resources and 
popular morale would be the decisive factors. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Shanghai and Tientsin, by F. C. Jones, with an introduc- 
tion by Harold M. Vinacke, New York, American Council, 
Institute of Pacific Relations, 1940. $2.00 


A careful study of the historical development of the two 
major foreign concession areas in China, covering their 
legal status, economic importance, effects of the Sino- 
Japanese war, and current issues. 


Sources of Information, by A. C. de Breycha-Vauthier. 
New York, Columbia University Press, 1939. $1.00 
A topical catalog of important documents published by 
the League of Nations. This work is valuable in its sim- 
plicity and careful exclusion of insignificant details. 


The Cruise of the Raider “Wolf,” by Roy Alexander. New 
Haven, Yale University Press, 1939. $2.75 


The fascinating adventure story of the exploits of a 
German raider during the World War, dramatically told by 
an Australian who was a prisoner on board for nine months. 


A Documentary Textbook in International Law, by 
Llewellyn Pfankuchen. New York, Farrar and Rine- 
hart, 1940. $6.00 
Useful compilation of documents, commentary, and ques- 

tions. 


Mineral Map of Europe, by the Geological Department 
of the Pure Oil Company, Theron Wasson, Chief Geolo- 
gist. Chicago, The Pure Oil Co., 1940. $3.50 
Shows the location of Europe’s mines and oil fields and 

the proportion of the world’s output of mineral they pro- 

duce. Supplementary tables give data on Europe’s mineral 
reserves. Invaluable to the student of the underlying eco- 
nomic factors in the European war. 


Japan Among the Great Powers, by Seiji Hishida. New 
York, Longmans, Green & Co., 1940. $3.50 


A revision and amplification of a doctoral dissertation 
originally published in 1905 under the title of The Inter- 
national Position of Japan as a Great Power. The author 
traces Japan’s rise to the position of a great power and 
defends present Japanese policy as an effort to maintain 
peace in East Asia. 


The March of the Barbarians, by Harold Lamb. New York, 
Doubleday, Doran and Company, 1940. $3.75 
A vivid account of the origins of the Mongol empire un- 
der Genghis Khan and of its later stages in China, the 
Middle East, and Russia. 
Some Notes on War and Peace, by Walter Lippmann. New 
York, Macmillan, 1940. 50 cents 


A brief, informal analysis of the broad bases of post-war 
settlement. 


News Is My Job: A Correspondent in, War-Torn China, 
by Edna Lee Booker. New York, Macmillan, 1940. $3.00 


A lively and informative story of the experiences of a 
woman correspondent in China since the early twenties. 
It offers an entertaining insight into ways of life in China, 
as well as a running commentary on the turning points 
in Chinese political development for the past two decades. 


Conference Board Studies in Enterprise and Social Pro- 
gress. New York, National Industrial Conference Board, 
1939. $5.00 
This handy reference volume gives a broad, factual sur- 

vey of the American economic system. It includes chapters 

on natural resources, population and employment, national 
income and wealth, standards of living, industrial organ- 
ization and public finance. 


Why War? by Nicholas Murray Butler. New York, Scrib- 
ner’s, 1940. $2.50 
In this collection of speeches and essays, a distinguished 
internationalist pleads the cause of world unity to assure 
peace and individual liberties. 


Fighting Years: Memoirs of a Liberal Editor, by Oswald 
Garrison Villard. New York, Harcourt Brace, 1939. 
$3.75 


The interesting autobiography of a distinguished pub- 
licist, formerly editor of the New York Post and The Na- 
tion. Mr. Villard is particularly effective in his condemna- 
tion of Wilsonian diplomacy during the World War and 
the Peace Conference. 


Land Without Laughter, by Ahmad Kamal. New York, 
Charles Scribners Sons, 1940. $3.00 


Narrative of a journey of adventure and misadventure 
through Sinkiang which began with a mid-winter cross- 
ing of the Himalayas. 


Asian Odyssey, by Dmitri Alioshin. New York, Henry 
Holt and Company, 1940. $3.00 
An extraordinary first-hand account of military service 
with General Kolchak in Siberia and with Baron Ungern 
in Outer Mongolia, ending with an escape across the Gobi 
desert to China. 


Emigrant Communities in South China, by Ta Chen. New 
York, Secretariat of the Institute of Pacific Relations, 
1940. $2.50 


An important sociological investigation, by a trained 
Chinese scholar, of the effects of Chinese emigration to the 
South Seas on the livelihood, family, education, health, so- 
cial organization and religion of the parent communities 
in China. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 42, AuGust 9, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FrRaNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lagr, Secretary; VERA MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Br 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


sitbes, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Auc. 5.—After several weeks of uncertainty, the 
Administration appears to be moving toward an im- 
portant decision on the issue of extending further 
military and naval aid to Great Britain. Evidence of 
the trend of Washington opinion is found in the 
radio broadcast of General John J. Pershing on Au- 
gust 4 urging the United States “to safeguard her 
freedom and security” by making available to Great 
Britain 50 overage American destroyers, and in the 
testimony of Secretary of War Stimson before the 
House Military Affairs Committee last week. 

NAVAL AID TO BRITAIN? While General 
Pershing was not speaking as an Administration 
official, he accurately reflected the concern of the 
White House and the State Department over 
Britain’s need for destroyers and small naval craft. 
Reports reaching Washington during the past few 
days have indicated that the British shortage of 
such naval auxiliaries is far more serious than is 
generally realized. During this critical period, Gen- 
eral Pershing declared, “we shall be failing in our 
duty to America” if we do not take any steps we 
can to save the British fleet. Secretary Stimson, who 
has consistently advocated all possible aid to Britain 
short of war, made no reference to the transfer of 
naval vessels in his testimony, but warned his au- 
ditors of the “possibility” that “in another 30 days 
Great Britain herself may be conquered and her 
shipyards pass under German control.” 

The conclusion drawn from these statements is 
that the Administration is seeking to revise its earlier 
policy of furnishing surplus war materials to Britain 
—a policy which was suspended without explana- 
tion about a month ago. It will be recalled that 
during the first weeks of June, before the capitula- 
tion of France, President Roosevelt authorized the 
sale of large stocks of surplus Army and Navy sup- 
plies to the Allies. Between June 6 and June 15, 
when the President made public his cable to Premier 
Reynaud promising “renewed efforts” to supply 
planes and munitions, the government released to 
the Allies 280 scout bombers and attack planes, 
600,000 Enfield rifles, about 800 French 75’s and 
quantities of machine guns, mortars and ammunition 
from our World War stocks. This procedure was ten- 
tatively approved by the Senate in the Army Expan- 
sion Bill, which passed by a vote of 80 to 0 on 
June 11, but was held up a few days later when 
Senator Walsh, chairman of the Senate Naval Af- 
fairs Committee, objected to the release of 20 new 


motor torpedo boats to Great Britain. Since June 25 
the Administration has virtually shut dowfi¢on the 
supply of ‘Army and Navy stocks to Britain." 

With’ tespect to the sale or transfer of naval ves. 
sels to Britain, three separate questions are involved; 


(1) Can such transfer be made under existing laws) 
(2) Are the vessels needed by our own Navy? 
(3) Would the transfer be in our national interest) 

There is a sharp difference of opinion on the legal 
question. On June 24, the Attorney General advised 
the President that the sale of the 20 motor torpedo 
boats ‘would seem to be prohibited” by the Act of 
June 15, 1917, which provided that: “During 4 
war in which the United States is a neutral nation, 
it shall be unlawful to send out of the jurisdiction 
of the United States any vessel built as a vessel of 
war with any intent . . . that such vessel shall be 
delivered to a belligerent nation . . .”"—a ruling in 
accord with our traditional neutrality policy under 
international law. The recent Act to Expedite Na. 
tional Defense, signed by President Roosevelt on 
July 1, prohibits the sale or transfer of any vessels, 
weapons or munitions to any foreign government 
unless the Chief of Naval Operations or the Chief 
of Staff certifies that they are not essential to the 
national defense. This proviso is cited by advocates 
of the sale of destroyers to Britain as granting full 
authority to the Executive, without the necessity for 
action by Congress. In view of the difference of 
opinion, and the importance of the issue, specific 
authorization by Congress would appear to be the 
wisest course for the Administration to take. 

At present, the United States has the largest de- 
stroyer fleet in the world, with some 237 vessels 
built and 60 more under construction. Our supeti- 
ority would not appear to be threatened by the sale 
of 50 overage destroyers built during the World 
War and reconditioned this year. Whether the Navy 


will “need” these vessels will depend, of course, on | 


what happens in Europe. If Britain is able to with- 


need to use them, but if the British Navy is de- 
stroyed or falls into the hands of Germany, the se 
curity of this country will be profoundly affected. 
Most Americans agree that our national interests 
would be jeopardized by a Nazi victory. The real 
question, however, is whether the 50 destroyers will 
be sufficient to turn the balance, and, if not, whether 
we will then be committed to full participation in 
the War. 
W. T. STONE 


An inter 


TS 
Vou. XT. 


Cataclysn 
threshold 
political « 
jn the eve 


Major 
American 


July issue 


—_— 
———= 


—_—-— 


H 
tk 
a far-re 
on ever 
ing rect 
the clo 
control 
agents 
brough 
Wester 
China 
issues | 
been ar 
militar 
THI 
the 2, 
order, 
tioned 
serious 
in Chi 
result 
Britain 
telatio 
of viev 
kong 
diplon 
of the 
sarily 


stand the threatened Nazi invasion, we will have no | On th 


may s 
While 
of Bri 
hot ye 
by Lor 
ing eff 

Wi 
morec 
explos 
Nank. 


