‘7: 
m in 
0 


n this lat 
iS will be 
here they 


with the 
. to offer 
r definite 
tained by 
ns, which | 
fe proved | 
ly if that 
of a new 
Joubtedly 
ashington 
is has yet 
e pledges 
Thailand 
tation on 
1-interfer. 
to Vladi- 
proaches, 
unofficial 
okesmen. 


es, more: 
s. Export 


extremely 
ry Ameti- 
acy, even 
ound. On 
yn. raising 
om 15 to 
lize pro- 
mmission 
about 90 
narket in 


extent to 
in a joint 
rtite com | 
+r specific 
can deal 
ic. Many 
se threat 


1 British- 
hina and | ’ 
1 the Far | 


BISSON 


Dr. Wil) © £i540p Entered as Pad class matter 


¢ University of Uichigan LibrarySEP Le 194) 


~ 


Ann Arbor, Mich. . 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Vo. XX, No. 46 SEPTEMBER 5, 1941 
REVOLT AGAINST NAZIS STIRS FRANCE 
om shooting at Versailles on August 27 of increased powers to Admiral Darlan, “to whom pub- 
former Premier Pierre Laval and the Paris editor, lic opinion has not always been favorable or fair, but 
Marcel Déat, both of whom had advocated Franco- who has ever helped me with loyalty and courage.” 
German collaboration, brought into the open the Marshal Pétain’s broadcast was an admission of the 


underground struggle that has been rending France restlessness that had gripped both occupied and un- 
almost from the moment Marshal Pétain signed the occupied France. As the French people gradually 
armistice with Germany. The collapse of the Third emerged from the daze in which they had been left 
Republic following a catastrophic military debacle by the suddenness and completeness of their disaster, 
had plunged France into such a state of apathy that even a rigid censorship could no longer conceal their 
the easiest way out seemed to be to accept the verdict lack of sympathy with either the Darlan-Laval = 
of the battlefield, and rebuild the country within the gram of collaboration, or the “let us be brave and go 


narrow framework allotted to it by the Nazis for the back to the soil” program of Pétain. Reports from 
duration of the war. France indicated that all elements opposed to Nazism 
PETAIN ACCEPTS COLLABORATION. This —Socialists and Communists, monarchists and liber- 
program of limited objectives was advocated by Mar- als, whether or not they adhered to de Gaulle—were 
shal Pétain, who believed that Hitler would impose beginning to stir; and every German setback sharp- 
on France a harsh, but honorable peace, and would ened their hopes that, perhaps, the verdict of June 
exact no terms that a soldier like himself could re- 1940 might yet be reversed, and France restored to 
gatd as disgraceful. When it became increasingly its former position in Europe. 
dear that the Nazis would demand French military EFFECT OF RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN. The tide 
and naval aid agains, sritain in return for whatever was definitely turned a year after the armistice when 
concessions they might make about release of prison- the Germans, on June 22, invaded Russia. This inva- 
es and other matters, the position of Pétain grew sion reopened all the old conflicts within France, 
daily more difficult. Unlike Admiral Darlan and superficially obscured by the Soviet-German non- 
Pierre Laval, who urged close collaboration with the aggression pact of 1939. French Communists, freed 
Reich on the assumption of a Nazi victory, Marshal of any “party line’ obligation to temporize with 
Pétain did not seem ready to accept Hitler’s “new Nazism, immediately indicated by renewed propa- 
order” until the issue of the war had been decided, ganda that their organization remained one of the 
and insisted that France would never do anything to most efficient and well-knit political groups in France. 
injure its wartime ally, Britain. Yet on August 12, And this time their activities coincide with the aspira- 
| aftec what must have been a long and painful tions of other elements in France—notably the Social- 
struggle behind the scenes at Vichy, Marshal Pétain, ists—who had once opposed Communist tactics. Per- 
ina broadcast to the nation, declared that collabora- haps the most paradoxical result of the Nazi struggle 
tion with Germany offered the only hope for France; against “Bolshevism” in Europe is that, in France at 
complained that the authority of his government was least, it has given new strength and prestige to Com- 
made subject to discussion” ; deplored the confu- munism. It is within the bounds of possibility that if 
sion of thought in France; suspended the activities of and when a large-scale revolt against German domi- 
political parties in the unoccupied zone until further nation comes in France, it will be !ed not only by ad- 


fotice; and announced that he had entrusted greatly herents of de Gaulle, but by men filled with the same 


spirit that characterized the Paris Commune in 1871, 
when France also passed through tragic days, only to 
emerge with enhanced strength and unity under the 
Third Republic. 

Growing unrest in France has led the Nazis to 
adopt severe measures of repression against persons 
described as ‘‘Jews and Communists” in the occupied 
zone; while in the unoccupied zone Marshal Pétain, 
whose government is also hostile to Communism, has 
attempted to bolster national morale by extending 
membership in the French Legion (founded in 1940) 
from the Veterans of Two Wars to include all those 
ready to volunteer their services for the National 
Revolution. In announcing this new move on Au- 
gust 31, the Marshal declared that from the ex- 
panded Legion his government expected to draw the 
support necessary to accomplish reform of the nation 
—thus creating the impression that the Legion might 
serve as a political party in a one-party state. Pétain’s 
announcement, however, was apparently not wel- 
comed in Berlin, which would prefer to have France 
remain weak, disunited and disorganized. The case of 
France shows that, if the Nazis are to maintain domi- 
nation of the Continent, they can permit no strong 
governments in the conquered countries because 
these governments, whatever their political com- 
plexion, might eventually provide a nucleus for re- 
volt against the conqueror. 


This fundamental problem of administering a con- 
tinent vanquished, but by no means subdued, becomes 
increasingly acute as the war drags on, and its out- 
come appears more doubtful than it seemed at Dun- 
kirk. The resistance of the Russian armies, prolonged 
beyond the expectations of themostsanguine observers, 


= Page Two 


—<— 


has already made a profound impression on the op, 
quered peoples, and has revived their hope of eyep, 
tually throwing off Nazi rule, which continues 4, 


meet with passive opposition everywhere, from Hol. 


land to Greece. 

Such problems are bound to preoccupy the Axis 
powers, and may have been one of the subjects dis 
cussed at the five-day conference held on the easter 
front from August 25 to 29. The communiqué issue 
at the close of the conference, which for the first time 


in Axis history came as an anticlimax after the Roose. 


velt-Churchill meeting, was neither boastful nor opt. 
mistic. The reference to the “community of fate” of 
the two dictators struck a Wagnerian note of doom 
The promise that “the new European order”’ will "ss 
far as possible remove the causes that in the pas 
have given rise to European wars’ was both circum. 
spect and vague. It has often been said, on this side 
of the Atlantic, that it will not be enough for Britain 
and the United States to win the war: they will als 
have to win the peace. This same task today confronts 


the Axis leaders as they gird their countries for pro. | 


longation of the war. 

It would be dangerously shortsighted, however, for 
the British and Americans to assume that Nazi domi- 
nation of Europe can be overthrown merely by the 
passive resistance of the conquered peoples. The pos 
sibility of German defeat through revolts in occupied 
countries depends, first and foremost, on the material 
aid that these countries can hope to receive from the 
Western powers. And this hope, in turn, depends on 
the production capacity that Britain and the United 
States can deploy in the months immediately ahead. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


CAN AGREEMENT BE REACHED IN THE PACIFIC? 


Premier Konoye’s personal letter to President 
Roosevelt, transmitted by the Japanese Ambassador 
on August 28, has added new significance to the ne- 
gotiations currently taking place between Tokyo and 
Washington. Details of the letter have been with- 
held, although Secretary Hull’s statement on Au- 
gust 30 that the Japanese-American conversations 
have been “purely exploratory” indicates that no 
agreement has yet been reached. As the negotiations 
proceed, a strong tide of extremist opposition tu the 
Tokyo Cabinet's policy increasingly prejudices the 
success of Prince Konoye’s démarche. 


SPECIAL OFFER—5 FPRs for $1.00 


EUROPE UNDER NAZI RULE 

AMERICA’S DILEMMA IN THE FAR EAST 
OIL AND THE WAR 

BRITAIN’S WARTIME ECONOMY 1940-41 
TOWARD A NEW WORLD ORDER 


This major development in the Far Eastern situe | 


tion had been preceded by the refusal of Washington 
and Moscow to consider Japanese “representations 
on August 25 concerning shipment of American wat 
supplies to the Soviet Union via Vladivostok. Tokyo 
officials carefully suggested that “protest’’ was to 
strong a term for their diplomatic warning, whid 
merely stated that the shipments created “a delicatt 
and embarrassing” problem for Japan. In his pres 
conference on August 27 Secretary Hull asserted tha 
the United States would insist on ‘freedom of tht 
seas” in the Pacific, while at Moscow Premier Mole 
tov warned that a Japanese effort to hinder norma 
Soviet-American trade relations would be regardet 
“as an unfriendly act to the U.S.S.R.” 


PRESSURE ON JAPAN CONTINUES. Despit 
the central rdle which current negotiations wil 


Japan are playing in the struggle for the Pacific, n¢| 


ther Britain nor the United States is permitting all 
relaxation of defense preparations in that area. A 


| 


| 


| 


as sta 
assist 
terest 
effort 
force. 
tion, 
equip 
issuec 
fense 
Cet 
and t 
early 
pectec 
as In 
Singa 
Toky. 
sendit 
Britis 
Britor 
enteet 
order 
were 
reach 
cans, 
barrie 
Japan 
ever, 
ing re 
to 1,0 
TH 
that | 
dilem 
consic 
a tem 
Amer 
is aga 
gasol: 
now | 
mittec 
to Jar 


<n 
FOREIG 
Headqua 
Entered 


> 


—_—_== 


N the cop. 
4 of even. 
ntinues ty 
from Hol. 


| the Axis 
bjects dig. 
he easter 
qué issued 
> first time 
the Roose. 
1 nor Opti- 
f fate” of 
of doom, 
will “as 
1 the past 
th circum. | 
n this side 
‘or Britain 
y will also 
- confronts 
s for pro 


wever, for 
Nazi domi- 
ely by the 
. The pos 
n occupiel 
e material ' 
> from the 
epends on 
he United 
y ahead. 


s DEAN 


tern situs 
‘ashington 
entations’ 
erican wat 
ok. Tokyo 
” was too 
ng, whid 
‘a delicate 
| his press 
serted that 
om of ve 
rier Molo 
er normal 


- regarded 


5. Despitt 
ions will 
acific, ne 
‘itting at} 
t area. A 


— 


gecession of moves during the past week suggests 
hat continued pressure on Japan is viewed as an 
adjunct of British-American diplomacy -in the ex- 
isting Far Eastern crisis. 

Outstanding among these additional steps was the 
announcement from Washington on August 26 that 
the President had ordered the dispatch of an Ameri- 
cn military mission to China. Headed by Brigadier 
General John Magruder, who has twice served as 
military attaché in China, the mission will include a 
staff of trained officers and will operate under di- 
rection of the Secretary of War. Its general purpose, 
as stated by the President, is to make “‘lend-lease 
assistance to China as effective as possible in the in- 
terest of the United States, of China, and of the world 
dfort in resistance to movements of conquest by 
force.” On the following day an Executive proclama- 
tion, extending license provisions to all military 
equipment and supplies not previously covered, was 
issued in order to bar the export of Philippine de- 
fense materials to Japan. ; 

Certain precautionary measures, both by Britain 
and the United States, also supply evidence that an 
early settlement of differences with Japan is not ex- 
pected. A large contingent of R.A.F. fliers, as well 
as Indian artillery and infantry units, landed at 
Singapore on August 25. The British Embassy at 
Tokyo announced on August 31 that London was 
sending a special ship to Japan in order to evacuate 
British nationals; a majority of approximately 1,000 
Britons in that country were preparing to leave. Sev- 
enteen American diplomatic and military officers, 
ordered out of Japan by the Washington authorities, 
were among 59 American nationals who finally 
reached Shanghai on August 30. About 500 Ameri- 
cans, many of whom were unable to cut through the 
barrier of Japanese restrictions, were still left in 
Japan. The plight of foreign nationals in Japan, how- 
ever, was somewhat eased by a relaxation of freez- 
ing regulations which allowed them to withdraw up 
to 1,000 yen monthly for living expenses. 

THE IMMEDIATE OUTLOOK. It seems clear 
that the authorities in Tokyo, confronted with a 
dilemma of their own making, have been forced to 
consider the possibility of concessions in order to win 
atemporary respite. The serious effect of the British- 
American freezing regulations on Japan’s economy 
is again illustrated by new restrictions on the use of 
gasoline. Japanese taxis, buses and private cars are 
now deprived of all gasoline, instead of being per- 
mitted the previous limited ration. Even more basic 
to Japanese policy is the shift in the balance of power 


Page Three 


| 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: UNREST IN OCCUPIED EUROPE 
Speaker: A. Randle Elliott 

Date: Sunday, September 7 

Time: 2:15 p.m. E.D.S.T. 

Station: NBC, blue network 


caused by Germany’s invasion of the Soviet Union. 
Tokyo's occupation of southern Indo-China was ap- 
parently carried through on the assumption of a 
speedy German victory over the U.S.S.R. With Hit- 
ler’s timetable in Russia upset, and an exhausting 
winter campaign for German arms in pros 
the balance of power in the Pacific has markedly al- 
tered to Japan’s disadvantage. The forces at Britain's 
disposal have greatly increased, while the strength of 
a combined Anglo-American-Soviet front in the Far 
East brings the threat of “encirclement” to Japan. 
Under these conditions, the Japanese Cabinet has 
become willing to enter into negotiations on Far 
Eastern issues with the United States. The obstacles 
to any general ‘settlement in the Pacific, however, 
appear too formidable to be overcome at this time. 
Tokyo could hardly accept such a settlement unless 
it included large territorial cessions by China. The 
army extremists in Japan, already restive, would de- 
mand at least this concession to their imperial am- 
bitions; their disapproval of any other arrangement 
might lead to a desperate revolt. Yet neither the 
United States nor Britain can be expected to coerce 
China into a peace settlement on these terms. 


Even a limited agreement, designed to ease the 
present tension, may prove hard to achieve. The 
United States and Britain can offer Japan a resump- 
tion of trade, including access to oil supplies. It is 
difficult to see what Japan can offer in return, other 
than pledges of good behavior. Effective guarantees 
for such pledges would constitute the real problem. 
At present, Japanese troops are being concentrated 
both in Indo-China and Manchuria, hoping for the 
“break” that will enable them to advance. An ex- 
tensive withdrawal of these forces would offer some 
guarantee, but they could be rapidly sent in again at 
a favorable moment. The efficacy of such a “standstill” 
agreement would depend primarily on an estimate of 
the trend of events on the European battlefields. If 
the trend is adverse to Germany, and time therefore 
runs against Japan, a modus vivendi in the Far East 
might be justified. In the opposite event, however, an 
agreement would enable Japan to bolster its resources 
for a final showdown in the Pacific. - A Bisson 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 46, SEPTEMBER 5, 1941. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dororny F. Legr, Secretary; Vera MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 


National 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Bi 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
SEPT. 2.—Washington circles have noted with in- 
terest that President Roosevelt's speeches on Sunday 
and Labor Day struck at the most vulnerable point 
in the nation’s armor—the failure of the general 
public to appreciate the real gravity of the interna- 
tional situation. The President and his advisers had 
become increasingly alarmed about what they re- 
garded as public apathy toward the country’s war 
effort. Mr. Knudsen, for instance, had returned from 
a long inspection trip convinced that the United 
States could out-produce any other nation, but that 
the people still did not have “the spirit’’ necessary for 
this job. 


AROUSING THE NATION. The President ac- 
cordingly took great pains to “awaken” the country. 
On Labor Day he warned that “our fundamental 
rights, including the rights of labor, are threatened 
by Hitler’s violent attempt to rule the world” and 
prophesied that the American Navy could not “main- 
tain the freedom of the seas against all the rest of 
the world” if the British and other friendly fleets 
were destroyed. He appealed to organized labor in 
particular to remember that one of the first acts of 
the Axis dictatorships had been ‘‘to wipe out all the 
principles and standards which labor had been able 
to establish for its own preservation and advance- 
ment.”” Talking to his neighbors at Hyde Park on 
Sunday, the President expressed his own dissatisfac- 
tion with the country’s morale even more pointedly 
by reading from the letter of an American woman 
who had been “terrified” to discover on returning 
from Europe, that many people in this country had 
“no idea of what hangs over their heads today.” 


Some observers were disappointed, however, that 
the President did not announce any concrete measures 
to accelerate the defense program. They looked in 
vain for a clear-cut enunciation of the government's 
labor policy, particularly regarding strikes and 
wages. They heard the President pledge the country 
to “do everything in our power to crush Hitler and 
his Nazi forces” without attempting to prepare the 
country for the necessity of war. On Sunday the 
President did intimate that continued peace “isn’t 
all in our keeping”; and Monday he suggested that 
we should not only “step up the total of our produc- 
tion,” but ‘‘safeguard”’ it more greatly ‘‘on its journeys 
to the battlefields.” Yet he did not claim that our 
“non-shooting” Atlantic patrol was inadequate. 


DISSATISFACTION WITH ARMS O 
The rate of munitions output in the United 
continues unsatisfactory despite an outlay of 
192,495,000 for the construction of defense plants, 
The recent exchange between President Rooseyel; 
and Senator Byrd brought to light some disap 
pointing figures on arms production. Of 1,46 
planes turned out in July, only 700 were comba | —— 
craft. The 300 bombers produced included but 14 Vo. X 
of the heavy four-motored type on which Britain 
must rely to carry the war deep into enemy territory, | R 
The President revealed that delivery schedules called 
for 61 modern 90 mm. anti-aircraft guns per month A t 
during the balance of the year, but did not deny that 
output had been very small up to the present. He 
claimed an output of 221 81 mm. mortars during 
July, but left unchallenged Senator Byrd's’ assertion | thorov 
that not a single 155 mm. gun would be produced in | -... 
1941. Up to the present the British are said to have wo 
obtained about 500 American tanks. While most of | 5.4 ;, 
these were light tanks, the new Chrysler arsenal is nuniq 
now turning out 32-ton models at the rate of 5 per! i: 
day, which will rise to 15 when full capacity 5} ). 
reached. To expedite production, which is expected / 1p 
to attain a value of $1,000,000,000 in 1942, the OPM 


outcon 
ing fr 
hang 1 


' on the 
Production Division announced on August 23 that tt 
it was lending its Tank Unit to the War Department Rivne 
under an arrangement which would “result in unified P 


maint: 


control of tank production in this country for both ! sake 


the United States Army and the British.” —_ 


NEW ADMINISTRATIVE SET-UP. In responst { and m 
to continued criticism of the administrative orgatt } strate 
ization of the defense program, the President cre | of te 
ated on August 29 a Supply Priorities and Allocations } tanks, 
Board headed by Vice-President Wallace and in ) Germ 
cluding the four directors of the OPM, as well a | the u: 
Leon Henderson and Harry Hopkins. Donald M. | effect 
Nelson, chief of the OPM Purchasing Division, was } it hac 
appointed its Executive Director as well as director } Euroy 
of the OPM Priorities Division. At the same time the | heavy 
OPACS was divided into the Office of Civilian Sup | figure 
plies, integrated into the OPM, and the Office of | advar 
Price Administration, which remains as an inde | by th 
pendent agency. By centralizing full control over the | Russi 
administration of priorities in the new Board, the} In 
President has sought to put an end to conflicts be | have 
tween OPM and OPACS. Moreover, he has entrusted | USS 
the Board’s active direction to Mr. Nelson who en | West 
joys the confidence of both business men and New | ton. 


r E 
Dealers. Joun C. peWnpe | 


