ed States 
ssary for 
rited Na 
ces from 
thich this 
cy of na 
program 
ned with 


23, 1945 
ermanent 
in people 
ife which 
od to sur 
ir civilian 
y Depart 
7, At the 
took n0 
rt explain 
hich had 
yur peace 
ook pass 
ive weeks 
le of the 
- General 
staff, pro 
the army 


BOLLES 


MAY 28 1946 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


Swe we 
wees 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN: 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


You. XXV, No. 32 


May 24, 1946 


GENERAL CONFERENCE OFFERS HOPE OF ENDING PEACE STALEMATE 


an spite of dire predictions by some sensation- 
seeking commentators, Secretary of State Byrnes, 
in his radio address of May 20 on the Paris confer- 
ence, did not take the view that Europe must in- 
evitably break up into two hostile worlds. On the 


| contrary, he left the door wide open to adjustment 


of conflicting points of view between the Big Four 


on controversial subjects such as reparations from 


Italy, the future of Italian colonies, the status of 
Trieste and Venezia Giulia, the removal of armies 
of occupation from Italy and Axis satellites in East- 
em Europe and the Balkans, and freedom of navi- 
gation on the Danube. He conveyed the impression 
that agreement might be reached on at least some of 
these questions at the meeting of the Council of 
Foreign Ministers to be held in Paris on June 15, 
but indicated this country’s determination that the 
general peace conference promised by the Big Three 
last December for May 1 should be held on July 1 
or July 15 at the latest. 


PEACE NOT PREROGATIVE OF GREAT 
POWERS. ‘““The making of the peace,” said Mr. 
Byrnes, ‘‘is not the exclusive prerogative of the four 
powers.” If a peace conference is not called this 
summer, he added, the United States (instead of 
seeking to make a separate peace, as had been freely 
predicted before April 25) will request the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, under Article 14 
of the Charter, to “make recommendations with 
fespect to the peace settlement.” Thus it has been 
made clear that the American government wants to 
bring the terms of the proposed peace treaties, both 
those on which the Big Four agree and those on 
which they differ, out of the privacy of the Council 
of Foreign Ministers into the larger forum either 
of a general conference of all nations that fought 
Germany, as agreed at Moscow, or the still larger 


assembly of all the United Nations, for “free dis- 
cussion.” In this endeavor the United States is bound 
to have the support of all small nations, especially 
those like Australia and New Zealand who in all 
international councils have been battling unremit- 
tingly against domination by the great powers. 

This decision comes at a psychological moment 
when the small nations, inspired and awed during 
the war by the technological power of the Big Three, 
have begun to be disenchanted, if not openly 
shocked by seeming poverty of spiritual leadership 
among the Leviathans which knew how to wage 
war but seem incapable of forging peace. This has 
proved as tragitally true of the United States and 
Russia as it was of Germany and Japan in their hour 
of short-lived triumph. Meanwhile, the British Em- 
pire, whose demise, periodically prophesied, is being 
transmuted, as often in the past, into renewal of 
life under new conditions to which this preeminently 
flexible organism is adapting itself with extraor- 
dinary skill. In general it can well be said, in the 
words of Dr. Hafez Afifi Pasha, Egyptian delegate 
to the Security Council, on May 16 that the “great 
mass of humanity” is disappointed “because it be- 
lieves that the Powers are not working as a united 
family, but are trying to further their own interests 
without regard or consideration for others.” 


IS WORLD ON POINT OF CONVALESCENCE? 
This disappointment, painful as it is at this moment, 
may prove to have some of the curative qualities 
of convalescence. It may mark the turning-point of 
one of the delusions of our times—the delusion that 
has led us to believe that bigness is of itself good, 
that material power justifies the flouting of moral 
values, that physical security or peace of mind can 
be achieved simply by submission to some form of 
authority, be it proclaimed in the name of God or 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


eT = = ae ENS = ERO 


man, and that the dictator in a nation, or the great 
power among nations, always “knows best.” We 
may be on the verge of rediscovering the funda- 
mental truths that have left an indelible imprint on 
human history, but have been obscured by the com- 
mg of our machine civilization, that human 

ings are not unthinking automata, to be borne 
this way or that by “waves of the future,” but be- 
ings endowed with the power to think and there- 
fore the responsibility to make choices and arrive 
at decisions. The spirit of inquiry has always proved 
the enemy of dogma and tyranny. The small na- 
tions all around the world are performing an in- 
estimable service first, by surviving at all, and then 
by inquiring persistently, and with a detachment 
unattainable by the great powers, into the motives 
and policies not only of Russia (singled out by the 
United States and Britain for critical scrutiny), but 
of all the Big Three. Without such inquiry the 
world might have gotten mired in increasingly dan- 
gerous controversies between the Western powers 
and Russia. By insisting that all the nations which, 
within the limits of their strength, contributed to 
the winning of the war should have an opportunity 
to discuss the terms of peace, the United States has 
done more to convince the world of its determina- 
tion to assume its share of responsibility for the 
future than it could by any pledges of four-power 
alliances. 


PEOPLE’S PEACE A LONG PROCESS. This 
does not mean that we are anywhere near the goal 
of an enduring peace. As Mr. Byrnes has rightly 
warned, “a people's peace’’ as distinguished from an 
imposed settlement, is bound to be “a long, hard 
process.” It has been given to this generation to 
effect a transition, within and among nations, from 
an economy of self-advancement for the individual 
to concern for the common welfare; from political 


LABOR GOVERNMENT OPENS WAY FOR INDIA’S INDEPENDENCE 


Britain’s Labor government has taken a step in 
India which may neither be disregarded by the In- 
dians nor overlooked by the world at large. The 
latest proposals for Indian self-government either 
within or outside the British Commonwealth, made 
public in London and New Delhi on May 16, fol- 
low closely on the failure of the British Cabinet 
mission and Indian political leaders to effect a satis- 
factory compromise at Simla on the form of the 
future government. But the new plan for a free 
India, to be united through federation, whatever its 
ultimate fate, marks an important development in 
India’s 50-year struggle for national independence. 
In the last seven weeks of inteasive negotiations, 
Indian political differences have been clarified, al- 
though the Hindu-Moslem rift remains, and eco- 
nomic and social problems are heightened by the 
peril of famine. A new trial period now opens, since 


Page Two 


' practice and, as so often happens, either suddenly 


——<—<—— 


liberty sometimes abused for personal or group 
regional ends to political responsibility for the ug 
of liberty; from a position of dependence for x 
yet undeveloped peoples to various degrees of ip 
dependence within the framework of a world com 
munity; from religious faiths that would bar _ 
tionalism and a rationalism that, in turn, woul 
banish religious faiths, to a recognition that scien 
and belief are not incompatible. Some of us are be. 
ing forced to leave ancient dwellings of thought anj 


see many cracks we had not noticed before, or ely 
cling to the familiar spot with inconsolable nostgl. 
gia. Others confidently enter new dwellings of 
thought and practice, only to be disillusioned whe 
they discover that outward change may not spel 
inward stability. 


Of the two systems so often counterposed to each 
other—capitalism and communism—neither is any 
longer exactly what it was when it first developed, 
neither can be said to offer a final answer to the 
problems of our times, both have something to con 
tribute to the world in the making in different de 
grees, depending on time and place. To say, a 
some do, that there can be no international organ 
ization as long as differences persist is to say that 
there will never be a possibility of international or. 
ganization. Nations will never all reach simultane 
ously the same level of development. But neither d 
the citizens of any nation. To exist, society does not 
require uniformity. What it requires is agreement 
among widely differing elements on the necessity of 
finding workable compromises. This is the task to 
which the United States should address itself in what 
Mr. Byrnes describes as its “offensive for peace.” 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The last in a series of articles on the peace negotiations in Paris.) 


an interim government must be established. Ye 
from the long-range point of view, Britain's offer 
to withdraw from India and the nature of the com 
promises suggested for an Indian government beat 
directly on British Commonwealth affairs. At the 
same time, London’s foreign policy is being tested 
as much in India as in Europe, the Middle East ot 
any other single area of British interest. 


BRITAIN PROPOSES—INDIA DISPOSES? The | 


White Paper of May 16 is quite specific, offering 
practical principles for early implementation. No 
detailed blueprint for a future Indian Constitution 
is given, but suggestions are made for convening 4 
constitutional convention, and an interim government 
is proposed in which the portfolios of war, hitherto 
the sole post held by a Britisher in the Viceroys 
Executive Council, is to be relinquished. To insure 
eventual unity, the Cabinet mission has suggested 4 


— 
central | 
and Ind 
federal 
since all 
commut 
wers, 
the stat 
“major 
yote no 
but a n 
represet 
jem mit 
provinc 


Alth« 
claims, 
of the 
and thi 
charge 
and rul 
ence 0: 
light o 
the spi 
will ne 
sincerit 
the cat 
party, | 
Mosler 
Mosler 
solutio 
has cor 
in the 


All 
soon b 
of Brit 
ment < 
ward 
both i 
as yet 
lations 
establi 
tual is 
nomic 
tinued 


LA’ 


———=: 
group or 
r the Use 
e for 
es of ip. 
tld com. 
l bar 
2, Would 
at SCienge 
IS are be 
ught and 
suddenly 
e, Or ely 
le nostal. 
lings of 
ied when 


not spell 


d to each 
ar is 
eveloped, 
er to the 
g to con 
erent de 
) Say, a 
al organ. 
say that 
onal of 
imultane. 
either do 
does not 
greement 
cessity of 
e task to 
f in what 
r peace.” 
DEAN 
s in Paris.) 
-E 
hed. Ye 
in’s offer 
the com- 
nent beat 
. At the 


ng tested 
e East or 


SES ? The 
offering 
tion. No 
nstitution 
ening 4 
vernment 
, hitherto 
Viceroy 
To insure 
pgested 4 


—_ 


central federal government to include all provinces 
and Indian states, now ruled by Indian princes. This 
federal union would have limited powers only, 
since all matters—except foreign affairs, defense and 
communications—along with the requisite financial 

wers, would be reserved to the jurisdiction of 
the states. And any question which might raise a 
“major communal issue’’ would require a majority 
vote not only of the legislature, which is proposed, 
but a majority vote also of its Moslem and Hindu 
representation. Protection thus afforded to the Mos- 
lem minority is also extended by plans for state or 
provincial groupings below the top federal level. 


Although attempting to balance Hindu-Moslem 
daims, the new British plan is a definite rejection 
of the extreme Moslem hope for a divided India, 
and thus should relieve Britain of the oft-repeated 
charge that it is employing the policy of “divide 


any} and rule” to maintain political control. The experi- 


ence of the interim government may throw new 
light on the efficacy of these latest proposals, but 
the spirit or intent in which they have been made 
will not be altered. Perhaps no further test of the 
sincerity of the new British effort is needed beyond 
the cautious Indian reaction. Neither the Congress 
party, the dominant political group in India, nor the 
Moslem League, which favors Pakistan or separate 
Moslem states, has approved the British compromise 
solution with loud praise. Neither faction, however, 
has condemned it outright, as has happened so often 
in the past with other British announcements. 


All of India’s formidable social problems will not 
soon be solved, but whatever criticism can be made 
of Britain’s past failures to develop India’s govern- 
ment or economy more fully, from this point for- 
ward great responsibility rests on India’s leaders 
both in the political and economic realm. There is 
as yet little indication of the eventual economic re- 
lationships—either state or private—which will be 
established between Britain and India, although mu- 
tual interests will dictate continuance of close eco- 
nomic ties. It is significant that, despite the con- 
tinued presence of sizable British investments in 


Page Three 


India, after six years of war in which Britain made 
heavy military expenditures in the Indian market, 
the official balances run in India’s favor. Through 
war purchases and the liquidation of private assets 
in India, Britain has now emerged with a sterling 
debt owed to India of over a billion pounds. 


FUTURE BRITISH-INDIAN TIES. If it appears 
that the Indians themselves can largely determine 
how long the interim government must serve before 
a politically independent régime is set up, and how 
India’s future economy will be managed, the out- 
side world will be mainly interested in the final se- 
curity arrangements that will be established between 
India and the other British nations. Britain’s inde- 
pendence offer is now categorical, although most 
Britishers hope that India will elect to remain with- 
in the Commonwealth. The Labor government's ac- 
tion in India has occasioned mild criticism from 
Conservative party members in London for not in- 
sisting more strongly on some such tie. But Britain's 
chief concern, like that of Commonwealth nations 
such as New Zealand and Australia, now turns to 
the more realistic issue that has arisen in Egypt. 

In Egypt, as well as India, the Labor Cabinet has 
clearly set forth its aim to abandon all special privi- 
leges. Yet because of its weakened power position 
relative to the other Big Three, Britain’s security 
needs and its search for export markets will be 
pushed with vigor in both the Middle East and in 
India. These aims are sought at a time when Britain 
finds Russian influence increasing along its historic 
empire route, and when the United States presses 
for a revision of the system of imperial preferences 
and freer economic trading terms between Britain 
and all sterling area countries. Faced by Indian na- 
tionalist desires that can no longer be denied, how- 
ever, the Labor government—less than a year after 
its election—has boldly sought to end British con- 
trol in India on generous terms. Only an open break 
between Moslems and Hindus in India or a final 
deadlock among the great powers would appear 
capable of delaying India’s independence much 


longer. Grant S. McCLELLAN 


LATIN AMERICA RENEWS EUROPEAN TIES TO COUNTERBALANCE U.S. 


A feature common to the policies of the larger 
Latin American countries is the endeavor to renew 
contacts with Europe interrupted by the war. In re- 
cent months a procession of diplomatic, cultural and 
trade missions from a number of European coun- 
tries, notably, Britain, France, Sweden and Russia, 
has made its way through Latin American capitals. 
The cordiality with which these missions have been 
teceived indicates that the American Republics are 
no less anxious to take up where they left off in 
1939 than the European countries. 

LATIN AMERICA COURTS EUROPE. That the 


Latin American nations would take steps to end their 
enforced isolation from Europe was, like the post- 
war deterioration of inter-American relations, fre- 
quently predicted here during the war. The rela- 
tions which had developed under stress of common 
danger unquestionably have been strained by the 
return to peacetime conditions. The Latin American 
countries feel that the United States has not, through 
concrete political and economic benefits, shown 
proper recognition of their wartime services. Annoy- 
ance is expressed over United States price policy, 
whereby Latin Americans are forced to sell their 


= Page Four 


products, such as coffee and sugar, at negotiated 
prices which do not fully reflect current price and 
cost relationships, while they must purchase Ameri- 
can machinery and manufactures at prices which are 
rising. Another cause of misunderstanding has been 
the abrupt removal of nearly all our licensing con- 
trols, which has left the United States unable to 
effect an equitable distribution of commodities in 
short supply and has put the Latin Americans at a 
disadvantage in our markets. Consequently, these 
countries, all of which possess ample dollar ex- 
change, are unable to alleviate the inflation, partly 
attributable to import shortages, under which they 
have labored during the war. While Washington 
believes that these inflationary conditions could have 
been lessened by the termination of import licensing 
control and the reduction of tariff and exchange 
barriers, the Latin American countries are reluctant 
to undertake these steps until they are assured that 
the United States will make reciprocal concessions. 


Even if this country had been in the position to 
make these adjustments—which it manifestly was 
not—such is the relationship of the other American 
Republics to the United States that one observer was 
recently moved to say: “In Latin America we fear 
that economic benefits from the United States will 
bring political effects.” Suspicions of this nature, as 
well as uncertainties concerning their long-term trade 
with the United States, clearly explains the haste 
of these countries to conclude agreements with non- 
American powers which would counteract what they 
regard as excessive United States influence in their 
domestic affairs. The most spectacular development 
along these lines has been the establishment of dip- 
lomatic relations and negotiation of trade agree- 
ments with the U.S.S.R. Russian diplomatic missions 
are now stationed in all the larger Latin American 
countries except Argentina, and the presence of a 
Soviet trade mission in that country augurs favorably 
for the early renewal of relations. 


RIGHTIST GAINS. The present rapprochement 


Just Published— 
RESTLESS INDIA 
by Lawrence K. Rosinger 
A 128-page illustrated pamphlet, including a statement 
by the Earl of Halifax and a 28-page appendix of perti- 


nent documentary material. 


35 cents 
HEADLINE SERIES No. 55 


HEADLINE SERIES are published bi-monthly 
Subscription: $2.00 for 10 issues 


— 
—— 


between Russia and several Latin American coyp. 
tries on the diplomatic and commercial levels, hoy. 
ever, has not been accompanied by a swing to the 
Left in domestic policies. On the contrary, these 
governments, with remarkable unanimity, have takep 
or contemplate taking steps to prevent the extreme 
Left from assuming greater political importance, 
The Communist party in Mexico, for example, will 
not be allowed to present a candidate in the July 
Presidential elections. In Brazil, where the Commy. 
nist leader, Senator Julio Prestes, discredited his party 
in the eyes of Brazilian moderates by an “unpatriotic 
declaration,” General Dutra’s government, in the 
words of a Brazilian commentator, “is determined 
to stem dissemination of Marxist ideas through the 
adoption of measures not merely preventive but also 
repressive.” 

The present drive against Communists wherever 
it is being undertaken reflects not only the uncertain. 
ties of the world political situation but also the 
growing social unrest at home, unrest which feeds 
on constantly rising costs of living. If recent na 
tional and by-elections are any test of public opinion 
in Latin America as a whole, however, Communism 
holds no great attraction for many people. This may 
be due partly to the fact that, in a region where 
politics are so largely personal, no outstanding Com- 
munist spokesman has aroused their allegiance, and 
partly because they have been disillusioned in their 
experience with liberal, reform governments, where 
such have existed. On the contrary, the evidence 
points rather to popular support of strong leaders 
in the tradition of Argentina’s Perén, who combines 
the promise of fulfilling the same social objectives 
offered by the Communists with the appeal of the 
Caudillo, whose type is familiar to Latin Americans. 

To assess the seemingly divergent currents of 
opinion in Latin America today and to develop 4 
realistic Latin American policy, as the United States 
must do to assure security in the New World, is no 
easy task. If Ambassador George Messersmith’s 
speech of May 10, on leaving Mexico City for his 
Buenos Aires assignment, expresses United States 
policy, Washington hopes “‘to bring about complete 
collaboration in the Western Hemisphere—political, 
military, strategic and economic.” Even if it were in 
the interest of the United States to collaborate with 
the governments of the New Right, as represented 


by Argentina, the question still arises whether such | 


a working relationship could be achieved. 


OLIvE HoLMES 
(The second of two articles.) 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 32, May 24, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; DorotHy F. Laer, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DBA, 
Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Yeat. 


Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


>" 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


1918- 


Vou. XX 
BIG 1 


O*; 


in its ir 
tions, t 
the wo 
war. 1 
strike s 
been s 
greater 
anxieti 
tunate 
chinery 
have t 
bound 
munity 
great 1 
ment t 
that p! 
IRA 
When 
May 8 
ation, 
cordar 
absent 
from 
Russia 
Marck 
treaty 
nounc 
from | 
dents 
which 
been 
tlatior 
Russi 
left i 


soup 


