




















Entered as 2nd class matter 
Dr. William W. Bishop De 
) % University of Wi¢ghigan Library 
A“ Ann Arbor, Mich. 5 
f\ 
a : 
Fi FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
and 
ions ' 
ner. 
Orts An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
ft FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
tom ) 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
un- 
Vou. XX, No. 51 OcToBER 10, 1941 
pea 
ram | HITLER SEEKS VICTORY IN RUSSIA 
a AS the battle-line swayed back and forth in the compared Mr. Churchill's address of September 30 
fe sixteenth week of the Soviet-Ge.nan war, to the House of Commons, in which he admitted 
3 te. | Berlin and Moscow also engaged in a batt'e of words that Germany retained superiority on land. The Ger- 
eas’ | tegarding their respective losses of mena and ma- mans, he said, could fight Russia, and still have 
ec. 6 | tériel. In his first public speech since May of this armies vast enough simultaneously to move against 
sels | yeat, Chancellor Hitler declared at the Sportpalast the Nile, to attack Spain and Portugal, and to in- 
ies | October 3 that Russia “is already broken and will vade Britain. “The enemy’s only shortage,” said 
t has | never rise again.” The Nazis, he admitted, did not Mr. Churchill, “‘is in the air’—apparently alluding 
ding | know “how gigantic’ Russia’s preparations “against to German losses of planes in Russia. “That is a 
wing Germany had been.” He asserted, however, that very serious shortage, but for the rest he retains the 
ng to } fresh operations of ‘‘gigantic proportions” were in initiative.” 
‘oviet | Progress on the Soviet-German front, which took the RUSSIA NEEDS WAR AID. While an accurate 
tican { form of a two-pronged drive against Moscow begun analysis of the German and Russian claims and 
stok, | 02 October 6. counter-claims must await the end of the war, it is 
ome CLAIMS AND COUNTER-CLAIMS. Hitler obvious that both Germany and Russia have suffered 
Iding | claimed that the Germans had taken 2,500,000 Rus- great losses in men and matériel during their three- 
Neu | sian prisoners, had captured or destroyed 22,000 month conflict. Germany's industrial system, which 
Vales | guns and 18,000 tanks, and had shot down 14,500 remains relatively intact despite British air raids, is 
nves | planes. In this connection, it is interesting to note probably in a better position to replace losses in 
press ) that the Italian Fascist leader, Roberto Farinacci, equipment than Russian industries, many of which 
| who has recently visited both Germany and the either were located in regions now occupied by the 
ident | Soviet-German front, reported at a public meeting | Germans or obtained their raw materials from these 
enter} in Cremona on October 1 that Russia, at the out- regions. Russia’s immediate problem is to obtain war 
f any | break of the war, had between 35,000 and 40,000 material in large quantities and at an ever quickening 
rts of | tanks and 35,000 planes, which would mean that tempo from Britain and the United States. This 
ps to the Russians, even according to Hitler’s figures, still problem was the subject of the three-power confer- 
ay of | retain half of their tanks and over half of their ence held in Moscow last week, which is discussed in 
Jifax. | planes. the Washington News Letter. Two crucial difficul- 
has Nazi claims regarding Russian losses were cate- ties confront the Western powers in their determina- 
erican ) gotically denied on October 5 in a statement pub- tion to aid Russia: first, they must speed up their 
other | lished by Alexander Scherbakoff, director of the own industrial production, and divert a major part 
ye ap { Soviet Information Bureau in Moscow. According to of the equipment they manufacture to the Soviet 
tween) his figures, Russia has lost 1,128,000 men—230,000 front—at the risk of losing it in case of Moscow’s 
yf the | killed, 720,000 wounded and 178,000 missing—as defeat; second, they must expand the transportation 
vithin | well as 7,000 tanks, 8,900 guns and 5,316 planes. facilities of the one route into Russia which is least 
> con } On the other hand, Scherbakoff declared that the vulnerable at the present time to Axis attack — the 
id the | Germans have lost 3,000,000 men—killed, wounded route through the Persian Gulf and then over the 
ly. and prisoners—and 11,000 tanks, 13,000 guns, and railway across Iran to the Caspian Sea. The connec- 
NE | %000 planes. With this Russian statement may be tion between the Iranian and Russian railway sys- 














——=— 











tems, however, is not yet completed. 

Meanwhile, the question of aid to Russia has be- 
come interwoven, in the United States, with ques- 
tions raised about Moscow’s internal policies, notably 
its attitude toward freedom of religion. President 
Roosevelt, in an effort apparently to win the support 
of Roman Catholics, not only in the United States 
but also in Europe and South America, for aid to 
Russia, indicated at a press conference on Septem- 
ber 30 that Russia, under its constitution, enjoys free- 
dom of religion analogous to that existing in the 
United States. For this remark the President was se- 
verely taken to task by several American religious 
and political leaders; and in an official statement 
issued on October 2 the White House voiced the 
hope that “complete freedom of religion is on its 
way” in Russia. 

MOSCOW’S ATTITUDE TOWARD RE- 
LIGION. While Article 124 of the Soviet constitu- 
tion of 1936 states that “freedom of religious 
worship and freedom of anti-religious propaganda 
is recognized for all citizens,” this article, as the Rev. 
Dr. Edmund A. Walsh pointed out in commenting 
on the President's first statement about religion in 
Russia, has been a “hollow shell.” It would be a 
disservice, both to American public opinion and, in 
the long run, also to the Russian people, to claim 
that Russia is a “democracy” in the Western sense, 
or permits the practice of civil liberties, including 
freedom of religion, which have become familiar to 
Western peoples. Until Germany's invasion of 
Russia, the Soviet government persecuted religious 
leaders, prevented religious education, scoffed at re- 
ligion, which Marx had described as “the opium of 
the people,” and supported the activities of the God- 
less League. Following the outbreak of war with 
Germany, Moscow has permitted the use of religious 
services by Polish forces that have been formed on 
Soviet soil, and discontinued publication of Bezbozh- 
nik (The Godless), organ of the Godless League 
—ostensibly because of lack of paper. On Octo- 


c= Page Two 








—= 


ber 4, in a prepared statement, the Soviet officia) 
spokesman, S. A. Lozovsky, reaffirmed Soviet free, 
dom, on the basis of the 1936 constitution, to belieye 
and practice any and all religions as well as cop, 





tinued liberty for the activities of anti-religious gy. | 
ganizations and propaganda. 

While no one acquainted with Soviet Russia could 
deny the absence of religious freedom in that coup. 
try, it is important for people in the United States 
to understand that the situation of organized religion 
in Russia before 1917 was not comparable to tha 
in Britain or the United States. Many of the leader; | 


of the Greek Orthodox hierarchy were closely asso. ! 


ciated with the Tsarist régime, and supported jt 
policy of repression toward liberal movements, 4s 
well as its obscurantist ideas regarding popular edy. 
cation. This does not mean that the Russian people 
were not religious. On the contrary, there was i 
Russiz a deep-rooted feeling of mysticism which, a 

least in the older generation, has survived two 
years of ‘ oviet propaganda and repression. The reyo. | 
lution of 1917 was directed primarily against Tsarism, 
It assumed an anti-religious character largely because 
the Greek Orthodox Church seemed committed ty , 
perpetuation of the Tsarist régime and of a system | 
of private property which held out little hope of 
improving the lot of the Russian workers and peas 
ants. To say that the Soviet government—which has 
proved more autocratic than the Tsars—has not yet / 
satisfied the material needs of these workers ant 
peasants is not an answer to the problems that pro- 
voked the Bolshevik revolution. It may well be that, 
in the course of this war, the Russian people—as dis 
tinguished from the small minority of Bolsheviks 
who seized power in 1917—will find an opportunity | 
to mold Russia’s social and economic system closet } 
to the Western concept of democracy. | 


Meanwhile, their resistance has galvanized th 
peoples of occupied countries into widespread revolt | 
against Hitler's “new order.” This revolt may prove | 


to have been tragically premature. But it may als | 


~ 


—_ 





Statement of the Ownership, Management, Circulation, Etc., 
Required by the Acts of Congress of August 24, 1912 and 
March 3, 1933, of 


Foreign Policy Bulletin 


Published weekly at New York, N. Y. for October 1, 1941. 

State of New York, Create of New York, ss. 

Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State and county aforesaid, 
personally appeared Vera Micheles Dean, who, having been duly sworn ac- 
cording to law, deposes and says that she is the Editor of the FOREIGN 
POLICY BULLETIN, and that the following is, to the best of her knowledge 
and belief, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the afore- 
said publication for the date shown in the above caption, required by the 
Act of August 24, 1912, as amended by the Act of March 3, 1933, em- 
bodied in Section 537, Postal Laws and Regulations, printed on the re- 
verse of this form, to wit: 


1. That the names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing edi- 
tor, and business managers are: 


Publishers—Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 22 East 38th Street, 
New York, N. Y. 


Editor—Vera Micheles Dean, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Managing Editor—None. 

Business Managers—None. 

2. That the owner is: 


Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, the principal officers of which 
are: Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorothy F. Leet, Secretary; both of 


70 Broadway, New York, N. Y 
3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holdts 
owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgagts / 

or other securities, are: 


22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y.; and William A. Eldridge, Treasuttt 
‘ | 


None. 

4. That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owntt | 
stockholders and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stom | 
holders and security holders as they appear upon the books of the compaij 


but also, in cases where the stockholder or security holder appears upon © 
books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, the na \ 
of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting, is given; # 
that the said two paragraphs contain statements embracing afnant's fe 
knowledge and belief as to the circumstances and conditions under whit | 
stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of | 
company as trustees hold stock and securities in a yo other than thaté | 
a bona fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any, 
person, association, or corporation has any interest, direct or indirect, a @ 
said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by her 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated } 

By VERA MICHELES DEAN, Eaitt | 

Sworn to and subscribed before me this 30th day of September, 1941. } 
{Seal} CAROLYN MARTIN, Notary Publi} 


New York County, New York, County Clerk’s No. 339. (My commisit® 
expires March 30, 1943.) 


\\ 


appe 
lem, 
conti 


to th 


? footl 


migh 
coun 


Brit2 
and 
adva 


con 
the 
foll 


FOR 
Hea 
Ente 


< 


1cial 








easuttt, 


holdes 
regage 


ownet 
f stod | 
ympan} 
pon th 
re nace | 
nm; als 
t's fe 
r whit } 
3 of m i 
that ¢ | 


, in | 
rated. } 


ue] 
+ Public 
nmissioe 








—_—” 


itimately tip the scales in a conflict which at times 
appears to reach a stalemate. Hitler's strategic prob- 
iem, like that of Napoleon, is first to consolidate the 
continent, and then to break out of the continent on 
to the high seas, in an attempt to defeat the British 
Empire. Britain’s problem, by contrast, is to find a 
foothold on the continent for a counter-offensive that 
might bring about the downfall of Nazism. For this 
counter-offensive Russia and the occupied countries 
seething with revolt offer potential bases, provided 
Britain and the United States have the determination 


' and the technical ability to make use of their 
, advantages. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


Page Three 











FPA FORUM 


When — Saturday, October 25. Sessions at 10 a.m, and 

3 p.m. Luncheon at 12:45 p.m. 
Where — The Waldorf-Astoria, New York, N. Y. 
Why — To hear leaders of our government and armed 

forces discuss: 

AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY 
Our First LINE OF DEFENSE 

Open to all men and women interested in world problems. 
Reservations at the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The Spoil of Europe, by Thomas Reveille. New York, 
Ww. W. Norton and Company, 1941. $2.75 
The author has drawn on many sources in compiling the 
frst detailed account of the methods used by the Nazis in 
exploiting the economies of the conquered countries. 


The Battle for Asia, by Edgar Snow. New York, Random 
House, 1941. $3.75 
Writing with his customary vigor and clarity, Edgar 
Snow ranges widely over the course of the war in China 
since 1937. While concentrating on the critical issue of 


, Kuomintang-Communist relations, he also devotes consid- 


erable attention to Japan’s current position and prospects, 


\ andthe Far Eastern policies of third powers. He concludes 


by outlining a liberal program of colonial emancipation 
which would marshal the Eastern world more effectively 
behind the war against Fascism. 


They'll Never Quit, by Harvey Klemmer. New York, Wil- 


Canada Fights: An American Democracy at War, edited 
by John W. Dafoe. New York, Farrar and Rinehart, 
1941. $2.00 


This long-needed survey of the Canadian war effort, 
written by Professor Percy Corbett of McGill University 
and five outstanding journalists, affords an excellent view 
of Canada’s political and economic life and its relations 
with Britain and the United States. 


What the Citizen Should Know about the Army, by Harvey 
S. Ford. New York, Norton, 1941. $2.00 


What the Citizen Should Know about the Navy, by Hanson 
W. Baldwin. New York, Norton, 1941. $2.00 


Good descriptions of the armed services for the layman. 


Under the Iron Heel, by Lars Moén. Philadelphia, J. B. 
Lippincott, 1941. $2.75 


A restrained, factual, and yet absorbing eyewitness ac- 
count of the Nazi occupation of Belgium, wr.tten by an 
American scientist. The author contributes pertinent ma- 
terial on King Leopold’s surrender, the work of fifth col- 
umnists, and the attempted German invasion of Britain 
in the fall of 1940. 


Neighbors to the South, by Delia Goetz. New York, Har- 
court, Brace, 1941. $2.50 


An interesting and very readable story of the Latin 
American republics, written primarily for younger readers. 


fred Funk, 1941. $2.50 


An interesting and highly sympathetic account of life in 
Britain during the latter half of 1940, written by a mem- 
ber of the American Embassy staff. Mr. Klemmer pleads 
for much fuller material aid to the British than we have 
thus far delivered. 


Finland Forever, by Hudson Strode. New York, Harcourt, 
Brace, 1941. $3.50 
A descriptive narrative of Finland and the Finns. The 
book, attractively illustrated, is a sympathetic “character 
study” of the country and its people. 





For an impartial examination of the Soviet Consti- 
tution, both in the light of Marxist doctrine and as 
a weapon in the struggle with fascism, read: 
THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF THE 
U.S.S.R. by Vera Micheles Dean 


Vol. XIII, No. 3, Foreign Policy Reports ... 


South-Eastern Europe—A Brief Survey, by the Informa- 
tion Department, Royal Institute of International Af- 
fairs. New York, Oxford University Press, 1940. $2.00 


A succinct description of the recent political and eco- 
nomic history of the Balkan area as an entity. The chapters 
on the industries and trade of the region are particularly 
valuable in estimating what the Nazis can obtain from 
their conquered lands. 


The United States and Japan’s New Order, by William C. 
Johnstone. New York, Oxford University Press, 1941. 
$3.00 


A thorough analysis of the historical development and 
present status of American rights and interests in China. 
Special consideration is devoted to the effects of the Sino- 
Japanese conflict on these rights and interests, while the 
concluding chapters summarize recent American policy in 
the Far East and offer suggestions for the course to be 
followed at the present time. 


25c. 








F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: ARMED TRUCE IN THE PACIFIC 
Speaker: T. A. Bisson 

Date: Sunday, October 12 

Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T. 

Station: NBC, blue network 

















FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 51, Ocronsgr 10, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DororHy F. Lggr, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


a 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 6.—The issue of aid to Russia emerged this 
week as perhaps the most difficult problem confront- 
ing the Administration in the field of foreign policy, 
temporarily overshadowing the drive for revision of 
the Neutrality Act and plans for early passage of 
the second lease-lend bill. In Moscow, members of 
the American and British missions to Russia were 
working on the technical problem of speeding de- 
livery of the vast supplies promised the U.S.S.R. 
under the agreement announced on October 1. In 
Washington, Administration officials were searching 
for an answer to the political question posed by the 
new commitments and aggravated by the controversy 
over freedom of religion in the Soviet Union. 


MOSCOW CONFERENCE. The official com- 
muniqués issued in Moscow furnished few details 
and left the precise terms of the agreement in doubt. 
The joint statement made by W. Averell Harriman, 
head of the American mission, and Lord Beaver- 
brook, British Minister of Supplies, declared that the 
two governments had ‘decided to place at the dis- 
posal of the Soviet government practically every re- 
quirement for which the Soviet military and civil 
authorities have asked.” In return, “the Soviet gov- 
ernment is to supply Great Britain and the United 
States with large quantities of raw materials urgently 
required in these two countries.” Apart from the 
broad statement that arrangements had been made 
to “increase the volume of traffic in all directions,” 
the heads of the two missions gave no indication of 
the extent of Russian needs or the manner in which 
they will be met. 


THE SUPPLY PROBLEM. Despite the optimism 
of the Moscow communiqués, Washington realizes 
the difficulties of supplying the Soviet Union. It is 
expected that the U.S.S.R. will in the long run need 
vast quantities of matériel to offset the loss of equip- 
ment and industrial capacity which it has already 
suffered or may sustain in the near future. Munitions 
production in Britain, and particularly in the United 
States, is unquestionably increasing rapidly. It has 
just been announced that American aircraft output 
in September amounted to 1,914 planes. Between 
three and four hundred tanks a month are also roll- 
ing off the assembly lines of this country’s arsenals. 
In Britain tank production is reported to have set 
new records recently. Yet the demand for all this 


war material is far greater than the two democraga’ 
can satisfy. The United States Army is still by g | 
means fully equipped, and in Britain the losses g 
past campaigns on the continent have only just bee, wail 
made good. Not only the Soviet Union, but als 
North Africa and the Middle East must be supplied 
with arms and ammunition. No front can be de 
nuded of equipment because, as Prime Ministe _ — 
Churchill pointed out in his last speech, Germany| Vo- > 
still has strength enough to strike in any direction 


TRANSPORTATION DIFFICULTIES. The Rus. 
sian front, however, is of such vital importance that N\ 
supplies can and undoubtedly will be allocated t) ~ 4 
the Soviet Union. The problem of transportation js | "84! 
generally considered to be the most baffling of all, ™*! 
While bombing planes can probably be flown to the Win 
U.S.S.R. from Britain, all other material must be > ’ 
moved over long distances by sea and land. The only ™" 
direct routes to Russia are those to the Arctic ports Gert 
of Murmansk and Archangel, and to Vladivostok in ™&* 
the Far East. The rail connection between Murmansk mé¢! 
and Leningrad has already been cut, and Archangel *4¥2 
will soon be icebound. Vladivostok is 6,000 mile and 
from San Francisco and at least another 4,000 miles “P! 
from the battle front. Moreover, Washington is stil! “™ 
uneasy about the ultimate attitude which Japan my T 
take toward the movement of war supplies to Vladi- ing, 
vostok. The remaining route across Iran is even| tive 
longer and more circuitous. It is 14,500 miles by sea | Rus 
from New York to the port of Bander Shapur on the) por 
Persian Gulf, and 870 miles by the Trans-Iranian| the 
Railway to the Caspian Sea. At this point supp syn 
must be reloaded on boats for the final haul to} net 
Russia. It is considered doubtful that a large volume} all 


of Soviet shipping can be mobilized for this purpose | S¢v 








As Washington and London prepare to translate 
the decisions of the Moscow conference into action,| ,; 
they are probably not entertaining any extravagant) | 
expectations about the assistance which can be di} . 
rectly given to the Soviet Union. They are encour) 5, 
aged, however, by reports from the Russian battle! 
front and hope that the U.S.S.R. will be able to} ;, 
continue resisting the German war machine through} ,, 
primary reliance on its own resources. Meanwhile, } 4) 
Britain can provide indirect help by intensive bom} 4 
bardment of German factories and communications, } j, 
and the United States gains valuable time to accel | s 
erate its munitions program. i 
JOHN C. pEWiLDE | # 


