





Bel o\\\ J 


il 13, 
BEW 
rt op. 
yy Mr. 
under 
les of 
» Con- 
10nths 
sident 
e, Mr. 
‘ithout 
am of 
which 
strates 
ivided 
y: 

v is tO 
> hope 
ns, di- 
»Llapse 
is ad- 
which 


[OTT 
) 43 





) 


— 





PERIODICAL 
GENERAL Libhane 
UNIV, op MiGa 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


niversity op ai... JUL 19 W4e 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 39 


JuLty 16, 1943 





GIRAUD VISIT SHOWS NEED FOR REVISED U.S. POLICY ON FRANCE 


| HE landings effected in Sicily by American, Brit- 
ish and Canadian forces on July 10, which Pres- 
ident Roosevelt described on the same day as “the 
beginning of the end,” brought to a focus the hopes 
and anxieties aroused throughout the world by the 
Allied invasion of North Africa last November. It 
would be obviously exaggerated to regard these land- 
ings, in themselves, as a prelude to victory over the 
Axis, but—and this is most important in the current 
phase of the war—they are at least a token of the 
kind of action the Allies are preparing for on the 
Continent, and the first direct encouragement from 
the Western powers (other than bombings of Ger- 
man cities) for the millions of people within the 
“fortress of Europe’ who have been waiting so long, 
and in such agony, for the hour of liberation. 


HOPE OF LIBERATION CREATES FRESH 
PROBLEMS. Paradoxical as it may seem, this first 
contact with European soil is bound to accentuate the 
doubts, fears and expectations that the conquered 
peoples have about the almost incredible moment 
when they will no longer be subject to Nazi rule. The 
closer Europe’s leaders, now in exile, draw to their 
respective homelands, the more acute becomes their 
concern both as to the situation they may find upon 
their return, and the role that Britain, the United 
States and Russia—without whose aid the Continent 
could not be liberated—intend to play once victory 
has been achieved. This complex of profound and 
poignant emotions on the eve of a liberation that 
would once more make free political action possible 
must be borne in mind in considering the manifold 
problems of this country’s relations with the French, 
taised anew in difficult form by the arrival in Wash- 
ington of General Giraud on the invitation of the 
United States government. 

The controversy about France has raged with such 
passion in London, Washington and North Africa, 
has been so heatedly discussed throughout our coun- 


try, and goes so deep to the roots of the moral crisis 
of our times that by now many people find it difficult 
to view it with detachment. It would be presumptuous 
to review once more the main features of this debate. 
Yet it may be useful to define the principal areas of 
conflict as they appeared on the eve of the landings 
in Sicily. 

WHAT WASHINGTON SAYS ON FRANCE. 
The most crucial issue at stake in this war is whether 
a military victory of the United Nations will also 
mean a victory over Nazi ideas and practices—or 
will leave untouched, in liberated Europe, the seed- 
lings of Nazism, for fear that the process of destroy- 
ing them would open the way to revolution. This 
issue has been squarely raised in the case of France. 
The official Washington view, as expressed on many 
occasions by government spokesmen, is that the 
United States must not recognize, in advance of 
France’s liberation, any individual or group as rep- 
resentatives of the French people, since there is no 
accurate way of determining the state of opinion 
among the conquered French. The United States, ac- 
cording to this view, is ready and eager to cooperate 
with the French armed forces in the task of liberating 
France, and to furnish them with arms for this pur- 
pose—as it is already doing—provided it has assur- 
ance that these forces are led by military men who 
have demonstrated their trustworthiness in collaborat- 
ing with the Allies. This, General Giraud is held to 
have done throughout the North African campaign— 
although it is admitted that similar coopetation was 
given by the much smaller force of de Gaullist troops 
commanded by Brig. Gen. Jacques Le Clerc, who 
made a long and hazardous trek northward from the 
Lake Chad region to fight side by side with the Brit- 
ish and Americans in North Africa. The negotiations 
now being conducted with Giraud in Washington, 
according to government spokesmen, deal solely with 
the further arming and use of the 300,000 French 


—————— 


a a — aims on ee a 











———— SSE =OPage Two ——_ —= 


now in North Africa which, very clearly, is 

the principal springboard for an invasion of southern 
Europe. As long as military operations continue, it is 
essential, it is argued, that political controversies 
should be held in abeyance. Once victory has been 
achieved, and the danger that “‘politics as usual” may 
jeopardize the lives, not only of the French, but of 
their Allies, is at an end, it will be for the French to 
decide what kind of government they want, and under 
what leadership. 


WHAT THE DE GAULLISTS REPLY. To this 
thesis, expounded most recently by President Roose- 
velt at a press conference on July 9, when he said 
that 95 per cent of the French people are still under 
the German heel and “there is no France now’— 
French de Gaullists and their American and British 
supporters give many cogent and persuasive answers. 
They recognize the paramount nature of military mat- 
ters, but contend that political strategy is fully as 
important as military strategy in winning the Battle 
of Europe. The United States, they believe, made 
an initial and, they fear, fatal mistake by accepting 
as its collaborators in North Africa not the men who, 
like de Gaulle, hold out, in their opinion, the 
promise of a new post-war régime for France, but 
those who were known to have opposed the Third 
Republic, and others who had actually “collaborated” 
with the Nazis. While it is acknowledged by de 
Gaullists that Giraud is a patriotic Frenchman and 
wants to rid his country of German rule, it is argued 
by them that de Gaulle is not only anti-German, but 
also anti-Fascist, and thus holds the key to France’s 
post-war resurgence and reconstruction. 


Having failed to bring de Gaulle in at the start, 
the Washington Administration, it is said, now re- 
fuses to correct its initial error, and multiplies it by 
snubbing de Gaulle at every opportunity—most re- 
cently by inviting not him, but Giraud, to the United 
States. For the Administration’s reluctance to deal 
with de Gaulle many reasons are ascribed—the least 
sinister being his admittedly difficult disposition, the 
most sinister being the suspicion that some Amer- 
ican government officials are fearful of the support 
he receives from the Communists, and desire the 
triumph of reaction in Europe after the war as a safe- 
guard against social revolution. This reputed policy 
is regarded as all the more dangerous for the future 
since it is believed that, in France, de Gaulle has 
become the rallying point for the underground move- 
ment, and has already shown he enjoys popular sup- 
port in North Africa, while Giraud has no such fol- 
lowing either in North Africa or in the homeland. 


Among many other arguments introduced into this 
controversy on both sides, several should be dis- 
missed as irrelevant. Those who oppose de Gaulle 
accuse him of seeking personal power. This fault 


could be attributed, with equal justice, to any ambj, 


tious man active on the political scene. If de Gaul \ 


does have dictatorial aspirations, the French, of aj 
people, can be counted on to oppose usurpation 9 
power by him or any one else who claims to lea 
them, and do not need us to intervene in this matte; 
Some of those who support de Gaulle, on the othe 
hand, feel that he is justified in his strictures gp 
Allied interference with French sovereignty, and tha 
the United States intends to substitute its rule fo 
that of the French in North Africa. If such a desig 
exists, it should certainly be combated by America 
public opinion. But reasonable Frenchmen doubtles 
realize that if an invasion of Europe were being up. 
dertaken from some other area—say, for example 
Norway—certain temporary infringements on loc 
sovereignty would occur there too. At the same time, 
the contention of some Americans that the Frencd 
should be grateful to the United States for helping 
to liberate them, and should therefore raise no ques 
tions and make no criticisms, is also irrelevant, sing 
this country is obviously fighting not merely to lib 
erate France, but to assure its own survival. That the 
resurgence of a defeated country is apt to take the 
form of extreme nationalism — another accusatiog 


brought against de Gaulle — should by now be well 


known to a generation that has witnessed the rise 
of a nationalist Germany. But it may be doubted that, 
without going back to the wellsprings of their his 
tory, the French would recover the spirit of self 
respect and independence which is essential to Allied 
victory in Europe and to eradication, within Frane 
itself, of the pro-Fascist trends so shrewdly utilized 
by Hitler. 


Out of this welter of conflicting views, two thing 
emerge with increasing clarity. Now that the French, 
after many tergiversations, have chosen a Committet 
of Liberation which represents a wide range of views, 
this Committee is entitled to recognition by the othe 
United Nations—not as an instrument of either 
Giraud or de Gaulle, but as a trustee for the interests 
of the French people until such time as the people 
can freely decide their own destiny. Second, Britaia 
and the United States should make it clear that they, 


in turn, have been acting in North Africa neither #} 


conquerors nor as liberators, but as trustees for the 
French Empire until it has recovered the freedom 
to assert its authority. It should be specified, howevet 
that this authority, for the duration of the war, mus 
be exercised in such a way as to promote, and not 
hinder, the Allied cause, which is also that of th 
French people—by helping to bring about as soo 
as possible the defeat of Germany, and thus clearifi 
the way for the restoration to France of some patt 
at least, of the influence on the spirits of men whid 
it has so effectively exercised for many centuries. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 












auulle 5 


of all 
of 
lead 


other 
S On 
1 that 
e for 
desire 


btless 
& un 
mple 

local 


‘rench 
ping 


- singe 
0 lib 
at the 
ce. the 
sation 
e well 
e rise 
1 that, 
ir his 
self 
Allied 
France 
tilized 


‘rench, 
mittet 
Views, 
> other 
either 
terests 
peo 
Britain 
t they, 
ther a 
‘or the 
eedom 
w evel, 
r, mus 
nd not 
of th 
Ss sol 
learing 
e part 
whid 
ries. 


JEAN 














At the June meeting of the Board of Directors of 
the Foreign Policy Association, Mr. W. W. Lancaster 
was elected Chairman of the Board to succeed Mr. 
Ralph S. Rounds, and Mrs. Learned Hand and Mr. 
H. Harvey Pike, Jr. were elected Vice-Chairmen to 
succeed Mrs. Henry Goddard Leach. This election 
continues the F.P.A. tradition of selecting officers of 
the Board from among those interested in various 


phases of international affairs as well as in community 


activities. 

Mr. Lancaster was born in Augusta, Maine, and re- 
ceived part of his early education in Switzerland. After 
graduation from Harvard College and the Harvard 
Law School, he entered the practice of law in New 
York City. About 1907, when he was associated with 
the law firm of Alexander and Green, he was as- 
signed to advise the International Banking Corpora- 
tion, a pioneer in the international field. Through this 
relationship he became interested in problems con- 
nected with international affairs, and has since con- 
tinued and intensified his interest through many years 
of contact with questions related to American for- 
eign policy. For many years he has been a partner in 
the law firm of Shearman and Sterling. In the course 
of his work he has often gone abroad, and has formed 
many friendships in foreign countries, especially in 
Russia and Latin America. He is a member of the 
Board of Directors of the International Banking Cor- 
poration, a member of the Council on Foreign Rela- 
tions, and a member of the Law Committee of the 
National Foreign Trade Council. 


Mrs. Learned Hand, the wife of Judge Hand of 
the United States Circuit Court, is a graduate of Bryn 
Mawr Coliege. Since graduation she has served her 
college first as one of the Alumnae Directors for 
twelve years, and for the past thirteen years as Direc- 
tor at large. Included in her many civic interests is 
the Women’s City Club, of which she was President 


Page Three 





For a survey of post-war air routes, international- 
ization of the world’s airways, commercial air 
transit, allocation of routes, private or government 
ownership, and plane production, READ— 
NEW HORIZONS IN INTERNATIONAL 
AIR TRANSPORT 


by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


July 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members $3. 

















al 
TT 


F.P.A. BOARD ELECTS NEW CHAIRMAN AND VICE-CHAIRMEN 





for a term. She has traveled widely abroad. She is 
now actively engaged in relief work for the citizens _ 
of many European countries who have sought refuge 
here. 

Mr. Pike is a graduate of Williams College and 
in World War I served in France in the Field Artil- 
lery. He is Vice-President of H. H. Pike & Co., Inc., 
a New York corporation engaged in foreign trade; 
also Vice-President of H. H. Pike Trading Co., Inc., a 
Cuban merchant corporation with head office in 
Havana. From 1931 to 1933 he was President of the 
New York Coffee and Sugar Exchange Inc., and is 
now a member of the National Foreign Trade Coun- 
cil, of the Committee on Foreign Commerce and Rev- 
enue Laws of the Chamber of Commerce of the State 
of New York, and of the Council on Foreign Rela- 
tions. He is Treasurer of St. George's Church. In 1940 
he served on the Administrative Committee sponsor- 
ing the passage of the Selective Compulsory Military 
Training and Service Act, and is Chairman of Advis- 
ory Board, Local Draft Board #50 in New York City. 

Upon the resignation of Mr. Rounds and Mrs. 
Leach as Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Board, 
the following Resolution was passed: 

RESOLVED, that the Foreign Policy Association 
wishes to express its keen regret that Mr. Ralph S. 
Rounds and Mrs. Henry Goddard Leach are resigning 
as Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Association. They 
have served on the Board since 1918 and 1919, and 
have guided the Association from its first steps and 
original policy through the many changes during these 
twenty-five years of crises in foreign affairs. We appreci- 
ate their long and valuable service to the Association 
which has been enhanced by their wide range of interests 
in the community and in the national efforts in relation 
to our position in the world. We are grateful that they 
will continue to serve on the Board and thereby to give 
the Association the benefit of their long experience and 
of their counsel not only in regard to our own affairs 
but also in relation to our contribution to world affairs. 





We Were Free, by Constantin Joffé. New York, Smith & 
Durrell, 1943. $2.75 
Moving story of one of the French war prisoners in 


Germany. Especially revealing is the account of the mis- 
treatment meted out to the prisoners by German civilians. 


The Coming Battle for Germany, by William B. Ziff. New 
York, Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1942. $2.50 
This appeal for the destruction of Germany from the 
air is of great interest in view of recent devastating raids 
on the Reich. 


Banking and Finance in China, by Frank M. Tamagna. 
New York, Institute of Pacific Relations, 1942. $4.00 
An authoritative and extremely valuable analysis of 

Chinese financial institutions. Essential for the under- 

standing of pre-war and wartime China. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 39, JuLy 16, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Luger, Secretary; VERA MicHELes Dgan, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 
One month for change of address on membership publications. 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








Washington News Letter 














JuLy 12.—Foreign affairs played a minor role in 
the first session of the 78th Congress, which con- 
cluded on July 8, when that body took its first ex- 
tended vacation since the outbreak of the war in 
September 1939. But the record of the new Congress 
in the field of foreign policy was marked, on the 
whole, by an effort to approach current problems in 
a constructive way. 

The three major issues of foreign policy dealt with 
in the session just ended were (1) renewal of lend- 
lease, (2) renewal of the Reciprocal Trade Agree- 
ments Act, and (3) the post-war policy of the United 
States. The first two subjects were disposed of by 
Congress, but the third was left as unfinished business 
for the national legislature to take up when it re- 
assembles in September. 

A CHANGE IN PUBLIC OPINION. The change 
in attitude of the American people with regard to 
foreign problems as reflected by Congressional votes 
was impressively revealed when lend-lease came up 
for renewal after two years of experimenting with 
this new procedure. While the Senate took eighteen 
days of bitter debate to pass it by a vote of 60 to 31 
in 1941, it agreed to its continuance by an 82 to 0 
vote on March 11. The day before, the House had 
carried the bill by the overwhelming vote of 407 to 6, 
compared with the vote of 260 to 165 by which it ac- 
cepted the original bill two years ago. 

Much more controversial was the Reciprocal Trade 
Agreements Act which also came up for renewal this 
year. In fact so evenly divided were the parties in the 
new Congress that, at the beginning of the year, some 
doubt had been expressed whether the bill to extend 
this Act could possibly get through. The importance 
the Administration attached to it was shown by Sec- 
retary of State Cordell Hull's declaration before the 
House Ways and Means Committee on April 12 that 
the attitude Congress took toward the bill would be 
a “signpost” indicating to our Allies whether this 
country was prepared to assume its full share of re- 
sponsibility for maintaining peace in the post-war 
world. The House passed the bill in virtually the 
form it had been introduced—the only important 
amendment accepted was that reducing the renewal 
period from three to two years—on May 13 by a vote 
of 342 to 65, and the Senate followed suit on June 
2 by passing it 59 to 23. 

But the most important foreign policy subject to 
be brought before the past session of Congress was 
the course to be pursued by the United States in the 
post-war world, and on this vital issue Congress has 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


still to act. A determined effort is being made by g 
number of influential Senators to avert a repetition of 
the tragedy of 1919—when a clash between the Ex. 
ecutive and Legislature wrecked the peace settle 
ment—by putting the Senate on record now as favor. 
ing participation by the United States in an interna. 
tional organization to preserve peace after the present 
conflict is ended. Thirty-six resolutions to this effect 
are now pending before Congress. 

SENATORS DEMAND ACTION. The Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee had taken no action on 
any of these resolutions by the time Congress re. 
cessed. The four Senators who have sponsored the 
Ball-Burton-Hill-Hatch resolution, however, gave no- 
tice on July 2 of their intention to insist on prompt 
action when Congress reconvenes. On the same day 
two Republican Senators, Vandenberg of Michigan 
and White of Maine, introduced still another resolu. 
tion, which favored American cooperation in post- 
war efforts to prevent any recurrence of military ag. 
gression. Pending, too, as Congress quit Washington, 
was the motion introduced by Representative J. Wil- 
liam Fulbright of Arkansas and adopted unanimous. 
ly by the House Foreign Affairs Committee, which 
would put Congress on record by concurrent resolu- 
tion as indorsing American participation in “appro- 
priate international machinery”’ to maintain peace. In 
view of these many resolutions on the subject and 
the determination of a number of Congressmen to 
press for action on them, it is difficult to see how even 
the procrastinating Senate Foreign Relations Com 
mittee, of which Senator Connally of Texas is chait- 
man, can continue to side-step them much longer. 

One of the most heartening features of the last 
session of Congress was the tendency of some of its 
members to reach agreement on questions of foreign 








policy, no matter how divided they were on domestic P 
politics. A majority of Republicans in both Houses, | 


for example, supported the Administration-sponsored 
legislation to renew the life of the Reciprocal Trade 
Agreements. Two Republican and two Democratit 


Senators have collaborated in drafting the most de} 
tailed of all the resolutions on post-war planning t0 





be introduced in Congress. True, this tendency maj 
have been due to recognition on their part that publit| 
Opinion is united in support of the Administration’; 
foreign policy. When it is recalled, however, that 
party politics were largely responsible for the failutt 
of the United States to join the League of Nations 
in 1919, this is nonetheless an encouraging sign. 
JOHN ELLIOTT 


—— 





—-_ ch el 


ee ee ee, i rr ae 


