


ite 
ils 


ed 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XIX, No. 52 OcroBer 18, 1940 








PERIODICAL ROOR 
JUST OUT! = apnerat LIBRARY 





EUROPE UNDER NAZI RULE 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


October 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Pose 
/ Office at New York, 

ig N. ¥., under the act 

sa Id” of March 3, 1879. 











SECOND CLASS MAIL 
Genera) Lih ary 
Wa az’t 
Valve Sity Af We 
cy of 
— +5 3n 
na Art or, Nich 
Ba . 











BRITAIN AND U.S. REOPEN BURMA ROAD 





ee reopening of the Burma Road, accom- 
panied by preparations to evacuate American 
nationals from the Far East, Washington and Lon- 
don have again assumed the initiative in the series of 
diplomatic maneuvers that had followed announce- 
ment of Japan’s alliance with Rome and Berlin. The 
orders for withdrawal of American nationals have 
apparently had a sobering effect at Tokyo, and the 
threatened reprisals for reopening of the Burma Road 
may be quietly abandoned. Japan's allegiance to its 
new alliance, however, was firmly maintained by 
Yosuke Matsuoka, Japanese Foreign Minister, in a 
speech delivered at Tokyo on October 13, the day 
after President Roosevelt's Dayton address. He 
stressed the common interests of Germany, Italy and 
Japan, as well as their intention to establish a “new 
world order” of complementary “natural geographic 
divisions,’ with the Western Hemisphere assigned to 
the United States, and asserted: ‘““We have entered 
an alliance and we will cling to our allies.” 


THE BURMA ROAD. Reopening of the strategic 
Burma Road, which runs from Lashio in northern 
Burma to Kunming in Yunnan province, has become 
the symbol of efforts to strengthen China’s means of 
fesistance. The task is more formidable today than it 
was three months ago, when the route was closed. 
During this period Japan has established military and 
ait bases in Tongking, northernmost section of Indo- 
China. The mountainous terrain will probably bar an 
overland offensive against Kunming, strategic center 
of Chinese resistance in Yunnan province, but it is 
no obstacle to air attacks. Based on the Hanoi airport 
—the only serviceable field for heavy bombers in 
northern Indo-China- ~Japanese bombing attacks may 
be directed against both Kunming and the Burma 
Road, at distances of 400 to 500 miles. While Kun- 
ming has already suffered considerable damage from 
the air, bombing raids are unlikely to halt movement 
of traffic along the road, judging from the unsuccess- 


ful Japanese attempts to close the Canton-Hongkong 
Railway at much shorter bombing range in 1938. 

The second major difficulty is the transportation 
problem, which hinges mainly on the number of 
trucks that can be secured for operation on the Burma 
Road. Rough estimates indicate that the 5,000 trucks 
now available can handle a total of some 25,000 
tons a month, half imports and half exports. If 10,000 
trucks could be made available, the capacity would be 
automatically doubled. More trucks can possibly be 
spared from China’s interior highways, but large 
additional imports would also be required. As further 
supplies of American trucks, together with greater 
amounts of gasoline, become available, it should be 
possible to add steadily to the carrying capacity of the 
Burma Road—provided the Japanese air attacks can 
be withstood. 

Still another problem concerns the availability of 
the heavy munitions, especially airplanes, field guns, 
anti-aircraft guns and light tanks, which China needs 
most. China has been obtaining these munitions from 
the Soviet Union, but the amounts must be consider- 
ably increased if the Chinese armies are to take the 
offensive. These types of munitions are not available 
in unlimited quantities. Can amounts adequate to 
China’s needs be made available from American or 
British Empire production? On this question may de- 
pend the extent to which China’s military force can 
immobilize Japan in the Far East. 

INDO-CHINA DEVELOPMENTS. Japan's next 
significant move is likely to involve pressure for addi- 
tional concessions in Indo-China. A Japanese eco- 
nomic mission is preparing to demand increased trade 
with Cochin-China, a section of Indo-China which 
produces large quantities of rubber and rice. On the 
Cochin-China coast, moreover, lies the French naval 
base at Cam Ranh, strategically important for a Jap- 
anese move against the Netherlands Indies. 

Relations between Thailand (Siam) and Indo- 





ra aa ra = : — 


Pe pater ST AO RE 











ib a aeeagn 














China, on the other hand, have somewhat improved. 
The Hanoi authorities announced on October 9 that 
Thailand has in principle accepted proposals to es- 
tablish a joint commission to deal with frontier inci- 
dents. These negotiations, it was said, would proceed 
locally, while Thailand’s territorial claims on ‘Indo- 
China were referred to the Bangkok and Vichy gov- 
ernments. The American Minister at Bangkok has 
called Thailand's attention to the State Department's 
attitude toward maintenance of the territorial status 
quo in the Far East, and 10 American dive-bombers 
consigned to Thailand have been detained at Manila. 


JAPAN’S PROBLEMS. While attempting to 
gauge the ultimate extent of the Anglo-American 
diplomatic counter-offensive in the Far East, Tokyo 
is also concerned over difficulties on the military and 
political fronts in China. In the north guerrilla at- 
tacks have weakened Japan's grip on communication 
lines, while on October 14 a new Japanese offensive 
was launched against an estimated 300,000 Chinese 
troops in the Shanghai-Hangchow-Nanking triangle. 
An important Chinese military victory in southern 


GERMANY ADVANCES IN THE BALKANS 


While Germany increased the scope and effective- 
ness of its air attacks on Britain, German forces on 
October 8 entered Rumania, ostensibly for the pur- 
pose of protecting Rumanian oil fields from acts of 
British sabotage, and Italian troops resumed their ad- 
vance in Egypt. The German move into Rumania may 
be a genuine attempt to safeguard the principal 
source of oil on the European continent; and it is 
probable that the British had hoped to destroy or 
damage the oil wells, as the Rumanians had done in 
1917 under Allied directions. In addition, however, 
the Nazis, who in August guaranteed Rumania’s fron- 
tiers after territorial cessions to Hungary and Bul- 
garia, expect to train the Rumanian army on the Ger- 
man model, and to establish a base for operations 
farther south and east. These operations, which are 
doubtless planned to coincide with the Italian ad- 
vance into Egypt, may be directed solely against Brit- 
ain and Britain’s two remaining satellites in the Bal- 
kans—Turkey and Greece. But the German moves 
could also be directed against the Soviet Union, 
should Moscow decide, at this stage, to oppose fur- 
ther German encroachments in the Black Sea region, 
and lend assistance to Turkey, which on October 11 
was reported ready to aid Syria against Axis attack. 


GERMANY OBTAINS RUMANIA’S OIL. From 
the point of view of the Nazis, control of the oil 
fields would in itself offer sufficient justification for 
their occupation of Rumania. In 1938 Rumania sup- 
plied slightly less than 1,000,000 tons of mineral oil 
to Germany, Austria and Czechoslovakia, at a time 
when the aggregate consumption of these countries 





Page Two 





| 
—— 





Anhwei was reported on October 12, and two days 
later Chinese occupation of a Yangtze river port cut 
Japanese land and water communications below 
Hankow. October 10, China’s national anniversary, 
passed without the expected signature of a treaty be. 
tween Japan and Wang Ching-wei’s Nanking régime 
emphasizing Japan’s lack of success in effecting po. 
litical consolidation of its conquests in China. On the 
eve of the anniversary, Generalissimo’ Chiang Kai. 
shek expressed China's determination to continue the 
struggle until its territorial integrity was restored. 
Tokyo’s concern over the withdrawal of American 
nationals was increased on October 14, when it be. 
came known that the State Department intended to 
send three special liners to the Far East to speed the 
evacuation. First reports indicate that about 70 of the 
580 Americans in North China, and between 50 and 
100 out of 900 Americans in the Tokyo-Yokohama 
district, were leaving immediately. Much larger num. 
bers, however, may leave Shanghai, and since ap- 
proximately 16,000 Americans are living in the areas 
affected, a total evacuation would necessarily require 
considerable time. T. A. Bisson 


was approximately 7 million tons, and their com 
bined imports about 5 million tons. The British block. 
ade, which cut Greater Germany off from all other 
sources of oil except Russia, greatly increased the 
Reich's need for Rumanian supplies. At the outbreak 
of the war, however, Britain and France—which te. 
ceived 540,000 and 289,000 tons of Rumanian oil 
respectively in 1938—vigorously contended with Ger- 
many for a share of Rumania’s petroleum products. 
This struggle grew sharper as Germany was forced, 
after April 1940, to draw on its oil reserves, the ex- 
tent of which remains a military secret. With its 
troops garrisoned in all important towns of Rumania, 
Germany not only commands Rumania’s total produc 
tion, estimated at 6,240,000 tons in 1939, but can 
prohibit oil exports to all countries it regards as hos- 
tile or subservient to Britain, notably Greece and 
Turkey. Rumania, alone, however, cannot fill the total 
oil needs of the European continent, which were te 
cently estimated by General Goering’s organ, Essener 
National Zeitung, at 19 million tons. Nor can the 
Soviet Union, whose oil exports are estimated by the 
German Militar W ochenblatt (Military Weekly) at 
less than one million tons, fill the gap in Europe's oll 
supplies created by the British blockade. It may there 








fore be expected that the Axis powers, especially now 
that they have turned their attention to the motorized | 
campaign in Egypt, will seek to obtain control of oil | 
fields in Iran and Iraq. 


Germany, moreover, controls traffic on the Danube, 
and can transport troops and equipment down that 
river to the Black Sea without fear of opposition of 








conf 
Inte! 
Ver: 
excl: 
sult 
perr 
whit 
Bul; 
ven 
Sov! 
on | 
not 


cove 
Get 
two 
not 
Gre 
on 

mai 
imn 
Me 
slay 
bel; 
ler’ 
thre 
Un 


gat 


cor 
ter¢ 


the 


mil 


clu 
Ziv 
pez 


FOI 
Hea 


Ent 





ays 


reas 
wire 


oMm- 
rck- 
ther 

the 
eak 

re- 

oil 
xer- 
cts. 
ced, 


nia, 











— 
—_—_ 





the part of riparian Balkan states, now under threat 
of German troops in Rumania. On September 17, at a 
conference held in Vienna, the Reich abolished the 
International Danubian Commission, set up under the 
Versailles Treaty, from which Germany had been 
excluded. The Commission was replaced by a “‘con- 
sultative committee’ on Danubian affairs, under a 
permanent German director, Dr. George Martius, 
which is composed of delegates from Italy, Hungary, 
Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and Slovakia, to be con- 
vened and adjourned by the director. Although the 
Soviet Union demanded the right to be represented 
on this committee on September 13, the matter has 
not yet been adjusted. 

Using Rumania, as well as Hungary and Bulgaria 
(both of which are indebted to the Reich for the re- 
covery of Rumanian territory), as an entering-wedge, 
Germany is in a position to impose its terms on the 
two remaining countries in the Balkans which have 
not yet bowed to its will—Greece and Yugoslavia. 
Greece, simultaneously threatened by Italian forces 
on the Albanian frontier and by Bulgarian de- 
mands for a portion of Greek territory, is faced with 
immediate peril, unless the British fleet in the eastern 
Mediterranean succeeds in giving it timely aid. Yugo- 
slavia, still on the fence, is divided between those who 
believe in a ‘‘realistic’’ policy of participation in Hit- 
ler's “new order’ in the Balkans, and those who 
through attachment to either the Allies or the Soviet 
Union oppose acceptance of Nazi rule. German dele- 
gates in Belgrade have already demanded absolute 
Axis control of Yugoslavia’s export of surplus wheat, 
corn and ores, notably lead, controlled by British in- 
terests, and copper formerly controlled by the French, 
On October 13, however, Premier Cvetkovitch urged 
the government to reject any territorial demands on 


THE F.P.A. 

J’Accuse! The Men Who Betrayed France, by André 

Simone. New York, Dial Press, 1940. $2.50 
Suicide of a Democracy, by Heinz Pol. New York, Reynal 

and Hitchcock, 1940. $2.50 

Two timely volumes on the events leading to the collapse 
of France, by authors who hold Right-wing politicians 
chiefly responsible for what has occurred. M. Simone 
(pseudonym of a French journalist) follows the gather- 
ing storm from 1933 to 1940, concentrating his attention 
on the major crises in French foreign and domestic policy. 
While he marshals much evidence to prove his contention 
that France was not beaten by Hitler but “destroyed from 
within by a Fifth Column with the most powerful con- 
nections in the Government, big business, the State ad- 
ministration and the Army,” his case is weakened by the 
sensational statements and rumors he has uncritically in- 
cluded. Heinz Pol, a German refugee resident in France, 
gives a more analytical account of the fascist and “ap- 
peasement” groups which weakened French resistance. 


Page Three 





—————— 
a 





Yugoslavia, and emphasized that the country would 
fight rather than make concessions in South Serbia; 
while Milan Neditch, Minister of War, declared the 
people of Yugoslavia would die for ‘“‘our indepen- 
dence and our right to live our own lives in our 
Own way.” 


WILL RUSSIA OPPOSE GERMANY? Although 
Germany's move into Rumania had long been antici- 
pated, it appears to have taken the Soviet Union by 
surprise. Reports indicate that the Soviet government 
has massed troops on the Rumanian frontier and has 
rushed military preparations in Northern Bukovina, 
former Rumanian province, which it occupied in 
July. It would be premature, however, to expect So- 
viet intervention against Germany in the Balkans. 
True, Communists have been active in Yugoslavia 
and Bulgaria, denouncing Axis encroachments and 
urging cooperation with the Soviet Union. But Russia, 
like smaller countries, is undecided, and the Nazis 
are apparently negotiating with Moscow regarding 
the share of spoils it might receive following the 
break-up of the British Empire. The Soviet Union, 
it is reported, would be awarded territory in the 
Middle East—lIran, Iraq and Afghanistan—and Cen- 
tral Asia, provided it does not resist Germany and 
concludes a non-aggression pact with Japan. Whether 
a Russia thus enlarged at the expense of smaller coun- 
tries might then, in turn, fall victim to Nazi expan- 
sion, remains a problem for Moscow to consider. But 
should the Soviet Union relinquish its dream of dom- 
inating the Black Sea and the Straits, it would in 
practice be abandoning Turkey to Germany's mercy 
and thus opening the way to fulfillment of Germany's 
long-cherished Berlin-to-Baghdad project. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BOOKSHELF 


Neither book is balanced or comprehensive, but both are 
stimulating and significant for American readers. 


German Economy 1870-1940, by Gustav Stolper. New York, 

Reynal & Hitchcock, 1940. $3.00 

The former editor of Der deutsche Volkswirt has written 
a brief, lucid survey and analysis of the main trends in 
Germany’s economic development. His book clearly shows 
the gradual growth in state direction of economic life 
which facilitated the transition to the totalitarian economy 
of National Socialism. 


Agrarian China, prepared by the Research Staff of the 
Secretariat, Institute of Pacific Relations. Chicago, Uni- 
versity of Chicago Press, 1938. $2.50 
These selected source materials from Chinese authors, 

with an introduction by Professor R. H. Tawney, offer a 

comprehensive survey of China’s agrarian problem, with 

no effort to minimize the long-standing evils that have af- 
flicted the Chinese countryside. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 52, OcroBer 18, 1940. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Eo 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micugres Dgan, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





ten Theanine gl 


Washington News Letter 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 14.—In measuring Washington’s reply to 
the triple alliance of the Axis powers, it is important 
to read all public pronouncements on American policy 
in relation to the diplomatic, economic and strategic 
moves which accompany them. Thus, in the case of 
President Roosevelt's Dayton speech of October 12, 
the full meaning of “total defense’’ is outlined even 
more sharply by the series of steps initiated during the 
past fortnight. 


TOTAL DEFENSE. In itself, the President's ad- 
dress to the nations of the Western Hemisphere con- 
stituted as a direct answer to the challenge thrown 
down by Germany, Italy and Japan. Mr. Roosevelt not 
only rejected the “doctrine of appeasement,” but 
warned that “no combination of dictator countries of 
Europe and Asia will stop the help we are giving to 
almost the last free people now holding them at bay.” 
He declared that the United States is mustering its 
men to defend “the whole hemisphere,” and added 
that in speaking of the Western Hemisphere ‘‘we in- 
clude the right to the peaceful use of the Atlantic 
Ocean and of the Pacific Ocean.”’ 


Read in conjunction with recent moves in Europe 
and Asia, the President's statement implies much 
more than a system of “passive” defense based on a 
mid-ocean Maginot line. Theoretically, at least, a 
passive defense policy might be enforced by a two- 
ocean navy and a program of economic autarchy for 
the Western Hemisphere. But the steps we are now 
taking point toward a return to the older, “tradi- 
tional” doctrine of sea power based on Mahan’s thesis 
that offense is the best possible defense. 


It does not necessarily follow that the United States 
intends to take the offensive in the immediate future. 
Despite the State Department's advice to American 
citizens on October 8 to return from China, Japan, 
Manchuria, and other parts of the Far East, respon- 
sible Administration officials have refrained from 
direct provocation and have sought to avoid aggra- 
vating tension in the Orient. Nevertheless, the adop- 
tion of an offensive strategy is clearly reflected in al- 
most every economic and diplomatic move as well 
as in the routine precautions taken by the War and 
Navy Departments. One-third of the United States 
fleet is being overhauled and refitted on the West 
Coast; its personnel, with 2,600 additional naval re- 
cruits, is being brought to full strength. Reports also 
indicate that American oil companies in the Far East 





are moving surplus stocks of oil and gasoline f 
Shanghai and Hongkong to Singapore. Nor is it 
prising that this strategy should take the form 
parallel action with Great Britain and the Britj 
Empire as a whole, and a cautious approach tow 
the Soviet Union. 


PARALLEL MOVES IN THE PACIFIC. On 
same day that the State Department made public if 
advice to American citizens in the Far East, the 
partment of Agriculture announced that export bo 
ties would be discontinued on all shipments of wh 
and flour consigned to China and Hongkong, p 
sumably because such shipments had been reachi 
the Japanese armies. Also on October 8, the Canadi 
government imposed an embargo on export of cop 
to Japan. On October 10 Richard Butler, British U 
dersecretary for Foreign Affairs, told the House 
Commons that matters of “considerable importance 
had been canvassed in “certain talks” touching 
question of cooperation in the Pacific between Gr 
Britain and the United States. 


The reopening of the Burma Road is officially r 
resented here as a British move, taken independenth 
of the United States. The general impression crea 
by the current discussions, however, is that the Uni 
States and the British Empire are already operati 
on the basis of an unwritten understanding, pred 
cated on joint recognition of a “community of intet 
est’ and supported by parallel action. Such actiom 
may be applied up to a certain point by joint aid 
China and parallel economic measures against Japam, 
But in the final showdown it can only be effective i 
the powers employing these measures are prepared 
support them by concerted fleet action. 


The approach to the Soviet Union has been some 
what more cautious. But here, too, there are definite 
indications that Washington is moving toward a more 
positive policy. Following conversations which took 
place last week between Under-Secretary Sumnet 
Welles and Constantine Oumansky, Soviet Ambassa 
dor in Washington, the Administration took steps t0 
release several consignments of machine tools to the 
Soviet Union which had been held in American ports; 
for several months. In addition, the Maritime Come 
mission has approved the charter by Russia of Amer 
ican tankers, while refusing such charters to Japam 
The result of these moves, however, will depend on 
the Soviet response to combined pressure from Get- 
many and overtures from Japan. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 





