MOve was 


of safety | 7 xx, No. 40 


clared in 
ted States 
of strate. 
r OF naval 
rn Hemi. 
assure the 
cognition 
(3) that 
tly issued 
s shall be 
ns in the 
ed States, 
states and 


e declara- 
mmediate 
naval and 
ations ex- 
war zone 
the Navy 
sels, and 
) shoot if 
1 of this 
> required 
0 replace 

between 
ase, how- 
ed States 
h Alantic 
ers which 
he West 
land and 
ie, to the 
President 


Congress 
10 retreat 
ity of the 
> call for 
1 the co 


STONE 


YUL 98 Wak * Batvers! 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


wildiam/W¥. Bissop be 


ou 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


JuLY 25, 1941 


= 


BRITAIN AND RUSSIA LAUNCH PROPAGANDA OFFENSIVES 


§ the Soviet-German war entered its fifth week, 
it became increasingly apparent that the Euro- 
conflict as a whole was reaching one of its criti- 

al phases — similar to the Battle of France in the 
spring of 1940 and the Battle of Britain in September. 
The fate of the Soviet Union, which occupies one- 
ixth of the earth’s surface and unites Europe and 
Asia, affects not merely the hostilities in the Atlantic 
ind Mediterranean but the whole distribution of land 
ind naval power from Suez to Singapore and Vladi- 
vostok. 

PROGRESS OF THE WAR. The Nazi forces, 
which on July 20 appeared to have occupied Smo- 
lnsk, only 230 miles from Moscow, have continued 
their steady push eastward on three main fronts. 
Whether they can reach Leningrad, Moscow and 
Kiev—Russia’s largest cities—in the immediate fu- 
ture depends largely on the ability of the Soviet 
forces to remain intact and to launch an effective 
tounter-attack. While there can be no question that 
he Red Army is putting up fierce resistance and 
uking heavy toll as it retreats, the severe strain of 
he campaign is clearly revealed by the series of po- 
litical developments in Moscow. On July 17 it was 
announced that political commissars—equal in status 
othe military commanders—were being established 
both the Soviet Army and Navy. The restoration 
of this system of dual control, which had been aban- 
doned after the Soviet-Finnish war because of the 
inefficiency arising out of conflicts in jurisdiction, 
uuggested the spread of instability and suspicion be- 
hind the lines. On July 20 Premier Stalin, after cen- 
ttalizing authority in a five-man National Defense 
Council on July 1 and dividing the military command 
among Marshals Voroshilov, Budenny and Timo- 
hhenko on July 12, took over the post of Defense 
(ommissar from Marshal Timoshenko and assumed 
direct control over a reorganized Commissariat for 
internal security. 


From the German point of view, it is essential to 
finish the Russian campaign as speedily as possible, 
to acquire foodstuffs and raw materials, and then 
to launch a new “peace offensive.” A quick victory 
over the Soviet Union would enormously increase 
Germany's prestige throughout the world, encour- 
aging Japan and perhaps discouraging Britain, its 
allies and the United States; a long stalemate, how- 
ever, would end Germany’s reputation for invinci- 
bility, as well as give Britain and America invaluable 
time to increase their armament production. Certain 
historic parallels become more obvious as the war 
continues, for Hitler, like Napoleon, has been forced 
to strike at both Egypt and Russia after being 
thwarted at the English Channel. Taking the road 
to Moscow is a gesture of weakness rather than 
strength. As in both the Napoleonic period and the 
World War, it becomes apparent that no single na- 
tion can control all of Europe without defeating both 
the great land power in the East and the great sea 
power across the Channel. 

THE ROLE OF PROPAGANDA. For the first 
time since the war began, Germany is on the de- 
fensive with regard to propaganda. For the past four 
weeks Moscow has been skillfully utilizing all the 
propaganda devices — exaggeration, mystification, 
braggadocio and vituperation — that heretofore have 
been a monopoly of Berlin. Within the course of five 
days the Moscow radio spread rumors that Marshal 
Goering had been disgraced, Hitler had suffered an 
epileptic fit, and Field Marshal von Reichenau and 
other Nazi officials had been dismissed. Whatever 
the actual truth, the constant reiteration of these 
stories—especially after the still unexplained Hess 
affair—probably stirs up doubt, suspicion and con- 
fusion all over Europe. The British, moreover, have 
taken the offensive by launching their ‘““V for Vic- 
tory’’ campaign. They are now preceding their short- 
wave broadcasts by either the V-symbol of three dots 


and a dash in the Morse code or the opening bars of 
Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, and are urging the 
conquered peoples of Europe to use the V-sign 
wherever possible and to prepare for revolt against 
the Nazis. That this surprise plan was having some 
effect was indicated by the belated adoption of the 
symbol by the Nazis, even though the German word 
for victory is Sieg. 

This trend marks one of the most promising de- 
velopments in the British war effort, for the Churchill 
government — like that of Neville Chamberlain — 
has been under fire for lack of imagination and drive 
with regard to propaganda. Many forthright books 
and articles have appeared — including Where Do 
We Go From Here?, by Harold J. Laski, and War 
by Revolution and Democracy’s Battle, by Francis 
Williams—maintaining that Britain can win the war 
only by effecting social changes at home and foment- 
ing revolution abroad, while Members of Parliament 
have continually condemned the Ministry of Infor- 
mation’s efforts in the propaganda field. The gov- 
ernment has been widely criticized not only for fail- 
ing to provide a precise definition of ‘war aims,” 
admittedly an extremely difficult task, but also for 
failing to resolve the persistent stalemate in the In- 
dian situation. With all regard to the obvious com- 


Page Two 


——= 


plexity of Indian politics, it can be argued 
Britain’s prestige—in the United States and 
other countries—would be immeasurably enhaneg 
by a generous compromise that would bring Ind 
more wholeheartedly into the war and provide fy, 
the release of Jawaharlal Nehru and hundreds y 
other nationalist leaders from prison. 

BRITISH CABINET CHANGES. In the Cabing 
reshuffle which accompanied Alfred Duff Cooper; 
transfer to Singapore on July 20, Brendan Bracken 
Prime Minister Churchill’s Parliamentary Priyg, 
Secretary and chief ‘‘brain-truster,”” was made Mip 
ister of Information, while the post of Parliamen 
Secretary to the Ministry went to a Laborite, Erney 
Thurtle. The latter appointment derives some sig 
nificance from the fact that one of the two resoly. 
tions adopted by the annual Labor party confe. 
ence in early June denounced the Ministry and & 
manded Labor representation there. Mr. Churchill’ 


latest shift of personnel also served to elevate tw| j 


of the most promising younger Conservatives t) 
higher office. Richard A. Butler was made Presiden; 
of the Board of Education, and his place as Parlia 


mentary Under-Secretary to the Foreign office wa) j 


filled by Richard K. Law. 
JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


NEW CABINET WEAKENS JAPAN’S TIES WITH AXIS 


That the Japanese government intends to pursue 
a policy of independence and opportunism in its 
foreign relations is indicated by official statements 
and inspired newspaper comment in Tokyo since the 
installation on July 18 of Prince Konoye’s new Cab- 
inet. The Cabinet was completed after more than 
two weeks of almost continuous conferences, involv- 
ing the Emperor, Army and Navy officials, and rep- 
resentatives of political groups, where changes in 
Japan’s international position produced by the Ger- 
man attack on the U.S.S.R. were discussed. 


In forming his third Cabinet, Prince Konoye 
dropped five members of the preceding body and 
added three new figures. The most significant change 
occurred at the Foreign Office, where Yosuke Mat- 
suoka, the outstanding exponent of collaboration 
with the Axis, was not taken back. Since the fall of 
France, Matsuoka negotiated the treaty of alliance 


Oil becomes a more vital factor in military and 
economic strategy every day. For a survey of oil 
resources and their significance in determining the 
course of the war, Read: 


OIL AND THE WAR 
by Louis E. Frechtling 


25¢ 


June 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports . . 


- 25. 


with Germany and Italy signed at Berlin on Sep 


tember 27, 1940, and in April of this year concludel| ! 


the less binding non-aggression pact with th 
U.S.S.R. Apparently unprepared beforehand fo 
Hitler’s aggression on Russia, the Japanese fount 
themselves in a precarious diplomatic position as: 
result of the new relationships arising from the Russ 
German conflict. The close alignment of Britain, the 
Soviet Union, China, and the United States confronts 
Japan with actual or potential opponents on al 
sides. If the four powers were able in the future ts 
take concerted measures in East Asia, Japan's situs 
tion would be exceedingly dangerous. 

Matsuoka is succeeded by Vice-Admiral Toyoda 
reported a moderate in outlook and therefore a us 


ful person to have at the Foreign Office if a mp/ 


prochement with the democracies should be # 
tempted. It is exceedingly doubtful, however, thi 
the new Cabinet will abandon the drive for % 
premacy in “Greater East Asia.” The imperialis 
point of view is strongly represented by four Am 
generals and by Baron Hiranuma, a leading advocat 
of Fascist policies, who takes the newly created po 
of Vice-Premier. 

Premier Konoye’s formal pronouncement of hi 
colleague’s views was purposely vague, revealitl 
only that they would put into practice the Empitt 
foreign policy, which is “‘already fixed.” Most 0 


| 


— 


tha} serve! 


will f 
cision 
ably | 
conce 
Japa 
dictat 

Jat 


terior 
mate: 
Chin: 
plies, 
and € 
in 19 
the d 
halte 
agricl 
Chins 
shipr 
tight 
ute te 
W 
may 
inflic 
Unite 
in th 
Far | 
sible. 
the it 
ing a 
FORE! 


Headqu 
Entered 


S 


ring Indi 
rOVide fy, 
indreds of 


he Cabing 
t Cooper’ 
n Bracken 
ry Privat. 
made Min. 
‘liamen 


levate two 
rvatives t 
> President 
- as Parlig. 
office wa 


- GREEN 


in on Sep 


concluded 

with the 
ehand for 
1ese found 
sition as i 
| the Russo 
Britain, the 
s confronts 
nts on al 
e future ti 
yan’s situs 


al Toyoda 


fore a use 
> if a fp 
ild be a 
vever, thi 
ve for st 


imperialis 
four Am) 
1g, advocatt 
reated pos 


ent of ht 
| reveal 
e Empite! 
’ Most ob 


a 


servers agree that considerations of aid to the Axis 
will no longer be a controlling factor in Tokyo’s de- 
dsions on diplomatic and military moves. Presum- 
ably Hitler will be repaid in kind for his slight in 
concealing his intentions toward Russia, and the 
Japanese government will move as its own interests 
dictate and as opportunities appear. 

Japan's chances for rapid aggressive steps in east- 
em Asia are less favorable than a year or 18 months 
ago. The key British base at Singapore has been 
strengthened by contingents of British, Indian and 
Dominion troops, and by sizeable shipments of air- 
craft. Imperial forces are reported massing on the 
Burma border to forestall Japanese occupation of 
Thailand and French Indo-China. The small but 
respectable Netherland Navy and Army has been 
reinforced by airplanes from the United States. On 
Japan’s Pacific flank, the United States has moved 
men, planes, and submarines to the Philippines, and 
is pushing the construction of naval air stations in the 
Aleutian Islands and Guam. While a portion of the 
United States Pacific fleet has apparently been trans- 
ferred to the Atlantic, the effect is minimized by the 
increased air power of the democracies in the East 
Indies and Philippines. In the narrow waters sur- 
rounding the islands, air power can be used to great 
advantage against naval vessels. 

Japan’s striking power has not only failed to 
match the growth of Anglo-Dutch-American forces 
in the western Pacific, but even shows signs of de- 
terioration. The Army has suffered casualties esti- 
mated at 1,250,000 in the four years of warfare in 
China and has expended immense quantities of sup- 
plies, while Chinese resistance continues stubborn 
and effective. Japanese industrial production declined 
in 1940 from 1939 levels, and reports indicate that 
the downward trend in some industries has not been 
halted this year. Organization of the industries and 
agricultural resources of Manchukuo and occupied 
Chinese areas has been slow and unsatisfactory. The 
shipping shortage in the Pacific and the gradual 
tightening of exports from the democracies contrib- 
ute to Japan’s economic difficulties. 

Weighing these factors, the Japanese government 
may decide to mark time, to see whether the Nazis 
inflict a decisive defeat on Russia and whether the 
United States becomes involved in a ‘shooting war’ 
in the Atlantic. In either case, the situation in the 
Far East would change in Japan’s favor. It is pos- 
sible, however, that pressure on the government by 
the imperialists, combined with the necessity of find- 
ing a drastic solution to Japan’s economic problems, 


Page Three 


! 


F.P.A. Radio Scheduie 
Subject: CONGRESS AND THE CRISIS 
Speaker: William T: Stone 
Date: Sunday, July 27 
Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 

Station: NBC, blue network 


will bring precipitate action. While it was widely 
predicted in late June that Tokyo would capitalize 
on Russia’s difficulties by moving against eastern 
Siberia, the strength of the Red Army in that area 
makes a Japanese attack very unlikely at the present. 
Moreover, the conquest of Russia’s Maritime Prov- 
inces would add little to Japan’s resources. The 
British and Netherlands Indies and Malaya are far 
more tempting economic prizes, but a Japanese thrust 
in that direction would meet the determined re- 
sistance of Britain and its allies, possibly backed up 
by the American Navy. A third possibility, fore- 
shadowed by Japanese newspaper charges that 
French Indo-China officials are engaged in “un- 
friendly activities,” is the occupation of Indo-China 
and Thailand. Tokyo would thereby gain control of 
sources of rice, tin and rubber, and obtain strate- 
gic bases for a drive on Singapore. 


Louis E. FRECHTLING 


Japan Unmasked, by Hallett Abend. New York, Ives Wash- 
burn, 1941. $3.00 
The well-known New York Times correspondent tells of 
his enforced retirement from Shanghai, discusses the mo- 
tives and aims of Japanese policy, and describes at first 
hand the war preparations in the strategic island empires 
of southest Asia. 


North of Singapore, by Carveth Wells. New York, Robert 
M. McBride, 1940. $3.00 
An account of travels in Japan, China and Malaya, 
profusely illustrated with a series of unusual photographs. 


Workers Before and After Lenin: Fifty Years of Russian 
Labor, by Manya Gordon. New York, Dutton, 1941. $4.00 


A penetrating and critical analysis of workers’ problems 
in the U.S.S.R., based on study of Soviet sources. The 
author, a former member of the Socialist party and now 
a member of the American Labor party, comes to the con- 
clusion that in 1917 the Russian workers exchanged ex- 
ploitation by employers, which was being gradually allevi- 
ated by social legislation, for exploitation by the state. She 
believes, however, they will ultimately achieve freedom, and 
prove the hope of democracy in Europe. 


The Army of the Future, by General Charles de Gaulle. 

Philadelphia, Lippincott, 1941. $2.00 

A translation of de Gaulle’s Vers l’Armée de Métier, first 
published in 1934 as a plea for a new system of military 
organization in France. At that time the present leader 
of the Free French troops vainly advocated the creation 
of a strong, first-line force of professional troops, grouped 
in mechanized formations and employing what are now 
known as Blitzkrieg tactics. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 40, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Juty 25, 1941. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dgan, Séitor. 


National 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


“Beis 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter |: 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 

JuLY 21.—While Congress is considering Presi- 
dent Roosevelt's request for authority to extend the 
military service of trainees and national guardsmen, 
other agencies of the government operating directly 
under the President are taking the initial steps in a 
program of economic warfare which may eventually 
prove more far-reaching than any measures yet pro- 
jected in Washington. 

LATIN AMERICAN BLACKLIST. The essential 
machinery for economic warfare has been in ex- 
istence for some time, and numerous controls over 
exports, shipping and financial transactions have 
been employed to cripple the Axis powers and 
strengthen the resistance of their opponents. The 
first step in the new program was taken a month 
ago, under the Executive order of June 14 which 
not only froze German and Italian assets in the 
United States, but also extended the control of finan- 
cial transactions to all the remaining countries of 
continental Europe. The second step was taken last 
week, when President Roosevelt issued a proclama- 
tion making public a “blacklist” of 1,800 Latin 
American firms and individuals deemed to be acting 
in the interest of Germany or Italy. 

The latest proclamation, announced on July 17, 
was the result of long and intensive investigations 
carried out by the State Department and the office 
of Nelson Rockefeller, Coordinator of Commercial 
and Cultural Relations with Latin America. In effect, 
the proclamation serves formal notice that the 
United States will use its financial and economic 
power to combat the activities of any person or com- 
pany engaged in business with the European Axis 
powers. The list—officially described as “The Pro- 
claimed List of Certain Blocked Nationa’ ill 
have two immediate functions. In the first pia ‘t 
will be used to shut off all trade with Axis-dominat. 
firms by widening the scope of existing export con- 
trols. The export of several thousand articles cov- 
ered by the Export Control Act will be prohibited to 
persons named on the list. Secondly, it will enable 
the Treasury to treat persons on the list as though 
they were citizens of Germany or Italy, thus extend- 
ing the ban on financial transactions covered in the 
general freezing order of June 14. 

The initial effect, therefore, will be felt chiefly in 
Latin America, where Nazi and Fascist intrigue has 
been most acute. The danger of permitting German 
penetration to continue unmolested is emphasized, in 


the view of Washington officials, by the attem 

Putsch in Bolivia on July 20, which has led to dismis. 
sal of the German Minister. While some protesy 
may be expected from business groups with European 
connections, the general response throughout Latip 
America seems to indicate a desire to collaborate 
a the United States in strengthening hemisphere 

nds. 

EXTENDING ECONOMIC WARFARE. The 
program of economic warfare is not limited to Lati 
América, however. This was made perfectly clear in 
the President’s proclamation, creating, in effect, a 
responsible board of strategy to administer the ney 
“Proclaimed List,” which may be extended to indi. 
viduals and firms outside the Western Hemisphere. 
This board is headed by the Secretary of State, who 
will act in conjunction with the Secretary of the 
Treasury, the Attorney General, the Secretary of 
Commerce, the Administrator of Export Control 
(General Maxwell), and the Coordinator of Com. 
mercial and Cultural Relations with Latin Ameria 
(Mr. Rockefeller). The real significance of this 
group lies in the fact that it provides a much-needed 
planning body to direct the over-all program which 
now seems to be taking shape. 

Up to this time, the major obstacle to an effective 
program of economic warfare has been the failure 
of the Administration to clarify its objectives or to 
coordinate the various agencies operating the ma 
chinery of economic controls. The resulting confu- 
sion was particularly evident in the measures applied 
to the Soviet Union and Japan. While the Soviet 
Union was never completely barred from access to 
American war materials, licenses for export of ma 
chine tools and other equipment were denied for 
many weeks prior to the German-Soviet war at 4 
time when State Department officials were presum 
ably seeking to keep Russia out of the Axis camp. 
Since the Nazi invasion of Russia, Soviet assets if 
the United States have been released, and licenses 
are being granted for some—but not all—of the ma- 
terials previously ordered by the Moscow goveft- 
ment. In the case of Japan, shipments of petroleum 
and high-test gasoline are still permitted to leave 
this country despite the embargo on airplanes and 
other types of war material. 

The steps taken during the past week indicate that 
the Administration has begun to clarify its objectives, 
and to organize a counter-offensive which may match 
the proficiency of the totalitarian states. 

W. T. STONE 


lands 
ing th 
forma 
this w 
bases 
ment, 
larges 
over t 
tural | 
oped 
key pe 
The 
occup: 
withir 
Dutch 
Ranh 
of th 
and o 
tion a 
ina p 
over 
Free ¢ 
by thi 
ity sp! 
plus ( 
tubbe 
wc 
Japan 
far-re 
ticipa 
were 
lL. 
Presic 
prom 
Germ 
June 
freezi 


