Oreign 
ard in 
tion of 
ted all 
at only 
‘O COM: 
ive not 
id they 

as the 
Orts, Of 
»f them 
ut they 
isal—at 
ions of 
unk and 
vat they 
2s with: 
form af 


Wash 

United 
at, what 
41 and 
id, what 
e Amer 
Her will 
e end of 
mn sibility 
f system 
azi doft- 
| consid 


STONE 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION 


, Incorporated 


22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


| Vou. | XX, No. 11 


——— 


JANUARY 38, 1941 


GERMANY PLANS NEW OFFENSIVE 


VIDENCE has been accumulating that Hitler’s 

legions may be preparing to strike early this 
year, either in the Balkans or the British Isles. In the 
Balkans reports were rife of heavy German troop 
movements into Rumania, and of countermoves by 
the Soviet Union in Bessarabia. In Britain the gov- 
emment urged renewed vigilance against invasion, 
and broke the informal three-day C hristmas truce by 
ordering destructive raids against French Channel 
ports. And in northern France Field Marshal Wal- 
ther von Brauchitsch intimated on December 24 that 
the German Army awaited only the Fuehrer’s order 
“to come to grips with the Englishman.” 


TROOP MOVEMENTS IN BALKANS. AI- 
though German sources ascribed the troop trans- 
ports across Hungary to holiday leaves, rumors of 
substantial increases in the German garrison in Ru- 
mania were too persistent to be ignored. Beginning 
December 28 normal traffic on the Hungarian rail- 
ways has been sharply curtailed in order to grant 
German troop and supply trains the right of way. 
No reliable indication has been given, however, con- 
ceming the size or the purpose of these reinforce- 
ments. Most of the totals mentioned in the press 
must be discounted because large bodies of troops 
and equipment cannot be quickly transported on the 
inadequate railways of the Balkans. Until December 
21 the German garrison in Rumania probably num- 
bered not much over 100,000; and in the ensuing 
week hardly more than 75,000 men can have been 
moved in. A considerable time may elapse before 
Germany can accumulate an army large enough for 
acampaign in the Balkans. 

Some observers have tried to relate the troop 
Movements to a forthcoming “showdown” in Russo- 
German relations. The Russian army in Bessarabia 
is said to have been strengthened; and the Soviet 
Minister to Bucharest is reported to have presented 
several sharp notes demanding an explanation of the 


Iron Guard’s anti-Communist activities, as well as in- 
formation concerning the reinforcement of the Ger- 
man garrison. Other rumors indicated that the confer- 
ence designed to work out a new international régime 
for the Danube had broken up in December, with 
complete disagreement between the Axis powers and 
the Soviet Union. Neither Germany nor Russia, how- 
ever, has any interest in provoking an armed clash. 
It is more likely that the chaotic conditions still 
prevailing in Rumania have led both to take military 
precautions. The gradual distribution of German 
troops among all the important towns in Rumania 
may presage a determined drive to restore the peace 
and order which Germany needs if Rumania is to 
serve as an important source of supply. Should the 
Nazis find it necessary to assume direct control, the 
Soviet army might w ell follow the precedent set in 
Poland by occupying Moldavia up to the Siretul river 
and seizing the entire estuary of the Danube, in- 
cluding the Rumanian port of Galati. Such moves 
need not precipitate war, especially since the Ger- 
mans would be left in possession of the vital oil 
fields around Ploesti. 


THE THREAT TO YUGOSLAVIA AND BUL- 
GARIA. The concentration of several German di- 
visions in the Rumanian Banat, and the arrival of 
other German forces at Giurgiu on the Danube, have 
given rise to fears than an invasion of Yugoslavia 
or Bulgaria may be contemplated as part of a cam- 
paign to relieve the bele: iguered Italian forces in 
Albania and prevent the British from establishing 
permanent air bases in Greece. Indications that the 
Germans are at last coming to the rescue of their 
allies have been strengthened by rumors that three 
or four German divisions have entered Italy and 
that German planes and technicians are already serv- 
ing with Italian troops in Albania. Yugoslavia af- 
fords the best avenue for a German attack on Greece. 
A German army might pass east of Belgrade, up the 


Morava river, past Nish, and then down the Vardar 
river valley to the Greek port of Salonika. The dis- 
tance, however, is 600 miles, and part of the route 
lies through difficult, mountainous country which 
the Yugoslav army, encouraged by the Greek ex- 
ample, would probably defend most tenaciously. 

An invasion of Bulgaria might prove still harder, 
even though the Bulgarian army is smaller and more 
poorly equipped than that of Yugoslavia. One route, 
through Sofia and up the Struma river valley, might 
lead the German forces into Greek Macedonia over 
extremely mountainous terrain which is especially 
inhospitable in winter. The only alternative road, down 
the Maritsa river valley into Thrace, lies right on 
the Turkish border, so that any invasion along this 
line would risk complications with Turkey. There 
are no signs as yet that Bulgaria might acquiesce in 
the passage of German troops in return for terri- 
torial access to the Aegean Sea, which it lost in 1919. 
While the Sofia government has “acquainted” Greece 
with the “character of Bulgaria’s territorial claims,” 
King Boris was reported on December 26 to have 
dismissed 27 high-ranking army officers who wanted 
to enter the war on the side of the Axis. Premier 
Bogdan Philoff recently declared that his country 
would countenance “no foreign régimes’; and the 
government has specifically refused proffers of ‘“‘pro- 
tection” from any source, whether Moscow or Berlin. 

The risks of a German campaign in the Balkans 
may well outweigh the possible gains as long as 
Italian forces can hold their own against the British 
and the Greeks. For the time being, Italian resistance 
is confining the Greek army in Albania to relatively 
small advances; and in Libya the Italian garrison at 
Bardia is still holding out. Berlin probably hopes 
that lengthening supply lines will be sufficient to 
prevent further Italian setbacks at the hands of the 
British and Greeks. While Germany does not want 
Italy to collapse, it is not especially interested in 
helping Mussolini win victories which might ulti- 
mately enhance his bargaining power. 

GERMANY MOBILIZES THE CONTINENT. 
On the whole, Germany’s primary objective is still 
to keep the continent at peace, so that it can produce 
the supplies essential for prosecution of the war 
against the British Isles. The economic organization 


Page Two 


—_—..., 
ee 


of Europe under the aegis of the Nazis is already 
proceeding apace. The industrial resources of the o¢. 
cupied territories are being utilized, either by trang 
porting needed machinery to the Reich or by order. 
ing existing shops and factories to carry out orders 
for the Army under the supervision of German com, 
missars. Unemployed workers in the occupied coup. 
tries are given the choice of starvation or employ 
ment in Germany. Intensive efforts are being mace 
to tap the available natural wealth. According tp 
one report, the Nazis are supervising construction 
of a new pipe-line to the Rumanian river port of 
Neu Moldova, thus making it unnecessary for oj 
shipments to pass through the lower reaches of 


the Danube which are already frozen over. German | 
interests are also negotiating for the purchase of| 


the French Mines de Bor in Yugoslavia, the larges 
European producer of copper outside of Spain; and 
a German monopoly has also been formed to take 
Norway’s entire copper output and boost production, 

All of Europe’s foreign trade is being increasingly 
centered in Berlin. Italy, Yugoslavia, Finland, Nor. 
way, Sweden, Holland and Belgium already clea 
part of their trade with non-German counttig 
through the German Clearing Office. A new Swedish 
German commercial pact, announced on December 
16, is expected to raise the trade turnover between 
the two countries from 1,400,000,000 to 2,000,000; 
000 kroner. The close integration of the Rumania 
economy with the German, which was originally 
contemplated by the Treaty of March 1939, wil 
now begin in earnest as the result of a new agree 


ment signed on December 4. Under this arrange | 


ment Rumanian oil deliveries are to aggregate 3; 
000,000 tons during the current year. Meanwhile 
the Germans are also boasting that German-Russian 
trade has exceeded the high levels attained in 1930 

The economic mobilization of Europe is all the 
more imperative for Germany, now that Berlin i 
beginning to worry about the prospects of increased 
American assistance to Britain. Ultimately, howeve, 
Europe’s resources are not large enough to be pitted 
against those of the United States. For this reason 
alone Germany will probably not postpone for long 
a major blow against Britain. 

JOHN C. DEWILDE 


TOKYO STRENGTHENS TOTALITARIAN STRUCTURE 


As the new year opens, a lull prevails in the Far 
East, broken only by reports that German raiders 
are being fitted out in Japanese harbors. While these 
reports may presage more ominous developments in 
1941, they are not characteristic of the immediate situa- 
tion. Confronted with increasing difficulties both at 
home and abroad, Japan has been marking time as 
it waits for a more favorable opportunity to move 
forward. Unable to settle the war in China or reach 


an understanding with the U.S.S.R., and concerné 
over the apparent stiffening of British and Americit 
policy, Tokyo has suspended its more openly aggit 
sive activities in southeast Asia. On the home frozl 
obstacles to the drive for political and economtl 
regimentation have also appeared. Sharp conflict 
within Japan’s ruling groups have delayed applic 
tion of Prince Konoye’s totalitarian program, aft 
left the new “political structure” hanging in mid-al 


5 


; 


ee 


JAP 
Konoy 
series 
project 
if ting 
been f 
varied 
unions 
difficul 
tities 1 
ultima 
will er 
and cu 
the ne 
cordin, 
is to b 
ployee: 
the op 
of the 
organi 
prehen 
and ce 
variou: 
into a 
of all 
hands. 


Seve 
mover 
a sing 
drawn 
politic: 
increas 
of the 
throug 
variou: 
and mr 
Diet. I 
by the 
conser 
withou 
fore h 
the pa 
could | 
not pa 


_ 


Ore 


Ja 
_———.-~. 
— 


FOREIG) 
Headquar 
Entered 2 


—=—= 


ilready 
the o¢. 
’ trans. 

order. 

Orders 
N com 
1 coun. 
mploy. 
y made 
ling to 
‘ruction 
port of 
for oil 
ches of 
serman 
nase of 

largest 
in; and 
to take 
duction, 
easingly 
d, Nor 
ly cleat 
ountties 
ywedish- 
ecember 
between 
100,000; 
imanian 
riginally 
39, will 
W agree 
arrange 
>gate 3, 
anwhile, 
-Russiat 
in 1930. 
; all the 
Berlin i 
increased 
howevel, 
be pitted 
iS reasol 
for long 


WILDE 


oncernel 
A merical 
ly aggre 
me front 
economl 

conflict 
1 applic 
ram, ae 
n mid-ail 


i 


— 
a 


JAPAN'S FASCIST REGIME. Since the second 
Konoye government took office in July 1940, a long 
series of totalitarian ‘reforms’ have been either 
projected or applied. Many organizations, especially 
if tinged with liberalism or internationalism, have 
been forced to dissolve. The list now includes such 
yaried groups as the political parties, the labor 
unions, and the Rotary Clubs. It has proved more 
dificult, however, to establish new totalitarian en- 
tities in place of the dissolved organizations. The 
ultimate goal is a set of corporative institutions that 
will encompass everything in the political, economic 
and cultural spheres. In a few cases the outlines of 
the new structure are already visible. For labor, ac- 
cording to a Cabinet decree of November 8, there 
is to be a special ‘‘cooperative body’ of all the em- 
ployees in each enterprise, under ‘‘the leadership of 
the operator,” while district and national federations 
of the local units will be formed. Existing trade 
organizations are being fitted into a similarly com- 
rehensive national association, with local, district 
and central headquarters. In the religious sphere, the 
various Christian denominations are being united 
into a single Japanese Christian Church; ownership 
of all church property is being vested in Japanese 
hands. 


Several difficulties have confronted this totalitarian 
movement. There is no well-defined dictatorship of 
a single party. Instead, there is a fascist movement 
drawn from among the army, navy, bureaucrats, 
politicians, business men and court circles, which has 
increasingly enforced its will by shrewd utilization 
of the national emergency. But it advances only 
through a series of compromises achieved by these 
various groups, often after severe conflict. Another, 
and more formal, difficulty concerns the Japanese 
Diet. For the Diet is part of the Constitution, granted 
by the Emperor, and is to that extent sacrosanct. The 
conservatives may rally behind the Constitution 
without fear of attack. The “reformers” have there- 
fore had to adopt oblique tactics in this case. Since 
the parties were extra-constitutional agencies, they 
could be forced to dissolve. Again, the Election Law, 
not part of the Constitution, can be revised by the 


Order your copy NOW! 


U.S. AID TO BRITAIN— 


1. What 
2. What 
3. What 
4. What 


January 1 issue of 


have we supplied? 

else does Britain need? 
more can we provide? 
are the risks involved? 


Foreign Policy Reports ... 


Page Three 


Cabinet. Proposals are now being considered for a 
reduction of members in the Diet’s lower house and 
for limitations on manhood .suffrage. 

A more formidable challenge to Japan’s parlia- 
mentary institutions has meanwhile arisen in the 
new Imperial Rule Assistance Association, which 
concluded its first conference in Tokyo on Decem- 
ber 18. The functions of this body have not been 
exactly defined. It has, however, all the aspects of a 
ready-made Fascist party, composed of a series of 
hierarchical councils reaching down to the smallest 
villages and towns, and ending with ‘“near-neighbor 
groups” in the localities. Officers are appointed by 
the President, who is always to be the Prime Min- 
ister. The central headquarters of the Association 
will maintain close liaison with the government de- 
partments and legislative branches. 

How this new organization will work in practice 
remains to be seen. The present Diet, which con- 
vened on December 24 and then adjourned until 
January 20 for the usual holiday recess, is in an 
anomalous position. The lower house, without par- 
ties, possesses neither leaders nor formal organiza- 
tion. Its proceedings will be influenced by the Im- 
perial Rule Association, and its members probably 
will not be inclined to repeat the strong criticism 
voiced in the last session. The capitalists are also 
concerned over other aspects of the Association— 
notably reports of schemes for state management of 
corporations—even though reassured by a pledge that 
the Association would respect the rights of private 
property. 

Recent changes in the Cabinet, and new appoint- 
ments to the Privy Council, indicate that the struggle 
to determine the limits of further totalitarian moves 
will continue. In the last analysis, however, the in- 
terests of the whole ruling group in Japan demand 
such moves. The need for stricter regimentation 
arises most of all from the growing hardships of the 
Japanese people. There is a shortage of rice; coal, 
milk, butter, eggs, potatoes and meat are virtually 
unobtainable; while charcoal, sugar, matches and 
gasoline are strictly rationed. If an end to the war- 
time emergency were in sight, the situation would 
be less critical. But, in fact, the government is forced 
to tell the people that new dangers and difficulties lie 


ahead. T. A. Bisson 


William T. Stone will broadcast from Washington on 
January 5; his subject is “The Issues Before Congress.” 
This is one of the regular FPA Sunday broadcasts, which 
are heard from 2:15 to 2:30 E.S.T. over the blue network 
of the National Broadcasting Company. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 11, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Beis 


JANUARY 3, 1941. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 
FRANK Ross McCoy, 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., 


Association, Incorporated. National 
Vera MIiIcHELES DEAN, Editor. 


Two Dollars a Year. 


President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; 


under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter sate 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Dec. 30.—In his first major address since the 
election, President Roosevelt last night rejected all 
proposals for a negotiated peace, pledged greatly 
increased aid to Britain, and called on the nation to 
become the “arsenal of democracy.” Mr. Roosevelt's 
fireside chat, skillfully designed to meet isolationist 
criticism, set the stage for the specific proposals 
which presumably will be forthcoming when Con- 
gress reassembles next week. 

NO APPEASEMENT. In many respects the first 
half of the address, outlining the Axis threat to 
the United States and rejecting any idea of appease- 
ment or compromise, was the most significant fea- 
ture of the President's appeal. Answering those who, 
like Senator Wheeler and Senator Tydings, have 
suggested “a negotiated peace,” the President de- 
clared that “such a dictated peace would be no peace 
at all. It would be only another armistice, leading 
to the most gigantic armament race and the most 
devastating trade wars in all history.” After quot- 
ing a few sentences from Hitler's speech of Decem- 
ber 10, which stated that “there are two worlds that 
stand opposed to each other,” the President emphati- 
cally asserted: “the United States has no right or 
reason to encourage talk of peace until the day 
shall come when there is a clear intention on the 
part of the aggressor nations to abandon all thought 
of dominating or conquering the world.” 

Many of the President's sentences resembled those 
of Woodrow Wilson in the World War, for Mr. 
Roosevelt assailed the tripartite treaty of Septem- 
ber 27 as ‘‘an unholy alliance of power and pelf to 
dominate and enslave the human race” and stated 
bluntly that “no nation can appease the Nazis.” 
Throughout the first half of his speech Mr. Roose- 
velt made it clear that he regarded peace as impos- 
sible so long as the present German government re- 
mained in power, and constantly warned of the 
Nazi threat to the entire Western Hemisphere. 


AID TO BRITAIN. It was only after describing 
the Axis challenge to the Western Hemisphere in 
some of the strongest language of his Presidency 
that Mr. Roosevelt advocated full aid to Britain. 
Warning that “there is risk in any course we may 
take,” the President argued that economic support 
of “Britain and other free nations which are resist- 
ing aggression” was the safest method of avoiding 
war. He declared that his defense advisers could 
decide “how much shall be sent abroad and how 


much shall remain at home . . . on the basis of oup 
over-all military necessities.” In his emphatic asset: 
tion that “our own future security is greatly de 
pendent on the outcome” of British resistance, the 
President was obviously preparing the public for g 
program of far greater aid to Britain—perhaps by 
the “loan” of American armaments, the requisition. 
ing of foreign shipping in American ports, assistance 
by naval convoys or patrols, or other measures “short 
of war.” Mr. Roosevelt sought to disarm his critics, 
however, by stressing his opposition to an expedi- 
tionary force, on the ground that the British Empire 
—"the spearhead of resistance to world conquest’”— 
needed only weapons to enable them to win. In an 
effort to check any ‘‘defeatist sentiment’ that Brit. 
ain’s war effort is a lost cause, the President climaxed 
his address by the statement, based “‘on the latest 
and best information,” that’ “the Axis powers are 
not going to win this war.’’ As though directly re. 
plying to the German Foreign Office spokesman who 
warned recently against American assistance to Brit 
ish shipping, Mr. Roosevelt asserted that the United 
States will not be deterred from aiding Britain by any 
interpretation the Axis may place on its actions. 


INCREASED PRODUCTION. In his closing ap- 
peal for increased production of armaments for 
Britain and America, the President sought to placate 
his critics in both labor and business. While prom. 
ising that the government would protect those whom 
it asks to work and fight for it, he urged that strikes 
and lockouts be voluntarily eliminated from defense 
industries. Mr. Roosevelt discounted the fears of 
many business men regarding the creation of surplus 
plant, on the ground that our future peace-time needs 
would require greatly increased production and that 
the emergency overrides all other considerations 
The President, however, warned that “business a 
usual” would be impossible under the armament 
program, and that production of some luxury goods 
might have to be curtailed. Whether Mr. Roosevelt 
can overcome the apathy, suspicion and hostility of 
many groups in the country and win their suppor 
for specific proposals to speed production will de 
pend largely on the public reaction to his statement 
that the nation faces the greatest danger in its his 
tory and must work and sacrifice as though it wett 
actually at war. It will also depend on his ability t0 
allay the fears of many citizens about the long 
term implications of this program for aiding Britain 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


—_—_—_— 


| : 


on Jar 
cans, 1 
denbe: 
Britair 
countr 
explor 
eight-} 
basis 
Whee! 
toratic 
tonom 
of ind 
and D 
tectior 
tries ; 
demni 
offerir 
“a jus 
stractl 
depen 
No 
than | 
which 
of wa 
it is € 
object 
long-t 
have | 
Hitler 
aims 
sixtee 
has a 
has al 
WI 
Grant 
avoid: 
its wa 


