with 
arrano 


gone ff 
eded, j 
rate Aus 
ces int 
5, during 
oven 
ment of 
potas 
of Ger 
ifficiency| 
tria’s rel 
fuary 28) 
, as com 
nge held 
OPS Wi 
ie, whose 
acilitated 


activities 
This pro 
has bees 
the moe 
{arch 29, 

Otto d 
; of high 
O proted 
-jans—it 
expected 
f of Ap 
apid Get 
oredict 1 
spiritual 
nany will 
* identity. 
Anschluss 
‘om with 


DEAN 


, by Jamet 
'. $4.00 
survey @ 
ican Rew 
reement 
marred bj 
ronological 


ed. Nationil 
\d-class matt) 


PAL LI 
y, OF MICH. 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


OOM 
CAL FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


"287 


class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


You. XVII, No. 26 


Apri 22, 1988 


— 


CHINA’S FINANCIAL PROGRESS 
By Arthur N. Young 


This report, prepared by the Financial Adviser to the 
Chinese government, reviews the development of China’s 
finances in the 10-year period before the outbreak of the 
Sino-Japanese war. A brief summary of financial con- 
ditions in recent months has been added by Mr. Bisson. 


April 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents a copy 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 


BRITAIN MAKES A DEAL WITH 


ITALY 


N an atmosphere filled with Easter hopes for 

European appeasement, Count Ciano, Italian For- 
eign Minister, and Lord Perth, British Ambassador 
to Rome, signed on April 16 a comprehensive accord 
covering the principal issues outstanding between 
the two countries. This accord, which is expected to 
end the era of ill-feeling prevailing since Italy's in- 
vasion of Ethiopia, was warmly greeted in an ex- 
change of messages between Mussolini and Prime 
Minister Chamberlain, who had staked his political 
future on the success of Anglo-Italian negotiations. 


The accord, consisting of a protocol, eight annexes, 
three sets of letters, and a “good neighbor” agree- 
ment concluded by Britain, Italy and Egypt regard- 
ing frontier problems in East Africa, is to go into 
effect “‘on such date as the two governments shall 
together determine.’ Lord Perth’s letter on Spain 
makes it clear that the date will be fixed only after 
settlement of the Spanish question. This provision 
furnishes Britain with a lever to secure Italy's with- 
drawal from Spain, unless Mussolini wants to 
jeopardize the Mediterranean settlement embodied 
in the Rome accord. The main points of this accord 
may be summarized as follows: 


The Mediterranean. Britain and Italy reaffirm the in- 
formal gentlemen’s agreement of January 1937, which 
fecognized that freedom of entry to, exit from and transit 
in the Mediterranean represents a “vital interest” for both 
countries. Contrary to expectations, no attempt was made in 
the accord to assure Italy a réle of preponderance by de- 
Sribing its interests as “vital,” and those of Britain as 
“essential.” The two countries are apparently to enjoy a 
position of equality in a sea where Britain had once been 
able to threaten Italy’s existence by its control of the prin- 
Gipal exits and entrances—and could still do so. At the 
same time, Italy undertakes not to use its present control 
of Spain and Ethiopia, which enabled it to negotiate with 


oo as an equal, to menace Britain’s Mediterranean 
ife line 


Spain. Count Ciano, in a letter addressed to Lord Perth, 
adheres to the British formula for proportional evacuation 
of foreign volunteers from Spain, and pledges Italy “to 
give practical and real application to such evacuation at the 
moment and on the pe es which shall be determined 
by the non-intervention committee.” If evacuation is not 
completed at the end of the Spanish civil war—whose con- 
clusion in Franco’s favor is taken for granted in the accord 
—all remaining Italian volunteers will forthwith leave 
Spanish territory, and all Italian war material will simul- 
taneously be withdrawn. Italy once more assures Britain 
that it has no territorial or political aims, and seeks no 
privileged economic position with regard to Spain, the 
Balearic Islands, Spanish possessions overseas or the Span- 
ish zone in Morocco, and has no intention of keeping armed 
forces in these territories. 


Ethiopia. As a quid pro quo for Italy's promised with- 
drawal from Spain, Britain undertakes to “clarify” the 
status of Ethiopia at the forthcoming meeting of the League 
Council. On April 11 the League had already published a 
communication from Britain asking that the Ethiopian 
question be placed on the agenda of the Council, which is 
to meet on May 9. In this connection, Italy renews previous 
assurances that it has no intention of “overlooking or re- 
pudiating” its obligations to Britain with regard to Lake 
Tana in Ethiopia, headwaters of the Blue Nile. 


Other African Questions. In an effort to remove other 
causes of friction in Africa, Italy declares that its troops are 
being withdrawn from Libya at the rate of 1,000 a week, and 
that withdrawal will continue at this rate until Libyan effec- 
tives have been reduced to peace strength. This undertaking 
removes Britain’s fear that reinforcements sent to Libya since 
the beginning of the Ethiopian war might be used for an 
attack on Egypt. Italy is also willing to accept the principle 
that natives in its East African colonies should not be com- 
pelled to perform military duties other than local policing 
and territorial defense. According to a Rome interpretation, 
Italy would undertake not to recruit native forces for use in 
Europe, provided France, which made extensive use of 


colonial troops during the World War, follows the same 
practice. 


Arabia. Britain and Italy agree not to conclude any 
agreement or take any action which might impair the inde- 
pendence of Saudi Arabia, regarded as a British sphere of 


influence, or Yemen, where Italy has sought to obtain a 
foothold during the past few years. They recognize that it 
is their common interest that no other power should acquire 
or seek to acquire sovereignty or a privileged position in 
either of these Arab states, which occupy a strategically 
important position at the entrance to the Red Sea. This pro- 
- i — as a poe to Hitler that Britain and 
ill jointly rman ion in the region 
of the Red Sea. _ oes . 

Suez Canal. The two governments reaffirm their inten- 
tion to respect and abide by the provisions of the 1888 
convention which guarantees free use of the Suez Canal to 
, all powers, in time of war as well as in time of peace. This 
_ assurance removes Italy's fear that Britain, as was thought 
: ible in 1935, might close the Suez Canal, thus cutting 

taly off from its East African colonies. Contrary to earlier 
reports, Italy is not accorded a share in the management of 
the Suez Canal. 

Military and Naval Questions. The two countries under- 
take to exchange information regarding redistribution of 
their military, naval and air forces, and to notify each other 
in advance of any decision to provide naval or air bases in 
the Mediterranean and the Red Sea. Italy will also accede to 
the London Naval Treaty of 1936, and will meanwhile 
conform with its provisions for naval limitation. 


Propaganda. The two countries state that any attempt 
by one of them to injure the interests of the other by 
propaganda would be inconsistent with the good relations 
envisaged in the Rome accord. 


The Anglo-Italian settlement, like Germany’s ab- 
sorption of Austria which hastened its conclusion, 
marks the end of the post-war period when peace 
was sought in collective security. It is an imperialist 
deal of the type familiar in pre-war history, when the 
needs of great powers were repeatedly satisfied at 
the expense of the small, until a clash between their 
ambitions could no longer be averted. Like the 
Anglo-French accord of 1904, which delimited 
spheres of influence in Africa, the Rome settlement 
may lay the basis for collaboration between two im- 
perialist powers, which have a common interest in 
blocking German hegemony on the continent and 
in the Mediterranean. The question remains whether 
the Anglo-Italian deal is a contribution to world 
appeasement, or merely a truce in the struggle for 
domination of Europe. 


Britain, which makes no territorial or economic 
sacrifices and even expects to reap the benefits of 
Franco’s victory, facilitated by German and Italian 
intervention, stands to profit more from the accord 
than Italy. By achieving reconciliation with one of 
its three potential enemies, it obtains a freer hand 
in the Far East, and secures Italian support against 
German expansion in the Eastern Mediterranean. 
Italy's principal gain is psychological. For the first 
time since the establishment of the Italian state in 
1861, Britain deals with Italy as an equal, not as a 
third-rate. power tolerated because of its artistic 
and historic heritage. Italy, moreover, is relieved at 
the thought that it need no longer depend exclusively 


Page Two 


—y 
es 


on Germany's friendship, which has never beeg 
popular among Italians. These psychological gains 
are apparently regarded as sufficient to offset the 
failure of the published accord to remedy Italy's eco. 
nomic grievances, which had served as the principal 
justification for the Ethiopian campaign. True, prj. 
vate British capital may now be placed at Mussolini's 
disposal for exploitation of Ethiopia, temporarily 
strengthening Italy's precarious financial position, 
But the accord makes no attempt to meet Italy's 
fundamental economic needs. It leaves unanswered 
the question whether Mussolini will be satisfied tp 
withdraw from Spain, where Franco, even after 
victory in the civil war, may need Italian assistance, 
If he does, will he, with Hitler's support, seek ter. 
ritorial satisfaction in Africa at France’s expense? 
Or are Mussolini’s dreams of a new African empigg 
ended with the conquest of Ethiopia? These que. 
tions may find an answer in the accord which the 
government of M. Daladier, who is to visit Londoy 
on April 28, plans to negotiate with Italy. That visit 
will also make it clearer whether Britain regards the 
Anglo-Italian settlement as the first step toward con- 
clusion of a Western four-power pact, isolating the 
Soviet Union, or as the kernel of a new alliance 
against the Third Reich, based on collaboration with 
Italy and new pledges of assistance to the countries of 


Eastern Europe. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


CHINA SCORES 

As the Sino-Japanese war entered its tenth month, 
China scored its first major military victory at 
Taierhchuang, a small town in southern Shantung. 
Japan had hoped to achieve decisive results quickly; 
instead, it faces a continuing struggle of serious 
proportions. In Tokyo the disaster to Japanese arms 
is reflected by a sagging stock market, apprehension 
in Japanese business circles, and a cabinet crisis, In 


China, the efforts to defend the nation’s existence | 


will be prosecuted with enhanced energy and de 
termination, and with even greater hopes of ultimate 
success. 

During the past two months, the Chinese militaty 
forces have demonstrated an increasing ability 
coordinate defense of front-line positions with of 
fensive operations in the Japanese rear. The spet 
tacular triumph at Taierhchuang has been duplt 
cated on a lesser scale in Honan and Shansi prov 
inces. In each case an extended line of Japanese 
communications, reaching from the north toward 
the Lunghai Railway, was so disrupted that the 
striking power of the front-line divisions was gradw 
ally spent. This was true in Shansi, where the Jap 
anese forces advanced along the narrow-gauge rail 
way from Taiyuan to the Yellow River at the south 
ern borders of the province. A parallel Japanese 

(Continued on Page 4) 


U 


EEE 


APR! 
Anglo- 
terms 
and m 
the bal 
fer, of 
official 
politic: 
which 
yr Con 
berlair 


the wa 


positin 
of the 
three 
the p 
demox 
chief | 
don t 
Asiati 
gestec 
East. 
any Cc: 
ingtor 
stren 
until 
reach 
is an 
antici 
is rea 
will | 
auxil; 
Britis 
isted 
Visit | 
ever 
effect 
the | 
Pacif 
a2t 
W 


will 


xpense? 

empifé 
e ques 
rich the 
Li »ndog 
hat visit 
ards the 
ard con 
ting the 
alliance 
on with 
ntries of 


DEAN 


- month, 
tory at 
lantung, 
quickly; 

serious 
se arms 
=hension 
crisis. In 


XISTENCE | 


and de 


ultimate 


military 
bility t0 
with of- 
he spec 
n duplt 
1Si_ prov. 
Japanese 

toward 
that the 
s gradu 
the Jap 
uge rail 
1e south 
Japanest 


Washington News Letter 


aE 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Apri 19—It is significant, perhaps, that the 
Anglo-Italian accord is assessed here not only in 
terms of its immediate effect in Europe, but also— 
and more particularly—for its long-term effect on 
the balance of power in the Far East. Opinions dif- 
fer, of course, but broadly speaking Washington 
officials seem to accept the view that this “power 
politics’ settlement marks a turning-point in Europe 
which will inevitably have its effect on other areas 
of conflict. No one here believes that Neville Cham- 
berlain has broken the Rome-Berlin axis or paved 
the way to a four-power pact; some look with mis- 
givings on the forthcoming approach to Berlin; but 
virtually all officials welcome the lifting of tension 
in the Mediterranean and the removal of at least 
one dangerous source of conflict. 


A few months ago, Washington entertained a 
fond hope that Britain was about to assert a more 
positive policy in the Far East. The formal opening 
of the Singapore naval base and the courtesy call of 
three American cruisers was designed to symbolize 
the potential power of the two great Western 
democracies in the Pacific area. Captain Ingersoll, 
chief of the War Plans Division, was sent to Lon- 
don to ascertain Britain’s plans for strengthening its 
Asiatic fleet, and concerted diplomatic moves sug- 
gested the possibility of parallel action in the Far 
Fast. But at that time Britain was not able to spare 
any capital ships for duty in the Orient, and Wash- 
ington was told in plain language that no effective 
strengthening of the Pacific fleet could be promised 
until a settlement of the Mediterranean had been 
teached. Now that the settlement with Mussolini 
is an accomplished fact, some Far Eastern experts 
anticipate important developments. They say there 
is reason to believe that Great Britain’s first move 
will be to send six capital ships with the necessary 
auxiliaries to Singapore as the nucleus for the new 
British Pacific fleet. Plans for this move, which ex- 
isted on paper at the time of Captain Ingersoll’s 
visit in January, are ready to be put into effect when- 
ever the political situation in Europe permits. The 
effect of the move will be to give Great Britain and 
the United States a total of 21 capital ships in the 
Pacific as compared to 10 for Japan—or better than 
a2 to 1 ratio. 


When this transfer will be made and whether it 
will be followed by diplomatic moves remains to be 


seen. Whatever Britain’s plans may be, Washing- 
ton officials are obviously following current political 
developments in Tokyo with the closest attention. 
As a result of the major defeats suffered by Japanese 
troops in Shantung and the cabinet crisis in Tokyo, 
there is a strong belief in some quarters that the 
Japanese government may soon be compelled to take 
into account the new balance of power in the Pacific. 


In this connection, Washington has noted the 
reaction of Japanese officials to the Administration's 
naval expansion program, which comes up in the 
Senate this week. On April 17 Japanese newspapers 
quoted unnamed officials as taking “the gravest 
view” of the situation, particularly the decision of 
the United States to lay down two or three 45,000- 
ton super-battleships this year. While opponents of 
the expansion program in the Senate are preparing 
to wage a fight on the super-battleships, and are 
pressing the Administration to make another effort 
at disarmament before proceeding with the program, 
the State Department is holding firmly to its posi- 
tion that “‘the time is not yet ripe” for any move in 
this direction. Mr. Hull made his attitude clear in 
his statement to Senator Walsh, chairman of the 
Senate Naval Affairs Committee, when he said “in 
the present circumstances, no practical result could 
come from any authorization and instruction to the 
President to call a naval disarmament conference....”” 


Far Eastern Trade Trends. The effects of hos- 
tilities in China on our Far Eastern trade are shown 
in the final trade figures for 1937 compiled by the 
Department of Commerce. Analysis of the trade in 
munitions, including airplanes, reveals that exports 
to China declined from $7,666,540 in 1936 to $4,- 
267,324 in 1937, while arms shipments to Japan in- 
creased from $1,000,000 in 1936 to $2,892,000, or 
nearly three times in the same period. While the 
quantity of munitions sent from the United States 
to China through the port of Hongkong increased 
sharply after the outbreak of war, the actual amount 
is smaller than is generally believed, totaling only 
$311,161 in 1936 and $526,343 in 1937. 


Japan’s need for basic raw materials is reflected 
in the expansion of exports from the United States 
to the highest figure since 1920. The value of all 
American exports to Japan in 1937 was estimated 
at $288,378,000—an increase of 41 per cent over the 
previous year. While American cotton declined from 
$88,388,000 in 1936 to $61,724,000 in 1937, other 
vital war materials increased rapidly in the months 


preceding the outbreak of hostilities. Scrap iron and 
steel scrap, for example, increased from $14,167,000 
in 1936 to $39,278,000 the following year, while 
crude oil rts jumped from $14,231,000 to $22,- 
102,000 in 1937. The bulk of these shipments were 
delivered in the first six months of 1937. Trade with 
Kwantung (Manchuria) rose to $16,062,000 in 1937 
—an increase of over 400 per cent. China, on the 
other hand, has suffered a serious loss, American ex- 
ports dropping to $49,697,000, or 50 per cent less 


than 1936. WituraM T. STONE 


CHINA SCORES 
(Continued from Page 2) 
drive through Honan province down the Peiping- 
Hankow Railway also threatened Chengchow and 
Kaifeng. Advance detachments of these forces even 
brought the Lunghai Railway under artillery fire, 
but the disruption of Japan’s supply lines eventually 
forced a withdrawal. 

In Shantung province, the same strategy led to 
the complete isolation of the front-line Japanese 
divisions. Chinese flank attacks south of Tsinan cut 
the Tientsin-Pukow Railway at a number of places. 
Neither food, munitions, nor reinforcements could 
get through to the Japanese troops operating 20 or 
30 miles north of Hsiichow. Severe Chinese counter- 
attacks speedily exhausted their supplies of muni- 
tions, including gasoline for motorized implements 
of war. In the end, the Japanese troops effected a 


Page Four 


disastrous retreat from Taierhchuang, after suffer 
ing losses estimated at possibly 42,000 killed. The 
survivors joined other Japanese at Yihsien, but the 
combined force was again cut off and besieged by 
numerically superior Chinese armies. Japanese rein. 
forcements are being rushed to southern Shantung, 
where an offensive on an even larger scale to vin. 
dicate Japan’s prestige is forecast. Meanwhile, the 
need to transfer forces from other fronts has weak. 
ened Japan’s hold on the North China provinces and 
on the Shanghai-Nanking region, permitting Chinese 
guerrilla troops to operate in the environs of Peiping 
and Shanghai. 


Rigid censorship in Japan, which has attempted 
to suppress news of the defeat in Shantung, has led 
to dissemination of wild rumors among the people, 
Intense activity prevails in government circles, ap. 
parently revolving around the question of applying 
the National Mobilization Bill recently passed by 
the Diet. It is reported that Premier Konoye will 
resign rather than accept responsibility for applica 
tion of this measure, which would subject Japan's 
man power and economic resources to an unlimited 
military dictatorship. Any cabinet change at the 
present time would almost certainly result in more 
overt army control. This would clarify the army’ 
responsibility for the state of affairs in which Japan 
finds itself, but would hardly broaden the gover 
ment’s basis of popular support. T. A. Bisson 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Watch Czechoslovakia! by Richard Freund. New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1938. $1.50 


A terse and objective survey of the problems of a de- 
mocracy in peril, this study is particularly valuable for 
its treatment of the German menace—from the imperialist 
neighbor without and the dissident minority within. The 
excellent discussion of Czech military strategy was unfor- 
tunately completed before the disappearance of Austria. 
But in the broader aspect—the relation between Czech 
security and a general European war—Mr. Freund’s con- 
clusions are more timely than ever. 


Problems of the Pacific, 1936, by W. L. Holland and Kate 
L. Mitchell. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 
1937. $5.00 


The Yosemite Conference of the Institute of Pacific Re- 
lations devoted special attention to the problems and inter- 
relations of the United States, Japan, China and the 
U.S.S.R. in the Far East. This volume’s careful sum- 
maries of the fortnight’s discussions at Yosemite include 
a mass of valuable data, as well as illuminating commen- 
taries by members of the various national councils. The 
record of the proceedings is supplemented by more than 
200 pages of important documentary material submitted 
to the conference. 


Utopia in Uruguay, by S. G. Hanson. New York, Oxford 


University Press, 1938. $3.50 


This self-styled “analysis of the first New Deal in the 
Americas” does not purport to be an economic history of 
the country, but it does present a fairly complete record 
of political, economic and social developments since José 
Batlle y Ordéfiez became President in 1903. The treat 
ment in general is conservative. While the study tends & 
suffer from the breadth of the field surveyed, it is a web 
come contribution to the all too meager social and et 
nomic lore of Latin America. 

This Troubled World, by Eleanor Roosevelt. New York, 
H. C. Kinsey, 1938. $1.00 


A plea for peaceful settlement of international disputes, 
containing the idealism and simplicity for which the Firs 
Lady is justly famous. 


The Process of Change in the Ottoman Empire, by Wilbur 
W. White. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1937. 
$3.50 
A case study of the disintegration of an empire and 4 


worthy contribution in the fields of history and intern® 
tional law. 


— 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 26, Aprit 22, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lesumm Busi, President; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor. 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Nationa 
Entered as second-class matt 


FO! 


An int 


— 
Vout. X 


| 


terms 
alist 
April : 
from t 
strove 
ployed 
artilles 
fitory. 
ward | 
gained 
over t 
utilizir 
Pyrene 
shiftec 
prepar 
port o: 
be red 
Thu 
many 
status 
fensive 
struck 
Saragc 
little 1 
the ma 
and h: 
Ment 1 
farthe: 
ed as 
fense, 
As ; 


