Ogress is 
“air raid 
and fire. 
) appeals 


t in only 


cquiesced 
id air de. 
tinues to 
ats in the 
nation of 
mn a third 
previous 
x by-elec. 
y govern. 
hope for 
novement 
ral, labor 
Chamber 
ommittee 
tion. The 
mises in- 
> Socialist 
n weaken 
GREEN 


lis, Bobbs- 


of William 
idle of the 
Nicaragua 


1, Pa., 3. & 


der States 
n authentic 
resented in 
nee Saionji 

Since the 
in’s modern 
mbedded in 


egal. New 


rar Poland, 
ic problems 
anti-Semitic 
‘janism, the 
yland’s pro- 
nment if it 
ountries. 
TT 
ted. National 
Dean, Editor. 
ar. 


|FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XVII, No. 34 


_ 


JUNE 17, 1938 


For a comprehensive survey of Soviet achieve- 
ments under the first two Five-Year Plans, read: 


Problems of Labor and Management in the U.S.S.R. 
and 


Industry and Agriculture in the U.S.S.R. 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under che act 
of March 3, 1879. 


AMERICAN EXPORTS 


BOLSTER JAPAN 


ING recent weeks the new military-fascist 

members added to Japan’s Cabinet have dem- 
onstrated how the war in China should be con- 
ducted. Not content with an intensified drive on the 
central China fronts, they have instituted a ruthless 
bombing of Canton which has piled up a total of at 
least 8,000 casualties, mostly civilian non-com- 
batants. Laying claim to “military necessity,” Jap- 
anese Officials have spurned protests against this 
barbarity, declared that the air raids would be con- 
tinued ‘““with even greater vigor,’ and acted on this 
declaration. By June 12, as a result, Canton was 
experiencing its fifteenth successive day of aerial 
bombardment. 


Military inefficiency rather than military necessity 
—if the realization that a desperate case requires 
desperate remedies be excepted—lies at the root of 
this latest exhibition of Japanese ‘‘frightfulness.” 
for months Japan’s naval planes have been bombing 
the tracks, stations and bridges of the Canton- 
Kowloon Railway in an effort to disrupt the muni- 
tions shipments which are reaching Hankow via 
Hongkong and Canton. Japanese planes have been 
virtually unopposed in the air; nevertheless, they have 
failed to interrupt railway traffic. Heroic Chinese re- 
pair crews quickly restored tracks or bridges where 
the raiding planes scored direct hits. Hoping to 
demoralize the Chinese defense, the new Japanese 
leadership deliberately resorted to an indiscriminate 
bombing of Canton. The doubtful efficacy of this 
weapon has again been illustrated in south China; 
latest reports indicate that the Canton-Kowloon Rail- 
way is still functioning and that munitions trains 
are still passing north to Hankow. 


The raids on Canton are not the responsibility of 
Japan alone. Americans should face the fact that 
this country is participating de facto in the destruc- 


tion wrought at Canton. The high-test aviation 
fuel, which the United States is supplying in large 
and increasing quantities to Japan, makes this coun- 
try a participant in the Canton bombardments; so, 
also, does the $5,670,237 worth of American air- 
craft and accessories sold to Japan since Januaty 
1938. As pointed out in the Washington News Letter, 
these facts led Secretary Hull on June 11 to reveal 
that the State Department was taking measures to 
“discourage” sale of American airplanes to Japan. 
Airplanes, however, constitute but a small por- 
tion of the war materials which American concerns 
are supplying to Japan. High-grade steels with 
specified alloys, special types of machinery and ma- 
chine tools, and certain fuels and lubricating oils— 
these, and other products, are available to Japan in 
large quantities only in the American market. When 
scrap and pig iron, refined copper, petroleum, auto- 
mobiles and accessories, non-metallic metals, and 
numerous lesser items are added to the list of Ameri- 
can exports to Japan, the full picture becomes ap- 
parent. A scientific study of this subject, to be shortly 
published by the Chinese Council for Economic Re- 
search at Washington, D. C., estimates that during 
recent months Japan has secured 54.4 per cent of its 
war imports from the United States. 


It is clear that Secretary Hull’s private warnings 
to a few American airplane manufacturers do not 
constitute an adequate answer to the question raised 
by these facts. The United States, as the chief 
source of supply of Japan’s war materials, has become 
a silent partner in Japanese aggression. It is not 
enough to say that this country is also supplying 
munitions to China. Nor does application of the 
Neutrality Act commend itself as the proper answer 
to the situation that has developed. As early as last 
September the American government explicitly 


eee 


= 


SP. Saab olaiensaens sa 


1 
at 
oe 
| 
Yi 
' 
} 
i} 
; 
t 
- 
t 
tg 
ry 
i 


ie 


a ae 


aap : 
Sg, «a 


ranged itself with the League in condemnation of 
Japan’s bombing of open cities in China; in more 
recent declarations, the State Department has im- 
plicitly branded Japan as the aggressor in the current 
Far Eastern hostilities. Something more than words 
is required, however, if the United States is not to 
be accused of transparent hypocrisy. In order to en- 
force a policy of non-participation in Japanese ag- 
gression, the American government must levy a strict 
embargo on sales of war materials to Japan. At the 
same time, the Chinese government should continue 
to enjoy every facility for the purchase of the muni- 
tions which it needs to protect China’s national ex- 
istence against an unjustified and ruthless assault. 
Only thus can the deeds of our government be 
squared with its words. This policy will demand a 
price from certain vested American interests, but that 
price will be cheap compared with the war which 
looms on the horizon if Japan ever establishes itself 
effectively in China. 

Despite Japan’s recent military gains, there is no 
reason to believe that the Chinese cause is hopeless. 
Rising waters and breaches in the dikes of the Yellow 
River have mired the Japanese advance along the 
Lunghai Railway, and Chengchow is apparently still 
in Chinese hands. Time is being given for the 
Chinese forces to reform their lines for the defense 
of Hankow. Withdrawal of further American aid 
to the aggressor at this crucial moment would con- 
demn Japan’s desperate eleventh-hour offensive to 


defeat. T. A. BIsSOoN 


CZECH ELECTIONS LEAVE EUROPE UNEASY 


The last in a series of three Czechoslovak munici- 
pal elections was held without incident on June 12, 
in spite of renewed attacks by the German press. 
Of the total vote cast in predominantly German com- 
munities 90.9 per cent, according to Konrad Hen- 
lein’s headquarters, was polled by the Sudeten 
German party, reinforced after Anschluss by the 
German Agrarians and clericals; the German Social 
Democrats experienced heavy losses, but succeeded 
in retaining political representation. In the predom- 
inantly Czechoslovak communities the government 
parties maintained their previous gains. The Com- 
munist vote, which had considerably increased during 
the first elections on May 22, owing partly to Czech 
hope of Soviet assistance against Germany, registered 
a decline. While complete figures are still lacking, 
the Catholic Slovak People’s party headed by Father 
Hlinka, who on June 5 made a plea for Slovak auton- 
omy, apparently suffered unexpected losses. 

The anticipated victory of Henlein candidates in 
German districts failed to clear the sultry atmosphere 
of Central Europe. Encouraged by his success Hen- 
lein, it is feared, may now press the maximum de- 


Page Two 


——— 
—— 


mands set forth in his Karlsbad speech of April 248 
Negotiations between Sudeten representatives and 
Premier Hodza were resumed on June 10, and wij 
probably be accelerated with the completion of the 
nationalities statute scheduled for June 14. Tha 
Germany has no intention of abating its pressure 
on Prague was indicated over the weekend by a new 
press campaign, based less on concern for the fate 
of the Sudeten Germans than on the charge that 
Czechoslovakia is a hotbed of communism. As in the 
case of Spain, this form of propaganda is intended 
to win adherents among conservative elements in 
France and Britain who regard communism as 4 
greater danger than fascism. 

Yet German agitation on behalf of the Sudeten 
Germans may prove a boomerang by focusing the 
attention of all European minorities on their real of 
imagined grievances. On June 7 the League of Poles 
in Germany submitted a memorandum to the Hitler 
government charging that the Polish minority of 
1,200,000 is subjected to all sorts of economic, cul- 
tural and religious discrimination and, in some cases, 
to boycott and physical violence. This memorandum, 
published in the Polish press in Germany and te 
produced with indignation in Poland, was not men 
tioned by German newspapers. While the Germano- 
phile Colonel Beck is not ready to pick a quarrel 
with the Third Reich, the fact that information un- 
favorable to Germany was allowed to appear is one 
of many straws in the wind indicating that the Po 
lish government may be veering away from its pro- 
German orientation. 


Similar stiffening against Nazi agitation may be 
detected in Hungary, where the pro-Nazi Premier 
Daranyi was succeeded on May 13 by Bela Imredy, 
an expert economist who had formerly served as 
Minister of Finance and governor of the National 
Bank. Dr. Imredy can in no sense be regarded as 
anti-German. In a speech of June 1 his Foreign Min 
ister, de Kanya, stressed Hungary's friendship for 
Germany and Italy, and the Premier made no effort 
to block the passage of an anti-Semitic bill limiting 
Jewish participation in trade and the professions to 
20 per cent. But like Dr. Schuschnigg the new 
Premier, a fervent Catholic, has adopted stern meas 
ures against Nazi propaganda, hoping to steer 4 
middle course. Nor does Dr. Imredy regard with 
favor Germany's attempt to achieve economic dom: 
ination in Eastern Europe. 


The question whether Imredy can succeed where 
Schuschnigg failed depends, in large part, on the 
future course of Germany's Drang nach Osten. 
The inroads made by German trade in Eastern Eu 
rope and the Balkans would be facilitated by the 


*"'The Road Back—to 1914,"’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, May 6, 1938. 
(Continued on Page 4) 


————— 
—=!j 


pril 24.4 
tives and 
and will 
on of the 
14. That 
pressure 
by a new 
the fate 
arge that 
As in the 
intended 
ments in 
ism as a 


> Sudeten 
using the 
ir real of 
> of Poles 
he Hitler 
nority of 
omic, cul- 
Me Cases, 
orandum, 
y and re 
not men- 
cermano- 
a quarrel 
lation un- 
ear is one 
it the Po- 
Nn its pro- 


n may be 
i Premier 
a Imredy, 
served as 
National 
garded as 
eign Min 
dship fot 
no effort 
1 limiting 
essions to 
the new 
ern meas 
oO steer a 
yard with 
ymic dom- 


>ed where 
rt, on the 
ch Osten. 
astern Eu- 


ed by the 


, 1938. 


Washin gton News Letter 


——— 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JUNE 13.—As bombings of civilian populations 
continue unabated in Spain and China, State Depart- 
ment officials are exploring ways of implementing 
the Administration’s recent proclamations con- 
demning unrestricted aerial warfare. At his press 
conference last Saturday, Secretary Hull revealed 
that the Administration is already taking steps to 
discourage shipments of American airplanes to coun- 
tries engaged in indiscriminate bombing from the 
air. As shipments to Spain are already prohibited 
under the neutrality laws, the new policy applies 
only to Japan. Until ten days ago the only measures 
taken to inform American airplane manufacturers 
of the government's attitude were the public state- 
ments expressing “emphatic reprobation”’ of ruthless 
bombing. During the past week, however, the Mu- 
nitions Control Board has explained the govern- 
ment’s policy in oral statements made to representa- 
tives of American manufacturers who have called 
at the Department to ask for guidance. So far only 
two or three aircraft firms have made such inquiries 
in Washington, and no steps have yet been taken 
to inform the aircraft industry as a whole. 


Moral Pressure Versus Embargoes. In confining 
itself to moral pressure the State Department is side- 
stepping the controversial issue of embargoes, which 
under existing laws could only be applied by invok- 
ing the Neutrality Act. The effectiveness of moral 
pressure, however, is open to question. Similar pres- 
sure was applied to discourage the export of oil 
and other war materials to Italy during the Ethiopian 
war, but without conspicuous success. In fact, pet- 
toleum exports to Italy rose steadily from a monthly 
average of $505,000 in 1934 to a peak of $2,296,000 
in December 1935, and exports remained well above 
the peace-time level until the end of hostilities. The 
same method was employed to discourage arms 
shipments to Spain during the first six months of the 
civil war, but in January 1937 the President finally 
fequested Congress to give him authority to embargo 
all arms shipments to both sides in Spain. In the 
Far East, records of the Munitions Control Board 
show a marked increase in aircraft orders from Japan 
in recent months. During March, April and May 
licenses were granted for the sale of aircraft products 
totaling $3,947,000, or more than the total value 


of aircraft sold to Japan during the entire preceding 
seven months. Since the outbreak of hostilities in 
July 1937, such licenses to Japan have reached $7,- 
414,387, as compared with $8,607,482 for aircraft 
sales to China. 

It is just possible that moral pressure may be 
more effective in discouraging aircraft sales to Japan 
than it was in the case of petroleum during the 
Ethiopian war. American aircraft manufacturers are 
now operating at or near capacity production, and the 
additional orders recently placed in this country by 
Britain and France may make it difficult for Amefi- 
can firms to fill Japanese orders in any case. 

Larger Issues Involved. The fundamental ques- 
tion, however, is not limited to the export of bombing 
airplanes, and State Department officials are well 
aware that they have opened up an issue with wide 
ramifications. Already Mr. Hull is being bombarded 
with resolutions and appeals from divergent pres- 
sure groups. On the one hand, five organizations 
representing the “neutrality” wing of the peace 
movement issued a statement on June 13 urging the 
State Department to stop the pending sale of 400 
airplanes to Britain, on the ground that the British 
Empire “is one of the offenders” in this practice. 
Declaring that “the bombing of helpless women 
and children on the northwest frontier of India is 
a matter of common knowledge,” this group is de- 
manding action on the Nye-Fish bill which would 
forbid munitions exports to all countries in time of 
peace as well as in time of war. On the other hand, 
delegations urging concerted action against aggres- 
sor nations are arriving in Washington to press for 
embargoes on all war materials to Japan. If the gov- 
ernment disapproves of the shipment of bombing 
airplanes, why should it allow the export of other 
munitions which are just as destructive? Moreover, 
they ask, why should Japan be allowed to purchase 
huge supplies of oil, scrap-iron, copper, cotton and 
other essential materials without which it could not 
carry Out its aggressive campaign in China? 


The State Department is dodging these questions. 
With Congress about to adjourn, the Administration 
has no intention of pressing for new embargo legis- 
lation or raising any controversial issue of foreign 
policy. But unless the President invokes the Neutral- 
ity Act—which he has steadfastly declined to do— 
he is powerless to prohibit airplane exports or any 


Note: With the adjournment of Congress, publication of the WASHINGTON NEWS 
LETTER will be suspended for the summer months. It will be resumed early in the fall. 


Brg « eal ER aura hi 
a, oem aia 


TSS 


other war material. The practical effect of Mr. Hull’s 
move to discourage airplane shipments is likely to 
be determined in large part by the trend of American 
public opinion during the next few months. At any 
rate public opinion continues to be the primary con- 
cern of the President's advisers on foreign affairs. If 
popular resentment against unrestricted bombing crys- 
tallizes in a movement to embargo airplanes and 
other war materials to aggressors, then, it is argued, 
the Administration will be in a position to launch a 
campaign for repeal or revision of the Neutrality 
laws when Congress reconvenes in January. 
W.T. STONE 
CZECH ELECTIONS LEAVE EUROPE UNEASY 
(Continued from Page 2) 

completion—set for 1945—of a canal linking the 
Rhine with the Danube, which would give Germany 
easier access to the oil, wheat and mineral resources 
of Hungary and Rumania. This trade expansion 
raises the question, answered in the negative in 1914, 
whether Germany will be content with a commercial 
victory over British, French and Italian interests 
in the Danubian region, or will seek to Germanize 
non-German peoples by force if necessary. Past ex- 
perience would indicate that Germany's success in 
fostering trade is in inverse ratio to its ability to 
understand the temper of non-German peoples. It is 
on the rock of nationalist sentiment in Czecho- 
slovakia, Hungary and Rumania that the eastward 
drive of German nationalism may eventually founder. 

Meanwhile, Germany's economic position shows 
signs of a strain which, depending on Hitler’s de- 
cision, may prove either a deterrent from or an in- 
centive to war. German foreign trade, which closed 
1937 with a surplus, has thus far this year shown a 
considerable deficit, further increased by the annexa- 
tion of Austria. The Reich, faced by a shortage of 
foreign exchange, has mobilized all the gold, silver 
and foreign currency found in Austria for the pur- 
chase of raw materials. These measures leave no 
exchange available for payment of debt service on 
Austria’s international loans of 1933-1934, guaran- 
teed by several European countries, notably Britain, 
France and Italy. Negotiations regarding these loans, 
undertaken in Berlin by Sir Frederick Leith-Ross, 
financial adviser of the British government, appar- 
ently reached a deadlock. On June 7 a committee 
representing the guarantor powers protested to Ger- 
many against default on the debt service due June 1. 
In retaliation, Britain and France plan to institute 
a compulsory clearing arrangement under which 
they would collect debt payments from money due 


Page Four 


to German exporters. Since Germany's exports to 
France and Britain are far greater than its purchases 
in these countries, such a move might prove embar- 
rassing for the Third Reich. 

Economic difficulties are also being experienced by 
Italy, which has suffered from the severe drought 
now afflicting Europe. After strenuous efforts to 
achieve self-sufficiency, Italy may once more be 
forced to import wheat, thus further straining its 
foreign trade balance, which at the end of April 
showed a deficit of over one billion lire. Yet Musso- 
lini seems determined to assure the victory of Franco, 
even at the price of jeopardizing the Anglo-Italian 
agreement of April 16. British protests to General 
Franco regarding the series of severe air-raids which, 
during the past week, wrecked British shipping along 
the Spanish coast and the British-owned port of 
Gandia in Spain should, according to well-informed 
observers, have been addressed to Hitler and Musso- 
lini. While British opinion has been shocked by the 
inhuman character of Rebel air-raids, directed for 
the most part at non-military objectives, retaliation, 
it is feared, would involve Britain in the war it has 
consistently sought to localize by its policy of non- 
intervention. This dilemma lends peculiar force to 


Headli 


castis 


Mr. Eden’s speech of June 12, in which the former 
Foreign Secretary told his Leamington constituents 
that “retreat is not always the path to peace.” Mr. 
Chamberlain’s “realistic” policy of concessions to 
Hitler and Mussolini—concessions made out of fear 
and at the expense of weaker countries—have so far 
had the unpalatable result of straining Britain's re- 
lations with both dictators. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY 1918-38 

The Foreign Policy Association, organized on No- 
vember 10, 1918 as ‘“The Committee on Nothing at 
All,” will celebrate its Twentieth Anniversary on 
November 18 and 19. The celebration will include a 
dinner, a Saturday luncheon, round table discussions 
and a branch representatives’ conference. The speak- 
ers at these sessions will be of exceptional interest to 
our membership. Topics and names of speakers will 
be announced in later Bulletins. A cordial invitation 
is extended to all of our members to attend this An- 
niversary celebration. 

As your share in this celebration won’t you pledge 
yourself to secure at least one new member this yeat 
—thus helping in the development of a steadily 
growing F.P.A.? 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 34, Jung 17, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. ¥Y. RayMonp Leste Buett, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


ps! 


Two Dollars a Year. 


Gern 
econ< 
the . 
justi 
Daw 
Aust 
econ: 
previ 
Funk 
that 

fore 


Tl 
read 
June 
This 
defa 
Ame 
loan 
swet 
will 
nize 
ued 
in ci 
of y 
$64, 
Unit 
the 
citiz 
issu 
ince 


