JAN &Z 7943 


PERIODICAL ROOA 
GENERAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF MICH. 








- are 
ssity 


ying 
nion 
ited 
die” 
De- 
the 
and 
[on 

in- 

his 
1 be 

on 
acy, 
slay. 


T 


) 


General Lip 
University of 


Ann Arbor, 


rary Entered as 2nd class matter 
Michigan 


Michican 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 11 


JANUARY 1, 19438 





MODERATES IN INDIA STILL SEEK TO END DEADLOCK 


ame PREMIER TOJO’S statement of De- 
cember 27 that the United Nations are preparing 
counterblows of “great importance’ may be a smoke 
screen for Japan’s own offensive plans, but no one can 
doubt that Allied power in the Far East is growing 
very rapidly. In New Guinea, MacArthur's Australian 
and American troops have gone a long way toward 
clearing enemy forces from the Buna area. Rabaul, 
key Japanese air and naval base on New Britain, 
| which has frequently been raided from Australia, has 
'now been bombed for the first time from Guadalcanal 
_in the southern Solomons, a round trip of more than 
1,100 miles. At the same time British troops, invad- 
ing Burma from India, are pushing along the difficult 
coasts of the Bay of Bengal toward the Burmese port 
of Akyab. Since these are all small-scale develop- 
ments, action in the Pacific war theatre remains epi- 
sodic and, on the surface, haphazard. But the opening 
of a major Allied offensive, especially one involving 
coordinated drives in the southwest Pacific and on 
the continent of Asia, would clarify the situation. 
INDIA A MAJOR SECTOR. When this clarifica- 
tion occurs, a few areas—including the European 
front—will stand out as decisive for the Far Eastern 
war. One of these is India, which Americans have 
tended to forget in recent months, either glossing 
over its continuing political problems with the com- 
forting thought that “India is quiet,” or dismissing 
the situation in despair as a ‘mess.’ Both points of 
view contain just enough truth to be dangerous, 
for the first overlooks the intense popular bitter- 
ness lying beneath India’s deceptive calm, while the 
other obscures the fact that even now a solution of 
the involved situation there remains possible. India’s 
political difficulties will inevitably condition all 
military developments within or across its borders, 
and the policy of ignoring these problems therefore 
involves considerable future risk. 
| Since last summer the various Indian groups have 


| 





shown a growing tendency to cooperate, although 
the movement has not yet reached fruition in an 
actual agreement. When the Congress party adopted 
its plans for civil disobedience in July and August, 
other sections of Indian opinion, represented by the 
Moslem League, Hindu Mahasabha, Non-Party 
Group and Communists, disapproved, but were un- 
able to influence the situation in time. Immediately 
after the arrest of the Congress leaders, certain out- 
standing individuals — notably Rajagopalachariar, 
former member of the Congress Working Commit- 
tee; Mookerjee, working president of the Mahasab- 
ha; and Sapru of the Non-Party Group—took steps 
to bring about fuller Indian cooperation. Their ob- 
ject was to establish the preliminary conditions neces- 
sary for an agreement between the two chief organ- 
izations, the Congress party and the Moslem League. 
This, it was hoped, would answer the argument that 
an agreement between Britain and the Indian nation- 
alists was impossible because of Indian disunity. 

WILL MOSLEM LEAGUE COOPERATE? One 
important problem was the attitude ~f the Moslem 
League which demanded as the price uf cooperation 
Congress recognition of the right of Pakistan—the 
name proposed for an independent state to be formed 
by the predominantly Moslem areas of India. To 
meet this difficult problem, the participants in the 
unity discussions began to consider the possibility 
of recognizing in some way the Moslem right of 
self-determination. This would not guarantee Pakis- 
tan as such, but would make the scheme possible if 
the Moslem community so desired. Here there arose 
the major question of bringing the Congress into the 
deliberations, for any agreement would be worthless 
if it did not express the views of the most impor- 
tant nationalist group. But how was the Congress to 
be approached, since the party had been declared 
illegal, and all of its outstanding leaders were be- 
ing confined by the government? 



































Sigg e TH0 —| = 
Rajagopalachariar attempted to cut this knot by group looks with any hope toward the government, } i9§ | 
conducting preliminary interviews with President although many elements sincerely desire to cooper. | prof 
Jinnah of the Moslem League and on this basis ate in the war effort. Increasingly, foreign observers | fom 
petitioning the Viceroy for permission to discuss the report that bitterness is spreading among the peas. | miqU 
situation with Gandhi. When the government's re- ants and industrial workers, who are disturbed not | whic 
fusal became known on November 12, Rajagopala- _ only by political developments, but to an even great. | the | 
chariar declared: “I would not bother the Viceroy er degree by economic difficulties—notably ising techt 
with a request to see Gandhi if I did not think there prices and shortages of rice and wheat. than 
was a reasonable chance for the meeting to bring a Yet, with the Far Eastern war approaching a new cal , 
settlement.” Considerable disillusionment then de- and supremely important phase, the United Nations = 
veloped among the moderate Indian groups, since are not coming to grips with the Indian crisis. It is _ 
the British attitude appeared to be stiffening with true that on December 11 William Phillips, former deg) 
the successful unfolding of the North African cam- Ambassador to Italy, was appointed President 98 
paign. The official policy of making no new move Roosevelt's personal representative in India with brie 
toward a settlement was underlined on December 7, Ambassadorial rank, but it is not clear how this vuls 
when it was announced that the Viceroy’s term of move will affect the Indian situation. The paralyz. byt 
office, scheduled to expire in April 1943, was to ing factor is the fear that frank discussion of India whi 
be extended six months beyond that date. On De- will adversely affect Anglo-American relations and live 
cember 16, after a conference of non-Congress lead- be of aid to the Axis. Actually, it is the unsolved prob. _ 
ers, Sapru, long known as 8 moderate, declared that lem of India and not its discussion among the Allies E 
Britain's course showed ‘not merely lack of states- that benefits the enemy. Self-imposed silence by those | or 
manship, but lack of efficiency. who desire a solution for the sake of the war effort | 
A SMOLDERING CRISIS. It would be well for would only permit continued deterioration of the | ™°! 
American opinion to recognize that, within the past situation, while giving free rein to Axis propa sg 
year, British-Indian antagonism has grown to such gandists. a 
proportions that today not one significant popular LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER oS 
Aga. 
WHAT KIND OF GOVERNMENTS FOR POST-WAR EUROPE?’ dea 
The assassination of Admiral Darlan on Decem- reference to every intended act of the military gov- ond 
ber 24 points up the necessity for development of a ernment, whether it will forward that object or “4 | 
United Nations policy toward the highly complex hinder its accomplishment.’ Subject to this patra- ap 
and explosive problems of post-war reconstruction mount necessity, “military government should be just, ms 
in Europe which are so clearly an integral part of humane, and as mild as practicable, and the wel- ve 
the task of winning the war. While Admiral Dar- fare of the people governed should always be the ‘t 
lan’s death removes an obstacle to whole-hearted aim of every person engaged therein.” Above all, | : 
collaboration between Britain, the United States and “a plan for military government must be flexible. 1 
the anti-Vichy French, assassination is obviously not It must suit the people, the country, the time, and obs 
a method to be approved of by nations seeking to the strategical and tactical situation to which it is | ©" 
advance democracy. In this respect, the Basic Field applied. It must not be drawn up too long in ad- | *" 
Manual of Military Government prepared by the vance or in too much detail, and must be capable | the 
United States War Department — which must have of change without undue inconvenience, if and when of 
guided the decisions of General Eisenhower in experience shall show change to be advisable.” - 
North Africa—offers a useful starting-point for dis- The Manual’s emphasis on flexibility could well be * 


cussion of the policy that might conceivably be laid 
down for the military commanders of the United 
Nations who, it must be assumed, will have to oc- 
cupy various territories in Europe, including those 
of Germany and Italy, before the war is won. 


NEED FOR FLEXIBILITY. According to this 
Manual, any plan of military government should 
conform to two basic policies: military necessity, and 
the welfare of the governed. ‘The first consideration 
at all times,” says the Manual, “is the prosecution of 
the war to a successful termination. So long as hos- 
tilities continue, the question must be asked, with 





1. The second of four articles on the reorganization of Europe. 


taken to heart by political theorists, who have 4 | y, 
tendency to propound rigid perfectionist formulas 
of international — or national — organization and, | ¢, 
when these formulas fail to be realized, despair of | 6, 
achieving a modest compromise adjustment. No valid 
approach can be made to the problems of political | qj. 
reconstruction in Europe without understanding at | fp 
the outset that no single formula is applicable to 

every nation of that continent, since all of them are, | j 
in a sense, living in different periods of history. Be | te 
fore the war some, notably Britain, France, Holland, | 
Belgium and the Scandinavian countries, had already 

emerged into the twentieth century. Their pioneer 



































_—) = >a lle; -———>—_{[{—>=—{_$_$ > == *i> SE ——_ EE EAA 
ent, | ing political, economic and social achievements had _ posed to plans for restoration, under Habsburg rule, 
yer. | profoundly affected the countries of the New World of anything resembling the Austro-Hungarian Em- 
ers | from whom, in turn, they had borrowed new tech- pire. 
gs. | niques, especially in the industrial field. Germany, The very fact that the nations of Europe vary so 
not | Which gave the appearance of having emerged into widely in historical development means that it will 
sat. | the twentieth century because it utilized the modern not be possible to set up the same kind of govern- 
ing | techniques of industry and warfare more effectively ment everywhere simultaneously. Nor should it be 
than Britain and France, had not shared in the politi- assumed for a moment that all the countries of Eu- 
ve cal transformations that have shaped Western civ- rope will automatically adopt institutions similar to 
‘at | ilization. Meanwhile, Russia and its neighbors in those of Britain and the United States the moment 
+ Eastern Europe and the Balkans are, with varying they have thrown off the Nazi yoke. Some of the 
ner | degrees of rapidity, telescoping the social and eco- — Nazi-occupied United Nations which have achieved 
ent | Homuc revolutions of the past two centuries into a the greatest social progress—notably Norway and 
‘ith brief span of years, not always without internal con- Holland—are constitutional monarchies. Others, 
his vulsions. These convulsions are further complicated which were just beginning to emerge from semi- 
y2- by the desperate efforts of national groups, some of feudal conditions before the war, for example Po- 
dis which have been forced for long periods of time to land, had outwardly republican institutions. To in- 
nd live under alien rule, to achieve at one and the same sist on restoration of “legitimate” governments—a 
ob. | time national independence and economic progress. thesis popularized by the late historian Ferrero—in 
lies EUROPE’S SEARCH FOR UNITY. What Euv- countries which are already in the throes of internal 
ose | tope needs most is to be roughly equalized, so that revolution would be to swim against the tide of 
‘ort | the various peoples who inhabit it can act out of a events unless the “legitimate” governments are will- 
the | more or less common experience for a more or less ing to adapt themselves to altered circumstances. 
enon purpose. The war has speeded up this = Yet, at the same time, to bar all restoration would 
process of equalization, and has united the Euro- create natural resentment in countries like Norway 
. | peans, at least superficially— but united them and Holland, whose peoples might feel relatively 
| against the Nazi “new order,” not for a joint en- satisfied with the conditions they had known before 
| deavor of reconstruction. Even now, when the out- the war. 
ov. | come of the war remains uncertain, signs of friction The test of any government—whether restored or 
a and division appear, and these may be expected to established as a result of war developments—should 
iq. | Multiply once the Axis powers are defeated. The be not the label by which it is designated, but the 
ist, | Major task of the advanced industrial powers on the _ spirit in.which it acts and, most important of all, its 
vk side of the United Nations—among them Russia— attitude toward human welfare. Today, the peoples 
il will be to encourage the equalization and unification of Europe are in revolt both against the new totali- 
aij, | of Europe after the war. tarian order of the Nazis, and against representa- 
ble TEST OF NEW GOVERNMENTS. The chief tives of the old order who blocked reforms and 
snd | obstacle to the formulation of a common policy that failed to avert catastrophe. The kind of administra- 
, js | could win the support of Britain, the United States tion they might welcome is one that would combine 
ad. | and Russia, as well as the small states of Europe, is effective power with a sense of responsibility for 
ble | the difficulty of reaching an agreement as to the kind the use of that power to further the spiritual and 
hen | Of government they may respectively find acceptable material welfare of human beings. 
in the countries now occupied by the Nazis, as well VERA MICHELES DEAN 
he as in post-war Germany and Italy. It is no secret that, 
ee 2 the whole, the statesmen of many of the United ae Jenaeey Senos, ae ho eee 
Nations, including Britain and the United States, International Affairs will join us for a group of round- 
alas are not favorably disposed to the establishment of tables on topics of mutual concern. Details will be an- 
‘nd, | Communist or semi-Communist régimes in Europe. se sadist 
of On the other hand, it is equally clear that Russia The Foreign Policy Association is inaugurating a series 
alid and some of the other United Nations, look with . ——— | ee ee b ge berg see 
ical | disfavor on any attempt to restore governments of G. McDonald will conduct these endl veunaa dis- 
: known reactionary views, and are particularly op- cutee Ge eee eee Se Oe eee 
are; | 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 11, JANUARY 1, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 

Be- Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lugr, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered as 

and second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
di one month for change of address on membership publications. 

ay | 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
icce Be 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











Washington News Letter 

















Dec. 28.—The future of relations between the 
United States and Finland will probably hinge on 
the report that H. F. Schoenfeld, American Minister 
in Helsinki, is now bringing back with him to Wash- 
ington. There is no official confirmation for the be- 
lief held in some quarters that Mr. Schoenfeld’s re- 
turn was motivated by the incident alleged to have 
taken place in the Japanese legation in Helsinki on 
December 7, when Juho Rangell, the Finnish 
Premier, is reported to have drunk a toast to the 
Axis and destruction to the American fleet. The 
Finnish legation in Washington issued a statement 
on December 24 in which it admitted that the tea 
party had been actually held, but denied that any 
member of the Finnish government had addressed 
congratulations to the Japanese. But Washington is 
anxious to get first-hand information concerning the 
true state of opinion both of the Finnish government 
and of the people toward the war. 

It is one of this war's anomalies that the United 
States should still be at peace with Finland. Two 
of our allies, Russia and Britain, are at war with 
that country, a Finnish Army is on Russian soil, and 
German forces are using Finnish territory as a base 
from which to attack United Nations convoys to 
Russia. 

SYMPATHY FOR THE FINNS. The explana- 
tion, of course, is that the United States government 
has until now hoped to detach Finland from the 
Axis. Whether this policy will have to be abandoned 
as illusory, or whether the State Department will 
still continue to work patiently toward that end, will 
be determined in large part by the information Mr. 
Schoenfeld has to communicate. The decision con- 
cerning maintenance of diplomatic relations with 
Helsinki will be based on the answer that can be 
given, in the light of available evidence, to the ques- 
tion: Is the Finnish government whole-heartedly for 
the Axis, or is it in the unhappy position of not be- 
ing able to pry itself loose from Hitler’s grip on the 
country ? 

The relatively friendly feelings for Finland that 
still exist in the United States stem from the belief 
that the Finns entered the war only to regain the ter- 
ritory taken from them by the Russians nearly three 
years ago. American sympathies in the first Soviet- 
Finnish war were for the most part on the side of 
the Finns, who were regarded here as the victms of 
unjustified aggression. But after heroic resistance the 
Finns were forced to surrender and, by the peace 


FOR VICTORY °* 


treaty of March 12, 1940, they ceded to the U.S.SR. 

about a tenth of their territory, containing almost 

an eighth of the country’s 3,650,000 inhabitants. 
The fact that the Finnish Army is confining its 


operations to areas adjacent to Finland’s borders as | ™ 


they existed before the first Soviet-Finnish war has 
lent support to the belief that the Finns are fighting 
in self-defense. For some months this front has been 
quiet. It is also pointed out by Finland's friends here 
that Marshal Mannerheim’s army has made no seri- 
ous endeavor to capture Murmansk, the Russian port 
where the Allies land most of their supplies for 
the Red Army. Moreover, while Finland signed the 
anti-Comintern pact in November 1941, it has not 
yet joined the Berlin-Rome-Tokyo military alliance. 

THE FINNISH POSITION. On September 19 
Hjalmar J. Procope, Finnish Minister in Washing- 
ton, issued a statement declaring that Finland would 
be willing to “cease fighting as soon as the threat to 
her existence has been averted and guarantees ob- 
tained for her lasting security.’’ But, the Minister 
added, “if at the end of the war, Finland were occu- 


pied or invaded, which great power would be will- | 


ing to open hostilities against the invaders to drive 
them out of Finland?” 

This is the crux of the whole problem. Under 
Secretary of State Sumner Welles suggested to M. 
Procope in August 1941 that peace negotiations with 
the Soviet Union might be possible. He is reported 
to have intimated that, if Finland quit fighting, the 
Anglo-Saxon powers would use their influence with 
Russia to try to obtain a revision of the 1940 peace 
terms. But the Finns are skeptical about the ability 
of Washington and London to help them, once the 
war is over, should Russia attempt to acquire bases on 
Finnish territory. Helsinki’s fears are fostered by 
Nazi propaganda, which keeps telling the Finns they 
cannot look for assistance from the United States if 
Germany is defeated since, in spite of the Atlantic 
Charter, Moscow will not allow the Allies to protect 
Finland’s independence. 

The best antidote to this propaganda would 
doubtless be a promise from the Soviet government 
to restore Russia’s pre-war frontiers with Finland on 
condition that the Finns drop out of the war. But the 
Russians, who claim they attacked the Finns in 1939 
to insure themselves strategically against an antici- 


pated war with Germany are opposed to Washing: | 


ton’s maintenance of relations with Helsinki. 
JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





