Sai 


he Na- 
d with 
ctions: 
led by 
e wing 
nizelist 
nstitu- 
etween 
1 Com- 
to the 
‘*hemis- 
in the 
. would 
rovern- 
s. M. 
alition, 
yposing 
nizelist 
divided 
-abinet,. 
imunist 
/ might 
ountry. 
iis cab- 
‘ion on 
remain 
ssembly 


od by a 
appar- 
that of 
een the 
ed that 
ase the 
sult of 
that, in 
cede to 
ipied in 
Dodec- 
3, which 
» King’s 
nand by 
)- Italian 
wers of 
nirer of 


DEAN 


1936. 


k, Stokes, 


Lonsdale 
hor, 1935. 


p of the 


1. National 
EAN, Editor. 
Year. 


% 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


4g interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at che Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


VoL. XV, No. 16 


FEBRUARY 14, 1936 


THE INTERNATIONAL PROBLEM OF REFUGEES 


by Norman Bentwich, Director, High Commission 
for Refugees Coming From Germany 


Mr. James G. McDonald’s letter of resignation as High 
Commissioner for Refugees (Jewish and Other) Coming 
From Germany has aroused world-wide interest. The report 
analyzes the international problem of finding homes for po 
litical exiles, and describes the various bodies created by the 
League to deal with the refugee question. 


February 12 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25c. 


piviston 


PAX AMERICANA 


ASHINGTON dispatches of February 8 

reported administration plans for a Pan- 
American Peace Conference, designed to fortify 
the “good neighbor” policy in the Western Hem- 
isphere by more definite provisions for preserving 
peace. Now that the Chaco war has ended, it was 
intimated that the parley would afford a timely 
opportunity to strengthen inter-American machin- 
ery for the prevention of future conflicts. The con- 
ference agenda may also include redefinition of 
the Monroe Doctrine, resented by many Latin 
Americans as an expression of self-assumed super- 
iority on the part of the United States. Should 
the Doctrine be changed into a multilateral decla- 
ration, committing all the American states to 
unified resistance against aggression, another 
obstacle to inter-American understanding might 
be eliminated. 

Some observers view the proposed conference 
as a step in a definite administration policy to 
build an “American peace.” President Roosevelt, 
in his message to Congress on January 3, con- 
trasted the unity prevailing in the American hem- 
isphere with the growing menace of autocracy and 
aggression in other parts of the world. Assistant 
Secretary of State Sumner Welles, speaking at 
Baltimore on February 4, stressed the various 
forces which draw the American republics to- 
gether and declared that they all face the same 
international problems and that “in their relations 
with non-American powers the welfare and secur- 
ity of any one of them cannot be a matter of 
indifference to the others.” 

The recent conclusion of the Chaco conflict 
made it possible for the State Department to in- 
itiate the present negotiations. On February 8 
the Bolivian Congress ratified the Chaco peace 
protocol, which had received the final approval of 
the Paraguayan Congress the previous day. This 
protocol, signed at the Buenos Aires mediation 
conference on January 21, outlined a compromise 


agreement concerning exchange of war prison- 
ers; provided for re-establishment of diplomatic 
relations between Bolivia and Paraguay; and re- 
iterated mutual guarantees against the resump- 
tion of hostilities. The boundary dispute which 
provoked the conflict still remains without solu- 
tion. Its consideration has been postponed until 
presidential elections—scheduled for May in both 
Paraguay and Bolivia—can clear the domestic 
political atmosphere. 

A recently reported army plot in Paraguay, led 
by Colonel Rafael Franco, illustrates the post-war 
unrest in the former belligerent countries, as well 
as the widespread preoccupation of South Ameri- 
can governments with alleged Communist activi- 
ties. Colonel Franco, commandant of the Military 
Academy at Asuncién, was exiled on February 6, 
charged by the authorities with heading a Com- 
munist conspiracy to overthrow the government. 
According to other sources, however, the move- 
ment originated in the discontent prevailing 
among the demobilized troops—particularly the 
younger officers—and the students. These groups, 
incensed at the wrangles of the older professional 
politicians, had planned to make Franco a Presi- 
dential candidate. In past years, Franco has re- 
peatedly played the réle of a stormy petrel. In 
1931 he attempted to organize an army revolt 
against the civil government, and his unauthorized 
attack on the Bolivian fort Vanguardia in 1928 
is reported to have precipitated the Chaco conflict. 


During recent months the Communists have 
been charged with responsibility not only for the 
Franco plot but also for the army revolt in Brazil; 
subversive activity in Uruguay leading to the 
breaking off of diplomatic relations with the 
Soviet Union; labor unrest in Mexico; and a rail- 
road strike in Chile. Among the dictatorships and 
semi-dictatorships which rule many of the South 
American countries, it has become popular to ex- 
aggerate the influence of the numerically small 


Communist groups and apply a radical label to 
any reform movement. In Chile, as a result of the 
railroad strike, the right-wing government of 
President Alessandri closed Congress on February 
7, decreed martial law for three months, and 
arrested some 600 oppositionists—former cabinet 
ministers, retired army officers and others. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


WILL EUROPE PRESERVE STATUS QUO 
BY COLLECTIVE ACTION? 


The funeral of George V provided an unusual 
opportunity for diplomatic conversations both in 
London, where representatives of the principal 
European states called on King Edward VIII and 
Mr. Eden, and in Paris, where they broke their 
homeward journeys to confer with the new 
French Foreign Minister, M. Flandin. The Paris 
conversations—in which Germany, Italy and Po- 
land did not participate—were chiefly concerned 
with the future of Austria, the prospects of an 
oil embargo against Italy, and the possibility of 
a German move to end demilitarization of the 
Rhineland. 


Negotiations regarding Austria were directed 
at the formation of an Eastern European bloc 
composed of the Little Entente states—Czecho- 
slovakia, Rumania and Yugoslavia—and the Soviet 
Union, which might replace Italy, now absorbed 
in colonial adventure, as official defender of Aus- 
trian independence against the designs of Nazi 
Germany. The Austrian Vice-Chancellor, Prince 
von Starhemberg, was at first reported to have 
promised M. Flandin that his government would 
not restore the monarchy without the consent of 
the Little Entente, provided the latter furnished 
Austria with financial and economic assistance. 
On February 5, however, following Archduke 
Otto’s surprise visit to Paris, Starhemberg denied 
that he had given France an ironclad pledge re- 
garding restoration. Meanwhile the Soviet Union 
—heartened by M. Flandin’s decision to submit 
the Franco-Soviet pact of mutual assistance to 
Parliament for ratification—expressed its readi- 
ness to collaborate with France’s ally Rumania. 
It declined, however, to participate in a bloc for 
defense of Austria on the ground that regional 
alliances tend to weaken the authority of the 
League. It is now expected that the Little En- 
tente—possibly with the aid of Hungary, Greece 
and Turkey—will undertake both the protection 
of Austria and the economic reconstruction of the 
Danubian region. 

Italy’s absence from negotiations concerning 
a region where it had previously claimed a sphere 


—— Page Two 


of influence registered the extent to which it has 
been forced to withdraw from European politics, 
This was further emphasized on February 2, when 
a League committee of experts representing the 
principal oil-producing and tanker-owning coun- 
tries began to study the possibility of an embargo 
on oil. The committee is reported to have reached 
the conclusion that Italy had stocked only enough 
oil to continue military operations until the be- 
ginning of the Ethiopian rainy season, and that an 
effective embargo would paralyze it at the end of 
six months. The opinion was also expressed at 
Geneva that—provided the United States limits its 


aN act aE AE 


babes. sabes a 


oil exports to the normal figure, or 10 per cent of § 


Italy’s total imports—the League embargo might 
prove successful, especially if League states pro- 
hibited use of their tankers for transportation of 
oil to Italy. Should the United States, however, 
continue its policy of “trade at your own risk,” 
and should American oil producers seek to capture 
the Italian market, the League powers might be 
obliged to blockade Italy to prevent failure of the 
oil embargo; and a blockade, in turn, might be 
regarded by Mussolini as an act of war. At the 
moment, however, it appears more likely that the 
threat of oil sanctions may serve as an entering 
wedge for renewal of peace negotiations, with a 


view to bringing Italy back into the European con- | 


cert before it has been so weakened as to prove 
a valueless ally against Germany. 
Fear of Hitler has been recently heightened by 


reports that Germany is on the verge of remili- z 


tarizing the Rhineland in violation of the Ver- 
sailles and Locarno treaties, and by Nazi demands 
for return of African colonies. 


onies; and the Baldwin government appears in no 
hurry to consider the Hoare proposal of Septem- 
ber 11 for redistribution of raw materials. When 
George Lansbury, veteran Laborite and pacifist, 
moved in the House of Commons on February 5 
that the government should immediately summon 
a new conference on migration of peoples and ac- 


cess to markets and raw materials, the cabinet) 


spokesman, Viscount Cranborne, replied that the 
time was not ripe for such a conference. The con- 
tinued reluctance of many League powers to con- 
sider any attempt at revision by peaceful means 
squarely raises the question whether the collective 
system, which has proved unexpectedly successful 


in penalizing—if not stopping—aggression, will) 


be used merely as an instrument for preservation 
of the status quo. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


Britain, which 
has acquiesced in Nazi rearmament and urged/ 
German participation in the London naval con-f 
ference, remains adamant on the subject of col-| 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 16, Fesruary 14, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Screet, New York, N. Y. RayMOnpd Lesitg Busit, President; EstHer G. OGpan, Secretary; VERA MicHeies Dean, Editor. — 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. Nationa! 


One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Ar 


\ 


