rogram. 


PLINE. 

to put 

ief that 

yr Pren. | 
; SuCces- 
ting the 
ate last 
e farm 
or costs 
inst this 
his seat 


ffair are 
recessity 
ing the 
carrying 
opinion 
- United 
“Eddie” 
ton De- 
om the 
nall and 
oys [on 
own in- 
| of his 
‘will be 
pose of 
nocracy, 


display. | 


LIOTT 


JAN 2 7943 


PERIODICAL ROOA 
GENERAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF MICH. 


General Lipb- 


ary Entered as 2nd class matter 


Un fwass.? 
YO.versity of Michizan 
: “**#5 as 


A 
Ann Arbor, Michican 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 11 


JANUARY 1, 19438 


MODERATES IN INDIA STILL SEEK TO END DEADLOCK 


rhage PREMIER TOJO’S statement of De- 
cember 27 that the United Nations are preparing 
counterblows of “great importance’ may be a smoke 
screen for Japan’s own offensive plans, but no one can 
doubt that Allied power in the Far East is growing 
very rapidly. In New Guinea, MacArthur's Australian 
and American troops have gone a long way toward 
clearing enemy forces from the Buna area. Rabaul, 
key Japanese air and naval base on New Britain, 
which has frequently been raided from Australia, has 
now been bombed for the first time from Guadalcanal 
in the southern Solomons, a round trip of more than 
1,100 miles. At the same time British troops, invad- 
ing Burma from India, are pushing along the difficult 
coasts of the Bay of Bengal toward the Burmese port 
of Akyab. Since these are all small-scale develop- 
ments, action in the Pacific war theatre remains epi- 
sodic and, on the surface, haphazard. But the opening 
of a major Allied offensive, especially one involving 
coordinated drives in the southwest Pacific and on 
the continent of Asia, would clarify the situation. 
INDIA A MAJOR SECTOR. When this clarifica- 
tion occurs, a few areas—including the European 
front—will stand out as decisive for the Far Eastern 
war. One of these is India, which Americans have 
tended to forget in recent months, either glossing 
over its continuing political problems with the com- 
forting thought that “India is quiet,” or dismissing 
the situation in despair as a “‘mess.’’ Both points of 
view contain just enough truth to be dangerous, 
for the first overlooks the intense popular bitter- 
ness lying beneath India’s deceptive calm, while the 
other obscures the fact that even now a solution of 
the involved situation there remains possible. India’s 
political difficulties will inevitably condition all 
military developments within or across its borders, 
and the policy of ignoring these problems therefore 


_ involves considerable future risk. 


DS 


Since last summer the various Indian groups have 


shown a growing tendency to cooperate, although 
the movement has not yet reached fruition in an 
actual agreement. When the Congress party adopted 
its plans for civil disobedience in July and August, 
other sections of Indian opinion, represented by the 
Moslem League, Hindu Mahasabha, Non-Party 
Group and Communists, disapproved, but were un- 
able to influence the situation in time. Immediately 
after the arrest of the Congress leaders, certain out- 
standing individuals — notably Rajagopalachariar, 
former member of the Congress Working Commit- 
tee; Mookerjee, working president of the Mahasab- 
ha; and Sapru of the Non-Party Group—took steps 
to bring about fuller Indian cooperation. Their ob- 
ject was to establish the preliminary conditions neces- 
sary for an agreement between the two chief organ- 
izations, the Congress party and the Moslem League. 
This, it was hoped, would answer the argument that 
an agreement between Britain and the Indian nation- 
alists was impossible because of Indian disunity. 
WILL MOSLEM LEAGUE COOPERATE? One 
important problem was the attitude of the Moslem 
League which demanded as the price of cooperation 
Congress recognition of the right of Pakistan—the 
name proposed for an independent state to be formed 
by the predominantly Moslem areas of India. To 
meet this difficult problem, the participants in the 
unity discussions began to consider the possibility 
of recognizing in some way the Moslem right of 
self-determination. This would not guarantee Pakis- 
tan as such, but would make the scheme possible if 
the Moslem community so desired. Here there arose 
the major question of bringing the Congress into the 
deliberations, for any agreement would be worthless 
if it did not express the views of the most impor- 
tant nationalist group. But how was the Congress to 
be approached, since the party had been declared 
illegal, and all of its outstanding leaders were be- 
ing confined by the government? 


ae 
2 Ss, seo pe ee 


_—— 


Rajagopalachariar attempted to cut this knot by 
conducting preliminary interviews with President 
Jinnah of the Moslem League and on this basis 
petitioning the Viceroy for permission to discuss the 
situation with Gandhi. When the government's re- 
fusal became known on November 12, Rajagopala- 
chariar declared: “I would not bother the Viceroy 
with a request to see Gandhi if I did not think there 
was a reasonable chance for the meeting to bring a 
settlement.” Considerable disillusionment then de- 
veloped among the moderate Indian groups, since 
the British attitude appeared to be stiffening with 
the successful unfolding of the North African cam- 
paign. The official policy of making no new move 
toward a settlement was underlined on December 7, 
when it was announced that the Viceroy’s term of 
office, scheduled to expire in April 1943, was to 
be extended six months beyond that date. On De- 
cember 16, after a conference of non-Congress lead- 
ers, Sapru, long known as a moderate, declared that 
Britain’s course showed “not merely lack of states- 
manship, but lack of efficiency.” 

A SMOLDERING CRISIS. It would be well for 
American opinion to recognize that, within the past 
year, British-Indian antagonism has grown to such 
proportions that today not one significant popular 


women 
a ——_ | 
—— 


group looks with any hope toward the government, 
although many elements sincerely desire to cooper. 
ate in the war effort. Increasingly, foreign observers 
report that bitterness is spreading among the peas. 
ants and industrial workers, who are disturbed not 
only by political developments, but to an even great. 
er degree by economic difficulties—notably ising 
prices and shortages of rice and wheat. 

Yet, with the Far Eastern war approaching a new 
and supremely important phase, the United Nations 
are not coming to grips with the Indian crisis. It is 
true that on December 11 William Phillips, former 
Ambassador to Italy, was appointed President 
Roosevelt's personal representative in India with 
Ambassadorial rank, but it is not clear how this 
move will affect the Indian situation. The paralyz- 
ing factor is the fear that frank discussion of India 
will adversely affect Anglo-American relations and 
be of aid to the Axis. Actually, it is the unsolved prob. 
lem of India and not its discussion among the Allies 


that benefits the enemy. Self-imposed silence by those } 


who desire a solution for the sake of the war effort 
would only permit continued deterioration of the 
situation, while giving free rein to Axis propa- 
gandists. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


WHAT KIND OF GOVERNMENTS FOR POST-WAR EUROPE?’ 


The assassination of Admiral Darlan on Decem- 
ber 24 points up the necessity for development of a 
United Nations policy toward the highly complex 
and explosive problems of post-war reconstruction 
in Europe which are so clearly an integral part of 
the task of winning the war. While Admiral Dar- 
lan’s death removes an obstacle to whole-hearted 
collaboration between Britain, the United States and 
the anti-Vichy French, assassination is obviously not 
a method to be approved of by nations seeking to 
advance democracy. In this respect, the Basic Field 


Manual of Military Government prepared by the 


United States War Department — which must have 
guided the decisions of General Eisenhower in 
North Africa—offers a useful starting-point for dis- 
cussion of the policy that might conceivably be laid 
down for the military commanders of the United 
Nations who, it must be assumed, will have to oc- 
cupy various territories in Europe, including those 
of Germany and Italy, before the war is won. 
NEED FOR FLEXIBILITY. According to this 
Manual, any plan of military government should 
conform to two basic policies: military necessity, and 
the welfare of the governed. ‘The first consideration 
at all times,” says the Manual, “is the prosecution of 
the war to a successful termination. So long as hos- 
tilities continue, the question must be asked, with 


1. The second of four articles on the reorganization of Europe. 


reference to every intended act of the military gov- 
ernment, whether it will forward that object or 
hinder its accomplishment.” Subject to this patra- 
mount necessity, “military government should be just, 
humane, and as mild as practicable, and the wel- 
fare of the people governed should always be the 
aim of every person engaged therein.” Above all, 
“a plan for military government must be flexible. 
It must suit the people, the country, the time, and 
the strategical and tactical situation to which it is 
applied. It must not be drawn up too long in ad- 
vance or in too much detail, and must be capable 
of change without undue inconvenience, if and when 
experience shall show change to be advisable.” 


The Manual’s emphasis on flexibility could well be 
taken to heart by political theorists, who have 4 
tendency to propound rigid perfectionist formulas 


of international — or national — organization and, | 


when these formulas fail to be realized, despair of 
achieving a modest compromise adjustment. No valid 
approach can be made to the problems of political 
reconstruction in Europe without understanding at 
the outset that no single formula is applicable to 


every nation of that continent, since all of them are, | 


in a sense, living in different periods of history. Be 
fore the war some, notably Britain, France, Holland, 
Belgium and the Scandinavian countries, had already 
emerged into the twentieth century. Their pioneet- 


— 


ing Pp 
profo 
from 
nique 
whict 
the t 
techn 
than 

cal t 
ilizat 
Easte 
degre 
nomi 
brief 


vulsis 


more 
com! 
proc 
pean 
agat 
deav 
com 
and 

mul: 
maje 
side 

will 


of E 


T 
obst 
cou! 
and 
the 
of | 
in t 
as i 


—=:1 


‘tnment, 
Cooper. 
bservers 
1e€ peas- 
bed not 
NM great. 
y rising 


2 a new 


Nations | 


is. It is 

former 
resident 
ia with 
ow this 
paralyz- 
of India 
ons and 
ed prob- 
e Allies 
by those 
ar effort 

of the 


propa- 


INGER 


Ary gov- 
bject or 
iS pata- 
| be just, 
he wel- 
; be the 
ove ail, 
flexible. 
me, and 
ich it is 
y in ad- 
capable 
id when 
le.” 


| well be 
have a 
ormulas 
on and, 
spair of 
No valid 
political 
iding at 
cable to 
rem are; 
‘ory. Be 
olland, 
| already 
pioneet- 


= 


——— 


ing political, economic and social achievements had 
profoundly affected the countries of the New World 
from whom, in turn, they had borrowed new tech- 
niques, especially in the industrial field. Germany, 
which gave the appearance of having emerged into 
the twentieth century because it utilized the modern 
techniques of industry and warfare more effectively 
than Britain and France, had not shared in the politi- 
cal transformations that have shaped Western civ- 
ilization. Meanwhile, Russia and its neighbors in 
Eastern Europe and the Balkans are, with varying 
degrees of rapidity, telescoping the social and eco- 
nomic revolutions of the past two centuries into a 
brief span of years, not always without internal con- 
vulsions. These convulsions are further complicated 
by the desperate efforts of national groups, some of 
which have been forced for long periods of time to 
live under alien rule, to achieve at one and the same 
time national independence and economic progress. 

EUROPE’S SEARCH FOR UNITY. What Ev- 
rope needs most is to be roughly equalized, so that 
the various peoples who inhabit it can act out of a 
more or less common experience for a more or less 
common purpose. The war has speeded up this 
process of equalization, and has united the Euro- 
peans, at least superficially—but united them 
against the Nazi “new order,” not for a joint en- 
deavor of reconstruction. Even now, when the out- 
come of the war remains uncertain, signs of friction 
and division appear, and these may be expected to 
multiply once the Axis powers are defeated. The 
major task of the advanced industrial powers on the 
side of the United Nations—among them Russia— 
will be to encourage the equalization and unification 


, of Europe after the war. 


TEST OF NEW GOVERNMENTS. The chief 
obstacle to the formulation of a common policy that 
could win the support of Britain, the United States 
and Russia, as well as the small states of Europe, is 
the difficulty of reaching an agreement as to the kind 


_ of government they may respectively find acceptable 


in the countries now occupied by the Nazis, as well 
as in post-war Germany and Italy. It is no secret that, 
on the whole, the statesmen of many of the United 
Nations, including Britain and the United States, 
are not favorably disposed to the establishment of 
Communist or semi-Communist régimes in Europe. 
On the other hand, it is equally clear that Russia 
and some of the other United Nations, look with 
disfavor on any attempt to restore governments of 
known reactionary views, and are particularly op- 


Page Three 


posed to plans for restoration, under Habsburg rule, 
of anything resembling the Austro-Hungarian Em- 
pire. 

The very fact that the nations of Europe vary so 
widely in historical development means that it will 
not be possible to set up the same kind of govern- 
ment everywhere simultaneously. Nor should it be 
assumed for a moment that all the countries of Eu- 
rope will automatically adopt institutions similar to 
those of Britain and the United States the moment 
they have thrown off the Nazi yoke. Some of the 
Nazi-occupied United Nations which have achieved 
the greatest social progress—notably Norway and 
Holland—are constitutional monarchies. Others, 
which were just beginning to emerge from semi- 
feudal conditions before the war, for example Po- 
land, had outwardly republican institutions. To in- 
sist on restoration of “legitimate” governments—a 
thesis popularized by the late historian Ferrero—in 
countries which are already in the throes of internal 
revolution would be to swim against the tide of 
events unless the “legitimate” governments are will- 
ing to adapt themselves to altered circumstances. 
Yet, at the same time, to bar all restoration would 
create natural resentment in countries like Norway 
and Holland, whose peoples might feel relatively 
satisfied with the conditions they had known before 
the war. 

The test of any government—whether restored or 
established as a result of war developments—should 
be not the label by which it is designated, but the 
spirit in.which it acts and, most important of all, its 
attitude toward human welfare. Today, the peoples 
of Europe are in revolt both against the new totali- 
tarian order of the Nazis, and against representa- 
tives of the old order who blocked reforms and 
failed to avert catastrophe. The kind of administra- 
tion they might welcome is one that would combine 
effective power with a sense of responsibility for 
the use of that power to further the spiritual and 
material welfare of human beings. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


The January luncheon will be on Saturday, the 23rd, 
instead of the 9th. Members of the Canadian Institute of 
International Affairs will join us for a group of round- 
tables on topics of mutual concern. Details will be an- 
nounced later. 


The Foreign Policy Association is inaugurating a series 
of nation-wide Saturday broadcasts on the Blue Network 
beginning January 9, from 1:15 p.m. to 1:45 p.m. James 
G. McDonald will conduct these monthly round-table dis- 
cussions on “America Looks to the Future.” 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 11, January 1, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Legt, Secretary; VERA MicHeLes Dran, Editor, Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


{Be 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor 


Washington News Letter 


Dec. 28.—The future of relations between the 
United States and Finland will probably hinge on 
the report that H. F. Schoenfeld, American Minister 
in Helsinki, is now bringing back with him to Wash- 
ington. There is no official confirmation for the be- 
lief held in some quarters that Mr. Schoenfeld’s re- 
turn was motivated by the incident alleged to have 
taken place in the Japanese legation in Helsinki on 
December 7, when Juho Rangell, the Finnish 
Premier, is reported to have drunk a toast to the 
Axis and destruction to the American fleet. The 
Finnish legation in Washington issued a statement 
on December 24 in which it admitted that the tea 
party had been actually held, but denied that any 
member of the Finnish government had addressed 
congratulations to the Japanese. But Washington is 
anxious to get first-hand information concerning the 
true state of opinion both of the Finnish government 
and of the people toward the war. 

It is one of this war's anomalies that the United 
States should still be at peace with Finland. Two 
of our allies, Russia and Britain, are at war with 
that country, a Finnish Army is on Russian soil, and 
German forces are using Finnish territory as a base 
from which to attack United Nations convoys to 
Russia. 

SYMPATHY FOR THE FINNS. The explana- 
tion, of course, is that the United States government 
has until now hoped to detach Finland from the 
Axis. Whether this policy will have to be abandoned 
as illusory, or whether the State Department will 
still continue to work patiently toward that end, will 
be determined in large part by the information Mr. 
Schoenfeld has to communicate. The decision con- 
cerning maintenance of diplomatic relations with 
Helsinki will be based on the answer that can be 
given, in the light of available evidence, to the ques- 
tion: Is the Finnish government whole-heartedly for 
the Axis, or is it in the unhappy position of not be- 
ing able to pry itself loose from Hitler’s grip on the 
country ? 

The relatively friendly feelings for Finland that 
still exist in the United States stem from the belief 
that the Finns entered the war only to regain the ter- 
ritory taken from them by the Russians nearly three 
years ago. American sympathies in the first Soviet- 
Finnish war were for the most part on the side of 
the Finns, who were regarded here as the victms of 
unjustified aggression. But after heroic resistance the 
Finns were forced to surrender and, by the peace 


treaty of March 12, 1940, they ceded to the U.S.SR. 
about a tenth of their territory, containing almost 
an eighth of the country’s 3,650,000 inhabitants. 

The fact that the Finnish Army is confining its 
Operations to areas adjacent to Finland’s borders as 
they existed before the first Soviet-Finnish war has 
lent support to the belief that the Finns are fighting 
in self-defense. For some months this front has been 
quiet. It is also pointed out by Finland's friends here 
that Marshal Mannerheim’s army has made no seri- 
ous endeavor to capture Murmansk, the Russian port 
where the Allies land most of their supplies for 
the Red Army. Moreover, while Finland signed the 
anti-Comintern pact in November 1941, it has not 
yet joined the Berlin-Rome-Tokyo military alliance. 

THE FINNISH POSITION. On September 19 
Hjalmar J. Procope, Finnish Minister in Washing- 
ton, issued a statement declaring that Finland would 
be willing to ‘cease fighting as soon as the threat to 
her existence has been averted and guarantees ob- 
tained for her lasting security.’’ But, the Minister 
added, “if at the end of the war, Finland were occu- 
pied or invaded, which great power would be will- 
ing to open hostilities against the invaders to drive 
them out of Finland?” 

This is the crux of the whole problem. Under 
Secretary of State Sumner Welles suggested to M. 
Procope in August 1941 that peace negotiations with 
the Soviet Union might be possible. He is reported 
to have intimated that, if Finland quit fighting, the 
Anglo-Saxon powers would use their influence with 
Russia to try to obtain a revision of the 1940 peace 
terms. But the Finns are skeptical about the ability 
of Washington and London to help them, once the 
war is over, should Russia attempt to acquire bases on 
Finnish territory. Helsinki’s fears are fostered by 
Nazi propaganda, which keeps telling the Finns they 
cannot look for assistance from the United States if 
Germany is defeated since, in spite of the Atlantic 
Charter, Moscow will not allow the Allies to protect 
Finland's independence. 

The best antidote to this propaganda would 
doubtless be a promise from the Soviet government 
to restore Russia’s pre-war frontiers with Finland on 
condition that the Finns drop out of the war. But the 
Russians, who claim they attacked the Finns in 1939 
to insure themselves strategically against an antici- 
pated war with Germany are opposed to Washing: 
ton’s maintenance of relations with Helsinki. 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


FOR VICTORY * BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


>» 


VoL. - 
“a 


; 
Ty 


by th 
to in 
ter, ¢ 
Afric 
slavic 
whic! 
of of 
} occu] 
in th 


gove 


ter ¢ 


