ore 


rge 
and 
nd- 

its 
nd- 
ory 
ini- 
ion, 


TN- 
icia 
ned 
one 
2V0- 
1, a 
1 of 
ring 
vere 
The 
cho- 
asis 
An- 
Jom 


the 
port 
ally 
e on 
trol 

ex- 
nt a 
only 
eign 
con- 
e to 


N 


pard. 


F the 


— 
ational 


Editor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 








re : 102 7 


=“ 








Vou. XVI, No. 14 


JANUARY 29, 1937 





SPAIN: CIVIL WAR 

by Charles A. Thomson 
This report covers the history of the first six months 
of civil war in Spain, and analyzes its three-fold char- 


acter: the military conflict, the social struggle of revo- 
lutionary change and reaction, and foreign interference. 


January 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Dr. William &. Bishop 
% University >¢ Michigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











il 


FRANCO-BRITISH OVERTURES TO GERMANY 





N January 30, when Chancellor Hitler ad- 

dresses the Reichstag to commemorate the 
fourth anniversary of his advent to power, France 
and Britain will be anxiously awaiting a reply to 
their latest overtures for German cooperation in 
a general European settlement. Spokesmen for 
both powers have recently outlined a new and 
constructive policy toward Germany. Speaking 
before the House of Commons on January 19, 
Foreign Minister Eden expressed the willingness 
of his government to cooperate in economic and 
financial measures that would raise the world’s 
standard of living. Stressing that “economic col- 
laboration and political appeasement must go 
hand in hand,” however, he appealed to the Reich 
to abandon “the doctrine of national exclusive- 
ness” and accept “every European state as a po- 
tential partner in a general settlement.” This, 
he indicated, would mean the reduction of arma- 
ments “to a level sufficient for the essential needs 
of defense” and acceptance of “such international 
machinery for the settlement of disputes as will 
make the League of Nations a benefit to all and 
a servitude to none.” In a speech delivered at 
Lyons on January 24, Premier Blum made a 
similar plea on behalf of France. While reject- 
ing a policy of bargaining economic assistance 
against political concessions by Germany, he de- 
clared that economic accords could not possibly be 
considered independent of a political settlement. 
He hinted at collaboration in a “great European, 
colonial and international project” to meet Ger- 
man economic needs, but insisted that extension 
of credits or assistance in obtaining access to raw 
materials should be conditioned on general arms 
limitation. 

This Franco-British plea has so far failed to 
arouse a favorable response in Germany. Most 
German newspapers emphasized that the Reich’s 
economic plight was far from desperate and 
scornfully rejected the idea of bargaining away 


the country’s freedom of action for a “mess of 
pottage.” Neither Germany nor Italy is sympa- 
thetic toward the political settlement favored by 
the democratic powers. In conversations with 
General Goering, who ended a prolonged visit to 
Italy on January 23, Mussolini and Foreign Min- 
ister Ciano are generally believed to have dis- 
cussed reviving the old Four Power Pact, which 
would exclude the Soviet Union from European 
counsels and could easily camouflage an anti- 
Soviet bloc. In his recent speech, however, Pre- 
mier Blum clearly refused “to separate French 
security from European peace” or to sacrifice 
French alliances with Russia and the Eastern 
European powers; and Mr. Eden rejected a settle- 
ment not open to all countries. 

With respect to the Spanish civil war, Italy and 
Germany seem to have adopted a more concilia- 
tory policy. Replying on January 25 to the latest 
British proposal for stopping the influx of vol- 
unteers into Spain, the two powers undertook to 
adopt immediate measures for the prohibition of 
enlistments, and to make them effective as soon 
as an adequate system of control had been agreed 
upon and a date fixed for their simultaneous en- 
try into force. The Italian and German notes ap- 
parently abandoned insistence on the preliminary 
evacuation of all “military and political volun- 
teers” from Spain and the interdiction of other 
forms of “indirect intervention.” Both questions, 
however, will be brought up again in the Non- 
Intervention Committee. Meanwhile, the insti- 
tution of adequate control over the dispatch of 
arms and volunteers is encountering many ob- 
stacles. Germany and Italy are still considering 
the supervisory scheme elaborated by the -Non- 
Intervention Committee. Should they accept the 
proposal, it is possible that pressure may be 
brought to bear on Portugal and the belligerents 
who have rejected the plan. 

The past week witnessed other developments 





a Ee -_ 


gn 


dy ek Se as 














in Europe—both favorable and unfavorable. On 
January 24 Bulgaria and Yugoslavia signed a 
“treaty of peace and lasting friendship” which 
seems to terminate their perpetual conflict over 
Macedonia and will make it less possible for out- 
side powers to fish in troubled Balkan waters. In 
Geneva, where the League Council convened on 
January 21, France and Turkey were apparently 
approaching a solution of their dispute regarding 
the status of the Alexandretta district.* The 
Council made a further constructive contribution 
by authorizing its president to appoint an ex- 
perts’ committee on “equal commercial access for 
all nations to certain raw materials.” American 
cooperation has been enlisted by designating as a 
member of this committee Henry F. Grady, 
former chief of the Trade Agreements Section of 
the State Department. Less hopeful is the settle- 
ment of the Danzig question negotiated by Poland 
and due to be ratified by the Council. A League 
Commissioner will be retained in the Free City, 
but he will no longer be permitted to interfere 
with Nazi violations of the constitution. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


ARMY VERSUS NATION IN JAPAN 


The swelling wave of discontent at the orien- 
tation of Japanese politics broke at a stormy ses- 
sion of the Diet on January 21, when Kunimatsu 
Hamada, Seiyukai party leader, rebuked the army 
for its interference in political life and the Hirota 
Cabinet for its Fascist tendencies. Two days 
later the Cabinet resigned, despite an attempt by 
Navy Minister Osami Nagano to arrange a com- 
promise on the basis of renewed cooperation be- 
tween the army and the political parties. 

After conferences with Imperial officials, the 
Emperor on January 25 commanded Kazushige 
Ugaki, a retired general of moderate views and 
with political affiliations, to form a cabinet. The 
artmhy, which had demanded dissolution of the 
Diet and formation of a government free from 
party influences, immediately signified its opposi- 
tion by intimating that it would not permit any 
officer to act as War Minister. Under Japanese 
law a general or lieutenant general on the active 
list must occupy this post. A veiled threat of mil- 
itary revolt, coupled with this defiance of the 
Emperor’s mandate by the arch-exponents of ex- 
treme patriotism, immediately crystallized na- 
tion-wide sentiment against the army. Isolation of 
the military has become virtually complete, and 
the impasse absolute. 

The roots of the crisis are to be found in the 


* Foreign Policy Bulletin, Jamuary 15, 1937. 


Page Two 








—= 


increasing unwillingness of large sections of the 
Japanese public to support policies forced upon 
the nation by the militarists. In foreign affairs 
the country has viewed with distaste the provoca. 
tive policy which appears to be rousing China to 
unified resistance. Public opinion has been dis. 
mayed by adverse foreign comment on the anti- 
Communist agreement with Germany—a reaction 
driven home by difficulties over renewal of the So. 
viet-Japanese agreement permitting fishing off the 
Siberian coast. At home the army’s policy has en. 
tailed mounting military expenditures, higher tax- 
ation, and burdensome increase of the public debt, 
which reached the figure of 10,800,000,000 yen on 
January 1, 1937. Although they find it expedient 
to make large gifts to the army, industrial inter- 
ests fear the spread of authoritarian ideas which 
would subject their activities to increasing goy- 
ernmental control for the ostensible good of the 
state. The economic nationalism which accom- 
panies this trend is fraught with serious effects 
for Japan’s vital export industries. These are 
already evident in the foreign exchange control 
established on January 8 and the proposed sys- 
tem of regulating imports. Fiscal and commer- 
cial policies of this type will undoubtedly inten- 
sify the sharp upward movement in Japanese 
prices, which is already reported to have raised 
the cost of foodstuffs and other staples by 10 to 30 
per cent since January 1. 

Confronted by this dark vista, the Emperor and 
the Privy Council are apparently seeking a com- 
promise similar to that which followed the mili- 
tary uprising at Tokyo in February 1936. The 
price of the army’s participation in the new gov- 
ernment is again likely to be concessions to its de- 
mands. Such a settlement will probably result in 
a stronger foreign policy, which in turn may bol- 
ster anti-Japanese factions in China and in other 
Pacific nations as well. DAvip H. Popprr 





I Found No Peace, by Webb Miller. 
& Schuster, 1936. $3.00 
Varied and vividly written experiences of a United 
Press correspondent which make light and _ interesting 
reading. 
A Place in the Sun, by Grover Clark. 
millan, 1936. $2.50 


Argues that the costs of colonies outweigh the gains, and 
suggests that the League be given authority to enforce 
complete equality of trade opportunities for all nations 
in colonial areas. 
The Balance Sheets of Imperialism, by Grover Clark. New 

York, Columbia University Press, 1936. $2.75 

A companion volume to A Place in the Sun, giving sta- 
tistical tables relating to the costs and profits of colonies 
and a brief summary of conclusions from the evidence. 


New York, Simon 


New York, Mac- 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 14, January 29, 1937. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lastim Bugit, President; EstHar G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


One Dollar a Year. 











