———, 


 Fespon- 
vays, on 
ent Pay- 
ised for 
and te. 
Otivated 
strikes, 
tially to 
ave been 
prosper- 
>urchase 
oil have 
0sed to 
licy. Its 
‘act that 
Ms with 
‘otection 
shington 
fascism 
iN active 
MSON 


Postgate 
rill, 1987. 


sh news- 
itish for- 
arloo and 
h of col- 
the press 
ary force 


y Foster 
37. $3.00 


he thesis 
or policy 
with our 
1 a prac- 
\sia, the 
10t main- 
na or the 
. checked 


and pres- 
nen have 
pport by 
material 
rnational 


sw York, 


osevelt’s 

a wealth 

| outlines 
States. 


. National 
class matter | 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


orc 14 193F 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Vou. XVII, No. 7 


DECEMBER 10, 1937 


—_ 


A 


Christmas Gift Suggestions 


Solve your Christmas gift problems with sub- 
scriptions to F.P.A. publications. A Christmas 
card bearing your name as donor will be mailed 
to your friends. 


Headline Books and World Affairs Pamphlets $2 a year 
4-page Foreign Policy Bulletin- - - - - $2ayear 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 


WILL HITLER ACCEPT HALF A LOAF? 


—— 


ENEATH the smooth phrases of the Franco- 

British communiqué of November 30 may be 
detected the main outlines of the new peace settle- 
ment which the two democracies propose to offer 
Hitler. The keynote of this communiqué is that 
European appeasement calls for a general settlement 
—not piecemeal bilateral arrangements such as those 
hitherto urged by Hitler. To this extent, the Franco- 
British conversations seem to exclude the possibility 
—widely predicted on the eve of Lord Halifax's 
visit to Berlin—that Britain might encourage a deal 
by which Germany, in return for moderation of its 
colonial demands, would receive a free hand in Cen- 
tral and Eastern Europe. 

The theory on which Britain and France now seem 
to be working is that some attempt should be made 
to satisfy Germany's “legitimate grievances,” both 
in Africa and in Europe; but that Germany, in re- 
turn, must undertake to keep the peace—or suffer the 
consequences. This certainly represents a more con- 
structive policy than the earlier insistence of the two 
Western democracies on maintenance of the status 
quo at any price, including that of possible war. 
The settlement they propose calls for sacrifices not 
only on the part of the small states of Eastern 
Europe, which gained most in 1919 from dismem- 
berment of the Hohenzollern and Hapsburg em- 
pires, but also on the part of Britain and France, 
which would return some of Germany’s pre-war col- 
onies, now administered as League mandates. It is 
not yet clear, however, to what extent Britain—less 
willing than France to make colonial concessions— 
is ready to contribute to this settlement out of its 
Own resources. As far as can be ascertained, the 
British government is not ready to surrender the 
strategically and economically valuable German ter- 
titories of Tanganyika and Southwest Africa—the 
latter a mandate of the Union of South Africa. 


What it apparently proposes is the formation of a 
colonial pool in West Africa, to which not only Brit- 
ain and France, but Belgium and Portugal would 
contribute—this new colony to be administered by 
chartered companies in which German capital would 
be heavily represented. 

The Franco-British conversations also strengthened 
the position of M. Delbos, French Foreign Minister, 
on his round of visits to France’s allies in Eastern 
Europe—Poland, Rumania, Yugoslavia and Czecho- 
slovakia. These visits had apparently a three-fold 
purpose: to ascertain the extent to which France's 
allies, subjected to the temptation of joining the 
Rome-Berlin axis, remain true to their treaty obliga- 
tions; to reassure them regarding Franco-British in- 
tentions to preserve peace in that region; and to ob- 
tain from them, in return, additional guarantees of 
the aid they might render the two Western democ- 
racies in case of war with Germany. 

M. Delbos found that the countries of Eastern 
Europe, disillusioned with collective security, are not 
so much pro-German or pro-French, as~ primarily 
concerned with furtherance of their own national 
interests. Poland, whose authoritarian régime shares 
Hitler's fear of communism, is not prepared to sat- 
isfy Germany’s most important “legitimate griev- 
ances’’ with respect to Danzig and the Polish Cor- 
ridor. On the contrary, it has already presented de- 
mands for a share of African colonies which, in a 
sense, make it a competitor of the Reich in the 
struggle for colonial spoils. At the same time, in 
spite of the desire of opposition parties for rap- 
prochement with France, the Polish government re- 
mains adamant in its objections to the Franco-Soviet 
pact of mutual assistance. A somewhat similar con- 
flict exists in Rumania, where the Tatarescu govern- 
ment, subservient to King Carol II, has displayed 
an ambiguous attitude toward the activities of the 


———— 


Iron Guard, which presses for cooperation with Ger- 
many and Italy; while the liberal Peasant party of 
M. Maniu—who has just arranged for the return to 
Rumania of former Foreign Minister Titulescu, ar- 
dent advocate of collaboration with France and the 
U.S.S.R.—demands restoration of democracy and, in 
an effort to secure fair elections, has concluded an 
electoral deal with its worst enemy, the Iron Guard. 

Equally complicated is the situation in Yugoslavia, 
where the ruling classes, influenced by White Guard 
refugees, remain hostile to communism, and the dic- 
tatorial government of Premier Stoyadinovitch has 
followed a pro-Italian orientation. Yet the forma- 
tion in October of an Agrarian-Democratic coalition 
uniting the Serb and Croat opposition parties, which 
demand restoration of democracy, is expected to 
weaken Yugoslavia's ties with Germany and Italy. 

In these Eastern European countries, where anti- 
communism and anti-semitism play into the hands 
of Nazi agitators, pro-French sentiment would un- 
doubtedly be strengthened if France could scrap its 
pact of mutual assistance with the Soviet Union, 
which in 1935 angered Germany and estranged Po- 
land. On this point France is less uncompromising 
than a year ago. The anti-Trotzkyist campaign in 
the U.S.S.R., with its revelations of military dis- 
loyalty and industrial inefficiency, discredited com- 
munism in France and created the impression that, 
in case of war, the Soviet Union might prove a 
liability rather than an asset. 

The main resistance to such a course in Eastern 
Europe might be expected from Czechoslovakia, also 
bound by a pact of mutual assistance to the Soviet 
Union. The Prague government, however, looks less 
to alliances than to its own military resources for de- 
fense against Germany. More important than the 
Soviet pact would be assurances that Germany will 
abandon its campaign on behalf of the Sudeten Ger- 
mans, whom Prague might conciliate by some mea- 
sure of autonomy; that Czechoslovakia’s partners 
in the Little Entente—Rumania and Yugoslavia— 
will give it unequivocal aid in case of German at- 
tack; and that Poland, which has supported the agi- 
tation of the Polish minority in Teschen, will not 
stab Czechoslovakia in the back. Such assurances, 
according to some observers, might be facilitated by 
abandonment of the French and Czechoslovak pacts 
with the U.S.S.R. 

Attractive as dissociation from the U.S.S.R. might 
seem to Paris and London, it must be recognized that 
under certain circumstances it would dovetail into 
Hitler's plans for isolation of the Soviet Union from 
Western Europe and for eventual German domina- 
tion of the East, to the exclusion of France, Britain 
and even Italy from that region. Nor is it certain 
that Hitler, having obtained concessions which might 
be regarded as legitimate, would not then press for 


Page Twe 


ee 
ee 


fulfillment of the far vaster program of German ey. 
pansion set forth in Mein Kampf. The best guar. 
antee against this eventuality would be a pledge by 
Britain and France to help the small states of Eastern 
Europe not only in case of direct German attack— 
the least probable of the hypotheses—but of Ger. 
man intervention in their internal affairs. Such a 
pledge, especially when re-enforced by Britain’s te. 
armament and its determination to reorganize and 
rejuvenate its army, would have to be reciprocated 
by the promise of the small states to moderate their 
own intransigence toward the revisionist demands 
of Germany and Hungary, and to do their share ip 
case of war with the Reich. The choice today, as 
when Hitler first came to power, is not between 


peace and war—but between a peace imposed by 
Germany, which would hardly be an improvemens 
on the imposed settlement of Versailles, and a peace 


negotiated on terms acceptable not only to the great 
powers, but to the European community as a whole 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BRITAIN OVERHAULS ARMY 


Announcing a sweeping reorganization of the 
Army Council, Leslie Hore-Belisha, Britain’s dynamic 
Secretary of State for War, inaugurated a series of 
military reforms on December 2 which may alter the 
composition of the British army more radically than 
any step taken in several decades. After a grim be- 
hind-the-scenes struggle necessitating the interven- 
tion of the cabinet, Mr. Hore-Belisha secured the re- 
placement of a sufficient number of elderly officers 
to reduce the average age of the members of Brit- 
ain’s supreme military body from 63 to 52. The new 
Chief of the Imperial General Staff, General Vis- 
count Gort, was promoted over the heads of fifty 
generals who ranked above him in seniority. His 
colleagues have been selected with a view to the in- 
troduction of a more resilient and progressive atti 
tude toward army problems. In an add 
ered on December 4 the War Minister decla 


aeuy 


| that 


henceforth merit will replace length of service as 
determining factor in promotion. He also outlined 
a program of decentralization bringing new respon- 
sibilities in the direction of military policy to high 
officers holding home commands. 

These changes foreshadow further efforts to de- 


mocratize the tradition-ridden, essentially aristocratic | 


structure of the army, which has apparently proved 
unequal to the stresses imposed by Britain's vast 
rearmament program. It is expected that higher sal- 
aries will be paid and a new recruiting system 


adopted to broaden the base from which officers| 
will be selected in the future. Faced by a shortage| 


of 12,000 enlisted men in the ranks, Mr. Hore 
Belisha will doubtless continue his efforts to im- 
(Continued on Page 4) 


lh 


al 


DE 
While 
into tl 

ress— 
a th 
Congr 
to tho 
passab 
the P1 

The 
that t 
attrip 
cempe 
nation 
in wo 
view 
Aloof 
was f 
cials \ 
timen 
laid c 
torial, 
tators 
of ac 
join 4 
The ; 
abled 
his hi 
will 1 
bark 


used 


ovement 
a peace 
he great 
a whole, 


DEAN 


of the 
dynamic 
series of 
alter the 
ally than 
grim be- 
interven- 
d the re- 
y officers 
of Brit. 
The new 
eral Vis- 
; of fifty 
ity. His 
ro the in- 
Sive att- 
deliv- 
ared that 


ice as the 


= 


W ashington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Desc. 7—Congress and American foreign policy. 
While issues of foreign policy have been thrust well 
into the background of the special session. of Con- 
gress—where they are likely to remain undisturbed 
for the present—there is increasing evidence that 
Congressional opinion is a major cause of concern 
to those Administration advisers who are seeking a 
passable road pointing in the general direction of 
the President's Chicago speech. 

The prevailing view in Administration circles is 
that the collapse of the Brussels conference can be 
attributed in large measure to the “isolationist” 
temper of Congress, which allows treaty-breaking 
nations to discount the influence of the United States 
in world affairs. The vigorous expression of this 
view in a leading editorial, entitled ‘America’s 
Aloofness,” in the New York Times on December 1 
was read with satisfaction by State Department off- 
cials who have been expressing much the same sen- 
timents for several weeks. Particular emphasis is 
laid on the statement, as phrased in the Times edi- 
torial, that “‘treaty-breaking governments and dic- 
tators have become convinced that for no cause short 
of actual invasion will the United States initiate or 
join any effective movement to assure world peace.” 
The attitude of Congress, it is hinted here, has en- 
abled more than one foreign Ambassador to inform 
his home government that American public opinion 
will not permit the Roosevelt Administration to em- 
bark on any positive policy—a point which has been 
used with some effect to impress on Congress its re- 
sponsibility in matters of foreign policy. 

Chere is little if any evidence, however, that the 


. outlined 


W respon | 
y to high | 


rts to de 
ristocratic 
ly proved 
ain’s vast 
igher sal- 
ig system 
h_ officers 
. shortage 


temper of Congress has changed materially in recent 
weeks. The central issue, as seen by Congress, is not 
whether the United States shall assume a position 
of leadership in world affairs, but whether the Ex- 
| ecutive shall be given a free hand to commit the na- 
_ tion to economic and military sanctions, or to assume 
| the war-making power. While there is much sym- 
pathy for China, there is no strong desire to take 
positive action against aggressors. Informal surveys 
of Congressional opinion seem to confirm earlier 
newspaper polls showing something like a two-to- 
| OMe Majority against joining with other nations in 
| Sanctions of any kind. The belief that sanctions 


Ar. Hore-| mean war is apparently stronger than it was during 
ts to im- the Ethiopian conflict in 1935, and there is greater 


| Suspicion of the motives of foreign powers. At the 


same time, there is obviously less faith in neutrality 
legislation as a “‘safe and sure” formula for avoiding 
war, and sharp division with respect to application 
of the existing Neutrality Act to the Far Eastern 
conflict. The desire to curb the war-making powers 
of the Executive is shown by the introduction of half 
a dozen “war referendum” resolutions, seeking a 
constitutional amendment limiting the authority of 
Congress to declare war—except in case of invasién 
—until after a nation-wide referendum. These reso- 
lutions, which will be analyzed in a future News 
Letter, are likely to come up for debate early in the 
regular session of Congress. Thus for some time to 
come American policy seems destined to remain sus- 
pended between the desire of the Executive to as- 
sume a positive rdle in defense of international cov- 
enants, and the unwillingness of Congress to assume 
the risks of forceful intervention in the game of 


power politics. WituiaM T. STONE 


Rear guard action at Shanghai. Since the break- 
down of its efforts at mediation in the Far Eastern 
war, Washington has centered its attention on Jap- 
anese moves to extend control over the Interna- 
tional Settlement in Shanghai. The Japanese de- 
termination to take over Chinese government func- 
tions and to suppress “‘anti-Japanism’’ is necessarily 
undermining the position of Americans there as 
built up by treaties and their own business efforts. 
Against these encroachments, Washington, in con- 
cert with Britain and France, is carrying on a cau- 
tious but dogged rear guard action 

The strongest stand seems to 
against the Japanese 
collection of the Chinese maritime customs. After 
the appointment of two Japanese as officials in the 
customs administration, Washington was informed 
that Japanese appraisers and examiners had been 
stationed at landing points in the International Set- 
tlement and the French Concession. At the same 
time, intimations were received that the Japanese 
were really seeking full control of the maritime cus- 
toms, but without confiscating that part of the re- 
ceipts which is pledged to the service of Chinese 
foreign debts. On November 27 the State Depart- 
ment expressed the concern with which the United 
States would view any attempt to destroy the in- 
tegrity of the Chinese customs. Two days later Am- 
bassador Grew delivered a note at Tokyo in which 
the United States claimed the right to be consulted 
regarding any proposed change, either in the ma- 


have been taken 


ssertion of control over the 


chinery of collection or in the distribution of cus- 
toms receipts. Simultaneously Consul-General Gauss 
at Shanghai is negotiating with the Japanese on is- 
sues arising from their measures of control or super- 
vision over radio and cable services. Although the 
American government will doubtless continue its 
protests against infractions of its rights, there are 
no indications here that it is ready to take any 


stronger action. Pau. B. TAyYLor 


BRITAIN OVERHAULS ARMY 
(Continued from Page 2) 

prove the amenities of barracks life and thus en- 
courage recruiting which, significantly enough, is 
fully up to schedule in the navy and air force. If its 
morale can be reconstituted by these measures, the 
army will be in a far better position to execute at a 
rapid tempo the extensive mechanization and motor- 
ization scheme begun on April 1, 1937. Consider- 
able effort, moreover, is being devoted to reconstruc- 
tion of the Territorial Army—the home defense or- 
ganization analogous to the American National 
Guard—as the foundation for a more democratic 
citizen force. The basic problem of providing 
eligible man power is being attacked from another 
angle by the prosecution of a nation-wide campaign 
to encourage physical fitness 

In other fields, too, the British government is 
straining every nerve to wipe out what it regards as 
a deplorable lag behind other leading European 
powers in the realm of rearmament. On July 1, 1937 
Britain, with a fleet totaling only 1,216,398 tons, 


Page Four — 


had laid the keels or appropriated the funds for an 
additional 541,190 tons of ships. In the face of 
much friction and criticism the Royal Air Force ig 
being rapidly expanded. The manufacture of air. 
planes and munitions, although hindered by lack of 
coordination, is unmistakably gaining momentum, 
Since Sir Thomas Inskip assumed office as Minister 
for Coordination of Defense twenty months ago, 
orders have been placed for £288,000,000 worth of 
armaments, while nineteen factories have been 
erected. The government's five “shadow’”’ airplane 
plants, intended as a reserve for large-scale produc- 
tion in an emergency, will be ready for operation 
early in 1938. Extensive precautionary measures 
against air raids are about to be financed by the gov- 
ernment, and over 19,000,000 gas masks have al- 
ready been manufactured. A “shadow” food con- 
trol organization is being created to function im- 
mediately on the outbreak of hostilities. 

Students of history are tempted to compare these 
intensive preparations, and the coincident visit of 
Lord Halifax to Berchtesgaden, with the reorgani- 
zation of the British army completed in 1910 and the 
attempt by its progenitor, Lord Haldane, to reach 
an understanding with Germany two years later. 
The situations are by no means entirely comparable. 
It is true, nevertheless, that visible evidence of ac- 
celerated British rearmament is likely to be more 
effective as a tonic for dispirited anti-fascist forces in 
Central and Eastern Europe than any conversations 
held by peripatetic diplomats in the capitals of the 


Continent. Davip H. Popper 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Plot and Counter-Plot in Central Europe, by M. W. Fodor. 
‘New York, Houghton Mifflin, 1937. $3.50 


The Vienna correspondent of the Manchester Guardian 
draws on his rich and intimate knowledge of Central Eu- 
ropean politics in this penetrating analysis of the forces 
and personalities at work in a region where a free hand 
is demanded by Nazi Germany. He believes that if Austria 
and Czechoslovakia succeed in escaping the danger of 
German aggression, the small countries of the Danubian 
and Balkan area will eventually collaborate in an effort to 
avoid entanglement in the conflicts of the great powers. 


The Problem of Peaceful Change in the Pacific Area, by 
Henry F. Angus. New York, Oxford University Press, 
1937. $2.00 


A study of the work of the Institute of Pacific Relations 
and its bearing on the problem of peaceful change. The 
achievements of the Institute are fully described, but it 
is freely admitted that its present usefulness is limited in 
matters involving sovereign rights. 


Japan Over Asia, by William Henry Chamberlin. Boston, 
Little, Brown, 1937. $3.50 


The basic elements in the confused political and eco- 
nomic situation within Japan are brought into clear focus 
as they pass through the lens of a keen journalistic ii 
tellect. Mr. Chamberlin depicts Japan’s imperialistic drive 


in Asia and its world-wide trade offensive, then traces the! 


interplay of forces in Japanese public life responsible for 
Tokyo’s policies. The discussion of Japan’s drift toward 


fascism and a regimented economy is concluded by a timely 


estimate of its power of endurance during a conflict and | 


a lucid summary of its war aims in China. The author 


deprecates the possibility of internal revolution in Japan| 


or of any immediate clash with the U.S.S.R. 


The Kaiser on Trial, by George Sylvester Viereck. New 
York, Greystone Press, 1937. $3.50 


more a victim of the disunity of Germany and a faulty 
world system than of his own character. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 7, Decemper 10, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lesiigp Bust, President; Vera MicHELes DRAN, Editor. Entered as second-class matte! 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National | 


An it 


by the 
Britis! 
by Pi 
profu 
and § 
signif 
guara 


it was 
the E 
politi 
The s 
blow 
tary | 
made 
Japan 


hostil 


with 


had 1 


| other 
A well-written volume contending that the Kaiser was) 


Me 
Japar 


| when 


walle 
into 
mark 


