


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


in ex ae 

ritry’s Subscription, Two Dollars a Year : 
Ice 0 FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 

reat 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


GER 


LAR 199 
7 > 


0 ide 


4+ 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


— 
foot 
7 











up 





aims! You. XVII, No. 12 


JANUARY 14, 1938 




















ion is) 
6 Headline Books, and 
0 $9 ~ Gen 
= 4 World Affairs Pamphlets eneral Library 
GIN A SPECIAL COMBINATION OFFER—$2.00 University of Michigan 
This subscription will begin with “Europe in Crisis,” by 
Vera Micheles Dean, the January issue of World Affairs Ann Arbor, Michigan 
coal Pamphlets. It will be followed, in February, with the Head- 
y task! jine Book, “War in China.” Other subjects which will be 
covered in this series are: the Conflict in Palestine, American 
Ms; Foreign Trade Policy, Latin America, Labor, and Soviet Russia. 
> Miss 6 
ntime,| —— 
secre. JAPAN ENFORCES A WAR ECONOMY 
ing a ~ <onngunreetnasiomatnpe es 
of ad. by T. A. BISSON drive in China and to realize an internal fascist pro- 
of his} Mr. Bisson has just returned from China and Japan where gram by gradual stages. The violent methods of the 
cnown| be spent a year under a fellowship from the Rockefeller former army extremists, typified by Generals Araki 
ember! Foundation. 


Rich 
“inter. 


of the 


woe large and important sectors of Japanese 
industry and finance lined up behind the army 
program, the major obstacle in the path of a rapid 
advance toward a fascist régime has been removed. 
Since the inauguration of the Hirota Cabinet, the 
dominant leaders in Japan have moved steadily to- 
ward establishment of a wartime economy, large 
tax increases, bigger deficit loans, elimination of 
parliamentary influence in government, suppression 
sell of labor unions and left-wing groups, and the silenc- 

York| ing of all opposition. Dissensions reported at this 
time among Japan’s ruling groups concern the tempo 
at which the invasion of China should be prosecuted 
rather than the general issue of whether the war 
should be continued. 


cal, af. 
ence of 





tion of 
States 
an ex 
and ex- 
s. 


New The relative speed of the continental advance 


has been the cssentia! issue of the bitter politicc! 
struggle waged in Japan since September 1931, when 
its leaders decided to seek a solution of the country’s 
economic problems by a program of military expan- 
sion instead of internal reform. During the early 
years of this period the army extremists forced the 
pace of territorial expansion, but within economic 
limits set mainly by Finance Minister Takahashi 
and the moderate business groups which supported 
his conservative fiscal policies. The assassination of 
Takahashi, in the course of the military uprising at 
Tokyo on February 26, 1936, brought this epoch to a 
(lose. As a result of the abortive coup d’état, the 
army extremists were temporarily relegated to the 
background. New leaders, notably Generals Terauchi 
and Sugiyama, took over the reins of control in the 
army. Eschewing the methods of assassination and 
coup d’état, they nevertheless sought to continue the 


d Com 
Jniver- 


> direc 
Peace, 
nerical 


Samud 
$5.00 

7, COM 
sionally 
lations 
thrusts 
1s mis 
-inenta 
Japan 
———— 
Nationd 
ss matte 





and Mazaki, had frightened Japan’s business and 
financial leaders, who had quietly prevented the 
attainment of the extremists’ objectives in relation to 
domestic affairs, both political and economic. 


By early 1936 an almost unnoticed change in 
Japan’s economy, resulting mainly from the imcreas- 
ing budgetary expenditures for military and naval 
armaments, had laid the groundwork for a rapid 
advance toward an authoritarian régime. Japan’s 
business and financial world had been dominated 
traditionally by the light industries in the Osaka 
area, featured by textiles. These merchants and in- 
dustrialists, joined with the financial leaders of the 
great banking houses, were dependent on an un- 
interrupted flow of international trade to facilitate 
expansion of their export markets. Unless the risks 
and attendant losses were negligible, they hesitated 
to embark on outright conquest of new markets by 
military force. Their program of peaceful interna- 
tional cooperation reached fullest expression during 
the decade of the twenties, when leaders such as 
Wakatsuki, Shidehara, Hamaguchi and Inouye 
dominated a series of Minseito governments. After 
September 1931, they had at best fought a rear-guard 
action through Takahashi and other moderate states- 
men. By 1936 the balance of power in Japan’s busi- 
ness circles was swinging toward the heavy indus- 
tries. New industrial giants, such as the Nissan in- 
terests dominated by Gisuke Aikawa, which special- 
izes mainly in mining and machinery, were coming 
to the fore. In the older firms, such as Mitsui and 
Mitsubishi, the heavy industries have been similarly 
favored, and their influence in the parent financial 
centers has correspondingly increased. In general, 
the proportionate share of Japan’s production taken 

















by the munitions industries, mining, metallurgy, 
chemicals and ship-building, had steadily increased 
up to 1936, and this evolution carried forward at a 
much faster rate in 1936 and 1937. 


These industrial magnates were naturally disposed 
to favor the army’s program of war and territorial 
expansion. With the advent of the somewhat less 
extreme military leaders in the Hirota Cabinet of 
March 1936, the heavy industrialists were disposed 
to strike hands with the army on a much more thor- 
oughgoing program of war preparation. The Baba 
budget, framed by the Hirota Cabinet, increased 
military appropriations by nearly half a billion yen. 
In the succeeding government Toyotaro Yuki, the 
Finance Minister, assisted by Mr. Seihin Ikeda as 
governor of the Bank of Japan, worked out the de- 


tailed application of the Baba budget in the form’ 


of a vast expansion of productive capacity in the field 
of heavy industry. The willingness of these men, who 
were closely linked with Mitsui and other leading 
banking houses, to foster a ‘‘semi-wartime economy” 
was significant of the direction of Japan’s evolution. 
In 1937, along with direct expenditures on the war 
in China, there was the largest capital investment in 
munitions and allied war industries of any recent 
year in Japanese history. 


Until the beginning of the war in China, there had 
been a fairly important liberal opposition composed 
of the conservative business groups, the parties, and 
the general public. This opposition managed to delay 
the application of certain aspects of the new army 
program, both under Premiers Hirota and Hayashi. 
In the latter Cabinet, for a brief interval, Foreign 
Minister Sato even sought to revive the principles of 
a more liberal foreign policy. The trend of develop- 
ment within Japan’s economy, however, had under- 
cut the possibility of any prolonged essay in this 
direction. Premier Hayashi’s blunt attack on parlia- 
mentarism, and particularly the effort to suppress 
party participation in the government, led to general 
Opposition and a political impasse following the 
election of April 30, 1937. His tactics were recog- 
nized as a blunder, and the resulting difficulties were 
cleverly overcome by the organization of a ‘‘national 
union” Cabinet, dominated by reactionaries under 
Premier Konoye, in June. When the war with China 
was started in July, the remaining political opposi- 
tion to the army program was speedily run to cover. 


Although observers in Japan noted a marked lack 
of popular enthusiasm during the initial phases 
of the war in July, this attitude rapidly changed 
when the avalanche of press, radio, and other forms 
of propaganda began to deluge the Japanese public. 
The man in the street soon learned to accept the of- 
ficial claims that Japan was “establishing peace in 
East Asia,” “saving China from Bolshevism,” “free- 


Page Twe —.. 








—— 


ing the Chinese people from misrule’’ and “chastis. 
ing the wicked Nanking government.” Such oppogi- 
tion as continued to exist was isolated and forced to 
remain silent. At the top the reactionary wing of 
Japan’s ruling circles became more and more promj- 
nent. The organization in October of a Cabinet 
Advisory Council, including such extremists as 
General Araki and Admiral Suetsugu, was followed 
on November 20 by the establishment of an Im. 
perial Headquarters, which emphasized the dominant 
role of the military-naval leaders in the conduc 
of the China war. Re-emergence of the extremist 
army-navy leaders in positions of high authority was 
a notable feature of the closing months of 1937, 


Admiral Suetsugu, in the middle of December, was 
advanced from the Advisory Council to the post of 
Home Minister, and immediately instituted a round. 
up of labor union and left-wing leaders. He is 
prominently mentioned as a candidate for the 


Premiership, while General Araki is believed wo be 
again in line for Cabinet office. 


This political evolution goes hand in hand with 
the extraordinary growth of the war industries in 
Japan, and the rapid progress toward a controlled 
economy. The conquest of China, if and when com- 
pleted, will find Japan in the grip of a powerfully 
entrenched minority, whose energies and aims are 
mainly bent on war. If success in China is complete, 
the accruing strength to Japan will not improbably 
be diverted to larger fields, say the British territories 
in the Far East, or an attack on the U.S.S.R. This 
disaster can be averted, if at all, only by converting 
the war in China into an effective set-back to Japan's 
dominant reactionary clique. By sending war sup- 
plies to China, organizing a widespread consumers 
boycott of Japanese goods and, if necessary as a last 
resort, establishing an official embargo on trade with 
Japan, the Western democracies have : thei 
power to defeat the ultimate objectives ot 
militarists. The risks of such action are much \ 
than the risks entailed by a Japanese victory in Chin: 
Unless such measures are adopted, in sufficientl 
drastic form to halt Japanese aggression, the United 
States is likely to find a policy of neutrality and iso- 
lation as ineffective as it was in 1914-1917. 


KING FAROUK DROPS HIS PILOT 





The troubled history of constitutional government 
in Egypt reached another dramatic climax on Decem-| 
ber 30, 1937, when 18-year-old King Farouk sum- 
marily dismissed the cabinet of Mustapha Nahas 
Pasha, leader of the Wafd (Nationalist party), 
which has long maintained a large parliamentaty 
majority. King Farouk then authorized the forma 
tion of a cabinet under Mohamed Mahmoud 
Pasha, former Premier and veteran leader of the 


(Continued on Page 4) 





—= 


astis- 
POs 
ed to 
ig of 
romi- 
ibinet 
tS as 
owed 
1 Im- 
inant 
Nduct 
remist 
y was 
1937, 
r, Was 
ost of 
‘ound. 
He is 
r the 
to De 


1 with 
‘ies in 
rolled 
1 COM- 
erfully 
ns are 
nplete, 
obably 
ritories 
.. This 
verting 
Japan's 
it Sup- 
umers’ 
; a last 
le with 
1 their 
Japan s 
CD Less 
China 
iciently 
United 
nd iso- 





rnment | 
Decem: | 


k sum 
Nahas 
party); 
nentaty 
forma: 
ahmoud 
of the 





Washington News Letter 


ae 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JANUARY 10—No section of President Roosevelt’s 
annual Budget Message excited more comment in 
Congressional cloakrooms last week than his warn- 
ing that “future events which today cannot definitely 
be foretold” may compel the Administration to pre- 
sent a new and extensive rearmament program. While 
Mr. Roosevelt sought to avoid the word “rearma- 
ment’ he left no doubt of his meaning when he 
said, “I refer specifically to the possibility that due 
to world conditions over which this nation has no 
control, | may find it necessary to request additional 
appropriations for national defense.” Yet despite 
this warning, few Congressmen were prepared for 
the series of new developments which now thrusts 
the armament program into the forefront of debate 
on American foreign policy. These developments 
include: 


1. A decision to send a Presidential message to 
Congress recommending adoption of a bill au- 
thorizing additional naval construction and a 20 
per cent increase in naval appropriations for 1939. 


2. Approval by the Maritime Commission of “the 
largest peacetime shipbuilding program in the 
history of the American merchant marine,” 
through long-term subsidy agreements calling for 
immediate construction of 20 ocean-going ves- 
sels and completion of plans for 23 more, in 
addition to arrangements previously made for 
construction of 12 large freighters and 12 high- 
speed tankers, convertible to navy use—the whole 
program totaling approximately 185 million 

3. Revival of plans, tentatively shelved last Novem- 
ber, for additional armament spending to meet 
the business recession. 


4. Intensification of the Administration campaign to 
educate public opinion on the urgent necessity 
for powerful armaments to support a “positive” 
American foreign policy based on defense of na- 
tional interests and cooperative action to uphold 
respect for international obligations. New evidence 
of the campaign is found in the speech of Secretary 
of War Harry Woodring at Kansas City on 
January 7, prepared with the careful assistance 
of the State Department, and emphasizing the 
need for a united front of democratic nations as a 
bulwark of world peace. 


. The “additional appropriations” for national de- 
fense, when they come, will pyramid the largest 
defense budget since the World War, and will con- 
tinue rather than initiate the process of rearmament. 
As recently as four years ago (fiscal year 1934) mili- 
tary and naval expenditures totaled 540 million 
dollars. Two years ago (1936) they had risen to 
820 million—an increase of approximately 50 per 
cent—while last year they had reached 923 million. 
The estimates submitted last week for the fiscal year 
1939 place direct army and navy expenditures at 
991.3 million, but do not include general public 
works expenditures for military purposes. Adding 
these items, the “normal’’ outlay for the coming year 
reaches the record total of $1,013,677,400—almost 
double the defense figure four years ago, and virtu- 
ally equal to the total amount allocated to unem- 
ployment relief for 1939. Competent observers here 
estimate that the minimum program now under con- 
sideration will add from 100 to 200 million dollars 
to next year’s budget, and probably double the pres- 
ent rate of expenditure by 1941. 


Rejection of the Ludlow amendment on Janu- 
ary 10 by a vote of 209 to 188 will pave the way for 
early consideration of the first of the armament 
measures. While Administration leaders hail the 
action of the House as endorsement of the Presi- 
dent’s foreign policy, the closeness of the vote indi- 
cates continued debate on the objectives of American 
foreign policy. 

WILLIAM T. STONE 


New move in Haitian-Dominican controversy. 
Washington officials have been disturbed at the slow 
pace of negotiations on the dispute between the two 
republics. A meeting of the conciliation commission 
has been delayed by absence of one of the Dominican 
delegates, Roberto Despradel. He was reported held 
in Havana by sickness, but a telephone call to his 
home put through by an enterprising newspaperman 
indicated that his illness was merely “diplomatic.” 
Suspicion that the Dominican government was de- 
liberately delaying an investigation of the recent 
massacres of Haitians led to a demand for action 
presented by the Haitian government to the three- 
man, permanent diplomatic committee. This body 
has cited representatives of both countries to meet in 
Washington on January 14. The recent announce- 
ment by the Dominican President, General Trujillo, 











T mamnen 
cea 








that he would not run in the coming Presidential 
campaign, has been interpreted by some observers as 
a move to undercut foreign criticism of his dictatorial 


régime. C.A.T. 


KING FAROUK DROPS HIS PILOT 
(Continued from Page 2) 


Liberal Constitutional party, and prorogued Parlia- 
ment for one month. When Dr. Ahmad Maher, a 
member of the Wafd and speaker of the Chamber 
of Deputies, attempted to read the royal order of 
suspension, Nahas and the Wafdists tried to obtain 
a vote of no-confidence in the new minority govern- 
ment, and uproar ensued. Dr. Maher and many of 
his followers were immediately expelled from the 
Wafd, which has been severely weakened by the in- 
ternal conflict over the leadership of Nahas. 


The bitter conflict between Palace and Parliament 
was inherited by King Farouk from his father, King 
Fuad, whose firm rule had alternated between de- 
crees and constitutions from 1917 until his death in 
1936. Since he mounted the throne last July, fol- 
lowing a short regency, King Farouk has constantly 
struggled with the Wafd for control of policy. The 
Nahas majority sought to change the army oath from 
a pledge of loyalty to “King and Country” to “King 
and Constitution,’ and introduced a constitutional 
amendment requiring a Cabinet without a parlia- 
mentary majority to call a general election. Charging 
that both measures were designed merely to damage 
his prestige by implying the possibility of dictator- 





Page Four — 





———es 


ship, the King, in retaliation, attempted to outlaw 
the Blue Shirts, a Wafd youth organization. The 
Blue Shirts had been formed in 1935 by university 
students and young intellectuals, who later with. 
drew to attack the Nahas régime on grounds of cor. 
ruption and nepotism. Charging that the Wafd had 
recently rebuilt the Blue Shirts into a quasi-military 
organization which endangered parliamentary goy. 
ernment, the King demanded their abolition. The 
situation has been exacerbated by religious and social 
controversies, for King Farouk has given unwonted 
support to the Moslem faith. 


Although the crisis thus far has involved only do- 
mestic issues, the uncertainty of Anglo-Italian rela- 
tions in the Mediterranean gives it international 
significance. To contradict reports of Italian influ. 
ence in his new Cabinet, Premier Mahmoud declared 
his adherence to the British alliance. When Egypt 
achieved statehood in 1936—gaining an agreement 
with foreign powers for the gradual disappearance 
of the historic capitulations, and entering the League 
of Nations in 1937— Britain pledged assistance 
in case of war. A British military mission is aiding 
the reorganization of Egyptian defenses, and addi- 
tional anti-aircraft troops, numbering about 1000 
men, were dispatched from England last week. Asa 
check to Italian propaganda, Britain is expanding its 
short-wave broadcasts throughout the Moslem world. 
Meanwhile, the safety of the Suez Canal causes the 
British to view political instability in Egypt with 


great anxiety. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Nutrition—The Relation of Nutrition to Health, Agricul- 
ture and Economic Policy: Final Report of the Mixed 
Committee of the League of Nations. Geneva, League 
of Nations, 1937. $2.50 


This study, which emphasizes human welfare rather than 
profits, should interest every one concerned with social and 
international problems. It concludes that “as a result of 
insufficient purchasing power, or as a result of the im- 
perfect distribution of resources between food and other 
objects of expenditures, or through ignorance of food 
values or carelessness and indifference, or as a result of 
the maintenance of food prices at levels involving hard- 
ships to large sections of the community, or other causes, 
millions of people in all parts of the globe are either suf- 
fering from inadequate physical development or from 
disease due to malnutrition or are living in a state of sub- 
normal health which could be improved if they consumed 
more or different food. That this situation can exist in a 
world in which agricultural resources are so abundant 
and the arts of agriculture have been so improved that 
supply frequently tends to outstrip effective demand re- 
mains an outstanding challenge to constructive statesman- 
ship and international cooperation.” 


Journalist’s Wife, by Lilian T. Mowrer. New York, Mor- 
row, 1937. $3.50 


The wife of Edgar Mowrer, Chicago Daily News cor- 
respondent best known for his work on Germany, gives 
an interesting and often moving account of post-war 
Europe as she and her husband saw it from Rome, Berlin, 
Geneva and Paris. The best chapters are those dealing 
with the German theatre before Hitler, which Mrs. Mowrer 
reviewed for an English newspaper, and those on the rise 
of Fascism in Italy. 


The Defense of the Empire, by Norman Angell. New 
York, Appleton-Century, 1937. $2.00 


A noted British publicist castigates the old-line conserva- 
tives and the conservative press of his country for their 
support of a short-sighted international policy which has 
wrecked the League, encouraged fascist adventures, and 
thus placed British imperial security itself in jeopardy. For 
its own self-interest as well as the peace of the world, Brit- 
ain is urged to support equitable concessions to the have- 
not states and an ironclad alliance against aggression. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 12, January 14, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Leste BUELL, President; VERA MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 





F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 
Entered as second-class mattet 





|<] 


wm Set Oe oe OO 


—_—_ a on sate 2. De 


