
































a, APR 30-1040 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN Entered as second- 
7 An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff UNIV, OF MICH. class mater December 
- Subscription, Two Dollars a Year pg wo) p Moe sre 
4 FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated APR 29 1940 ST pall ae 
a 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Y LIBRARIAN'S OFFICE 
| You. XIX, No. 27 APRIL 26, 1940 
haat wi11i i. Bisho 
th | Can the Hull program function during and after the war? br. WiLliows , 
1s | Have reciprocal agreements helped U.S. foreign trade? % University of Wichigan Library 
3 SIX YEARS OF AMERICAN TARIFF eae et 
< BARGAINING by David H. Popper ccapetinaieteinar 
ize 
of 25¢ 
April 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 
a — = =. 
a} THE EAST INDIES~JAPANESE BARGAINING POINT? 
rn- 
he Sag growing interaction between the European commodities, he declared: “Intervention in the do- 
ent | * and Far Eastern conflicts was clearly illustrated — mestic affairs of the Netherlands Indies or any alter- 
an | during the past week, when Tokyo expressed its ation of their status quo by other than peaceful 
his | concern over the effects Holland’s possible entrance processes would be prejudicial to the cause of stabil- 
nd | into the war might have on the status of the Nether- ity, peace and security not only in the region of the 
lands Indies. Immediate rejoinders from Washing- Netherlands Indies but in the entire Pacific area.” 
lic | ton and The Hague indicated, in turn, the concern = This declaration was supported by reference to the 
ace | felt by these capitals over Japan’s intentions regard- Four-Power Pact of 1921, under which Japan had 
by ing the Netherlands Indies, but did little to clarify agreed to respect the integrity of the Netherlands’ 
ty | the probable course of developments in this rich and insular possessions in the Pacific. In conclusion, Mr. 
tp | strategic colonial area.* Hull stated that it was the hope of the American 
in| STATEMENTS UNDERLINE “STATUS QUO.” government, “as it is no doubt that of all peace- 
ent} On April 15 Hachiro Arita, Japanese Foreign Min- fully inclined governments," that fundamental prin- 
uld | ister, requested that the Netherlands Ambassador ciples such as “the faithful observance of treaty 
red | transmit to The Hague a statement concerning the pledges” should govern “the attitudes and policies 
e.”| Netherlands Indies. After lengthy Cabinet confer- of all governments,” and “be applied not only in 
ind | ences at Tokyo, this statement was formally issued every part of the Pacific area, but also in every part 
on. | 02 April 16. The Arita declaration, apparently in- of the world.” ' 
og. tended as a warning to the Western powers, stated While official circles in Tokyo greeted this state- 
en. | that Japan, as well as “other countries of East Asia,” ment with considerable reserve, the Japanese press 
en | Maintained “close economic relations” with the did not manifest similar restraint. The Foreign Of- 
‘ns | Netherlands Indies. Should extension of European fice contented itself with circulating a reply from 
ish | hostilities to the Netherlands “produce repercus- The Hague, indicating that in case the Netherlands 
its | Sions” in the islands, the statement continued, it became involved in the European war it would 
ing would not only interfere with these relations but neither _fequest nor accept aid from any power in 
en. | Would also “give rise to an undesirable situation protecting the East Indies. On April 19, after an 
2eq | from the standpoint of peace and stability in East interview with Secretary Hull, the Japanese Ambas- 
as. | Asia. In view of these considerations, the Japanese sador, Kensuke Horinouchi, disclaimed any “special 
of | government cannot but be deeply concerned over interest of Japan in the East Indies and stated that 
he | *ty development accompanying the aggravation of Japan was “satisfied” with the Dutch statement. 
mi | tte war in Europe that may affect the status quo of SIGNIFICANCE OF THE DIPLOMATIC EX- 
on. | the Netherlands East Indies.” CHANGE. Taking these statements at their face 
Secretary Hull immediately issued a vigorous value, it would appear that Japan intended to 
cir | “i0inder on April 17. After referring to the Neth- “smoke out” the Western powers—especially the 
ess | “lands Indies’ importance in world trade and to United States, which is in the strongest position to 
ter | te substantial dependence of many countries, in- oppose Japanese moves at this time. Having found 
the | ‘“luding the United States, on some of the islands’ that these powers do not intend to place the Neth- 
— | +, th ey. : erlands Indies in “‘protective custody,” Japan has 
Reports, November 13, 1939, 0% in Southeast Asia.” Foreign Policy thus achieved its object, and is content for the pres- 








aermes 


Soe en ee 














ent. The Western powers, however, apparently fear 
that Japan may be staking out a claim to the rich 
Dutch possessions, to be made good at some later 
time. A Japanese attack on the islands in the im- 
mediate future may be dismissed as unlikely, since it 
would hardly be preceded by an announcement on 
the part of Japan’s diplomats. 

The difficulties of such an undertaking, in any 
case, are much more formidable than is generally 
realized. There is a temptation to view the operation 
as involving merely a sudden Japanese naval descent 
on the islands, followed by their speedy occupation 
and effective exploitation. In reality the problem is 
far more complicated. A large-scale military-naval 
expedition would be required, and would place a 
heavy additional strain on Japan’s overburdened 
shipping. The nearest Japanese base, Formosa, lies 
1,000 miles north of Borneo—a distance which 
would preclude the possibility of unexpected attack 
and minimize the advantages of surprise. Expert ob- 
servers are by no means convinced that an effective 
occupation of any large section of the islands would 
be easily achieved. The Netherlands Indies are far 
too strategic an area to become a pawn in a game 
of appeasement. Such Anglo-French forces as are 
available, and possibly Australian troops, would 
come to the assistance of the Dutch authorities. 
Should the attack nevertheless meet with speedy 
success, it is unlikely that the oil wells—the chief 
prize—would be left intact. The wells are mined, 


and would undoubtedly be destroyed before being 
abandoned. 


On the diplomatic front, meanwhile, Japan would 
have risked serious dangers. The possibility of an 
agreement with Britain and France, on which Jap- 
anese diplomacy is now counting, would be lost. In 
the case of the United States, Japan would risk 


EUROPE’S COURSE HINGES ON NORWAY STRUGGLE 


As reports of the conflict in Norway begin to filter 
out from Allied, Scandinavian and German sources, 
three main points emerge from the welter of news 
and conjecture. First, the Allies have not yet cut 
off the flow of men and supplies from Germany to 
southern Norway, where the Germans are seeking 
to become entrenched. Second, the Allies, under 
cover of their fleet, supported by frequent air raids 
on the German base at Stavanger, have succeeded 
in landing considerable forces at several points along 
the Norwegian coast, notably Namsos north, and 
Andalsnes south, of Trondheim, which the Allies 
are trying to encircle. There is thus a possibility that 
the Allies may establish a northern front which, if 
extended into Sweden, might bar Germany from 
access to the Swedish iron ore mines at Kiruna and 
Gallivare. If the Nazis suffer reverses, they may be 


Page Two 








————, 
—, 


application of an embargo, if not more direct opp 
sition. Finally, Japan would have exposed its north, 
ern flank to the Soviet Union. 


A BARGAINING POINT? These various factops 
suggest that the costs of an attack on the Nether 
lands Indies might far exceed the gains. On th 
other hand, it remains true that the Japanese nay 
is the most formidable striking force within ran 
of the islands. The Western powers, especially Bri. 
ain and France, are not anxious to be called upoy 
to assist in the defense of the Dutch possessions 
and the American public would perhaps disapproy 
of intervention in their behalf. Japan may thus fed 
that it commands a bargaining point of some value 
by keeping the issue of the Netherlands Indies 
the fore. Foreign Minister Arita’s recent statement, 
it should be recalled, was preceded on February 1) 
by Tokyo’s formal denunciation of the Netherlands 
Japan arbitration treaty. Both moves might wel 
be interpreted as a bid for concessions elsewhere. At 
present Japan is mainly intent on achieving some 
de facto arrangement with the Western powers re 
garding China—a result that might be furthered by 
a Japanese pledge of non-interference with the Neth 
erlands Indies. Tokyo’s nuisance value as regards 
the Netherlands Indies is considerable, and should 
perhaps claim a price. Will the price be paid by the 
Western powers at the expense of China? 

Again, the attitude of the United States is see 
to be crucial. An agreement between the Anglo 
French coalition and Japan could become effective 
only with the acquiescence of the United States 
So long as this country continues to supply the 
major portion of Japan’s imports of war materials, 
the possibility of a comprehensive Far Eastern a 
rangement at China’s expense remains open. 


T. A. Bisson 


the first to invade Sweden. Third, and perhaps mos 
important for the future course of the European wat, 
the aid extended by the Allies to Norway, and the 
fact that Germany, for the first time, appears to be 
suffering at least a partial setback, may alter the 
balance of forces on the continent in favor of France 
and Britain. 

STRUGGLE AGAINST NAZI “FIFTH COL 
UMNS.” During the past week Europe has beet 
flooded with rumors of impending attacks by Ger 
many on Hungary and the Low Countries, and bj 
Italy on Yugoslavia and Greece. These rumors, what 
ever their truth, have played an important part if 
that war of threats and propaganda by which Hitle 
has so far won his major successes with a minimu® 
expenditure of men and material. A German invé 
sion of the Low Countries or the Balkans woul 











po 
rth. 


tots 


lavy 
Nge 
Srit. 


rove 
fee! 
alue 
S to 
ent, 
By 
nds. 
well 


ome 
» fe 


‘eth. 
ards 


ould 


glo- 
tive 
ates. 

the 
ials, 
\ at: 


Most 
wat, 
| the 
o be 

the 
ance 


bee 
Ger: 
1 by 
yhat: 
rt i 
itlet 
num 
nve 


ould 








eR 
ee 


indicate that the Nazis had despaired of imposing 
their demands on neutrals by methods short of 
force. Among such methods, none have been so 
calculated to demoralize Germany's intended vic- 
tims as the activities of German ‘fifth columns,” 
reported from Holland, Belgium, Sweden, Hungary, 
Rumania and Yugoslavia. 

By publicizing acts of so-called “treachery” on 
the part of some Norwegians, the Nazi press warned 
neighboring neutrals against the danger of such 
methods, and caused them to adopt precautionary 
measures. On April 19 a state of siege was pro- 
daimed in Holland, where the Nazi party headed 
by the engineer Anton Mussert is said to enjoy 
some support among army officers. Sweden, which 
has announced the intention to defend its neutrality, 
imposed drastic restrictions on aliens. In Hungary 
Premier Paul Teleki, who still hopes to resist Ger- 
man domination with the aid of Italy, threatened 
on April 16 to dissolve Parliament if members of 
his party should join the pro-German Nazi group. 
In Rumania King Carol, while continuing to release 
members of the Iron Guard, previously banned for 
pro-Nazi activities, sought to form a united politi- 
cal front. In Yugoslavia former Premier Stoyadi- 
novitth—known as a warm supporter of Germany 
and Italy—was arrested on April 18 on the charge 
that he had been plotting to overthrow the gov- 
ernment with the aid of German Nazis, who have 
been active among Yugoslavia’s 500,000 Germans. 
If pro-Nazi elements could score even temporary 
successes in Norway, where they formed an infinitesi- 
mal proportion of the population, and where in- 
ternal conflicts had been reduced to a minimum, it 
would be dangerous to underestimate the inroads 
of Nazi propaganda in countries like Rumania and 
Yugoslavia, chronically afflicted with political and 
economic problems. 


ITALY’S HOUR OF DECISION. Meanwhile, in 
Italy, the press continued to voice contradictory 
opinions which may reflect a tug of war between two 
opposing views regarding the country’s future course. 
One view, which is said to have the support of the 
King, the army and the Vatican, as well as of mod- 
erate Fascists, favors continuance of the present pol- 
icy of “‘non-belligerency.”” The other, more dynamic 
view, is that favored by pro-German Fascists, and 
voiced in Count Ciano’s organ, the Leghorn 
Telegrafo, which advocates Italy's entrance into the 
war as the ally of an allegedly victorious Germany. 
Behind the barrage of Italian press attacks on the 
Allies, efforts are apparently being made by France 
and Britain both to conciliate Mussolini and to warn 





Page Three 








him of the dangers Italy will face if it enters the 
war. While Britain’s Economic War Minister, Ron- 
ald Cross, demanded “plain speaking” from Italy 
on April 17, Premier Reynaud on April 20 stated 
that France was willing to settle its differences with 
Italy, and considered a Mediterranean entente with 
Italy and Spain as one of the indispensable bases 
of peace. 


It would be an illusion to believe that Mussolini, 
who expects to benefit by the break-up of the British 
and French empires, could adopt a pro-Ally policy; 
but neither is his policy primarily pro-German. It is 
first and foremost pro-Italian. Mussolini still hopes 
to achieve his ambitions without sacrificing either 
men or material by actual participation in a war 
for which neither Italy's army nor its economy is 
prepared, and which might conceivably undermine 
his own power. His ambitions include special rights 
for Italians in Tunisia, over which France has had 
a protectorate since 1861; a free port in French 
Djibouti on the Red Sea, which used to serve as 
the principal outlet for the trade of Ethiopia before 
that country was conquered by Italy in 1936; and a 
share in the management of the Suez Canal, now 
operated by a private company controlled by French 
and British stockholders.* The frantic threats and 
warnings that have been coming from Rome since 
Germany's invasion of Norway may be intended to 
force concessions on these points from France and 
Britain. A diplomatic triumph is particularly desir- 
able for Italy at a moment when it appears as if 
Russia, with the acquiescence of Germany, may be 
on the point of drawing into its orbit Yugoslavia 
and Bulgaria, long considered by Italy as part of 
its sphere of influence in the Balkans. 


Russia, the other great ‘“non-belligerent,” has 
meanwhile expressed the desire to reopen trade 
negotiations with Britain regarding exchange of So- 
viet timber for Empire rubber and tin and British 
machinery, which had been interrupted by the out- 
break of the Soviet-Finnish war. The chief obstacle 
to these negotiations — Russia's re-export to Ger- 
many of raw materials, notably copper, that it has 
been purchasing in the United States—is minimized 
by the Soviet press, which has adopted a more con- 
ciliatory tone toward the Allies since Germany's 
invasion of Norway. Russia, like Italy, is following 
a foreign policy determined not by sympathy for 
either Germany or the Allies, but by its own national 
interests. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


*Cf. V. M. Dean, “‘Italy’s African Claims Against France,’’ Foreign Policy 
Reports, June 1, 1939. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 27, Aprit 26, 1940. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lager, Secretary; Vera MicueLes Dean, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Br 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 


















WASHINGTON BUREAU 

National Press Building 

Apr. 22.—Some indication of the perplexing 

problems created by events in Europe and the Far 

East was furnished last week when the statement 

of Foreign Minister Arita expressing concern over 

the maintenance of the status quo in the Dutch East 

Indies brought a quick reply from Secretary Hull 

at a moment when Washington was weighing the 
outcome of the decisive struggle in Europe. 


IMPENDING ISSUES. One impending question 
is whether those responsible for American foreign 
policy are prepared to take positive action in the 
Pacific so long as the outcome of the war in Europe 
remains uncertain. Last week, the promptness with 
which Mr. Hull moved to clarify the position of the 
United States in relation to the Dutch East Indies 
was interpreted in some quarters as a hardening of 
American policy in the Pacific. To most Washing- 
ton observers, however, this conclusion appeared to 
be premature. While reaffirming the basic principles 
of non-intervention and emphasizing international 
interests (rather than “national” interests cited by 
Mr. Arita), the Secretary was careful to remain 
within the limits of previous declarations of policy. 
Moreover, the studied phrasing of Mr. Hull’s state- 
ment to the press suggested an effort to forestall 
any development which might lead to a crisis in the 
Far East, rather than a move to implement a positive 
program of action. 


This interpretation is strengthened by the obvious 
concern with which officials are following the course 
of events in Europe. On the basis of initial reports 
from the Norwegian front, informed military ob- 
servers took a grave view of the strategic situation 
confronting the Allies in Scandinavia. Some of the 
first pessimistic estimates were modified by later re- 
ports confirmed in Washington, and the successful 
landing of Allied forces north and south of Trond- 
heim was interpreted here as increasing the chances 
of creating a northern front. In some quarters this 
accomplishment was regarded as convincing evi- 
dence of the ability of sea power to defend Allied 
lines of communication against Nazi air power. 
Nevertheless, most officials are reluctant to draw 
final conclusions at this stage. Washington opinion 
continues uncertain about the outcome in Scandi- 
navia, and apprehensive about the réle of Italy in 
the Mediterranean. 


This uncertainty, in turn, poses another difficult 
question which may soon become more pressing 
During the first stage of the war in Europe, Pres. 
dent Roosevelt, with much difficulty, found it pos. 
sible to reconcile the dual objectives of his foreign 
policy. As long as the conflict remained localized 
and inactive in the West, the President was able tp 
assure aid to Britain and France by all measure 
“short of war” without appearing to jeopardize his 
second avowed objective—the maintenance of tech. 
nical neutrality. From September 1 to mid-April, 
the Executive branch of the government proceeded 
on the assumption that economic and financial aid 
to the Allies would be sufficient to assure the defeat 
of Germany, or at least to prevent an Allied defeat, 
And as long as this assumption appeared tenable, 
the Executive policy was unlikely to alarm a Con. 
gress committed to strict neutrality and non-inter- 
vention. Once the assumption begins to be ques 
tioned, however, the situation will be altered. For 
if and when Congress begins to doubt the ability 
of the Allies to win the war without the military 
assistance of the United States, the Executive will 
be faced with a hard decision. Under such condi. 
tions, it will be difficult for any government in 
power in Washington to.avoid a choice between 
supporting the Allies regardless of the risk involved, 
or completely abstaining from the conflict regardless 
of the outcome in Europe. 


Whether this issue will come to a head before 
the fall elections depends largely on the turn of 
events in Europe and the Far East. Last week—for 
the first time since early September—W ashington 
was buzzing with speculation about the date of 
American entry into the war. For the most part, this 
was irresponsible gossip, disavowed by political 
leaders and government officials. But such talk, even 
though irresponsible, accurately reflects the new 
doubts and uncertainties raised by the decisive period 
which may lie ahead. 


For the present the Administration and its critic 
are playing safe. Several Republican candidates are 
sounding a stronger isolationist note, but without 
risking a direct challenge to the President on the 
issue of foreign policy. Mr. Roosevelt, while de 
fending his record, is cautious in dealing with 
Europe and is making no new commitments in Asia. 
But the central issues remain. 


W. T. STONE 











