— 


1 Pow. 
e non- 
revent 
ces of 
Jecem- 
In the 
. three 
n them 
war by 
nt and 
by the 
ort of 
+t with 
y and 
. Nor 
of the 
which 
WV hold- 


sum- 
\ovem- 
which 
ion in 
peace, 
.dopted 
rstand- 
ned ir- 
ffirmed 
refrain 
others; 
pains” 
s strin- 
th” for 
ed the 
ish me- 


Litherto 
non-in- 
shifted 
mn Min- 
nons to 
, speci- 
Soviet 
sted to 
idor in 
1 Rebel 
n from 
1e total 
12,000 
resent- 
int by 
tlement 
it leave 
Spanish 


DEAN 


National 
AN, Editor. 
Year. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Vou. XVI, No. 10 


JANUARY 1, 1937 


CREATING A PHILIPPINE COMMONWEALTH 
by David H. Popper 


This report discusses the constitution and govern- 
ment of the new Philippine Commonwealth; the politi- 
cal, economic and social problems it must face; and the 
significance of Philippine defense policy for the Com- 
monwealth and the United States. 


December 15 issue Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Dr. William W. Bishop 
‘ University 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


SETTLEMENT OF 


THE SIAN COUP 


ITH the release of Generalissimo Chiang 

Kai-shek on Christmas afternoon, China’s 
dramatic political crisis ended as abruptly as it 
had begun. Chiang’s triumph was graced by the 
return to Nanking of his erstwhile captor, Mar- 
shal Chang Hsueh-liang, as an official prisoner of 
the government. While no satisfactory explana- 
tion of these events has been vouchsafed by the 
Nanking authorities, it is possible to trace the 
outlines of a general political compromise in what 
has thus far occurred. 

The statements delivered at Nanking by Chiang 
Kai-shek and the Young Marshal seem to be the 
first moves in a carefully planned course of action, 
evidently decided upon during the negotiations at 
Sian. Chang Hsueh-liang’s abjectly worded sub- 
mission to the central authorities safeguards the 
prestige of the Nanking government, while Chiang 
Kai-shek’s declaration of responsibility for the 
incident may be considered an indirect plea for 
leniency to the government prisoner. Up to the 
present no punishment has been meted out to the 
Young Marshal, who is secluded in the Nanking 
residence of T. V. Soong, the principal intermedi- 
ary in the settlement. Even more important, 
Chiang’s statement tends to substantiate reports 
that government changes are in the offing. These 
may mean nothing more than a temporary rest 
cure for the Generalissimo; on the other hand, 
they may forecast replacement of Chiang Kai-shek 
by T. V. Soong as chairman of the Executive 
Yuan. The latter step would tend to shift govern- 
ment policy in the direction demanded by Chang 
Hsueh-liang, but would not necessarily give rise 
to fundamental changes. Chiang Kai-shek has 
been Premier for little more than a year; prior 
to 1936, his main governmental positions related 
almost solely to military affairs. 

Should a compromise of this nature be reached, 
it would indicate that the negotiations at Sian 
were largely concerned with the political issues 


originally raised by the Young Marshal. No evi- 
dence of any cash settlement has appeared, despite 
the rumors to this effect from Japanese and other 
sources since December 13. Chang’s crucial 
proposals had required a declaration of war on 
Japan and the readmission of the Communists 
into the Kuomintang. Although these demands 
could not be granted, their essential aim would 
be satisfied if Nanking stiffened its Japanese 
policy and relaxed its military operations against 
the Chinese Communists. T. V. Soong’s appoint- 
ment as Premier would tend to emphasize pre- 
cisely these ends. 

In the past, T. V. Soong has often been at odds 
with Chiang Kai-shek on the policies debated at 
Sian. His resignation as Finance Minister on 
October 29, 1933 was attributed partly to his 
anti-Japanese stand, and partly to his opposition 
to the large expenditures involved in Chiang Kai- 
shek’s anti-Communist campaigns. These factors, 
combined with his family relationship to the 
Generalissimo, made him an ideal mediator in the 
crisis precipitated by the Sian coup. As Premier 
he might be expected to exert his influence along 
the two lines suggested by Chang Hsueh-liang. 
In general, this would mean subordinating Chiang 
Kai-shek’s internal efforts at strengthening his 
dictatorship, which necessarily involve civil strife, 
to the task of protecting the country from Jap- 
anese aggression. While a formal united front 
between Nanking and the Chinese Communists 
would be unlikely, the possibility of a truce in 
this quarter would appear closer to realization 
under a cabinet headed by T. V. Soong. 

It remains to be seen whether these indications 
of a general political compromise are borne out 
by the actual course of developments. For the 
present, the release of Chiang Kai-shek has 
averted imminent, and possibly disastrous, in- 
ternal warfare. More even than before the Sian 
coup, Chiang’s voice remains decisive on both 


5¢ Miehigan Libr 


internal and external issues. The test of his for- 
eign policy is still in the north, where the victory 
of the Suiyuan provincial troops has created the 
immediate possibility of regaining Chahar and 
overthrowing Yin Ju-keng’s puppet régime in 
East Hopei. For this program, rapid and effec- 
tive aid from the central authorities at Nanking 


is required. T. A. BISSON 


BATISTA PULLS THE STRINGS 


The impeachment on December 24 of President 
Miguel Mariano Gémez, who had clashed with 
Colonel Fulgencio Batista, army chief, brought 
into the open the military dictatorship which has 
long ruled Cuba from behind the scenes. Another 
dictatorship may thus be added to the already large 
number of absolute governments in Latin Amer- 
ica. The governmental change, however, was 
carried through in strict accordance with consti- 
tutional norms. Gdémez was succeeded by Vice 
President Federico Laredo Bru, who selected a 
cabinet of men known to be amenable to the wishes 
of the military. 

The issue which precipitated the test of strength 
between Cuba’s civil and military powers con- 
cerned a bill to finance a program of army-con- 
trolled rural schools by a 9-cent tax on every bag 
of raw sugar produced in Cuba. Seven hundred 
of these schools are reported already established, 
and it is planned to increase their number even- 
tually to 3,000. When President Gémez vetoed 
this measure on the ground that “the Department 
of Education and not military institutions” should 
direct public instruction, the House of Represen- 
tatives promptly instituted impeachment proceed- 
ings. The President was faced with flimsy 
charges of “preventing the free functioning of 
the legislative power” and of “coercion of Con- 
gressmen.” In a defense statement Gémez 
termed the charges false and declared that they 
had been brought only because of “pressure from 
known sources.” 

Under Colonel Batista the armed forces have 
been doubled, and their support now absorbs a 
fourth of the national budget. The military have 
largely assumed the functions of the Public 
Works, Health, Education, Labor and Interior 
Departments and exercise dominant influence in 
other branches of the civil government. This po- 
sition of power and control of the spoils of office 
enabled Batista to command the votes of the great 
majority of Congressmen and Senators in all 
parties. A skillful propaganda campaign has 
sought to indoctrinate the Cuban masses with 
faith in the virtues of army rule. 

While Washington does not relish establishment 


Page Two 


LL 
Ls 


of a military dictatorship in Cuba, many observers 
view the present situation as largely the outcome 
of the Welles-Caffery policy in the island. Sumner 
Welles, when Ambassador in Havana, refused to 
sanction recognition of the liberal Grau Sap 
Martin government, the only régime since the 
fall of Machado which has been in a position 
successfully to challenge the growing dominance 
of the military. Jefferson Caffery, as Welles’ 
successor, displayed such public favor to Colonel] 
Batista as markedly to increase the influence of 
the army leader. In the present crisis United 
States capital in Cuba has been generally reported 
favorable to the cause of Batista. 


Will the army colonel soon supersede the Laredo 
Bru régime by an open dictatorship? Although 
apparently supreme, Batista is in reality only the 
leading figure in the junta of ex-sergeants who 
rose to power in September 1933. Pressure from 
other members of this group may push him into 
such action. Domestic opposition is as yet un- 
organized and chiefly underground. The United 
States has abrogated the Platt Amendment and 
is bound by anti-intervention pledges—only re- 
cently tightened at the Buenos Aires Conference— 
not to interfere in Cuba. Yet the island’s pros- 
perity remains vitally dependent on the sugar 
quota and duty reductions granted by Washing- 
ton. Unlike other absolute rulers in Latin Amer- 
ica, Colonel Batista must weigh carefully how 
far public opinion in the United States—possibly 
“enlightened” by beet-sugar interests and other 
rivals of Cuba in this country’s markets—will ap- 
prove continuance of trade concessions to a 
frankly dictatorial government. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


The Far Eastern Crisis, by Henry L. Stimson. New York, 
Harper, 1936. $3.50 


A valuable account of the Manchurian dispute by the 
former Secretary of State, urging the necessity of Amer- 
ican participation in collective action to prevent war. 
The Flight of an Empress, by Wu Yung. New Haven, Yale 

University Press, 1936. $2.50 

A fascinating account of the experiences of a Chinese 
magistrate who served the Empress Dowager during the 
flight from Peking in 1900. 


Under the Axe of Fascism, by Gaetano Salvemini. New 
York, Viking, 1936. $3.00 


The most penetrating critic of Mussolini’s régime offers 
an authoritative and trenchant analysis of Fascist methods 
and achievements. 


The Spanish Tragedy, by F. Allison Peers. 
Oxford University Press, 1936. $2.50 
A temperate history—with more understanding of con- 


servative than radical currents—of the five years preced- 
ing the present civil war. 


New York, 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 10, January 1, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesiie Burtt, President; Estuer G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MicHEtes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


FC 


An | 


|3| 


Janua 


| 


