











Entered as 4ag, a matter 


CONGRESS > 














FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation 


of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





VoL. XXIV, No. 10 


DECEMBER 22, 1944 





CRISIS IN EUROPE DEMANDS FURTHER DEFINITION OF U.S. POLICY 


"[ HE counteroffensive launched by the Germans on 
the Western front on December 16 will have had 
a salutary effect if it arouses the United Nations to 
the fact that by their bickerings about post-war ad- 
vantages they are doing their best to save Germany 
from defeat. So perturbed has public opinion become 
here and in Britain that if we are to keep our per- 
spective—and our temper—on both sides of the 
ocean we must bear in mind a few essential points. 


1. Two paramount issues are at stake at this stage 
of the war: the issue of how nations can best achieve 
security against future aggression, and the issue 
whether the end of hostilities will usher in res- 
toration of pre-1939 conditions or some kind of a 
better order. Those who have harped on the need of 
first winning the war, then talking about the politi- 
cal, economic and social maladjustments that brought 
it about, have proved consistently wrong. They could 
have been proved right only if it had been possible 
to keep the world in a state of suspended animation 
while military victory was being achieved. Instead, 
the world has been changing during the war with 
breath-taking rapidity, and what we face now are not 
Frankenstein nightmares but changes that could have 
been anticipated and were, in fact, anticipated by 
informed observers. 


2. Had more attention been paid to these changes 
by Allied statesmen, the proposals made at Dumbar- 
ton Oaks would have been considered long ago, and 
the skeleton of an international security system, how- 
ever tentative and imperfect, would have been created 
by now. In the absence of such an organization, 
which even at this zero hour is still on paper, every 
nation is seeking to assure its security as best it can 
by its own national efforts. What is disturbing about 
the Anglo-Russian alliance of 1942 and the Franco- 
Russian alliance of 1944, or about efforts of Britain 
and Russia to create blocs of “friendly” states in re- 
spective spheres of influence, is not that they are 


being made, but that there should have been so little 
else for Britain, France and Russia, not to speak of 
weaker nations, to hold on to as protection against 
future German aggression. 


3. The saddest feature of the situation is that 
every attempt by other nations to achieve security as 
best they can arouses reactions in this country that 
presage return to isolation—this time the isolation of 
an armed camp on the alert for danger from any 
quarter. American disillusionment with Europe is en- 
hanced by dismay that the liberated peoples are not 
more ‘‘grateful” to us, and by fear that war will leave 
in its wake poverty beyond our strength to alleviate. 

4. Asa matter of cold realism, there is no reason 
why the liberated peoples should be ‘‘grateful’” to the 
non-European powers—Britain, the United States and 
Russia. Of the three, Britain alone can be said to 
have had an interest in the fate of Europe from the 
outset of the war. The United States and Russia did 
not become directly concerned until they themselves 
were attacked in 1941. The best thing we can hope 
for is that the liberated peoples will feel that we are 
all fighting a common enemy in a common cause. 


5. Right there, however, a fundamental difficulty 
arises, for after the first hours of jubilation the 
peoples of Europe have begun to wonder whether we 
are all, in fact, fighting in a common cause and, if so, 
how that cause is defined in the United States. It so 
happens that the elements in the conquered countries 
who fought the Nazis most bitterly, and thus made a 
genuine contribution to the military effort of the 
Allies, are often also elements who favor certain in- 
ternal changes—moderate reforms in Western Eu- 
rope, drastic changes from feudalism to twentieth 
century conditions in Eastern Europe and the Balkans. 
Yet the Allies, in their natural desire for order be- 
hind military lines, sometimes tend to repress these 
elements, which they themselves armed, more vigor- 
ously than they do the pro-Fascists. 














believe that the return of governments-in-exile 
acceptable to the great powers will of itself end 
a revolutionary ferment born of hunger, misery and 
despair is to misinterpret tragically the temper of 
Europe. The British, as Mr. Churchill bluntly stated 
on December 15, are ready to forego the principle of 
legitimacy in Poland. They do so not because they 
necessarily prefer the Polish Committee of National 
Liberation, but because they have agreed to consider 
Poland as Russia's sphere of influence, and expect 
Russia will soon use Poland as a more direct route for 
the invasion of Germany than that offered by Hun- 
gary or Czechoslovakia. In Greece, which Russia 
agreed to regard as within Britain’s military sphere, 
Mr. Churchill is following the opposite course. In 
neither case has Britain clearly cast its lot on the side 
of the forces opposing all forms of Fascism—thus 
causing some anti-Fascists to make common cause 
with Russia. 

But whatever criticisms we may have of the policy 
of Britain and Russia, those two countries have at 
least made their political objectives reasonably clear. 
Mr. Churchill, however, is justified in asking (and 
doubtless the same question could be asked by Stalin) 
where the United States stands on these controversial 
questions. This country cannot be an active partici- 
pant in military operations, and yet disinterest itself 
in the political and psychological results of these 
operations. Our decisions today could turn the tide 
in Europe both on the issue of security and on internal 
post-war reforms in liberated countries. 

The statement on Poland made by Secretary of 
State Stettinius on December 18 recognizes that 
boundary questions (which are in essence security 
questions) in Europe cannot be postponed until the 
end of the war, but does not really come to grips with 
the Russo-Polish controversy. He declared that, “if a 
mutual agreement is reached by the United Nations 
directly concerned [regarding the future frontiers of 
Poland], this Government would have no objection 
to such an agreement which could make an essential 
contribution to the prosecution of the war against 


Page Two 

6. No responsible person favors anarchy behind 
the military lines of the Allies, and anarchy, where it 
does exist, is just what the Germans want. But to 








the common enemy.’ The Soviet government, rightly 
or wrongly, considers that it has made an effort to 
reach an agreement with former Premier Mikolaczyk 
of the Polish government-in-exile, but that that gov- 
ernment is irrevocably opposed to the cession of East- 
ern Poland to Russia. By making no reference to the 
question of who, on behalf of Poland, is to accept the 
proposed agreement, Mr. Stettinius may give the 
Polish government-in-exile the hope that it will have 
the support of the United States, or at least of in- 
fluential Polish and Catholic groups in this country, 
for its opposition to Russia. Much as one can sym- 
pathize with the tragic plight of the Poles, the fact 
is that the liberation of Poland from German rule 
can be effected only by Russia. And if Moscow be- 
comes convinced that there is no hope of settling the 
matter of Eastern Poland by agreement in the near 
future, its attitude both on the proposed international 
security organization and on the future course of the 
war may be adversely affected. It is the danger of 
such an eventuality that gave peculiar urgency to Mr. 
Churchill's December 15 address on Poland. 

IS SITUATION BEYOND HOPE? Even now a 
reasoned statement of the differences that may have 
arisen between the United States and our Allies, of 
the points on which we agree with them, and the po- 
litical objectives we are pursuing in Europe, would 
help immeasurably to clear the atmosphere both at 
home and abroad. There is urgent need of another 
Big Three conference. But what we need most of all 


is continuous consultation about the day-to-day prob 
lems that are bound to multiply as the war reache 
its climax political Combined Board, similar to 
the Combined Boards on economic problems and the 


Combined Chiefs of Staff that have mapped out the 
military strategy of the war. This period of intense 
crisis could spell either the dissolution of the Allied 
coalition, or bring about far more intimate collabora- 
tion between the United Nations. But machinery 
alone, no matter how good, will not help. As John 
Mason Brown has said in Many a Watchful Night, 
the making of the peace will require greater courage, 
“greater character and characters” than the waging 
of the war. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FOREIGN POLICY ISSUES DOMINATE BRITAIN’S POLITICAL SCENE 


Despite the vote of confidence on British policy in 
Greece, which Prime Minister Churchill's coalition 
government received on December 8, public debate 
and demonstrations for reversal of that policy con- 
tinue. These discussions are broader in scope than the 
Parliamentary hearings on Greece, extending as 
they do to the policy on Poland, defined by Churchill 
on December 15, and to the projected Western Euro- 
pean bloc. It is important for Americans to under- 
stand this restive state of public opinion in Britain, 
since—admitting the necessity for further definition 


of American policy—it is desirable to frame our pol- 
icy with full knowledge of all sections of British 
opinion which, at this juncture, cannot be wholly effec- 
tive owing to the exigencies of coalition government. 

BRITISH PUBLIC AROUSED. The vote on 
Greece might have been predicted, and since that 
time the annual conference of the Labor party de- 
cided on December 11 that its Ministers should re- 
main in the coalition government until the defeat of 
Germany. But the Labor Conference listened to 
numerous speeches critical of Churchill's foreign pol- 











' 


I 








ave 
of 
pr )- 


uld 


ol- 
tish 
fec- 
ent. 
on 
that 
de- 

re- 
t of 

to 
pol- 

















cies, and many Labor party members both in and out 


of Parliament subsequently challenged the wisdom of 


ursuing the type of intervention Britain has under- 
aken in Greece. Not since the vigorous public de- 
ands of 1942 for the opening of a second front 

Western Europe has the British public been so 
roused. Added to the opposition voiced by prom- 
1ent Laborites is that of the Dean of Canterbury, th 
Very Rev. Hewlett Johnson, who has made known 
hat he is irrevocably opposed to the government's 
ourse in Greece. Mass meetings in Trafalgar Square, 
n London, were followed by even larger demonstra- 
tions in Scotland on December 18, involving shipyard 
and aircraft workers. 


ELECTION FORECASTS. Although cleavages on 
the various foreign issues now besetting Britain are 
somewhat contradictory, they reveal for the first time 
during the life of the wartime coalition government 
a striking rift on broad terms of foreign policy. 
Whereas many Conservative party members view the 
intervention in Greece with equanimity, many Labor- 
ites abstained entirely from voting on that matter. 
On the whole, the positions of the two parties are 
reversed with respect to Poland. Yet such differences, 
although not entirely consistent now, will gain in 
importance when general elections are held at the 
end of the European war—the more so since the date 
of the defeat of Germany has been postponed beyond 
all former prophesies. Meanwhile, foreign affairs 
will inevitably become increasingly significant in 
party politics, in contrast to forecasts which assumed 
that the elections would turn on domestic problems. 

Many observers had predicted a favorable vote for 
labor candidates in the event that domestic problems 
lominated the political scene. Now, with the injec- 
tion of foreign policy into the forthcoming party con- 

, the question is immediately raised whether this 
nels will hold. In view of present objections to 
the Churchill policies, there is little doubt that in 
uch cases as the Greek intervention the temper and 
the objective would be greatly changed under a Labor 


Page Thre« 





JUST PUBLISHED— 
ANGLO-AMERICAN CARIBBEAN COM.- 
MISSION—Pattern for Colonial Cooperation 
by Olive Holmes 


25¢ 


Dec: er 15 issue of FOREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPO} S are p bli hed on the Ist and 15th of each month 


$5; to F.P.A. members, $3 

















‘nment. Yet whatever the character of Britain's 
elations with individual countries where it has vital 
interests, as in Greece, there is no doubt that all 
British political groups would agree on the need of 
assuring their country’s security. 


BRITAIN’S SEARCH FOR SECURITY. While 
the unilateral and anti-Leftist diplomatic moves re- 
cently made by the Churchill government may prove 
detrimental to our future cooperation with Britain, 
much of the anti-British feeling that is again emerg- 
ing in this country may have similar consequences. 
To aa misunderst: indings, Americans must appre- 
ciate the desire for security which has prompted Brit- 
ain's action in Mediterranean countries and has grad- 
ually led the British to hope for the creation of a 
Western European bloc whereby the English Channel 
might be safeguarded—through eventual arrange- 
ments for air bases, if necessary, in the Low Coun- 
tries. This problem of security has again been raised 
by the 20-year Franco-Soviet alliance announced on 
December 17. Many American observers have jumped 
to the conclusion that this pact would nullify Brit- 
ain’s efforts, but the British believe that, like their 
own alliance with Russia, it will aid them in their 
search for security. 


But American understanding of Britain’s objectives 
will not suffice. Britain itself will have to clarify 
sooner or later its broader aims in such a way that 
the American public may feel that they are in harmony 
with the war aims so often proclaimed by the United 
Nations. The British believe that the chance for West- 
ern European unity will be enhanced if Britain and 
Russia agree on future milit iry measures to prevent 
the resurgence of Germany. Similarly, the demarca- 
tion of spheres of influence in other areas will -they 
claim—contribute to security only if these spheres are 
geared into the broader framework of a United Na- 
tions organization. If all steps to achieve security have 
an international organization as their ultimate ob- 
jective, a real case can be made out for Britain's pol- 
icy. But as military operations are prolonged, politi- 
cal developments in Europe, which increasingly 
arouse the sympathy and concern of both the Ameri- 
can and British public, demand action on the part of 
all the great powers in concert. Since the establish- 
ment of a broader United Nations organization has 
been delayed, however, the Allies must make sure 
that their day-to-day diplomatic decisions are com- 
patible with the projected international security 


system. GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 





OREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 10, DecemperR 22, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, tow York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Largt, Secretary; Vera MicHeces Dean, Editor. Entered ss 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., umder the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at lease 


e month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


cof 18) 


Produced under union conditions and combosed and printed by union laber 


Washington News Letter 




















WAR SHIPPING NEEDS BLOCK RELIEF TO EUROPE 


The 3,700 vessels in the United Nations shipping 
pool are insufficient to transport across the Atlantic 
and Pacific all the goods requested by area comman- 
ders for military operations, let alone relief goods— 
whether these are destined for distribution by the 
Army, the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation 
Administration, the local government or special com- 
mittees. This acute shipping shortage explains to a 
considerable degree the statement by the Earl of Sel- 
borne, British Minister of Supply, in the House of 
Commons on December 15 that the food crisis in 
Europe has grown worse since D-Day (June 6). For 
much of its food Europe today depends on the West- 


ern Hemisphere, and ships are needed for this pur- 
pe se. 


MILITARY PRESSURE ON SHIPPING. United 
Nations ships are supplying two major fronts—on the 
Rhine and in the Philippines—as well as the military 
needs of the armies in Italy. They are hauling goods 
to ports of supply for the Soviet Union. The dis- 
tance across the Pacific and the still limited number 
of ports in Western Europe keeps ships a long time 
on any one journey. Ships have waited as long as 20 
to 40 days off the coast of France for unloading, but 
the recent opening of Antwerp is sure to reduce these 
delays. Many ships bound for Leyte leave from East 
Coast ports because the Pacific Coast lacks port facili- 
ties to handle all the vessels needed for supplying 
General MacArthur's armies in the Philippines; the 
round trip from the United States to Leyte averages 
100 to 150 days, or about three trips a year for one 
ship. 

The enemy understands the dependence of our 
military operations on shipping. The Japanese news 
agency, Domei, announced on December 15 that it is 
more important for the Japanese to sink ‘enemy 
transports and cargo ships’ than battleships and car- 
riers. The United Nations still suffer some losses to 
submarines. Although the 154 vessels completed in 
United States shipyards in November exceed by far 
the number of sinkings in this period, many ships are 
removed from transoceanic service by military re- 
quirements for short-haul vessels. Ships totaling more 
than 5,000,000 deadweight tons are making shuttle 
runs between England and the European continent, 
and between the Philippines and Pacific bases to the 
east and south. 


The War Shipping Administration has notified 
FOR VICTORY ° 


agencies sending relief supplies to Europe that it will 
try to get goods aboard ship if the agency gets them to 
dockside. Nevertheless, UNRRA has been unable to 
ship to Italy any materials in its $50,000,000 program 
for mothers, children and displaced persons. Six ship- 
ments of relief materials for needy men, women and 
children in liberated Italy have left the United States 
under the auspices of American Relief for Italy; the 
first shipment, arriving in Italy early in December, 
included 1,000 tons of ready-made clothing, hospital 
supplies, and infants’ food. Between the Allied land 
ings in Sicily in 1943 and mid-September 1944 only 
2,500,000 tons of relief goods reached Italy for dis 
tribution under military direction. 


Opportunities for expanding the merchant fleet are 
limited. Negotiations going on in London probably 
will bring Swedish-flag ships into the United Nations 
pool, but not until the day war ends in Europe. The 
Swedish government, meanwhile, has offered the use 
of ships of Swedish registry for transportation of re- 
lief materials, and has proposed specifically that 
Swedish ships carry food to the occupied Netherlands 
as they have to Greece. The Allies have not accepted 
the Netherlands program, and it is doubted whether 
the Germans, blockading the entrance to the Baltic, 
would permit Swedish ships to emerge into the At- 
lantic for the purpose of carrying relief supplies to 
liberated areas behind Allied lines. 


RELIEF NEED GROWING. Since the beginning 
of hostilities on December 7, 1941, United States pol- 
icy has been to put conduct of the war ahead of every 
other question, political and humanitarian. But the 
coming of winter makes the relief problem so urgent 
that the Allied governments may decide to increase 
the shipping space assigned to relief goods headed 
abroad. Herbert H. Lehman, Director General of 
UNRRA, is expected to advocate this change before 
the Combined Shipping Board when he returns from 
Europe, where he has been consulting officials in 
Paris and London; and Richard K. Law, British Min- 
ister of State, has just arrived in Washington to dis- 
cuss supply problems in liberated European territories. 
Hunger aggravates the discontent disturbing the po- 
litical life of Belgium, Italy and Greece, and thereby 
threatens military communications. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 











