— 
pensa- 


ourag- 
rse for 
ceably 
raniza- 
ym its 
onflict. 
clauses 


dinary 
neld in 
nd on 
ilatory 
> Mon- 
f their 


SHER 


en City, 
premacy 


-conomic 
to over- 


6. $3.00 
ism has 
that has 


ird How- 
rsity of 


ation for 


to fear, 
1d’s come 


+ George 
0 

ssia’s de- 
or Millis. 


3; mental 
mminent 


Strachey. 


cal back- 
nist com- 


‘lorinsky. 


tic inter- 
n is cus- 


ew York, 
‘an mone- 


Yosts and 
L. Cohn. 


ide in the 


1. National 
EAN, Editor. 
Year. 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Vou. XVI, No. 23 


APRIL 2, 1937 


CAN WAR PROFITS BE ELIMINATED? 
by Harold Tobin and R. L. Buell 


An analysis of the pending legislation before Congress 
designed to protect the United States from inflation in 
wartime and to finance the conduct of a war out of current 
revenue, this report points out the dangers as well as the 
almost insuperable difficulties of taking “the profit out of 
war” under our present economic system. 


April 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


of March 3, i879. 


Dr. William W. Bishop 
* University of 


i} 


* 
. ZLCON. 


Ann Arbor 


ITALY 


IMPERILS MEDITERRANEAN PEACE 


HE diplomatic and military incidents provoked 

by Italian fascism during the past month 
have severely strained Italy’s relations with Brit- 
ain, already disturbed by the British program of 
naval rearmament, and have created serious fric- 
tion between France and Italy. The shooting of 
hundreds of Ethiopians following the attempted 
assassination of General Graziani in Addis Ababa 
on February 19 brought condemnation of Italian 
“atrocities” from the Archbishop of Canterbury 
and members of the British House of Commons. 
The sudden advance of Spanish Loyalists, who 
routed Italian “volunteers” at Brihuega on March 
16-20, was compared to Italy’s World War defeat 
at Caporetto, and raised serious doubts regarding 
Fascist military valor. Reports that Italian troops 
had landed at Cadiz on March 5, in violation of 
an international agreement to prevent the depar- 
ture of volunteers for Spain after February 20, 
increased French and British apprehensions re- 
garding Italy’s designs in the western Mediter- 
ranean. Nor did Mussolini’s tour of Libya, de- 
signed to place Rome in the réle of protector of 
the Moslems, serve to strengthen British sympa- 
thies for Italy. 

Angered by foreign comment on this series of 
setbacks Mussolini delivered a fighting speech on 
March 23 in which he described anti-Fascist news 
writers as “illiterate,” denounced “the hysterical 
oratory of certain Anglican pulpits,” and declared 
that Italy would avenge League sanctions sooner 
or later, as it had avenged Adowa by its conquest 
of Ethiopia. 

Il Duce’s belligerent words were echoed by 
Count Grandi, Italian Ambassador in London, 
who told the international non-intervention com- 
mittee on March 23 that not one Italian “volun- 
teer” would be withdrawn from Spain until the 
end of civil war. Aroused by Italy’s defiant atti- 
tude, which threatened recent efforts to tighten 
non-intervention, the French Foreign Minister 


Yvon Delbos informed the British Ambassador in 
Paris on March 24 that France’s patience was 
wearing thin, and that it would insist on strong 
measures to prevent further landing of Italian 
forces in Spain. M. Delbos apparently also urged 
Germany to counsel moderation in Rome, and con- 
sulted France’s Little Entente allies regarding the 
course to be pursued in case Italy extended its 
military activities on Spanish territory. 
Confronted by the possibility of a new clash 
with Britain in the Mediterranean, Mussolini took 
the precaution of shielding Italy from attack from 
the rear by concluding a comprehensive five-year 
treaty with Yugoslavia on March 26. By the terms 
of this treaty Italy and Yugoslavia, which have 
lived in a state of latent hostility since the war, un- 
dertake to respect each other’s boundaries and to 
remain neutral in case one of them is attacked by 
a third power. They pledge themselves not to tol- 
erate on their respective territories any subversive 
activities directed against each other’s territorial 
integrity or political régime. In case of internation- 
al complications the two countries agree to confer 
regarding measures to protect threatened com- 
mon interests. This provision apparently envi- 
sages the possibility that Austria may seek a so- 
lution of its problems either by union with Ger- 
many—a course unpalatable to Italy—or by res- 
toration of the Hapsburgs, a move opposed by 
Belgrade. The treaty also provides for improved 
commercial relations between the two countries, 
as set forth in a provisional trade agreement 
signed on the same day, which will facilitate ex- 
ports of Yugoslav cattle, timber and agricultural 
products to Italy. In three additional protocols 
Italy and Yugoslavia recognize and guarantee the 
independence of Albania, which has served as an 
Italian sphere of influence since the war; grant 
cultural rights to the 250,000 Serbs, Croats and 
Slovenes in Italy, and the Italian minority in 
Yugoslavia; and provide for termination of Italian 


Michigan Library 


aid to the Croat terrorist organization, Ustasha, 
whose members are held responsible in Belgrade 
for the assassination of King Alexander in 1934. 

The significance of the Italo-Yugoslav treaty 
has been variously interpreted. Some observers 
regard it as an attempt by Italy to detach Yugo- 
slavia from its Little Entente associates, Czecho- 
slovakia and Rumania, and its post-war ally, 
France, and bring it within range of the “Berlin- 
Rome axis”; others, see in it a move by Mussolini 
to effect a rapprochement between the Little En- 
tente and the Rome bloc, composed of Italy, Aus- 
tria and Hungary, which might counterbalance 
German influence in the Danubian region. What- 
ever the ultimate effects of the treaty, it indicates 
that Yugoslavia is determined to follow a foreign 
policy free of dependence on any one power or set 
of powers, in the hope of obtaining the maximum 
economic advantages in time of peace and of 
maintaining its neutrality in time of war. 

The tendency of the small powers to seek secur- 
ity irrespective of traditional diplomatic align- 
ments, already strikingly displayed by Belgium, 
is not of a nature to reassure Britain and France. 
By their successive failures to check aggression 
in Manchuria, Ethiopia and Spain, the Western 
democracies have not only shaken the foundations 
of collective security, but have lost the support 
they once enjoyed among the small powers—a 
support they may need the day they are involved 
in a direct clash with Germany or Italy. Yet 
even at this late hour a clear indication that Brit- 
ain and France are prepared to use their greatly 
increased armaments in defense not only of their 
own territories, but of all victims of aggression 
in Europe, might rally to their side those coun- 
tries which, despairing of mutual assistance, seek 
uncertain refuge from war in a policy of neu- 


trality. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


KUOMINTANG REBUFFS COMMUNISTS 


The complete failure of an important Japanese 
trade mission to China, announced in Tokyo on 
March 27, affords a further illustration of the 
deep-seated antagonism to Japan which has in- 
creasingly gripped the Chinese populace. The 
mission’s negative results are the more remark- 
able because the prevailing faction in Nanking at 
the moment, headed by Wang Ching-wei, chair- 
man of the Central Political Council, is known to 
be relatively pro-Japanese and anti-Communist. 
Had public opinion permitted, Wang’s group 
might have been inclined to come to terms with 
the Japanese. 

Although the political situation at Nanking is 


Page Two 


— 
ne 


far from stable, the dominance of the pro-Japan. 
ese element has been apparent since the plenary 
session of the Central Executive Committee of the 
Kuomintang, held at Nanking from February 15 
to 22. On that occasion the Chinese Communist 
authorities, apparently willing to subordinate 
their social and political program to consumma. 
tion of the united front against Japan, proposed 
that the Kuomintang stop the civil war, concen- 
trate all the national forces on the task of repel]. 
ing Japanese invasion, declare a political amnesty, 
and restore freedom of speech and assembly. In 
return the Communists declared themselves will- 
ing to abandon opposition to the Nanking govern- 
ment, further the general program of an anti- 
Japanese united front, place their army under the 


immediate direction of Nanking, and institute q_ 
democratic system of government in the areas _ 


under their control, refraining from confiscation 
of the property of large landowners. 


Stressing their disruptive tactics in the past, 
the Kuomintang Committee on February 21 
sharply refused to effect a reconciliation unless 
the Communists abolished the Red Army and in- 
corporated its soldiery into the Nanking forces, 
dissolved the Chinese Soviet Government and 
ceased all communist propaganda. These terms, 
which were tantamount to voluntary destruction 
for the Chinese Soviets, were not accompanied by 
any assurance of a stronger anti-Japanese policy. 
On the contrary, the Central Executive Commit- 
tee issued a manifesto on February 22 stating 
that “if there is still hope for peace we shall still 
be willing to continue our efforts in working fora 
preliminary readjustment of Sino-Japanese rela- 
tions on the basis of equality, reciprocity and mu- 
tual respect of each other’s territorial integrity” 
—a sentiment recently echoed in Japan. 


The Central Executive Committee has thus 
cleared the ground for the resumption of punitive 
measures against the Communists in order to 
achieve unification, while offering to embark on a 
moderate policy toward Japan. A dispatch from 
Sianfu on March 22 stated that the Nanking gov- 
ernment is already undertaking a campaign to 
oust the Red Army from northern Shensi—the 
area assigned to it in the truce reported on Jan- 
uary 28. Meanwhile, it appears possible that 
Japan will restrain its activity in China as a 
means of aiding Chiang Kai-shek to wipe out the 
Red forces. It remains to be seen whether Chinese 
military leaders who preach a doctrine of extreme 
nationalism will peacefully accept these develop- 


ments. Davip H. PoPPER 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 23, Apa 2 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. ¥Y. Raymonp Lasimm Bugit, President; Estumr G. Ocpin, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editer. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Associ 
appeal 


provid 


at the 


Ple 


National 


———— 
————= 


-J apan- 
plenary 
2 of the 
lary 15 
imunist 
rdinate 
summa. 
roposed 
concen- 
'-Tepell. 
mnesty, 
ly. In 
es will- 
govern- 
n anti- 
der the 
titute a 
2 areas 
iscation 


le past, 
ary 21 
- unless 
and in- 
forces, 
nt and 
. terms, 
ruction 
nied by 
: policy. 
sommit- 
stating 
iall still 
ig fora 
se rela- 
und mu- 
tegrity” 


as thus 
punitive 
rder to 
irk on a 
ch from 
ing gov- 
aign to 
1si—the 
on Jan- 
le that 
la as a 
out the 
Chinese 
extreme 
develop- 


OPPER 


|. National 
EAN, Editor. 
Year. 


r 


will be especially welcome. 


The Annual Meeting of the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 
will be held at the Hotel Astor, New York, on Thursday evening, April 22, 1937. After the dinner, which will be 
served promptly at 7:30 P.M., there will be a short business meeting including a brief report on the work of the 
Association by the Vice-President, William T. Stone, and an address on “Democracy in the Present-Day World” by 
His Excellency M. Georges Bonnet, Ambassador of France to the United States. Professor J. P. Chamberlain, Chair- 
man of the Board of Directors, will preside. Covers for members and their guests will be $3. Out-of-town members 


PROXY FOR BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


The candidates listed below have been nominated to serve on the Board of Directors of the Foreign Policy 
Association, Incorporated, as indicated, and have expressed their willingness to act if elected. The word “‘Re-election” 
appears after the names of the present members of the Board of Directors who have consented to run again. 

Persons other than those nominated by the Nominating Committee are eligible to election, and space is 
provided on the proxy for naming such other candidates. Attention is called to the fact that 

‘‘All members of the Board of Directors shall be members of the Association who are 
so circumstanced that they can attend the meetings of the Board regularly.” 


Constitution, Article IV, Paragraph 3. 


In accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, the candidates receiving the largest number of votes cast 
at the annual meeting April 22, 1937, will be declared elected. 


Please note that proxies cannot be used 
1. unless received at National Headquarters not later than Wednesday, April 21, 1937. 
2. unless the proxy returned is signed by the member. 

Only members of the Association who are citizens of the United States have voting privileges. 


Nominating Committee: FRANCES HAND, Chairman 
Mary FINDLAY ALLEN Sipngy D. GAMBLE 
HENRY PRATT FAIRCHILD Wi.iaM C. RIVERS 


Please cut along this line and sign and return the proxy to the office of the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 


8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


PROXY 
Put cross (x) beside names of candidates of your choice. 
Vote for six in Class of 1939 and six in Class of 1940. 


I authorize Raymond Leslie Buell or William T. Stone to vote for directors of the Foreign Policy Association, 
Incorporated, as indicated below: 


CLASS OF 1939 


PAUL U. KELLOGG 


H. HARVEY PIKE, Jr. 


RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 
MRS. THOMAS W. LAMONT RALPH S. ROUNDS 

RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 
JAMES G. McDONALD EUSTACE SELIGMAN 

RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 


CLASS OF 1940 


BRUCE BLIVEN 


MRS. BAYARD JAMES 
RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 


ROBERT M. FIELD 
Lawyer, New York 


FRANCIS T. P. PLIMPTON 
RE-ELECTION 


CARLTON J. H. HAYES DR. FLORENCE R. SABIN 


RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 


(Sign Were)  .........00....cccccsssccesverssssesescesseosssosssssnsesosooossosossssesessne 


