ning of 
powers, 
ra lim 
OF not 
| corre. 
se Am- 
> House 
inst any 
his visit 
hek had 
It. 


ollowed 
or’s call 
with the 
OP Con: 
of No 
mbass. 
OFigitas: 
morning 
> envoys 
the con- 
Jevelop- 
ons may 
vidently 
is noth- 
ton will 
he State 
- for the 
ving the 
| to the 


TONE 


_ Entered as 2nd class matter 
Or De 


inn Arbor, Mich. 5 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vo. XXI, No. 8 


——— 


DECEMBER 12, 1941 


JAPAN'S SURPRISE ATTACK OPENS PACIFIC WAR 


a powerfully on December 7 in a 
surprise offensive, cleverly screened by the ne- 
gotiations still being conducted at Washington, 
Japanese naval and air forces gained initial advan- 
tages of considerable significance in the first stages 
of the Pacific war. The bombing raids on the 
Hawaiian islands—reminiscent of Japan’s previous 
attacks in the Sino-Japanese and Russo-Japanese 
wars of 1894 and 1904—preceded Tokyo’s formal 
declaration of war by several hours. The original 
orders for the attack, however, must have been is- 
sued at least a week earlier, in order to give the naval 
vessels, including submarines operating between 
Honolulu and San Francisco, time to reach their 
appointed stations. In retrospect, it now appears 
evident that Tokyo deliberately utilized not only the 
negotiations at Washington but also the reinforce- 
ments sent into Indo-China to divert suspicion from 
its bolder intentions. 


THE FIRST BLOW. While the Japanese stroke 
has cemented American national unity as nothing 
ese could have done and will thus exert a profound 
efect on the eventual outcome of the war, both in 
Europe and Asia, it is equally apparent that Japan 
has gained important strategic benefits by striking 
the first blow. Early reports indicate that the attack 
was driven home with a large measure of success. 
One “old battleship’’ was ‘‘capsized” and other 
vessels, probably cruisers and capital ships, ‘‘seri- 
ously hit.” A destroyer was blown up and a con- 
siderable number of planes destroyed. The severity 
of these losses suggests that the surprise was 
complete, and that the attack caught many planes on 
landing fields and at least part of the fleet at anchor 
in the waters of the Pearl Harbor base. Dive bombers 
were apparently launched from one or more Jap- 
anese aircraft carriers, and large -four-motored 
bombers may also have been flown from bases estab- 


lished in the Japanese mandated islands. 

While the first and heaviest assault was delivered 
against Hawaii, the full scope of the Japanese of- 
fensive covered an area ranging from Malaya to the 
waters off the California coast. With Japanese 
submarines obviously scattered widely over the 
Pacific, it may be expected that the toll of mer- 
chant and army transport vessels will steadily in- 
crease, at least until an effective convoy system has 
been arranged. Attacks on Guam, Wake and Mid- 
way islands have taken place, and one or more of 
these island outposts may be quickly lost. In the 
Philippines, army and navy posts have been bombed 
and Lubang island, 60 miles southwest of Manila, 
has apparently been captured. American marines in 
North China, numbering approximately 200, were 
interned, while at Shanghai a British gunboat was 
destroyed, an American gunboat seized, and the In- 
ternational Settlement occupied. 

In the Western Pacific, however, the Japanese 
forces concentrated their greatest offensive effort 
against Thailand and Malaya. Thailand, after brief 
resistance, had permitted the entry of Japanese 
troops, which then occupied strategic points on the 
Gulf of Siam along the narrow Thai peninsula ex- 
tending down to Malaya. At least two Japanese de- 
tachments had effected landings in northern Malaya, 
but these forces and their naval escorts, according to 
British reports, were being successfully checked. 
Both Singapore and Hongkong had suffered bombing 
raids, and direct attacks on these British strongholds 
were anticipated. 


THE STRATEGIC OUTLOOK. While the dras- 
tic attack on Hawaii has necessarily attracted major 
attention, and has raised searching questions re- 
garding the ease with which the American defenses 
were penetrated and surprised, there is little reason 
to believe that Japan can continue to hold the of- 


coe 
ed 


¥ 


———— 
ere 


fensive in the mid-Pacific for any length of time. 
The shock of the initial setback should create an 
attitude of redoubled watchfulness sufficient to pze- 
vent unpleasant surprises in the future. 

Far more significant, with respect to the . »al out- 
come, are the engagements that have begu:. in 7" ai- 
land and northern Malaya. Here it is evident that 
the Japanese forces are striving with considerable 
determination to place land-based armies »:h 
striking distance of Singapore—the strategic key to 
Southeast Asia. In this case, again, their prelim‘nary 
successes have been considerable. As the formidable 
British land and air units in this area fully engage 
the Japanese forces, however, it may be expected 
that the latter’s overland advance will be halted at 
some point well north of Singapore. Meanwhile, the 
equally crucial struggle for control of the relatively 
narrow waters of the Gulf of Siam and the South 
China Sea will be reaching maximum intensity. The 
combined Anglo-American-Dutch air strength in 
this region, now buttressed by a British naval force 
including capital ships, should prove able to estab- 
lish superiority in Southeast Asia. Unless the Jap- 
anese naval command is willing to risk its ships of 
the line in this region, Japan’s land forces in Indo- 


WILL WAR IN PACIFIC HELP HITLER? 


The first question that came to the minds of most 
Americans on hearing that Japan had attacked 
British and United States possessions in the Pacific 
was whether this new conflict would aid or hamper 
the Western powers in their struggle against Ger- 
many. 

In the new phase of the war that opened on De- 
cember 7, as on many previous occasions during the 
past two years, the factor of ume may assume para- 
mount importance. If American aid to Britain, in the 
form of tanks, airplanes and munitions, represents 
the margin between victcry and defeat for the Brit- 
ish in Africa, then, in the short run, it may well be 
that this country’s preoccupation with the Far East- 
ern conflict will create fresh difficulties for Britain. 
But if the British, with the equipment they have so 
far obtained from the United States, should be able 
to hold the Germans in Africa, while the Russians 
maintain their resistance on the eastern front, then 
in the long run Japan’s attack—which brings the 
United States into the second world war with a united 


READ— 


America’s Naval Preparedness 

U.S. Defense Outposts in the Pacific 
Japan’s Drive into Southeast Asia 
China’s National Front 

The Netherlands Indies at War 


25c each or 5 for $1.00 


These five issues of FOREIGN Poticy REporTs will give you 
the strategic and political facts behind the war in the Pacific. 


Page Two 


st 
—— 


China and Thailand may then find their lines 9 
supply from the homeland cut off and their militar 
position increasingly untenable. 

Should the Japanese forces now threatening Sing). 
pore be defeated, however, only the first step toward 
an Allied victory would have been taken. Such , 
victory can only be obtained by a combination of 
factors, including an ironclad blockade of Japan, 
the equipping of Chinese armies for a counter. 
offensive, establishment of air bases within close 
bombing range of Japan, and destruction of the Jap. 
anese fleet. Before these results can be achieved, , 
strong American fleet will have to enter Far Easter 
waters, joining hands with the considerable Anglo. 
American-Dutch naval force already in Southeas 
Asia. Should the Soviet air, land and sea power in 
Siberia be drawn into the struggle, the defeat of 
Japan will be made more certain and will come 
much sooner. In many quarters, Japan’s entrance into 
the war has been viewed as a long-sought aim of 
Hitler's, yet a coordinated and powerful Allied of. 
fensive in the Pacific may lead to a Japanese defeat 
that could swiftly turn the scales against Hitler in 
Europe. 


T. A. Bisson 


home front—may work against Hitler and his 
allies. Among the many incalculables that may affect, 
the situation are Vichy’s answer to Hitler’s demand 
for use of the French navy; the action Germany may’ 
take in support of its Axis partner, Japan; and the 
course Russia may follow in Europe and the Fu 
East. 

1. WHAT WILL VICHY DO? Scant informa-| 
tion is as yet available regarding the interview that | 
Marshal Pétain and Vice Admiral Darlan had with 
Marshal Goering at St. Florentin, in occupied France, 
on December 1. It has been reported that Pétain 
had been willing to permit use by the Germans of | 


French bases in Africa, but had opposed use of the| , 


French fleet. The entrance into the war of Japan, | 


which ranks third in naval power after Britain 4 


the United States, lends particular significance t 
Nazi negotiations with Vichy. So far as is knows, | 
the French navy (as of January 1, 1941), consisted 
of one battleship, one aircraft carrier (stationed at 
Martinique where, presumably it is under watch by 
the United States Navy), 14 cruisers, 52 destroyets,| 
and 60 submarines. It has been recently reported that 
another battleship, the Richelieu, which had beet 
damaged during the British attack on Dakar in 
1940, has just been reconditioned. These vessels, if 
placed at Hitler’s disposal, might prove formidable 
weapons now that Britain and the United State 
must divide their fleets between the Atlantic and the 
Pacific. 


on Sept 
yndertor 
eonomi 
contract 
got invc 
japanes: 
nouncec 
many b 
this COL 
oficial 
decide | 
gubmar: 
frst mc 
Both th 
Germar 
of Fret 
many s 
by deve 

3. 
f Red 
from ct 
checkec 
sponde 


i been fi 


had re 
the Ca 
fully a 
side, a 
Decem 
aid fr 
may O 
with R 
attemp 

The 
admitt 
pokes 


, | of Ma 


ent, 
Germ 
suffere 
with r 
States 
Germ: 
dicate 
and t 
prepat 
their 

has be 
Stalin 
ment-! 
FOREIG 


Headqua 
Entered 


= 


—<$<<$<=$ | 


lines of} 2. WHAT WILL GERMANY DO? Under Ar- 
Military } tide III of the Axis tripartite pact signed in Berlin 
‘| September 27, 1940, Germany, Italy and Japan 
& Singa.| yndertook to assist one another “with all political, 
» toward | gonomic and military means when one of the three 
Such a} ntracting powers is attacked by a power at present 
ation of} pot involved in the European war or in the Chinese- 
Japan| japanese conflict.” While the German press has de- 
counter-| pounced the United States as a ‘‘warmonger,” Ger- 
Nn closer} many by December 9, had taken no action against 
the Jap-| this country and, similarly, the United States was 
ieved, a} oficially at war only with Japan. Should Berlin 
Eastem decide to act against the United States, unrestricted 
' Anglo-{ ubmarine warfare in the Atlantic might be its 
outheast | first move, accompanied by “‘all-out’’ war in Africa. 
ower in| Both these operations would be greatly facilitated if 
efeat of| Germany could make use of the French Navy and 
ll come} of French bases in North and West Africa. Ger- 
ce into | many’s decision on this score may, in turn, be affected 
aim of| by developments on the Russian front. 


llied of | 3. WHAT WILL RUSSIA DO? While reports 
€ defeat of Red Army successes against the Germans come 
Hitler in} from censored Russian communiqués, and cannot be 
checked against reports of independent corre- 
spondents, Berlin has not denied that its troops have 
| been forced to retreat from Rostov, which the Nazis 
and his| had regarded as the gateway to the oil resources of 
ay affec| the Caucasus. Meanwhile, Turkey, which has care- 
demand| fully abstained from military commitments to either 
any may| side, allowed it to be announced in Washington on 
and the| December 3 that it has been receiving lend-lease 
the Far| ad from the United States since last May. This 
may open the possibility of Turkey's collaboration 
with Russia and Britain in blocking further German 
attempts at a drive toward the east. 

The hazards of a winter campaign in Russia were 
admitted on December 8 by a German military 
spokesman in Berlin, who declared that the capture 


ISSON 


informa: | 
iew that| 
1ad with | 
1 France | 


t Pétain ; 
of Moscow is not expected this year. This announce- 
mans 0 
E the| | ment, which must have seemed a cruel blow to the 
eo 


F J | | German people after the losses of lives and material 
apan, 
P | wuffered on the eastern front, was made to coincide 
ain and . . : 
with news of Japanese successes against the United 
cance tt 
} States in such a way as to soften its impact on the 
known, | C 
|| German public. The Russians, meanwhile, have in- 
“onsisted | : "a. . “9 
rr icated that they are reorganizing their armed forces 
ioned at} 7 a . : 
| and their industrial resources east of Moscow in 
vatch by} . a ea 
_ preparation for a spring offensive, and have cemented 
stroyers, ; ; “ ; . 
: an their collaboration with the Polish Army which 
rted that 
4 bel has been formed on Russian soil. On December 4 
ad be ; 
Stalin and Premier Sikorski of the Polish govern- 


ment-in-exile signed a declaration in which they 


Makar if 
assels, if 


= Page Three = 


| 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: PACIFIC CONFLICT LINKS 
TWO WARS 
Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 
Date: Sunday, December 14 
Time; 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over NBC 
For station, please consult your local newspaper 


undertook not only to fight the war until “complete 
destruction of the German invaders,” but to pro- 
mote af_ z the victory ‘“‘a new organization of inter- 
national relations on the basis of unification of the 
democratic countries in a durable alliance.” 

Under these circumstances, Americans must view 
with as much realism as possible the question of 
what Russia may do in the Far East—a question that 
can be frankly discussed now that Maxim Litvinov, 
Soviet Ambassador to this country, has reached 
Washington. The Soviet Union has an independent 
army in the Far East, estimated at over a million 
men, as well as an air force and a fleet of submarines 
said to number between 70 and 100, b..sed on Vladi- 
vostok. At least a portion of the Far Eistern Army, 
however, has been diverted to the western front 
against Germany, and now that the Germ. ns occupy 
Russia’s principal industrial regions — the Ukraine 
and the Donets Basin — the armies in the w st and 
in the east must both depend on the second. -y in- 
dustrial base in the Urals for their supplies. For the 
time being, it would seem advisable from the point 
of view of Russia and of the ABCD powers that the 
Soviet Union should not scatter its forces, and should 
give single-handed attention to Germany. 

It is, of course, not out of the question that the 
Nazis, having decided to suspend major operations 
on the eastern front, may now focus their efforts on 
Africa. There they might hope—if they obtain the 
“collaboration” of Vichy—to deliver a serious blow 
at the British Empire at the very moment when the 
United States must turn from the Atlantic to the 
Pacific. This strategy of trying to separate potential 
allies, and of defeating each opponent separately, 
has been effectively used by the Nazis in the past. 
Today it is being applied on a world, no longer 
merely on a European, scale. The vast pincer move- 
ment that is developing from the Mediterranean- 
African front to the new front in the Pacific is di- 
rected ultimately against the United States. But today 
the Nazis, as well as the countries that oppose the 
Axis, must fight on several fronts. And the trans- 
formation of the European war into a world war may 
prove as great a test for Germany as for its opponents. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


-midable FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 8, December 12, 1941. 
d States Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lret, Secretary; Vera MicHetss Degan, Editor. 


q the Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
an 


Bw 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Dec. 6.—Less than 24 hours after the Japanese 
attack on the United States the President and Con- 
gress had recognized that a state of war existed be- 
tween the United States and Japan. 


A week of intensive negotiation and consultation 
preceded the final break. On December 2, at the re- 
quest of the President, Japan was asked to explain the 
increased concentration of Japan’s armed forces in 
French Indo-China. On December 3 Secretary Hull 
outlined the course of the United States-Japanese 
conversations in a press conference statement which 
revealeci unsatisfactory progress. On December 6, 
followig Japanese “explanations” concerning mili- 
tary coacentrations in French Indo-China, President 
Roosevelt dispatched a dramatic appeal to Emperor 
Hiroh to in which he termed the situation “a keg 
of dynamite” and urged the Emperor “to give 
thought in this definite emergency to ways of dis- 
pelling the dark clouds.” No reply to this personal 
appeal was received before the first bombs fell over 
Hawaii. 


U.S. PROPOSALS. The American proposals, pre- 
sented to the Japanese on November 26 and rejected 
by them at the last moment, contained ten specific 
steps based on general principles of American 
foreign policy. These steps were as follows: (1) “A 
multilateral non-aggression pact among the British 
Empire, China, Japan, the Netherlands, the Soviet 
Union, Thailand, and the United States”; (2) an 
agreement to respect the territorial integrity of Indo- 
China and to prevent preferential economic relations 
with that country; (3) Japanese withdrawal of 
forces from China and French Indo-China; (4) rec- 
ognition of the Chungking government as the na- 
tional government of China; (5) an agreement to 
abandon extraterritorial rights in China. In return 
for these concessions to be made primarily by Japan, 
the United States undertook to negotiate a trade 
agreement with Japan based on the most-favored- 
nation principle and the reduction of trade barriers 
by both countries. In addition, the United States pro- 
posed that both governments take steps to remove 
freezing restrictions on each other’s funds, and to 
stabilize the dollar-yen rate. Finally, both govern- 
ments were to agree that no arrangement with a 


third power should conflict with the establish 
and preservation of peace in the Pacific. 

Tokyo replied that its “immutable policy’ was 
“to insure the stability of East Asia’’ and that 
the Chinese affair broke out “owing to the failure 
on the part of the Chinese to comprehend Japan's 
true intentions.” The note charged that the Unite 
States and Great Britain had resorted to every pos. 
sible measure “to obstruct the settlement of a gen. 
eral peace between Japan and China, interfering 
with Japan’s constructive endeavors toward the 
stabilization of East Asia.” After reviewing the 
course of the conversations, the note concluded that 
“it is impossible to reach an agreement through fur. 
ther negotiations.” On receiving this reply, Secre 
tary Hull stated to the Japanese Ambassador, “‘I have 
never seen a document that was more crowded with 
infamous falsehoods and distortions.” 


REACTION IN LATIN AMERICA. Within 24 
hours of the attack on Honolulu, half a dozen Latis 
American republics had formally declared war on 
Japan, and an overwhelming majority of the repub- 
lics had gone on record as favoring some form of 
collaboration with the United States. Costa Rica was 
the first to declare war: it was followed by Nic) 
aragua, Honduras, El Salvador, Haiti, Guatemala, 
the Dominican Republic and Panama. On Decem- 


ber 9, similar declarations were momentarily ex- 
pected from Cuba and Mexico. 


The most important move on the South Ameti- 
can Continent proper was Argentina's statement on 
December 8 that it intended to regard Japan's attack |" 
as directed against the entire Western Hemisphere. | 
It was expected that Argentina would issue a decree 
declaring the United States would not be considered | 
a belligerent power in its conflict with Japan and 
that therefore the government of Buenos Aires “will 
not make the customary declaration of neutrality.’ 
Meanwhile, the President of Uruguay, Alfredo Bal-| 
domir, urged his people i in a radio address to aban 
don the fiction of “neutrality.” From Bogota it was 
announced that Colombia would put its bases both 
on the Caribbean and the Pacific at the disposal of | 
the United States. Peru—which, like Brazil, has 4 
sizeable Japanese population of its own and also has 
important Japanese commercial contacts—is reported 
to have offered the United States “moral and spiritual 
solidarity.” 

A.H. J. and J. 1. B. M. 


———— 
Vou. XX] 
—— 


U 


§ th 
wa 
talitariar 
ment to 
Pacific a 
one cout 
producti 
tial blow 
on Ame! 
have so 
the Uni 
counterb 
powers 
now dri 
they can 
have to 
the Atla 
Yet a 


| Atlantic 


ties wor 


tained 
Valera. 
ity, eve 
might ¢ 

The 
would 
French 


