| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN ae 
— An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
rts to bpICAL ROOM Subscription, One Dollar a Year Office at New York, 
chases Te FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated T ala ee 
mbar- \- 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
ed by | Yor. XVI, No. 35 JUNE 25, 1937 General Library 
ought 
oe ON Monpay, JUNE 28, AT 12:45 O'CLOCK university of Michigas 
re be Special F. P. A. Luncheon Arbor, Michigaa 
Ng its Ann At ’ 
April in honor of 
fusen. HIS EXCELLENCY M. PAUL van ZEELAND 
ranco, at the HOTEL ASTOR 
[talian (The Premier will speak in English) 
eneral F. P. A. members, $1.75 Non-members, $2.25 
which, 
-alon 
a | BLUM’S FALL PRESAGES RENEWED INSTABILITY 
oO 
— FTER a little more than a year in office, the the Treasury faced the task of borrowing more 
by the cabinet of Léon Blum resigned early on than 40 billion francs during 1937. Confidence 
ed & June 21 following rejection by the French Senate in the government, however, was at such a low 
a of its request for power to meet the financial ebb that the Treasury was able to cover only a 
iation, | emergency. This government was not only the very small portion of its needs. In March the 
‘ithas first based on the Popular Front which emerged situation became so serious that the government 
f non- victorious from the elections of May 1936, but called a halt in further reforms and cut public 
yrce to. had the added distinction of having lasted longer works expenditure in an effort to gain the confi- 
former | than any ministry since November 1928. Its de- dence of business and secure the repatriation of 
ituents | feat at this time threatens to bring about another more than 40 billion francs of French capital 
Mr. | period of governmental instability which may which had sought refuge abroad. For a time this 
f | well have serious repercussions on economic and about-face seemed likely to succeed. The govern- 
Ons political life at home, and aggravate the uncer- ment was able to float a loan of 8 billion francs for 
of fear tainty of the international situation. national defense, although on extremely unfavor- 
he fat| Like almost all governments of the Left, that able terms. 
ins tf | of Blum failed because of its inability to cope Nevertheless, French business refused to trust 
with government finances. Under pressure from the Popular Front cabinet. Government spokes- 
YEAN its own followers it rapidly enacted a compre- men pointed out in vain that recovery was gradu- 
hensive program of social and economic reforms ally setting in, that prices were tending toward 
| and brought about a general rise in wages. While stability and that foreign trade was picking up. 
8 most of this legislation was praiseworthy in pur- Nor were business men completely reassured by 
on No-| pose, it imposed a heavy burden on business at a the renewal for another six months of the collec- 
hing at; time when practically all enterprises were tive labor agreements due to expirein June. They 
sary on} struggling to remain solvent. Wholesale prices feared or professed to fear further restrictive 
clude aj accordingly rose 50 per cent and retail prices measures at their expense, and in justification 
cussions } S°me 30 per cent. In order to offset the growing pointed to certain “disquieting” utterances of 
» speak- disparity between French and foreign prices, labor leaders and members of the government. 
crest the franc was devalued last September. Even Under these circumstances the Treasury was un- 
og this step, however, did not produce any marked able to borrow the 20 billion francs required for 
7. ae recovery. Industrial production increased about the remainder of the year. In desperation the 
vitation') 10 per cent, but largely as the result of armament government turned to Parliament on June 15 and 
this An-} orders, Railway carloadings in the first five requested full powers until July 31 “to take by 
months of 1937 were scarcely higher than the decree all measures needed to assure the recovery 
, pledge low levels of the previous year. Moreover, by of public finances and to meet attacks against 
‘his yeat May of this year the foreign trade balance already public savings and credit.” It was generally 
steadily showed a deficit of over six billion francs. expected that this authority would be used to raise 
The absence of any substantial economic re- approximately 4 billion francs by direct and in- 
vival made the financial situation of the govern- direct taxes and, perhaps, to borrow another 10 
National | Ment increasingly precarious. Burdened by heavy billion from the Bank of France to tide over the 
an, Editors) expenditures for armaments, public works and emergency. 
the deficits of railways and local governments, On June 16 the Chamber approved the full 


= Page Two 


powers by a vote of 346 to 247, although twenty 
Radical Socialists deserted and the Communists 
only at the last minute reversed a decision not to 
support the government. The Senate, however, 
completely emasculated the bill. Dominated by 
the extreme conservative wing of the Radical So- 
cialist party, the upper chamber, on June 19, 
adopted an alternative proposal giving the cabinet 
restricted powers to act against “speculative 
maneuvers likely to injure saving funds or public 
credit” and specifically prohibiting further bor- 
rowing from the Bank of France. Unable to se- 
cure reconsideration of this action, the govern- 
ment preferred to resign. 


Fortunately the fall of the cabinet has not led 
to public disturbances, nor to any immediate finan- 
cial crisis. The future, however, can hardly be 
viewed with optimism. While the political com- 
position of the Chamber makes a new Popular 
Front government likely—either under the Radi- 
cal-Socialist Camille Chautemps or again under 
Léon Blum— it is difficult to see how such a min- 
istry can solve the financial problem in the face 
of the hostility of French capitalists. Only the 
determination of all political factions to preserve 
peace throughout the summer would grant it any- 
thing more than a brief lease on life. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 
PARAGUAYAN ARMY BLOCKS CHACO PEACE 


Efforts to liquidate the Chaco war struck a new 
snag with the announcement on June 13 that the 
Paraguayan army had refused to heed a govern- 
ment order demanding withdrawal of its lines. 
Two years have passed since the armistice proto- 
col of June 12, 1935 ended open hostilities. Under 
this agreement the belligerent armies were de- 
mobilized and prisoners of war exchanged. But 
the Chaco Peace Conference at Buenos Aires— 
made up of representatives from Argentina, 
Brazil, Chile, Peru, the United States and Uruguay 
—has made no appreciable progress, through 
sponsorship of direct negotiation between the par- 
ties, toward settlement of the territorial dispute 
underlying the conflict. Opposition by army of- 
ficers to any concessions was a factor in revolu- 
tions which, during the first half of 1936, over- 
threw civilian cabinets in both countries and 
brought to power military régimes. In Paraguay 
the government is headed by Colonel Rafael 
Franco, in Bolivia by Colonel David Toro. 

To accelerate the peace negotiations, the Chaco 
Conference attempted to secure renewal of diplo- 
matic relations between the former enemies. On 
January 9, 1937 delegates of the two nations ap- 
proved this step. Bolivia, however, made accept- 
ance conditional on withdrawal of Paraguayan 


— 
a, I 


troops from the main-line road connecting Bo. 
livian military headquarters at Boyuibe with Villg 
Montes in a rich agricultural district. The armis- 
tice had left the victorious Paraguayans astride 
this highway in Bolivia proper. For four months 
Paraguayan army leaders stubbornly refused to 
carry out this move. In May a new accord wag 
approved, specifying conditions for putting the 
January agreement into effect. But a speech of 
the Paraguayan Foreign Minister on June 6, in 
which he attempted to marshal popular support 
for the pledge, was reported to have so angered 
the Bolivian government that it refused to pro- 
ceed with the resumption of diplomatic relations, 
Then President Franco was defied by his own 
officers, representing the principal group which 
had earlier placed him in office. 

Franco, faced on the one hand by a — 
army and on the other by pressure from the Chaco 
Peace Conference (which included oe rgentina, 
Paraguay’s most powerful supporter), finally 
took refuge in a policy of persuasion, in which 
he sought the Conference’s cooperation. As a 
companion group to two neutral officers dis- 
patched to the Chaco on June 16 by the Buenos 
Aires Conference, the Paraguayan Foreign Office 
named an official commission. Both were charged 
with the difficult task of persuading army leaders 
to change their attitude. Should their failure 
bring with it the breakdown of direct negotia- 
tions, the Chaco Peace Conference is authorized 
by the 1935 protocol to initiate discussion of an 
arbitration agreement for submission of the ter- 
ritorial dispute to the World Court. But the re- 
current bickering of the parties promises as 
thorny a road for this procedure as that already 
encountered. Fears are now expressed that in- 
creasing recalcitrance on the part of both nations 
may lead to a renewal of the costly and futile 


struggle. CHARLES A. THOMSON 


The Revolution Betrayed, by Leon Trotzky. Translated 


by Max Eastman. Garden City, Doubleda Doran, 

1937. $2.50 

With undiminished vigor Trotzky carries o contro 
versy with Stalin regarding the objectives an hods 


of the Soviet system. He contends that the sional rela 
of the Soviet Union have betrayed the cause of socialism, 
calls for a political revolution to overthrow the party 
bureaucracy. 


Social Aspects of the Banana Industry, by Charles David 


Kepner, Jr. New York, Columbia University Press, 
1936. $3.00 


A study of the United Fruit Company and its relations | 


with labor and planters. 


Japan’s Feet of Clay, by Freda Utley. New York, Norton, | 


1937. $3.75 

The Western powers are exhorted to call Japan’s bluff by 
firm opposition to the territorial expansion which may one 
day ameliorate its economic and social weaknesses. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 35, Jung 25, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMoNnD Lzstim BugLt, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MIcHELES Dran, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


FC 


Ani 


