BEG 




















itet- 


ds a 


dline 


cord 


5.00 


3.00 


32.00 


Jational 
ered 
at leas 





Univar-st¢ 
22 % we Ssly 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


. 
chies 
Ch 


od tr. 
- *+504-- 


~ dhe 


Ann Arbor, Michican 





_ FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





You. XXIV, No. 7 


DECEMBER 1, 1944 





AS replies to Argentina’s request for a conference 
of Foreign Ministers come in from the various 
American governments, it seems probable that an 
inter-American conference on post-war affairs will 
be held shortly, but that the Argentine question will 
be handled, if at all, incidentally to the main busi- 
ness of the assembly. Mr. Stettinius, whose nomina- 
tion to succeed Mr. Hull as Secretary of State was 
announced on November 27, declared three days 
earlier that final decision would devolve on the Gov- 
ening Board of the Pan American Union. 


LATIN AMERICA IN FERMENT. If and when 
the conference is held, it will be without the repre- 
sentation of Argentina and San Salvador, neither of 
which has been recognized by the majority of the 
other American governments. By their absence the 
fact will be stressed that the New World union 
of states is faced with problems as grave as any it 
has ever encountered in its fifty years of existence. 

For five years participants, directly or indirectly, 
in the world war, the people of Latin America are 
again turning their attention to the pressing need for 


_ political, economic and social reform at home. Po- 


litical shifts, upheavals and revolutions in Central 
America, Ecuador and Bolivia, and further south 
among the countries within the Argentine orbit, do 
not seem to fall into the old familiar pattern of one- 
man seizure of power. Instead, they appear to owe 
their existence to a combination of novel factors: 
wartime social and economic dislocations; widening 
cleavages between Left and Right; a growing aware- 
ness of the evils of governments palpably maintained 
by force; and such ideological challenges of the war 
years as the Four Freedoms and the Atlantic Charter, 
which have made a serious and lasting impression on 
the rank and file of Latin America. 

For the first time in the history of Latin America, 
perhaps, the man in the street is taking an active and 
Sustained part in bringing about political reform. The 





WARTIME CONDITIONS GENERATE UNREST IN LATIN AMERICA 


revolutions of last spring and summer in San Salva- 
dor and Guatemala were the result of popular agita- 
tions, in the course of which the new weapon of 
passive resistance was introduced. When the revolu- 
tion in Guatemala showed evidence of backfiring to 
the advantage of the former dictator Jorge Ubico 
through his tool, Provisional President Federico 
Ponce, the people rose again on October 20, in a not- 
so-bloodless revolt, to establish a more democratic 
government and elect a Constituent Assembly. Oppo- 
sition broke out in San Salvador on the same date. But 
the uprising which effected a people’s victory in Gua- 
temala, in San Salvador only perpetuated the ascend- 
ancy of military elements, now headed by Colonel 
Osmin Aguirre. The people of that small but poli- 
tically conscious country, however, have not yet been 
subdued—as evidenced by reports of strikes, rioting 
and underground resistance. The San Salvadoreans 
have established the first government-in-exile in this 
hemisphere, with headquarters in Mexico. Mean- 
while, the tottering dictatorships of Honduras and 
Nicaragua may join with the government of Salvador 
in throwing a cordon sanitaire atound Guatemala to 
prevent spread of revolution by exiles now safe in 
Guatemala and Mexico. 


THE “ARGENTINE TANAKA MEMORIAL.” 
Further south, closer union of Colombia, Venezuela 
and Ecuador is being sought. The movement for 
“Greater Colombia” may be interpreted simply as 
a step toward the realization of Simén Bolivar’s old 
dream of federation. It may be, on the other hand, 
an attempt to seek mutual protection against pos- 
sible Argentine expansionist tendencies. It is not im- 
possible that the Foreign Offices of Bogota and 
Caracas have seen the document purportedly issued 
on May 3, 1943 by the Argentine G.O.U. to army 
officers, stating that ‘‘in South America, it is our mis- 
sion to make the leadership of Argentina not only 
possible but indisputable. Once we have won power, 











it will be necessary to arm ourselves constantly. Hit- 
ler’s fight in peace and war will guide us.” 
According to this program of aggression, a bloc 
of southern states will be forged by means of alli- 
ances with Paraguay, Bolivia and Chile, and _pres- 
sure subsequently exerted on Uruguay and Brazil to 
combine with them. In Chile and Brazil, this docu- 
ment is not being dismissed as a military pipe-dream. 
In Chile, the demand for closer economic and politi- 
cal union with Buenos Aires may become a feature 
of the program of the parties of the Right. Already 
such leading politicians as ex-President Arturo Ales- 
sandri—who has recently been elected Senator, and 
Galvarino Gallardo, Mayor of Santiago, have ex- 
pressed themselves in favor of closer relations with 
Argentina. Meanwhile, from behind the censorship 
curtaining Brazil, rumors escape to indicate that the 
question of recognizing the Farrell-Perén government 
may be dividing the country as it has divided Chile. 
The reactionary elements now uppermost in the 
Vargas government that rules Brazil might draw 
comfort from the support of like-minded elements 
in the Farrell government. Counterbalancing this 


Page Two 








consideration, however, is the traditional rivalry be- 
tween Argentina and Brazil for leadership on the 
South American continent. Brazil, which counts as 
immediate neighbors all the South American coun- 
tries except Chile, is equally concerned with what 
happens in Uruguay, Paraguay and Bolivia, and in 
these countries its interests seem more likely to clash 
than to coincide with those of Argentina. In addition, 
United States disapproval of a resumption of diplo- 
matic relations between Rio de Janeiro and Buenos 
Aires would weigh heavily with Vargas. 


Beyond the immediate and obvious problems 
which an inter-American conference must face— 
participation in the proposed security organization, 
development and correlation of post-war economic 
programs, and the like—there is, then, the need to 
review hemisphere relationships and to find some 
basis for continued collaboration. This imponderable 
cannot be listed on an official agenda; but it will be 
implicit in all that is said and done at the conference. 


O.LIvE HOLMES 


(The second in a series of articles on post-war Latin America.) 


RUSSIAN AID IN LIBERATION AFFECTS NORWAY’S FOREIGN POLICY 


With Red Army forces and a small Norwegian 
vanguard fighting side by side on Norway's Arctic 
front, the liberation of the first Western European 
nation to fall to the Wehrmacht in 1940 has begun. 
Although in its initial phases the Battle of Norway 
has been fought for small towns that seem remote 
and relatively unimportant to most Norwegians, and 
has involved naval and air bases the Nazis used in 
attacking Russia-bound convoys, these actions have 
succeeded in whittling down strength the Nazis 
might otherwise have used farther south. The Nor- 
wegians are not unduly optimistic about the date of 
liberation, however, and are aware that the approx- 
imately 175,000 German troops now in Norway will 
continue to use their present scorched-earth policy 
to impede the Russian drive southwestward. To 
speed up the fighting and restrict the destructive Ger 
man rearguard actions, Norwegians feel the Red 
Army's land campaign will have to be supplemented 
by Anglo-American naval operations. 

RUSSIA AS A NEW NEIGHBOR. Russia's par- 
ticipation in Norway's liberation and the establish- 
ment of a Russo-Norwegian frontier as a result of 
Finland's cession of Petsamo to the U.S.S.R., make it 
necessary for the Norwegian government to clarify 
its relationships with its new neighbor in the far 
north. Accordingly, Foreign Minister Trygve Lie ar- 
rived in Moscow on November 6 for extended talks 
with Soviet officials. The first questions discussed 
were of a practical nature and involved further im- 
plementation of the agreement reached by the Nor- 
wegian and Russian governments on May 17 for 
as military 


restoration of local government as soon 


operations permitted. 

The Red Army is reported to have been scrup- 
ulously correct in carrying out these Russo-Norwe- 
gian arrangements. The Russians have also agreed 
to turn over the administration of the liberated ter- 
ritories behind their lines to Norwegian ‘police’ 
forces trained in Sweden. These forces consist of 
young Norwegians who fled to Sweden during the 
years of German occupation and there volunteered 
for police duties in their native country following 
its liberation. During their training in Sweden these 
men, who number approximately eight or nine thou- 
sand, have been schooled both under Swedish Army 
officers and leaders from their own army who escaped 
to Sweden, and are now capable of serving as second- 
line troops. To assure these police forces’ entry into 
Norway before the country is entirely liberated, as 
required by the original Swedish plan, the Nor- 
wegian Foreign Minister stopped in Stockholm en 
route to the Kremlin. The Swedish government, in 
line with its current policy of supporting the Allies— 
and particularly Norway—as openly as its neutrality 
permits, granted the Norwegian request, and at least 
a part of the police forces are believed to be already 
on their way to northern Norway by a secret route. 

Russian approval of a food relief program for 
Norway was also sought by the Norwegian Foreign 
Minister during his visit to Moscow, and there are 
indications that it has been secured. The Norwegian 
eovernment feels that immediate food relief is vital, 
for present Allied strategy which requires that 
German troops in Norway be locked in and pre- 
vented from joining in the battle of Germany—has 





we Oe ae 





re 





——— 


ee ee oe 


* 


* ea i: RS ST aia a Rte cc 


1 eats tons 


ites of 





»- <n 


— age 
Pesci rat etal A le 











id- 








Oe 


I aad 

















resulted in stopping all traffic between Norway and 
the Reich. It is consequently no longer possible for 
the Germans to bring food and other supplies into 
Norway, as they have done in former years, and the 
Nazis are requisitioning increasingly larger amounts 
of food and equipment locally. To meet this crisis, 
the Norwegian government proposes that food ob- 
tained from Sweden, with the recent Swedish grant 
of 200,000,000 crowns ($50,000,000) in credit for 
relief, be sent to Norway under supervision of the 
International Red Cross and Sweden. 

WHAT FUTURE FOREIGN POLICY? In the 
new Europe that is emerging from the war, in which 
Germany will no longer be a dominant nation and 
Russia will exercise strong influence, Norway's posi- 
tion in international affairs—like that of most of the 
Continental nations—will require considerable re- 
orientation. In Norwegian opinion, there is little rea- 
son for the belief that the Scandinavian community 
that existed before the war will resume its old form. 
One reason is that Finland has now been placed 
under Russian control, and although the Norwegian 
vovernment merely severed relations with Finland 
following Britain’s declaration of war against that 
country in 1941, it is eager to avoid any involvement 


Page Three 








in Finnish-Russian affairs. As a form of insurance 
against such involvement, Norway has reached an 
informal agreement with the Russians, whereby the 
Red Army will prevent Finnish forces—now about 35 
miles from the Norwegian border—from entering 
Norway in the course of action against the Nazis. 

A change may also be expected in Norway's atti- 
tude toward Britain. In the past, most of Norway's 
commercial as well as political ties have been with 
the West because of its heavy dependence on imports 
and, therefore, on overseas trade. Nothing would 
seem more natural, accordingly, than that Norway 
should join the projected British bloc in Western 
Europe after the war. Such a step may not, however, 
be taken by the Norwegians because of both eco- 
nomic and poltical considerations. In the economic 
sphere, it may appear necessary for Norway to form 
commercial ties with many nations besides Britain, 
and particularly with the United States, in order to 
obtain the shipbuilding facilities needed to restore its 
merchant fleet—more than half of which has been 
destroyed during the war. And in the realm of inter- 
national politics the Norwegians feel that they can- 
not afford to join a bloc that might be viewed with 


distrust by Russia. WIniFRED N. HADSEL 


AFGHANISTAN LEADS THE MIDDLE EAST ON OPIUM 


Afghanistan will prohibit all planting of the 
opium poppy from March 21, 1945. The State De- 
partment, on November 20, released the announce- 
ment of policy in which Afghanistan declares that, 

in the interest of international cooperation and be- 
cause of humanitarian sentiment,” it is ready to take 
this important step. The opium it exported was used 
for legitimate drug manufacture for medical and 
scientific use. Instead of claiming any share in the 
legitimate export market for medical and scientific 
needs, Afghanistan is stopping all production of the 
raw material. Thus, it is willing to eliminate, in one 
drastic move, a product which amounts to a consid- 
erable percentage of its total export trade. 

This action proves not only Afghanistan’s desire 
to collaborate internationally but also its freedom of 
action. This nation enjoys independence in an im- 
portant strategic area in the Middle East. Its action 
on opium shows what a country so situated can do 
when it is not subject to political pressures from great 
powers, directly or indirectly. By this action, Afghan- 
istan becomes a leader of the Middle East in matters 
of humanitarian sentiment and international coopera- 
tion. Its decision raises sharply the question as to 
what action Iran and India will take in replying to 
the resolution—first introduced in Congress by Rep- 


resentative Walter Judd of Minnesota—authorizing 
the President to urge countries producing opium to 
limit the volume of production strictly to medical 
and scientific purposes.* Iran has frequently declared 
that it could not make any reduction in its poppy 
acreage without a foreign loan to compensate for the 
loss of revenue, and technical agricultural assistance 
to its opium farmers for substitution of crops—in 
spite of the fact that its international position has 
been complicated over many years by large seizures 
of Iranian opium in the illicit traffic. India has always 
heretofore maintained that the sale of government 
opium for eating through government-licensed shops 
fills a ‘‘quasi-medical need” and, as an internal ques- 
tion, is not subject to treaty limitation. 


Experience has proved to governments that addic- 
tion among their own nationals does occur in those 
areas where the opium poppy is produced. Afghan- 
istan will no longer permit this danger, which might 
eventually debase its own sturdy peasants. Seldom be- 
fore in the international history of opium control has 
a country given more heartening proof that it is 
facing the future with wisdom and vision. 


HELEN HOWELL MOorRHEAD 


*See Foreign Policy Bulletin, July 21, 1944. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 7, DecemBerR 1, 1944. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


} 


eo 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed hy union labor. 


Washington News Letter 

















WILL INTERNATIONALIST MEMBERS OF CONGRESS WIN LEADERSHIP? 


The manner in which Congress responds during 
the coming two years to foreign policy proposals 
from the White House will depend in some measure 
on the willingness of newly elected, internationally 
minded members of the Senate and House to take 
positions of leadership in debate while they are yet 
fledglings. Few of the new members are likely to 
be ‘selected by their colleagues for key positions of 
direct influence on foreign policy inside Congress— 
such as membership in the Senate Foreign Relations 
or the House Foreign Affairs committees. The two 
houses of Congress customarily honor seniority in 
major committee selections, and the committees 
possess the great power of ignoring any matter re- 
ferred to them. Only extraordinary pressure from 
other members and the public can move committees 
against their will. 


STRENGTH OF NEW CONGRESSMEN. Yet 
the group of mew members may exercise unusual 
indirect influence on Congressional attitudes toward 
policy. Their election apparently reflected a strong 
desire on the part of the voters for United States 
participation in an international organization, and 
this trend in popular sentiment can fortify the large 
number of veteran Senators and Congressmen who 
share the views of those who will become their col- 
leagues with the opening of the Seventy-Ninth Con- 
gress on January 3. 

This gathering of strength has greater importance 
in the Senate than in the House, where the Adminis- 
tration’s following is more regular. The outstanding 
Senators-elect with internationalist sympathies are 
J. W. Fulbright, Democrat of Arkansas, who played 
a leading role during his first term in the House; 
Brian McMahon, Democrat of Connecticut; John 
Moses, Democrat of North Dakota; Francis J. Myers, 
Democrat of Pennsylvania; Leverett Saltonstall, Re- 
publican of Massachusetts; H. Alexander Smith, Re- 
publican of New Jersey; and Bourke Hickenlooper, 
Republican of Iowa. 

Some of these newcomers to the Senate enjoy wider 
national reputations than many already there. Ful- 
bright’s name is attached to the first resolution passed 
by Congress in support of United States member- 
ship in an international organization. Saltonstall be- 
came well known as Governor of Massachusetts, and 
Hickenlooper as Governor of Iowa. McMahon, a 
former Assistant Attorney General of the United 


FOR VICTORY ° 


States, is familiar to Washington. Moses, a lawyer, 
while not nationally known, symbolizes with special 
clarity the trend away from isolationism. Not only 
did he defeat Senator Gerald P. Nye, but he won in 
spite of the fact that during much of the election 
campaign he was confined to the Mayo Clinic in 
Rochester, Minnesota. 


NEW FOREIGN RELATIONS COMMITTEE. 
While the Democratic and Republican Steering Com- 
mittees are expected to choose none of these new 
men for the Senate Foreign Relations Committee 
of the Seventy-Ninth Congress, the Democrats at 
least are disposed to select members who support 
international collaboration. The 1944 primaries and 
election retired from the Senate five of the Commit- 
tee’s twenty-three members—two isolationist Demo- 
crats, Robert R. Reynolds of North Carolina and 
Bennett Champ Clark of Missouri; one lukewarm, 
internationalist Democrat, Guy Gillette of lowa; and 
two isolationist Republicans, Nye and James J. Davis 
of Pennsylvania. The leading candidates for two of 
the Democratic vacancies are Carl Hatch of New 
Mexico and Scott Lucas of Illinois, both internation- 
alist supporters of the Administration. 


Yet, at the same time that voters in some staies 
were electing energetic friends of an international 
organization, others re-elected a number of isola- 
tionists, notably Alexander Wiley of Wisconsin and 
Charles Tobey of New Hampshire; and sent to the 
Senate for the first time some men whose policies are 
not yet clear, among them- Homer Capehart, Repub- 
lican of Indiana, a successful businessman in sev- 
eral fields. A number of Senators previously con- 
sidered isolationists will sit in the Seventy-Ninth 
Congress as hold-overs. Some of them—Hiram John- 
son, Arthur Capper, Robert M. LaFollette, Wallace 
H. White, Jr., and Henrik Shipstead—are members 
of the Foreign Relations Committee. 


Time will show whether these men, known as iso- 
lationists, will change the views they have sincerely 
held because many voters seemed to favor interna- 
tional collaboration. Meanwhile, new Senators like 
Fulbright and Saltonstall will battle for their cause 
beside Senator Joseph M. Ball, Republican of Minne- 
sota, one of the most outspoken Senatorial interna- 
tionalists who, nevertheless, is not a member of the 
Foreign Relations Committee. 


BLA BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 








