FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


>pposed 
ree can 
rinciple 
e these 
> on the 
rogram, 
MSON 


rinciples 
among 


aly and 
inst Ge. 
tvive by 
without 
il devel- 
il means 
fovenant 
raw ma- 
ed. The 
onsisting 
: Europe 
»£ small 
ictatorial 
erely act 
a course 
h might 
neutrals 
- Scandi- 
ips have 
the basis 
nsigence 
yuld end 
nh a new 
all their 
ss rather 
rve as a 
negotiate 
a settle- 
possible. 


DEAN 


Jhittlesey. 


ary prob- 
e old gold 
tible with 
ility. He 
nge rates, 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


. FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


2 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


| (EKA 


ira 
~ a 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Won. -XVIT,” No. 9 


DECEMBER 24, 1937 


CAN JAPAN BE QUARANTINED? 
by John C. deWilde 


Japan’s invasion of China has once more raised the 
question of imposing economic penalties against aggres- 
sor nations. This report discusses the effectiveness—and 
the danger—of isolating Japan by imposing an embargo 
on shipments of raw materials, and at the same time 
reviews the League’s experience in imposing sanctions 
on Italy. 


December 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


General Library 


25 cents a copy 7 


————— 
—_ 


“PANAY”—A TEST OF U.S. FOREIGN POLICY 


— stern attitude displayed by the United States 
in the Panay incident may be fraught with grave 
consequences for both: this country and Japan. In 
Washington this incident revealed the ease with 
which considerations of national prestige may bring 
America to the brink of hostilities, despite the 
strongest desire to remain aloof from foreign wars. 
In Tokyo it has apparently demonstrated the conse- 
quences of a heedless and uncontrolled militaristic 
policy, which tends to force Japan’s potential ad- 
vetsaries to adopt parallel measures of retaliation, 
while its defensive strength is scattered more and 
more thinly over the vast expanse of China. 

Recognizing the precarious nature of their situa- 
tion, responsible Japanese officials have striven to 
placate American opinion. Tokyo, at first inclined 
to demur at the unprecedented request that President 
Roosevelt's concern be conveyed to the Emperor, has 
since shown willingness to overlook traditional pro- 
cedure in this instance. Full details concerning the 
attack were personally transmitted to the throne by 
Prime Minister Konoe on December 18. It was in- 
timated that an Imperial response might be forth- 
coming. To the official Japanese apology and as- 
surances, delivered to Ambassador Grew two hours 
before receipt of the’ formal American protest on 
December 14, there were soon added numerous ex- 
pressions of regret by military and naval authorities. 
In this country, Ambassador Saito broadcast a state- 
ment on December 19 stressing Japan’s intention to 
make reparation for the “shocking blunder” and pre- 
vent recurrence of similar events. Of greater im- 
port was the announcement on December 16 that 
Rear Admiral Keizo Mitsunami, chief of Japanese 
naval air operations in China, had been relieved of 
his command and ordered home forthwith. 

These measures, however, satisfied neither the 
United States nor Britain, which had followed the 


American lead on December 15 by formally protest- 
ing the shelling of its own Warships and merchant 
vessels. The American note to Japan insisted that 
American vessels were in the’ Yangtze “by uncon- 
tested and incontestable right,’ and that “acts of 
Japanese armed forces have taken place in complete 
disregard of American rights, have taken American 
life and have destroyed American property, both 
public and private.” The British cited a statement by 
Colonel Kingoro Hashimoto, commanding Japanese 
military officer at Wuhu, that he had orders to fire 
on every ship on the river. Both governments de- 
manded evidence that definite and specific steps 
would be taken to guarantee the safety of their na- 
tionals and property against irresponsible attack by 
military authorities. 

Confronted by the spectre of possible joint action 
by Britain and the United States, the Japanese have 
maintained that the incidents were not deliberate 
militaristic excesses but simply accidents on the part 
of troops eager to intercept Chinese forces in flight 
from beleaguered Nanking. The credibility of tne 
Japanese explanation, however, has been severely 
shaken: first, by survivors’ accounts of the machine- 
gunning of the Panay by army launches—which Jap- 
anese army officials denied; and second, by flatly con- 
tradictory assertions of fact on the part of military, 
naval and diplomatic spokesmen in Tokyo on the 
one hand, and a general staff representative at 
Shanghai on the other. From the fog of evasion and 
confusion in the Japanese capital the fact has 
emerged that the adroit American appeal to the 
Emperor has for the first time in many months 
provided the relatively moderate Japanese civilian 
authorities with an opportunity to check the rampant 
military. The withdrawal of a high naval officer 
from the field of battle while Colonel Hashimoto, 
the responsible army commander, remains at his 


post, has suggested possible repetition of the poli- 
tical situation which existed early in 1937, when 
the entire country, including the navy, opposed the 
army's attempt to inaugurate a régime intended 
to further its program. Today the army high 
command itself appears divided. The conservative 
faction has stressed the necessity for the preservation 
of discipline; the reactionary clique of younger ofh- 
cers—among whom Colonel Hashimoto is a leading 
figure—has invoked high political support in behalf 
of his aggressive policies. This complex and obscure 
struggle may lead to a shift in the balance of poli- 
tical forces in Japan. 

In both the United States and Britain the tense 
diplomatic situation has provoked rumors that one 
or both of these powers might stage naval demon- 
strations to impress the Japanese with the gravity of 
their offense. Officials in both countries have denied 
that such measures are being contemplated. Britain 
could ill afford to send an imposing naval contin- 
gent to the East, even temporarily, without danger- 
ously weakening its defenses in the North Sea and 
the Mediterranean; and it is doubtful that such a 
bellicose move would now be supported by the Amer- 
ican public. Yet it is significant that a new American 
naval program calling for additional capital ships, 
cruisers, aircraft carriers and other vessels is being 
publicized in the wake of the emotions aroused by 
the Panay crisis. 

Should the conflict in China be prolonged, further 
American casualties may be expected, particularly 
since Secretary Hull on December 20 expressed 
strong opposition to the withdrawal of American 
forces from China in the near future. Many Amer- 
icans would support a firm protest to Japan if it 
were made on broad grounds of the necessity for 
curbing aggression or maintaining the sanctity of trea- 
ties. But in this instance hostilities, if they occur, will 
be precipitated through insistence on the safety of 
American life and property abroad—a_ prospect 
which does not appeal either to advocates of collec- 
tive security or to those of neutrality. Neither group 
can in conscience support a unilateral conflict waged 
for the maintenance of national honor. The ultimate 
problem is that of renouncing the tactics of power 
politics in a world in which they seem to rule su- 
preme. Only a resolute choice between international 
cooperation and isolationist neutrality can afford a 
visible alternative. The decision is not an easy one, 
but unless it is made this country may run the risk 
of aimlessly drifting from one inflammatory incident 
to another, until at last it reaches the impasse which 
confronted it in 1917. Daviw H. Popper 


TRUJILLO ACCEPTS CONCILIATION 


The Dominican Republic, by accepting on Decem- 
ber 17 a conciliation proposal for its controversy 


Page Two = 


LT 
ee 


with Haiti, may allay a serious danger to the peace 
of the Western Hemisphere. Relations between the 
two republics have been severely strained since the 
reported massacre early in October of some thov- 
sands of Haitian civilians by Dominican troops. De. 
spite Dominican contentions that the affair repre. 
sented a minor border incident, press dispatches in. 
dicated that wholesale killings had been carried out 
at widely separated points in the Dominican Re. 
public, often at a distance from the frontier. Pres. 
ident Stenio Vincent of Haiti had appealed for in. 
ternational action to solve the difficulty—a sugges. 
tion opposed by the Dominican President, Rafael L, 
Trujillo, who advocated a settlement through inves- 
tigation by Dominican officials and direct negotia. 
tions between the parties. 

In support of its position the Dominican | 
ment cited an official communiqué issued jointly with 
the Haitian government on October 15. This doc 
ment declared that “the Dominican Government after 
energetically condemning the facts that have been 
denounced to it has immediately opened a searching 
investigation, with the purpose of fixing responsi- 
bilities and of applying the sanctions that may be 
necessary.’ Haiti's concurrence in this statement sug- 
gests that its government was at first disposed to 
hush the matter up and leave Dominican officials re- 
sponsible for settlement. In the past, the two Pres- 
idents have cooperated closely; both head dictatorial 
régimes, although the government of Vincent is less 
absolute and oppressive than that of Trujillo. But 
as news of the massacre leaked out, popular indig- 
nation rose in Haiti, and Vincent’s opponents pre- 
pared to make political capital of the situation. 

With his domestic position thus threatened, Pres- 
ident Vincent on November 12 declared that the 
Dominican investigation had been too “prolonged,” 
and requested Cuba, Mexico and the United States 
to tender their good offices. This invitario: 
cepted, but the efforts of the three friend|; 
came to naught, as a result of Dominican unwilling 
ness to recognize that the matter had become an it- 
ternational question. 

On December 15 the United States, as one of the 


was ac- 
nations 


DEC 
amend 
duced 
damen 
ably b 
self. W 
cision, 
ona ' 

f bill 
amend 
resolut 
drawa 


posals. 


lesser 
hand 
affairs 


To 
measu 
prestis 
other 
encou: 
the A 
of act 
Congt 
to ret: 
tion Oo 
a free 


° 3 
WhICH 


Te 


the i 
this |, 
. years 
in th 
last v 


parties to the good offices, sent other American gov- 
ernments a message regarding the negotiations which 


gave substantial support to the Haitian case. It an-| 


nounced that “the incidents had assumed an inter- 
national aspect,’ termed the controversy ‘‘a factor 
susceptible of disturbing the peace of the American | 
continent,” and approved invocation by Haiti on! 


December 14 of the inter-American conciliation 
treaties. In answer apparently to this message, Do- 
minican officials at Washington made public on De 
cember 17 a lengthy statement, which declared that 
international action would “imply an extraneous in- 


(Continued on Page 4) 


to a 

floor 
| the f 
| “Exce 
State: 
its ci 
gress 
confi 
a na 
shall 
ilar | 
and 


a 


1€ peace 
een the 
ince the 
e thov- 
ps. De. 
r repre. 
ches in. 
ried out 
can Re. 
rt. Pres. 
- for in- 
sugges 
afael L, 
h inves- 
ne gotia- 
tly with 
1S docu- 
ent after 
ive been 
earching 
esponsi- 
may be 
lent sug- 
osed to 
icials re- 
wo Pres- 
ctatorial 
nt is less 
illo. But 
ar indig- 
ents pre- 
ion. 
ed, Pres- 
that the 
longed,” 
ed States 
was ac- 
> nations 
willing: 
ne afi in- 


ne of the 
ican gov- 
yns which 
se. It an- 
an inter- 
“a factor 
American 
Haiti on 
nciliation 
sage, Do- 
ic on De 
ared that 


neous in- 


W. ashington News Letter 


, 


stbben, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Dec. 21.—The’ sudden emergence of the Ludlow 
amendment in the midst of the diplomatic crisis pro- 
duced by the Panay incident brings to a head a fun- 
damental issue of national policy which is consider- 
ably broader than the war referendum proposal it- 
self. While the issue has not been defined with pre- 
cision, it promises to dominate Congressional debate 
on a wide variety of measures during the regular 
session beginning in January. It is found in a score 
of bills and resolutions now pending: all kinds of 
amendments to the Neutrality Act, arms embargo 
resolutions, scrap iron embargoes, requests for with- 
drawal of armed forces from China and similar pro- 
posals. For each of these measures, in greater or 
lesser degree, will tend to strengthen or weaken the 
hand of the President in the conduct of foreign 
affairs. 

To the State Department, the test of every such 
measure will be its effect on the influence, power and 
prestige of the United States in world affairs: in 
other words, does it tend to discourage aggression or 
encourage potential treaty-breakers in the belief that 
the American people will fight for no cause short 
of actual invasion? To a large body of opinion in 
Congress, the test is whether the American people are 
to retain any voice in deciding the paramount ques- 
tion of war, or whether the Executive is to be given 
a free hand to commit the nation on some incident 
which the people do not think worth fighting for. 


The Ludlow 
n, it is now beginning to be realized, is only 
the first of many legislative measures which pose 
this larger issue. Originally introduced nearly three 


Terms of Ludlow Amendment. 


resol 


. years ago, the war referendum had been pigeonholed 


in the Judiciary committee for many months until 
last week, when its sponsors secured 218 signatures 
to a discharge petition which will bring it to the 
floor of the House on January 10. The terms of 
the proposed constitutional amendment are brief: 
“Except in the event of an invasion of the United 
States or its territorial possessions and attack upon 
its citizens residing therein, the authority of Con- 
gress to declare war shall not become effective until 
confirmed by a majority of all votes cast thereon in 
a nation-wide referendum . . . the question being 
shall the United States declare war on 2” Sim- 
ilar resolutions introduced by Senators La Follette 
and Clark make the referendum inoperative in the 


event that “any North American or Caribbean na- 
tion” is invaded, and another House resolution spon- 
sored by Representative Ashbrook seeks to reserve 
the Monroe Doctrine. 

The case for the referendum, as presented by its 
sponsors, rests on the simple contention that the 
American people should be given an opportunity to 
decide not only the routine matters but the funda- 
mentals of public policy. A democracy which permits 
its citizens to cast their ballots for everything from 
“dog catchers to constables,” they s ‘Y, , to give 
them a voice in the momentous decision to wage wat 
abroad. Senator La Nay speaking in support of 
the referendum, said: “A declaration of war can, 
without further check Ne the people, set up a vir- 
tual military dictatorship, send millions of men to 
death in foreign lands, open the sluice gates to bil- 
lions of war loans to foreign nations and burden 
down the nation with more than double the present 
national debt.’ The authority to declare war, it is 
argued, should not rest with a small group of men 
subject to political pressures. If the American people 
are competent to elect Senators and representatives 
to make so important a decision, they are competent 
to make the decision themselves. 

Answers to this argument have come from many 
quarters inside and outside the Administration. Pres- 
ident Roosevelt, asked at his press conference wheth- 
er a war referendum was “consistent with repre- 
sentative government,’ answered in one word— 

o.” Secretary Hull emphatically declared: “From 
the standpoint of op peace and keeping this 
country out of war, I am unable to see the wisdom 
or practicability of this proposi l.”” Opponents, while 
conceding the high motives which inspired the plan, 
assert that the referendum would actually expose 
the country to the very dangers which it seeks to 
avoid. It would encourage the present reign of law- 
lessness and would virtually invite attack on Amer- 
ican shipping, commerce and interests anywhere out- 
side our own borders. It would condone violations 
of the Monroe Doctrine by leaving in doubt the 
willingness of the American people to resist en- 
croachments against South American nations. In 
short, it proposes that we ignore any and all threats 
which affect the vital interests of the nation, up to 
the point of actual invasion. By that time, it is 
argued, American armed forces would be placed at a 
serious disadvantage by the delay in holding the 
plebiscite, and they might in fact become involved 
in hostilities without declaration of war. While some 


=— 


of the referendum proposals cover the Monroe Doc- 
trine and seek to prevent the use of armed forces 
outside of the United States, no legislation—not 
even a Constitutional amendment—can prevent a 
belligerent or blundering President from creating a 
warlike situation. 


But the central issue overshadows these relatively 
minor arguments. Mr. Roosevelt and Mr. Hull op- 
pose the amendment because they know it will make 
them impotent in the only kind of diplomacy which 
seems to carry weight in the world today. If the 
amendment were adopted, the President could pro- 
test the sinking of another gunboat on the Yangtze, 
but he could not back up his notes with anything 
stronger than an appeal to reason. And, in dealing 
with treaty-breaking powers, that would be regarded 
as tantamount to abandoning the use of diplomacy. 


Yet the emergence of the war referendum is es- 
sentially a symbol of the instinctive popular distrust 
of power-politics diplomacy. If the President wants 
a free hand to use diplomacy to prevent war, Con- 
gress wants to know how he intends to play his 
hand. Does he propose to prevent war by seeking to 
find some basis for political and economic appease- 
ment? If so, he will find some, but not much, op- 
position in Congress. Or does he simply propose to 
outplay the dictators in the game of bluff, to write 
diplomatic notes backed by the threat to fight? Last 
week Congress showed considerable restraint in com- 
menting on the Panay bombing. A few strident 
voices called for strong action, but the overwhelm- 
ing majority, while supporting a firm protest, showed 
no desire to create a diplomatic impasse or to whip 
up war emotions. Some even looked with misgivings 
on the unusual publicity devices employed by the 
State Department to arouse public opinion on the 
issue of national honor. Given two or three more 
Panay incidents, Congress may be ready to give the 


Page Four 


Executive a free hand; but when it does, its action § 


will be more likely to vindicate ‘national honor” 
by armed force than to prevent war by international 


cooperation. WILLIAM T. STONE 


TRUJILLO ACCEPTS CONCILIATION 
(Continued from Page 2) 
tervention” in the internal affairs of their country, 
and expressed opposition to conciliation procedures, 
Pressure from Washington and other American cap- 
itals may have been responsible for almost imme. 
diate reversal of this stand. 

The two treaties invoked by Haiti—the Gondra 
accord of 1923 and the Convention of Inter-Amer- 
ican Conciliation of 1929—provide for five-member 
commissions of inquiry and conciliation. Each party 
to the dispute is authorized to name two members, 
only one of whom in each case may be its national, 
The four members thus selected choose a president 
from some neutral state. Pending organization of 
the five-member commission, the treaties provide that 
a committee composed of the three senior diplomatic 
representatives of American nations in Washington 
may initiate conciliatory endeavors. This committee, 
consisting of the representatives of Guatemala, Peru 
and Argentina, held its first meeting on December 
15, and extended the invitation which was ac 
cepted by the Dominican Republic two days later. 
Whether this peace machinery can operate success- 
fully depends in the last analysis on the willingness 
of both parties to cooperate. Should obstructionist 
tactics on the part of the Dominican Republic sabo- 
tage the effectiveness of conciliation endeavors, the 
American republics may yet be faced with the ques- 
tion whether some form of sanctions—possibly with- 
drawal of diplomatic representatives—may have to 
be considered if the maintenance of international jus- 
tice in the Western Hemisphere is to be assured. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Aliens in the East: a New History of Japan’s Foreign 
Intercourse, by Harry Emerson Wildes. Philadelphia, 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1937. $3.00 
This fascinating survey of Japan’s contact with the Oc- 

cident between 1543 and 1868 will explode the commonly 

accepted notion that the island empire was introduced to 

Western culture by Commodore Perry in 1853. Mr. Wildes’ 

excellent style is well fitted to preserve the glamorous at- 

mosphere in which Portuguese, Spanish, Dutch, British, 

Russian and American adventurers vied for religious, com- 

mercial or strategic advantage in a mystic land. Many of 

the national characteristics of the country are shown to be 
deeply rooted in Japanese history. 


Is It Peace? A Study in Foreign Affairs, by Graham 
Hutton. New York, Macmillan, 1937. $2.50 


A rather discursive account of the problems faced by 
British foreign policy, which accuses Britain and France 
of responsibility for the present Italo-German threat to 
European peace, but offers no solution beyond a program 
of expediency. 


Frank B. Kellogg, by David Bryn-Jones. New York, Put- 
nam, 1937. $3.75 


A sympathetic biography of one of the authors of the 
Anti-War Pact, which utilizes hitherto unpublished papers. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 9, December 24, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lgsiig BueLt, President; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered as second-class matter 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


— 
——— oe 


FC 


Annot 


EUR‘ 


——- 


S UI 
J 
night 
on C] 
by Ja 
Amer 
ceipt 
whict 
Hirot 
can d 
taine 
tentic 
force: 
Stress 
again 
nifica 

Th 
to ch 
trals 
there 
form: 


