


Ovide 
yf the 
could 
order, 


, and 
Js to 
uper- 


| ZOv- 





nition : 


lantic 
Reich. 
ort to 
| sub- 


reign 


ecline 
mirez’ 
wants 
Secre- 
ber 7, 


, Vice | 


iments 

while 
sphere 

alter- 
ray be 
leader 
Minis- 
stated 
: peace 
FeIness 


ibtedly 





ysal of | 


amirez 
$ agri 


1g pfo- 
na the 
is now 
) Spain 
in Sep 


) in fe 
pentina 
urished 


jisposal | 


DSEL 


943 





ma. NBER 


PERIOD. 
GENERAL LIBRE? 
wety.. UF piGe 


SEP 17 4s 
Dr. William W. Bi diafded as 2nd class mati 
% University of Michigan Library 


5 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 48 


SEPTEMBER 17, 1943 





POST-WAR ORDER TO BE ROOTED IN WAR EXPERIENCE 


a by the grim realization that Italy's 
surrender has thrown the British, Americans and 
Canadians into a life and death struggle with Ger- 
man forces now consciously fighting for defense of 
their own country, Allied statesmen are beginning 
to acquaint their peoples with the outlines of the 
world order they expect to see emerge from the con- 
flict. The degree of unanimity already achieved in 
this country, on the surface at least, was revealed 
last week. Following the statement of the Repub- 
lican Post-War Advisory Council on September 7, 
expressing support for post-war participation by the 
United States in an international organization, Sec- 
retary of State Hull in his broadcast of Septem- 
ber 12 urged nonpartisan discussion of American col- 
laboration with other free nations after the war. 
Nor did the almost simultaneous suggestion by Mr. 
Churchill and Governor Dewey that a first step to- 
ward world order is the continuance of collaboration 
between Britain and the United States—Mr. Dewey 
did not hesitate to use the word “alliance’”—evoke 
the hostile reaction that might have been anticipated 
at an earlier stage of the war. 

WORLD ORGANIZATION THE ULTIMATE 
GOAL. Yet many people in this country, and many 


| more in Asia, Latin America, and conquered Europe, 


1g SUP: | 


still fear that an Anglo-American understanding, 
whether formalized into an alliance or not, and 


| whether or not expanded to include Russia and China, 





may turn out to be a substitute for international or- 
ganization, or even an attempt to circumvent its for- 
mation. This apprehension cannot be lightly brushed 


_ aside. But before jumping to the conclusion, as some 


have done, that an understanding between Britain and 
the United States would merely underwrite the status 
quo of 1939, and thus “freeze” British interests in 
Asia, notably India, it may be useful to consider two 
points. 


First, what Mr. Churchill proposed in his 


Harvard address was the maintenance, in the post- 
war period, of the machinery of collaboration de- 
veloped by Britain and the United States during the 
war—machinery in many phases of which Russia, 
China, and others of the United Nations have par- 
ticipated. Whatever views one may hold regarding 
the merits or demerits of an Anglo-American alli- 
ance, it would seem suicidal—especially in the light 
of our experience after World War I—to dismantle 
the complex arrangements that have enabled the 
Allies to pool men, munitions, raw materials, food, 
shipping, the talents of their military and political 
leaders, and the skills and loyalties of their soldiers 
and technicians, instead of adapting these arrange- 
ments so far as possible to peacetime needs. The in- 
terests of the United Nations, to borrow an earlier 
Churchillian phrase, have become pretty thoroughly 
“mixed up” during the war. To “unmix” them the 
moment the war is over would be willfully to dissi- 
pate the only positive advantage that civilized 
peoples may be said to have gained from this gruel- 
ing ordeal. For surely acquisition of strategic bases 
or new sources of raw materials, or even thorough 
destruction of enemy wealth and power, will prove 
fruitless unless the United Nations acquire, during 
the war, a new “know-how” in the bafflingly diff- 
cult art of getting along with each other, and retain 
it after the cessation of hostilities. 


The only point that might arouse concern is Mr. 
Churchill’s statement at Harvard that the machinery 
of Anglo-American collaboration should be kept “in 
running order after the war . . . not only till we have 
set up some world arrangement to keep the peace, but 
until we know that it is an arrangement which will 
really give us that protection we must have from dan- 
ger and aggression.’” However, those who fear that 
an Anglo-American understanding might thus be 
perpetuated for an indefinite period, possibly to the 
detriment of a world organization, should find in 





——————=<_{=*=*{*__==== hein s=_=_==_"_—_—_"_= 


Mr. Churchill’s statement an incentive to create a 
world organization as soon as possible, and make it 
sufficiently effective so that the need for the pro- 
tective scaffolding of more limited engagements be- 
tween nations may soon disappear. 

INTERIM MEASURES. The second point to 
stress is that Mr. Churchill’s Harvard address, and 
his t's foreign policy, indicate he regards 
any bila arrangements merely as a steppingstone 
toward an international organization stronger and 
more effective than the League of Nations. This is 
shown by the Anglo-Soviet treaty of alliance of 
May 26, 1942, in Article III of which the two coun- 
tries declare their desire “to unite with other like- 
minded states in adopting proposals for common 
action to preserve peace and resist aggression in the 
post-war world,” but, “pending the adoption of such 
proposals,” pledge themselves, after the termination 
of hostilities, to ‘take all the measures in their power 
to render impossible a repetition of aggression and 
violation of the peace by Germany or any of the 
states associated with her in acts of aggression in 
Europe.”” What this treaty makes clear is that coun- 
tries which have suffered from the aggression of 
Germany (or Japan) and, at the same time, have 
now accumulated sufficient force to resist it, will 
insist upon retaining the use of force after the war. 
This force may either take the form of an interna- 
tional organization or, should that prove unattain- 
able in the immediate future, the form of bilateral 
or other arrangements for self-protection regarded 
as necessary interim measures. 

To assume, as some observers have done, that 
there is one way, and one way only, to achieve inter- 
national collaboration—and that is by the immedi- 
ate formation of an organization of fifty or more 
nations—may prove as dogmatic as the opposite 


assumption that no world organization can ever be 
created. The growth of political institutions is e. 
tremely slow when measured by the life-span of 

one generation. If—and admittedly this is a most 
important “if’—agreements among the United Na. 
tions which today command the force to carry out 
their decisions can pave the way to international 
organization, this approach should not be rejected 
out of hand merely because it is not perfect. Nor is 
there anything sinister in the belief, known to be 
held by President Roosevelt among others, that post. 
war reconstruction may be more effectively advanced 
by gradual fusion of the interests of the United Na. 
tions on such matters as food, relief, and so on, 
rather than by full-dress conferences such as that of 
Paris in 1919, where the possibility of workable, if 


modest, adjustments was sacrificed to all-embracing | 


plans that remained unimplemented. 

Conflicts between nations, as we should certainly 
have learned from the experience of two wars, are 
due not to any one single cause, such as the iniquity 
of munition makers, or the existence of cartels, but 
to a multiplicity of crisscrossing emotions and aspira- 
tions, some good, some evil, which cannot be satis- 
fied or alleviated merely by signing a peace treaty 
or establishing a world organization. The very fact, 
however, that Allied statesmen now incline more 
and more to shaping peace in the midst of war by a 
series of concrete decisions in specific cases makes it 
more imperative than ever that these piecemeal ad- 
justments should be inspired by a long-range vision 
representing the interests not only of the great pow- 
ers, but of all human beings who struggle, suffer, and 
die in this war, often in complete ignorance of what 





the statesmen who seek to shape their destiny have 
in mind. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The first of a series on the outlook for the future in Europe.) 


GRIM FIGHTING MARKS ASSAULT ON NAZI FORTRESS 


Although Allied setbacks at Salerno on Septem- 
ber 13 have shattered hopes for a speedy occupation 
of Italy, the broad military picture on the Mediter- 
ranean and Russian fronts remains encouraging. 
With Allied acquisition of the greater part of the 
Italian fleet, the establishment of a bridgehead at 
Salerno, and control of the “heel” as well as the 
“toe” of the peninsula, the Allies seem assured of 
ultimate victory in Italy, while the continued success 
of the massive Russian offensive has not only driven 
the Germans from the Donbas but threatens the 
Dnieper line itself. 

ITALIAN SURRENDER GREAT ALLIED 
GAIN. Conquest of Italy promises to be a difh- 
cult task. The Germans are estimated to have 
eighteen to twenty divisions in the peninsula, and 
they apparently have effective military control of the 
country from Naples to the Alps. Their supply lines 


are short, compared with those of the Allies, and 
south of the Brenner Pass are largely based on road 
transport and therefore independent of Italian rail- 
roads. The seventeen Italian divisions reportedly in 
the peninsula when the armistice was announced caf 


probably be counted out as far as opposition to the | 
Nazis is concerned—and some units may actually | 


continue to support the Germans, as a few have done 
in the Balkans. 


But the Italian surrender has greatly improved the | 


Allied position in the Mediterranean. The presence 
at Malta of 5 Italian battleships, 6 cruisers, 12 
destroyers, 1 seaplane carrier and 18 submarines 
clinches the Allied hold on the Mediterranean 
and, there as well as in other theatres, assures 


much greater freedom of action. The conquest of | 


southern Italy alone—if it includes the airfields 
of Foggia—will enable the Allies to begin an aif 








<= 


ver be 
iS ex. 
of any 

most 
d Na. 
'} Out 
tional 
“jected 
Nor is 
to be 
t post- 
vanced 
d Na- 
sO ON, 
hat of 
ble, if 
racing 


tainly 
rs, are 
liquity 
ls, but 
aspita- 
> Satis. 
treaty 
y fact, 

more 
it by a 
akes it 
~al ad- 
vision 
t pow- 
*r, and 
E what 
y have 


EAN 


uro pe.) 


Ss, and 
n road 


n rail- | 


edly in | 


ed can 
to the 
ctually 
e done 


ved the 
resence 
rs, 12 
narines 
‘ranean 
assures 
iest of 
irfields 


an ait 














SSE OO8 eee 


offensive from the south against such centers as 
Munich, Vienna, Budapest and the Ploesti oilfields 
in Rumania, all within 600 air miles. It will also 
the way to operations against Greece and Al- 
bania. Conquests further north will provide routes 
into Yugoslavia, and, if Sardinia and Corsica are 
occupied, into southern France. Even if none of 
these operations should be undertaken, the possi- 
bility that they might take place would almost cer- 
tainly compel the Nazis to divide their forces. This 
would be particularly important in Western Europe, 
where the Germans would have to split the armies 
designated for the defense of France to prepare for 
assaults from both Britain and the Mediterranean. 
Probably this very fact will lead the Germans to put 
forth every effort to defend Italy, even if it involves 
transferring some strength from the Russian front. 
RUSSIANS FORCE NAZIS BACK. But the Ger- 


man High Command is hardly in a position seriously : 


to weaken its lines in the east, where it has had 
roughly 230 German and satellite divisions facing 
possibly 300 divisions of the Red Army. After two 
months of tremendous gains by the Soviet summer 
offensive, the Nazis are in difficulty all along the 
front from Smolensk to Melitopol. In the north, 
Soviet forces had captured Bryansk by September 
13; in the center, units driving toward Kiev were 
dosing in from the north and east; in the Kharkov 
sector, the Russians pushed on toward Poltava; 
while in the south they had reached a point half-way 


between Stalino and the Dnieper. It is doubtful if 
the Red Army can break through the remaining 
German defenses to the east of the Dnieper before 
the autumn rains set in—unless the Nazis follow a 
deliberate policy of withdrawing from these posi- 
tions in order to reinforce their armies in Italy, the 
Balkans and western Europe. But, regardless of 
their strategy, it seems likely that before many 
weeks the Nazis will be forced back to the Dnieper, 
and that they will face tremendous difficulties in 
defending this position during the winter months. 

GERMANS STILL STRONG. The efficiency with 
which the Nazis took over the greater part of Italy, 
as witnessed by the opposition they are putting up 
at Salerno, and the tenacity with which they are 
meeting the Russian onslaught in the east do not 
warrant any optimistic conclusions about early Ger- 
man collapse; nor do reports reaching London re- 
garding civilian morale in Germany, where the 
people are apparently reacting to Allied raids in 
much the same way that the people of Warsaw and 
London reacted to Axis bombs. Much grim fighting 
lies ahead in Italy and Russia. Increasingly heavy 
air raids must be carried out over Germany and 
Nazi-held territory. But, in addition, one or more new 
Allied invasions—in the Balkans, southern France, 
northern France and the Lowlands, or Norway— 
will probably be necessary before final victory can 
be achieved. 

HowarbD P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


GAINS IN EUROPE SET STAGE FOR GROWING PACIFIC OFFENSIVE 


Japan’s war operations have had no direct link 
with Italy, but the splitting of the European Axis 
has caused tremors in Tokyo. The report on Septem- 
ber 13 that Britain will move naval units and troops 
to the Far East points to important actions that have 
become possible with the removal of the Italian fleet 
as a potential threat in the West. But the Japanese 
have more than this to worry about, for the basic 
assumption behind their entrance into the war in 





What role will Russia play in post-war Europe? 

For a survey of the questions preoccupying public 

opinion in the United States today, READ— 

THE U.S.S.R. AND POST-WAR EUROPE 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


August 15 issue of FoREIGN PoLticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











December 1941 is being undermined. Compared to 


this grim fact any specific problem is likely to appear 
insignificant. 


JAPAN CANNOT STAND ALONE. When the 
Japanese struck at Pearl Harbor, they probably be- 
lieved that by throwing their weight into the balance 
they would assure the ultimate victory of the Axis, 
or at least bring about a stalemate settlement from 
which they would emerge greatly enriched. Certain- 
ly they did not expect to win the war by themselves, 
especially since their geographic position prevents 
them from striking at the main centers of the United 
States, Britain and the Soviet Union. Consequently, 
loss of Italy as a partner and the weakening of Ger- 
many on the Soviet and Mediterranean fronts spells 
their ultimate doom, even though they are very far 
from the scene of the events and retain considerable 
strength. Japan is in the position of a man chained 
to a railroad track who cannot expect outside help 
in freeing himself. Even though the train may be 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 48, SEPTEMBER 17, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


Nationa! 


, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lumr, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 
scond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Sui 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


— ¥ 


ass: 
Se 5 


FA REESE SESE 


ae et SE a 
———— 


De ae lag ~22 
SS SSS eee 


ee 


aE 


fl 
i 
Hi 
ki 


| 
oh 


4] 
it 
5 

4 








a thousand miles away at the moment, he is hardly 
likely to be in good spirits. 

That Tokyo has been gravely disturbed for some 
time is clear from a series of meetings recently held 
between the Emperor and individual industrial lead- 
ers. Japan’s ruling circles are clearly concerned about 
the low level of Japanese production in comparison 
with the vast output of the United Nations, par- 
ticularly the United States. The Japanese people 
have been warned again and again in recent months 
to expect not only increasing difficulties on the 
periphery of the Empire, but air raids on the home 
islands as well. Since it is usually Japan’s policy to 
keep the truth from the public at all costs, there 
seems to be only one explanation for this frank- 
ness: that the public is so close to learning the facts 
for itself, as a result of United Nations action, that 


the government considers it wise to cushion the 
shock. 


A GATHERING OFFENSIVE. There can be no 
doubt that, even though it is still of small propor- 
tions, an offensive in Asia is already under way and 
will probably gather increasing force as the months 
pass. This is indicated by recent action in all the- 
atres of the Pacific war. On the New Guinea front 
it was announced on September 14 that Australian 
troops had taken Salamaua two days before. This 
followed the descent of American and Australian 
paratroopers near Lae, not far north of Salamaua, 
on September 5. As a result of these actions and of 
an Allied landing on the coast east of Lae, reported 
on the same day, the Japanese in the Lae-Salamaua 
area are being bottled up more and more, without any 
apparent means of escape. Their complete defeat, 
which is probably not far off, will clear the portion 
of New Guinea closest to the adjoining island of 
New Britain. The latter contains the important 
Japanese base of Rabaul—the main objective of the 
operations on New Guinea and in the Solomons. 

At the same time Far Eastern air activity has in- 
creased. It was announced on September 8 that in 
the raid—exactly a week before—on Marcus Island, 
less than 1200 miles from Tokyo, carrier-based air- 
craft destroyed an estimated 80 per cent of the 
island’s installations at a cost of three planes. In this 
attack Grumman F6F “Hellcat” fighters were used 
for the first time. On September 3 Liberator bombers, 
operating at the other end of the Pacific war, struck 
at one of the Nicobar islands in the Bay of Bengal 
on a 2,000-mile round trip from a base in India or 
Ceylon. Many observers believe that seizure of this 
island group, together with the Andamans to the 
north, is a necessary prelude to amphibious opera- 
tions against Burma. Over Burma itself Allied air- 
craft have been striking out at ships, bridges, rail- 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


Prt _—{_{_{*z{v*=*<*_<*—<#_<[][[$"—=|]]_ = || _  |=__=Z 


road facilities and oil installations. As a result of 
supply difficulties the China theatre, to the north, 
has perhaps been more quiet than the others men. 
tioned, but the United States Fourteenth Air Force 
has been attacking Japanese positions on an ar 
from the upper Yangtze river port of Ichang 
Hongkong on the southeast coast. On September 
a communiqué from China referred for the first ti 
to the use of P-38 “Lightning” planes on that f 


“JAPAN FIRST” ISSUE DEAD. These devel 
opments indicate that the desire of the American 
public for action in the Pacific is on its way toward | 
being satisfied—and not through neglect of the 
European war, but through its vigorous prosecution, 
Concentration against the western end of the Axis 
—as the advocates of a “Germany first’ policy al. 
ways insisted—has strengthened our position in the 
Far East instead of weakening it. This suggests an 
important corollary for the future: the more the 
Allies speed up the European war, making full use 
of the present situation to add new fronts to the 





Italian and Soviet theatres, the more hope will there}. 


be of stepping up the Pacific offensive to the maxi- 
mum. Only when our hands are completely free in 
the West, as a result of Germany's defeat, will the 
United Nations be able to concentrate in East Asia 
the power necessary to destroy Tokyo's military 


strength. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


ANNUAL FORUM AND 25th ANNIVERSARY 


On Saturday, October 16, the annual Forum of 
the Association will be held at The Waldorf-Astoria 
to discuss “Today's War—Tomorrow’s World.” 
There will be morning, luncheon and afternoon ses 
sions with speakers representing our own govefm- 
ment and the governments of foreign countries. The 
luncheon will also serve as the Twenty-Fifth Anni- 
versary celebration of the Association. Names of 
speakers will be announced within the next ten days. 










Please save this date and notify your friends of these 
important meetings. 





What to Do with Italy, by Gaetano Salvemini and George | 
La Piana. New York, Duell, Sloan & Pearce, 1943. $2.75 | 


A bitter warning from two historians that the com | 
bined efforts of the Vatican, the monarchy, the British | 
Foreign Office and the State Department of the United 


States may make fascism without Mussolini prevail in | 


post-war Italy. 


The Modern Democratic State, by A. D. Lindsay. New 
York, Oxford University Press, 1943. Vol. I, $3.75 


An interesting study of the growth of the democratie 
ideal and the foundation of the democratic state, including 
a restatement of the principles of democracy as they apply 


to 20th century conditions. This book will be of particular / 


interest to students of political theory. 


5 





