



ae 





L?\ 


e Bn? 


) at 
Ces. 
Ons 
ater 
, to 


ned 


nent 
the 
» the 
the 
ively 
resi- 
sides 
also 
iS to 
COM: 
stra- 
s of 
tical 
ative 
‘rom 
Con- 
com- 
- eX 
and 
Dasic 
teel. 
con- 
yuld, 
ibili- 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, No. 
wet 
\ oP 
Vou. XVIII, No. 32 Vv JUNE 2, 1939 
: ‘ ‘3 ‘uo ; ee 
For a detailed analysis of Ital? @eMands concerning Tunisia, 
Djibouti and the Suez Canal, and of the reasons why France 
resists these demands, read: 














ITALY’S AFRICAN CLAIMS AGAINST FRANCE 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


June 1 issue of FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS .. . 25 cents 








Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 











BALANCE OF POWER TURNS AGAINST GERMANY 





i ye Italo-German military alliance, signed in 
Berlin on May 22 with unusual ceremony, was 
intended both to checkmate Poland’s unexpected 
resistance over Danzig and to forestall consumma- 
tion of the Anglo-Soviet pact. Unlike the pre-war 
Triple Alliance between Germany, Italy and Austria- 
Hungary—which was defensive in character and, at 
Italy's express desire, excluded war against Britain— 
the new alliance is offensive as well as defensive, be- 
ing designed to rebuild Europe on a new basis of 
“justice’” and to provide “living space’ for the two 
partners. This living space is to be found by Ger- 
many in Central and Eastern Europe, and by Italy 
in the Balkans, Africa and the Mediterranean, with 
whose ‘free development,” according to the Italian 
press, the Reich has promised not to “interfere.” 


SCOPE OF ITALO-GERMAN PACT. The alli- 
ance provides for consultation whenever the inter- 
ests of one of the partners are threatened by one or 
more powers; coordination of their economies for 
wartime purposes; and wholehearted cooperation in 
case of war, expressly prohibiting the conclusion of 
a separate armistice or peace. The alliance has al- 
teady been implemented by conferences between 
German and Italian military leaders, and by techni- 
cal arrangements for the construction of standard- 
ized armaments in both countries. Germany will ap- 
parently provide the raw materials needed by Italy's 
war industries; and Rome expects to obtain iron, 
copper and mercury from Spain. The Fascist dictator- 
ships also hope that, in the Hungarian Parliamentary 
elections of May 28-29, the Nazis will muster suf- 
ficient votes to swing their country irrevocably into 
the orbit of the Rome-Berlin axis. 

The Italo-German alignment—with the exception 
of Spain, which remained neutral in the World War 
—corresponds fairly closely to the geographic boun- 
daries of the pre-war Triple Alliance. The axis may 





yet make inroads in Yugoslavia, torn by the conflict 
between Serbs and Croats—although Matchek, the 
Croat leader, favors collaboration with the Western 
powers and opposes the pro-Nazi orientation of the 
Belgrade government; and may win over Bulgaria, 
Germany's war ally, by promises of territorial re- 
vision at the expense of Greece and Rumania. Such 
support as Spain may give the axis, however, is 
counterbalanced by the defection of Turkey, in 1914 
an ally of Germany, which has now joined the British 
coalition. 

NEGOTIATIONS FOR SOVIET PACT. Mote- 
over, the Italo-German alliance, far from frighten- 
ing neighboring countries into submission as had 
been hoped in Berlin, merely hardened British de- 
termination to consolidate the “stop-Hitler” coali- 
tion by a pact with the Soviet Union. After a long 
period of hesitation, which could not fail to be in- 
terpreted in Moscow as preparation for another 
Munich, the British Cabinet finally decided on 
May 24 to meet most of the terms proposed by the 
Soviet government, which on May 29 ¥tihounced that 
it was increasing its military expenditures by 66 per 
cent over the past year. Britain is apparently ready 
to sign a mutual assistance pact with the U.S.S.R.— 
already linked to France by a similar pact concluded 
in 1935, but never implemented by a military alli- 
ance—which would provide for common action by 
the three powers in case one of them was attacked 
on any European front. The Anglo-Soviet pact, for 
the present at least, would apply to Europe, but not 
to the Far East, where Britain still hopes to avoid 
a break with Japan. Meanwhile, it is not clear just 
what is going to be done about the strategic Aland 
Islands, commanding the approaches to the Gulf of 
Bothnia, which Russia lost to Finland in 1917 and 
which Finland and Sweden now want to fortify. 
While the signatories of the 1921 Aland convention 








a 











have all agreed to fortification of the islands, Russia 
—not a signatory—blocked action on this matter 
in the League Council on May 27. The Soviet gov- 
ernment, apparently with some reason, fears that 
Sweden, which supplies a large quantity of iron ore 
to Germany, and Finland, which has displayed anti- 
Soviet sentiments, might fortify the islands in such 
a way as to favor German strategic interests in the 
Baltic. 

EUROPE AT THE CROSSROADS. Should Brit- 
ain and Russia finally come to terms, the prospects 
for a successful short war by the Rome-Berlin axis 
would be materially reduced—provided, of course, 
that the various states composing the “stop-Hitler’’ 
coalition remain united. At the same time, the Anglo- 
Soviet pact would undoubtedly increase the risk that 
Germany, rather than acquiesce in “encirclement,” 
might strike now, before Britain’s conscription, its 
naval and air program, and the Triple Entente mili- 
tary consultations have reached their maximum ef- 
fectiveness. Germany and Italy have the advantage, 
. in Europe, of compact territory, shorter internal 
communications and unified command as compared 
with the British coalition; they are far weaker, how- 
ever, from the point of view of economic and finan- 
cial resources which, unlike France and Britain, they 
would be unable to replenish from non-European 
sources. The British coalition received further en- 
couragement from the United States on May 27, 


BRITAIN STRIVES 


The present journey of King George VI and 
Queen Elizabeth across North America — the first 
visit of British sovereigns to the New World—te- 
veals the importance of imperial considerations in 
British diplomacy. During the post-war years the 
historic ties of empire tended to weaken because of 
the demand for self-government, constitutionally 
recognized in 1931 by the Statute of Westminster. 
The various Dominions, particularly Canada, op- 
posed any commitments in Europe, either through 
the League of Nations or through regional pacts, 
which might involve them in war, and frequently 
demanded the right of “neutrality” in event of a lo- 
calized conflict. Even though the combination of 
Germany, Italy and Japan threatens the Empire at 
many different points, the British government still 
lacks the certainty of the automatic and unequivocal 
support which it received in 1914. 

Canada has been particularly hesitant about Em- 
pire cooperation because of the ethnic division of 
its population and the proximity of the United 
States. French Canadians, who comprise nearly 30 per 
cent of the population and are increasing more rap- 
idly than English-speaking Canadians, remember 
with resentment their conscription in the World 


= Page Two 


FOR EMPIRE UNITY 








ee 
es 


when Secretary Hull, breaking the long silence main. 
tained by the Administration regarding neutrality 
proposals now pending in Congress, urged abolitiog 
of the automatic arms embargo, in line with the 
Pittman resolution; and on May 28, in Chicago 
came out strongly against isolation. While optimism 
about the future would be premature, it become 
increasingly evident that Germany may have reached 
the peak of its striking power at Munich, and that 
its threats of “frightfulness’” will have progressively 
less effect on its neighbors. 


The mere fact of checking further expansion by 
Germany for the time being seems a major victory | 
to Paris and London, as well as to the small Euro. 
pean countries, which had practically resigned them. 
selves to German hegemony of the continent. | 
would be most unfortunate, however, if the Ger. | 
man people were now allowed to believe that their 
neighbors, having prevented further aggrandizement 
of the Reich, had no other objective except its de. 
struction or permanent emasculation. Such a belief 
would do more than anything else to solidify Hitler's 
hold on the Germans, who have not forgotten the 
experience of Versailles. Now that the balance of 
power seems to have been reversed in favor of France, 
Britain and their allies, it can only be hoped that the 
opportunities neglected or betrayed since 1919 can 
be brought to fruition. 





} 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





War and distrust any obligation to fight for Great 
Britain. Being predominantly Roman Catholic, they 
are suspicious of arrangements which might place 
them on the side of the Soviet Union against Italy. 
The Dominion has frequently followed the “‘isola- | 
tionist” policy of its powerful neighbor, while en- | 
joying the security afforded by the American navy. 
The Canadian government has authorized the manu- 
facture of airplanes and guns for Britain and the 
training of British pilots, although the Prime Min 
ister, Mr. W. L. Mackenzie King, has consistently | 
declared that Parliament will make the final decision | 
regarding participation in war. Canada’s defense pro- | 
gram, increased to $63,400,000 for 1939-1940, is for 
the first time being partially financed by loans. 

The other Dominions, with the exception of Eire, 
have been more favorable to the imperial tie, since 
they are more directly threatened by the anti-British 
powers. The Union of South Africa, after enacting 
“neutrality” legislation in 1934 in opposition to Em 
pire commitments, now realizes that it would be 
required to return German Southwest Africa, which | 
it holds as a mandate, if Hitler should defeat Britain | 
in Europe. Similarly, Australia and New Zealand, | 
which have been steadfastly loyal to the Empire, are 








= 
direct 
south 
to pr 
retait 
naval 


Al 
Briti: 
Engl. 
Dom 
The 
is in 
Sing: 
sions 
the 
conf 
milit 
nava 
of a 
first 
crea 
gov 


as37 Wl 





eit | 
ent 
de. 
ief 
t's 


the 


Ce, 
the 


an 


eat 


ace 
aly. 
yla- 
en: | 


nu- 


the 





in- 
ly | 
10n | 
f0- | 
for | 


ire, 
nce 


‘ish 


ich 
ain 
nd, 


are 








eee. 
—— 





directly menaced by the expansion of Japan into 
southeastern Asia. Both Dominions are determined 
to preserve their territory for the white race, and to 
retain their mandated islands, despite a hopeless 
naval inferiority to Japan. 


AUSTRALIAN DEFENSES. Since the fate of the 
British Empire will be settled at London, in the 
English Channel and the Mediterranean, the Oceanic 
Dominions are collaborating in defense preparations. 
The widely quoted axiom that “Australia’s frontier 
is in the Mediterranean” is completely apposite, for 
Singapore, which defends British and Dutch posses- 
sions throughout Asia, will prove of little value if 
the battlefleet is defeated in European waters. A 
conference of British, Australian and New Zealand 
military officials was held in April to prepare for 
naval and air defense, and to accelerate production 
of airplanes. Australia is building an air fleet of 212 
first-line planes for defense of its coasts, and is in- 
creasing its pilot force by 900 per year. The new 
government of Mr. R. G. Menzies, who took office 





Page Three 


———— 
— 





after the death of Prime Minister Joseph Lyons on 
April 7, plans to borrow approximately half of its 
£26,000,000 defense program for 1939-1940. 

By sending the King and Queen to Canada and 
appointing the Duke of Kent as the next Governor- 
General of Australia, the British government is 
warning its opponents of an imperial unity covering 
the seven seas. The Empire would be considerably 
safer, however, if Britain had given more effective 
support in recent years to the League of Nations. Al- 
though the League was often regarded in Britain and 
the Dominions as an undesirable rival of the Empire, 
its collective security system actually reinforced im- 
perial ties. The failure of British Conservatives to re- 
alize the utility of the League, which they customarily 
regarded as involving responsibilities without com- 
pensating advantages, contributed to Britain’s decline 
in power and prestige. The close cooperation of Ger- 
many, Italy and Japan has apparently revived im- 
perial unity, which will probably hold firm as long 
as the present international tension continues. 

JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Canada Today, by F. R. Scott. New York, Oxford Uni- 
versity Press for the Canadian Institute of Internation- 
al Affairs, 1939. (2nd. ed. rev.). $1.50 


A brief but comprehensive survey of Canadian affairs, 
combining accurate information with suggestive interpre- 
tation, and containing maps, tables, bibliography and in- 
dex. Highly recommended as an introduction to the do- 
mestic problems and foreign policy of the Dominion. 


Through the Fog of War, by Liddell Hart. New York, 
Random House, 1938. $2.50 


A series of essays on the personalities and outstanding 
events of the World War, penetrating in its judgments 
and unsparing in its criticism of the military methods and 
military minds responsible for so many of the war’s disas- 
trous blunders. 


Latin America: A Brief History, by F. A. Kirkpatrick. 
New York, Macmillan, 1939. $3.75 
Compresses much useful historical material into one 
volume despite a certain sketchiness. 


The Crisis of Democracy, by William E. Rappard (Harris 
Foundation Lectures). Chicago, University of Chicago 
Press, 1938. $2.50 
A thoughtful and temperate discussion of democratic 

institutions by a Swiss authority, deserving a large public 

in the United States. 


America’s Stake in International Investments, by Cleona 

Lewis. Washington, Brookings, 1938. $4.00 

This book contains a wealth of extremely useful data 
bearing on our debtor-creditor position. It not only traces 
the development of foreign investments in the United 
States and our investments abroad, but shows in detail 
where American capital has been placed. The reader will 
miss, however, a thorough appraisal of the real value of 
foreign investments to the nation as a whole. 


Blood is Cheaper Than Water: The Prudent American’s 
Guide to Peace and War, by Quincy Howe. New York, 
Simon and Schuster, 1939. $2.00 
Mr. Howe bids reluctant farewell to the isolationists; 

fatalistically accepts the triumph of what he calls the war 

party; and utters a pious prayer that, when the almost 
inevitable war comes, it will find the United States con- 
tending for an empire of its own in the Americas and 
the Far East rather than for the preservation of the 
British and French imperial realms. 


The Silk Road, by Sven Hedin. New York, E. P. Dutton & 
Company, 1938. $5.00 


A fascinating account of the famous Swedish explorer’s 
trip through Inner Mongolia to Sinkiang in 1934, and his 
return from Urumchi to Sian via the ancient “silk road.” 
The expedition, undertaken by motor truck for the Chinese 
government, surveyed the route along which Russian sup- 
plies are now reaching China’s armies. This volume is a 
second installment of the expedition’s narrative, which 
began with “The Flight of Big Horse.” 


The New Western Front, by Stuart Chase. New York, 
Harcourt, Brace, 1939. $1.50 


Hard-hitting, journalistic restatement of the case for 
American isolation. Mr. Chase believes that the challenge 
of fascism cannot be met by American participation in a 
European war but only by making our democracy func- 
tion effectively. 


The Rise of Anglo-American Friendship: A Study in 
World Politics, 1898-1906, by Lionel M. Gelber. New 
York, Oxford University Press, 1938. $3.75 


An extensive and interesting study of world diplomacy 
at the turn of the century. Mr. Gelber, a Canadian scholar, 
shows effectively the extent to which Theodore Roosevelt 
intervened in both Europe and Asia, and advocates con- 
tinued Anglo-American collaboration in behalf of peace. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 32, 


JuNE 2, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


> 181 


1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


RAYMOND LgsLig BUELL, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MicHeres Dgan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


May 29.—With a temporary lull in Europe and 
the Far East, Washington has been more active than 
usual in the sphere of Latin American affairs during 
the past few weeks. Generally speaking, these activi- 
ties have followed three basic lines. 

1. Concern over Nazi penetration of Latin America. 

2. Progress in Washington’s Latin American aid pro- 
gram, which is, of course, partially linked to the first. 


3. Study of internal political trends which may have a 
bearing on Western Hemisphere solidarity. 


Concern regarding Nazi activities has been focused 
on Bolivia. No less an authority than the Japanese 
brother-in-law of the President is reported to have 
stated that Bolivia would soon join the Rome-Berlin 
axis, and the Bolivian Minister in Rome is said to 
have declared that the Busch régime was organized 
in the same way as Italy and Germany. Meanwhile, 
there is little doubt that Bolivia’s economic and po- 
litical ties with Germany are being strengthened. 
Aside from the rumored barter deal, under which 
Bolivia would exchange oil for German equipment 
needed by its petroleum industry, an influx of 
German technical men is understood to have been 
under way for some time. From the purely internal 

int of view, moreover, the strict regimentation of 
political and economic life in Bolivia, the exile of 
liberal leaders, and the discovery of a “Jewish prob- 
lem” indicate that the Busch régime may assume the 
political, if not the economic, trappings of fascism. 


LATIN AMERICAN PROGRAM MOVES 
AHEAD. In spite of developments in Bolivia and 
rumors of Nazi plots in Brazil and Ecuador, Wash- 
ington’s program for cooperation with Latin America 
is moving steadily ahead. The Brazilian agreement 
negotiated last March has already borne fruit in an 
announcement by the Bank of Brazil on May 20 that 
it was prepared to liquidate all blocked dollar credits 
covering merchandise of United States origin. The 
sum involved is approximately $26,000,000, and 
holders of milreis deposits may liquidate them im- 
mediately subject to the deduction of a small com- 
mission, or in 60 days at full value. 

Brazil, which has been the scene of the greatest 
German-American commercial rivalry in South 
America and has a domestic political régime suspect- 
ed of Fascist tendencies, has become the spearhead of 
American “solidarity” efforts. Following the conclu- 
sion of trade and financial arrangements, the interest 
of the United States along more purely political lines 





is now being demonstrated by the visit to Brazil of 
Brigadier General Marshall, who will soon become 
Chief of Staff of the United States Army. Genera] 
Marshall, moreover, has invited the Brazilian Chief 
of Staff to return with him on board the cruiser 
Nashville for a visit to the United States. 

American exporters to South America also found 
encouragement in the recent decision of the Argen- 
tine Foreign Exchange Control to allow increased im- 
ports of automobiles from the United States. The 
American exporters involved, however, must freeze 
the proceeds in Argentina by purchasing an equiv- 


alent amount of Treasury bonds of three-year ma- | 


turity. The total amount of such bonds which the 
Argentine government is reported to have assigned 
to automobile importers is $8,000,000, and the issu- 
ance of an additional $12,000,000 for other manu- 
factures is under discussion. 

This evidence that American private interests are 
exercising more initiative in the development or 
maintenance of Latin American commercial and fi- 
nancial relations is corrobo1ated by the announce- 
ment that private funds were being used for Latin 
American credits. Thus, in connection with the Nica- 
raguan credit of $2,500,000, it was revealed that the 
entire sum had been supplied by the Bank of the 
Manhattan Company, although the loan was guaran- 
teed by the Export-Import Bank. In the case of the 
Brazilian credit, seven United States banks provided 
all the funds, on which they receive 1.25% interest, 
with the remainder of the 3.6% paid by Brazil going 
to the Export-Import Bank in return for the guar- 
antee. 


CHILE PLANS OIL MONOPOLY. On the eve 
of negotiations for credits in the United States, Fi- 
nance Minister Wachholtz of Chile is understood to 
have told foreign oil companies that a government 
monopoly on the sale and distribution of petroleum 
would be established by September 3. Foreign oil 
companies, chiefly represented by subsidiaries of the 
Standard Oil of New Jersey and the Royal Dutch 
Shell, would thus be forced to liquidate by that 
date properties valued at an estimated $9,000,000. 
While this action on the part of the Chilean govern- 
ment is not comparable with the Bolivian and Mexi- 
can expropriation measures, and the necessary legis- 
lation has been on the books since 1932, its announce- 
ment at this time might possibly weaken Chile's 
position in the loan negotiations. 


HowarD J. TRUEBLOOD 





An i 


age 


tov 
desi 


clos 
of t. 
trac 


Rus 
Ger 
for 


