


rror- 


con. 
sures 
Opu- 
.rabs 
) the 
cing 
ales. 


ziven 
es in 


Vhite 
tates, 
» Pal. 
slican 
on of 


irrent 
ales- 
ngton 
y the 
ation 
t the 
y the 
of a 
ration 
ay be 


saged 


LES 


§S 


~ fh LN Nad 





—1944 
y PERIODICAL vous 
GENERAL LIRPAR 
UNIV. « 


PP MiCcn 


General Library 


Univ swat 4 
hav we os | 


red as 2nd 
mm | a) aie 


ur a We . 
“J We aichiga : 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIV, No. 6 


NOVEMBER 24, 1944 





ie shake-up of the Chinese government on 
November 20 constitutes a highly significant de- 
velopment in Chungking politics. General Ho Ying- 
chin, Minister of War, Dr. H. H. Kung, Minister of 
Finance, and Chen Li-fu, Minister of Education, have 
been deprived of these posts. At the same time there 
has been a reshuffling of officials within the cabinet, 
and one new man, General Chen Cheng, a progres- 
sive military leader who in recent years has opposed 
dvil war and favored internal military reorganiza- 
tion, has been added to the government as Minister 
of War. Although caution is required in judging the 
long-term effects of these moves, the reorganization 
teflects the increasing pressure of the Chinese people 
for reforms, the insistence of the United States on 
changes beneficial to the war effort, and the desperate 
position in which Chungking has been placed by 
japan’s recent offensives. 


OUTCOME IN DOUBT. The current shift is wel- 
gome but does not indicate decisively where the Chi- 
fese government is going from here. Ho Ying-chin 
mains as Army Chief of Staff; H. H. Kang’ von- 
) tinues as Vice President of the Executive Yuan, and 
chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank of 
China and Central Bank of China; and Chen Li-fu, 
while ceasing to be Minister of Education, has taken 
over the key post of Minister of Kuomintang Organ- 


* | zation, which puts him in charge of all branches of 


the official political party. As an Associated Press 
correspondent notes, “the patronage is considerable.” 
Moreover, Chen’s successor as Minister of Education 
is Chu Chia-hua, a political rival, who is an equally 
teactionary figure. And Chang Li-sheng, the new 
Minister of the Interior, who will be in charge of the 
police and various administrative units, is reported 
to belong to Chen Li-fu’s political group. 

It remains to be seen whether the present minis- 
terial changes are a prelude to a more thorough over- 
hauling of the Chungking régime and the adoption 





CHUNGKING CABINET SHIFTS REFLECT DEMANDS FOR REFORM 


of new policies. Will the removal of Ho, for ex- 
ample, end the military blockade against the guer- 
rilla areas in the Northwest? Will Kung’s replace- 
ment by his Vice Minister of Finance, O.K. Yui, re- 
sult in a vigorous offensive against hoarders and 
profiteers? And will the new Minister of Education 
permit freedom of speech in China’s schools and 
universities? It may be assumed that Chen Cheng 
will press strongly for military reorganization, since 
he has been on the side of army reform for a long 
time. But effective military change will require politi- 
cal progress, for the home and war fronts ate mutu- 
ally interdependent. 


COALITION OR NOT? The crucial issue raised 
by the current cabinet shifts is whether Chungking 
will move forward to establish a coalition régime, 
containing representatives not only of the Kuomin- 
tang, but also of the Communists and of third-party, 
liberal elements. Only a government of true national 
unity can hope to deal with the critical situation now 
confronting the Chinese people. The Japanese, hav- 
ing taken the key Kwangsi cities of Kweilin and 
Liuchow, are pressing inland in the general direction 
of Kweiyang, capital of Kweichow province. They 
still have a considerable distance to go, but if Kwei- 
yang should fall, the road link between Chungking 
and Kunming, chief supply center of the south, 
would be broken. This would nullify to a large extent 
the results expected from the construction of the 
Ledo Road and the Calcutta-Yunnan pipeline and 
would bottle the Chungking government up in the 
western provinces as never before. 

The demand for a coalition government has been 
rising within Chungking itself. On October 9, eve 
of the anniversary of the Chinese Revolution of 1911, 
Sun Fo, President of the Legislative Yuan and son 
of Sun Yat-sen, urged that the Kuomintang give 
up “political tutelage,” i.e., one-party government. 
Recently a meeting of more than 500 persons, 











————oooooooeee—== 








" Page Two EE —. 


| including important political figures, voted unani- 


Fama 
. 


mously to request the establishment of a coalition 
administration. Among those participating were Gen- 
eral Feng Yu-hsiang, a member of the Standing 
Committee of the Kuomintang’s Central Executive 
Committee, and Tan Cheng, Vice President of the 
Judicial Yuan. General Feng warned: “Unless we 
make far-reaching reforms now we will very soon 
see the disintegration of our country.” Tan com- 
mented on the fact that, although the Chinese Re- 
public has existed for 33 years, it is still necessary to 
talk about establishing democracy at an early date. 


OUR STAKE IN CHINESE DEMOCRACY. One 
thing Americans should never forget is that, while 
we desire to see China become as democratic as pos- 
sible because we like to see democracy spread over 
the world, our interest is much more concrete and 





“selfish” than this. The development of democratic 
unity in China would enable the Chinese people tp 
fight Japan more effectively, to play a vigorous role 
in the preservation of peace after Japan’s defeat, and 
to carry through internal reforms needed for the 
expansion of the China market in which Americag 
businessmen are so deeply interested. A progressive 
China therefore means a great deal to the United 
States in terms of the number of American lives te 
quired to defeat Japan, the number of American jobs 
after the war, and the possibility of avoiding a third 
world war. This is why in the weeks and months 
ahead the American public will have reason to be 
concerned about whether the cabinet changes jp 
Chungking are followed by basic alterations of policy 
and the creation of a genuine coalition government, 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


WHY GERMANY SURRENDERED LAST TIME 


As the mighty Allied offensive unfolds along the 
Western front on which the Germans had hoped to 
dig in for the winter, the thoughts of those who lived 
through the first World War inevitably turn to the 
bleak days of another November, 26 years ago, when 
the newly formed government of Prince Max of 
Baden, at the urgent demand of Ludendorff and Hin- 
denburg, sought and obtained an armistice from the 
Allies. Is the present military situation comparable 
to that of 1918? Why did Germany decide to sue 
for peace at that time? What caused the Allies to 
consider Germany's plea? 


GERMANY’S EXHAUSTION IN 1918. The 
answers to many of these questions are found in an 
extraordinarily timely book, Armistice 1918, by 
Harry Rudin. This book points out that, in spite of 
the efforts of Gerinan nationalists and especially the 
Nazis to blame Socialists, pacifists, Jews and others 
on the home front for initiating armistice negotia- 
tions, the first demand for suspension of hostilities 
came from the German Army on September 28, 1918 
when Ludendorff, fearing that Allied offensives 
would at any moment result in a break-through, insist- 
ed that the Foreign Office approach the Allies with- 

' out delay concerning the possibility of an armistice. 

In explaining the urgency of the situation to 
civilian officials, Ludendorff emphasized four main 
causes for what he regarded as an impending catas- 
trophe: the lack of German reserves, as compared 
with the uninterrupted flow into France of unwearied 
American troops; the sudden appearance on the 
Western front of tanks, which at first had demoral- 
ized the Germans; the defection of Germany’s allies, 
Bulgaria, Turkey and Austria-Hungary; and poor 
morale on the home front, which in turn was attrib- 
uted by civilian authorities to increasing shortages of 
essential goods, notably potatoes, fats, and clothing. 

In this war, as compared with World War I, Ger- 


many—by farsighted planning which took the de 
ficiencies of 1914-18 carefully into account—has suc 
ceeded in fighting for an additional year. As in 1918, 
it is faced with lack of military reserves at a time 
when fresh American forces are spearheading the Al. 
lied offensive. It has lost all its allies and satellites— 
Italy, Finland, Rumania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Slovakia 
and Hungary. Japan, an ally of the Western powers in 
World War I, is still on Germany's side, but unable 
to offer direct assistance. In one essential respect, 
however, there is no comparison between 1918 and 
1944. This time the development the Germans most 
dreaded in 1918—and hoped to avert by suing for an 
armistice—has occurred. The Allies have invaded 
German soil. To meet this invasion, the Nazis have 
taken a measure the civilian authorities considered 
in 1918 but abandoned on the advice of Ludendorf. 
They have ordered a /evée en masse by forcing all re 
maining men capable of bearing arms to serve in the 
Volkssturm, a home guard. Such a measure, Luden 
dorff declared in 1918, could not save the Germans. 


ALLIES EAGER FOR PEACE IN 1918. The Ab 
lies, for their part, were not only willing to receive 
the German armistice mission, but feared that the 
terms their military leaders wanted to impose might 
be so severe as to prove unacceptable in Berlin. Rus 
sia was out of the war, and had been forced to relit- 
quish Russian Poland, Finland, Estonia, Latvia and 
Lithuania under the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk of 
March 3, 1918. France and Britain were both pie 
foundly war-weary and, although encouraged by the 
increasing assistance of the United States, were ap 
prehensive about the social consequences of anothet 
winter of conflict. So much was said later about the 
intransigence of the French that one tends to forget 
that Clemenceau and Foch both welcomed the pros 

of an armistice. The only prominent spokesmai 
who urged the Allies to carry the war into Germallj 








leade 


the | 
the e 
mass 
with 
upon 
ck 
Kiel 
armi: 
fores 
come 
Franc 
kept 
shevi 
man 

for € 
the v 
tion 

incip 
the ¢ 
socia 


achie 
main 





FESs ASR FRE se i 


Fs x 


ez... 


BES 


se 7 eR 


able 


or an 
aded 
have 
lered 
Jorff. 
Il re 
n the 
iden- 


e Al 
ceive 
t the 
might 
_ Rus 
relin- 


sk of 
1 pro- 
Dy the 
re ap 
nother 
ut the 


forget 


esmaa 











_——— —— 





was General Pershing—and his advice was set aside 

President Wilson and Colonel House as well as 

the French and British. 

FEAR OF BOLSHEVISM IN 1918. The factor 
which, above all others, persuaded both the Germans 
and the Allies to suspend hostilities in 1918 was fear 
that Russian Bolshevism would spread to Germany, 
and thence to the rest of Europe. Germany's military 
jeaders appear to have been less affected by this fear 
than the Social Democrats, who were haunted by 
the thought that, if peace did not come promptly, 
the extremist Independent Socialists would wean the 
masses away from them and make common cause 
with Russia. It was the Social Democrat Ebert who, 
upon succeeding Prince Max as Chancellor in the 
dark days when German sailors were mutinying in 
Kiel and Hamburg, authorized conclusion of the 
amistice signed on November 11 in the historic 
forest of Compiégne—where Hitler, events having 
ome full circle, forced Marshal Pétain to sign 
France’s armistice with Germany in June 1940. The 
skeptical French had strong doubts about the Bol- 
shevik threat, regarding it, prophetically, as a Ger- 
man stratagem designed to win more favorable terms 
for Germany—but the other Allies tended to share 
the view of the German Social Democrats. The ques- 
tion whether, if the Allies had allowed Germany's 
incipient revolutionary movement to run its course, 
the Germans would have emerged with a political, 
social and economic system better prepared for peace- 
time collaboration with other nations than that 
achieved under the Weimar Republic, will always re- 
main one of the baffling ‘‘ifs’’ of history. 

WHAT WILL GERMANY DO THIS TIME? 
Sooner or later in this war the Germans will have to 


= PageThre —— 


ee ee 








make the decision reached by Ludendorff in tan 
1918. But even if the German Army had fa an 
armistice last summer, when German troops were 
still on foreign soil—as the coup against Hitler 
would indicate—they would have been balked by 
three factors that did’ not exist in 1918. Today the 
Nazis have such a grip on the German people that, 
without their consent—which for them would be 
tantamount to suicide—no group in Germany, no mat- 
ter how sincerely disposed to collaborate with the 
Allies, could make its voice heard abroad. The Allied 
governments, too, have been hardened by the experi- 
ence of two wars with Germany, and are determined 
to obtain Germany’s unconditional surrender on its 
own soil. And, in contrast to 1918, the United States, 
Britain and France are in a position to work with, 
not against, Russia. Yet it would be self-deception to 
overlook the fact that the peoples of liberated Eu- 
rope, as we can see in different degrees in Belgium 
and Italy, are exhausted by years of war and priva- 
tion, and inured to lawlessness by their heroic efforts 
to resist Hitler's illegal ‘‘new order.”’ Nor has fear of 
Bolshevism, during the intervening quarter of a cen- 
tury, by any means vanished from the scene. Hunger, 
misery, disease, the tragic habits of terrorism and 
brutality bred of war cannot but create political 
extremism. Even if Russia had never existed, and 
Lenin had never hoisted the flag of Communist revo- 
lution in Petrograd in November 1917, Europe, in- 
cluding Germany, would be faced today with the 
social and economic upheavals which were temporar- 
ily checked by the armistice of 1918, but remained 
unresolved during the 25-year reprieve that should 
have been used by all nations to alleviate the causes 


of war. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


LATIN AMERICANS APPRAISE THEIR PROSPECTS IN POSTWAR WORLD 


The preliminary exchange of views among the 
American republics on post-war security objectives 
was concluded with the announcement on November 
13 by Acting Secretary of State Stettinius that the 
Dumbarton Oaks charter had been provisionally dis- 
missed and approved by all Latin American na- 
tions with which the United States maintains diplo- 
matic relations. The consultations have taken the 
form of individual conferences between Mr. Stet- 
tinius and Latin American diplomatic representa- 
tives in Washington; and are merely designed to 
invite comment on the project thus far tentatively 
drafted. 

For months the Latin American states have been 
atively engaged in post-war planning. They feel, 
according to Latin American press comment, that the 
new league to maintain peace must strike a compro- 
mise between a “big power plan,” whereby the Allies 
would constitute themselves the guardians of the 
peace and distribute world leadership into three or 


four spheres of influence, and the “union of nations” 
envisaged in the “sane principles of liberty and equal- 
ity” established by Woodrow Wilson and the League 
of Nations. For while Latin American political think- 
ers realize that the major responsibility for the preser- 
vation of peace must necessarily be assumed by the 
great powers, they are not convinced that Britain and 
the United States will jettison the principles of the 
Atlantic Charter by entirely disregarding the rights 
of small nations to a share in security decisions. 
The opportunity freely to study and discuss the 
Dumbarton Oaks proposals extended by Secretary 
Hull was welcomed by Latin Americans in a “better- 
late-than-never” spirit. An editorial published some 
months ago in the Chilean daily, E/ Mercurio, ex- 
pressed the prevailing sentiment when it said that 
Latin America would no longer be content to play 
the role of “poor relation” assigned to it at the pre- 
liminary discussions of the League Covenant in 1919. 
The middle and small nations of the New World 











— ae 
—_— 


a te ne ij 











—_ Page Four — 


feel they represent a political, economic and moral 

force which cannot be disregarded. These govern- 

ments, therefore, resent the tardiness of the United 

States in obtaining their views on organization for 

, especially since, after the attack on Pearl Har- 

t, Washington was swift to consult with them on 
how best to mobilize for war.* 


RIGHTS OF SMALL NATIONS. First reading 
of the Dumbarton Oaks charter has aroused opinions 
as vigorous as they are diverse. With the exception 
of Uruguay and Venezuela, the Latin American 
chancelleries have not issued official statements of 
their position on the proposed organization. But, un- 
officially, considerable fault has been found with the 
absence of strong guarantees and adequate represen- 
tation for the small nations in the proposed organiza- 
tion. Mexican editorials point out that, whereas 
the Assembly will be nothing more than a “lower 
house” with facilities for debate, the Council, an 
“upper house’ of the powers-elect, alone will have 
freedom of action. In the first authoritative criticism 
of the Dumbarton Oaks document to come from a 
small nation, Uruguay instructed its Ambassador to 
Washington to suggest that if stronger representa- 
tion for small states was not to be provided for, it 
might be better to revive and modernize the old 
League of Nations. 

This insistence on the juridical equality of states 
under the law of nations is a principle to which these 
states adhered as a body throughout their participa- 
tion in the League of Nations. It is not strange, there- 
fore, that the same criticism which was made repeat- 
edly of the League Council should again be voiced 
in connection with the proposed composition of the 
Security Council. While there are indications, of 
course, that the Latin American nations are prepared 
to accept the Dumbarton Oaks document as a first 
step, the ideal solution from their point of view 
would be an executive council elected by the proposed 
General Assembly of the United Nations. 

AN AMERICAN BLOC? The scope of Pan 
American machinery for the maintenance of peace 
within the proposed framework promises to be as 
live an issue in the coming discussions as it was in 
the early history of the League. There seems to be 
little disagreement among Latin American spokes- 
men that much of the American experience in inter- 
national collaboration might well be incorporated 
into the projected world organization. Considerable 
difference of opinion exists, however, as to the re- 
spective jurisdiction of the Pan American Union and 


*See Bulletin, November 10, 1944. 





the over-all world security organization. Some hold 
that purely American problems should be handled 
through existing or special American institutions. 
while others believe that disputes arising on the 
American continent would actually have their origin 
in more far-reaching international developments and 
should therefore come under the jurisdiction of the 
United Nations organization. 


In view of the need for precisely determining the 
relationship between the American regional union 
and the proposed world security organization, it js 
desirable to take stock of existing hemisphere rela. 
tions. At more than one Lr the all-American front 
precariously maintained through the critical wa 
years is threatening to break down under the cumulg. 
tive weight of problems directly or indirectly related 
to the termination of the war. Observers of the inter. 
American scene wonder whether this regional ma 
chinery—which, it is proposed, might serve as the 
model for world organization—will actually be util. 
ized to iron out continental difficulties. Meanwhile 
the Western Hemisphere is witnessing the forma 
tion of hostile alignments of American states, which 
might in the future undertake to solve their inter. 
national problems outside the continental machinery 
established for such purposes. It is in order to pre. 
serve the inter-American consultative method that 
thoughtful Latin American leaders insistently urge 
the convening of the American Foreign Ministers. 


O.Ive HoLmgs 
(The first in a series of articles on post-war Latin America.) 


SS SSS SS SSS 


Christmas Gifts 


As another Christmas approaches, we remind 
FPA members and subscribers to give friends a 
membership in the Association or a Headline 
Series subscription. In the year ahead, your gift 


will be read, re-read, and shared as a living record | 


_ poli 


of the war and the emerging post-war world. 


REGULAR MEMBERSHIP*....... $5.00 
ASSOCIATE MEMBERSHIP* (open only 


to teachers, full-time students, librarians, 
social workers, the clergy, men and 
‘women in the armed forces, and employee 


groups of ten or more) ......... $3.00 
SPECIAL HEADLINE SERIES SUB- 
SCRIPTION (10 issues) ........ $2.00 


*Includes weekly Bulletin and Headline Series. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, Ne. 6, NovemBsr 24, 1944. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationdl 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lezt, Secretary; Vera MicHEeLtes Dean, Editor. Entered # 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at lea 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
e's! Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


t 
By 
, OF 


191 


\=| 


Ame 
inter 
be he 


ness 
tion 

annc 
earl 
ernit 


the | 
sent: 
whi 
othe 
fact 
of s 
has 


in t 
aga: 


litic 
Am 
amc 
not 
mai 
the 
Wa! 
cle 
nes 
by 


yea 
the 


pei 


Sus 








