Stic 
ich 
939 
ent 


(in- 
ely 


yar 


Yew 
ical 


the 
rer- 
y in 


r to 
dis- 
; an 


itry 
; of 


wis 
sity 


bib- 
ces. 


the 
ork, 


s of 


Ed- 
ton, 


rice 


918- 
dale 
) 

rial, 
lop- 
; in 


ional 
ditor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVIII, No. 11 JANUARY 6, 1939 


—_—_—— 





DIPLOMATIC BACKGROUND OF MUNICH ACCORD 
by Vera Micheles Dean 
A lucid and revealing picture of the diplomatic develop- 
ments leading up to the Munich accord—from the occupa- 
tion of Austria by German troops in March to the oppressive 
days of September, when events followed each other with 
dizzying rapidity, culminating in the “peace” of Munich. 


January 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents each 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 




















— 
——— 


AXIS POWERS RAISE PRICE OF “APPEASEMENT” 





 greabes troublesome problems which would tax 

the powers of any apostle of appeasement, 
Prime Minister Chamberlain and Viscount Halifax 
prepared to visit Rome from January 11 to 14 with- 
out giving the slightest indication of the nature of 
the concrete results they are to seek from Mussolini. 
So far as the Franco-Italian dispute is concerned, 
Britain seems to have acquiesced in the French view, 
presented at London by Roger Cambon, French 
chargé d'affaires, on December 29, that the Franco- 
Italian dispute must be directly settled by the two 
parties involved. As for the Spanish civil war, it still 
appears doubtful that General Franco's offensive, 
begun on December 23, will have made sufficient 
headway by January 11 to permit new discussions 
on the basis of a Rebel victory. Indeed, the 
announcement that the British statesmen would be 
received in audience by Pope Pius XI on January 13 
and that a Papal delegate with diplomatic rank 
would be sent to London shifted somewhat the em- 
phasis of the Rome conversations. Several observers, 
believed that closer relations between Britain and the 
Vatican might be the prelude to formation of a bloc 
for resistance to Fascist expansion on moral grounds. 


If Chamberlain and Mussolini are to do more 
than exchange formalities, they must necessarily dis- 
cuss Franco-Italian differences, which constitute the 
most immediate menace to European stability. The 
Italian press has bandied about the most belli- 
cose threats against France, vehemently protesting 
French “intransigence” regarding cession of terri- 
tory to Mussolini. This press barrage was followed 
by a diplomatic démarche on December 17, when 
Italy informed the French that it did not consider 
valid the Laval-Mussolini accord of January 7, 1935, 
which purported to settle the outstanding issues be- 
tween the two countries. Italy's denunciation of the 
accord — entirely legitimate since ratifications had 


never been exchanged—leaves in suspense the fate 
of more than 44,000 square miles of territory which 
were to have been ceded to Italy, as well as the fu- 
ture of 94,000 Italians resident in Tunisia. 


The Italian campaign has awakened a spirit of 
defiance in France which tends to unify the nation 
in support of Premier Daladier’s government. Italian 
demands for French territorial cessions beyond 
those of the 1935 agreement have been met by a flat 
negative, expressed in a French note of Decem- 
ber 26 and in speeches by M. Daladier and Foreign 
Minister Bonnet. Accompanied by a small, naval 
flotilla, the Premier sailed on January 1 for a demon- 
strative ten-day visit to Corsica and Tunisia, dur- 
ing which enthusiastic demonstrations of loyalty 
to the Republic took place. The Quai d’Orsay, 
where the psychology of “appeasement” is strong, 
has attempted to keep public sentiment within 
bounds by denying reports that Italian troops had 
violated the Somaliland frontier and minimizing the 
significance of minor military and naval reinforce- 
ments sent to Djibouti. Possibly as a result of the 
strong popular reaction in France, Italian sources on 
December 28 stated that Rome was not contemplat- 
ing disturbance of the territorial status quo in the 
Mediterranean or Red Sea area—guaranteed under 
the Anglo-Italian accord of April 16, 1938. The 
ground has thus been cleared for a series of non- 
territorial concessions to Italy, which would increase 
Italian participation in the administration of the Suez 
Canal and the Djibouti-Addis Ababa railway; im- 
prove port facilities for Italian shipments at Djibouti; 
and permit Rome to maintain a considerable degree 
of control over the Italian population of Tunisia. 

Firm resistance to Italian pretensions would be 
impossible, were it not for a definite improvement in 
the internal situation of France. With the reins of 
government definitely in the hands of a conserva- 





Ae cana ee FP 
oe ee ee —t 


- . pedicles 
ry am a a+ 


} 


| 


AN seater: eps rast wns 








= 


tively inclined majority, Finance Minister Paul Rey- 
naud’s budget was finally enacted by parliament on 
January 2, after only eighteen days of debate. M. 
Reynaud has achieved a financial coup by refunding 
foreign obligations of the French railways totaling 
3,500,000,000 francs at a lower interest rate. The 
flight of capital from France has been reversed. The 
collapse of labor opposition to the frankly capital- 
istic program of the new Finance Minister has been 
revealed by a union agreement to accept a 50-hour 
week in armaments industries where required. 

At the moment when Franco-Italian tension 
seemed to be subsiding, a new maneuver by Ger- 
many once again jolted the equanimity of the Anglo- 
French entente. On December 31 it was revealed 
in Berlin that, in conformity with the Anglo-German 
naval agreements of 1935 and 1937, the German 
government had decided to increase its submarine 
tonnage by about 45,000 tons to a figure equal to 
that of the British submarine fleet. Germany, it is 
reported, has also decided to build two more heavy 
cruisers in addition to three already under construc- 
tion, and has raised the question of increasing the 
maximum caliber of naval guns from 16 to 18 inches. 
Whatever the motivation for these moves—Soviet 
naval construction in the Baltic, the need for long- 
range vessels to meet a possible American naval 
menace, or preparation for protection of future 
colonial sea routes—it was clear that they will 
in the first instance affect Franco-British communica- 
tions and naval predominance in the Atlantic. 

Whether planned or fortuitous, the sequence of 
the Italian and German initiatives subjects the West- 
ern democracies to a diplomatic crossfire which they 
have not yet learned to combat effectively. France, 
fully occupied by Italian threats to its territories, can- 
not raise a finger to hinder German expansion to the 
east; and Britain, facing the menace of a rearmed 
Germany across the North Sea, finds it difficult to 
oppose Italian designs in the Eastern Mediterranean. 
Nothing can be done to bring this process to a halt 
unless a policy of stronger resistance and closer 


cooperation is adopted. Davin H. Popper 


GERMANY AND U.S. AT LOGGERHEADS 


German-American relations came dangerously 
close to a complete rupture after Acting Secretary of 
State Sumner Welles bluntly rejected Germany’s re- 
quest that the American government disavow a 
speech in which Secretary Ickes had assailed Hitler- 
ism and sharply attacked Americans for accepting 
decorations ‘“‘at the hand of a brutal dictator.” In 
an interview with the German chargé d'affaires on 
December 21 Mr. Welles not only declined to ex- 
press regret, but represented the utterances of the 
Secretary of Interior as a natural expression of pub- 


Page Two 








es 
re 


lic indignation aroused by “the recent policies in 
Germany.” He also stressed the impropriety of the 
protest at a time when the German press was filled 
with attacks against President Roosevelt and mem. 
bers of his Cabinet. Although Berlin was obviously 
taken aback by this rebuff, it decided not to press the 
issue at this time. A German communiqué of De. 
cember 30 deplored the action of Mr. Welles and 
expressed the conviction that no improvement in 
relations between the two countries could be ex. 
pected “so long as a procedure is to be followed 
which manifestly serves Jewish interests.” 


The present tension between Germany and the 
United States climaxes a long period during which 
relations have steadily deteriorated. The most re. 
cent wave of antagonism was unleashed by Ger- 
many’s anti-Semitic measures, which brought a pub- 
lic condemnation from President Roosevelt on No- 
vember 15 and the demonstrative withdrawal of 
the American Ambassador from Berlin. Since this 
recall, which was promptly followed by that of Mr. 
Dieckhoff, German Ambassador in the United 
States, for an indefinite period, the two countries 
have been at swords points. Attacks by prominent 
Americans and the press on the oppression of Jews 
in Germany provoked a storm of abuse in Nazi 
circles. An inspired drive in the German press de- 
picted the American people and their rulers as the 
base tools of “international Jewry.” Repeated repre- 
sentations by Washington insisting that the anti- 
Semitic decrees should not apply to American citi- 
zens were interpreted as a disguised method of agi- 
tating against the domestic policies of the Reich. 
The Pan-American Conference at Lima increased the 
rapidly growing estrangement. While American 
statesmen sought to rally the Americas against the 
“invasion” of Fascist ideologies, German newspapers 
ridiculed this effort and “exposed” it as a brazen 
attempt to advance Yankee imperialism. 


Should German-American relations go from bad 
to worse, a rupture would seem inevitable. Both 
governments must realize the consequences of such 
a development. By severing diplomatic or even com- 
mercial relations, the American people would not 
bring about Hitler’s downfall; nor could the Ger- 
man government, by this procedure, compel Ameti- 
cans to abstain from denunciation of fascism. Unless 
war follows severance of relations, the renewal of 
formal diplomatic contact becomes inevitable sooner 
or later. The history of Soviet-American relations 
until 1933 illustrates the impracticability of one 
major government refusing to recognize another's 
existence no matter how dramatically opposed its 
régime may be. In declaring on December 23 that “the 
people of the United States do not like the govern- 


(Continued on Page 4) 








The 
ing 


val 
stu 
int 


sul 
val 
reé 


en 
un 
an 
Sté 


OV 
sh 


to 
of 
U: 


th 


~~ owe 


~~ -_— 


~a 





‘his 
Mr. 
ted 
ries 
ent 
“WS 
azi 
de- 
the 
re- 
nti- 
“iti- 
gi- 
ich. 
the 
can 
the 
ers 
zen 


sad 
oth 
uch 
m- 
not 
yer- 
efi- 
less 
of 
ner 
ons 
one 
er’s 
its 
the 
-rn- 





THE LIMA CONFERENCE: 


SUCCESS OR FAILURE? 


by CHARLES A. THOMSON 


The following article was sent from Ecuador by Mr. 
Thomson, who is en route to the United States after attend- 
ing the Eighth Pan-American Conference at Lima, Peru. 


Quito, Ecuador, Dec. 30.—The most lasting 
value of the Lima Conference may be its use as a case 
study in the application of democratic methods to 
international relations. It revealed the limitations 
of that method in securing prompt and concrete re- 
sults. But it may also demonstrate the long-term 
value of such procedure for the development of 
realistic understanding and freely given cooperation. 

The United States delegation came to the Confer- 
ence primarily concerned to forge inter-American 
unity against commercial and cultural penetration 
and possible armed aggression by the totalitarian 
states. Secretary Hull, in his opening address, as- 
serted that an ‘ominous shadow falls athwart our 
own continent’ and proclaimed repeatedly that there 
should not be “‘a shadow of a doubt anywhere”’ con- 
cerning the determination of the American nations 
to oppose either a military or an ideological invasion 
of the Western Hemisphere. For this program the 
United States found substantial support in a Carib- 
bean bloc of twelve nations, made up of Mexico, 
the Central American countries, Panama, Colombia, 
Venezuela, and the three West Indian republics. 


A distinctly different point of view was voiced by 
a South American group headed by Argentina, and 
including the neighboring states of Uruguay, Para- 
guay and Bolivia. Chile and, to a lesser degree, 
Brazil were also found in this camp. Argentina re- 
fused to show alarm at the immediacy of the Nazi- 
Fascist menace. It was unwilling to sign any docu- 
ment which might be interpreted as a slap at a 
specific European nation. This attitude, according to 
the Argentines, was determined not by mysterious or 
sinister influences, but by sound reasons of national 
self-interest. The economic life of Argentina and 
the countries which supported it depends to a major 
degree on European markets. A large proportion of 
their population is made up of European immigrants, 
whose ties with their home lands still foster vital 
currents of sympathy and interest. Moreover, Ar- 
gentine foreign policy has traditionally favored a 
universal rather than a regional emphasis. Buenos 
Aires has long viewed the United States as its lead- 
ing rival in the Western Hemisphere, a habit of 
mind which five years of the Good Neighbor policy 
have not entirely erased. Argentina consequently de- 
clared its willingness at Lima to cooperate against 
any real threat to the inter-American order, but at 
the same time reserved its freedom of action. It 
saw no need for specific pacts to maintain “‘con- 
tinental solidarity.” Thus at the moment when the 


United States gave indications of offering to the 
American nations the type of “entangling alliance” — 
which it had always refused to Europe, its proposal 
fell on deaf ears. Ironically enough, Argentina’s pol- 
icy—general support of international cooperation, 
with opposition to specific commitments—was al- 
most an exact parallel of what Washington has de- 
manded for itself in the past both in European and 
inter-American affairs. As late as the 1928 Havana 
Conference, the United States fought shy of any 
political ties with New World nations. 

In view of the Argentine position, Secretary Hull 
and his colleagues were forced to choose between 
two courses. By pressure tactics they might have 
marshalled an impressive numerical majority for the 
United States program. But this procedure would 
necessarily have isolated Argentina, made it the pos- 
sible nucleus of a future opposition bloc, and 
definitely disrupted Pan-American unity. Or the 
United States might have sought to go only so far 
as common agreement would permit. It was decided 
to follow the latter course, and Mr. Hull’s policy of 
unanimous support for important decisions, initiated 
in 1933 at Montevideo, was continued at Lima. 

Working harmony was thus maintained, but only 
at considerable cost to tangible achievement, par- 
ticularly in cementing an inter-American front. The 
United States delegation had brought to Lima a re- 
ported draft for a protocol to the consultative pact 
signed at Buenos Aires in 1936. This draft pro- 
vided for joint defense against external aggression, 
with establishment of a permanent consultative com- 
mission, made up of the Foreign Ministers of the 
American countries. Opposition from the Argentine 
bloc forced the scrapping of this project, and in- 
stead, after protracted negotiations, a Buenos Aires 
proposal for “A Declaration of the Solidarity of 
America” was finally adopted on December 22, with 
only slight changes from its original text. 

This document substituted for any clear-cut obli- 
gation to cooperate in mutual defense, a reaffirma- 
tion of ‘continental solidarity” and a declaration on 
the part of the American states that 
“in case the peace, security or territorial integrity of any 
American Republic is thus threatened by acts of any nature 
that may impair them, they proclaim their common concern 
and their determination to make effective their solidarity, 
coordinating their respective sovereign wills by means of 
the procedure of consultation . . . using the measures which 
in each case the circumstances may make advisable.” 


It was further provided that, to facilitate consulta- 
tion, ‘the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Amer- 
ican Republics, when deemed desirable and at the 
initiative of any one of them, will meet in their sev- 
eral capitals by rotation and without protocolary 











character.” This cautious pledge of cooperation did 
not go substantially beyond the Declaration of In- 
ter-American Solidarity adopted at Buenos Aires, in 
which the American nations went on record in favor 
of consultation. But the clause prescribing how con- 
sultation was to be carried out represented a definite, 
if small, advance. A second project approved at the 
Conference provided that consultation might be in- 
voked for economic and cultural as well as political 
questions. 


While the Conference avoided any open expres- 
sion of hostility to the Fascist states, various resolu- 
tions adopted at Lima indicated determination to 
check the tactics of divisive penetration. A Brazilian 
resolution opposed introduction into the Western 
Hemisphere of the principle of political minorities. 
An Argentine resolution, directed at the plebiscite 
of German residents recently held in the Latin 
American countries, declared against the collective 
exercise by foreigners of political rights granted by 
countries of origin. A Cuban proposal condemning 
racial and religious persecution, after being watered- 
down in subcommission, was finally adopted. 


In the economic field, Secretary Hull secured 
unanimous support for the introduction and ap- 
proval of a resolution recommending ‘reasonable 
tariffs in lieu of other forms of trade restrictions” 
and “the negotiation of trade agreements, embody- 
ing the principle of non-discrimination.”” This move, 
however, only reaffirmed similar action taken at the 
Montevideo and Buenos Aires Conference. 


On the previously controversial question of 
women’s rights, the Conference adopted compromise 
measures, which may possibly presage an end to 
the struggle waged between the advocates of “equal 
rights” and those favoring protective legislation for 
women. “The Lima Declaration of Women’s 
Rights” proclaims that women are entitled to equal 
political and civil status with men, but also “to the 
most ample opportunities for work and to be pro- 
tected therein” and ‘‘to the most ample protection 
as mothers.” Provision was made for continuance 
of the Inter-American Commission of Women as a 
consultative body. 

In tangible results, the Lima Conference fell far 
short of the two preceding Pan-American gather- 
ings at Montevideo and Buenos Aires. Its failure to 
conclude a single treaty or convention is matched by 
only one other Pan-American Conference—the first, 
held in 1889. It refused to take action on mediation 
in the Spanish civil war and avoided discussion of 





Page Four —e 





——e 


the refugee question. Its cautious and limited affirma- 
tion of inter-American solidarity revealed that the 
American republics are unwilling to form an oppos. 
ing front, not only toward Europe in general, but 
against the totalitarian states in particular. Equally 
clear was the reluctance of the leading South Ameti- 
can nations to support the type of ideological war 
apparently favored by many in Washington, or to 
join in any concerted program of rearmament against 
the possible threat of external aggression. 


On the other hand, the Lima Conference was free 
from the open manifestations of inter-American fric- 
tion which marked the 1923 and 1928 conferences 
at Santiago and Havana. It conserved the gains 
made at Montevideo and Buenos Aires, and made 
some improvements in the machinery for inter- 
American consultation. In positive achievements, the 
Conference may be ranked as a failure. Negatively, 
it may claim to be a success; for it at least took no 
backward steps. At a time when general retreat 
characterizes the forces of peaceful cooperation and 
international understanding, it held ground previ- 
ously won and kept the road open for further ad- 
vance in the future. 


GERMANY AND U.S. AT LOGGERHEADS 
(Continued from Page 2) 


ment of Germany” as well as that of Japan, Senator 
Pittman, Chairman of the Senate’s Committee on 
Foreign Relations, undoubtedly voiced the sentiments 
of the majority of Americans. Yet if we should begin 
officially to express our dislike of every government 
whose principles are alien to our own, it would be 
difficult to know where to stop. Soon we might find 
ourselves in diplomatic hot-water with almost every 
country. 


Unless Germany and the United States are pre- 
pared to drift into a position where war between the 
two countries will be practically inevitable as soon 
as a conflict breaks out in Europe, a new policy of 
restraint is called for on both sides. In the interest 
of restoring “correct,” if not “friendly,” relations, 
American officials may have to curb the expression 
of their own opinions. In return, they should insist 
that the Reich impose similar restraint not only on 
its spokesmen, but on the contents of the press, for 
which, as a totalitarian régime, it is peculiarly re- 
sponsible. Both the German and American people 
will probably in the end have to accept the co- 
existence of the two political régimes, however 


antagonistic their principles. Joun C. peWipe 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 11, January 6, 1939. Published weekly by che Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Leste Bugit, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES DEAN, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


8 


Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Ww 


e. 


A ~p BP BP 


-_ im the, 2 Ane eae lle el hmm lhe lee ee 





