









} FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 














2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 

















——<—<— 
———— 








th . 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 

ues 

Ho) Woe_XVL, No. 19 Marcu 5, 1937 

lV 

na’ THE OPIUM MENACE IN THE FAR EAST 

ions by Frederick T. Merrill Dr. William ¥. Bishop 
International control over narcotic drugs, advocated and sup- 

and ported for many years by the United States, is threatened by the ichi Libr 

N menace of opium in the Far East. This report gives the back- x University of Michigan rary 
und of narcotic consumption in China; discusses a eon 

rY 1935 regulations; describes the Manchoukuo opium monopoly; an 

ol concludes that if China is able to curb opium cultivation and drug Anti Arbor, Wich. 

~ addiction, this would have a favorable reaction on world 

it] public opinion and would throw into relief Japan’s responsibility. 

am March 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 

rch. — 

ittee 

eto CAN THE U.S. WITHDRAW FROM PHILIPPINES? 

onl 

tan MPORTANT issues of American and Philip- Quezon’s energetic leadership, some of its most 

ern pine policy may be clarified as a result of serious problems have not received due considera- 


n o& conversations between President Manuel L. 
encé Quezon, Philippine Field Marshal Douglas Mac- 
Arthur, President Roosevelt and American offi- 
nen Ccials, which began in Washington on February 26. 
- 11, According to a State Department announcement, 
tha the primary purpose of these “informal discus- 
gov: sions” is to prepare for the joint trade and eco- 
airs) nomic conference prescribed in the Independence 
urcht Act of 1934. The outcome of this conference may 
itd determine the fate of the new Philippine Common- 
_ wealth. 
The The Islands, whose economy is bound to that 
dllem Of the United States by the free trade relation- 
com) ship established in 1909, are entirely dependent 
-and, on the 80 per cent of their exports—chiefly sugar 
1] b@ and coconut products—which find a market here. 
ctiva Largely as a result of pressure from American 
men} Sugar and agricultural interests, the Independence 
jons) Act imposes a progressive export tax on Philip- 
ver g@ Pine products beginning at 5 per cent of the Amer- 
pro} ican tariff in 1940 and rising to 25 per cent in 
1945. Full tariff barriers are to be erected when 
independence is attained in 1946. Unless exten- 
sive adjustments are made in Philippine economic 
life to compensate for loss of the American mar- 
ket, the Filipinos may be plunged into social and 
political chaos. The stability of the Common- 


n ar 
: CON: 
a 
orou 


= a. 


ialis| wealth can be maintained only by altering the 
pres} economic stipulations of the Independence Act, 
n fo permitting the Filipinos to raise tariff barriers 
istr against American goods, and furnishing techni- 
Is im} cal and financial assistance in the development 
- 7 of a diversified agriculture and industry for the 
n 


home market. The United States could also con- 
tribute to Philippine independence by lengthening 
the period of readjustment and concluding a re- 
ciprocal trade agreement with the new nation. 

" Although the Commonwealth has thus far had 
a creditable legislative record under President 


LDE 


| 


ee 
=. 








tion. The government has not removed the basic 
cause of social unrest by measures breaking up 
the large landed estates and mitigating the evils 
of share tenancy. Diversification plans remain 
largely in the blueprint stage. There is a dis- 
quieting tendency toward dictatorship under 
President Quezon, who appears inclined to repress 
Left-wing elements. Moreover, instead of hus- 
banding its fiscal resources for imperative social 
improvements, the government has embarked on 
a program of militarization which absorbs about 
25 per cent of its budgetary expenditure. 


The military program involves perhaps the 
greatest danger to the success of the independence 
effort. Avowedly designed to make conquest of 
the Islands so difficult that no aggressor will 
hazard the task, this program institutes a thor- 
oughgoing conscription system which will train 
400,000 reservists in ten years. Critics believe 
that the military organization would prove in- 
effective against a naval blockade, and that it 
might be used to support a dictatorship. Since 
Field Marshal MacArthur, leader of the Ameri- 
can military mission in the Islands, remains an 
officer in the United States Army, and since the 
Philippine force may be utilized by the United 
States until 1946, fear has also been aroused that 
the Filipino program may be intended to strength- 
en American military power in the event of war 
with Japan. Liberals consequently hope that the 
Roosevelt Administration will demand modifica- 
tion of the program, along with social and eco- 
nomic reforms, as the price of American trade 
concessions. They also want the President to 
negotiate a neutralization agreement for the 
Islands—a move which would be favorably re- 
ceived by Britain, the Netherlands, France, 
China, and possibly even Japan. 

While no indication of the results of the Wash- 



































Page Two 


ington conversations has yet been forthcoming, 
an ominous development is the appointment on 
February 17 of Paul V. McNutt, former Governor 
of Indiana, as American High Commissioner in 
Manila. His connection with militaristic circles 
in this country may cause him to exercise the 
vague powers of his office to foster the military 
program at the expense of much-needed social 
measures. More dangerous still, if the discussions 
in Washington do not result in action diminish- 
ing the uncertainties of the Philippine situation, 
the Commonwealth may collapse and the United 
States may again be forced to intervene in the 
Far East under highly difficult circumstances. 


DAvip H. PoPpPER 


THE ANGLO-CANADIAN TRADE AGREEMENT 


On February 25—the day on which the United 
States Senate approved the House action extend- 
ing the President’s authority to conclude trade 
agreements until June 12, 1940—the Canadian 
government announced the terms of a new com- 
mercial treaty with Britain which is bound to 
affect the success of Secretary Hull’s trade pro- 
gram. : 

The Anglo-Canadian agreement replaces the 
accord concluded at the Ottawa Conference in 
1932 and will remain in force at least until August 
20, 1940, when it may be terminated. While the 
treaty continues reciprocal preferential treat- 
ment, its concessions were not facilitated, as in 
1932, by raising duties against other countries. 
The number of items on which Canada will accord 
preferences to Britain have, in fact, been reduced 
from 215 to 91 and the margin of preference has 
been narrowed on 21 of these items. Canada has 
agreed to lower duties on 179 items covering a 
wide range of manufactures and to bind 246 items 
against increases. In return, Britain maintains 
unrestricted free entry for all Canadian products 
except those reserved under the 1932 agreement, 
and guarantees preferential rates on wheat, dairy 
products, lumber, apples, canned salmon, certain 
metals and patent leather. It reduces the rate on 
silk stockings and agrees not to increase the duty 
on automobiles. Britain further undertakes to 
expand imports of Canadian bacon and ham up to 
280 million pounds and to give increased accom- 
modation to Canadian cattle and meat. 

The agreement with Britain affects directly 
only six items in Canada’s treaty with the United 
States. By reducing the number of preferences, 
it should even open up new opportunities for trade 
bargaining between the two North American 
countries. The accord fails, however, to improve 


prospects for a trade treaty between the United 
States and Britain. Imperial preference and the 
obvious reluctance of the British government to 
make substantial concessions continue as formid- 
able obstacles to such an agreement. Speaking 
in the House of Commons on February 9 Walter 
Runciman, President of the Board of Trade, de- 
clared that his recent conversations with Presi- 
dent Roosevelt showed “further explorations” to 
be necessary “before it can be determined whether 
there is a firm basis upon which detailed negotia- 
tions can take place with a view to a reciprocal 


trade agreement.” JOHN C. DEWILDE 





The Devil Theory of War, by Charles A. Beard. New 
York, The Vanguard Press, 1936. $1.50 
Dr. Beard popularizes the Nye Committee revelations 
bearing on our entrance into the war and uses them as a 
persuasive argument to support a policy of mandatory 
neutrality and “tilling our own garden.” 


The International Money Markets, by John T. Madden 
and Marcus Nadler. New York, Prentice-Hall, 1935. 
$5.00 


A lucid description of the world’s financial markets. 


A History of the Far East, by G. Nye Steiger. New York, 
Ginn and Co., 1936. $4.75 
A comprehensive, well-written text book, bringing the 
historical development of China, India and Japan up to 
the contemporary epoch. 


Metternich, by H. du Coudray. New Haven, Yale Uni- 
versity Press, 1936. $4.00 
Sympathetic portrayal of a fascinating figure in 

diplomacy. 

The President’s Control of the Tariff, by John Day Larkin. 
Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1936. $2.00 
Description and critique of American flexible tariff pro- 

cedure. 

Europe Since 1914, by F. L. Bemis, second revised edition. 
New York, F. S. Crofts, 1936. $5.00 
Very convenient source for record of events. 

The Future of the League of Nations. London, The Royal 
Institute of International Affairs, 1936. $1.00 
A series of thought-provoking discussions on the re- 

form of the League of Nations. 

After the New Deal What? by Norman Thomas. New 
York, Macmillan, 1936. $2.00 


The author argues more or less convincingly that the 
New Deal has failed to meet most of our major problems. 


In the Shadow of Tomorrow, by Jan Huizinga. New York, 
Norton, 1936. $2.50 
A scholar reviews the crisis in contemporary culture and 

politics and ends on a note of vague hope. 

The Flight of “Big Horse,” by Sven Hedin. New York, 
Dutton, 1936. $3.75 


Civil war in Chinese Turkestan, including the capture of 
Sven Hedin’s expedition by General Ma Chung-yin (“Big 
Horse’’), who dreamed of empire and devastated a province. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 19, Marcu 5, 1937. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lgsiiz Bust, President; Estuer G. Ocpgen, Secretary; VeRA MICHELES Dran, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. National 


One Dollar a Year. 








Blu 


anc 
ser 
anc 





