\ is Niele 


ci 


L 





‘B22 


28 


Be 


BRSASEas 


n 2. 


rity 


y to 


ken 
its 


rend 


nate 
tion 
Mis 
Ope: 


den: 
lank 
HON. 
ela: 
ting 
aust 
It is 
and 
"aro- 


s of 


NE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














Vou. XIX, No. 26 


—_— 


F.P.A. best seller... 


WAR ATLAS 


45 maps 25¢ 


F.P.A. Members—Use postcard enclosed in your 
WAR ATLAS to order copies for your friends. 


Bulletin Subscribers—Send for your copy today. 


APRIL 19, 1940 





Dr. William gy. Bishop 


* University of Michigan Library 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 











SCANDINAVIAN CAMPAIGN TESTS ALLIED STRENGTH 





HE smashing series of blows delivered by 

Germany and Britain in and around Norway 
marks a new phase of belligerent operations in 
Europe. If German air and submarine bases can 
be firmly established in southwest Norway, Ger- 
many will be in a position to strike at Scapa Flow 
and Northern Scotland from a distance of little 
more than 300 miles. It will have obtained control 
of the reservoir of commodities produced or stored 
in Scandinavia and cut off British imports from 
all of Northern Europe. Unless Allied sea and air 
forces can retain general command in the North Sea, 
harry German supply lines to Oslo in the Skager- 
tak, and land a strong expeditionary force in Nor- 
way before local resistance entirely collapses, Ger- 
Many’s strategic position may have been greatly 
improved, at least for the next year. On April 15 it 
was stated that the first British troops had debarked 
on Norwegian soil, apparently at Narvik and other 
points. 

SCANDINAVIA IN THE BALANCE. From the 
incomplete and often conflicting reports of the 
Scandinavian campaign, it is still impossible to state 
whether the Allies can successfully parry the latest 
German thrust. By its well coordinated execution 
of the intricate plan for the capture of Norwegian 
centers, Germany scored a tremendous initial ad- 
vantage. The Norwegians were unable to carry out 
their mobilization and offered little resistance for 
the first few days. In some instances, notably at 
Narvik, Norwegian traitors assisted the invaders, 
demonstrating the efficacy of Nazi intrigue in under- 
mining resistance to German attack. After the Ger- 
mans had halted at their primary objectives, the 
Norwegians, heartened by pledges of full Allied 
aid, slowly gathered an estimated 30,000 troops 
around Oslo and the hills east of Trondheim and 
Narvik. By April 15 they were engaged in guerrilla 
operations north of Oslo, where perhaps 20,000 


Nazi troops were concentrated, but had not been 
able to retain control of the forts on the shores of 
Oslo fjord. 

Meanwhile, the Allied navies went into action to 
prevent the Germans from consolidating their po- 
sitions and strengthening their forces. No great 
naval battle was fought, but a number of isolated 
encounters occurred around Norway. After an 
earlier attempt made with insufficient force had 
been repulsed, a larger British squadron led by the 
battleship Warspite fought its way into Narvik on 
April 13. Three days earlier British light surface 
vessels and submarines had intercepted a large 
convoy of troopships proceeding up the Skagerrak 
toward Oslo, in an area hitherto dominated by the 
German navy. There were heavy German casualties. 
On April 12 the British announced that they were 
laying the greatest mine barrier in history, designed 
to close both the Skagerrak and Kattegat to Ger- 
man shipping bound for Norway or into the North 
Sea, and two days later they even claimed to have 
mined the Baltic from Kiel Bay to Memel. It is 
unlikely that the mines can be replaced as quickly as 
German vessels can sweep them up, especially in 
the Baltic. On April 16 Premier Paul Reynaud stated 
that 30 per cent of the Nazi navy, including 20 per 
cent of its cruisers and 25 per cent of its destroyers, 
had been lost. 

The evidence now at hand indicates that the flow 
of German troops and supplies to Norway has been 
hampered but not interrupted. German naval losses 
have been disproportionately heavy, perhaps vital, 
and further strengthen Britain’s control of the sea. 
Yet the success of the German campaign, here and 
elsewhere, may depend less on sea than on air 
power. In the crucial days ahead, this new weapon 
will receive a thorough test in both offensive and 
defensive operations. Already German planes have 
sunk minor British fleet units, and have damaged 





J 2 


. 
| 








ee 
ae 








though not destroyed the battleship Rodney. German 
planes have ferried large numbers of troops to 
Norway and are bombing Norwegian concentrations 
wherever they can be located. In return, the British 
air force has made repeated attacks on Bergen, 
Stavanger, Kristiansand and Trondheim to prevent 
the establishment of major German air bases in 
those ports. 

Should the Nazis fail to maintain supply lines 
direct to Norway, they would almost certainly seek 
a land route northward from the southern tip of 
Sweden. The position of the Swedes is in any case 
critical. Through their country passes the only rail 
link between southern Scandinavia and Narvik. A 
successful German occupation would give the Nazis 
direct access to the iron deposits at Kiruna as well 
as those in the south portion of the country, unless 
strong British effectives starting from Narvik should 
win the race to the mines. A German offensive in 
Sweden would also forestall a flank attack on the 
Nazi forces in Norway by the Swedes. While 
Swedish resistance would be incomparably stronger 
than that of Norway, it might easily be paralyzed 
by a Russian attack through Finland. 

ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES. The economic 
consequences of a German occupation of Scandi- 
mavia are serious for the Allies. Over half of all 
Danish exports went to Britain in 1938, as against 
only 20 per cent to Germany, and over one-third of 
its imports came from the United Kingdom as com- 
pared with only 25 per cent from the Reich. Britain 
was also more important than Germany as an ex- 
port market for both Sweden and Norway. Severe 
readjustments will be necessary in all three countries 
as their economies are perforce geared to that of 
Germany. Britain, moreover, will have to obtain im- 
ports of a number of essential foodstuffs from more 
distant overseas sources. In 1938 the British pur- 


Page Two —— 








—= 


chased from Scandinavia 36.7 per cent of their im. 
ports of eggs (in which Britain is 61 per cent self. 
sufficient) as well as 28 per cent of their butter 
imports (in which it is 10 per cent self-sufficient) 
and 53 per cent of their foreign bacon (in whic 
Britain is 28 per cent self-sufficient). What is still 
more important, Sweden and Norway have supplied 
the United Kingdom with about 36 per cent of its 
iron ore imports, although the home supply of irog 
ore equals about two-thirds of the normal require 
ments. British newspapers have already been te 
duced in size because 94 per cent of the United King. 
dom’s wood pulp came from northern Europe, Ger. 
many and Czechoslovakia. 

If the Reich could control all Scandinavia’s sup 
plies, it would come into possession of areas which 
produced 9,500,000 tons of iron in 1938—three 
times the pre-war domestic German output (exclud: 
ing Austria). Germany would also obtain a small 
supply of molybdenum and nickel as well as larger 
amounts of pyrites and copper, although by no 
means enough to cover its peace-time import te 
quirements. On the other hand, once existing stocks 
were exhausted, Germany would be forced to fur 
nish whatever petroleum products, rubber, tin, 
vegetable oils, and other raw materials the Scandi- 
navian area required, since these are normally ob 
tained from overseas. Scandinavian agriculture will 
soon deteriorate if it is not furnished with imports 
of grain, fodder, oil cake and vegetable oil seeds. 
Should the Nazis control all Scandinavian trade, 
they will have won certain immediate gains in the 
economic sphere which will be of considerable as 
sistance to them in a short war. Ultimately, however, 
they will be confronted with the problem of both 
supporting and subjugating the Scandinavian popu 
lations unless they can bring the general conflict 
to a successful conclusion. Davi H. Popper 


WILL WAR SPREAD TO THE BALKANS? 


The struggle over Norway may have a decisive 
effect on developments in Southeastern Europe and 
on the attitude of the two great European “‘non-bellig- 
erents,”” Italy and Russia. A German victory in Scan- 
dinavia would further dishearten the Balkan countries, 
and might frighten them into submission to Germany 
before they, too, are forcibly brought under Nazi 
“protection.” It might also cause Italy and Russia 
to enter the conflict, not so much for the purpose 
of assisting Germany against the Allies, as of 
achieving their own ambitions and forestalling Ger- 
man encroachments on their respective spheres of 
influence. An Allied victory, on the contrary, might 
rally the Balkan countries to the side of France and 
Britain, thus closing one of the last remaining gaps 
in the Allied blockade; and persuade Italy and 
Russia to maintain their fence-sitting position. 


THE BALKAN TUG OF WAR. The pattem 
followed by events in Scandinavia has thus far been 
closely duplicated in Southeastern Europe. Here, 
as in the North, Germany and the Allies have been 
engaged in a ruthless tug of war to win control of 
neutral countries by propaganda, economic pressufe, 
and threats of retaliation. As Germany invaded 


Norway, the struggle for the Balkans was threaten: | 


ing to result in an economic stalemate for the Reich 
The countries of Southeastern Europe have shown 
increasing reluctance to meet the Reich’s demand 
for foodstuffs and raw materials. On April 15 the 
Rumanian government, which earlier had suspended 
freight car and oil barge loadings for Germany, 
prohibited new contracts for exports of cereals. 
Germany might, of course, invade Rumania, but if 
such a case the Bucharest government would prob 











Soe QS@SQ@SRREBSrI Be? 


Any, 
als, 
t in 


rob- 








— 


ably damage its oil fields, as it did in 1916. Mean- 
while, the Nazis, unable to compete with the financial 
inducements Britain is offering the Balkan countries, 
demanded a share in the control of traffic on the 
Danube which, they claimed, was being sabotaged 
by the British. 

WHAT ROLE WILL ITALY PLAY? The course 
ultimately followed by the hard-pressed Balkan 
countries will depend not only on the relative pres- 
sures applied to them by Germany and the Allies, 
but also on the attitude of Italy and Russia. In a 
broadcast on April 14 Giovanni Ansaldo, editor of 
the Leghorn Telegrafo and a close associate of 
Count Ciano, warned the Italian armed forces that 
Italy's entrance into the war was not a matter of 
months, but of weeks or even days. While the Italian 
people have little sympathy for Germany, and still 
passionately hope to avoid war, the government is 
using every effort to create the impression that the 
Reich has inflicted a severe defeat on the Allies in 
Scandinavia, and that the Franco-British cause is as 
good as lost. This line of argument is well designed 
to prepare the Italian public for a sudden Italian 
thrust, which might take the form of invading 
Greece and/or Yugoslavia through Albania, where 
many thousands of Italian “colonists” are reported 
to have arrived in the past few weeks. Any attempt 
to alter the Balkan status quo, moreover, might 
bring Russia into the fray, both because the Soviet 
Union still hopes to recover Bessarabia from Ru- 
mania, and because it is directly interested in the 


fate of Rumania and Bulgaria, bordering on the 
Black Sea. 

BALANCE OF POWER IN THE MEDITER- 
RANEAN. Favorable as Italy's entrance into the war 
might appear for Germany—which now obviously 
hopes to engage Allied forces on as many scattered 
fronts as possible—it would also provide the Allies 
with an opportunity to enter a theatre of war in 
which the Reich is far more vulnerable than in the 
West. The outcome here would hinge, in the first 
place, on the relative efhicacy of the Allied and 
Italian navies. It may be assumed that the Allied 
naval forces in the Mediterranean have been weak- 
ened little if at all since the summer of 1939. At 
that time the British Mediterranean fleet comprised 
4 or 5 battleships, one aircraft carrier, 6 cruisers, 
39 destroyers, 7 submarines and 6 motor torpedo 
boats. French capital-ship strength was concentrated 
in the Atlantic, and several French units are appar- 
ently participating in the battle off Norway. The 
French Mediterranean squadron contained no capi- 
tal ships, but had 4 heavy destroyers and 3 light 





Page Three = 





cruisers in addition to a large complement of de- 
stroyers and submarines. 

Italy, whose entire naval strength is concentrated 
in the Mediterranean, has 4 pre-World War capital 
ships, two of which have been completely recon- 
structed, while the other two should by now have 
been similarly refitted. The Italians are building 4 
new battleships of 35,000 tons, but none were ready 
in September 1939, although two were nearing 
completion. In smaller vessels—6-inch cruisers, de- 
stroyers and submarines—the Italian naval forces 
have a slight margin over the French alone, especial- 
ly in the submarine class. With the destruction of 
part of the German navy, however, Britain may 
transfer additional units to the Mediterranean. 

Should Italy regard this as an opportune moment 
to deliver a blow at the Allies, it could cut East- 
West communications through the Mediterranean, 
and probably effect a quick landing of considerable 
forces in Greece, supported by a land attack from 
Albania. If such a move succeeds, the Allied forces 
in the Near East, variously estimated at between 
250,000 and 500,000, would find it difficult to re- 
plenish supplies of men and material from the 
West, although they would still maintain communi- 
cations with the French and British Empires further 
east. It may be doubted that Italy could concentrate 
its fleet in the Dodecanese in the eastern Mediter- 
ranean. Such a move would leave its west coast ex- 
posed to Allied attack, and France might then de- 
liver thrusts by land and air on Italy’s vital northern 
industrial area; and meanwhile France and Britain, 
by closing the exits and entrances to the Mediter- 
ranean, could prevent overseas supplies from reach- 
ing Italy. which is far more vulnerable economically 
than the Allies. On the other hand, if Italy should 
undertake offensive operations in the Balkans, the 
Allies, although capable of defending their present 
positions, would not command the resources — in 
men, material or air power—to deliver an immedi- 
ate, crushing counter-offensive. The Allied position 
in this region would be further weakened should 
Russia simultaneously strike in the Balkans. At the 
same time, an Italian attack on the Allies would 
bring into action Turkey, which hopes to oust Italy 
from the Dodecanese, while a Russian thrust at the 
Balkans might cause the Turks—hitherto reluctant 
to engage in war with the Soviet Union—to permit 
the Allies to use their bases against Russia’s oil cen- 

ters in the Caucasus, with possibly disastrous results 
for Soviet agriculture, which is increasingly de- 
pendent on motorized equipment. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


em 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 26, Aprit 19, 1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Nationa! 


Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotny F. Lert, Secretary; Vera Micuetas Daan, Editor 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year 


GB» 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Apr. 15.—The repercussions of Germany’s in- 
vasion of Denmark and Norway were felt almost 
as swiftly in Washington last week as in European 
capitals; but for the moment, at least, the spread 
of hostilities to Scandinavia left American foreign 
policy unchanged. By the end of the week the Roose- 
velt Administration was still anxiously weighing its 
course, after taking eight emergency steps in rapid 
succession. 


WASHINGTON DECISIONS. In the order in 
which they were taken, these steps were: 


1. A Proclamation issued by President Roosevelt 
(April 10) barring all American shipping from the new 
area of hostilities. The combat zone originally defined by 
the President last November under section 3 of the Neu- 
trality Act is extended from Bergen, Norway, to include 
the entire Norwegian coast and the Russian Arctic coast 
to a point east of Murmansk. 

2. An Executive Order issued the same day under 
authority of a World War statute, imposing restrictions 
on the sale or transfer of securities or other property held 
by Danish and Norwegian nationals in the United States. 
The effect of this sweeping order, which is administered 
by the Treasury, is to prevent Germany from securing 
access to property of the two Scandinavian countries. 

3. A tentative decision (April 10) to hold up the 
transfer of credits already granted to Norway and Den- 
mark by the Export-Import Bank, pending the receipt of 
official information on the status of these countries, each 
of which had been granted credits of $10,000,000. 

4. Announcement of plans for evacuation of American 
citizens desiring to leave Scandinavia, followed by a re- 
quest to Britain, Norway and Germany to permit safe 
passage of three American vessels from Norwegian ports. 

5. Conclusion of arrangements (April 12) for the im- 
mediate sale of 2,500 latest type military airplanes to the 
Allies, under contracts stipulating that the Allied pur- 
chasing mission will pay part of the cost of developing 
new models for the American army. Ultimate orders placed 
under this agreement may exceed 5,000 planes. 

6. A White House Conference (April 12) with Navy 
Department officials and Congressional leaders to con- 
sider additional appropriations for new naval construction. 

7. Formulation of plans to aid the 17,000 inhabitants 
of Greenland in the event that this Danish colony should 
be cut off from its source of supplies. 

8. A formal statement by President Roosevelt (April 
13) condemning the invasion of Norway and Denmark 
as an “unlawful exercise of force” and reiterating the at- 


titude of this government toward the rights of small na- 
tions. 


In confining its action to these cautious and essen- 


tially routine steps, the Administration has indi- 
cated an acute awareness of the forthcoming politi- 


cal conventions and the prevailing desire of the 
country to stay out of war. Mindful of the strength 
of isolationist sentiment in Congress—which has 
not been lessened by the invasion of Scandinavia— 
both the White House and the State Departmen 
have carefully avoided any move which might cause 
alarm on Capitol Hill and have sought to minimize 
the possibility of any change in the direction ‘of 
American foreign policy. 


WESTERN HEMISPHERE SOLIDARITY. Ney. 
ertheless, evidence is not lacking of a quickened 
tempo and a growing concern over the decisive turn. 
ing-point which many officials believe may soon be 
reached in Europe. It was underlined in President 
Roosevelt’s strongly worded speech at the Pan 
American Union on April 15, and again in his 
pointed observations on the relation of Greenland 
to the Western Hemisphere. 


To the representatives of the American republics 
Mr. Roosevelt declared that the “cooperative peace 
of the Western Hemisphere was not created by 
wishing; and it will require more than words to 
maintain it.” While he made no attempt to add to 
the pledges of continental solidarity contained in 
the declarations of Lima and Panama, the President 
warned that the nations of this hemisphere could 
only retain their peaceful system if they are prepared 
“to meet force with force if challenge is ever made.” 


The reference to Greenland was less direct, and 
implied no immediate challenge. At his press con- 
ference on Friday, Mr. Roosevelt merely took cog- 
nizance of the fact that Germany's invasion of Den- 
mark might one day alter the status of this northern 
territory. He made no comment on Great Britain's 
occupation of the Faroe islands, another Danish 
possession, or the decision of Iceland to declare its 
independence, and he parried all questions bearing 
on the application of the Monroe Doctrine to Green 
land. His only immediate move was to ask the Red 
Cross to investigate the possibility of rendering as 
sistance if supply ships from Denmark are cut off 
by the war. But the President made it clear that he 
considered Greenland to be in the Western Hemi 
sphere, and that its security is a matter of vital con 
cern to the United States. 


Both of these hemisphere references have theif 
implications for the future. And as far as Congress 
is concerned, the President is unlikely to encounter 
Opposition to any measures for the defense of the 
Western Hemisphere. W. T. STONE 










es 
Vou. x 


Can tl 
Have 


Tr 


he 
an 
durin; 
conce: 
into t 
lands 
ton a 
felt b 
ing tl 
the P 
strate 
ST 
On / 
ister, 
trans: 
Neth 
ences 
on A 
tende 
that | 
main 
Neth 
hosti 
sions 
woul 
wou 
fron 
Asia 
pove 
any 
the 
the | 
Se 
rejo. 
erla: 
the 
clud 
*Cf. 
Repor 








