





-RPPraagcrt rs of Sp 


eo 


re 


he 








ad IVS. 3a 


ONIV. oy 














- 


"ERIODICAL Room 


GENERAL | IRPADY 








Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


University of Michigan 


Aan A whan iiekt 





POLICY BULLETIN 








FOREIGN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIV, No. 24 


Marca 380, 1945 





— 


= is growing danger that the maze of pro- 
cedural technicalities connected with the presen- 
tation of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals to the San 
Francisco conference will obscure, in this country, 
the forces that are shaping post-war Europe and, 
most of all, the human fears, passions and desires 
which are the stuff and substance of relations be- 
tween nations. For no matter how elaborate and 
well-intentioned may be the Charter of the United 
Nations now in the making, it will prove a dead 
letter unless the day-to-day actions of the Big Three 
illay the anxieties and encourage the hopes stirring 
among the ruins of Europe. 

MONARCHY IN SPAIN? It would be danger- 
gus to generalize about conditions on the continent 
from the meager indications that can be gleaned 
from censored news—but a few main trends may be 
detected. First, and most obvious, is the recognition 
by neutral countries, in some cases delayed beyond 
the zero hour, that Germany has been defeated. The 
most striking evidence of this trend is the sudden 


about the atrocities perpetrated by the Japanese 
against Spanish citizens in the Philippines. While it 
would be awkward, to say the least, for Franco to 
justify a last-minute attack on Germany, whose 
totalitarian régime he has labored to copy, he may 
hope that verbal denunciation of Japan would im- 
pose no military burdens on Spain and might secure 
for that country a place in the ranks of the United 
Nations and a seat at the peace table. It seems doubt- 
ful, however, that Franco's hopes in this respect will 
be realized. The United States and Britain have per- 
force had to work with Franco during the grueling 
years when a German thrust through Spain would 
have endangered Allied operations in North Africa 
and the Mediterranean. But it is no secret that the 
Churchill government would like to see monarchy re- 





gncern expressed by the Falange press in Spaitt™ 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


BIG THREE SUPPORT TREND TOWARD STABILITY. IN EUROPE 


place the Franco dictatorship as soon as conditions 
permit. A bid for restoration of the monarchy was 
made by Prince Juan, son of the late King Alfonso 
XII, in a proclamation released on March 22, in 
which he declared that Franco’s domestic and foreign 
policies were contrary to the traditions of Spain, and 
warned that another civil war was impending unless 
the General surrendered his power. However, 
Spaniards in exile in France and Mexico hope to 
reestablish a republican régime after the war by 
peaceful means, for reports from Spain indicate re- 
luctance on the part of the people to face the horrors 
of another civil war. 

EASTERN EUROPE IN TRANSITION. While 
the trend of events, not only in Spain but in lib- 
erated areas of Western Europe, appears to be in 
favor of stabilization, with emphasis on orderly re- 
form rather than revolution, the countries in Eastern 
Europe, freed from Nazi rule, are struggling through 
a transition period, in some cases marked by violence, 
as they seek to preserve a measure of independence 


“without at the same time antagonizing” Rissia> Pres 


ident Benes of Czechoslovakia, who arrived in Mos- 
cow on March 18 on his way to Kosice where he 
plans to set up his government pending the libera- 
tion of Prague, appears to have good prospects for 
stability at home and friendly relations with the 
U.S.S.R. His most important immediate task is to 
satisfy the desire of Slovaks for a status of equality 
with the Czechs in liberated post-war Czechoslovakia. 

In Rumania Premier Groza, representing the Na- 
tional Democratic front which includes Communists, 
took office on March 7, following the ouster of Gen- 
eral Radescu, who had been criticized by some Ru- 
manians, as well as by Moscow, for delaying puni- 
tive action against pro-German elements. Groza’s 
position was promptly strengthened on March 9, 
when Stalin authorized the reincorporation into Ru- 





| 
{ 
' 








mania, as provided by the Allied-Rumanian armis- 
tice, of the province of Transylvania, previously 
gtanted by Hitler to Hungary. Russia's intervention 
in Rumania, which brought about inquiries by Brit- 
ain and the United States, was justified by the Soviet 
government on the ground of military necessity—a 
justification frequently invoked by London and 
Washington. In Rumania, as in Hungary and Poland, 
the chief item on the domestic agenda is agrarian 
reform, involving the distribution of large estates 
among the peasants. Such reform has long been fav- 
ored by peasant leaders in all three countries, and 
was partly effected, notably in Poland, after World 
War I—but complaints frequently had been made 
that the process of land distribution was unduly 
slow, and that the economic position of great land- 
owners, and hence their political influence, had re- 
mained undisturbed. Premier Groza, however, has 
sought to allay fears of a far-reaching economic 
revolution by stating that industrialists, businessmen 
and bankers are needed for the reconstruction of 
Rumania, and will not be placed in the category of 
war criminals. 


In Finland the elections of March 17 and 18—the 
first general elections held in Europe since the out- 
break of war—revealed a slight trend to the Left, as 
the Popular Democratic coalition, which includes 
Communists, won 51 out of 200 seats in the unicam- 
eral Legislature, largely at the expense of the Social 
Democratic and Agrarian parties. Considering, how- 
ever, the proximity of Russia, which made no pre- 
tense of disinterest in what happened at the polls, 
the Finnish elections indicate a tendency to settle 
down to a middle course, which may become evident 
in other countries as they emerge from the chaos of 
war and civil struggle. 


Page Two 








a 
Le 


Americans who fear Russia’s encroachments op 
Eastern Europe and the Balkans may ask whethe 
the Soviet government will permit any country along 
its border to follow a middle-of-the-road course, ang 
will not instead insist on thoroughgoing revolutiop, 
Predictions are always dangerous. But the Sovig 
government has shown greater concern about public 
opinion in the Western world than could have beep 
anticipated after a quarter of century of deep-seated 
mutual distrust and fear; and to the extent that dis. 
trust and fear are gradually dispelled on both sides, 
it may be expected that Russia will accept, not dis. 
courage, the stabilization of Europe. There is no 
doubt whatever that Russia is intervening in the 
affairs of nations whose geographical position affects 
the security of its territory —but Britain and the 
United States, too, have shown an active interest ip 
the internal affairs of countries which, in ther 
opinion, affect their security. 

All three great powers, in varying degrees and by 
different methods, are trying to steer Europe in a 
direction favorable to their interests. All three are 
beginning to realize that, while European nations 
welcome the aid of the non-European powers in their 
liberation and recovery from war, they have not lost 
their identity, and will not permit domination by 
their great Allies any more than they permitted dom. 
ination by Hitler. Europe, fortunately, in spite of its 
terrible sufferings and losses, is not dead. It is in the 
interest of the United States, Britain and Russia that 
it should revive as soon as possible—and revive un- 
der such conditions that it will look hopefully to 
voluntary collaboration with the Big Three. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The first of a series of articles on political trends in Europe 
on the eve of San Francisco.) 


OPPONENTS OF MONETARY FUND PURSUE DELAYING TACTICS 


A feeling in some quarters that Congressional ac- 
tion on the Bretton Woods monetary proposals must 
be delayed has resulted from the objections offered 
to the plans in the House Banking and Currency 
Committee since hearings were first begun on March 
6. The principal criticisms have come from the Amer- 
ican Bankers Association, which has suggested that 
the International Monetary Fund be dropped and 
that the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development be charged with the function of ex- 
change stabilization as well as capital investment in 
the post-war period. Other business groups, includ- 
ing the Committee for Economic Development and 
the Chamber of Commerce of the United States, have 
also offered testimony before the Committee pro- 
posing that the function and organization of the 
Monetary Fund be reviewed. The National Foreign 
Trade Council favors the adoption of the Bretton 
Woods monetary proposals, although certain reser- 


vations were advanced by individual members of 
that group. It is to be noted, however, that the CED 
statement does not ask for complete abolition of the 
Fund, and all banking groups have not concurred 
with the ABA report. 

ADOPTION NOW OR NEVER? Certain pres 
reports suggest that Administration officials are now 
less insistent on speedy Congressional action and 
some opinion in the Senate indicates that a final de 
cision on the Bretton Woods agreement may not be 
taken until after the United Nations conference has 
begun at San Francisco. Many proponents of the 
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, both in testt 
mony before the House Committee and in the press, 
have intimated that the Bretton Woods agreement 
must be approved in substantially its present form of 
no institutions for post-war economic collaboration 
can be established. It must be appreciated, howevel, 
that they have been forced to take this extreme 





— 


stand 
Fund 


in fac 
arguil 
fered. 
to its 
their 

favor 
have 

of the 
the C 
to pa 
In vi 


tend 
thori 


- ~Brett 
-avoic 


Brett 
its ac 
mant 
Sena’ 
the ( 


cals 
whic 
ment 
july 
the 

pres 
Con; 
thes 
were 
conf 


} men 


how 





FOR] 
Head 


one f 








s of 
CED 
the 
irred 


press 
now 

and 
1 de 
ot be 
» has 
t the 
testi- 
ress, 
ment 
‘m of 
ation 
revel, 
rreme 








— 





sand largely because those who have opposed the 
fund have also characterized it in extreme fashion. 

Some critics have suggested that the Fund would, 
in fact, constitute an economic superstate. Yet this 
argument is contradictory to the other criticisms of- 
fered. For although the Fund gives little authority 
fo its directors in forcing member nations to alter 
their internal monetary policies, certain groups that 
favor delay in considering the Bretton Woods plan 
have declared that the Economic and Social Council 
of the United Nations Organization envisaged under 
the Dumbarton Oaks agreement should have power 
to pass on the establishment of the Fund and Bank. 
Jn view of such opposition, is it reasonable to as- 
sume that those who oppose the Fund or Bank in- 
tend that the new Economic Council shall have au- 
‘thority greater than that now proposed under the 
‘Bretton Woods plan? Candid opinion can hardly 
awoid asking whether suggestion for delay on the 
Bretton Woods agreement is not a method whereby 
its adoption may be jeopardized in much the same 
manner as was the League of Nations in 1920, after 
Senate reservations were attached to acceptance of 
the Covenant by the United States. 


AMERICAN RESPONSIBILITIES. Treasury off- 
dals and others have pointed out the difficulties 
which would be involved in drafting a new agree- 
| ment. While in no way minimizing the results of the 
july conference at Bretton Woods last year, where 
the financial experts of 44 nations produced the 
present plan, no one can object to the most careful 
Congressional scrutiny and further public debate on 
these proposals. Nor would it be a complete disaster 
were it necessary to call the United Nations into 
conference again in order to redraft the whole agree- 
ment or any part of it. It must remain a question, 
however, whether those interests now critical of the 





What will United Nations delegates discuss at the 
historic April 25 meeting? Read 

AFTER VICTORY... 

by Vera Micheles Dean 
A clear, brief survey of world organization in question 


and answer form. Cuts through the mass of technical in- 
formation now being published. Includes text of Dum- 


barton Oaks agreement. 
25¢ 


Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 B. 38th St., New York 16 











ADR 17 104K 





Page Three = 





Fund are opposed to its purposes or to technical pro- 
visions which could be ironed out in the course of 
experience once the new institution was established. 
This procedural difficulty is largely of importance 
because it masks more fundamental questions, and 
has thus caused public debate about the issue of 
delay. 


The Bretton Woods plan represents, of course, a 
compromise with other nations, many of which—un- 
der unorthodox economic views—are less interested 
than we are in the mechanisms of monetary rela- 
tions, but more concerned over the maintenance of 
a high level of economic activity. This is particularly 
true of Great Britain, now embarked officially on a 
policy designed to create and sustain full employ- 
ment. This should be no less true of the United 
States and, if delay in adopting the Bretton Woods 
agreement served to broaden the discussion of Amer- 
ica’s economic problems—both on the part of Con- 
gress and of private groups—then the delay would 
be wholly beneficial. 


Critics of the Bretton Woods plan have pointed 
out that other factors—tariff problems, sterling bal- 
ances, employment possibilities and world political 
security—will all greatly affect the desirability or 
even feasibility of establishing such a Monetary 
Fund. This is true beyond doubt. What is not so 
clear, however, is whether the present discussion of 
priority regarding adoption of monetary plans will 
not contribute to inaction on these other problems. 
Congress must eventually deal with both political 
and economic agreements of diverse character, but 
above all with the creation of an expanding economy 
within the United States. Due to the predominant 
world influence of American economic strength this 
decision cannot be delayed much longer. 


Were an American policy of full employment as- 
sured, there would be less interest in the precise tech- 
nical details of monetary stabilization either in this 
country or abroad. Then it would be more feasible to 
reduce American tariffs, expand our imports as well 
as our exports, and enter fully into the operations 
of the Monetary Fund and the Bank for Reconstruc- 
tion and Development. Should the United States pur- 
sue such policies and enter these institutions, other 
nations—which are closely watching the American 
Congress in this instance—would then know that we 
are vitally interested in an expanding world economy 
which can become a real foundation stone for world 
political security. 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 24, MarcH 30, 1945. 


second-class matter December 2 
oe month for change of address on membership publications. 


Be 121 





Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lugr, Secretary; VERA MicHELzs Dzan, Editor. Entered as 


, 1921, at the Poste Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


if 
¥ 
l 





Washington News Letter =a 





i 











NEUTRALS INCREASE AID TO ALLIES AS GERMAN DEFEAT IMPENDS 


The neutrals pose a difficult problem for the gov- 
ernments whose delegates are to assemble in San 
Francisco on April 25 and draw up a charter for a 
world security conference. “Membership in the Or- 
ganization should be open to all peace-loving states,” 
says Chapter III of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals. 
But only members of the United Nations have re- 
ceived invitations to San Francisco. 

MOVES BY SWITZERLAND AND SWEDEN. 
The Dumbarton Oaks plan calls for abstention from 
the giving of “assistance to any state against which 
preventive or enforcement action is being undertaken 
by the Organization.” In recent days the two demo- 
cratic neutrals.on the European continent, Sweden 
and Switzerland, have given demonstrations of 
friendliness toward the Allies which practically 
amount to acquiescence in the non-assistance prin- 
ciple. The Swiss, on March 8, signed an agreement 
with the United States, Britain and France which 
ends their country’s usefulness to the Germans. They 
undertook to forbid shipments of coal through 
Switzerland’s tunnels to northern Italy, controlled by 
the German armies; to cease exports of electrical 
power to Germany; to freeze German assets in Switz- 
erland and assets held by Swiss for Germans; and to 
reduce to a dribble Swiss purchases of gold from 
Germany. Five days later the Swiss declined to renew 
their trade pact with Germany. 

In addition, that country gave assurance to the 
Allies last August that it would surrender war crim- 
inals. There are several hundred Italian fascist off- 
cials in Switzerland—among them Count Giuseppi 
Volti, formerly Mussolini's Minister of Finance— 
and difficulties may confront that country when the 
Allies request it to make good its pledge. But the 
temper of the Swiss people as well as the policy of 
the Swiss government is unfriendly to the Axis and 
its agents, despite the fact that they have suffered 
occasional accidental bombings of Swiss towns by 
Allied planes, such as those of March 4, when Zurich 
and Berne were hit. Zurich not long ago refused 
permission to Dr. Wilhelm Furtwaengler to conduct 
concerts, and when he gave a performance in the 
small Swiss town of Winterthur, the police had to 
protect him from the crowds. 

Sweden has gradually reduced its trade with Ger- 
many to the point where it is negligible, and at the 
same time has assumed budget-straining obligations 
of assistance toward the economically depressed re- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


gions of Europe. From its limited stocks of food. 
stuffs, Sweden has sent 10,000 tons of edibles tp 
German-occupied Netherlands, where the popula. 
tion in some instances is subsisting on 630 calories 
of food a day. A second shipment is about to go for. 
ward. The Dutch distress arises from the failure of 
the Nazis, who realize their expulsion from Holland 
is inevitable, to provide food for a region that has 
never been self-sustaining, and from the Nether. 
lands general strike, which has interfered with trans- 
portation within the German-occupied region. 


SWEDEN MAY FIGHT. Since the outbreak of 
the war, the Swedish government has allotted 400, 
000,000 kronor (about $100,000,000) for gifts to 
the populations of war-ravaged countries. On March 
7 Finance Minister Ernst Wigforss presented a bill 
to the Riksdag that would add another 70,000,000 
kronor by June 30, 1946 to this outlay for gifts. At 
the same time, he proposed the appropriation of 
1,440,000,000 kronor to be lent for the rehabilitation 
of industry in neighboring European countries. The 
contribution of neutral capital toward reconstruction 
might in time be great, for it is doubtful whether 
the United States will be willing to undertake the 
whole task of providing funds to make possible 
European recovery from the destruction of the war. 
The Wigforss credit bill would bring to the equiy- 


alent of $625,000,000 the amount which Sweden has}. 


made available in loans to other states during the 
war. Sweden, whose first interest is its immediate 
neighbors, intends to lend $50,000,000 to Norway 
and to help replace ships lost from the Norwegian 
merchant fleet; $30,000,000 to Finland; and $18; 
750,000 to Denmark. 

The Swiss and Swedish policies testify not only to 
their own Allied bias, but also to the declining influ 
ence of Germany, which lost its last effective prope 
ganda weapon when the V-1 and V-2 bombs failed 
to change the course of the war. The Swedes, how 
ever, believe that the war may continue for many 
months, and there is a possibility that they may ente! 
it if the Germans follow a scorched-earth policy it 
evacuating Norway. “A situation may arise in neigh 
boring countries the consequences of which it is if 











k 


nx 
UR 
HI 


vel 
nilitas 
un F 
was st 
reques 
ind p 
States. 
vheth 
kadet 
demat 
shoul. 
envisa 
wnxiet 
Geor; 
for at 
nitori¢ 


| 


o Eu 
War | 
tional 
ix 
hand] 
for t 
yen 
W 
INC 
of m 
not \ 
‘erie: 
Milit 
and 
1943 
publ 
Thre 


ssible to foresee,” Defense Minister Per Edvit},.,.; 


Skéld said on March 15, when he announced the 


Hun 


purchase of 50 fighter planes, P-51s, from the Unitel} p,;, 


States. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


serv. 








