(08m 
‘ART 


At. 











WAR 24 1944 | 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Nichtzan 





: 
|| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 























ed i : An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
ng o FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
idk 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
tly tp] Vo. XXIII, No. 23 Marcu 24, 1944 
by a 
: ita RUSSIA’S CLEAR-CUT POLICY CONTRASTS WITH AMERICAN INDECISION 
- oo crossing of the Dniester River, announced on on the part of small nations—in marked contrast to 
’ Jer. March 18, brought Russian troops into Bessa- 1919, when that right became one of the cornerstones 
ly re abia, giving added significance to the Kremlin's rap- of the peace settlement. There is no doubt that self- 
“ond. My unfolding foreign policy, represented in the determination, unless it takes place within the frame- 
ess of| north by its peace negotiations with Finland and in work of an international organization, is bound to 
of the ) the south by its recognition of the Badoglio régime. result in further pulverization and hence weakening 
FINLAND AT BAY. While Moscow’s peace of Europe. The alternative to self-determination, 
terms were, on the whole, moderate considering the however, is not the absorption of small nations into 
| §°F! blows Russia could, if it wished, inflict on Finland the territories of great powers, as the London Times 
Whit at this juncture, and Marshal Mannerheim was tre- seems to suggest, but the establishment, as soon as 
States, ported to have said his forces could not withstand possible, of an international organization within 
fiddly renewed Russian onslaught, the Finnish govern- which, as anticipated at the Teheran conference, all 
‘shall ment, on March 14, rejected these terms, in spite of countries, great and small, could find a measure of 
‘0 the pressure from the United States and Sweden. To security. Otherwise, just as the Finns are understand- 
mutt} many people in this country Finland’s action may — ably timorous at handing over their fate to the 
tee appear foolhardy and unjustified. But from the point U.S.S.R., so the Russians are understandably anxious, 
- The of view of many Finns a shift from the domination in their hour of victory, to consolidate their strategic 
ious) of Germany to that of Russia offers little perceptible position on the Baltic—and prefer their own method 
i improvement. of attaining security in the hand to an international 
Such improvement could have come if Britain, system still very much in the bush. 
LOPE} Russia and the United States had implemented their Meanwhile, the Soviet government, which has 
yuncel| Moscow pledge to establish an international organ- castigated the Polish government in exile and used 
ore he} ization ‘‘at the earliest possible opportunity.” Only unvarnished language to the Finns, appears to be 
1943| within an international organization could Finland, meting out more gentle treatment to the Badoglio 
d that or any other small country, expect adequate guar- régime, which it recognized as the government of 
immi| antees against threats by any one of the great powers. Italy on March 11. This decision has been explained 
ed be| In the continued absence of a system of collective by Communists in the United States as an attempt to 
yta off security, American advice to quit the war can hardly restore lost morale to the Italians, and thus strength- 
Rabbi| prove effective, since the Finns learned by bitter ex- en them for the selection of their own post-war gov- 
Silvet| perience during their first war with Russia in 1939-40, ernment. As a matter of fact, there has been rela- 
given» when they enjoyed considerable sympathy here and tively little criticism of Badoglio among members of 
1 them} in Western Europe, that they cannot count on con- the Italian Committee of National Liberation. Their 
ors of} «ete assistance from us or from the British—least of attacks have been directed not against Badoglio, but 
id that} all now, when we are fighting side by side with against King Victor Emmanuel, and those elements 
will be\ Russia in a common effort to defeat Germany. surrounding the monarch who have profited by Al- 
ne.” | SELF-DETERMINATION QUESTIONED. In lied occupation to use Fascist methods against all 
fact, so great is our concern to maintain intact the political opposition, without benefit of the Fascist la- 
LLES | walition of great powers that there is a growing bel. Britain and the United States at least could have 
DS | tendency to question the right of self-determination made, had they wished, a distinction between the 








a erm ee 


Qe ee 


SO enna) ates 


oo reenn seve 





SL OT ee ceria. Sort = a TN 


‘5 








King and Badoglio, thus giving some encouragement 
to those anti-Fascist groups in Italy which have been 
pleading for the establishment of a regency. Such a 
measure would even have satisfied Mr. Churchill’s 
expressed preference for the monarchical system 
without, at the same time, sanctioning the semi- 
Fascist elements now regrouped around the King. 
In practice, Anglo-American policy of leaving both 
the Badoglio régime and the six parties compris- 
ing the Italian Committee of Liberation in the dark 
concerning our future intentions has tended to alien- 
ate both, without rallying the Italians to our side. 
RUSSIA’S AIMS IN EUROPE. The chief weak- 
ness of our policy is that, in contrast to the Russians 
who have a definite objective in mind and use a 
wide range of methods to attain it, Britain and the 
United States give the impression of not being cer- 
tain just what they are striving to achieve on the con- 
tinent once Hitler has been overthrown. Russia's ob- 
jective is two-fold: to win the war as soon as human- 
ly possible; and to achieve its own security against 
the renewal of German aggression. To achieve their 
own security, the Russians are following two inter- 
locked policies: they are establishing along their 
western border a safety belt of territories which, in 
their opinion, could otherwise be utilized by the Ger- 
mans for some future attack on Russia. Hence their 
insistence on the incorporation into the U.S.S.R. of 
Eastern Poland, the Baltic states, Bessarabia and 
the section of Finland they acquired at the close of 
the first Russo-Finnish war in 1940. Second, they are 
seeking by all means at their disposal to make cer- 
tain that countries adjacent to Russia’s 1941 border 
will, after the war, have governments friendly to the 


Page Two = 





= 


———— omen aan 


U.S.S.R. and the Soviet system. Hence their hostility 
to the Polish government im exile, their backing of 
the Union of Polish Patriots and the Polish army jy 
Russia headed by Lieut. Gen. Berling, their treaty of 
mutual assistance with Czechoslovakia and, furthe 
afield, their recognition of the Badoglio régime. 





———e 


Compared to these clear-cut aims, the policy of 
Britain and the United States in Europe remains up. 
clear. Are we merely striving to assure our Own sur 
vival—in itself a worthy and obviously essential 
aim? Or are we also intent on extirpating in Europe 
the forces that bred Fascism and Nazism, and that, 
unless they are uprooted, may breed them again once 
hostilities are over? Naturally, the military comman- 
ders in the field must have the first say when the 
lives of millions are at stake. But this is only a partial 
answer. Commanders in the field are not functioning 


in a vacuum. They either have, or if they do not, ; 


should have some idea of the general course pursued 
in world affairs by the governments they serve. To 
raise these questions is not to weaken the war ef. 


a 





fort, as some people contend. On the contrary, it 


could be fairly argued that if the military forces of 


the United States—whose prevailing lack of convic- 
tion has been the subject of recent comment—were 
more fully aware of the issues at stake, they might 
make an even more valuable contribution to the war 
effort. And this applies with still greater force to the 
civilians behind the lines who can hardly be expected 
to perform adequately their functions as citizens of a 
democratic society unless they have a rough idea of 
the direction in which the government is moving, 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


ANGLO-AMERICAN COOPERATION HINGES ON POST-WAR TRADE POLICIES 


The impending conversations in London between 
an American mission headed by Under Secretary of 
State Stettinius and a group of British officials led 
by Foreign Secretary Eden are expected to cover 
many problems of current interest to the two govern- 
ments. It has been suggested that the discussions will 
include not only political issues such as the present 
situation in Italy but also the problem of economic 
relations between the United States and Britain. If 
this proves to be the case currency, shipping and con- 
trol of raw materials will undoubtedly be explored, 
but even more important may be discussions on two 
other foreign trade questions on which agreement is 
necessary—one of immediate concern and the other 
with far-reaching post-war implications. 

LEND-LEASE RESTRICTIONS ON EXPORTS. 
The first problem, involving a revision of the 
British White Paper of September 10, 1941, has 
arisen as a result of the recent increase in reverse 
lend-lease aid from Britain. The White Paper was a 
unilateral declaration of policy by which the British 


government guaranteed not to permit the re-export | 
of lend-lease goods or similar goods in short supply | 


in the United States except where considerations of 
war supply made it necessary. According to a joint 


statement issued on March 18 by Secretary of State | 








Hull and Foreign Economic Administrator Crowley, | 
this policy has been conducted successfully over , 


the past two and a half years. But with the expan- 
sion of reverse lend-lease from Britain to include 
raw materials, the British government quite naturally 
asked that an agreement be reached whereby future 
restrictions such as those in the White Paper be ap- 
plied equally to American exporters. Although nego- 
tiations to this end were begun several months ago, 
an understanding has not as yet been reached. 
Apparently the desire of exporters on both sides 
of the Atlantic to improve their competitive position 


has delayed the negotiations. But the fears expressed — 


in this country that such an agreement would benefit 
British export trade at the expense of the United 
States seem to have no more justification than earliet 








——— 


adv: 


000 
app 








— 
tility 
g of 
LY in 
ty of 
rther 
y of 
5 Un- 
sur: 
ntial 
rope 
that, 
once 
man- 
| the 
irtial 
ning 


not, ; 


‘sued 
. To 
r ef. 
'y, it 
es of 
nvic- 
were 
night 
Wat 
© the 
ected 
of a 
oa of 


ving, 
AN 

[ES 
x poit 


as of 
joint 


State | 


~~ 





—_—_—_ ee — 








wley, | 
over , 


cpai- 
clude 
irally 
uture 
e ap- 
ne€go- 

ago, 


sides 
sition 
essed 
enefit 
nited 


arlier 





——S 
—— 


charges that lend-lease was giving Britain an unfair 
advantage in world markets. United States cash ex- 

rts reached a value of approximately $3,150,000,- 
900 in 1942, compared with an average of $3,000,- 
900,000 for the period 1936-38, and in 1943 totaled 
approximately $2,774,181,000, or a drop of only 744 
per cent below 1936-38 levels. British exports on the 
other hand—owing almost entirely to shortage of 
labor and supply rather than to the White Paper re- 
strictions—were drastically reduced during 1942-43, 
probably by as much as 50 per cent from the 1936- 
38 average. In the Middle East, for example, where 
British exports were roughly three times greater than 
American before the war, the volume of United 
States cash exports is now much larger than the 
British. In view of these facts it seems probable that 
American export trade has not suffered, except in 
relatively minor instances, by irregularities in the 
White Paper procedure, and there appears to be no 
reason why an agreement should not be reached 
which would make restrictions equally applicable to 
American exporters. 


THE COMMERCIAL POLICY ISSUE. The prob- 
lem of reconciling American and British post-war 
commercial policies, however, will be of much more 
vital importance. True, the basic principles for a 
solution of this problem were laid down in Article 
VII of the Master Lend-Lease Agreements of Febru- 
ary 23, 1942, in which the United States and Britain 
agreed to seek joint action looking toward the re- 
moval of discriminatory treatment in international 
commerce and the reduction of tariffs and other trade 
barriers. On the American side, it is clear that the 
Administration strongly supports the restoration and 
expansion of international trade and finance on a 
multilateral basis and would like to use Article VII 





| as the vehicle for establishing an international trade 


ipply | 


agreement or convention to which all the United Na- 
tions would adhere. But if general acceptance of Ar- 


= Page Three 





What effect will the United States attitude toward 
the tariff, shipping, rubber, foreign lending and 
lend-lease have in influencing Britain’s post-war 
trade policy? READ— 
BRITAIN’S POST-WAR TRADE AND 
WORLD ECONOMY 


by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


December 15 issue of FOREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















——— 


ticle VII is to be achieved, the United States will 
have to make substantial reductions in its own tariff, 
and probably remove its preferential arrangements 
with the Philippines, the Virgin Islands and Cuba. 
So long as our allies feel uncertain that this will be 
done, they are unlikely to commit themselves to re- 
move exchange controls and bilateral or preferential 
trading arrangements. 








In London there is also support for the restoration 
of multilateral trade, but with certain reservations. 
As a result of the war Britain, which previously paid 
for over a third of its imports with income derived 
from foreign investments and shipping, will have a 
deficit—of probably £200,000,000—in its balance of 
payments which can be filled only by an export ex- 
pansion of roughly 40 or 50 per cent. In facing 
this prospect the British government has apparently 
felt that immediate achievement of multilateralism 
would be impossible, but that if sufficient liquid re- 
serves for the transition period could be provided 
by an international clearing union or fund the bilater- 
al and preferential arrangements used in the ‘thir- 
ties and during the war could be gradually removed. 


In taking this position, however, the government 
is far ahead of the bilateral thinking of many Brit- 
ish manufacturers, and the recent series of articles 
on foreign trade in The Economist, Britain's leading 
economic journal, suggests that opposition will be 
met from that quarter also. For The Economist, after 
admitting the merits of “omnilateralism,” argues 
that it cannot be achieved, contending that the 
only possible solution for Britain is a form of closely 
controlled regional multilateralism. 


Although this position is not accepted by the gov- 
ernment, the difficulties of the transition period may 
make it impossible for Britain to give full and im- 
mediate support to multilateralism. If this is the case, 
and Britain is permitted certain deviations from the 
multilateral principle while making post-war adjust- 
ments, the question still remains whether it will then 
be possible for the Administration to obtain support 
for its program from Congress, which will probably 
be reluctant under any circumstances to make the 
essential tariff reductions. Until the central issue of 
commercial policy is solved, related questions such as 
currency, shipping, oil, rubber and free access to raw 
naterials in general, will not be readily adjusted, and 
Anglo-American economic collaboration will have 
no solid basis for the post-war period. 


HowarpD P. WHIDDEN, Jr. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 23, MarcH 24, 1944, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
_ Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lzgr, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dgan, Editer. Entered as 





second-class matter December 2, 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








r 


MS 26 
a. 


mp emer eg ay 
ar. 


ee ee ee 


Washington News Letter 





sibbesr, 








MarcH 20.—Treasury Secretary Henry Morgen- 
thau, Jr., late last March invited finance ministers of 
the United Nations governments to send their mon- 
etary experts to Washington for exploratory tech- 
nical discussions on how to stabilize the world’s 
currencies. These preliminary talks recently came to 
a close, and the United States government tentatively 
expects to be host to a world monetary conference 
some time this summer. The need for universal cur- 
rency stabilization challenges the governments to 
discover a formula for multilateral economic coop- 
eration because, as the preamble to the United States’ 
proposal for an international stabilization fund of 
the United and Associated Nations says, “world pros- 
perity, like world peace, is indivisible.” 


CURRENCY TALKS UNDER WAY. Three 
proposals have furnished the bases for the pre- 
liminary talks. They are the United States Stabiliza- 
tion Fund plan, made public on April 7, 1943 and 
revised on July 10, 1943; the plan for an interna- 
tional clearing union, made public by the British 
government on April 8, 1943; and the Canadian 
government's proposal for an international ex- 
change union. On November 24, 1943 the United 
States also published a preliminary draft outline of 
a proposal for a bank for reconstruction and develop- 
ment of the United and Associated Nations. Its pur- 
pose—to encourage the flow of private investment 
capital to war-stricken countries—is in keeping with 
the general goal of stabilization, which is to secure 
economic advancement for all. 


The specific objectives of the advocates of currency 
stabilization are to help stabilize the foreign ex- 
change rates of the currencies of the member coun- 
tries, and to help create conditions under which the 
smooth flow of foreign trade and productive capital 
will be fostered. Such a program would liberate 
trade from the dangerous confinement of bilateral 
controls, special clearing arrangements, multiple cur- 
rency devices and discriminatory foreign exchange 
and currency restrictions which dominated world 
commerce during the 1930's and contributed to the 
outbreak of World War II. 

The British plan states “there is a growing meas- 
ure of agreement about the general character of any 
solution of the problem likely to be successful.” 
There are still disagreements, however, on details. 


The revised American plan proposes a fund of 
$5,000,000,000 whereas the Canadian plan proposes 


FOR VICTORY °* 





$8,000,000,000. The American plan would limit 
credits from the fund for an individual member to 
the amount of its contribution to the fund, whereas 
the British would effect ‘‘the substitution of an ex. 
pansionist, in place of a contractionist, pressure on 
world trade” by “allowing to each member state 
overdraft facilities of a defined amount.’’ The Amer. 
ican plan would require each member to pay at least 
30 per cent of its quota of the fund in gold, whereas 
the British plan, not prescribing the nature of the 
payment medium, says that “we need a quantum of 
international currency which is neither determined 
in an unpredictable and irrelevant manner as, for ex- 
ample, by the technical progress of the gold industry, 
nor subject to large variations depending on the gold 
reserve policies of individual countries.” Both the 
American and British plans, nevertheless, would fix 
the value of the fund’s monetary unit in terms of 
gold. The Soviet government, whose monetary repre- 
sentatives only recently concluded their technical dis- 
cussions here, is said to favor the use of gold in the 
establishment of the fund. 

WHY LONDON CONFERENCE FAILED. The 
last attempt to agree upon world-wide stabilization, 
through the London Economic Conference of 1933, 
failed chiefly because individual governments, es- 
pecially that of the United States, took the view that 
domestic monetary questions and domestic political 
interests should be satisfied before the international 
questions were dealt with. The lesson of the past 
eleven years suggests that in the long run unsolved 
international problems are bound to affect the do- 
mestic situation of each nation. 

To pave the way for domestic acceptance of Amer- 
ican participation in a world currency stabilization 
fund, Mr. Morgenthau has kept the appropriate 
House and Senate committees informed of the pre- 
liminary discussions. Officers and directors of various 
Federal Reserve Banks have examined stabilization 
proposals at their conferences; and Treasury officials 
have conferred on the matter with the Advisory 
Council of the American Bankers’ Association, the 
Foreign Trade Council and other organizations. 
Membership in the fund would require no greater 
surrender of sovereignty than a commercial treaty, 
according to the authors of the British plan, who 
foresee that the fund “might become the pivot of the 
future economic government of the world,” other 
desirable collaborative arrangements being aided 
and supported by its existence. BLam BOLLEs 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





ll 











191 


tr2 


