



) 
a 
rat 





on 


‘a 
uch 
fety 
ame 
orts 
war 
Sed 
ugh 
that 
dan. 
Irity 
Xist- 
‘om- 
pro- 
sion 


and. 
for- 
ding 
1 by 
rods 
s be 
sers. 
peal 
the 
arty 
rs in 
TESS 
the 
Act 
and- 
‘arty 
" to 
r of 
n to 
ting 
and 
ause 
‘rom 
off 
ench 
alia, 
erri- 
resi- 
pro- 
n 
Jays, 
) re 
edits 
is iS 








| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


peeeaL LIBR oer est 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


LRAL LIB 





Vo. XVIII, No. 50 


— 


JUST OFF THE PRESS—OCTOBER Ist 


OcToBER 6, 1{ ; 





WILL NEUTRALITY KEEP U.S. OUT OF WAR? 


by William T. Stone 
Head of the FPA’s Washington By... u 


25¢ 








Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 














HITLER B.. 


GS RUSSIA BACK TO EUROPE 





— Hitler prepared the peace offer he was 
expected to make in his Reichstag speech, the 
outlines of a new settlement in Eastern Europe were 
beginning to emerge from the chaos into which that 
region had been plunged since the outbreak of war. 
The principal developments on the eastern front 
were the establishment of Soviet air and naval bases 
on Estonian territory; the conclusion of three addi- 
tional Soviet-German agreements; and the apparent 
stalemate in Soviet-Turkish negotiations. 


ESTONIA’S SURRENDER. Following a midnight 
session with Soviet officials reminiscent of the 
Schuschnigg and Hacha episodes, Dr. Karl Selter, 
Estonian Foreign Minister, flew back to Tallinn on 
September 24, and returned in a few days with 
his government’s acceptance of Soviet demands, 
which were embodied in a pact of mutual assistance 
signed on September 28. In this pact—whose pre- 
amble recognized the principle of “non-interven- 
tion”—the two parties undertook to render each 
other every assistance, “including military,” in the 
event “of direct aggression or menace of aggres- 
sion arising on the part of any great European power 
against the sea frontiers of the contracting parties 
in the Baltic Sea or their land frontiers across the 
territory of the Latvian republic.” Since the only 
great power in Europe capable of attacking Estonia 
across Latvian territory at the present time is Ger- 
many, this provision was interpreted as a Soviet “no 
trespassing” sign against further German penetra- 
tion in the Baltic region. This warning is to be im- 
plemented by the establishment of Soviet naval bases 
and airdromes on lease terms “‘at a reasonable price”’ 
on the strategic Estonian islands of Oesel and Dagoe, 
and in the town of Paldiski (Baltic Port). For the 
protection of these bases and airdromes the U.S.S.R. 
acquired the right to maintain at its own expense land 
and air armed forces “of strictly limited strength.” 





The Soviet government lost no time in consolidat- 
ing its gains on the Baltic. On October 1 it was re- 
ported that Moscow was making claims on Latvia 
for control of the ports of Libau and Windau, as 
well as on Lithuania. As early as the first week in 
September Norwegian commentators had predicted 
that the U.S.S.R. might go even further and, after 
imposing its conditions on Finland, attempt to oc- 
cupy the adjoining northern provinces of Norway, 
in an effort to obtain an ice-free port on the North 
Sea, which would give it that “window” on Western 
Europe which Peter the Great thought he had 
opened in 1721, when he founded St. Petersburg. 

By these rapid moves the Soviet government has 
turned the tables on Germany, which in 1918, under 
the treaty of Brest-Litovsk, had forced Lenin to 
surrender Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Finland, 
all Of which had formed part of the Russian Empire 
for nearly two centuries. Excluded from the Baltic 
region first by Imperial Germany, then by the vic- 
torious Allies who decided to erect a group of small 
buffer states between Germany and Russia, the So- 
viet Union now returns there as a great power, with 
the acquiescence, voluntary or involuntary, of the 
Third Reich. The acquisition of bases and ports in 
Estonia, and probably in Latvia and Finland as well, 
assures Russia’s mastery of the eastern Baltic, and 
will make it possible for the Soviet government to 
resist German encroachments on the Gulf of Fin- 
land through which, as was learned during the World 
War, Germany could easily menace Leningrad. 


IS RUSSIA WORKING WITH OR AGAINST 
GERMANY ? The check administered by the Soviet 
government to Hitler’s plans for expansion in the 
Baltic does not appear to have been offset by any 
material Soviet concessions to Germany, in spite of 
the pleasure officially expressed by Herr von Rib- 
bentrop regarding his visit to Moscow on Septem- 


» a 





































ee 


EE 











ber 27-29. The principal features of the act ord co; 
cluded by Russia and Germany at the close. of th 
visit were a joint declaration by the two goveé, qments 
regarding their future course in Europe; “fal” 
delimitation of the Soviet-German border ip Po. 
land; and plans for economic cooperation between 
the two countries. 


1. SovieTt-GERMAN DECLARATION. In this declaratio: 
the two governments stated that they had “definitely solved 
questions resulting from the disintegration of the Polish 
state and thereby established a secure foundation for perma- 
ment peace in eastern Europe.” Having accomplished this 
task, they “unanimously” voiced their opinion “that it would 
be in the interest of all nations to bring to an end the state 
of war presently existing between Germany on one side 


and England and France on the other.” They therefore un- 


dertook to concentrate their efforts, “if necessary in coopera- 
tion with the other friendly powers,” on reaching this goal. 
Should their efforts prove unsuccessful, “the fact would 
thereby be established that England and France are respon- 
sible for continuation of the war,”’ in which case the two 
countries “will consult each other as to necessary measures.” 


The implied threat to fix war guilt on the Allies, 
and the warning that they would then be faced with 
a joint Soviet-German attack, seem to have been 
the principal advantages secured by Hitler, who is 
obviously anxious to avert a conflict with the West- 
ern powers. While the Soviet government might 
benefit by Germany's defeat in the West, which 
would give it a free hand in Eastern Europe, it is 
difficult to see why it should render military aid to 
the Reich, when its chief concern is to avoid active 
participation in a general war. Nor would a clear- 
cut German victory over the Allies necessarily serve 
the purposes of the U.S.S.R., which might then be 
left to cope with Germany single-handed. The most 
plausible explanation of the Soviet-German declara- 
tion is that both the totalitarian dictatorships are 
using their potential collaboration as a weapon to 
obtain what each wants from the Allies: Germany, 
cessation of war in the West; and Russia, retention 
of the territorial and political gains it has made 
during the last four weeks. If one may judge from 
Winston Churchill's radio broadcast of October 1, 
the Allies are ready to fall in with the plans not of 
Hitler but of Stalin, by accepting Russia's return to 
Eastern Europe, which they regard as a powerful 
obstacle to Hitler’s Drang nach Osten. 


2. BORDER AND FRIENDSHIP TREATY. This treaty traces 
the “final” Soviet-German frontier in Poland, with the pro- 
viso that the two governments “will reject any interference 
in this settlement by third powers.” The new delimitation 
enlarges the territory allotted to Germany, and gives it a 
corner of Poland bordering on Lithuania. 


While the U.S.S.R. thus appears to have made 
territorial concessions to Germany in Poland, this 
may prove to have been an extremely shrewd move, 
as the new frontier leaves practically all the Polish 


pee Two 








a 
a 


population under German jurisdiction, the Sovig 
Union obtaining only land peopled by White Rus 
sians and Ukrainians whom it can claim on th 
principle of “blood brotherhood.” Should the Allig 
defeat the Reich and attempt to reconstitute a Po 
lish national state, Russia would be in a positiog 
to contend that it holds no Polish-inhabited ter, 
tory; and the London Times has already indicate 
editorially that this reasoning might be acceptabk 
to the Allies. Conversely, if Hitler makes creation 
of a paffer Polish state one of the points in his peag 
proposals to the Allies, such a state would have tp 
be formed at the expense of Germany, not of Russia 


3. SovieT-GERMAN ECONOMIC COLLABORATION. In; 
letter addressed to Hetr von Ribbentrop, M. Molotov, Sovig 
Premier and Foreign Commissar, said that ‘‘on the basis an 
in the spirit of the general political understanding” reachej 
between the two countries, the U.S.S.R. is willing to de! 
velop economic relations with Germany. For this p 
an economic program will be drawn up by both sides, unde 
which the Soviet Union will deliver raw materials to Ge. 
many in return for industrial products to be furnished by| 
the Reich “over an extended period.” This economic pro’ 
gram is to be carried out in such a way “that the volum}| 
of the German-Soviet exchange of goods will again attaia| 
a high peak.” 

German access to Soviet raw materials—like the 
threat of Russo-German military action in the Wes 
—is a weapon used by Hitler to force Allied accept 
ance of his peace terms. While Soviet-German ec- 
nomic collaboration in peace time could prove mos! 
fruitful, since each country produces what the other 
needs, it may be doubted that the U.S.S.R. is able, 
even if it were willing, to supply Germany with the| 
raw materials it lacks. In 1932, the peak year of 
Soviet-German trade, German imports from the 
U.S.S.R. constituted 5.8 per cent of its total imports] 
—a figure which had sunk to less than 1 per cent ia 
1938. Granted that trade between the two countries 
can be restored immediately to its 1932 level, this| 
would still fall far short of filling the gap in Get 
man imports created by the British naval blockade’ 
which is estimated to have cut off 50 per cent of 
German import trade. It should be pointed out 
moreover, that the Soviet Union, now that it is o 
a war basis, would find it difficult to maintain ‘| 
peace-time level of exports, since it needs most d) 
the principal products—oil, manganese, phosphatt 
—which it had been exporting to Germany. Tht 
real battle in Europe is being waged not on militay| 
or economic fronts but in Foreign Offices; and thanks 
to the far-reaching effects of the Soviet-German pat, 
the country whose support is most ascidoaa 
courted by both sides is the U.S.S.R., which as latt 
as Munich seemed to have been permanently ¢ 
cluded from European politics. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 








\\ 


atin wow Gt 2 aoe ee. lle eS 






to de 


o Ge. 
1ed by 
IC pro 
rOlum: 

attain 


ce the 
Wes 
.cCept- 
N eco 
> Most| 
other! 
- able. 








th the} 
sar of! 
nthe) 
nports| 
ent in 
Intries | 
1, this) 
1 Ger 
ckade, 
ent of 
1 out,| 
is 01 
tain i 
ost of} 
phates 
. The; 
ilitany| 
‘hanks 
1 pac, 
10usl 
is late 
ly cr 


| 
' 
' 


- 
+ 
- 














Page Three 





WESTERN POWERS PREPARE FOR SIEGE WARFARE 


Undaunted by the collapse of Poland and the 
deadlock on the Western front, both Britain and 
France have braced themselves to withstand the 
moral shock of the Nazi peace offensive. In a widely 
broadcast radio address on October 1, Winston 
Churchill, First Lord of the Admiralty, affirmed that 
Poland would rise again; put the best possible face 
on the Soviet Union’s westward advance by stress- 
ing Soviet, British and French community of inter- 
est against Nazi expansion in the Balkans; and pro- 
claimed the failure, thus far, of the German submar- 
ine campaign. Confirming his statement that “armies 
upon the scale of the effort of the Great War’ were 
being prepared, the British government summoned 
an estimated 250,000 young men 21 years of age 
to register for military service. 


To finance Britain’s participation in the conflict, 
Sir John Simon, Chancellor of the Exchequer, pre- 
sented a crushing emergency budget to the House 
of Commons on September 27. Anticipating that war 
costs would aggregate not less than £2 billion in 
the first year alone, Sir John raised income taxes 
to a point unequalled in British history and in- 
creased a number of other levies. Excess profits are 
to be kept down by a 60 per cent impost, formerly 
applicable only to armaments industries. These 
measures, it is estimated, will yield approximately 
£1 billion. The government will borrow an equiva- 
lent sum, as far as possible from the “genuine sav- 
ings of the people.” 


FRANCE GIRDS FOR WAR EFFORT. Devel- 
opments in France have been analogous to those in 
Britain. In an official statement on September 20 
and a speech by Premier Daladier a day later, the 
French government affirmed its intention to perse- 
vere until it had achieved complete victory. Belief in 
the government's sincerity had been strengthened by 
a Cabinet reshuffle on September 13, when Georges 
Bonnet, France's outstanding Munichois, was 
moved from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the 
Ministry of Justice. 

The altered conditions of French political life in 
wartime were graphically illustrated by the govern- 
ment’s decision, on September 26, to suppress the 
Communist party in France, together with all its 
publications and affiliated organizations. The party 
had polled 1,200,000 votes and elected 72 deputies 
in 1936, but conclusion of the Nazi-Soviet non- 
aggression pact dealt it a blow from which it could 
not have quickly recovered. While French public 
opinion was reported generally to approve the dis- 


solution, foreign critics regretted it as a vindictive 
act tending to discredit the liberal principles for 
which the French insisted they were fighting. 


MARITIME WARFARE AFFECTS NEUTRALS. 
On the sea, too, the war seemed to be falling into 
the siege-like pattern of 1914-1918. British blockade 
measures were quickly clamped down on neutral 
shipping. A sweepingly inclusive contraband list 
modeled on the American schedule of June 1917 
was published. British subjects were forbidden to 
deal with neutral business firms placed on a black 
list because of their connections with the enemy. 
Neutral shipping was invited to call for examina- 
tion at several control ports, and in some cases was 
forcibly detained in British harbors. Negotiations 
were undertaken to secure the greatest possible share 
of the export surplus of European neutrals. 

In retaliation German submarines were able to 
destroy 31 British merchantmen of 148,913 gross 
tons during the first month of the war. Sinkings rap- 
idly decreased, however, as naval convoys were or- 
ganized. No British losses were reported between 
September 24 and October 2, when it was announced 
that a British vessel bound from New York to Brazil 
had been successfully attacked. German sources 
hinted that, because British ships were being armed, 
they would be compelled to disregard their 1936 
pledge not to resort to unrestricted submarine war- 
fare. Although this step might inflame neutral 
opinion and endanger neutral commerce, many in- 
ternational lawyers considered it justified under the 
circumstances, since submarines could not be ex- 
pected to make inquiries or provide for the safety 
of crews when under enemy fire. 

Although German U-boats found it increasingly 
difficult to halt British shipping, they tightened their 
counter-blockade against Britain by surveillance of 
the commerce of the Scandinavian neutrals. Swedish, 
Finnish, Norwegian and Danish vessels were ap- 
prehended or destroyed, some while they were car- 
rying cargoes of wood products and iron ore, others 
while traveling empty. Interception of trade be- 
tween Britain and the northern neutrals would im- 
pose a severe strain on Scandinavian economy and 
might tend to force some of the countries affected 
into war on the British side. But the fate suffered 
by Poland and the extension of Soviet power in the 
Baltic seemed likely to prevent such a development 
—even if the Western powers finally published 
peace terms appealing to the intelligence and con- 
science of a neutral public. Dav H. Popper 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 50, Ocrosgr 6, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


<p> 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
Oct. 2.—The momentous debate over revision of 
the Neutrality Act which was launched in the Senate 
this week threatens to overshadow all other issues 
in Washington for some time to come. While the 
principal problem as posed in the opening speeches 
of Senators Pittman and Borah is repeal of the arms 
embargo, there are several other vital questions af- 
fecting the neutrality and security of the United 
States which are too important to be ignored. Two or 
three such questions have already been raised by the 
measures initiated through the Executive branch of 
the government and the declaration approved by the 
conference of American republics at Panama. 
“TERRITORIAL WATERS.” One of these in- 
volves the proposed extension of American terri- 
torial waters far beyond the traditional 3-mile limit 
recognized by international law. Two weeks ago 
President Roosevelt startled his press conference by 
declaring that American territorial waters extended 
“as far as our interests required.” The significance 
of this novel definition was underlined a few days 
later when it was revealed that the President has 
full authority to issue executive orders regulating 
the operation and movement of “any vessel, foreign 
or domestic, in the territorial waters of the United 
States,” and to “take possession” of such vessel if 
necessary to secure the observance of the rights of 
the United States. This sweeping authority, con- 
ferred in the so-called Espionage Act of June 15, 
1917, was cited on September 8 when the President 
issued his “Proclamation of National Emergency.” 
‘The importance of territorial waters was empha- 
sized again at Panama last week when Under-Sec- 
retary Sumner Welles and representatives of several 
Latin American states proposed a ‘‘safety zone” ex- 
cluding belligerent operations within an area extend- 
ing in some places up to 700 miles from the Atlantic 
and Pacific coasts of this hemisphere. 
DECLARATION OF PANAMA. Apparently 
spurred on by the sinking of a British freighter off 
the coast of Brazil, the Panama conference approved 
a declaration ratifying the neutrality of the American 
states, and designed to keep hostilities away from 
the Western Hemisphere. But the Panama discus- 
sions raised a host of perplexing questions in con- 
nection with this project. For example, there was a 
sharp difference of opinion on the delimitation of 
the safety zone, with Cuba suggesting an area cover- 
ing virtually half of the Atlantic Ocean, and other 











countries proposing an area close to the coastline, 
The extension of territorial waters beyond the 3. 
mile limit, however, is likely to be challenged by 
belligerents. If the belligerents should refuse to 
recognize the zone, and if American warships} EU 
should attempt to stop belligerent vessels, the result 
might increase rather than reduce the danger of 
conflicts close to our own shores. J 

Another difficult problem is involved in arrange. 
ments for patrolling the safety zone. Is the United 
States to patrol the coast of Brazil and Argentina, 
for example, or will this be left to the Latin Amer. 
ican countries? If joint patrols are established, who | — 
will direct the operations? The Declaration of 
Panama merely states that the American republics D 
“may carry out individual or collective patrols} },, 
whichever they may decide through mutual agree} 4; 
ment. 


NEUTRAL COOPERATION. A second innova- pez 
tion resulting from the Panama conference is a} var 
permanent Advisory Committee representing the} cor 
American republics, which will sit in Washington} an 
for the duration of the war. This committee, com-} wo 
posed of experts, will be prepared to deal promptly Cor 
with emergencies, and will seek to coordinate the} of 
action of the American states on matters affecting | the 
the rights and duties of neutrals. One of the first | ins 
problems the committee may face will be to recon-} wh 
cile the domestic legislation of the United States} th 
with the established practice of Latin American} — 
nations. At Panama, many of the Latin American | 
delegates advocated maintenance of trade relations | 





\\ 





; ; = | in 
with belligerents, in contrast to the cash-and-carty} .. 
policy proposed in the Pittman bill which would} ,, 
forbid American vessels to carry “any articles or} ;, 


materials” to any warring nation. The Uruguay dele- | 
gation formally proposed a joint declaration of the} 4, 
American states protesting the right of belligerents| .. 
to place foodstuffs and all articles “destined for the | 
civil population” on contraband lists. 
Many other measures recommended at _ the | 
Panama conference will be referred to the perma 
nent advisory committee in Washington. Some of | 
the most important of these deal with economic | 
and financial measures to cushion the shock of the | 
war, and to develop closer ties between North and 
South America. This attempt to establish a frame 
work for neutral cooperation may not produce sen- | 
sational results, but it promises to be an important 
factor in the shaping of a common policy in the | 
Western Hemisphere. W. T. STONE 


