


art: 
nal 
and 
nees 
| of 
urce. 
ntly 
aws 
» for 
| te. 
ere, 

the 
nent 
dern 

for 
owl- 


y in 
tion. 
,400 
that 
tical 
ance 
n of 
and 


rt to 
in a 
itaty 


f the 
ysis 
CO 
ires” 
m is 
re to 
ular, 
a fe: 
. will 
1 ob 
and 
-aken 
oard. 
) act 
NE 








Dr. William @. Bishop 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


% University of Michigan Library 


wa 


Ann Arhor. Wich. 


og! 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Yo. XX, No. 89 


JuLy 18, 1941 





BRITAIN AND SOVIET UNION PLEDGE MUTUAL AID 


yt the signing of a mutual assistance treaty 
on July 12 Great Britain and the Soviet Union 
provided a legal basis for their military cooperation. 
In this treaty, signed in Moscow by Foreign Com- 
missat Molotoff and the British Ambassador, Sir 
Stafford Cripps, the two governments promised that 

would ‘render each other assistance and sup- 
port of all kinds in the present war against Hitlerite 
Germany,” and that they would “neither negotiate 
nor conclude an armistice or treaty of peace except 
by mutual agreement.” 

Giving substance to the pledges of Prime Minister 
Churchill and Foreign Secretary Eden for full col- 
laboration with the Soviet Union, the pact was desig- 
mated a formal alliance on July 15. It was obviously 
intended not only to guarantee the continuance of 
the “two-front’’ war which Hitler had sought to 
avoid, but also to counter any tendency in the United 
States and other countries to distinguish between 
Germany’s opponents on an ideological basis. 

POSITION OF THE U.S.S.R. It is difficult to see 
how this new accord can have any immediate effect 
o the conflict now raging in the East. In Germany's 
frst offensive along the 2,000-mile front, extending 
fom June 22 to July 7 and starting with the now 
familiar assault by airplanes and mechanized units, 
the Nazi forces succeeded in overrunning most of the 
Soviet-occupied buffer zones—Estonia, Latvia, Lithu- 
aia, eastern Poland, and Bessarabia. While the 
Getmans sought to smash their way quickly into the 
three largest Russian cities—Leningrad, Moscow and 
Kiev-—the Red Army’s chief task was to withstand 
this initial onslaught and to inflict as heavy damage 
4s possible on the advancing Panzer divisions. Large 
Soviet forces, apparently placed too far west in 
Poland, were destroyed in the Bialystok-Minsk sector 
a the Nazis pushed toward the so-called “Stalin 
Line’—the fortifications in depth that extend in 


varying degrees of strength through European Russia. 
The second German offensive, which began about 
July 12 after several days of reorganization, was de- 
signed to destroy the main Soviet armies and to con- 
quer the vital cities and industrial areas of western 
Russia. Although little accurate information was 
available amidst the conflicting claims of the two 
combatants, the scope of this battle was indicated 
on July 13, when Moscow admitted the loss of 253,- 
000 men, 2,200 tanks and 1,900 planes. 

The ability of the Soviet Union to hold out until 
autumn, when unfavorable weather and the strain 
of over-extended lines might effectively check Hit- 
ler’s eastward drive, depends on a number of un- 
certain factors: the quantity and quality of the Red 
Army’s men and matériel, the efficiency of Soviet 
industry and transport, and the availability of aid 
from Britain and the United States. Some of the 
questions about the strength of the Soviet Union's 
land and air forces may be answered within the next 
few weeks. Many military observers believed that the 
historic lack of maneuverability in Russia’s armies 
might prove a grave defect against the unprecedented 
striking power of Germany. The Soviet Union not 
only has great reserves of man power, which per- 
mitted Imperial Russia to continue fighting for three 
years despite almost 3,500,000 casualties, but also 
far better equipment than in the World War. If the 
Russian forces can remain intact during the present 
critical period and inflict sufficiently heavy damage 
on the German army, this campaign may prove to be 
the turning point of the war. 

Despite the vast resources of the Soviet Union, 
many weaknesses are generally believed to exist in 
the heavy industries and railways, and the country’s 
economy is probably not as completely geared for 
war as that of Nazi Germany. It is difficult to pre- 
dict whether the Soviet armies, if driven east of 
Moscow, could be sustained by the new factories in 





—— 


— Page Two 














—_—— 
—=$, 


the Ural region, or whether the Stalin government had presented any new requests for supplies. Tray, | on Fre 
could survive the administrative breakdown and loss port difficulties also will impede whatever materigl{ on the 
of prestige that would follow such a setback. By is made available from these two countries, since th} Moroc 
pursuing the “scorched earth” policy and by resort- Baltic and Black Sea are closed to commerce, api} yaluab 
ing to guerrilla warfare, as ordered by Premier Stalin exports to Vladivostok require transshipment oye} reaS ’ 
on July 3, the retreating Russians could deprive Ger- the trans-Siberian railway. tion of 
many of most of the economic fruits of victory. The most effective military assistance that Britaig| and a 
Especially in the Ukraine, the richest of Russian can render is the-continuation of its large-scale aerjg)} watd 

provinces, the passive resistance of the peasant popu- offensive against Germany. Despite the hazards of} Of pa 
lation could probably become as effective as in Ger- daylight raiding and the shortness of summer nights} the Ft 
many’s occupation in 1917-18. the R.A.F. has incessantly bombed western Germany} in the 


AID FROM BRITAIN AND AMERICA. For the and German-occupied France for over a month, Qp| leadin 
immediate future the Soviet Union can expect little | July 14 Prime Minister Churchill claimed that the} To 


material assistance from either Great Britain or the R.A.F. had unloaded “in the past few weeks” half} iatere: 
United States. While British industrial production as many bombs as Germany had rained on Britain | sough 
has increased enormously during the past year, it is during the whole war. Although Britain is reported| blocks 
still unable to meet Britain’s maximum needs in to have planned occasional sorties on the Continent} mater 
airplanes, tanks, anti-aircraft guns and the other like the raid on the Lofoten islands last March, any | nounc 
weapons that are probably of greatest urgency in full-dress invasion of Germany—as urged on July) two 
the U.S.S.R. American production is similarly inade- by Maxim Litvinoff, former Soviet Foreign Commis Franc 
quate at present to fulfill any large requests from sar—is highly unlikely at this time. The British lack} placec 
Russia, except with regard to certain types of ma- both men and equipment to seize and hold a foot-| stated 
chine tools which have been refused export licenses. hold on the Continent. It is not impossible, however, ply b 
On July 11 the Soviet Ambassador, Constantine A. that Britain may resume operations against Libya} Afric 
Oumansky, conferred with President Roosevelt and and elsewhere in the Mediterranean. presu 
Under Secretary of State Welles but denied that he JAMES FREDERICK GREEN - 
essen 

BRITISH TAKE SYRIA, REVIEW VICHY POLICY stren 

The capitulation of the remaining French forces _ that it removes a principal source of friction be| ™%™ 
in Syria to their Allied opponents, embodied in an tween the French government and the democracies.) °PP° 
armistice initialled at Acre, Palestine, on July 12, Relations between London and Washington and the} ““@ 


should improve the Allied position in the Middle cabinet at Vichy, never cordial since Marshal Pétain aes 
East both politically and strategically. Participation assumed power on July 3, 1940, rapidly deteriorated Depa 


by Free French troops in the successful five-week this spring when it was reliably reported that the a 
campaign and assumption by de Gaulle representa- Germans were obtaining large quantities of sup| *°" 
tives of authority over another French territory will plies from unoccupied France and had persuaded _B 
add to the prestige of the anti-Nazi movement else- Vichy to grant permission for the use of bases in that 
where in the French empire. The Allies now have Syria. Recently the announcement that, following the} ® be 
an opportunity in the mandate to frame and imple- German attack on Russia, Vichy had broken of ol 
ment a policy designed to enlist the support of the diplomatic relations with Moscow and was tacitly od 
Arab peoples in the war against the Axis. Moreover, encouraging the enlistment of Frenchmen in Hitlers} 
the military occupation of Syria adds an important crusade against Bolshevism resulted in a further cool: oN 
sector in the British defense line from Libya to ing of opinion in the democracies toward France. a 
India, which may have to meet in the future German Nevertheless the British and American govett-| | -“ 


real 
onslaughts southward from Russia. ments are apparently attempting to delay as long ‘ 


ly 
EFFECT ON U.S.-BRITISH POLICY. The wider as possible full cooperation of the Pétain govem| ;” 





seen et aie oi . for 

significance of the armistice in Syria lies in the fact ment with Germany in order to safeguard the ies 

vital interests over which Vichy still exercises hi 

CHINA’S NATIONAL FRONT: PROBLEMS some control. Specifically the State Department, 10 ri 

AND POLICIES “a T. A. Bisson less than the Foreign Office, hopes that France will) | 

not collaborate in the German war effort beyond the a 

25 g requirements of the Franco-German armistice off __ 

The July 15 number of Foreign Policy Reports presents June 22, 1940 by sending war materials to the Reich,} ror: 

an analysis of Kuomintang-Communist differences, to- by allowing the Axis to employ bases in unoccu jed| Head 

gether with a survey of the five major issues which require y & : poy 2 P Enter 

adjustment. A map of the war fronts in North China is France, or by turning over the remainder of the @ 
incinded. French fleet to Hitler. Even greater interest centets 























etial 
S of 
ght, 
any 


- the 
half 
itain 
rrted 
rent, 

any 
ly 8 
\mis- 
lack 
Foot: 
ever, 
sibya 


| be. 
ACies, 
1 the 
étain 
rated 
t the 
Sup. 
aded 


es if 


g the | 


1 of 
acitly 
tler’s 
cool- 
€. 
veri 
long 
vern- 
| the 
rcises 
it, no 
will 
d the 
e of 
eich, 
upied 
f the 


niters 








——— 
— 





on French territories in Africa—Algeria and Tunisia 
on the southern side of the Mediterranean, and 
Morocco and West Africa on the Atlantic with their 
yaluable harbors of Casablanca and Dakar. If these 
yeas were to fall under Germany’s control, domina- 
tion of the continent of Africa might become feasible 
and a Nazi drive across the “Straits of Dakar’ to- 
watd South America would be greatly facilitated. 
Of particular importance to American defenses are 
the French islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe 
in the Caribbean, located close to vital sea lanes 
leading to the Panama Canal. 

To insure the protection of at least some of these 
interests, the British and American governments have 
sought to win Vichy’s cooperation by relaxing the 
blockade and permitting shipments of food and raw 
materials. On March 22 the State Department an- 
nounced that the British had given permission for 
two shiploads of wheat to clear for unoccupied 
France. The agreement was then suspended, but 
placed again in operation on June 30 when London 
stated that six French ships would be allowed to 
ply between the United States and French North 
African ports, but not to metropolitan France. The 
presumption is that by providing the areas directly 
under General Maxime Weygand’s command with 
essential supplies, the General’s hand will be 
strengthened against the day when Nazi troops de- 
mand transit through the region. Whether Weygand 
opposes the pro-Nazi trend at Vichy and would 
actually fight the Germans contrary to Pétain’s or- 
ders remains an uncertainty, but apparently the State 
Department is convinced that an attempt to persuade 
him to adhere to France’s obligations as a neutral is 
worth the risk. 

BRITISH PERMIT SHIPMENTS TO SPAIN. 
That the British government had been forced against 
its better judgment to make this breach in the block- 
ade of continental Europe was suggested during de- 
bate in the House of Commons on July 2. Prime 
Minister Churchill’s defense of the agreement 
tended to dissociate the Cabinet from any responsi- 
bility for its inception and threw the burden on the 
American State Department. There is probably little 
teal divergence between the two capitals on the wis- 
dom of propitiating continental neutrals, however, 
ior as recently as June 20 the British government 
signed a new agreement with Spain continuing the 
shipment of large quantities of petroleum products. 
Likewise the British have permitted the government 
of General Franco to import other important raw 
materials at levels equal to or above normal. 





Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: BRITAIN AND THE SOVIET- 
GERMAN WAR 

Speaker: James Frederick Green 

Date: Sunday, July 20 

Time; 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 

Station: NBC, blue network 











Concessions to France and Spain have been at- 
tacked here and in Britain as futile gestures com- 
parable to the appeasement policy pursued so un- 
successfully toward Germany and later Italy. The 
critics declare that Pétain and Franco will take all 
they can get from the democracies and then join the 
Axis when the time is ripe. According to these ob- 
servers, all who are not with us in the fight against 
Nazism are against us, and should be treated as 
enemies. Nevertheless, the official attitude is one of 
watchful waiting, of encouraging resistance to Hit- 
ler within Europe by shipments of food, and of 
keeping as many countries out of the Axis camp as 
may be persuaded to remain neutral. Thus far, the 
appeasement policy has failed when applied to Ger- 
many and Italy but, at least until the present, it has 
been a factor in keeping France, Spain and Japan out 


of the European conflict. Louis E. FRECHTLING 





MRS. DEAN TO TRAVEL IN SOUTH AMERICA 


On June 30 Vera Micheles Dean, research di- 
rector of the F.P.A., left for a six-week trip in South 
America. Traveling by plane, Mrs. Dean will visit 
Brazil, Argentina, Chile and Peru, returning to New 
York early in August. 





War in the Desert, by Raoul Aglion. New York, Henry 
Holt, 1941. $2.75 
A light account, with long historical introduction, of 
the war in north Africa. The author served in the French 
legation in Cairo and under Weygand in Syria, later join- 
ing the Free French forces. 


Men and Politics, by Louis Fischer. New York, Duell, Sloan 

and Pearce, 1941. $3.50 

The interesting record of one of America’s leading for- 
eign correspondents, best-known for his commentaries on 
Soviet developments. The chapters on Russia and Spain are 
the most illuminating, both as regards the character of 
twentieth century revolutions and the author’s own atti- 
tude toward the most gripping prcblems of our times. 


Focus on Africa, by Richard U. Light. New York, Amer- 
ican Geographical Society, 1941. $5.00 
An American surgeon and amateur flyer describes an air 
journey in 1937-38 from Capetown to Cairo and thence to 
Tunis. Admirable aerial photographs supplement the au- 
thor’s comments on the economic geography of British 
territories in Central and Southern Africa. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 39, Jury 18, 1941. 


Entered as se 


Bore 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary 


; Vera MicHe.es Dgan, Editor. 


s matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


| 
| 
| 
| 


eae 








Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 

Juty 14.—In the wake of the occupation of Ice- 
land by American armed forces, the old problem of 
effecting a working relationship between Congress 
and the Executive has assumed a new and critical 
importance. For despite the recognized constitutional 
powers of the President as Commander-in-Chief, the 
support of Congress has again become a vital factor 
in implementing the fixed policy of the government 
and carrying out the extended program of hemi- 
sphere defense and aid for Britain to which the 
United States is now committed. 

REACTION IN CONGRESS. While the response 
on Capitol Hill was generally favorable to the Presi- 
dent's strategic move in Iceland, a number of 
prominent Congressional leaders declined to support 
enabling legislation asked by the Administration to 
extend the period of service for trainees and national 
guardsmen and to permit the use of these short- 
term troops outside the Western Hemisphere. The 
three resolutions requested by the War Department 
were introduced by Senator Robert R. Reynolds of 
North Carolina, an outstanding isolationist and— 
through the accident of seniority rules—chairman 
of the important Military Affairs Committee, who 
promptly announced his opposition to the proposed 
legislation. But other Congressional spokesmen, in- 
cluding Speaker Rayburn and Representative McCor- 
mack of Massachusetts, the Administration’s lead- 
ers in the House, and Senator George, chairman of 
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, urged the 
Administration to modify its plans in order to avoid 
a bitter debate which they said might cover the 
whole field of foreign policy. Confronted again 
with these warnings from its own leaders at a White 
House conference on July 14, the Administration 
decided to sidetrack the request for authority to 
send short-term service men beyond the Western 
Hemisphere, while continuing to press for immedi- 
ate action on the remaining legislation to extend the 
period of service beyond one year. 

This compromise formula appeared to offer little 
more than a temporary solution. To many Washing- 
ton observers it seemed to leave unsolved the basic 
problem of how to achieve unity of purpose and 
effective coordination—a «toblem which obviously 
goes far beyond the old question of checks and bal- 
ances or the constitutional issue of the powers of 
the President. But for the moment it may afford both 
branches of the government, as well as American 





public opinion, an opportunity to weigh the 
quences of divided counsels in a time of peril 
further chance to measure the limits of the new 
mitments which the nation has assumed with 
occupation of the outpost in Iceland. 

THE NEW COMMITMENT. In his message tp 
Congress announcing the occupation, Presiden: 
Roosevelt made it clear that this strategic move was 
dictated by fundamental “considerations of saf 







from overseas attack.” The President declared ip 
sharp and specific terms: (1) that “the United State 
cannot permit the occupation by Germany of strate. 
gic outposts in the Atlantic to be used as air or naval 
bases for eventual attack against the Western Hemi. 
sphere”; (2) that “this government will assure the 
adequate defense of Iceland” with full recognition 
of its independence as a sovereign state; (3) that, 
“as Commander-in-Chief, I have consequently issued 
orders to the Navy that all necessary steps shall be 
taken to insure the safety of communications in the 
approaches between Iceland and the United States, 
as well as on the seas between the United States and 
all other strategic outposts.” 

It is obvious that the consequences of these declara- 
tions extend well beyond Iceland. The immediate 
commitment requires the use of American naval and 
air forces to keep open a line of communications ex. 
tending through the German-proclaimed war zone 
in the North Atlantic. This means that the Naw 
must convoy troop ships and supply vessels, and 
that American warships will be required to shoot if 
they are interfered with in the execution of this 
mission. It also means that the Army will be required 
to dispatch and maintain a force sufficient to replace 
the present British garrison, numbering between 
40,000 and 60,000 men. In a practical sense, how- 
ever, the commitment means that the United States 
must be prepared to police the entire North Alantic 
and to anticipate any move by the Axis powers which 
might threaten other strategic outposts of the West: 
ern Hemisphere, from the bases in Scotland and 
Northern Ireland suggested by Mr. Willkie, to the 
Azores and Cape Verdes referred to by President 
Roosevelt. 

In the face of these commitments, both Congress 
and the Executive know that there can be no retreat 
from Iceland or the Atlantic. But the security of the 
United States and the Western Hemisphere call for 
an effective working relationship between the © 
ordinate branches of the government. 

W. T. STONE 





ety Vor. X. 


S | 
it 
Ci 

al ph 

spring 

The f: 

gxth ¢ 

Asia, é 

and M 

and ni 

vostok 

PR( 

which 

lensk, 
their 

Whet 

Kiev- 

ture « 

forces 
count 

he F 

ukin, 

the c: 

litical 

annor 
to th 
in bo 











