
































MAY 4 1949 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN ae 
7 An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff class matter December 
J Subscription, Two Dollars a Year PSRIODICAL — Otice ‘- fon eke 
GENERAL LIBRARY | AY. under the act 
A FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated UNIV. OF MICH. of March 3, 1879. 
a 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
\ 
— | Vou. XIX, No. 28 May 3, 1940 decttnteandits 
ult JUST OUT! a survey of the military and economic General Library 
e position of Italy. Read: University of Michigan 
ITALY’S ROLE IN THE EUROPEAN CONFLICT 
- by Robert Gale Woolbert Ann Arbor, Michigan 
be Research Associate, Council on Foreign Relations 
t 25¢ 
hs May 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 
ch- — 
i} CHAMBERLAIN’S WAR POLICIES UNDER ATTACK 
led 
aid dew small British forces in Norway were re- regarding the Government’s war policies is not lim- 
eat ported last week to have been outmaneuvred _ ited to the military sphere, however, as the new 
sat_| and repulsed by the Germans, the Chamberlain budget—introduced in the House of Commons by 
le, | Cabinet faced mounting criticism in Parliament and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir John Simon, 
on} the press. Many Conservative back-benchers — in- on April 23—is also under fire. The budget provides 
et-| cluding Richard K. Law, son of Andrew Bonar for an expenditure of £2,667,000,000 in 1940-41, in 
ies | Law, Prime Minister in 1922-23, and one of the contrast to the £1,816,000,000 spent in 1939-40. 
For | most promising young Conservatives — joined the (These figures exclude the self-balancing Post Office 
lity | Labor and Liberal critics of the Government’s mili- expenditures of over £80 million.) It is difficult 
ary tary and financial policies. The most vigorous con- to compare these gigantic totals, as many news- 
vil] | demnation was voiced by David Lloyd George, papers have done, : withthe present expenditures 
di. | dynamic leader in the World War, and Leslie Hore- of the American government because of exchange 
in | Belisha, former War Secretary in the Chamberlain fluctuations and the inclusion in Britain’s budget of 
sen | government. While Mr. Chamberlain will probably many local expenses handled in this country by 
eq | be hard-pressed by questions and criticism during states and municipalities. Britain’s expenditures for 
less | the next few weeks, it is unlikely that his govern- 1939-40, however, were 1.9 times the average out- 
ment will fall, particularly as Winston Churchill— _lays for the three preceding years; its estimates for 
responsible for coordinating Britain’s naval, land 1940-41 total 2.8 times that average. If the Ameti- 
ore} and air action in Norway—is still popular through- can government’s expenses for 1937-1939 were to 
of} out the country. The Labor party, however, appears increase at a similar rate, they would equal $15,- 
for} unable to challenge the Chamberlain régime effec- 800,000,000 in 1940 and $23,400,000,000 in 1941. 
ton} tively and does not desire a wartime election, which Although the government spent approximately 
of} would probably favor the Conservatives. 30 per cent of the national income during 1939-40 
his} Although news from Norway is still incomplete, and proposed to spend over 40 per cent next year, 
ical | teports that the British expeditionary force was in- Sir John Simon’s budget was widely criticized as 
ven | adequately prepared and equipped may prove to be _— not going far enough. Many critics remarked that 
ew | the most dangerous issue for the Chamberlain gov- the government's expenditures for the first seven 
iod | etnment. These deficiencies undoubtedly were caused months of the war were about 12 per cent below 
largely by inadequate landing facilities, loss of trans- | the amount estimated by the Chancellor last 
__| Port ships, the absence of airfields, and the speed of tember, indicating that Britain’s industries had not 
UG | the operation. The British army, moreover, tends to yet achieved capacity production. This industrial 
are} divide up its expeditionary forces into separate sec- inefficiency was further illustrated by the persistence 
out | tions, unlike the American army, which favors smaller of unemployment, totaling 1,121,000 on March 11. 
the | units of completely equipped troops. The slowness of Britain’s leading financial journal, The Economist, 
de-| Britain's campaign, however, tends to disprove the re- _—_ maintains, therefore, that the proposed expenditure 
ith | cent allegation of the German Foreign Minister, Joa- of £2,667,000,000, of which £2,000,000,000 is allo- 
sia. | chim Von Ribbentrop, that the Allies and Norway cated to defense, is “hopelessly inadequate” in com- 
had carefully planned this venture long in advance. parison to Germany’s wartime outlay, estimated at 
CRITICISM OF THE BUDGET. Dissatisfaction £2.5 to £3 billion. 














NEW TAXATION. Of the £2,667,000,000 ex- 
penditure estimated for 1940-1941, the government 
to raise £1,234,000,000, or 46 per cent, 
5 taxation, and £1,433,000,000, or 54 per cent, 
by borrowing. To increase the 1939-40 revenue re- 
turns by about £185,000,000, Sir John Simon pro- 
posed a variety of new taxés,'designed to hit every 
| income level in the country. The basic income tax 
rate is raised, as announced in-the War Budget of 
last September, from 35 per cent to 3714 per cent, 
and many exemptions are removed. The surtax rates 
are to begin on incomes in excess of £1,500 rather 
than £2,000. To check on wartime profiteering and 
to encourage corporate saving and plant improve- 
ment, the government proposes to limit all corpora- 
tion dividends to the highest paid during the three 
pre-war years, or to 4 per cent for corporations not 
paying dividends during that period. Since many 
firms engaged in producing armaments, steel, chemi- 
cal and other products have paid fairly large divi- 
dends in recent years, this measure may not prove 
as effective as many of its proponents expect. It 
should be noted, moreover, that Great Britain does 
not have a capital gains tax, although it now has 
an excess profits tax of 60 per cent on business profits 
in excess of a pre-war average. 
To spread the burden of war as fairly as possible, 
the Chancellor announced higher taxes on tobacco, 


i} 
iq —oooSSSqqqaqqaq— — Page Two 








— 


——— ———— 
beer, whiskey, and matches, as well as higher postal, 
telephone and telegraph rates. The most novel fea. 
ture of the budget is a general sales tax, the exag 
amount of which is to be determined later, to cove 
wholesale transactions on all commodities exc 
food and drink, certain items already specifically 
taxed—tobacco, gasoline, etc.—and articles for e. 
port. Critics of the government's fiscal policy argue 
that these taxes will not prove adequate for wartime 
needs and will not avert inflation, the two purposes 
of the plan for compulsory savings proposed by the 
economist John Maynard Keynes, which the gover. 
ment rejected as too difficult to administer. 


Criticism of the Chamberlain Cabinet has so far 
been largely restricted to its inertia and unimagina- 
tiveness in both military and economic affairs. Many 
Britishers, however, are wondering why the air 
force bombs Norwegian and Danish towns but 
spares German seaports and industrial centers 
Until recently at least, the government hoped to 
escape the moral opprobrium of bombing civilians 
and to avoid uniting the Germans behind the Hitler 
régime. The demand for action and for immediate 
victories, which seems to be growing in Britain, 
would require military and economic measures fat 
more extensive than any yet adopted by the Allies. 





JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


GERMANY DEFENDS NORWEGIAN INVASION 


While German troops continued to advance in 
Norway, Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop 
attempted to explode a “diplomatic bombshell” in 
Berlin on April 27. In a statement delivered before 
a specially summoned gathering of diplomats, 
journalists and high Nazi officials, the German For- 
eign Minister announced the release of the first of 
a series of White Books to prove that Germany had 
invaded Scandinavia only to thwart Allied plans for 
landing troops on Norwegian soil. The same charge 
had already been made in the memoranda deliv- 
ered to the Norwegian and Danish governments 
early on April 9. This time, however, the Nor- 
wegian government was accused of complicity with 
the Allies. The circumstances surrounding the pub- 
lication of these charges indicate that Germany is 
particularly anxious to exonerate itself in the eyes 
of the neutrals, and to warn the remaining European 
non-belligerents of the fate in store for them should 
they depart from the German conception of strict 
neutrality. 

THE GERMAN WHITE BOOK. Although the 
full text of the White Book is not yet available in 
the United States, it apparently does not contain 
any of those “unchallengeable documents” which 
the German government, in its communications to 
Norway and Denmark, claimed to possess. The only 


two documents which might constitute definite proof 
of Britain’s intention to invade Norway were al- 
legedly found on British officers captured at Lille 
hammer and north of Trondheim. These consisted 
of orders instructing the 148th Infantry Brigade and 
a battalion of the Sherwood Foresters to effect a 
landing at certain Norwegian ports. The Nazis rest 
their case primarily on the date of these orders, 
April 6 and 7—three and two days respectively be 
fore the actual invasion of Norway by Germany. 
The other documents can hardly be held to “in 
criminate” the Allies in any way. Most of them re 
late to the Franco-British plans for intervention in 
the Soviet-Finnish war and reveal nothing that was 
not previously known. In addition, the German 
White Book reproduces certain telegrams, said t 
have been discovered in the British Consulate at 
Narvik, which request information on the strategic 
aspects and defenses of that Norwegian port. These 
requests, the dates of which are not given, may 
easily have been of a routine character and so do 
not necessarily prove that the British definitely com 
templated landing there. Nor do any of the doc 
ments justify the German invasion of Denmark. 
On the basis of available evidence it is difficult 
to distinguish truth from falsehood in the charges 
and counter-charges made by both sides concert 








—— 
ing the 
in Sca 
Germa: 
ae 
war, V 
constit 
dusion 
Allies | 
Scandi: 
on the 
late in 
the sul 
about 
The R 
by Bri 
sternet 
numbe 
longer 
waters 
invasic 
vated 
GE] 
It may 
inforn 
actual 
mentis 
claime 
Britat 
water: 
annou 
ing vi 
Britis! 
ready 
ships, 
was « 
even 
destrc 
had ¢ 
navy 
it is 
seize 
very 
that 
tion 
ports 
wegi 
Stock 
cause 
ing 
the | 
office 
that 
a vic 
PORE! 


Headq 
Entere 





raw eaeeir=sa Se SB He TF SO. | hUr 


Pe 


— 
3 


PV RPePeasve 


gic 
1ay 
On- 


irk. 
sult 
ges 


rn 








-_———_— 


ing the invasion of Norway. Plans to land troops 
in Scandinavia were undoubtedly made by both 
Germany and the Allies long before April 9. Such 
plans were probably completed during the Finnish 
war, When the development of a northern front 
constituted a real possibility. Even after the con- 
dusion of the war in Finland, the Reich and the 
Allies continued to suspect each other of designs on 
Scandinavia. Germany knew that the Allies had been 
on the point of intervening in the Finnish struggle 
late in February and early in March, and heard of 
the subsequent recriminations in France and Britain 
about the failure to extend the war to Scandinavia. 
The Reich also noted a succession of declarations 
by British statesmen forecasting the adoption of a 
serner attitude toward the neutrals, as well as a 
aumber of acts indicating that the Allies were no 
longer disposed to respect Norwegian territorial 
waters. Under these circumstances, the German 
invasion of Scandinavia may have been partly moti- 
vated by fear of drastic measures by the Allies. 
GERMAN CHARGES UNSUBSTANTIATED. 
It may be doubted, however, that the Germans had 
information proving that Britain and France were 
actually preparing an invasion. In his speech com- 
menting on the White Book, Herr von Ribbentrop 
daimed that the German government learned about 
Britain’s intention to mine Norwegian territorial 
waters two days before April 8, when it was officially 
announced. He further charged that the mine-lay- 
ing was really designed “to insure the safety of a 
British expeditionary force which at that time al- 
teady was on the North Sea.” The British transport 
ships, he said, were recalled when the German fleet 
was discovered to have anticipated this move, but 
even so “‘a number of these ships were caught and 
destroyed by German bombers.” If the British really 
had embarked such an expeditionary force and the 
navy had made preparations to protect its landing, 
it is amazing that the Germans were allowed to 
seize all the important Norwegian ports under the 
very nose of the British fleet. It seems more likely 
that the British had learned about the concentra- 
tion of German troops at various north German 
ports, as Mr. C. J. Hambro, President of the Nor- 
wegian Storting, declared in a statement issued in 
Stockholm on April 28. These reports may have 
caused hurried counter-measures in Britain, includ- 
ing the mobilization of a small landing force. If 
the operation orders said to be found on British 
oficers in Norway are genuine, it may be significant 
that they speak of occupying Norwegian ports “with 
a view to denying them to Germany” and that they 





Page Three 








mention that “our assistance” will probably “be 
welcomed by the inhabitants.” In any case, German 
troops must have sailed many days before April 8 
when they were already at Narvik, a port well over 
1,000 miles from the nearest German embarkation 
point. These troops were apparently transported in 
merchant vessels, including a whaler, which must 
have taken a week for the journey. 


ALLIED REVERSES IN NORWAY. Whatever 
the truth of this matter, the war is now joined in 
Norway. The struggle promises to be prolonged, 
although up to the present the Germans have clearly 
held the advantage. Except for the first few days, 
German communications with Norway have at no 
time been seriously interrupted, despite occasional 
forays by Allied destroyers and submarines into the 
Skagerrak. Germany still seems to be reinforcing its 
troops more rapidly and on a larger scale than 
Britain and France. Motorized German columns 
have been pushing up the Gulbrands and Oester 
Valleys in an effort to prevent a junction between 
the Allied forces landed at Namsos and Aandalsnes 
and to establish permanent contact with the be- 
leaguered German garrison at Trondheim. One col- 
umn is threatening Dombaas, an important junc- 
tion of the railways leading from Aandalsnes and 
Trondheim; and other German troops have halted 
an Allied advance from Namsos at Steinkjer. The 
Allies have been seriously handicapped by several 
factors. All the important airports were seized by 
the Germans, who can now harry British and French 
troops from the air. For the most part, the British 
air force must continue to operate from distant bases 
in England or from aircraft carriers which are them- 
selves vulnerable to bombardment. Moreover, land- 
ing facilities at the two ports held by the British 
—Namsos and Aandalsnes—are extremely limited, 
and have already been partially destroyed by Ger- 
man air raids. So far the British fleet has not yet 
succeeded in blasting its way into the Trondheim 
fjord, control of which is absolutely essential to the 
Allied campaign. In order to prevent the Germans 
from seizing all strategic points, the first British 
troops were apparently thrown into Norway in great 
haste and without adequate equipment; and it has 
since proved difficult to provide them with the tanks, 
anti-aircraft guns, armored cars and artillery needed 
to withstand the attack of superior German forces. 
Nevertheless, the Allies are still landing additional 
forces and supplies. If they show the necessary skill 
and boldness, they may yet succeed in matching 
Germany's present strength. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 28, May 3, 


1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dgan, Eéitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


1 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








eee eine gett eee eee 





- 





| Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


Apr. 29.—Since the German invasion of Denmark 
and Norway, State Department officials have been 
giving much thought to the problems raised by pos- 
sible territorial transfers in the Western Hemi- 
sphere. While President Roosevelt has indicated that 
all questions relating to application of the Monroe 
Doctrine to Greenland are “hypothetical and prema- 
ture,” the fact remains that the future status of this 
Danish possession is already under careful study in 
Washington, and it is not unlikely that informal 
diplomatic discussions may soon be initiated among 
the American republics. 

HEMISPHERIC PROBLEMS. The interest in 
Greenland—and also Iceland—is primarily strate- 
gic, as these territories form potential stepping 
stones in a Great Circle air route from Europe to 
North America. This route, which was used by 
Marshal Balbo in his massed flight to the United 
States in 1934, is considerably shorter than any 
other trans-Atlantic route, and Cape Farewell, at 
the southern tip of Greenland, lies only about 900 
miles from St. John’s, Newfoundland. Iceland, ap- 
proximately midway between Greenland and North- 
ern Scotland, cannot be “placed” so easily in the 
Western Hemisphere, but its strategic position is 
almost equally important. A significant memoran- 
dum recently received by the War Department from 
Vilhjalmur Stefansson, the Arctic explorer, points 
out that climatic conditions in Iceland are favorable 
to flying at all times of the year and that the average 
temperature is much the same as that of New York 
or Philadelphia. Evidence of Washington’s inter- 
est is seen in its prompt acceptance on April 25 of 
Iceland’s request for establishment of direct rela- 
tions with the United States. Washington has pro- 
visionally recognized Mr. Stefan Stefansson, Ice- 
land’s Trade Commissioner in New York, as Con- 
sul General with jurisdiction to cover the United 
States, and plans to open a consular office at Reykja- 
vik late in May or early in June. 

The proximity of Canada to Greenland raises the 
larger question whether the United States would 
regard a transfer of former European possessions 
in the Western Hemisphere as compatible with the 
Monroe Doctrine. Presumably, objections would be 
made to any direct transfer to Great Britain. But 
Canada, while a member of the British Common- 
wealth of Nations, is an autonomous state in the 
Western Hemisphere, with its own federal govern- 


ment and its separate legation in Washington. {) 
far as is known, the question has not been broached 
officially, but it is one of the problems which is 
much in the minds of Washington officials. 

Attention is also focused on the Netherlands pos. 
sessions in the West Indies and the territory of 
Dutch Guiana in South America. The Dutch island 
of Curacao and Aruba, situated off the coast of 
Venezuela, are particularly important because of 
their large oil refineries and storage facilities. Any 
change in the status of these possessions—or any 
future threat to French or British possessions in the 
Caribbean—would be a matter of vital concern no 
only to the United States, but also to the other 
American republics. At the Panama Conference held 
shortly after the outbreak of war in Europe, the 
Foreign Ministers of the American republics unani- 
mously approved a resolution calling for immediate 
consultation whenever the question of a change of 
sovereignty should arise. The resolution stated; 
“That in case any geographic region of Americ 
subject to the jurisdiction of any non-American state 
should be obliged to change its sovereignty and there 
should result therefrom a danger to the security of 
the American continent, a consultative meeting such 
as the one now being held will be convoked with the 
urgency that the case may require.” 

No such case has yet arisen, and no official call 
for consultation has yet been issued. But the situs 
tions foreseen at Panama are considerably less re 
mote today than they appeared last September, and 
the possibility of informal exploratory talks is nov 
under serious consideration. 

NEUTRALITY ACT APPLIED TO NORWAY. 
Meanwhile, President Roosevelt extended the New 
trality Act to Norway in a series of three proclams 
tions issued from Warm Springs on April 25—two 
days before Germany formally announced a ‘“‘statt 
of war” in Norway. The effect of the President’ 
action, which is virtually mandatory under the pro 
visions of the Neutrality Act, is to place Americas 
trade with Norway on a cash-and-carry basis and to 
cancel the $10,000,000 credit recently granted by 
the Export-Import Bank. American vessels had al 
ready been barred from Norwegian waters by ai 
earlier proclamation extending the area of combit 
operations around all Scandinavia. The President 
did not invoke the Neutrality Act in the case a 





Denmark, however, apparently because that cout 
try, unable to resist German occupation, is not tech | 
nically at war with the Reich. W. T. STONE 





AS 
€ 
shiftec 
might 
April 
the ef 
the pr 
ships 
route 
the A 
port ¢ 
pains 
ward 
nounc 
“prov 
BA 
of th 
ing e 
the p: 
ships 
of Yi 
path 
ranea 
railw 
Allie 
agair 
front 
zatio 
500, ( 
Nazi 
Csak 
who: 
reacl 
activ 
the 
Som 
mig] 
for 


| Urge 
| 





