on 
At- 
2, 
re- 
ate 
ly, 
t- 
ive 
the 
ex- 
sla- 


ttle 
tic 
taly 
ave 
LOSS 
i yn 
ver, 
XS, 
able 
nent 

did 
oral 
rOwW- 
ated 
Zees. 
e on 
ews. 
| So- 
anti- 
nded 
ther. 


con- 
y 16, 
lism” 
apos- 
Ly OF 
tive 
ist Of 
ad to 
socia- 
‘ascist 
ck on 
party 
at the 
solint 
raight 


LOR 


National 
, Editor. 


| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 
N 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVII, No. 43 


AucustT 19, 1938 





THE MEXICAN OIL DISPUTE 
by Charles A. Thomson 


An authoritative analysis of the internal conflict 
underlying the Mexican petroleum controversy, and a 
survey of the external problems which seizure of the oil 
properties has occasioned. 


August 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents a copy 





AUG 20 = — 


class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under che act 
of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 











JAPAN ACCEPTS 


| 


BORDER TRUCE 





— Japanese and Soviet troops separated by 
less than two hundred yards in the Changku- 
feng area, as the result of a truce arranged at Moscow 
on August 10, an uneasy peace has settled over the 
Siberian-Manchoukuo frontier. Both sides are re- 
portedly apprehensive that further border clashes 
will occur in the near future. A communiqué of the 
Soviet Foreign Office on August 14 charged that the 
Japanese forces had violated the armistice by reoccu- 
pying the northern slope of Changkufeng hill. 
After some haggling, both sides withdrew 90 yards 
from the crest of the hill. Despite the nervousness 
indicated by this incident, the chances seem to favor 
gtadual implementation of the terms of the armistice. 
For a period of nearly two weeks, from July 29 to 
August 10, the Changkufeng affair reached propor- 
tions which threatened the outbreak of a general 
Soviet-Japanese war. An initial settlement had ap- 
parently been reached on July 21, following ex- 
changes at Moscow between Maxim Litvinov, Soviet 
Foreign Commissar, and the Japanese Ambassador, 
Mamoru Shigemitsu. This settlement left Soviet 
border troops in occupation of the Changkufeng 
region, which M. Litvinov claimed to be Soviet ter- 
ritory on the basis of the provisions of the Treaty of 
Peking (1861) and the supplementary Hunchung 
Agreement of 1886. On July 29-31, however, a strong 
force of Japanese infantry and artillery effected 
complete occupation of Changkufeng and neighbor- 
ing hills along a four-mile front. Soviet regulars 
of the First (Maritime) Army, supported by air- 
planes and heavy artillery, were thereupon brought 
up in an effort to reoccupy the disputed area. Despite 
conflicting claims, it would appear that by August 10 
the Soviet force had retaken a considerable portion 
of the line of hills in the Changkufeng region. At 
this point, after previous inconclusive discussions, 
Foreign Commissar Litvinov and Ambassador Shige- 





mitsu suddenly concluded an armistice at Moscow. 
European reactions may have hastened this result: 
Japan obtained no concrete support from Germany 
or Italy, while the U.S.S.R. may well have been con- 
cerned over the Czechoslovakian issue. 

According to the truce terms, hostilities were to 
cease at noon on August 11 after proper arrange- 
ments by officers on the spot. Both sides were to hold 
the positions occupied on midnight of August 10. 
The disputed sector of the frontier was to be re- 
demarcated by a mixed commission formed of two 
representatives from the U.S.S.R. and two from the 
Japanese-Manchurian side. Shigemitsu turned down 
Litvinov’s proposal that an arbiter chosen from a 
third country by agreement of both sides should be 
added to the commission. The documentary basis on 
which the proposed commission would work was 
left unsettled. Litvinov suggested that the commis- 
sion be empowered to work “with treaties and maps 
bearing signatures of accredited Russian and Chinese 
representatives.” Shigemitsu first proposed the ad- 
dition of other materials—which the Japanese side 
had not hitherto produced—but finally agreed to 
consult his government and give an answer shortly 
on this issue. 

A wide variety of conflicting interpretations has 
been advanced as to the party responsible for the 
Changkufeng hostilities and the forces which mo- 
tivated the outbreak. In general, those who hold the 
Soviet Union responsible point out that the clash 
occurred at a moment when Japan was facing seri- 
ous military difficulties in China and grave economic 
problems at home. Soviet military pressure against 
Japan, coming at such a time, involved little risk 
yet promised important gains. It would be a decided 
help to China. The threat of major hostilities in the 
north would weaken the Japanese drive on Hankow, 
either by forcing recall of Japanese troops to Man- 




















churia or immobilizing reserves both in Manchuria 
and Japan. 

On the other hand, some observers feel that the 
peace policy which the U.S.S.R. has consistently 
maintained precludes any such military adventurism, 
however plausible it might appear in this case. Those 
who hold Japan responsible for the Changkufeng 
incident claim that it was created by unruly local 
Japanese commanders, either to “feel out” Russian 
strength or to prevent the Tokyo authorities from 
sending more troops south of the Great Wall. They 
point out that Shigemitsu had quickly settled the 
original affair on July 21, and that the Tokyo au- 
thorities apparently felt that the matter had ended 
there. This contention is supported by a statement 
of the War Office spokesman at Tokyo on August 3, 
admitting that the Japanese occupation of Changku- 
feng on July 29-31 was effected upon the initiative of 
the local Japanese command. 

Some further light on this question has been af- 
forded by the terms of the armistice and subsequent 
developments. Japan’s willingness to consent to an 
equality of membership on the border commission 
represents an important concession. For years Tokyo 
has insisted that the Soviet Union, Manchoukuo and 
Japan should each have the same number of repre- 
sentatives on such a commission. The new concession 
is not only a sign of weakness, but also a tacit ad- 
mission that Manchoukuo is a Japanese protectorate 
rather than an independent state. On the other hand, 
Shigemitsu’s refusal to accept a neutral arbiter may 
easily condemn the activities of the commission to 
deadlock and futility. A similar effort to forestall 
a decision is evident in the refusal of the Japanese 
military representatives to accept the Russian offer 
to sign an agreement and a map showing the present 
positions of Soviet and Japanese troops. On these 
two points, the Soviet Union has shown a greater 
willingness than Japan to conclude a definitive settle- 


ment of the border issue T. A. Bisson 


EUROPEAN TENSION CONTINUES 

With August half gone, Europe’s chances of gain- 
ing some summer respite from its continuing crisis 
have dwindled. The beginning of the German army 
maneuvers on August 15 was preceded by another 
“week-end scare” caused by reports of far-reaching 
German military preparations. These maneuvers, 
held earlier than usual, include reserve units for the 
first time since the war and hence involve virtually 
a partial mobilization. The announcement of the use 
of reserves practically coincided with orders requisi- 





Page Two = 





tioning the trucks and automobiles necessary for 
such exercises, and with a statement that the Rhine- 
land fortifications were being rushed to completion. 
Reports of these preparations, coupled with the 
menacing German press campaign against Czecho- 
slovakia, have caused apprehension in other capitals. 


On August 12 the French government inquired at 
Berlin concerning the meaning of the maneuvers, 
Berlin ridiculed rumors of an attack on Czechoslo- 
vakia and intimated that the maneuvers were neces- 
sary for technical military reasons. Admittedly lack- 
ing trained reserves, Germany might reasonably 
wish to give practice to its assorted reserve forces. 
Moreover, the rapid completion of its western line 
of fortifications, enabling it to defend that frontier 
with fewer soldiers, has led to changes in the whole 
German war plan. These explanations reassured 
Paris and London to some extent, giving rise to 
speculations that the reports had been exaggerated 
in order to smoke out Nazi intentions in advance. In 
any case, Germany's formidable military display 
brings strong pressure on the Prague government to 
make greater concessions than have so far been 
offered. These maneuvers, which will reach their 
climax in September at the time of the Nuremberg 
Party Congress, seem likely to thwart Lord Runci- 
man’s attempt to put the Sudeten question “on ice” 
for the rest of the summer. 


In view of the continuing tension, several smaller 
powers have taken further steps to maintain their 
neutrality in the event of war. At a meeting of the 
“Oslo powers” at Copenhagen, Dr. Peter Munch, 
Danish Foreign Minister, asserted on July 23 that 
“all 7 of our States are definitely determined never 
to participate in any conflict between great powers.” 
On the following day, the conference declared that 
under the League Covenant each state is free to 
decide whether or not to take part in sanctions. The 
Polish government, too, has sought to reduce its 
League responsibilities. On August 11 it announced 
that it would not seek re-election as a member of the 
Council. In the past, Poland has worked zealously 
for Council membership and has been re-elected 
regularly as a non-permanent member. Its present 
move must be attributed to a desire to be free from 
commitments in the event of a conflict in which other 
powers might seek to apply Article 17 against Ger- 
many. Nevertheless, its retirement from the Council 
may actually expedite application of sanctions in 
such a case, for Poland will no longer be in a position 


to impose a veto. 
P PAUL B. TAYLOR 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 43, AuGust 19, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOnpD Lesiig BueEtt, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


<8 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





i<t 


es 


