










Entered as 2nd class matter 


SEP 25 1944 ” 


General Library 


University of Michigan 





Ann Arbor, Mich. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





SEPTEMBER 22, 1944 








the 

Ov-' 

his Vou. XXIII, No. 49 

SS, 

be 

7 THE conclusion of the Anglo-American confer- 

Ps ences at Quebec on September 16 naturally has 

my not been followed by any detailed explanation of the 
}military decisions reached there. But it is clear from 


ask 


ate 





J the joint statement issued by Roosevelt and Churchill 
Jas well as from their remarks to newspapermen that, 


apart from decisions relating to the remainder of the 


} European war, long-range planning took place with 


regard to ‘the destruction of the barbarians of the 
Pacific.”” Most striking was the strong emphasis on 
the desire of the British to participate as fully as pos- 
sible in the Far Eastern war. For the communiqué 


} declared plainly that “the most serious difficulty” at 


Quebec had been “‘to find room and opportunity for 


On| marshaling against Japan the massive forces which 


each and all of the nations concerned are ardent 
to engage against the enemy.’’ And Mr. Churchill 


ST dotted the 7s and crossed the ¢#s when he told re- 


porters that ‘some of us felt the United States wanted 
to keep too much of it [the war with Japan} to 
themselves.” These statements should finally set at 
rest all doubts concerning Britain’s intentions in the 


Pacific. 





‘1 
Ke WILL RUSSIA FIGHT JAPAN? Just as last 


‘Ott 
ob 
the 
1M 
ons 
yn's 


ent years Anglo-American meeting at Quebec was a 


necessary preliminary to the meetings at Cairo and 
Teheran, so this one should ultimately lead to con- 
sultations with the Chinese and Russians, if a genu- 
ine over-all strategy is to be laid down. For while the 
British and ourselves can plan operations in south- 
east Asia and neighboring waters, no design for the 
whole of the war in Asia can be a two-power propo- 





oS. . é‘ ig 

wall sition. That this is appreciated by Roosevelt and 
eit | Churchill is indicated by their invitation to Stalin to 
, jg, Join them in the conferences just concluded. 


S 


. 
) 





The improved state of relations between the 
U.S.S.R. and the United States and Britain, taken in 
conjunction with Russia’s strategic position in the 
Far East, now makes it seem likely that the Russians 


EVENTS IN CHINA MAY AFFECT RUSSIA'S ENTRY INTO PACIFIC WAR 


will enter the war against Japan some time after the 
defeat of Germany. It is true that Stalin declined 
the invitation to meet with Roosevelt and Churchill, 
but he did so officially on the ground that, because 
of military duties “at the present time,” he could 
not leave the Soviet Union. No effort was made in 
his statement to avoid the implication that, when 
there were no more Nazis to fight, his attitude toward 
discussing Pacific questions might change. 

More important, however, than any current straw 
in the wind is the long-term self-interest of the 
U.S.S.R. in facilitating the thorough destruction of 
Japanese militarism and securing a voice in the Far 
Eastern settlement on equal terms with the United 
States, Britain and China. Russia’s national interest, 
moreover, requires the defeat of Japan at the earliest 
possible date, for the sooner the Far Eastern war is 
over, the more rapidly will the reconstruction of 
world economy become feasible. Such reconstruction 
cannot get into full swing while half the world is at 
war, including the two principal capital-exporting 
powers, the United States and Britain. As long as:the 
invasion of western Europe had not been launched, 
it would have been unwise to ask the Russians to 
assume new military obligations. But the unfolding 
of the Teheran strategy this summer has brought the 
defeat of Germany in sight and, despite existing dif- 
ferences among the Big Three, has strengthened 
their relations. 


THE CHINESE HINGE. If this reasoning about 
Soviet policy is correct, then the timing of Russia’s 
entrance into the Far Eastern war becomes an im- 
portant problem. For after bearing the brunt of land 
warfare against the German Army for several-years, 
the U.S.S.R. is not likely to take on Japan until Amer- 
ican, British and Chinese forces have significantly 
weakened the Japanese and forced Tokyo to commit 
a large part of its remaining strength in battle. But 
the question arises whether these conditions can be 





a ee 


Bn) ae gee 


a: ae 


Sebi 


Se ER 


eee 


r tess 





ee ee 


Sarak. pep ae ee Se 


eee —_ 
ne ~ 7 ~ 





a 


met until American or Allied forces have opened up 
a port on the China coast, making possible the land- 
ing of men and equipment on a large scale and lay- 
ing a basis for greatly intensified continental air and 
land attacks against the Japanese. 

To prevent coastal landings, thereby protracting 
the Far Eastern war, is certainly the broad objective 
of Japan’s continuing offensives in China. At present 
the Japanese are well on their way to the leading 
American advance air base in south China at Kweilin, 
capital of Kwangsi province. When Kweilin falls, as 
now seems certain, Japanese shipping off the China 
coast will probably be safe from attack by General 
Chennault’s air force, and B-29s based on the deep 
interior will have lost forward landing fields on their 
way to and from bombing targets in Japanese terri- 
tory. But most important of all is the effect on 





China’s military strength. For should the Japanese . 


succeed in pushing the organized Chinese armies far- 
ther away from the coastal region, China might be 
unable to launch an effective diversionary action to 
aid our invasion forces. 

FERMENT IN CHINA. These matters are of 
enormous significance to American and British mili- 
tary leaders, for they involve the length of the Pacific 
war, as well as China’s role in it. The desire to see 


CHANGES IN EUROPE’S TEMPER CALL FOR AMERICAN UNDERSTANDING 


In discussing Europe's future prospects it is im- 
portant for those of us here who have had no direct 
contact with the war to imagine as vividly as we can 
the changes in temper that war has wrought among 
Europeans. Only thus can we consider, with any de- 
gree of perspective, the question whether the lib- 
erated peoples may become vulnerable to Commu- 
nism or, on the contrary, seek a middle course be- 
tween the various extremist doctrines that vied for 
domination during the inter-war years. 

Such projection of our imagination requires an 
arduous effort on our part. For it is difficult, for most 
of us, to understand the sufferings of others unless 
we have had comparable experiences. Those who 
have either been close to death themselves (this is 
true of our soldiers at the front), or have seen the 
death of those they love, can plumb to some extent 
the agony of irreparable loss, of hope frustrated—an 
agony that, multiplied a thousandfold under the most 
horrible circumstances imaginable, hangs like a pall 
over Europe. Those of us who have seen acts of 
cruelty perpetrated in individual cases and have 
sought redress for the victims, can in a dim way ap- 
prehend the horror that must be imprinted on the 
minds of Europe’s survivors, to whom scenes of un- 
speakable brutality have become a familiar sight. 

EUROPE’S POST-WAR MOOD. In what mood 
have'five grueling years of war and resistance to con- 
quest left the liberated peoples? Some, inevitably, 
are weaty and apathetic, wanting order above all 


Page Two 


* 
J 


: 





"tl 
———, 





the Chinese front assume the strategic tasks thay 
should properly be assigned to it undoubtedly goe 
far to explain Washington’s interest in the improve. 
ment of Chinese Army conditions and China’s eco. 
nomic and political situation. 


There are signs that the Chinese people are also 
becoming increasingly concerned about their coun 
try’s position. The latest session of the People’s Poli. 
tical Council, just concluded in Chungking, was the 
most critical in all the six years since that govern. 
mental advisory body was established. Members de 
manded improvements in the conscription system 
which, as at present organized, frequently amounts 
to armed impressment of peasants for military serv. 
ice. Sharp words were also heard about corruption 
and inefficiency, and there was evident a strong desire 
for a settlement between the government and the 
Communists, so that all of China’s military forces 
might be available for the war with Japan. No one 
can yet say how soon this criticism will bear fruit in 
Chungking, but the duration of the Far Eastern wat, 
the timing of Russian aid, and the validity of the 
conceptions developed at Quebec may well depené 
on what happens in China. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


else—order which would permit resumption of af 
least rudimentary forms of social living. These might 
accept any political and economic regime, provided 
it promised surcease from constant danger and up 
heaval. Others, on the contrary, have found that they 
thrive on danger, and welcome risk in a cause that 
kindles their spirit. These have been the backbone of 
resistance movements. For them indignation at com 
quest and oppression has been an act of faith. But 
they also feel indignant at the pre-war conditions 
that produced war and murder, and have no desire 





= 
tomot 
mont 
jzatio 
ern | 
stabil 
war ! 
strair 
ferm« 
the c 
many 
muni 
trend 
True 
lutio 
Tito 
by tt 
of L 
the n 
and 

pay 

trod 
Fren 
tion 
and 

lutic 
the 
one 

fect 
Fret 


Futt 

S 
and 
syst 
cou 
por 
lect 
aliz 
anc 





to be paid off in the small change of old-style polité 
cal maneuvering. They have proved they could be 
ruthless in revenge, but many of them have displayed 
heroic capacities for the kind of selfless comrade 
ship that is engendered by dangers shared in common 
—in the armed forces, in prison camps, in under 
ground movements. They are the spearhead of rebel 
lion against mere return to the past. But they are also 


harbingers of reconstruction on new foundations— 


provided reconstruction is not so long delayed, and 
so hampered by possible opponents that revolution 
seems to offer the only way out. 


TREND TOWARD POPULAR DEMOCRACY. 


In any social group, no matter how educated, rebels 
are usually in a minority. It is their capacity for lea¢ 
ership, their intuitive understanding of the histori¢ 
moment and the.cause that will capture men’s minds 
and emotions, that gives them an opportunity 


transform the minority of today into the majority of 


esst 
gue 








| L 





FO 
He: 
sec 
one 


< 





100 
sire 
rces 
one 
t in 
vat, 


end 


—_ 
— 

















tomorrow. It is they who will bear watching in these 
months when a new Europe is in gestation. General- 
izations, as always, are futile. The countries of West- 
ern Europe, industrially advanced and _ politically 
stabilized before 1939, may effect reforms that the 
war revealed as necessary without excessive internal 
strain. In France, where public opinion was in a 
ferment on the eve of the war, in Italy, disoriented by 
the collapse of Fascism, in the countries east of Ger- 
many, some observers detect a trend toward Com- 
munism. It would be more accurate to describe it as a 
trend toward a larger measure of popular democracy. 
True, some of the forms it will take may appear revo- 
lutionary in character. The insistence of Marshal 


Tito on the revival of village councils elected directly 


by the peasants; the plans of the Polish Committee 
of Liberation for the breakup of large estates (with 
the notable exception of those owned by the Church), 
and the grant of land to poor peasants who are to 
pay for it over a period of years, but without the in- 
troduction of collective farming; the demand of 
French workers for participation in the administra- 
tion of factories on a basis of equality with managers 
and consumers—all these could be described as revo- 
lutionary. Yet they are in fact attempts to broaden 
the political and economic base in countries which, in 
one way or another, had not caught up with the ef- 
fects of either the Industrial Revolution, or the 
French and Russian Revolutions. 


Future of Free Enterprise 


Some Americans may be disturbed by these plans 
and demands. For they portend restrictions on the 
system of free private enterprise advocated for this 
country at the end of the war. They do not, however, 
portend indiscriminate industrial or agricultural col- 
lectivization—except perhaps for the possible nation- 
alization of certain heavy industries essential for war, 
and some forms of state control over enterprises 
essential for the public welfare. Leaving aside the 
question whether untrammeled private enterprise— 


Page Three 





JUST PUBLISHED— 


U.S. FOREIGN POLICY AND THE VOTER 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


September 15 issue of ForEIGN Poticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















which in the midst of tariff, currency and other re- 


strictions was rapidly becoming a myth by 1939— 


will prove practicable after the war, we must con- 
sider measures advocated by Europeans not in terms 
of whether we like them or not, but whether’ they 
will advance the welfare of Europe, and thus our 
own as well. For unless the liberated countries 
can recover at least partly through their own efforts, 
Britain and the United States would be faced with an 
insuperable problem of pumping new blood into 
political and economic institutions atrophied by lack 
of use during the years of Nazi conquest. 

It is in our interest that the peoples of Eu- 
rope should make every effort they can to further 
their own reconstruction. And if reconstruction, in 
some countries, means the overhauling of pre-war 
concepts and machinery, we should view this process 
in the perspective of a history different from our own, 
and in terms of passions and convictions generated 
by a war whose effects we are only beginning to ex- 
perience. The life of mature human beings, regret- 
table as it may seem, is not a movie that has an in- 
variably happy ending, and for years now few human 
beings in war-torn countries have known the meaning 
of personal happiness. If we want to help, in the 
future, to promote happier endings, we shall have to 
re-examine our own objectives in Europe. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The third in a series on Europe's problems as seen 
from the United States.) 


NEW ASSISTANT TO PRESIDENT 

The F.P.A. takes pleasure in announcing the ap- 
pointment of Professor Charles Grove Haines to the 
position of Assistant to the President, replacing Mr. 
Sherman Hayden, absent on service in the Navy. Pro- 
fessor Haines received his Ph.D. from Clark Univer- 
sity, and is now Professor of History at Syracuse Uni- 
versity. He has traveled extensively and has written 
several authoritative books in the field of foreign 
affairs. He has spoken before Foreign Policy Associa- 
tion Branches, and prepared the Foreign Policy Re- 
port “What Future for Italy?” published in October 
1943. On the F.P.A. staff he will serve also as 
Director of the Department of Popular Education. 





German Radio Propaganda, by Ernst Kris and Hans 
Speier. New York, Oxford University Press, 1944 
(Studies of the Institute of World Affairs). $4.00 
A highly illuminating analysis of how Goebbels and his 


propagandists indoctrinated the German people in_ their 
presentation of World War II. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 49, SppremBger 22, 1944, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. Nasional 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lugt, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dean, Editor, Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> 61 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








pr Ee AT eS TE Ree 
vate tidaans * tie eee ee eee 


ate 


5 


ee ee oad 


te 


ee RE 2 RE 


oS er 
iT eee a 


= 
¥ 
— 


prance 










Washington News Letter 











In 46 anti-trust suits filed since 1939 against mem- 
bers of international cartels in which United States 
companies participate, the Department of Justice has 
disclosed much evidence that cartel agreements re- 
strict commerce in this country and limit outlets for 
American exports. These findings, supplemented by 
studies of the Interdepartmental Committee on Car- 
tels and hearings before the Kilgore Senate Subcom- 
mittee on War Mobilization, have caused the Ad- 
ministration to seek international collaboration for 
the eradication of cartel practices that interfere with 
trade. On September 6 President Roosevelt wrote 
Secretary of State Hull: ‘I hope that you will keep 
your eye on the whole subject of international car- 
tels, because we are approaching the time when dis- 
cussions will almost certainly arise between us and 
other nations.” On September 13 Mr. Hull notified 
the President, then in Quebec, that he wanted soon 
to take up plans for conversations with other United 
Nations ‘‘in respect to the whole subject of commer- 
cial policy.” 

HOW CARTELS RESTRICT TRADE. At their 
worst cartels restrict production of both raw ma- 
terials and finished products, and keep prices at an 


artificial level. The most common cartel practice is to- 


divide trade by allocating certain geographical areas 
to particular firms—much as governments divided it 
in the days of mercantilism. Charges made by the 
United States Department of Justice in recent anti- 
trust suits—in some of which the Attorney General 
agreed to postpone trial until it will not interfere 
with the war production of defendant firms—state 
that American and European firms agreed to allocate 
by geographical areas exports of such products as 


_ pigment titanium, military optical instruments, photo- 


graphic materials, dyestuffs, deadburned magnesite 
or magnesite brick (important to the steel and copper 
industries), and glass bulbs. In some instances the 
agreements, it is charged, were made by American 
firms with German concerns, in some with concerns 
of other European countries. 

For example, it is charged that in 1929 Harbison- 
Walker Refractories Co., Pittsburgh, agreed with the 
Veitscher group in Europe (Germany, Czechoslo- 
vakia and Switzerland) that Harbison would not 
ship deadburned magnesite or magnesite brick to 
Europe, Asia or Africa and that Veitscher would not 
ship those commodities (important in the steel and 
copper industries) into the United States, Canada or 


FOR VICTORY ° 





U.S. TACKLES INTERNATIONAL CARTEL PROBLEM 


Mexico except to Harbison or the General Refrac- 
tories Co., Philadelphia. 


In other cases cartel agreements, which take many } 


diverse forms, restrict international commerce in 
chemicals, tannin, aspirin, synthetic gasoline, and 
magnesium. Cartels control hevea rubber, tin and 
African oil nuts. 

FOREIGN ATTITUDES IMPORTANT. While 
the anti-trust suits brought by the Department of 
Justice have drawn the attention of foreign countries 
to the domestic policies of the United States, they 
have failed to break up international combinations, 


In 1928 the United States government entered a con- 
sent decree with the Kina Bureau, the Netherlands } 


world quinine monopoly, after suing for breach of 
the Sherman Act. A simple operational adjustment, 
however, enabled Kina Bureau to keep the monop- 
oly control over the distribution and price of qui- 
nine in the United States that it possessed before 
the suit. On September 14 Wendell Berge, Assistant 
Attorney General, instituting suit in California 
against seven domestic and foreign borax companies, 
said that “more than just litigation’ was needed to 
deal with the international cartel question. 

The readiness with which other governments will 
support an American program for cartel restriction 
is open to question. As President Roosevelt told Mr. 
Hull in his September 6 letter, ‘a number of foreign 
countries, particularly in Continental Europe, do not 
possess such a tradition against cartels.’ The British 
White Paper on Full Employment of May 26, how- 
ever, gives this government some encouragement by 
suggesting that the United Kingdom should seek the 
power to obtain information about cartels and check 
practices harmful to the public interest. To explain 
our position to the British, the Administration is send- 
ing to London as economic counsellor Harry Haw- 
kins, who until now has been Director of the Office 
of Economic Affairs of the State Department. There 
is cumulative evidence, at least, that the various na- 
tions are prepared to take part in governmental com- 
modity controls. The recent British-American oil 


oe 






































| 


<= 


OL. 


| 


lays, 
of v 
furic 
hop 


we 


befc 
at a 
pow 
we 
our 
are 


leas 
any 
and 





agreement is illustrative of this trend. Government 
supervision, while often criticized in itself, would 
offer public protection to consumer interests since it 
would afford full publicity for commodity agree- 
ments—a practice wholly different from the present 
secret, private cartel arrangements. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


