SEP8 1944 | 


Entered as 2nd class matter i 


VIB AL Bove.» 


oneal VENERAL LIBRARY 


NY, OF MICH 


f sub. 
> taken 
riation 
ed evi. ) 
mbina- 


veneral Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Michigan 


House f 


#/ FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 


tribute PL 
- at the 4 
August j An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
tates as J FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 

22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
NG. It Pou. XXIII, No. 46 SEPTEMBER 1, 1944 
res and | 
iti LIBERATED FRENCH MOVE TOWARD FOURTH REPUBLIC 
area is LTHOUGH the Allies’ major objective in the struction of their property resulting from this new 
e com- Battle of France was achieved with the destruc- phase of the war. But now that Paris and the impor- 
already Htion of the Nazis’ Seventh Army, as announced by tant cities of the south of France have responded to 
w ones, |General Eisenhower on August 26, it is the result- the Allies’ arrival with unbounded joy and eagerness 
London fing liberation of almost half of France—including to cooperate in speeding the day of German defeat, 
pecting paris itself—that stirs the Allied world more than we know that the spirit of Normandy was not typical 
essmen pany of its previous military victories. Paris occupies of France as a whole. Far from presenting the spec- 
owered Ja unique place in the sentiments of the freedom- tacle of an indifferent and broken people, the French 


reas theploving world, and its rebirth of independence seems 
m from@the perfect symbol of the eventual triumph of the 
of hem- PUnited Nations. But the freeing of a large part of 
st them g France has done more than give a tremendous boost 
ket, es gto Allied morale. It has also dispelled grave fears 
yutcome # concerning the future of France that prevailed among 


not so 
F fascist 
ital eco 
nt mili’ 
aking 4 
o a bak 

middle 
on then 
illing to 
asse OC 
ith that 
s to cok 
lem may 


many Americans as long as the temper of the French 
people inside Hitler's fortress remained a matter of 
speculation rather than observation. Under those 
conditions doubts arose about the French people's 
devotion to liberty and the Allied cause, and led to 
tautious American policies that the Free French re- 
sented but were unable to attack with conclusive 
tv.2ence. Now, however, that Frenchmen in France 
ate free to speak for themselves, it is possible at last 
for realities instead of opinion and incomplete under- 
‘ground reports to shape our policy, and it can be con- 
fdently anticipated that Franco-American relations 
will be improved as a result. 


TEMPER OF FRANCE REVEALED. Among 


rn to its#fears dispelled by our new contact with the Fren 
is extet= {men who have lived under enemy occupation was tlfe 
ern bloc belief that France’s strength and spirit might have 
ontinent Pheen so seriously sapped by the nation’s four years 
of suffering that its people would be indifferent to 
liberation and incapable of aiding the Allies at that 
National pUCIal moment. During the period immediately fol- 
Entered & (lOWing D-Day there seemed to be some basis for this 
low #t KM Wdisquieting thought, for from Normandy came re- 
ports that many of the peasants were either apathetic 
fo the invasion or concerned above all with the de- 


ILMES 


of Paris, Marseilles, Toulon, and other important 
centers, appear—in our first glimpses of them—as a 
nation in which youthful leaders and the enthusiastic 
spirit of youth abound. On first thought it is surpris- 
ing to find young men and women figuring so prom- 
inently in the liberated towns and cities since pre-war 
France was usually led by men of advanced years, 
and millions of young Frenchmen are still held by 
the Germans as prisoners of war or conscript labor- 
ers. Yet it is probably precisely because pre-war lead- 
ers were discredited in France and German rule was 
so severe that thousands of French youth felt com- 
pelled to join the Maquis. 

French members of the underground have played 
an important role in liberating their country, both by 
supplying vital information on which pre-invasion 
Allied air attacks were planned and by destroying 
German communications and directing the Allies to 
concealed Nazi positions during the Battle of France. 
That the Maquis were rarely able to attack German 
positions successfully does not detract from their 
achievements for, regardless of courage and daring, 
men with rifles are no match for regular soldiers 
armed -with machine guns and mortars. And the 
French tendency to exaggerate the Maquis’ successes 
—as de Gaulle did on August 25, when he declared 
Paris had been “liberated by ourselves” —is na- 
tural on the part of a people vitally interested in re- 
establishing France as a great power. 


FRIENDSHIP FOR U.S. There is, however, glory 
and gratitude enough for both the Maquis and the 


a, aE a 


————_____ Page Two —— 
Allies in France, and the Frenchmen’s enormous en- Gaulle’s success will rest, in large part, on his ability | ions. 
thusiasm for the American soldiers has disproved the to cooperate with the local leaders of resistance, for } you: 
pre-invasion prophecy that liberated Frenchmen members of the Maquis will undoubtedly demand joined 
might be cold and unfriendly toward the United important places in*France’s new government. This} -suse 
States. The tensions between Algiers and Washing- task of incorporating the Maquis into his régime) jgher< 
ton, it appears, are almost unknown in France and should not prove too difficult for de Gaulle, for he} gespit 
have done nothing to damage the traditional friend- has been in close contact with the underground since} py 
ship for the United States among the French people its formation and has always based his claim to repre | pen 
as a whole. The United States and the leaders of the sent France on his ties with the forces of resistance} 4. |; 
new France will have, therefore, a fresh chance, un- Moreover, de Gaulle’s administrators in Normandy whicl 
clouded by the record of Algiers-Washington dis- have shown signs of recognizing the importance of] .¢ (1, 
putes, to establish close bonds between the two re- local resistance leaders by cooperating with them. |). p 
publics in the post-war period. 


Whether de Gaulle wins the French people's ap-| doub 
proval as their political leader depends to an even} |iber: 
greater extent on his ability to become the acknowl-} Yarg 
edged spokesman of the French patriots who have popu 
paid dearly for the liberation of their country and) might 
demand, in return, a new France that will succeed) shat 
where the old one failed. Consideration of these de} dissc 
mands has apparently shaped de Gaulle’s outline for} ed‘ 
a new Fourth Republic to replace the régime he in- 


American fears that General de Gaulle might not 
represent any sizable proportion of Frenchmen and 
that the French majority might therefore resent any 
efforts by the United States to support his provisional 
government, have also been dispelled by recent 
events in France. Yet weeks before these proofs of 
de Gaulle’s widespread popularity were received the 
United States was obliged to accept his unauthorized 


ate past 
appointments of administrators in Normandy be- sists Marshal Pétain destroyed when he accepted de-} of n 
cause of the sheer impracticability of the original feat in 1940. The Fourth Republic, de Gaulle has mor 
American plan that required General Eisenhower to indicated, will rest on a new economic structure in! frjer 


choose the French personnel needed for administer- 
ing liberated French territory. This practical consid- 
eration, in fact, rather than any admission that de 
Gaulle represents France, forms the basis of the new 
agreement between Washington and General de 
Gaulle that was signed August 22. This arrangement 
merely recognizes and extends to other parts of 
France the administrative system that de Gaulle 
worked out in Normandy and specifically states that 
it will continue only as long as de Gaulle’s group 
continues “‘to receive the support of the majority of 
the Frenchmen who are fighting for the defeat of 
Germany and the liberation of France.” American 
policy toward de Gaulle still remains, therefore, a 


which the state will control great sources of national] and 
wealth and organized workers will share in the con-]} de ¢ 
duct of industry. Whether this program of modified } obsc 
state socialism will be in tune with the ideas of the’ to < 
liberated French people remains to be seen, but it} Ped: 
can hardly be expected that a system of free enter} Fore 
prise will appeal to a nation whose capitalist econ-} forc 
omy collapsed under German pressure. thei 

De Gaulle’s reiterated pledge that France's new), C 
government shall rest on an election in which womedy niti 
as well as men shall have the vote also expresses the!| Bra 
demands of French underground leaders for a om gre 
plete break with the Third Republic. And it is in this} lars 

: : : ' same spirit of reform that de Gaulle promised the} fas! 
cautious one in which the burden of proof of his French people on August 25 that their deep desire] rég 
leadership rests entirely upon him. 


for security from future German invasions will be 
DE GAULLE'S POLITICAL FUTURE. In view fulfilled. France also has a right, he insisted, “to be 
of the widespread French enthusiasm for de Gaulle 


in the first line among the great nations who age Ye 
as the symbol of national rebirth, there can no longer going to organize the peace and the life of the world) Y° 
be wr doubt about his paereg ers popularity and pits She has a right to be heard in all four corners of the Ch 
tige in France. However, his claim to be the politi = orld.” In this declaration there are hints of the} ° 
cal leader of France and the head of a “govern- strong foreign policy the new France will demand] 
ment” that soon expects to move from Algiers to de 
Paris remains to be tested. In this political realm de ; WinirrepD N. HapseEL } tio 
im 
REACTIONARIES IN BRAZIL FORCE FOREIGN MINISTER’S RESIGNATION | ;. 
The resignation of Brazilian Foreign Minister however, he has distinguished himself as the prim} A; 
Oswaldo Aranha on August 23, widely interpreted cipal Brazilian spokesman for the Allies. As Ambas} i 
as a blow to pro-Allied sentiment, actually hints at sador to Washington and later as President of the} d¢ 
the existence of great cracks in the internal structure Rio Conference in 1942, where he contributed n0 it 
of Brazil. The second most important political figure little to the drama of the final session by announcing; in 
in the country, Aranha has long been a supporter cessation of diplomatic relations with the Axis pow) w 
of President Getulio Vargas, whom he helped to ers, he has worked constantly for closer identification | 


power in the revolution of 1930. In his own right, of his country with the fortunes of the United N@} gj. 


3 ; 
nis ability 
tance, for 


Fiions. It was in large part due to his efforts that on 
mAugust 20, 1944 a Brazilian Expeditionary Force 


| demand#igined the Fifth Army in Italy. His espousal of the 


ent. 
is régime 
le, for he 
und since 
| to repre. 
esistance. 
Jormandy 
rtance of 
1) them. 

»ple’s ap. 
-an even 
acknowl. 
who have 
intry and 
| succeed 
these de. 
utline for 
ne he in- 
epted de 
aulle hag 
ucture if 
national 
the con. 
modified 
as of the 
n, but it 
ee enter 
list econ. 


i i cause of the democracies to which many Brazilians are 


Winherently sympathetic has won him wide support, 
Idespite recent reports that his prestige is on the wane. 
DICTATORSHIP STRENGTHENED. At a time 
mwhen every political occurrence is being assessed in 
Isis light of its influence on the Presidential elections 


which Vargas has repeatedly promised for the end 
jiof the war, Aranha’s resignation is significant. Should 
he present himself as a candidate, he would un- 
doubtedly carry a considerable portion of the 
liberal vote. If, as seems more likely, however, 
Vargas does not intend to submit his government to 
popular revision, Aranha’s presence in the Cabinet 
might prove embarrassing. Recent events indicate 
that all articulate resistance to the 1937 coup, which 
dissolved Congress and instituted the Army-support- 
ed “New State,” is being progressively stifled. In the 
past weeks a number of pro-democratic periodicals 
of national circulation have been shut down. Even 
more serious has been the replacing of important 
friends of collaboration between the United States 
band Brazil either with ‘strong men’”’ like Coriolano 
de Goes, new Chief of the Federal Police, or with 
obscure department employees who may be expected 
to do as they are told. Acting Foreign Minister, 
Pedro Leao Velloso, an official of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, seems to be of the latter stamp. The 
forces of Brazilidn reaction appear to be tightening 


ce’s news) 


h women 
‘esses the 
ra com 
is in this 
nised the 
ep desire 
; will be 
d, “to be 
who age 
1e world. 
rs of the 
s of the 
demand. 


[ADSEL 


TION 
the prit- 
; Ambas 
it of the 


their lines against the advent of peace. 

One by-product of the change may well be recog- 
nition of the military government of Argentina. 
| Brazil, already closely associated economically as the 
| greatest source of Argentina’s imports and the third 
largest contender for its exports, may seek in this 
fashion to ally itself politically with the Farrell 
régime. It is also possible that certain elements within 


The arrival of an American military mission at 
Yenan, nerve center of the Communist areas in 
China, is an event that would have attracted consid- 
erable attention in any summer other than the present 
one with its impressive successes in Europe. Yet; the 
development is full of significance for the prosecu- 
tion of the war against Japan. It means, in its most 
immediate sense, that the United States has succeeded 


| in breaking down one of the barriers separating the 


American armed forces from China’s fighting guer- 
tillas. Taken more broadly it suggests the increasing 


yuted n0 
nouncing | 
XiS POWs 
tification 
ited Na} 


determination of the State Department and our mil- 
itary leaders to exert every effort to prevent China’s 
internal political problems from impeding essential 
War operations. 

MILITARY OBJECTIVES. The mission, small in 
size, is a token of possible actions to come. In an- 


Page Three 


the Army are not unfriendly to the idea of thus 
actively expressing dislike of United States “inter- 
vention” in national and hemispheric affairs. The 
question confronting Brazilians today is whether 
such a step would be in harmony with the “funda- 
mental directives of its foreign policy of continental 
solidarity and strict cooperation with the Allied Na- 
tions,” reaffirmed on the occasion of the Foreign 
Minister's retirement. 

UNREST BELOW THE BORDER. What is hap- 
pening in Brazil is not an isolated incident but the 
reflection of a widespread and growing disquietude 
in Latin America. As the European war draws to a 
close, the fundamental political and economic prob- 
lems of the continent, shelved for the duration, are 
reasserting themselves with new urgency. Not to 
be disassociated from these are the increasing mani- 
festations of anti-American feeling, for they spring 
from a deep-seated suspicion that the United States 
is in Latin America to stay. The fact that Congress 
delays action on the bill granting self-government 
to Puerto Rico disturbs Latin Americans, the more 
so since they have always regarded that island as a 
sounding board of their big neighbor's intentions 
toward the rest of the hemisphere. Despite repeated 
denials on the part of the State Department, the con- 
viction is strongly held in some quarters that this 
country will not only refuse to withdraw from bases 
in Brazil and the Caribbean but will attempt to 
acquire new ones. The resolution offered by Senator 
McKellar on August 15 that the United States pur- 
chase the Galapagos Islands from Ecuador did not 
allay their fears, although President Velasco Ibarra 
characterized the proposal as unrepresentative of 
American opinion. In the days ahead, Latin America 
and the United States alike must bring to bear on 
these knotty aspects of continental and internal affairs 
all the statesmanship that can be mustered. 


O.tveE HOLMES 


U.S. MILITARY MISSION CONFERS WITH CHINESE COMMUNISTS 


nouncing on August 2 that the Americans were en 
route to the Communist areas, a Chungking spokes- 
man declared that the group had three purposes: to 
collect aeronautical data and weather information, to 
aid American airmen forced down in Communist 
territory, and to develop closer cooperation between 
Chinese ground forces and American air units. To 
these goals Colonel Davis Barrett, head of the mis- 
sion, added a fourth when he stated after arriving 
at Yenan: “We have come here to study how these 
people have been able to keep the superiorly armed 
Japs in north China at bay for seven years.” This 
declaration recognizing the great military role of the 
guerrillas is all the more significant because some 
military and political leaders in Chungking have 
publicly contended that the Communists do not fight. 
Such is clearly not the view of the United States Army. 


A Re “hew we. 
ok en 


r= 
° 


Serr Fee 
e 


- ee 


==———_—_—_—_ = 


This country has wanted to establish contact with 
the Yenan headquarters of the Eighth Route and 
New Fourth Armies for a long time, but only now 


has it become possible to secure the permission of the 


Chungking government. The development is inti- 
mately linked with the launching of our B-29 Super- 
fortress raids, for the guerrilla areas could provide 
excellent bases against the enemy's “inner zone’’ in 


-morth China, Manchuria, Korea and the Japanese 


homeland. It is also not a coincidence that the dis- 
patch of the mission has occurred at a time when the 
war against Germany is entering its final phase. With 
the United States and Britain moving steadily closer 
to the period when their full strength can be turned 
against Japan, and with the China front a notoriously 
weak base from which to use that strength, every 
effort must be made in the coming months to bolster 
‘China’s fighting power. In this effort, it would be 
dangerous to ignore any forces in China that are hit- 
ting the enemy effectively and whose territory would 
provide us with new ways of striking at Japan. 

INTERNAL POLITICAL DIFFERENCES. It is 
an appalling fact that, despite Japan’s success in 
taking the key points of Changsha, Loyang and 
Hengyang within the past three months, there is still 
no military cooperation between the two main bodies 
of China’s troops—those of the Central government, 
numbering some 3,000,000, and the Communist 
forces, estimated roughly at 500,000. Indeed, many 
divisions of Central soldiers are still blockading the 
Communist’ areas. Under the circumstances it has 
been imperative that the United States establish its 
own contact with the Communists, paralleling the 
contact we have long had with the armies of the 
Central government. 

By being represented in both areas, we may, in 
effect, establish a liaison between the Chinese groups, 
for if our air operations are coordinated with the 
local ground activities of the Communist and Chung- 
king forces, the two may find after a while that their 
separate actions have begun to dovetail as parts of a 
single military plan. This would encourage the con- 
clusion of a political accord. Recognition by the 


—— Page Foasr ——— 


United States of the guerrillas’ place in the way 
effort might remove from discussion one issue be 
tween them and the Central government: whether 
the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies should be 
incorporated fully into the struggle against Japan; 
or whether Chungking, while in a state of war wil 
the Japanese, should devote a large part of its energy 
to restricting guerrilla activities. 


It must be emphasized, however, that at present 
the American mission’s purpose is simply to secure 
information and carry on discussions. Whether 
Chungking has as yet consented to the implementa- 
tion of any plans that may be reached is not publicly 
known. It may be significant that, when Dr. K. C.| 
Wu, Chinese Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs, was 
asked on August 2 whether American air bases in 
Communist territory would not be very valuable to 
the Allies, he replied that “the question of bases in 
those areas has not arisen.’” He added that he did not 


know what attitude his government would take to 
ward such a proposal. Yet, nothing is clearer than 
the fact that, unless such bases are established and 
other concrete measures of cooperation instituted, 
the mission will have been little more than a sight- 
seeing tour. 


LIFTING THE BLOCKADE. If the guerrilla 
regions of north and central China are to make their 
maximum contribution in the war against Japan, two 
steps are necessary: the Central government must lift 
its long-standing blockade on supplies for the Eighth 
Route and New Fourth Armies, and it must grant 
permission to the American authorities to work with 
those armies in the same way as with other Chinese 
forces. When one considers what the guerrillas have 
been able to do all these years while lacking outside 
supplies, air support and advice, it is obvious that 
their war effort, with these factors present, would be 
capable of enormous expansion. The result would 
be to help shorten the struggle against Japan and 
save many lives of Chinese, American and other 
United Nations troops. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Ten Escape from Tojo, by Commander Melvyn H. McCoy 
and Lieutenant Colonel S. M. Mellnik, as told to Lieu- 
tenant Welbourn Kelley. New York, Farrar and Rine- 
hart, 1944. $1.00 


The story of Japan’s brutal treatment of American and 


Germany After Hitler, by Paul Hagen. New York, Farrar 
and Rinehart, 1944. $2.00 
Because of his experience as an anti-Nazi in the under- 
ground movement the writer has faith in possible revolu- 
tion backed by youth and underground groups but fears 


1191 


Filipino prisoners of war captured on Bataan and Cor- the Allied armies may back leaders who will again 
regidor. plan war. 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 46, Sgpremper 1, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Pose Office at New York, N. Y., under che Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


LE 
he: 
Eu 
It 
As 
the 
gi 
fli 
| th 
th 
de 


pe 
fi 


