ast four 
vith the 
eeds. In 
e Treas- 

set up 
F.C. to 
lude the 
in, man- 
ber Re- 
Corpora- 
ials such 
se quan. 
ates that 
it of pol: 
es which 
the Axis 


vernment 
1 foreign 
nker con 
spionage 
; leaving 
Maritime 
- controls 
r to allo 
- transfer 


the chief 
is one of 
os of the 
economic 
sition to 
c defense. 


STONE 


FOREIGN POI] 


Genéral Library Entered as 2nd class matter 


Univers ity of Mich: 


Ann Arbor, Mich. [~ 


ACY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XX, No. 16 


Fesruary 7, 1941 


JAPAN DICTATES PEACE IN INDO-CHINA 


OLLOWING successful “mediation” of the 

Thailand-Indo-China conflict, Japan seems about 
to establish its dominance over the strategic coastal 
area of Indo-China. Its prospective gains, both politi- 
cal and economic, far surpass those attained by the 
Tokyo-Hanoi pact of last September. The entering 
wedge was then inserted; now, full control of Indo- 
China may be realized. Japan’s position has also been 
strengthened by Chinese political strife, revealed in 
the attempted suppression of the Fourth Route Army. 

THE SAIGON ARMISTICE. In the complicated 
three-cornered struggle centering about Indo-China, 
Tokyo had cleverly exploited its unique strategic 
position. Its political influence in Bangkok was 
strong enough to warrant the belief that it virtually 
controlled Thai policy. Japanese military advisers, 
as well as planes and even pilots, were evidently 
aiding Thailand’s drive into Indo-China’s territory. 
Indo-China, with few planes and inadequate military 
equipment, was caught between the Thai advance 
and Japanese pressure. Japan was able to choose the 
opportune moment to step in and dictate a settle- 
ment that would provide the greatest benefits to 
itself. Above all, by this method of action, Japan 
teckoned that outside powers would find it difficult 
to take exception to the results achieved. 

The Japanese offer to ‘mediate’ the dispute was 
tendered on January 21. It was accepted by Thailand 
on the same day, and by the French government at 
Vichy on January 22. French, Thai and Japanese 
tepresentatives completed the drafting of armistice 
terms on January 30; the meeting was held aboard 
the Japanese cruiser Natori, anchored in Saigon har- 
bor. Other Japanese war vessels were cruising off 
the southern coast of Indo-China. The armistice 
merely laid down measures to prevent further hos- 
tilities, but a conference to settle the terms of peace 
is scheduled to meet at Tokyo within two weeks. 

At the peace conference, Thailand will undoubted- 


ly be rewarded with slices of Indo-Chinese territory, 
but whether these will be more extensive than the 
districts already occupied by Thai forces remains to 
be seen. The largest gains will go to Japan. Reports 
from Shanghai, as yet unconfirmed, outline a series 
of concessions which Japan is exacting from Indo- 
China. In the military sphere, they include an army 
post at Saigon, a naval base in Cam Ranh Bay, gar- 
risons on Indo-China’s northern border facing China, 
and free use of all Indo-Chinese air bases. In the 
economic field, Japan would obtain a virtual monop- 
oly of Indo-China’s rice, rubber and coal, and a free 
hand in the development of natural resources, 
especially minerals. Whether or not these points 
have been definitely conceded, they offer a good in- 
dication of Japan’s immediate aims. 


ANGLO-AMERICAN POLICY. Tokyo’s occupa- 
tion of Saigon, along with the excellent harbor at 
Cam Ranh Bay, would carry Japan a long step closer 
toward its ultimate objectives in southeast Asia. The 
airfields at Saigon are 750 miles from Singapore, 
while Cam Ranh Bay is only 800 miles from the 
great British stronghold in the Far East. In addition, 
Thailand may now become sufficiently amenable to 
assist Japan in a land campaign against Singapore 
through the Malayan peninsula. Yet the difficulties 
of reducing Singapore are most formidable, especial- 
ly with Hongkong and Manila on the Japanese 
flanks, and Japan may well hesitate to take the risks 
involved under present conditions. A serious British 
setback in Europe, however, might quickly alter this 
Situation. 

Both in Malaya and the Netherlands Indies, de- 
fense preparations have been rapidly pushed forward 
during recent months. Sir Robert Brooke-Popham, 
with unified control of British defenses in the Hong- 
kong-Singapore area, has been bringing in new 
troops and equipment, although the naval strength 
at his disposal cannot be very great. Since last fall 


Anglo-American-Australian conversations on defense 
matters in the Pacific have been proceeding at Wash- 
ington. While little information on the progress of 
these negotiations has been divulged, there is grow- 
ing evidence that cooperative measures are being 
quietly instituted. Reports from New Zealand have 
intimated that ports and airfields, now being devel- 
oped in the long Hawaii-Singapore arc swinging 
south of the Japanese mandated islands, would be 
available to the United States. Along this arc the 
British Dominions are now beginning to use large- 
type American seaplanes, particularly as scouts for 
German sea-raiders. 

For the moment, however, it is clear that there is 
no intention, either in Washington or London, to 
lay down a challenge to Japan in the Pacific. The 
unexpressed hope is that no critical issue with Tokyo 
will emerge during the crucial months ahead in 
Europe. Admiral Nomura, the new Japanese Am- 
bassador, comes to Washington as an exponent of 
moderate views, but there is slight feeling that he 
can alter the course of Japanese policy. Despite the 
embargoes on scrap steel and aviation gasoline, 
American pressure against Japan has thus far been 
sparingly used. During the first ten months of 1940, 
total American exports to Japan increased by 12 
million dollars over the same period for 1939. Ex- 
ports of scrap iron fell by nearly 10 million dollars, 
but shipments of steel products rose by 12 million. 
Exports of petroleum, machine tools and copper all 
showed increases. These figures do not justify occa- 
sional complaints from Tokyo spokesmen of “‘eco- 
nomic pressure” by the United States. 

CIVIL STRIFE IN CHINA. Late in January it 
was revealed that the dispute attending the Fourth 
Route Army* had led to a severe clash between a 
unit of this Chinese Communist force and centrol 
troops. The Fourth Route Army’s rear-guard, with 


Page Two 


ee, 
— 


8,000 troops, headquarters unit, and medical service 
was attacked by 27 central -divisions on January 2 
as it prepared to cross northward over the Yangty 
River. After a nine days’ battle, the Fourth Army’s 
rear-guard was defeated, with 4,000 casualties and 
2,000 prisoners. Its commander and vice-commander 
were captured, and the latter is said to have been 
executed. The Chungking authorities have ordered 
formal disbandment of the Fourth Route Army. The 
greater part of this force is still in being, however 
in the provinces directly north of the Yangtze River. 

Statements by both Chiang Kai-shek and Choy 
En-lai, the chief Communist representative at Chung. 
king, indicate that the conflict is not being allowed 
to develop further at this time. Generalissimo Chiang 
Kai-shek declared that the step was necessitated by 
the “disloyalty” of the Fourth Route Army, but that 
such measures would not be extended to other 
forces, presumably meaning the Eighth Route Army. 
Similarly, although Chou En-lai sharply criticized 
the “injustice” of the central government's action, 
he expressed the hope that unity would continue to 
prevail. 

The outcome of the new Japanese offensive 
launched against the Lunghai Railway in Honan 
province, may shed further light on developments 
in this crucial sphere of Chinese political unity. De 
tachments of the Fourth Route Army, occupying 
southern areas of the province, are cooperating in the 
defense against this drive. Maintenance of China’ 
internal unity in the immediate future depends large 
ly on what is done with the Fourth Army. At pres 
ent, although its divisions are opposing the Japanese 
in scattered areas over several provinces, it has no 
formally recognized status. Its anomalous legal pos: 


tion may lead to further conflict at any time. It is cer | 


tain that Japan alone will gain if civil strife is per 
mitted to continue in China. T. A. Bisson 


DOMINIONS INCREASE AID TO BRITAIN 


While Hitler last week predicted a Nazi victory in 
1941 and seemed to have forced Laval’s reinstate- 
ment in the French Cabinet, the British Empire was 
preparing for a test of strength this spring. Cele- 
brating the eighth anniversary of his accession to 
power, the Fuehrer on January 30 promised that 
Germany's greatly enlarged land, sea and air forces 
would soon launch a gigantic offensive against Brit- 


For your background of defense facts, read: 


U.S. STRATEGIC BASES IN THE ATLANTIC 
U.S. AID TO BRITAIN 

U.S. DEFENSE: MOBILIZATION 

U.S. DEFENSE: RAW MATERIALS 

U.S. ARMY IN TRANSITION 


SPECIAL OFFER: 5 Foreign Policy Reports for $1.00 


ain. In tacit reply to President Roosevelt's lend 
lease proposal, Hitler warned that any ships bringing 
aid to Britain, whether convoyed or not, would be 
torpedoed. The British, expecting surprise attack 
against the British Isles in the near future—perhaps 
in conjunction with a Nazi offensive in the Mediter 
ranean — have taken additional precautions along 
their coasts and renewed their aerial bombardmetl 
of Germany's “invasion ports” in western Franc 
Britain’s war effort, which is receiving extensive sup 
port from Canada, Australia and New Zealand, i 
still hampered by continued dissension in the Unio 
of South Africa, the neutrality of Eire, and the pe 
litical stalemate in India. 


RIOTS IN THE TRANSVAAL. The outbreak 


*Cf. ‘Japan Gains by Thai Invasion of Indo-China,’’ Foreign Policy Bw 
letin, January 17, 1941. 


succe 
of th 
for p 
with 

Mala: 
peate 
have 

again 
on th 
ina | 
Afrik 
predo 
indus: 
wing 
a rep’ 
Gene! 
pro-G 
of D 
imme 
vemb: 
a lon 
the R 
liame: 
Despi 
benef 
Smuts 
active 


sistan 
not y 
paign 
can h 
ary 2 
a 
FOREIG 


Headqua 
Entered 


oad 


o Chiang 
itated by 
but that 
to other 
te Army, 
criticized 
'S action, 
ntinue to 


offensive, 
1 Honan 
lopments 
nity. De 
ccupying 
ing in the 
fF China’s 
ids large 
At pres 
Japanese 
it has no 
egal post 
. It is cer 
fe is pet 
BISSON 


It’s lend 
; bringing 
would be 
e attacks 
—perhaps 
. Mediter 
yns along 
bardment 
n France 
nsive sup 
ealand, i 
he Union 
d the pe 


itbreak of 


»m Policy Bus 


_— a 
eV— 


rioting in Johannesburg on January 31 revealed the 
deep rift in South Africa over participation in the 
war. Johannesburg police had to intervene with tear- 
as bombs and armored cars when Union soldiers 
attempted to break up a meeting of the Ossewa- 
brandwag, an extremist organization of Afrikaners. 
(The Afrikaners are descendants of the Dutch Boers 
and Huguenots, and represent about 60 per cent of 
the white population of 2,000,000). About 140 per- 
sons were injured in the street fights which lasted 
three days. 

Opposition to the war has continued ever since 
September 4, 1939, when the House of Assembly 
defeated — by 80 to 67 — Prime Minister J. M. B. 
Hertzog’s proposal for neutrality, thus ending the 
coalition government. General Hertzog, who was 
succeeded by General Jan C. Smuts, deputy leader 
of the coalition government, continued to agitate 
for peace, and in January 1940 he formed an alliance 
with the extreme nationalist party of Dr. D. F. 
Malan. While the opposition forces have been re- 
peatedly outvoted—by a majority of about 18—they 
have succeeded in rallying many different elements 
against the Smuts government, especially by playing 
on the traditional anti-British sentiment that persists 
ina large portion of the Afrikaner population. The 
Afrikaners, chiefly engaged in agriculture, resent the 
predominance of the English-speaking elements in 
industry, banking and commerce. While the Malan 
wing of the movement continued its campaign for 
a republic free of all ties with the British Empire, 
General Hertzog—as well as a number of openly 
pro-German leaders, including the former Minister 
of Defense, Oswald Pirow — constantly advocated 
immediate peace negotiations with the Axis. On No- 
vember 6, 1940, however, General Hertzog—after 
along struggle with Dr. Malan for leadership in 
the Reunited Nationalist party—resigned from Par- 
liament and announced his retirement from politics. 
Despite this friction, the government, which has 
benefited from the great personal prestige of General 
Smuts, has recruited many thousands of troops for 
active service and has sent large forces northward 
to protect Kenya and Tanganyika and to assist in the 
Empire attack on Ethiopia. Only volunteers, however, 
serve outside the boundaries of the Union. 

THE OTHER DOMINIONS. Athough the as- 
sistance of Canada, Australia and New Zealand is 
hot yet sufficient to be decisive in the spring cam- 
paigns, it may prove of vital importance if Britain 
can hold out until late 1941 and 1942. On Febru- 
ary 2 Prime Minister W. L. Mackenzie King an- 


Page Three 


A 
———— 


nounced that Canada was preparing to complete its 
two divisions already in Britain and to send a third 
division overseas in the near future. The Canadian 
navy, which now comprises 175 ships and 15,319 
men, is expected to reach 413 ships and 26,920 men 
by March 1942, with numerous corvettes, auxiliary 
craft and merchant vessels already on the ways. Mr. 
Mackenzie King declared, moreover, that 25 new ait 
squadrons would be trained, and that the comple- 
ment of 36,000 men now serving in the Common- 
wealth Air Training schools would be doubled. 

The Australian troops which have headed the Em- 
pire’s drive across Libya represent the largest pro- 
portion of some 100,000 men now serving over- 
seas, even though enlistment for the A.I.F. is volun- 
tary. Australia, which introduced conscription last 
July, is preparing a home force of 250,000 men. 
Naval personnel, now numbering over 15,000, has 
trebled since the outbreak of war, while construction 
of three destroyers and many smaller vessels has been 
begun. The government has also started construc- 
tion of a graving dock at Sydney, costing £2,000,000 
and capable of handling the largest capital ships. 
Similar progress has been made in aviation. By Sep- 
tember 1940 the Australian Air Force had accepted 
over 33,000 men for basic training, and had already 
sent pilots to Canada for final training and to Britain 
for active service. New Zealand has also expanded 
its land, sea, and air forces, totaling 80,000 men in 
October 1940. By November 1940, more than 20,000 
New Zealanders were serving overseas. 

The British Dominions, like the United States, are 
finding that time is the most vital element in “‘aid to 
Britain.” They have the advantage of vast resources 
in raw materials and foodstuffs, rapidly expanding 
industrial capacity, and a cooperative project ulti- 
mately capable of turning out pilots by the thousands, 
but they need many more months to become fully 
mobilized for total war. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


“FRANCE UNDER PRESSURE” is the subject of the 
FPA’s broadcast on February 9, over the blue network 
of the National Broadcasting Company from 2:15 to 
2:30 E.S.T. The speaker will be David H. Popper. Please 


let us have your comments. 


The City of Man: A Declaration on World Democracy. 
New York, Viking, 1940. $1.00 


Seventeen intellectual leaders join in an eloquent state- 
ment of the need for revivification of democracy along pro- 
gressive lines, within a federal world-state. Having 
sketched out the generalizations, the group now intends to 
grapple with the more concrete constitutional, economic, re- 
ligious and international issues involved. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 16, FEBRUARY 7, 1941. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


hw 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MicHEeLtes Dean, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act .of March 3, 1879. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


National 


Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


peed btag 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 

FEB. 3.—While Congressional debate on the lease- 
loan bill continues to hold the center of the stage in 
Washington, several developments in the field of 
international relations are attracting the interest of 
this government. The most important of these is the 
regional conference of the River Plate, now meeting 
at Montevideo with the object of strengthening trade 
and commercial relations between Argentina, Brazil, 
Uruguay, Paraguay and Bolivia. 

RIVER PLATE CONFERENCE. The conference, 
which met on January 27, marks a further extension 
of the trend toward regional economic accords be- 
tween the American republics. Just a year ago Argen- 
tina and Brazil signed a significant bilateral trade 
agreement providing for substantial reductions in the 
prevailing tariff duties on agricultural and manufac- 
tured products of the two countries. This was fol- 
lowed, in October 1940, by a supplementary agree- 
ment looking toward the exchange of Brazilian and 
Argentine surpluses, and by similar negotiations be- 
tween Argentina and Chile. In the present confer- 
ence, the scope of the agreements is widened by the 
inclusion of the five countries of the River Plate 
basin, with the United States, Chile and Peru repre- 
sented by official observers. By reducing trade bar- 
riers and removing other commercial and shipping 
restrictions, the five countries hope to compensate, 
at least in part, for loss of their European markets. 

It is only natural that some of the projects under 
discussion at Montevideo should raise the question 
of whether preferential regional accords would con- 
flict with the trade policy of the United States. At 
every Pan-American conference since 1933, the 
United States has urged adherence to the uncondi- 
tional most-favored-nation clause as the basis of 
American commercial policy. At Lima in 1938, Sec- 
retary Hull won unanimous support for a resolution 
embodying the broad principle of nondiscrimination. 
Nevertheless, Latin American states have been re- 
luctant to accept this principle without reservation, 
especially since the outbreak of war in Europe. 

At least three of the major proposals now ad- 
vanced at Montevideo would apparently suspend op- 
eration of the most-favored-nation clause. The first 
of these proposals is a draft convention under which 
Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay would grant prefer- 
ential treatment to the products of Bolivia and Para- 
guay. The second is a resolution introduced by Ar- 
gentina calling for a study of the feasibility of 


establishing a customs union between the five coun, 
tries. The third project, advanced by Uruguay, ig4 
draft convention providing for preferential distriby 
tion of raw materials and manufactured good 
among the same countries. 

In normal times, projects along these lines migh; 
have drawn objections from the United States. |p 
the present situation, however, there is no indication 
that Washington is disturbed by anything under dis. 
cussion at Montevideo. State Department official 
merely smile at newspaper reports suggesting tha 
this government may protest against the customs 
union project—which is at best a remote possibility 
—or the other current proposals. They deny that the 
United States has ever raised objections to the Argen. 
tine-Brazilian trade pact. On the contrary, the 
recognize the necessity for such bilateral accords and 
appear to welcome regional agreements which serve 
to increase inter-American trade. Thus, even though 
the Administration is not yet prepared to announce 
a departure from its most-favored-nation principle, 
it is compelled by the realities to give tacit approval 
to the trend toward regionalism. 

A more immediate question of policy is raised by 
some of the steps which the United States may take 
under the lease-lend bill when Congress has acted on 
that measure. Unofficially, several Latin American 
countries have expressed concern over the provision 
authorizing this country to open its ports to British 
war vessels, and have pointed out that this step run 
counter to the inter-American agreement reached at 
the Panama conference in October 1939, shortly after 
the outbreak of war. At that time the Foreign 
Ministers of the American republics joined in 
affirming “the status of general neutrality,” and te 
solved to prevent their territories from being used # 
bases for belligerent operations, and even to pie 
hibit the ‘‘fitting out” or arming of any ship em 
ployed by one of the belligerents. 

There is little doubt that most, if not all, of the 
Latin American nations are concerned over the threat 
to Western Hemisphere security, and are anxious tt 
strengthen Pan-American solidarity. They are anxiow 
to cooperate closely with the United States. But some 
of them are concerned by the fact that this countty, 
having modified its earlier policy, has not summoneé 
the representatives of the other American republic 
to consult on the new situation. In the interest 0 
hemisphere solidarity, it seems to some observers thal 
this step might well be taken without delay. 

W. T. STONE 


es 
anc 
Minist 
activitt 
ties in 
appear 
was af 
culture 
and w: 
In his 
Church 
and ai 
forwar 
with, v 
garian 
added, 
ground 
Church 
to con 
eastern 
and rer 
suffere 
spite © 
and A 
ficially 
the on 
and me 
army. 
appare: 
kans b 
tives f 
pected 
Ruman 
the Ru: 
BRI’ 
major 
their s; 
Germa: 
tension 


