littee h 
| Novem 
re Assem- 


fact the 
pril 4 he 


ime Min. 
sident of 
1 May 15 
ition that 
rovisional 


rere, per 


ashington 
that. the 
leader in 
y led him 
proval of 
embly on 
Commit. 
evelop on 
that, as 
tes is dis- 
se leader. 


General | 


1e French 
se its soy- 
vernment. 


INT. The 
de Gaulle 
some fe- 
ed, with 
he exiled 
and Not 
en Allied 
ee in the 
he agree 
, not pfo- 
iltimately 
be tanta 
t himself 
, but the 
rstanding 
This un 
yse at his 
1 to move 


tropolitam ' 


BOLLES 


NDS 4 


PARIUDILAL KM 


¥ 
@BNERAL Lik AR 
unty. oF wer 


Bik eks: woas¥ 6 a Entered as 2nd class matter 


datversity ct wis... oe Se 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


You. XXIII, No. 40 


JuLY 21, 1944 


hr. rapid advance of the Russian armies, which 
by July 18 had brought them within a few miles 
of East Prussia, is in sharp contrast to the relatively 
slow and arduous progress made by Allied forces 
in Normandy and Italy due to difficulties of terrain, 
and of fighting overseas without adequate port facili- 
ties. But while military operations in the west, 
as in 1914-18, have taken the form of a war of posi- 
tion, and those in the east of a war of movement 
| over vast spaces, political problems in all theatres of 
battle continue to bear striking similarities. In Po- 
land and Yugoslavia, as in Italy and France, the 
painful transition from a life of terror under Ger- 
| man domination to attempts at self-rule is being 
| gradually effected; and in each instance decisions, 
while inevitably influenced by the attitude of the 
| great powers, are shaped, in the final analysis, by the 
temper of the people who have borne the brunt of 
conquest. 


ARMISTICE TERMS TROUBLE ITALY. Of all 
the countries liberated from the Nazis, Italy offers 
the least hopeful appearance—partly because for 
twenty years its people had been subjected to Fas- 
cist authority, which had prevented the development 

/ of active political opinion except among a very small 
minority who for that very reason have been the 
special object of Nazi reprisals, partly because Italy 
is not only a liberated but also a defeated country. 
The terms of the armistice by which Marshal Ba- 
doglio, on behalf of his country, acknowledged its 
defeat on September 8, 1943, have not yet been made 
public. But reports from Rome indicate that they 
came as a shock to members of the Bonomi cabinet, 
some of whom apparently would like to throw the 
}) Onus for their alleged harshness on the Allies. 

)) Many Italians had hoped that, once their country 
had abandoned Germany, it would be treated as a 


@ co-belligerent, more or less indistinguishable from 


| the United Nations. This hope can hardly be realized 


LIBERATED PEOPLES TACKLE PROBLEMS OF SELF-RULE 


in the immediate future when one recalls the suffer- 
ing inflicted by Italian forces, willingly or unwill- 
ingly, in Albania, Greece and Yugoslavia—not to 
speak of the danger to which British and American 
forces were long exposed by Italo-German control 
of the coasts of the Mediterranean. Sympathy for the 
Italian people, and especially for those who con- 
sistently opposed Mussolini, cannot wipe out over- 
night the memory of Italy's participation in the wat 
at the side of Germany for over two years. No people 
can be held responsible for every action of its rulers. 
But neither can any people be freed from all respon- 
sibility for action taken in its name by its rulers. 
The United States and Britain, concentrated on the 
winning of the war, have not done much about 
planning the rehabilitation of Italy—which in any 
case must await the liberation of its northern prov- 
inces, containing 85 per cent of its industrial estab- 
lishments. But neither have the great powers sought 
to punish the Italians, whom they have treated 
in friendly fashion—although it is true that they 
have not fostered the utilization of Italian soldiers 
on the fighting fronts. 


ITALIANS MUST FACE RESPONSIBILITIES. 
The Italian situation reveals what may happen in the 
case of Germany. It would have been better if the 
armistice terms had been concluded with represen- 
tatives of the Mussolini régime, who would then 
have been clearly saddled with the blame for launch- 
ing a war that could result in such terms. Marshal 
Badoglio might have been regarded, in this respect, 
as the next best choice, since he had been associated 
with Mussolini. Yet that very association caused 
many people in Britain and the United States to de- 
mand his removal at the earliest possible opportun- 
ity, and his replacement by a régime that would 
more closely represent anti-Fascist forces. The 
Bonomi cabinet—although headed by a Premier who 
recalls the days of frustration before 1922, when 


- 


et et Ok, em he 


a SS Saar es. 
——— ate © e=meete O.. Gee eam s 


sy 
\ ail 


CRIES = 


bo 


liberals and socialists failed to prevent Mussolini's 
rise to power—at least meets the wishes of those who 
wanted an Italian cabinet based on representation of 
all the political parties. If now this cabinet should 
have to carry out, even in part, armistice terms the 
Italian people may regard as harsh, its position might 
prove no more stable or enviable than that of the 
Weimar republic. 

The answer to this, however, is not to denounce 
the Allies, as Commander Pacciardi, who served gal- 
lantly in the Spanish civil war on the side of the 
Loyalists, is doing in Voce Republicana, the Republi- 
can organ of Rome. Instead, the leaders of the new 
Italy who have sought the responsibility of governing 
it in this critical transition period must invite the Ital- 
ian people to face as realistically as possible the heri- 
tage left by the Fascist era both in domestic and for- 
eign affairs. It is a sad heritage, and it is obvious that 
Italy will not be able either to restore its economic 
life or to play an active role on the international 
Stage without concrete, and sympathetic, assistance 
on the part of the Allies. But it will be difficult to 
enlist aid abroad for Italy—especially at a time when 
countries which determinedly resisted Hitler are in 
dire need of aid—aunless the Italians, as represented 
by their political leaders, show a determination to 
help themselves. 


POLISH-RUSSIAN DETENTE. Meanwhile, the 
Polish-Russian controversy, which at one time threat- 
ened to bring about a serious rift among the United 
Nations, has assumed a less disturbing aspect. On 
July 8 Wolna Polska, organ of the Union of Polish 
Patriots in Moscow which seemed for a while to claim 
the exclusive right to represent the Polish people, 
said that the next step in Polish-Russian relations 
“apparently lies with Stanislaw Mikolajczyk, and his 
negotiations with the United States will serve as a 
starting point.” The decrease in tension between the 
two countries is due apparently to three main factors. 
First of all, the Allied invasion of France dispelled 
any lingering doubts the Soviet government might 
still have had concerning the all-out military collab- 
oration of Britain and the United States, and notice- 
ably improved the atmosphere of diplomatic nego- 
tiations between the three great powers. Second, the 
Russians, on coming closer to Poland, have discov- 
ered that the Polish underground is both more effec- 
tive and more favorably disposed toward the Polish 


Page Two 


Ss 
———— 


government in London than they had been led to 
expect. And, third, Premier Mikolajczyk left Wash. 
ington with the definite impression that, while the 
United States is ready to facilitate a Polish-Russiag 
reconciliation, it will not go to war with Russia over 
Poland’s territorial claims.* This, however, has not 
alleviated his cabinet’s concern over the status of 
Vilna, which Stalin proclaimed as the capital of 
Soviet Lithuania. The rapprochement of Catholics 
and Communists in Italy is not without bearing on 
the Polish situation. Poland, a predominantly Cath- 
olic country, has been of special concern to the Vati- 
can, which had feared that Russian occupation might 
prove a serious threat to the Catholic Church. Any 
friendly gesture by the Russians toward Poles now 
in Poland contributes to a future understanding be 


stere: 
manu 
Certii 
leaka 
some 


tween Moscow and the Vatican. 

Progress, too, has been made by the new Yugo- 
slav cabinet in London, headed by Dr. Ivan Su- 
bashitch, who has apparently established good work- 
ing relations with Marshal Tito. Contrary to the alle- 
gations of former Yugoslav Ambassador Fotitch 
who on July 8 declared in Washington that the 
Subashitch government was unrepresentative because 
it contained no Serbs, Subashitch—himself a Croat— 
has in the cabinet he formed on July 7 two promi- 
nent Serbs: Professor Sreten Vukosavljevitch, Min- 
ister of Supply, Agriculture, Mines and Forests, and 
Sava Kosanovitch, Minister of Internal Affairs. Mr. 
Fotitch’s statement reflects the views of extremist 
nationalist Serbs who, in contrast to Serbs of liber- 
al views, have resisted the creation of a truly united 
Yugoslavia in which Serbs, Croats and Slovenes 
would collaborate on terms of equality. 

It is encouraging to see that the unremitting ef- 
forts of political leaders, who in the darkest hour did 
not despair of eventually adjusting seemingly hope 
less conflicts of opinion, are slowly beginning to bear 
fruit. These developments offer many lessons for the 
future—not the least of which is that human rela- 
tions, which run the gamut from pity and love to hate 
and cruelty, cannot be fitted into any universal formu- 
la, be it that of revolution or conservatism. The new 
Europe, and the new world, will have in them a little 
of everything—with mixtures of different strength 
brewed in different countries according to circum- 


stances. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


~ *See “Polish Premier Makes Good Impression,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, 
June 23, 1944. 


CONGRESS AUTHORIZES PRESIDENT TO ACT ON OPIUM 


Another move forward in the international control 
of opium was made on June 22, when the Senate 
unanimously passed a resolution first introduced in 
the House by Representative Walter Judd of Minne- 
sota — and passed by the House — authorizing the 
President to urge countries producing opium to limit 
the volume of production strictly to medical and 
scientific purposes. This action follows logically the 


decision of Britain and the Netherlands to discon- 
tinue the government monopoly system for selling 
opium for smoking in their colonial territories in the 
Far East.* Hence, in the post-war period, there will 
be no legal market for export opium except for medi- 
cal and scientific needs. 


*See ‘“‘Dutch and British Pledge End of Opium Smoking Monopoly,” 
Foreign Policy Balletin, January 21, 1944. 


SI’ 
| to ar 
opiur 
and ¢ 
most 
coun 
culty 
oly s 
bein; 
com} 
man’ 
Vlad 
whet 
were 
the ( 
out 
duce 
of Cl 
drus 
if it 
| erat: 

A 
inte 
part 
for 
| by | 
| Stat 
J 


) 


—— 


| 
| 


a 
4 FOR 
| Heac 
& sco 
one 


< 


=e 
n led to 


a 
—e— 


The principal countries to which the President will 


Page Three 


has based its policy is that any production of opium 
in excess of medical and scientific needs constitutes 
a danger and a potential source of illicit traffic, and 
is therefore properly the concern of this govern- 
ment. For smuggled opium flows to that market 
where the highest prices are obtainable as surely as 
water flows downhill. 

There is some evidence that the present govern- . 
ment of Iran will be more receptive to a note from 
the United States than the past administration. The 
matter will be watched with much interest by those 
circles in this country whose duty it is to inform 
American public opinion of the facts on this question. 

The note to India must be framed to meet quite a 
different situation. Since 1935 the Government of 
India has not exported opium for smoking. Occasion- 
al seizures of Indian opium, chiefly from Native 
States sources, have been made in the illicit traffic. 
There is however in India, as in Iran, a large crop 
grown for internal use. The sale of opium is licensed 
by the government for eating, and in certain provinces 
this consumption is very high. The reduction of the 
production of Indian opium to medical and scientific 
needs will be one of the problems to be solved by 
whatever government is established in India after 
the war. 

HELEN HOWELL MOORHEAD 


NEW RESEARCH STAFF MEMBER 

The Association announces with pleasure the ap- 
pointment to the Research Department of Olive 
Holmes. Miss Holmes received a B.A. at Barnard 
College; an M.A. at Columbia University in interna- 
tional law and relations; and spent a year and a half 
at the University of Chile Law School studying the 
legal status of women and the family in Latin Amer- 
ica. Before returning to this country in June 1944, 
Miss Holmes spent six months visiting Argentina, 
Uruguay, Paraguay, Brazil and Colombia. 


The Fruits of Fascism, by Herbert L. Matthews. New 
York, Harcourt Brace, 1943. $3.00 
One of the most interesting expositions of the movement 
and its failure by one who has long known and liked the 
Italian people. / 


Palestine, Land of Promise, by Walter Clay Lowdermilk. 
New York, Harper, 1944. $2.50 
A well-known soil conservationist praises the Zionists’ 
record in Palestine and estimates that a land reclamation 
project would make it possible for an additional four 
million refugees to settle there. 


The Lion Rampant, by L. de Jong and Joseph W. F. 
Stoppelman. New York, Querido, 1944. $3.00 


The inspiring story of the heroic stand of the Nether- 
lands under Nazi occupation. 


t Washe) address the notes contemplated in the resolution are 
rhile the Yugoslavia, Turkey, Iran, India, and Afghanistan. 
-Russiag Afghanistan opium plays only a small part in the 
$Sia Over} international market at present. However, its produc- 

has not tion will become important if its neighbors reduce 
tatus of their crop, thus making smuggling from Afghanistan 
pital of F more profitable for the illicit trader. No part of the 
-atholics | world is too remote for the activities of smugglers. 
aring on Yugoslavia and Turkey have had, in the past, a joint 
ly Cath. marketing and sales arrangement, effectively admin- 
the Vati- istered. All opium from this area was sold for the 
on might ) manufacture of drugs under the Import and Export 
rch. Any Certificate system, and there was no considerable 
les NOW Tieakage of this material into the illicit traffic for 
ding be: | ome years before the war. 

SITUATION IN IRAN. Iran has never adhered 

NV YUgO- |i) any of the opium treaties, with the result that 
van Sur ¥ opium produced in that country has been sold to any 
od work- and all buyers. Iranian opium has been found in al- 
the alle- | most all seizures of illicit opium smuggled into this 

Fotitch } tuntry and Canada. It was a major source of difh- 
that the} culty in the Far East, when the government monop- 
- because oly systems were attempting to prevent opium from 
Croat— I}eing smuggled into their territories, as “bootleg” 
> promir Fcompetition for government sales. Shipments of 
th, Min-Fmany tons left Bushire, consigned ostensibly to 
ests, and | Vladisvostok, but actually appeared in every port 
its. Mt. }where there was a smuggling market. These facts 
-xtremust Twere made public year after year in the meetings of 
of libet- f the Opium Advisory Committee at Geneva, but with- 
y united f out effect on Iranian policy. The illicit market pro- 
Slovenes f duced more revenue, with no administrative problem 

of control, than any share of the regular market for 
tting ef dmg manufacture which Iran might hope to receive 
hour did {if jt had accepted the system of international coop- 
ly hope | eration and control. 
gto beat | Another difficulty in the Iranian situation is the 
s for the J internal use of opium for smoking and, in certain 
an rela- parts of the country, for eating. Production of opium 
€ to hate } for internal use by its own nationals might be claimed 
1 formu- by Iran to be a matter of no concern to the United 
The new "| States. But the main principle on which this country 
n a little 
strength }| JUST PUBLISHED— 

ea OIL: AN ECONOMIC KEY TO PEACE 
DEAN by Blair Bolles 
icy Bulletin, + 

| 25¢ 
July 1 issue of ForEIGN Poticy REPORTS 

» discon- REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
r selling a Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 
es in the | _—— 
here will 


‘or medi- 


Monopoly,” 


{ FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 40, Juty 21, 1944, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National. 


| Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lugr, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es DEAN, Editor. Entered as 


& ‘tcond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


me month for change of address on membership publications. 


ze 181 


Please allow at lease 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union lavwe 


gee? 


_ 


oo © off .- = 


Washington News Letter 


me gueb bien 


ALLIED ACTION AGAINST ARGENTINA DETERRED BY WAR NEEDS 


Bellicose statements and actions on the part of 
the Farrell régime in Argentina have caused con- 
cern in Washington lest a South American war break 
out as an epilogue to war in Europe or Asia. In June 
the Farrell régime created a National Defense Coun- 
cil, whose purpose is to fit the whole Argentine econ- 
omy into a military plan. On May 23 the War Min- 
istry decided to set up a new army division, the 
Seventh, which is to be stationed along the Para- 
guayan and Brazilian borders. On July 1 the Argen- 
tine navy placed a contract for 100 radios with 
Siemens-Schukert, a contracting firm on the Allied 
black list. All these measures have had a disturbing 
effect on. inter-American harmony and the program 
of the United Nations. 

A PROBLEM FOR U.S. DIPLOMACY. The de- 
sirability of discouraging a régime with such tenden- 
cies is plain, especially when the tendencies are com- 
plemented by a » aga of repression of domestic 
rights that includes tolerance of anti-Semitic out- 
bursts and the institution of severe controls over edu- 
cation, press and labor. But the United States is pro- 
ceeding cautiously in dealing with Argentina, be- 
cause the conduct of the war and the need for com- 
plete victory at the earliest possible moment are the 
. decisive factors today in our decisions concerning 
any international issue. Argentina’s economic use- 
fulness to the Allies complicates the formulation of 
any policy aimed at weakening the present Buenos 
Aires government. This dilemma of having to choose 
between the adjustment of problems raised by the 
current war and of problems that might be raised 
by a possible war in the future fogs the atmosphere 
in which officials in Washington are conferring with 
Norman Armour, American Ambassador to Argen- 
tina. Mr. Armour has been in an anomalous position 
since General Edelmiro Farrell assumed the Presi- 
dency on February 28, because the United States de- 
clined to recognize his government, and has there- 
fore had no diplomatic relations with it. 

ARGENTINA'S ECONOMIC TRUMPS. For the 
conduct of the current war the United States and 
Britain need beef, linseed and corn produced by 
Argentina, and the advocates of economic sanctions 
are unable to offer the Allies any substitute source of 
those commodities. Another factor that affects our 
policy is the need for Anglo-American cooperation 
with respect to Argentina. Britain hesitates to take 
drastic steps which might cause the Argentine 
régime, in reprisal, to expropriate the extensive Brit- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


ish properties within its borders. However, Sir David 
Kelley, British Ambassador to Buenos Aires, who 
stopped in Washington on his way to London, will 
submit to his government a summary of this coun- 
try’s attitude and of events in Argentina. The Farrell 
régime is clearly anti-foreign, and it is quite pos. 
sible that it may expropriate foreign properties 
whether Britain acts or not. 

A third deterrent to action on the Argentine ques. 
tion is the hope which still exists in some official 
quarters that the Farrell régime will mend its ways, 
abandon its bellicosity, and embrace inter-American 
collaboration. Those who hold this view were en- 
couraged when, on July 5, Juan Domingo Perdn, 
Argentine War Minister, became Vice President and, 
on July 6, General Luis Cesar Perlinger, Minister of} 
the Interior, retited from the cabinet. Perlinger is an 
intransigent foe of the United States, while Perén 
has fostered a belief that he favors the United Na. 
tions and inter-Americanism in foreign policy and 
a return to constitutionalism in domestic affairs. On 


| NA 


June 10, however, he made a belligerent speech at) » 


La Plata which the State Department subsequently! 
publicized, and on May 2 sponsored the appoint} ‘ 
ment of Orlando Peluffo as Foreign Minister. Peluffo 
fenced for Argentina in the 1936 Olympic Games at 
Berlin, where his friendship for the Nazis led the 
Argentine Sporting Federation to bar him from 
sports activities for five years. 


SUMNER WELLES INFLUENTIAL. A fourth | a 


obstacle to a clean-cut decision on ways and means 
of implementing our policy of nonrecognition is the 
natural hesitation of the Roosevelt Administration, 
which has fostered the Good Neighbor Policy, to 
make any move that could justifiably be condemned | 
as intervention in the domestic affairs of another 
American republic. On May 29 former Under Secre- 
tary of State Sumner Welles, urging recognition of 
Farrell, said that forceful action to cause changes in 
existing régimes in Latin America might inflame 
latent nationalism. It is noteworthy that on June 2) | 
the Farrell régime required newspapers and radio 


stations in Argentina to report Mr. Welles’ remarks. | , 


The influence of Mr. Welles remains strong at the 
State Department, but Department advocates of 
forceful action contend that stern measures are pet- 
missible because the internal policy of President 
Farrell is injurious to our interests. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


