govern. 
es in an 
National 
Carol's 
tion of 
ation ip 
cluding 
suard of 
dictator. 
nd Italy. 
no be 
eon 
ining 66 
‘ed with 
for the 
ed ina 
NS, con- 
-rnment, 
rust Oc. 
Stic and 
e forma- 
rve asa 


DEAN 


National 
I, $1.00; 


m for re 
orforms a 
work now 
nizations. 


lew York, 


, a noted 
knesses of 
italist so- 
lalities of 
make the 
also sees 
t socialist 


by Lionel 


ymic plan- 
that plan- 
bly to the 
nt aggra- 
ners” will 
y criticize 
relatively 


—— 


d. National 
i-class moattef 


PERIODICAL ROOM 


arn 


_| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Vou. XVII, No. 11 


JANUARY 7, 1938 


oe 


REBUILDING THE U.S. MERCHANT MARINE 


General Library 


by Clarence N. Weems, Jr. lin twawae  4< Me ns 
LR) Wika vUroicy of Michigan 
The deplorable condition of American shipping confronts 
us with the question of government versus private owner- An: 7 ie 
ship of the merchant marine. This report discusses the nn Arbor, Nich. 
Merchant Marine Act of 1936, the labor problems, and 
the subsidy system, as well as the justification and the 
cost of a first-class merchant fleet. 
January 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents a copy 
RANCE is experiencing a recrudescence of strikes and radical supporters of the government is widen- 
indicative of the political and economic unrest ing in both countries. 
which continues to trouble that country. The collec- The only encouraging factor in the French eco- 
tive labor agreements which last summer were ex- nomic situation is the immediate financial outlook. 
tended by law for six months are now coming up for Owing in part to the collapse of stock prices in Wall 
renewal. With the cost of living rapidly catching up Street, about 10,000,000,000 francs of French cap- 
with the wage increases won during 1936 and early ital was repatriated during the last months of 1937. 
1937 labor is once more agitating for higher pay, With the additional foreign exchange obtained 
while capital—handicapped by high costs and small through a railway loan of 200,000,000 Swiss francs 
turnover—is resisting these new demands to the limit and another credit of 50 to 150 million florins se- 
of its resources. Strikes, sometimes employing the cured in Amsterdam, the French Treasury was able 
familiar sit-down technique, have affected depart- to pay off the £40,000,000 loan which fell due in 
ment stores, transport and a number of industrial London during December without having recourse 
plants and mines. Some of them have already been to the gold holdings of the Bank of France. The 
settled through official intervention. The Popular government bond market improved sufficiently in 
Front government, although resting on the support the second half of 1937 so that the Treasury needed 
of the workers, dealt firmly with a strike of public to utilize only 5 billion of the 15 billion francs in 
utility employees which broke out in the Paris dis- new advances which it was authorized in June to 
trict on December 29. Partly by the promise of pay draw on the central bank. While the ordinary budget 
concessions and partly by the threat of mobilizing for 1938 recently approved by Parliament shows a 
strikers into the army. the cabinet ended the strike slight surplus and the present condition of the 
after only one day. Treasury is not alarming, it is expected that large 
In many respects the situation in France is not —S — ” - a - ee = — 
unlike that in the United States. Both countries Craorcinary DURgE Sad te i ae 
eS . ernments, colonies and railways. Whether these 
ave experienced a period of New Deal reforms fol- me . 
fa a : + ' needs amount to 20 billion, as estimated by Finance 
lowed by a “pause” or “breathing spell” designed “er 1: 
te ae EE *¥ Migs Minister Bonnet, or up to 46 billion, as claimed by 
Iness ¢ Oo F , 
ihe e my Preside £24 a J ] ngetnsieaha . di the government’s opponents, they may well provoke 
lative. g y ¢ - « ; - : : 
oes ts , Gh pees "a so cg ne ” another financial crisis unless substantial business 
r y S TOV y o . 
ust between a an _ ernment which ham recovery intervenes. 
economic revival; and the inevitable result has Unfortunately production and domestic trade are 
een mutual recrimination. While the more radical but little above the extremely low levels of the pre- 
proponents of the American New Deal are begin- ceding year. Foreign trade has improved gradually, 
ning to accuse capital of “going on strike,” many but the import surplus for the first eleven months of 
Socialists in France are champing at the bit, impa- 1936 was twice as large as that of the year before 
tient of the restraints imposed on them by the con- and, if continuous, is likely to be a heavy drain on 


setvative course of the second Popular Front min- 
istry. Undoubtedly the rift between the conservative 


the balance of international payments. The report of 
the committee of inquiry on production, appointed 


last August, was finally issued on December 16. 
This report, largely the product of compromise be- 
tween the conflicting views of labor and capital, 
made a few clear-cut recommendations. Most im- 
portant were its proposals—which were promptly 
carried out—to modify the operation of the 40-hour- 
week law so as to meet the needs of industries sea- 
sonal in character or suffering from lack of qualified 
workmen. Rationalization of production and mar- 
keting, as well as improved credit facilities, were 
also recommended. On the whole, however, the re- 
port failed to dispel the general atmosphere of 
malaise which is retarding a business upturn. 


If the Chautemps cabinet has managed to remain 
in power under these unfavorable circumstances, this 
may be largely attributed to lack of any practicable 
alternative. The extreme Left is disunited, negotia- 
tions between Communists and Socialists for a single 
proletarian party having been broken off due to 
mutual distrust. The Right is still torn by dissension 
to which the libel trials centering about Colonel de 
la Rocque and his discredited French Social party 
have contributed not a little. Thus Premier Chau- 
temps may continue almost indefinitely to steer his 
rather cautious course in the troubled waters of 


French politics. JouHN C. pEWILDE 


RUMANIA TURNS FASCIST 


With theatrical suddenness King Carol of Ru- 
mania—who only three weeks earlier had welcomed 
French Foreign Minister Delbos to Bucharest—de- 
cided on December 28 to entrust Octavian Goga, 
leader of the National Christian party, with the task 
of forming a cabinet. This party had obtained only 
9 per cent of the popular vote in the general elec- 
tions of December 21*—as compared with 38.5 per 
cent for the National Liberals, 20 for the National 
Peasants, and 15 for the Fascist Iron Guard. The 
National Christians champion anti-Semitism, anti- 
parliamentarism, adherence to the Rome-Berlin axis, 
rupture of diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union 
and gradual separation from France. 


It is believed that Carol, fearing the ascendancy 
of the Iron Guard—which shares the pro-fascist and 
anti-Semitic principles of the National Christian 
party, but is prevented from collaborating with it by 
personal differences between the leaders—chose the 
lesser of two evils in the hope of retaining power in 
his own hands. The Goga cabinet, however, bids fair 
to out-fascist the fascists. One of its first acts was to 
attack the Jews, who predominate in trade, finance 
and the professions, and whose ranks were swollen 
by an influx of non-Rumanian Jews after the World 
War; as well as the “monopoly” exercised by 


***Fascism Gains in Rumania,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, December 31, 1937. 


Page Two 


re 
— 


foreign capital over the country’s industry and na. 
tural resources. Rumania’s anti-Semitic and anti. 
foreign sentiment received political expression as 
early as 1910, when Alexander Cuza—now an “‘elder 
statesman’’—formed the National Democratic party 
which in 1935 merged with the National Agrarians 
of Octavian Goga to form the National Christian 


party. Members of the party’s army, known as Lance 
Bearers, have already been posted in each of Ru. 
mania’s 61 administrative districts under the com. 
mand of its most violent anti-Semitic leaders. Three 
prominent democratic newspapers in Bucharest have 
been suppressed, and protests against this measure 
ignored. The government's program is reported to 
include revocation of the citizenship of all Jews who 
emigrated to Rumania after the World War; curtail. 
ment of the rights of Jewish traders and professional 
men; confiscation of Jewish landholdings; and prac 
tical exclusion of Jews from Rumanian journalism, 
which is to be controlled by a Propaganda Ministry 
on the German model. 


The extent to which this fascist program can be 
reconciled with the pro-French orientation which has 
been the cornerstone of Rumanian foreign policy since 
the war remains to be seen. Former Foreign Minister 
Titulescu, staunch advocate of collaboration with 
France and the U.S.S.R., has offered M. Maniu, lead- 
er of the National Peasant party, his aid in fighting 
the cabinet’s fascist tendencies. And it is reported 
that Goga’s War Minister, General Antonescu, took 
office only on condition that Rumania’s policy of 
collaboration with Western powers would remain 
unaltered. Yet Rumania, like Poland and Yugo- 
slavia, seems bent on following a course inde- 
pendent of France, even at the price of being 
drawn into the orbit of Germany and Italy. This 
course threatens French influence in Eastern Ev- 
rope, and may result in the isolation of Czecho 
Slovakia, last outpost of democracy in th | 
A bloc of fascist or semi-fascist dictators Now 
stretches from the Baltic to the Mediterranean—all 
imbued with hatred of communism and Jews, twin 
scapegoats for economic and social evils which the 
dictators have made little effort to correct. The dan- 
ger is that these dictatorships may, to their own ulti- 
mate peril, become instruments in Germany's plans 


for eastward expansion. Wera_ MIcHELES DEAN 


Theory and Practice in International Relations, by Salva- 
dor de Madariaga. Philadelphia, University of Penn- 
sylvania Press, 1937. $1.50 


Despite the anarchy inherent in the existence of some 
60-odd national sovereignties, the author is convinced that 
ultimately the “organic” view of the world as one com- 
munity will prevail. In his opinion the primary task will 
be to recruit a “powerful élite of world citizens” who would 
create the sense of international solidarity needed to guide 
and inspire statesmen. 


Y 


————— 


JAN. 
voting 
proble: 
legisla 
govert 
his bri 
for at 


of “ac 


A\ 
fnict O 
somew 
cago s 
away | 
spirit 
this si 
said: * 
follov 
cratic 
seem, 
tional 
cratic 
words 
those 
or ha: 


hristian 
S Lance 
of Ru- 
1€ com- 
. Three 
ost have 
measure 
yrted to 
ws who 
curtail. 
essional 


ad prac- 
rnalism, 


Ministry 


. can be 
hich has 
icy since 
Minister 
on with 
iu, lead- 
fighting 
reported 
cu, took 
olicy of 
| remain 
1 Yugo- 
se inde- 
f being 
ily. This 
rern Eu- 


/ | 
\LZCCh0- 


how 
1ean —all 
ws, twin 
vhich the 
The dan- 
own ulti- 
y's plans 
DEAN 


by Salva- 
of Penn- 


-e of some 
rinced that 
; one com- 


Washin gton News Letter 


—E—_ 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JaN. 4—The President’s Message. While de- 
yoting most of his annual message to the domestic 
roblems of a balanced agriculture, wages and hours 
legislation, labor conditions and the relation between 
government and business, President Roosevelt, in 
his brief reference to world affairs, paved the way 
for a renewed drive to secure Congressional support 
for a “positive” foreign policy backed by a program 
of “adequate national defense.” 


Avoiding any reference to the Far Eastern con- 
flict or to specific nations, the President returned, 
somewhat more cautiously, to the theme of his Chi- 
cago speech in condemning the “trend in the world 
away from the observance both of the letter and the 
spirit of treaties.” Placing primary responsibility for 
this situation at the door of the dictatorships, he 
said: “Disregard for treaty obligations seems to have 
followed the surface trend away from the demo- 
cratic representative form of government. It would 
seem, therefore, that world peace through interna- 
tional agreements is most safe in the hands of demo- 
ctatic representative governments—or, in other 
words, peace is most gravely jeopardized in and by 
those nations where democracy has been discarded 
ot has never developed.” 


After referring to past efforts to achieve disarm- 
ament, the President declared: “But in a world of 
high tension and disorder, in a world where stable 
civilization is actually threatened, it becomes the re- 

nation which strives for peace at 
ith and among others to be strong 
enough to assure the observance of those funda- 
mentals of peaceful solution of conflicts which are 
the only ultimate basis for orderly existence. 


‘ , 
. i:, { 
ponsidility OF eaci 


nome a d peace W 


“Resolute in our determination to respect the 
tights of others, and to command respect for the 
tights of ourselves, we must keep ourselves ade- 
quately strong in self-defense.” 


The first test of how far the President can hope 
to carry Congress with him will come on January 10, 
when the Ludlow war referendum comes before the 
House. While the referendum proposal does not 
bear directly on current issues of foreign policy, a 
considerable number of Congressmen are supporting 
the measure as a symbol of protest against what they 
tegard as the “dangerous” and “provocative” course 


on which the President has embarked. Supporters of 
the resolution hope to win a majority on the motion 
to “receive consideration,” even though the amend- 
ment itself, which requires a two-thirds vote, is sub- 
sequently defeated. Whatever the outcome, the de- 
bate will be followed closely by the Administration 
and the State Department for possible indications of 


the trend of public opinion. WiLuiAM T. STONE 


Retreat from silver policy. President Roosevelt's 
New Year’s Eve proclamation reducing the Treas- 
ury’s purchase price of newly mined domestic sil- 
ver from 77.57 to 64.64 an ounce, and ex- 
tending purchase for another year, is interpreted 
here as at least a partial retreat from an attempt to 
raise and stabilize the value of silver. The new price, 
which is the same as that established in the Presi- 
dent’s original proclamation of December 21, 1933, 
is 13 cents less than the Treasury price which has 
prevailed since April 24, 1935, but is still approxti- 
mately 20 cents above the figure at which the Treas- 
ury can buy foreign silver in the New York market. 


cents 


The Treasury has never been happy in carrying 
out the mandate of the Congressional silver and in- 
flationary blocs which forced through the Thomas 
amendment to the Agricultural Adjustment Act and 
the Silver Purchase Act of 1934. But in continuing 
to pay a premium of 20 cents an ounce to the do- 
mestic silver producers—equivalent to a Federal sub- 
sidy of approximately $9,000,000—the Administra- 
tion again recognizes the political influence of this 
small but entrenched bloc. Although the interna- 
tional silver accord of 1933 expired on January 1, 
1938, the United States has continued for six months 
its undertaking to buy part of China's silver stocks 
and extended for a provisional period of one month 
agreements to purchase part of the output of Canada 
and Mexico, probably at a price approximating world 
market levels. Of the 1,280,677,000 ounces of silver 
purchased by the Treasury from December 1933 to 
June 30, 1937 at a total cost of $758,000,000, 1,015,- 
828,000 ounces represented foreign silver. 


Though the President's action brings the price of 
domestically produced silver nearer to parity with 
the world price, observers are asking which of the 
original reasons advanced for the silver-buying pro- 
gram are still valid, apart from its obvious purpose 
of helping to sustain the domestic mining industry. 


— 


= Page Four 


For few, if any, of the original claims can be 
sustained today. Although the policy was to raise the 
purchasing power of silver-standard countries, China 
was driven off silver after increases in the world 
price led to depletion of its currency reserves and the 
disruption of its banking and commerce. American 
trade with the Orient, which the silver program was 
to protect,was, instead, seriously impaired. Mexico, 
the largest silver producing country, benefited di- 
rectly from the high prices obtaining for the metal. 


By contributing to the stability of the Mexican e| 4” 
change rate, it has in part. subsidized that couritrys 
prosperity. Finally, far from stabilizing the price of 
silver, the program has been accompanied by greater 
fluctuations than at any time in recent history. 

Despite the acknowledged failure of these aims} You. 3 


— FO 


there is no indication yet that the Administration js} ~~~ 


prepared, at least in the immediate future, to go s9 
far as to press for repeal of the silver legislation. 
S. Bourcin 


RESIGNATION OF MISS ESTHER G. OGDEN 


It is with deep regret that the Board of Directors 
announces the resignation, because of ill health, of 
Miss Esther G. Ogden as secretary of the Foreign 
Policy Association. Joining the staff in 1921, Miss 
Ogden devoted fifteen years to the work of the As- 
sociation, first as membership secretary, then, upon 
the resignation of Miss Christina Merriman in 1928, 
as secretary of the F.P.A. Not only because of her 
length of service but also because of her rare wis- 
dom, warmth of friendship and unflagging faith in 
the continuing possibilities of the organization, Miss 
Ogden was a pillar of strength for the F.P.A. What- 
ever success the Foreign Policy Association has 
achieved during that period has been enhanced in- 
calculably by the insight, the poise and the rare capa- 


cities which Miss Ogden contributed to every task 
of the organization. 


The Board of Directors expects to announce Miss 


Ogden’s successor in a few weeks. In the meantime} = 


it has named Miss Carolyn Martin as acting secre. 


tary. Mr. Charles A. Thomson, while remaining aj —— 


research associate, has been placed in charge of ad. 
ministration, to relieve Mr. Buell of some of his 
duties. Mr. Maurice Wertheim, a banker well known 
for his cultural interests, has been elected a member! 
of the Board of Directors, while Rear Admiral Rich 
ard E. Byrd, who is taking an active interest in intet- 
national affairs, and Mr. Henry Toll, director of the 
Council of State Governments, have become mem: 
bers of the National Committee. 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


The Memoirs of Sir Ronald Storrs. New York, Putnam’s, 

1937. $5.00 

A British proconsul, whose official career spans the 
period in which his nation’s hegemony was cemented in the 
Near East, presents between the covers of a single book the 
highlights of a life of public service spent largely in Egypt, 
Palestine and Cyprus. As a personal record by one whom 
T. E. Lawrence called “the great man among us,” it is 
notable for its insight into the problems of colonial gov- 
ernment, its inimitable pen portraits of Storrs’ talented 
superiors and associates, and its vivid demonstration of 
the possibility of combining a rich cultural life with 
pressing administrative duties. Particularly timely is the 
trenchant discussion of the Palestine problem. 
Inside Europe, by John Gunther. New York, Harper’s, 

1937. $3.50 

A completely revised edition of a deservedly popular 
non-fiction best-seller, containing new chapters on the 
Soviet trials and civil war in Spain, as well as new ma- 
terial on the Mediterranean crisis, the Rome-Berlin axis 
and other topics. Although the mass of detail, not all of it 
significant, marshaled by Mr. Gunther sometimes makes 
it difficult to see the forest for the trees, his book remains 
a valuable behind-the-scenes analysis of European politics. 
Swords into Ploughshares: An Account of the American 

Friends Service Committee, 1917-1937, by Mary Hoxie 

Jones. New York, Macmillan, 1937. $3.00 

A history of the inspiring service of the Quakers, written 
by the daughter of Rufus M. Jones. Its combination of fact 


d 


and fiction, although at times uneven and uncritical, af. 
fords an interesting survey of the widespread influence of 
a small but devoted group. 


The Enemy Within: The Inside Story of German Sabotage) ’ 
in America, by Captain Henry Landau. New York, 
Putnam, 1937. $3.00 
A thorough but somewhat Hollywoodesque description of 

wartime sabotage which concludes that the United States 

needs a more efficient secret service. It contains an et 
haustive examination of the Black Tom and Kingsland ex 
plosions, and the subsequent litigation over damages. 

The Dairy Industry in Canada, by H. S. Innis. 
Haven, Yale University Press, 1937. 

The Railway Interrelations of the United States and Cam 
ada, by William J. Wilgus. New Haven, Yale Univer 
sity Press, 1937. $3.00 
These two exhaustive studies, prepared under the diree 

tion of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 

are indispensable for the specialist in Canadian-Americal 
relations. 


A Diplomatic History of the United States, by Samud 
Flagg Bemis. New York, Henry Holt, 1936. 


New 


$3.75 oi 
strug 
its le; 
econ 
sion 

years 
pace 


$5.00 | limit 


W 


progr 
advar 
Since 


An outstanding survey of American diplomacy, com and 


bining scholarship with vigorous style. 
overly patriotic, as in its whitewashing of our relations 
with Mexico. Arguing cogently that our imperial thrusts 
into the Far East since 1898 have been a grievous mis 


It is occasionallf§ his ¢ 


Taka 
Toky 


take, Bemis urges withdrawal to a stronger continental close 
position and settlement of outstanding issues with Japal) army 


| back 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 11, JaNuaRY 7, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Natione 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonD Lgstig BUELL, President; VERA MIcHELeS DEAN, Editor. Entered as second-class mattt and 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. army 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


coup 


