1 desires 
- Silesia, 
eir state. 
t giving 
‘he chief 
Poles is 
officials, 
iel, who 
16, 1943 
m; Min- 
ambassa- 
Lazimierz 
ef. The 
ypen dis. 
erence in 
>, has yet 
National 
ring Sos 
y- Miko- 
F the Po 
yr him if 
d not as 


>. Miko- 
SCOW, ac 
cago pfo- 
ner Orle- 
onference 
was here. 
1 westem 
ussia felt 
the Rus 


und is to 


‘ther con- 
of diplo- 
“abor”’ of 
id almost 
cred with 
s chief of 
t the pos- 
land. But 
future of 
sian, not 
2 Admin- 
e Russian 
for coop- 


BOLLES 


olicy Bulletin, 


V DS 


A 
ee | 


~~ 


University of Uichigan 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


ju. 3 19M 


Ann Arbor, Michiran 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vout. XXIII, No. 37 


JuNE 80, 1944 


ALLIES SEEK TO END PRO-AXIS TIES OF FINNS AND CHETNIKS 


‘AS the Red Army continues the offensive it began 

in White Russia on June 23—counterbalancing 
in the east the Allies’ invasion of Europe from the 
west—another portion of the Anglo-American-Soviet 
strategy planned at Teheran last December is being 
carried into effect. Meanwhile, on the diplomatic 
front, the United States and Britain are waging po- 
litical warfare alongside the U.S.S.R. against Fin- 
land and the Mikhailovitch faction in Yugoslavia 
on the assumption that no nation or group coop- 
erating with Germany, regardless of its motives, can 
avoid falling into the enemy camp. 


LOCAL WARS RULED OUT. The Finnish gov- 
ernment has always contended that its present war 
with Russia is a strictly local struggle against an 
age-old enemy, and that Finland entered into mil- 
itary cooperation with Germany for purely defensive 
purposes entirely unconnected with the conflict be- 
tween the Axis and the Allies. This thesis, however, 
proved unacceptable to Britain toward the end of 
1941, and it has become increasingly unsatisfactory 
to the United States during the past two years. Yet 
the United States has hesitated to break off relations 
with Finland because of this country’s old friendship 
with the pre-war Finnish democracy, and the State 
Department has tried instead to treat Finland as a 
special case. The success of this effort depended, 
however, on the possibility that the Finnish war 
could be isolated from the Allied struggle against 
the Nazis—and this no longer proved feasible after 
the breakdown of Russo-Finnish peace negotiations. 

One of the important indications that the Finnish 
war overlapped with our war against Germany ap- 
peared in 1942, when the Department of Justice dis- 
covered that the Finnish information center in New 
York City was dispensing pro-Nazi and anti-Russian 
information strikingly similar to that heard over the 
Berlin radio. An order was given to close the office, 
and at the same time the travel and publicity privileges 


of members of the Finnish legation in Washington 
were curtailed. Then, as German submarines and 
planes based on Petsamo attacked lend-lease cargoes 
bound for Murmansk, and as Nazi divisions in Fin- 
land hindered full-scale Russian attacks on the eastern 
front, the local and world wars became inextricably 
linked. When, therefore, the U.S.S.R. offered definite 
armistice terms to Finland in the spring of 1944, 
the State Department joined with Russia in urging 
the Finnish government to get out of the war. Al- 
though Washington realized that the reparations 
figure of six hundred million dollars named by Mos- 
cow was enormous for a country of less than four 
million people, it believed that, once Finland ac- 
cepted the principle of reparation, the Helsinki gov- 
ernment—with American aid—might be able to 
whittle down the Russian bill. 


When the Finns refused to accept the Russian 
terms and reports circulated in the Finnish press that 
relations between the United States and Russia were 
so strained that the State Department was on the 
verge of breaking with the U.S.S.R., Washington 
experienced increasing difficulties in reconciling its 
special policy toward Finland with its need for Al- 
lied solidarity against Germany. Accordingly, on 
June 3, Washington put additional pressure on 
Finland to accept an armistice by blacklisting Fin- 
nish business firms with connections in the United 
States, and officially referring on June 10 to the 
Finnish government's censorship of a pro-Allied 
newspaper as indicative of its “pro-German sympa- 
thies.” The climax of the State Department's refusal 
to countenance anti-Russian activities in the present 
decisive phase of the war against Germany was 
reached when Minister Procope was handed his pass- 
port on June 16 for actions “inimical” to the interests 
of the United States. 


Although the armistice proposals reportedly made 
by Russia on June 20 appear to be essentially the 


we 
My 
Mt: 
ae 
iy * 
By 
| 
tt 
ee 
Ve 
it Al 


-_- 


——_—_—_—_—_—_—_—=—= 
same as those presented three months ago, the two 
main obstacles in the way of a Russo-Finnish agree- 
ment persist. One of these obstacles consists of the 
pro-Nazi sympathies of some members of the present 
Finnish government headed by President Ryti and 
Germany's pressure on Finland to remain in the war. 
Assuming this difficulty could be overcome by a 
German withdrawal, however, there would still re- 
main a second difficulty: the Finns’ widespread and 
centuries-old fear of Russian expansion, which might 
be overcome if Moscow were to give the Finns con- 
crete assurances that it will adopt a good-neighbor 
policy in the post-war period. 

YUGOSLAV IMPASSE BROKEN. Allied diplo- 
macy has proved more successful in conciliating the 
Opposing sides in Yugoslavia than it has been in 
bringing the Finns and Russians together. According 
to an announcement made by Marshal Tito on June 
18, a compromise has been reached by the Partisans 
and King Peter’s new Premier, Ivan Subasitch, end- 
ing the impasse which has existed between the two 
sides for two and a half years. Although the agree- 
ment is reported to involve such important pro- 
visions as the creation of a new cabinet-in-exile in- 
cluding Partisan members and the holding of a post- 
war election to determine whether or not the people 
of Yugoslavia want a monarchy, its single most sig- 
nificant condition is that General Mikhailovitch will 
no longer be a member of King Peter’s regime. The 
Chetnik leader symbolized the pro-Serb character of 
previous Yugoslav governments-in-exile, since his 
military organization is almost exclusively Serbian 


Page Two 


——ee 
——, 


in membership and he personally favors a greater 
Serbia rather than a united -South-Slav state. The 
main reason he has been dropped from his position 
as Minister of War, however, is due not to the na. 
ture of his political views and the relatively smal] 
size of his forces, but to the fact that the Chetniks 
have cooperated with the Nazis. 


Adjustment of the Yugoslav problem—one of the 
most complicated and seemingly hopeless European 
tangles—has been achieved on the basis of far-reach- 
ing concessions that would have seemed unlikely 
even a few weeks ago. On the one hand, King Peter 
completely abandoned his former pro-Serb and anti- 
Partisan political leaders on May 20 and named as 
Premier on June 1 Subasitch, a Croat who has 
praised Tito. On the other hand, Tito has apparent- 
ly retracted his demand—repeated as recently as 
April 30—for Allied recognition of his Committee 
of National Liberation as the government of Yugo- 
slavia and temporarily accepted King Peter, pending 
a post-war plebiscite on the nation’s form of govern- 
ment. Although Premier Subasitch and the Par- 
tisans had well-matched bargaining power based on 
the former’s control of Yugoslav ships and gold and 
the latter’s large armed force and widespread de 
facto authority in Yugoslavia, the strong desire of 
all three major Allies to speed victory by eliminating 
the pro-Axis Mikhailovitch was an important factor 


in effecting reconciliation between King Peter and 
Tito. 


WHINIFRED N. HADSEL 


WALLACE OUTLINES BASIS FOR POST-WAR HARMONY IN FAR EAST 


Vice-President Wallace's trip to Siberia and China 
has been one of the most underplayed news events 
of this dramatic year. In the past month Mr. Wallace 
has visited the chief industrial cities of Siberia and 
has held discussions with Generalissimo Chiang Kai- 
shek and other leading Chinese officials. He has not 
only had an opportunity to gain first-hand knowledge 
of areas which can be of great importance in the 
defeat of Japan, but his conversations in Chungking 
(and possibly in Russia) may well have involved 
the threshing out of definite questions rather than a 
mere exchange of opinions. 


OBJECTIVES OF THE TRIP. Concretely, in the 
words of a joint Chinese-American press release of 
June 24, it was agreed that quick and efficient prose- 
cution of the war against Japan “is fundamental in 
Chinese-American relations’ and requires “mutual 
assistance in every possible way.’ Previously, the 
Vice-President had voiced his expectation that the 
next twelve months “will be the final year of Jap- 
anese aggression in China.’’ Concerning the problems 
of peace in the Pacific, three essential conditions 
were set forth in the release: (1) “effective perma- 


nent demilitarization of Japan’; (2) friendly col- 
laboration of China, the Soviet Union, United States, 
British Commonwealth and other United Nations; 
and (3) “recognition of the fundamental right of 
presently dependent Asiatic peoples to self-govern- 
ment, and the early adoption of measures in the 
political, economic and social fields to prepare those 
dependent peoples for self-government within a 
specified practical time limit.” The last point prob- 
ably represents the clearest statement yet made by a 
high American official on the importance attached 
by public opinion in this country to the ultimate in- 
dependence of colonial Asia. It is noteworthy that it 
has been couched in moderate terms, so as not to 
offend the colony-holding nations among our allies, 
while expressing in straightforward fashion the in- 
terest of the United States in the development of a 
free Asia.* 

BRINGING CHUNGKING AND MOSCOW 
TOGETHER. Perhaps the most striking aspect of 
the Vice-President’s published activities has been his 


*Many of the views expressed by Mr. Wallace in China and Siberia have 
been developed at greater length in his recent pamphlet, Our Job in the 
Pacific (New York, Institute of Pacific Relations, 25c.). 


e—— 


empha: 


) China 


king 0! 
pressin, 
dary, li 
would 
days la 
continu 
“maint 
derstar 
China‘ 
peace. 
of por 
peace.’ 

This 
China 
in wh 
would 
| Washi 
dosely 
the ex 
and tl 
into tl 
well f 
that e° 
tion b 
would 
ington 
lation: 
in the 
the R 


Chuns 
many 
future 


Unfini 

Dou 

i Ap 
| the m: 
as the 
source 
Allies 


Four 
ber 
| Yor 
One 


POREIC 
Headqu 
second - 
one mo 


= 


——< 


greater 


xe. The 
0sition 
the na- 
y small 
hetniks 


of the 
iO pean 
'-reach- 
inlikely 
g Peter 
id anti- 
med as 
10 has 
parent- 
atly as 
mittee 
Yugo- 
ending 
rovern- 
e Par 
sed on 
id and 
sad de 
sire of 
inating 
factor 
er and 


DSEL 


ST 


ly col- 
States, 
ations; 
ght of 
overn- 
in the 
- those 
hin a 
prob- 
e by a 
tached 
ate in- 
that it 
not to 
allies, 
he in- 
t of a 


COW 
ect of 
en his 


pria have 
b in the 


en 
— 


emphasis on the need for friendly relations between 
China and the Soviet Union. On arriving in Chung- 
king on June 20 he issued a prepared statement ex- 
ressing the belief that the Chinese-Siberian boun- 
dary, like that between the United States and Canada, 
would be one of friendship, not separation. Four 
days later the joint press release declared that the 
continuance of American-Chinese friendship and the 
“maintenance of relations on a basis of mutual un- 
derstanding between China and the Soviet Union— 
China's nearest great neighbor” are essential for 
peace. The release added significantly: “No balance 
of power arrangement would serve the ends of 
peace.” 

This declaration expresses the self-interest of both 
China and the United States in avoiding a situation 
in which unsatisfactory Chinese-Russian relations 
would result in antagonism between Moscow and 
Washington. The danger of such a development is 
dosely linked with China’s domestic politics, for if 
the existing sharp differences between Chungking 
and the Chinese Communists should be projected 
into the post-war period, the leading powers might 
well find themselves aligned on opposite sides. In 
‘that event, the structure of United Nations coopera- 
tion built up so laboriously in the course of the war 
would be gravely threatened. This explains Wash- 
ington’s urgent desire to promote more friendly re- 
lations between China and Russia than have existed 
in the recent past, especially since the willingness of 
the Russians to make war supplies available to 
Chungking on a large scale after the defeat of Ger- 
‘many may be determined by their estimate of the 
future course of the Chinese government. 


How New Will the Better World Be? by Carl L. Becker. 
New York, Knopf, 1944. $2.50 


A distinguished American historian discards Utopian 
plans for world federation and contends that post-war 
eoperation among nations will have to be determined in 
large part by the old forces of nationalism, power politics 
and imperialism. 
Unfinished Business, by Bonsal. 

Doubleday, 1944. $3.00 

A personal record of the peace conference of 1919 by 
the man who served President Wilson and Colonel House 
as their interpreter. Important not only as an historical 
source but as a commentary on international problems the 
Allies are again facing. 


Stephen New York, 


Four Years: A Chronicle of the War by Months, Septem- 
ber 1989-September 1948, by Adrian Van Sinderen. New 
| York, Coward-McCann, 1944. $2.75 


One of the very useful chronological guides. 


Page Three 


ISSUE OF POLITICAL AGREEMENT. That 
Mr. Wallace explored the current political situation 
with China’s leaders is suggested by the emphasis in 
the joint press release on China's intention to estab- 
lish democratic, constitutional government after the 
war. Moreover, Mr. Wallace’s visit apparently oc- 
curred at a time when political discussions between 
the Central government and the Communists were 
going on in the Chinese capital. It is by no means 
impossible that the Chinese conferees, concerning 
whose activities there have been no press reports 
since May 24, will be influenced in their decisions by 
the nature of the Vice-President’s mission. 

On this, as on many other points, it is still too 
early to assess the results of his journey. But his state- 
ment of American political aims in Asia comes at a 
time when military progress in the Pacific and mil- 
itary difficulties in China require increased attention 
to long-term Far Eastern issues. This is all the more 
true because the end of the war in the West will 
make eastern Asia and the adjacent waters our 
primary war front. Mr. Wallace's emphasis on close 
relations among the United States, China, Russia and 
the British Commonwealth, his desire to bring Mos- 
cow and Chungking into greater harmony, his en- 
couragement of democratic tendencies within China, 
and his expression of interest in the independence of 
colonial Asia all represent essential aspects of this 
country’s future policy in the East. At the same time 
Americans must not forget that, if these aims are to 
be realized, the United States will have to accept its 
full share of international responsibility. Failing this, 
any declaration of policy will be as worthless as an 
overdrawn check. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Twentieth Century India, by Kate Mitchell and Kumar 
Goshal. Institute of Pacific Relations (New York) and 
Webster Publishing Co. (St. Louis, Dallas and Los 
Angeles), 1944. 40 cents. 

An admirable introduction to India in pamphlet form. 

The authors have touched the high spots of their subject 

simply and objectively. 


Japan: A Short Cultural History, by G. B. Sansom. New 

York, Appleton-Century, 1943. $5.00 

A slightly revised edition of an indispensable work that 
has been out of print for some time. The author, now Min- 
ister Advisory on Far Eastern Affairs at the British Em- 
bassy in Washington, is distinguished for the felicity of 
his style and the scientific, objective nature of his treat- 
ment. 


White Smoke over the Vatican, by Don Sharkey. Mil- 
waukee, Bruce Publishing Company, 1944. $2.00 


Accurate background information on the government, 
history, and physical aspects of the Vatican. 


oe month for change of address on membership publications 


BP 181 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 37, JUNE 30, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. LeET, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


t 
%: 


2 
4 


' 
stbben, 


S 


7 
ent 


AEG IOIEREE 2 


U.S. PRESSES FOR AID TO REFUGEES 


While the Nazis struggle to defend their Euro- 
pean stronghold against the United Nations liber- 
ators, they continue to persecute Jews and political 
prisoners within that stronghold. The Swiss news- 
paper Neue Zuercher Zeitung reported on June 17 
that German occupation authorities have established 
at Kistarcza, Hungary, a new concentration camp 
nicknamed “the Hungarian Dachau.” The camp, 
according to the newspaper, is reserved for the in- 
ternment of political prisoners (among them pro- 
Allied Italian officers), who are regarded as hostages 
“to be shot in the event of sabotage.” 


In other parts of Hungary the “lives of almost 
1,000,000 Jews hang in the balance,” Chairman Sol 
Bloom of the House Foreign Affairs Committee told 
Congress on behalf of the Committee on June 21. 
The following day Mr. Bloom introduced a resolution 
in the House criticizing Hungarian official anti-Semit- 
ism, which has taken extreme forms during the past 
two months. On May 2 the Hungarian European 
Service broadcast the news (in German) that “in 
towns in Hungary and in the towns in the vicinity of 
Budapest the Jews have already been housed in 
ghettos-or will be shortly.’”” The broadcast added 
that “the Jewish quarter in Ujpest will be set up 
among the factories.” One reason for locating the 
Jews near factories, apparently, is to subject them to 
the risks of Allied bombing raids. 


U.S. REFUGEE POLICY HAMPERED. Although 
it is doubtful that many will escape, the Hungarian 
Jews and the prisoners in Kistarcza are a special con- 
cern of the United States because they are potential 
refugees. President Roosevelt’s executive order of 
January 22 creating the War Refugee Board stated 
that the United States government's policy is “‘to 
take all measures within its power to rescue the vic- 
tims of enemy oppression who are in imminent dan- 
ger of death and otherwise to afford all possible re- 
lief and assistance consistent with the successful 
prosecution of the war.” 

Despite a considerable measure of success in its 
work, serious problems confront the War Refugee 
Board in carrying out the policy outlined by the 
President. For instance, although our Ambassador, 
Laurence A. Steinhardt, has prevailed on the Turkish 
government to admit refugees who arrive illegally 
by ship from Rumania en route to Palestine, the 
Turks decline to admit those who flee across the 
Turkish-Bulgarian land frontier, and Mr. Bloom on 
June 23 introduced a resolution in Congress asking 


FOR VICTORY °* 


Secretary of State Hull to press Turkey for fullg 
cooperation. 

Indicating dissatisfaction with the policy of Spaig 
respecting refugees, Representative Celler, Demo 
crat, of New York, issued a statement on June 2 
blaming, not the Spanish government, but America 
Ambassador Carlton J. H. Hayes whose recall be 
advocated. The Spanish government has granted 
passports to many Sephardic Jews scattered ove 
Europe and has admitted many Frenchmen and stats 
less persons from France. But it has followed the 
policy that refugees within Spain should be moved 
out before others are admitted. Mr. Celler said that 
Spain might adopt the policy of some other neutrals } 
notably Sweden and Switzerland, and set up a “free 
port” for refugees if the Ambassador ‘would 
much as approach the Spanish government.” 


UNRRA CAMPS IN MIDDLE EAST. During 
their conference at Casablanca in January 1943 
President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill 
in company with the French National Committee 
agreed to the establishment of a camp for refuges 
fleeing Europe by way of Spain. The camp, situated 
at Casablanca and named for Marshal Lyautey, is 
ready to function. It will be operated by the United 


191% 
] 
ee: 


— 
Vou. - 


—_——-— 


FRE! 
Sy 
port ( 
event 
oper 
have 
tions 
Fran 
the i 
viou: 
pany 
don 

reacl 


Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, 
which on May 1 took over from the Middle East 
Relief and Refugee Administration the operation of 
six other refugee centers housing approximately 
40,500 Greek and Yugoslav refugees. Their popula 
tion is expected soon to increase greatly, for 9,000 
refugees are leaving the coastal and island areas of 
Greece and Yugoslavia every month. There are also 


100,000 Polish refugees in the Middle East. The} 


Middle Eastern centers administered by UNRRA are 
at Moses Well, El Shatt, El Khatatba, and Tolumbat 
in Egypt; Nuseirat in Palestine; and Aleppo in Syria. 

By its decision to establish an Emergency Refugee 
Shelter at Fort Ontario, near Oswego, New York, 
the United States government has assured asylum fot 
many more refugees than the 1,000 who, according 
to President Roosevelt’s statement to Congress of 
June 12, will be accommodated there. Some of the 
other countries which are in a position to care fof 
refugees have indicated they would give asylum if we 
would. The leadership assumed by the United States, 
therefore, greatly improves the prospects of our ob 
taining cooperation from friendly governments im 
rescuing oppressed persons in the Nazi-controlled 


portions of Europe. BLA BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


Frer 
renc 

in F 
curr 


