Berkeley, 


. made it 
ocial 
f the 


|. Nations 
ry F. Lm 
- New York 


a4 , Entered as 2nd class matter 
Sila De 


7 2%. 


rary 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXI, No. 22 


MarcxH 20, 1942 


SWEDEN BETWEEN TWO FIRES 


[N his memorial day address of March 15 Chancel- 
lor Hitler expressed the belief that the German 
Army would defeat Russia next summer, “with com- 
plete destruction of the Bolshevist hordes’ —a defeat 
which, he claimed, had been prevented only by the 
premature arrival of the Russian winter. This pre- 


4 diction focused attention anew on preparations for 


a German spring offensive on the eastern front, 
which has been widely rumored from Stockholm to 
Ankara. With their usual ability at waging the “war 
of nerves’ on several fronts at once, the Nazis have 
created the impression that Sweden is in imminent 
danger of being attacked by the Allies through Nor- 
way, while at the same time they have increased 
their pressure on Turkey by feverish preparations 
for land and naval warfare in Bulgaria and Greece. 


To this war of nerves Sweden, one of the few 
temaining islands in a sea of German conquests, 
has responded by staging, on February 26, the most 
extensive army maneuvers in its history, held in the 
province of Jamtland, close to the Norwegian bor- 
der, and by rejecting fresh German demands for 
the transit of troops across Sweden to Norway. The 
Swedes have been disturbed by references, in the 
Quisling-controlled press, to Norway's need for 
“Lebensraum” at Sweden’s expense—references 
which are regarded as a prelude to German invasion 
of Sweden. Mounting criticism of the Nazi “new 
order” in the Swedish press has brought sharp re- 
monstrances from Berlin, and last week the gov- 
etmment suppressed ten newspapers accused of being 
unfriendly to Germany, including a provincial organ 
known as the mouthpiece of Gustaf Andersson, Min- 
ister of Communications. Official restraint, however, 
has not prevented Swedish Bishops from protesting 
against the dismissal by Quisling of the Right Rev- 
erend Berggrav, Bishop of Oslo, which was followed 
by the resignation of six Norwegian Bishops. Nor 
did it prevent the students of Lund University from 


ousting the editorial staff of their student newspaper 
on the ground that the newspaper had been far too 
mild in its comment regarding the treatment meted 
out by the Quisling régime to Dr. Seip, 60-year-old 
former President of Oslo University, who was sen- 
tenced to solitary confinement in a concentration 
camp because “of continued resistance to the occu- 
pying authority.” 

NAZIS INCREASE PRESSURE ON SWEDEN. 
Recent developments in the European war explain 
this suddenly increased tension over Sweden. Several 
Swedish newspapers have suggested that Sweden 
should take the initiative in effecting peace between 
Finland and Russia, and do everything in its power 
to take both Finland and Norway out of the war— 
a suggestion which provoked the ire of the Nazis, 
who have put strong pressure on the Finns to con- 
tinue their struggle against Moscow. Moreover, if 
the Allies should decide to take the offensive in 
Western Europe, an invasion of Norway would ap- 
pear to offer chances of success—first because the 
Norwegians themselves are stubbornly resisting the 
Nazis, and second because a junction might thus 
be effected in the north between Allied and Russian 
forces. This possibility would be obviously undesir- 
able for the Nazis, not only because it might remove 
Finland from the war, but because it would facili- 
tate shipment of Allied supplies to the Russian front 
through the ports of Murmansk and Archangel. The 
transfer of the German warships Gwneisenau, 
Scharnhorst, Tirpitz and others to northern ports 
is not unconnected with preparations for war 
in the Scandinavian theatre. The encounter on 
March 11 between the Térpitz and British planes in- 
dicates that German warships are lying in wait for 
the Allied fleet, either to prevent invasion of Norway 
or to attack convoys bound for Russia, or both. 

To meet the danger of German invasion, Sweden 
has an army of over 600,000 men, which is now being 


reorganized in accordance with a five-year-plan pro- 
viding for increased mechanization and expansion of 
aviation; an air force reported to total 500 planes; 
and a navy which includes 3 cruisers, 20 destroyers 
and 28 submarines. The war has cut Sweden off from 
its overseas markets, which took about 70 per 
cent of its exports, and supplied an even higher per- 
centage of its imports, thus making Swedish trade 
dependent almost entirely on Germany and Ger- 
man-controlled countries. Through careful husband- 
ing of stocks accumulated before the outbreak of 
war, the Swedes have managed to maintain a stand- 
ard of living which, although much lower than that 
of pre-war times, is still higher than that of coun- 
tries conquered by Germany. Moreover, Sweden has 
the advantage of possessing, on its own territory, 


CHINA’S ROLE IN THE PACIFIC WAR 


With the capture of Rangoon on March 9, Japan 
has accomplished one of the major objectives of its 
southward thrust. It has severed the only existing 
line of communication between the United States 
and China, our most powerful ally in the war against 
Japan. Yet with the loss of Southeast Asia, China 
has assumed crucial importance in the military and 
political strategy of the United Nations. This has 
been recognized in the $500,000,000-American !oan 
to China sanctioned by law on February 13, the 
dispatch of General Joseph W. Stilwell to strength- 
en military liaison between China and the United 
States, the arrangements made by Chiang Kai-shek 
in India for the opening of new transport routes to 
China, and the belated appointment of Wellington 
Koo as representative to the Pacific War Council in 
London, announced on February 26. 

A CHINESE COUNTEROFFENSIVE? China 
provides a base for launching a counteroffensive by 
land against Japan’s right flank and by air against 
its communications and home territory. Its army of 
some three million regular troops and four or five 
million irregulars and partisans, all seasoned fight- 
ers, outnumbers Japan’s by three or four to one. It 
has an exceptionally able corps of officers whose 
strategic and tactical methods have been tested in 
successful combat. Finally, China has the uncon- 
querable will to win of a people who have had first- 
hand experience of Japanese conquest. 

Moreover, for nearly a billion Asiatics Chinese 
resistance is a symbol negating Japan’s claim to be 
fighting the battle of the Oriental against the white 
man. The large Chinese communities throughout 
Southeast Asia, organized too late for effective home 
defenses, now form a tough core of passive or ac- 
tive resistance to the Japanese forces of occupation. 
Chiang Kai-shek’s visit to India laid the founda- 
tions for a new partnership between China and In- 
dia directed against Japanese aggression. The estab- 


Page Two 


factories capable of producing armaments such , 
rifles, machine guns and anti-aircraft guns, as we) 
as high-grade iron ore to feed these factories. 

The terrible choice that has faced every peace 
loving country since 1933—a choice between resis, 
ing the Axis powers, even though there be no hop 
of victory, or surrendering for fear of destructigy 
—is about to confront Sweden which, like so many 
other countries, had hoped to find refuge from wa 
in a policy of carefully balanced neutrality. Thi 
choice is made particularly painful by the fact that 
until now, Sweden has feared Russia even more thap 
Germany, and might still be reluctant to cast its |g, 
on the side of the United Nations as long as Russiz 
is in their ranks. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


lishment of diplomatic relations with Iran and Irag 
is another sign of China’s emerging leadership in ag 
Asia whose restless nationalism must be enlisted op 
the side of the United Nations. 

Military cooperation between China and the other 
Allies in the first phase of the Pacific war was ham 
pered by lack of liaison and advance planning, for 
which China was not responsible. Hongkong and 
Rangoon might conceivably be in British hands to. 
day had advantage been taken earlier of Chines 
offers of assistance made before December 7. Since 
that date, China’s contribution to the common strug 
gle has been far from negligible. Its armies are im. 
mobilizing at least half a million Japanese troops 
stationed in China. In countless local engagements, 
notably the battle of Changsha, Chinese regular and 
guerrilla troops are constantly waging their slow 
but deadly war of attrition. The exploits of the 
American Volunteer Group in the defense of Burma, 
and the brilliant but isolated air raid on Hanoi on 
January 22, have demonstrated the possibilities of 
Sino-American cooperation in aerial warfare. 

CHINA’S SUPPLY PROBLEM. At present upper 
Burma, including Lashio, terminus of the Burma 
Road, is, like Australia, a crucial area in the Far 
Eastern war. Chinese troops must bear the brunt of 
the defense of this area, which is of vital importance 
for the development of new supply routes to China 
From the railhead of Sadiya in Assam goods may 


Will war needs expedite the growth of Latin Amer- 
ican industry? Read: 

ECONOMIC PROJECTS FOR HEMISPHERE 
DEVELOPMENT by John C. deWilde 


25¢ 


March 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 


REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


—_ 


be mov: 
Burma 

existing 
highwa) 
structio! 
plete; < 
China, 

Burma 

for equ. 
to keep 
liance f 
mated | 
as mucl 
Road. 7 
the Un 
and the 
Shou 
cupatio 
the ove 
landed 
China ° 
to Lan 
feasibl. 
and tc 
from 
Last C 
Russia 

Chung! 
discont 
was rey 
that Sc 
It is 
festing 
to coo} 
Soviet 

to lar 
Japane 


The 
targets 
on M:; 
motor 
taids ¢ 
a new 
dustri: 
northe 
nature 
plants 
airpla 
Frenc 
unit, 
undis' 


— 


such 4 
as Weil 


Peace. 
1 resist 
10 hope 
‘ructiog 
© many 
om. war 
y. This 
ct that 
re than 
t its lot 
; Russig 


YEAN 


nd Iraq 
ip in an 
sted on 


1e other 
as ham 
ing, for 
ng and 
inds to 
Chinese 
7. Since 
n strug. 
are im 
; troops 
rements, 
ilar and 
‘ir slow 
of the 
Burma, 
anoi on 
lities of 


> 


it upper 

Burma 
the Far 
runt of 
portance 
> China. 
ods may 


Amer- 


HERE 
Wilde 


month. 


———— 
— 


be moved to China in three ways: (1) by road to 
Burma (a road as yet unbuilt) and thence over the 
existing Burma Road; (2) by the Assam-Sikang 
highway behind the Burma Road, now under con- 
struction but requiring a year and a half to com- 
plete; or (3) by air transport, either directly into 
China, or by air into Burma and thence by the 
Burma Road. The highway routes are important 
for equipping a future large-scale Chinese offensive; 
to keep essential supplies moving now, the main re- 
liance must be placed upon air transport. It is esti- 
mated that a hundred transport planes could carry 
as much pay tonnage as was ever borne by the Burma 
Road. The planes, of course, must come largely from 
the United States, and in all probability both they 
and their bases will need fighter protection. 

Should these routes be disrupted by Japanese oc- 
cupation or bombardment, China must fall back on 
the overland route from Russia. American supplies 
landed on the Persian Gulf can be shipped into 
China via the Turksib Railway and the truck route 
to Lanchow. Actually, however, it may be more 
feasible for Russia to send supplies directly to China, 
and to be compensated by additional shipments 
from America via the shorter route to Archangel. 
Last October, when the German offensive against 
Russia was at its height, the Soviet Embassy in 
Chungking announced that Russia would have to 
discontinue sending military supplies to China. It 
was reported from Chungking in February, however, 
that Soviet supplies were still coming in. 

It is not surprising to discover that China is mani- 
festing a renewed interest in Russia. China is eager 
to cooperate in an offensive against Japan, and the 
Soviet Union seems to be the only power now able 
to launch such an offensive. An early Russo- 
Japanese clash is being freely predicted in Chung- 


Page Three 


king. This sounds rather like wishful thinking at 
present, but when and if such a clash occurs China’s 
armies, fortified by even a modicum of air support, 
can render invaluable assistance by thrusting against 
the Japanese flank. 

Can China hold out if foreign aid is sharply 
curtailed? It can itself produce the essential minima 
of food, clothing and shelter, and it has considerable 
stocks of munitions. Its new industries in the west 
can furnish its armies with small arms and ammuni- 
tion, and can assemble airplanes from imported 
parts. It needs medical supplies and machinery for 
further industrial development. And for offensive 
operations it needs, of course, mechanized equipment 
and particularly airplanes. 

China has been sharply disappointed and disil- 
lusioned by the poor showing which its more power- 
ful allies have so far made against Japan. But 
despite the psychological strain and physical hard- 
ships of nearly five years of war, intensified by in- 
adequate transport and by acute monetary inflation, 
its will to resist is still strong. Internal divisions ex- 
ist, of course, but it may be questioned whether 
political factionalism is a more serious drag on the 
war effort in China today than it is in the United 
States. Some sort of peace overtures by Japan are 
quite probable. There is no reason to think, however, 
that they would be any more successful now than 
they have in the past. 

The United Nations badly need the help that 
China can give. They can use it effectively only by 
coordinating their strategy with China’s, and by put- 
ting arms in the hands of its soldiers. The difficulties 
of doing this are admittedly tremendous, but there 
is NO easy way to win the war. 

MIRIAM S. FARLEY 
Institute of Pacific Relations 


EUROPE’S INDUSTRIAL RESOURCES SERVE NAZI WAR MACHINE 


The repeated RAF bombing attacks on industrial 
targets in occupied France, which were inaugurated 
on March 3 with a damaging raid on the Renault 
motor vehicle shops just outside Paris, followed by 
faids on the Krupp works at Essen, appear to herald 
anew and wider offensive against the German in- 
dustrial machine. Ever since the Nazis took over 
northern France in 1940, they have counted on the 
natural hesitation of the British to bomb French 
plants, and have utilized these plants to construct 
airplane engines, army trucks and munitions. The 
French factories have constituted a sort of ‘‘shielded”’ 
unit, where war production could go on practically 
undisturbed. 

OCCUPIED LANDS WORK FOR REICH. The 
part played by occupied countries in helping Ger- 
Many to feed its military machine is often under- 
éstimated, especially in the case of iron ore and steel 


products. Germany could not possibly produce 
enough iron for its war needs today if it were un- 
able to draw on the resources of the conquered coun- 
tries. The German iron ore deposits consist mainly 
of low-grade ore, with a large content of foreign 
matter which makes it expensive to process. Hence 
the Nazi leaders prepared from the outset for a 
gradual conquest of neighboring countries rich in 
iron and other ores. 

The annexation of Austria opened the rich iron 
ore deposits of Styria to German exploitation. It is 
claimed that the Austrian iron deposits contain 
around 200 million metric tons of ore, with a metal 
content of 30 to 45 per cent—as contrasted with the 
content of the German ore, which is usually lower 
than 30 per cent. In 1937 the Austrian iron ore pro- 
duction was 1.9 million metric tons. Today, according 
to recent German sources, it totals around 3.5 million 


oe earn wee 


metric tons a year. Control of Austria also gives the 
Nazis access to huge supplies of magnesite (mag- 
nesium ore). Magnesium, lighter than aluminum, 
is an admirable material for airplane parts and 
powder for incendiary bombs. 

Soon after the conclusion of the Munich agree- 
ment, another source of iron ore was added to Ger- 
man resources by the conquest of Czechoslovakia. 
The Czech mine of Nuchice, southwest of Prague, 
with its yearly output of 750,000 metric tons of ex- 
cellent ore, was incorporated into the German eco- 
nomic sphere, as well as other workings. Moreover, 
the iron ore of Poland, Norway, Belgium, Luxem- 
burg and France has found its way to Germany or has 
been processed on the spot for the benefit of the Ger- 
man military machine. The invasion of Norway iso- 
lated Sweden from the non-German world and gave 
Germany control of the valuable Swedish, as well 
as Norwegian, iron mines. Sweden produces some 
of the highest grade iron ore in the world. The 
northern Swedish deposits are estimated to contain 
more than two billion metric tons of first-class ore, 
easy to mine and with an iron content of around 65 
per cent, or twice as much as the French and Ger- 
man ore. In 1938 the production of Swedish ore 
passed the 14-million-ton mark. More than two- 
thirds of this went to Germany; the rest was shipped 
to Great Britain, Belgium, the United States and 
other countries. Since the occupation of Norway, 
practically the whole Swedish production has gone 
to Germany, either in the form of ore, ingots, or fin- 
ished goods. 

Among the ore deposits of Western Europe con- 
quered by the Nazis, those of France are doubtless 
the most valuable. For a long time, France has been 
the greatest producer of iron ore in Europe. In 1938 
its production surpassed 32 million tons. By con- 
trast, the iron ore production of the United States for 
the same year was only 28.3 million tons, but this 
country’s iron and steel industry was then working 
at less than 40 per cent of capacity. The whole of 
France's iron ore output is now earmarked for Nazi 
Germany. 


STEEL AND MUNITIONS. Besides gaining ex- 
clusive access to the richest iron ore deposits of 
Europe, the Nazis have also obtained control of a 
number of large smelters, steel mills and munitions 
factories, the two most important of which are the 
Skoda Works in Czechoslovakia and the Schneider- 
Creusot Works in France. The Czech steel works are 
said to have a potential output of some three mil- 


= Page Four 


a 
ee 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule * 


Subject: BRAZIL CLASHES WITH AXIS 


Speaker: John I. B. McCulloch, Acting Director 
-P.A. Washington Office; Editor, Inter. 
American Monthly 


Date: Sunday, March 22 


Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 
For station, please consult your local newspaper 


lion metric tons of steel ingots a year. The Frengy 
steel-ingot production probably totals some six mil. 
lion metric tons a year. Belgium can produce anny. 
ally about 2.5, and Luxemburg about 1.5 million 
tons of steel. In all, the production of steel ingots 
under the control of Nazi Germany, which amounte 
to about 24 million metric tons in the pre-Blitzkrieg 
phase of the war, may well have grown today to 4 
total of about 43 million metric tons. Sabotage may 
somewhat reduce this top figure. 


Not all of this production, however, can be de. 
voted to military purposes. In exchange for indis. 
pensable raw materials and foodstuffs, Germany 
must supply steel to various European countries, 
notably Italy and the Balkan States. In fact, from 
time to time the German War Economy Board has 
found it difficult to supply the iron works with the 
quantities of ore or scrap needed for the production 
of mechanized weapons on the desired scale. When 
the difficulties became intense, the German authori- 
ties did not hesitate to cut civilian supplies to « 


minimum and to requisition all iron gates, fences) 


balconies, and the like. Poland, after the conquest, 
was stripped of every pound of iron not considered 
essential. In spite of such extreme measures, the 
increased production will probably not suffice for 
a long war against the combined resources of the 
United Nations. The total capacity of the United 
States alone is estimated at 83 million tons of sted 
ingots and castings, as against a probable top figure 
of 43 million tons for Germany and German-con 
trolled Europe. It could be considerably increased in 
a relatively short time. 


The war against Russia has necessarily raised to 
unprecedented heights the consumption of steel and 
iron for German Army needs. These needs can be 
met only by working all of Europe’s iron mines, 
especially those of France. In view of this fact, the 
destruction of iron and steel works, as well as au 
tomobile factories working for Germany, wherevet 
they may be located, becomes an absolute necessit) 


for a speedy Allied victory. ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI,, No. 22, Marcu 20, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; WirttaMm P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lam 


Secretary; Vera Micue es Dean, Editor; Davin H. Poppgr, Associate Editor. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Bo 181 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


HI 


Mz 
mande 
in Aus 
offensi 
of ray 
Unitec 
people 
a com 
tion, | 
discare 


ters ir 
The / 
with : 
ficient 
fronts 
looms 
has a 
terial, 
that i 
quite 
States 
positi 
At 
equal 
woul 
well | 
the p 
This 
Evatt 


