


Lc 


urt 
in- 
ell. 


rer 
Ces 


Dal- 


and 
riv- 


The 


On 
iD 
dis- 
0SI- 


| be 


tive 
ntal 
ttee 
tive 
om 
t at 
pro- 









wou 
A 7 qd» ‘e 
oe 


—1945 


ant Wij, 
y "AB 


* ‘ 
v 


? 


as 


NOV 7 i394 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Genera) Library 


Valversity of & 


*chigan 


A 
mm Arbor. Nichtoe, 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





You. XXV, No. 3 


—_—_— 


NoveMBER 2, 1945 





ALLIES TIGHTEN ECONOMIC CONTROLS IN GERMANY 


BERLIN—As the autumn fogs close in on defeated 
and ravaged Germany, three things stand out most 
stikingly in Berlin. First, a profound revolution, 
which was already long overdue in 1919, is now 
being systematically effected, not by the Germans 


themselves but, in a 
manner without pre- 
cedent in history, by 
the four occupying 
powers. Second, this 
endeavor to alter 
Germany's political, 


economic, and social 


structure, so that it 
cannot in the foresee- 
able future wage a 
war of aggression, 
has brought Russia 
and the Western 
powers into closer 
contact with each 
other than ever be- 
fore except, possibly, 
under somewhat 
comparable circum- 
stances, during the 
Napoleonic wars. 
And, third, the need 
for achieving Allied 
cooperation in the 
treatment of Ger- 
many has led to the 
Creation of coherent 
and promising ma- 
chinery of interna- 
tional adminis- 
tration, machin- 
ety that grew out of 








President Commends Work of F.P.A. 


WASHINGTON 
October 13, 1945 
Dear General McCoy: 


I am very sorry indeed that I cannot attend the forum of the 
Foreign Policy Association to speak to your members in person. The 
fine work your organization has been doing has my complete support. 
There is, in my opinion, no more urgent task before us at this time 
than the building of an informed public opinion on the problems 
of foreign policy. Without a firm foundation of public understand- 
ing the United States cannot fulfill its responsibilities or exercise the 
leadership which our position as a great democracy demands of us. 


The American people are embarking on a new course of full 
participation in international affairs, full cooperation in the solution 
of the problems of peace. Not only our humanitarian impulses, but 
considerations of self-interest dictate this foreign policy. We are 
aware, and we shall become increasingly aware that the road we 
have taken is hard. The way of cooperation is laborious, and often 
discouraging. It will demand of all of us great patience, and more 
than that, a much clearer understanding than we have ever had of 
the problems of other peoples. 

Unless we exercise this patience and attain this understanding, 
there will be widespread disillusionment and loss of faith in the 
possibility of ‘an expanding international collaboration, Such a 
development would jeopardize the future security and well-being of 
the American people. Therefore I urge the Foreign Policy Associa- 
tion and other public spirited citizen groups to redouble their efforts 
at public education in the field of international relations. 


Your government welcomes this cooperation, and will do its 
utmost to make available the facts and interpretation of policy on 
which an intelligent public opinion must be based. 

Very sincerely yours, 
Harry S. Truman 
Major General Frank Ross McCoy, 
President, Foreign Policy Association, 
New York 16, New York 








the patient, constructive and too little publicized 
work of the European Advisory Commission. 
BERLIN IN DEFEAT. Berlin has thus become 
the scene both of a four-power attempt to revolu- 
tionize internal conditions in Germany and of a bold 


and challenging ef- 
fort by the occupying 
powers to devise 
workable inter- 
national organ- 
ization. This grim 
city is today a 
shambles like most 
of Germany's other 
cities. The gaunt 
skeletons of the 
Reichstag and the 
Chancellery domi- 
nate scenes of de- 
struction so compicte 
that it is impossible 
to identify lamd- 
marks in the former 
business and fashion 
centers of Berlin. 
Shabbily dressed 
people, at last 
aroused to the stark 
reality that no coal 
will be available for 
the heating of homes 
this winter, haul 
handcarts loaded 
with firewood; and 
amid the blackened 
tree stumps of the 
Tiergarten, Germans 
barter everything 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 




















from bicycles to girdles for bread and cigarettes in 
the open-air black market. 

With textbooks purged of Nazi concepts, ele- 
mentary schools, attended by children, from six to 
fourteen, have been reopened under the supervision 
of the Allies, who have also striven to denazify the 
teaching staffs and have furnished the schools with 
coal, window glass, and tiles to render them hab- 
itable. in the winter. Higher schools are to be re- 
opened as soon as books and denazified . faculties 
become available. The four occupying powers are 
making a determined effort to provide the minimum 
rations of 1,500 calories, but the rate of tuberculo- 
sis is rising dangerously. Typhoid and paratyphoid 
cases also remain high, and hospitals, suffering from 
a shortage of doctors, are filled to capacity. 

Political parties, early permitted by the Russians, 
are reviving in all four zones, but the workers are 
more interested in the reorganization of trade unions 
than political parties. An all-Berlin trade union con- 
ference, which is to be held shortly with the approval 
of the Allies, may set an interesting precedent for 
the rest of Germany with respect to methods of 
elections and procedure of operation. The voices of 
men long silenced by Hitler are being heard again 
in the six Russian-licensed and Russian-censored 
newspapers, two of them published by Communists 
in the Berlin district administered by the U.S.S.R., 
and in Der Tagespiegel, the first German newspaper 
licensed by the United States in its area of the capi- 
tal. But it is still difficult to discover what the Ger- 
mans think. Many of them show a servility that is 
the reverse side of brutality, and equally horrible; 
others are arrogantly convinced that Germany's de- 
feat was just a matter of bad luck. 

A NON-NAZI ECONOMY? In appraising the 
results thus far accomplished by the four Allies, and 
especially by the United States, it is essential to bear 
in mind that the Allied military and civilian authori- 
ties have been directed to carry out the policies 
agreed on at Potsdam. It is within the framework 
of these policies that their work must be judged. 
Many of the criticisms made of the Allied Control 
Council, on which the four occupying powers are 
represented, tend to be mutually contradictory. The 
Allies are accused of being too slow or too mild in 
effecting denazification and, at the same time, of 
being slothful in promoting the economic recovery 
of Germany. They are criticized for their delay in 
deindustrializing the Reich, and at the same time for 
not permitting German industries to produce in 
sufficient quantities the coal and manufactured goods 
which the Reich used to sell to its neighbors and 
which these neighbors admittedly need more ur- 
gently than ever. These conflicting objectives cannot 
be attained simultaneously by any Allied authority, 
however vigilant, conscientious and firm. 


Page Two 











ey 
— 


Denazification, first applied to government op 
gans, is now being pressed in schools, business enter. 
prises and financial institutions, and the United 
States has been far more vigorous than the othe 
Allies (except Russia which, in the early days of 
the occupation, swiftly removed many top Nazis) 
in ousting Nazis, depriving them of economic power 
and forcing them to seek their livelihood at menial 
tasks. But denazification has meant—and this is q 
matter of concern to some American officials—that 
the economic recovery in the United States zone has 
been retarded until adequate personnel could be 
found or trained to replace the ousted Nazis. The 
situation is said to be considerably better in this 
respect in the French and British zones, where the 
authorities have not hesitated to use Nazis when 
this seemed desirable from the point of view of 
maintaining production, sometimes hiring Nazis 
purged by the United States. And even the Russians 
have employed technicians known to have had Nazi 
sympathies. Industrial recovery in the United States 
zone has been slow. As of September, plants operat. 
ing there represented about 15 per cent of the indus. 
trial establishments and, in terms of output, were 
producing not more than 5 per cent of capacity. 

But even if the Allies wanted to rebuild German 
economy, irrespective of Nazism, and were ready 
to risk the industrial resurgence of Germany to as- 
sure adequate supplies of goods for the rest of 
Europe in the form of reparations or exports, they 
would be unable to do so in the visible future. The 
reasons for this are that many German factories have 
been destroyed or damaged. Raw materials are not 
available, and there is a lack of skilled manpower 





for certain key enterprises, notably coal mines, neat- 
ly 60 per cent of whose workers at the close of the 
war were war prisoners or forced laborers. 

U.S. WILL FULFILL POTSDAM. The inventory 
of Germany's economic assets, which must precede 
any reasoned steps to fulfill the Potsdam stipulation 
that the country’s standard of living should not 
exceed that of its neighbors (exclusive of Britain 
and Russia), is still in the process of being taken 
in all four zones. Once such an inventory has been 
completed and accepted by the four Allies, the 
process of earmarking factories for destruction of 
shipment to various of the United Nations as rep- 
aratiors should gain momentum. February 1946 
has been set as the deadline for completion of the 
reparations bill, and American officials here are de 
termined to fulfill the Potsdam economic program, 
which most of them consider feasible even after the 
cession of Germany's principal agricultural areas to 
Poland and Russia. This program would reduce 
Germany to a country producing primarily food and 
consumers’ goods and exporting just enough of cet 
tain raw materials, notably coal and potash, to im 


ee 





= 


rt | 
id p 

Un 
the h 
jf nei 
man 
Reich 
their 
dustr 
eithe: 
from 
that 
reduc 
by A 
just | 
othet 
the ¢ 
Pots 
man 
prac 
the ¢ 
achi 


tion 
tain 
is U 
stru 
ove 
tha 
the 
dor 


wit 





lave 
wet 


\eat- 
the | 


tory 





cede 
tion | 
not 
itain 
aiken 
Deen 
the 
1 Of 
rep- 
1946 
- the 
. de- 
ram, 
' the 
Ss to 
duce 
and 
cet- 
im- 











tt urgently needed products, such as foodstuffs 
and phosphates from North Africa. 

Under this program, Germany would be shorn of 
the heavy industries necessary for modern warfare. 
if neighboring countries want security against Ger- 
man aggression through deindustrialization of the 
Reich they cannot, at the same time, complain of 
their inability to obtain the products of heavy in- 
dustry from Germany and must find other sources, 
either through their own production or by imports 
from other countries. When the Germans complain 
that the economic terms of Potsdam will drastically 
seduce their standard of living (to a level estimated 
by American experts as the depression level of 1932 
just before Hitler's rise to power), the Russians and 
others answer that the war was not fought to make 
the Germans comfortable. The extent to which the 
Potsdam program, which is revolutionizing Ger- 
many's political, economic and social life, can in 
practice be carried out will depend on the attitude of 
the Germans, as well as on the degree of cooperation 


achieved by the Allies. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The first in a series of articles on Germany.) 


FOURTH REPUBLIC WINS IN FRANCE 


Now that the results of the French general elec- 
tions, held on October 21, have been tabulated, cer- 
tain facts about the political mood in which France 
is undertaking its enormous tasks of national recon- 
struction are clearly discernible. By registering an 
overwhelming vote for a new constitution to replace 
that of the Third Republic, and by routing not only 
the Right-wing factions but the Radical Socialists— 
dominant party of the conservative middle class for 
nearly 50 years—the French have turned their backs 
on the political institutions and leaders associated 
with the defeatism that led to Munich and Vichy. 
The very size of the vote seems to underline this 
widespread determination to wipe clean the political 
slate and to start afresh, for no less than 82 per cent 
of the registered voters went to the polls. 

Since French voters gave 435 of the 586 seats in 
the new Assembly to the Communists, Socialists and 
Popular Republican Movement (MRP)—the three 
parties which have at least subscribed to a socialist 
program—it is clear that the Fourth Republic will 
continue the marked Leftward swing that has be- 
come the standard political trend throughout post- 
war Europe, from Britain eastward across the con- 
tinent. But what the precise character of this new 
Leftist régime in France will be remains to be seen. 


— 


Page T bree 








NEW DIVIDING LINE APPEARS. Already it is 
clear that the new dividing line in French politics 
will be drawn not between the Right and the Left, 
but between the Communists and the democratic 
Left. The strongest single source of opposition to the 
Communists will undoubtedly come from the MRP, 
a new, predominantly Catholic party, which grew up 
during the resistance among liberals and former sup- 
porters of the Right who detested collaboration but 
were at the same time unwilling to embrace what 
they considered the materialistic and extremist goals 
of the Socialists and Communists. To be sure, the 
MRP will have only 142 seats in the new Assembly 
to be convoked on November 6, as compared with 
151 for the Communists—who are now the largest 
party in France—and 142 for the Socialists. The 
MRP, nevertheless, will serve as a strong reminder 
that there remains in France today a large group of 
people who insist on combining nationalization of 
certain key industries with individualistic patterns 
of life based on private property. 

Since the balance of power between the Commu- 
nists and MRP is held by the Socialists, the extent to 
which the French economy is nationalized will de- 
pend largely on the outcome of the current struggle 
within the ranks of the Socialist party—between 
those who favor cooperation with the Communists 
and those who prefer to work with the MRP. The 
Socialists are also in a position to take a decisive 
stand on the important constitutional question of the 
proper relation of the executive to the legislature, 
since the Communists call for an all-powerful single 
chamber and a weak president, while the MRP de- 
mands a stronger executive and limitations on the 
chamber’s powers to overthrow the cabinet. In the 
realm of foreign policy, it appears that the Socialists 
will join the MRP against the Communists, for both 
of the more moderate parties favor a pact with Brit- 
ain and arrangements that would draw the western 
European nations more closely together, while the 
Communists strongly oppose these measures. 

To assert that these differences are not sharp and 
deep would cast a false light on France today. It 
would be equally untrue, however, to conclude that 
they constitute an insuperable obstacle on the road 
to reconstruction, for all three major parties have 
not only agreed that General de Gaulle shall be 
elected President by the new Assembly, but have in- 
dicated their willingness to form a coalition govern- 
ment during the next seven months while a constitu- 


tion is being framed. Winurren N Hee 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 3, NoveMBER 2, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FrRaNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lert, Secretary; VERA MicHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 
oe month for change of address on membership publications. 


1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ge» 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











Ce eee 





Washington News Letter 

















U.S. WAVERS BETWEEN WORLD POLICY AND NATIONALIST AIMS 


At a time when the United States, more than at any 
period in the past, needs decisiveness of conception 
and action in foreign affairs, it appears dangerously 
irresolute and beset by contradictions. In the three 
months since the Senate formally departed from our 
historic isolationism by approving the United Na- 
tions charter, the United States has been groping for 
policies that would make our internationalist posi- 
tion effective. But neither President Truman, Secre- 
tary of State Byrnes, nor Congress has been able to 
evolve such policies. In the absence of decision 
United States policy wavers, principally because the 
Administration is in the dark about the Soviet 
Union’s intentions. This uncertainty has resulted in 
our insisting on American participation in the affairs 
of the Balkan and eastern European states while ob- 
jecting to Soviet participation in Japanese affairs. The 
Administration has sought a voice in the Darda- 
nelles but would certainly oppose Soviet interest in 
the Panama Canal. At Potsdam the United States 
agreed to the military occupation of Korea by parti- 
tion between the United States and the Soviet Union, 
and now objects to this partition. 


The 12-point program which President Truman 
outlined for the United States in New York on Octo- 
ber 27 prescribed irreconcilable policies of coopera- 
tion and individual action. He reaffirmed his belief 
that “the preservation of peace between nations re- 
quires a United Nations Organization composed of 
all the peace-loving nations of the world who are 
willing jointly to use force if necessary to insure 
peace.” Yet at the same time he stressed his determi- 
nation that the United States decide unilaterally 
whether governments abroad are established accord- 
ing to the wishes of the people. He closed the West- 
ern Hemisphere politically to Eastern Hemisphere in- 
terests, and reiterated his intention to keep the atomic 
bomb the private property of the United States. 


THE PRESIDENT’S RESPONSIBILITY. Presi- 
dent Truman has not explained in detail the obliga- 
tions this country assumed on casting aside isolation- 
ism; Secretary Byrnes, busy abroad much of the time 
since he entered the Cabinet on July 2, has not reor- 
ganized the State Department into the energetic and 
competent agency which the hour demands; and Con- 
gress, consistently ignoring requests of the Adminis- 
tration, is supporting nationalist policies incompat- 
ible with the major tenet of the United Nations 
Organization that world affairs are best settled co- 


operatively. In its nationalist mood, Congress is fo}. 
lowing the trend of an articulate segment of the 
public. Since official British and American commit. 
tees began negotiating on September 11 for a finan. 
cial and commercial agreement, opinion has been 
growing increasingly hostile to the proposal that this 
country make a large Treasury loan to Britain. Letters 
received by the State Department oppose the loan 
two to one. At the same time Secretary of the Treas. 
ury Vinson, a member of the U.S. negotiating com. 
mittee, has urged privately that the loan be limited | 
to $2,500,000,000, instead of the $5,000,000,000 
Britain seeks, on the ground that Congress will ac 
cept only the lesser figure. 





The House Appropriations Committee has refused 
Assistant Secretary of State William Benton's request 
for deficiency funds to finance an Interim Interna- 
tional Information Service, as successor to the over- 
seas informational activities of the Office of War 
Information. Stressing the regional-exclusive instead 
of the universal-cooperative approach to world af- 
fairs, a sub-committee of the House Naval Affairs’ 
Committee recommended on August 6 that the’ 
United States keep the Pacific islands taken from | 
Japan during the war. On October 1 Chairman Con. | 
nally of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee | 
urged in Chicago that this country retain the secret | 
of the atomic bomb. 





191 


Ger 
achi 
bein 
win! 
cove 
witl 
issu 
feri 
NO | 
nan 
con 
tho: 
dis} 
All 
rel} 

\ 


ulti 


These Congressional tendencies have produced 1} Tp, 
crisis for the makers of American foreign policy. The | om 


Administration remains formally committed to United 


Nations cooperation. But, in fact, the idea of coop | 


eration on the highest political level has suffered de 
spite the sincere interest in cooperation in specific 
matters, as exemplified by the United Nations Food 
and Agriculture Conference which opened in Quebec 
on October 16 and the United Nations Conference on 
Education, Science and Culture which convened in 
London this week. President Roosevelt's experience 
in formulating a wartime foreign policy made it cleat 
that strong Presidential leadership is essential if the 


Administration is even to approach the goal it sets” 


for the United States in world affairs. The problem 
confronting President Truman and Secretary Byrnes 
is whether they should seek to convert public opinion 
to firm support of the UNO, or adjust policy to sutt 
the nationalist tendencies of Congress and some set 
tions of the population. 

BLAIR BOLLES 





the 
thi: 
gru 
het 


