


ted 
the 

to 
id- 
ng 
ter 
de- 
Si- 

to 
ler 
ia- 
cal 


4 


lew 
ons 
sa 
ory 


den 
935. 


ork, 


the 
» to 


Jni- 

in 
kin. 
pro- 


tion. 


oyal 


New 


- the 
ems. 


Tork, 
) and 
vork, 
re of 
“Big 


rince. 


ational 
Editor. 





"FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVI, No. 20 MarcH 12, 1937 


AMERICAN POLICY IN THE FAR EAST 
by T. A. Bisson 

This report describes United States participation in recent de- 
velopments affecting the Far East—the London Naval Confer- 
ence, agreement to purchase China’s silver, issues affecting Man- 
choukuo, inauguration of a trans-Pacific airline, and the Philip- 
pine Independence Act. The objectives and methods of American 
policy in the Far East are of more than ordinary importance, for 
there is always the danger that the United States will ultimately 
be involved in any conflict which may develop in the Pacific area. 


February 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 








of March 3, 1879. 











Dr. William 4. Bishop 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 








LE 
SS 





THE FRENCH GOVERNM 


ENT FACES A CRISIS 





_o 


ONFRONTED by a serious financial emer- 

gency, the Popular Front cabinet of Léon 
Blum approved a radical change in policy on 
March 5. It decided to postpone further social 
and economic reforms and embark on a more con- 
servative course designed to restore confidence 
and end the widespread hoarding of capital. The 
fate of the government now hinges on the success 
of this new policy. 

The present crisis in France is primarily due 
to the disappointing results of devaluation. By 
depreciating the franc last September the gov- 
ernment had hoped to stimulate business through 
the readjustment of prices and expansion of ex- 
ports, and to bring about a return of French capi- 
tal which would enable the Treasury to cover its 
needs in the loan market. Economic improve- 
ment, however, has been slight. Industries have 
been seriously handicapped by the rapid advance 
in production costs, which is estimated to have 
reached 35 to 40 per cent since May. Costs have 
risen substantially not only owing to wage in- 
creases, application of the 40-hour week and other 
reforms, but also because devaluation entailed a 
sharp upswing in the prices of imported raw ma- 
terials. Since the government came into power 
wholesale prices have gone up almost 40 per cent, 
while retail prices have increased over 25 per cent. 
The disparity between French and foreign prices 
which was removed by devaluation of the franc 
now threatens to reappear. Although the value 
of exports in the first four months following de- 
valuation was 25 per cent greater than in the 
corresponding period of the previous year, im- 
ports rose twice as rapidly and the import surplus 
increased by 2.5 billion francs. 

The government was most seriously alarmed by 
the continued hoarding of capital. Neither the 
announcement of a “breathing spell” by Premier 
Blum, nor the offer to exchange bonds carry- 
ing a 40 per cent premium for gold was sufficient 





to bring capital out of hiding. Lack of confidence 
in the franc and fear of further “socialist” meas- 
ures prevented the repatriation of capital and 
even produced a renewed flight of funds. In the 
last few months the gold holdings of the Exchange 
equalization account are reported to have been 
largely exhausted in an effort to keep the franc 
from slipping. Faced with the necessity of bor- 
rowing 36 billion francs during 1937, the French 
Treasury has scarcely known where to turn for 
funds. Early in February it borrowed £40,000,000 
in London for the French Railways, and it has 
managed to secure an additional 4 billion francs 
through a domestic loan. Further resort to for- 
eign loans has proved impossible, however, and 
the domestic market has been unable or unwilling 
to absorb more government bond issues. With 
the Treasury nearly empty, the Cabinet was com- 
pelled to alter its course. 


All the measures announced on March 5 are 
calculated to revive confidence. In order to stimu- 
late the return of gold, restrictions on its sale 
have been abolished and the Bank of France will 
henceforth buy gold at current market prices. 
Those who sell gold to the Bank will not have to 
identify themselves and will thus be immune from 
punishment for hoarding. To inspire confidence 
in the franc, management of the exchange equal- 
ization fund has been entrusted to a commission 
of four recognized and conservative experts, in- 
cluding the governor of the Bank of France and 
Charles Rist, an economist of outstanding ability. 
The government has pledged that no demands for 
additional credits will be introduced in parliament 
except for necessary increases in the incomes of 
low-salaried civil servants. Projects for new re- 
forms such as the establishment of a national 
unemployment fund are therefore deferred in- 
definitely. Prices will be kept down as far as 
possible. The government has also promised to re- 
duce Treasury borrowing by about 6 billion francs 


X University of Michigan Library 














































Scerreresmmenn gr nc aS 


ae mele oe 





———————————————— = Page Two 


through economies and postponement of expendi- 
ture for public works. Finally, it has announced 
the flotation of a huge national defense loan and 
appealed to all Frenchmen to subscribe on patri- 
otic grounds. To encourage the repatriation of 
French capital and promote the sale of the bonds 
in foreign countries, notably the United States 
and Britain, this loan will be issued in pounds and 
dollars, as well as francs. On the basis of the 
Johnson Act, however, the American government 
has rejected a request to establish an agency in 
this country for the payment of coupons. 


If the new policy meets with success, the Blum 
government will be able to weather the present 
crisis. The initial response has been favorable, 
and the more moderate leaders of the parlia- 
mentary opposition are now expected to support 
the program. Although amazed by the sudden 
about-face, the government’s Popular Front sup- 
porters seem to realize the need for drastically 
new steps. If assured a period of political calm, 
Premier Blum may still receive a new lease on 


power. JOHN C. DEWILDE 


BEHIND JAPAN’S POLITICAL STRUGGLE 


(This article is based on information received from 

T.A. Bisson, Research Associate of the Foreign Policy 

Association, who was in Tokyo during the crisis.) 

Public debate over the most vital international 
issue underlying Japan’s recent crisis—the ques- 
tion whether the army’s aggressive tactics in 
China should be continued—culminated in an im- 
portant statement by Foreign Minister Naotake 
Sato on March 8. China, Mr. Sato declared, 
should be treated as an equal, and the interests of 
foreign nations there should be respected by 
Japan. If steadfastly pursued, this policy may 
mark abandonment of Japan’s claim to a para- 
mount position in Eastern Asia, asserted by the 
Foreign Office on April 18, 1934, and make pos- 
sible more friendly relations with Britain and the 
United States. 


No comparable development, however, is evi- 
dent on the home front. Here the military have 
not only secured increased defense appropria- 
tions, but have continued to apply pressure in two 
fields. They seek, first, to curb the influence of 
the political parties, and to curtail the freedom 
of action of civilian ministers by concentrating 
governing power in a small cabinet board. Sec- 
ond, they desire to extend state control over 
private economic enterprise, with nationalization 
of the electric power industry as the opening move 
in this direction. Their aims are opposed by the 





| FC 


Ar 








political parties and by large business interests 
dissatisfied with unfavorable economic trends 
for which Japan’s militaristic policies are chiefly 
responsible. 


In the political maneuvers which followed par 
liamentary criticism of the Hirota Cabinet’s 
Fascist and militaristic tendencies, the parties 
won a tactical victory when the army failed to 
secure dissolution of the hostile Diet. Instead, 
the Cabinet was forced to resign on January 23. 
A further advantage was gained when General 
Kazushige Ugaki, a moderate, was chosen to form 
a cabinet two days later. At this point the tide 
turned against the politicians. Although unfavor- 
able public response to its political activities con- 
vinced the army that it stood to gain nothing by 
dissolution and new elections, the parties lacked 
the self-assurance and initiative needed to preserve 
their power and prestige. The stubborn refusal 
of the military to supply a war minister created 
a deadlock which was broken only when General 
Senjuro Hayashi, a candidate acceptable to the 
service, received the imperial mandate on Janu- 
ary 29. The army’s policy throughout the crisis 
—directed by the “upper strata,” relatively mod- 
erate officers who control the top positions of the 
military hierarchy—has been explained as a con- 
tinuation of the attempt to end disaffection among 
the “middle strata” of younger extremists promi- 
nent in the revolt of February 26, 1936. In mov- 
ing to restore unity in the service, the older officers 
have in many respects adopted the basic policies 
of the extremists but favor a slower tempo for 
their execution. 


Despite some opposition from liberals, the par- 
liamentarians have accepted a soldier-dominated 
Cabinet containing not a single party member. 
The Hayashi government must, however, face the 
possibility of future sabotage by the unrepre- 
sented parties or by the younger officers. For its 
support it must depend on the precarious coopera- 
tion of the “upper strata” and the large capitalists. 

The crisis as a whole has been marked by a 
steady increase in the army’s political strength 
at the expense of adherents of civilian govern- 
ment. It is predicted that open intervention in 
domestic political and economic affairs by the 
military will be carried further, but at a gradual 
pace. The essential struggle between the army 
and finance capital will continue within the Cab- 
inet. Since neither seems inclined to push home 
its contentions at the moment, the Hayashi gov- 
ernment may achieve enough compromises to re- 
main in office for a fairly long period. 

D. H. P. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 20, Marcu 12, 1937. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lesiip Bust, President; EstHer G. OGpEn, Secretary; Vera MicHEiEs Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


National 


One Dollar a Year. 


AR IO! 


EX 


— 


VoL 


— 


oe «eaten o 


es “sO te Db’ oO 








