Entered as 2nd class matter 


ndenberg, 
. intention 
iree heads 
ent “speak 
es on for. 
rted to be 
tb the out- 
. His In 
Ww whether 


AN. The 
essage but 
ion of the 
it, because 
‘ make col- 
ator urged 
1 and fast 
ermanently 
an agree. 
vill submit 
t yet estab- 
(Poland), 
tween Rus- 
kia, Russia 
made dur- 
e that our 
has appfe- 
nomic pol- 
ited States, 
s»mbrace ef- 
s proposed 
n and Jap 
1 of future 


yy EXpress- 
the United 
nt in an it 
ver, he still 
to an intet- 

the use of 
ltation with 

reduce the 
at Dumbar- 
tion treaty, 

closely to 
; considered 
it might be 
iggested by 
R BOLLES 


INDS 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vout. XXIV, No. 15 


JANUARY 26, 1945 


By LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


Mr. Rosinger has just returned from the Ninth Conference of the 

Institute of Pacific Relations, held in Hot Springs, Virginia, Janu- 

ary 6-17. The subject of the Conference was “Security and Devel- 
opment in the Post-War Pacific.” 


eeMIER Kuniaki Koiso’s Japanese cabinet, which 

assumed office last July after the American 
seizure of Saipan, is facing a crisis of growing inten- 
sity. As American troops move inland on Luzon in 
the direction of Manila and carrier planes of the 
United States Navy strike out at objectives in Indo- 
China and Formosa, as well as along the China coast, 
Koiso seems threatened by the fate that befell his 
predecessor, Hideiki Tojo. At the moment, however, 
the Premier is making a determined effort to stabil- 
ize his régime and carry through measures designed 
to allay criticism. A far-reaching manpower mobil- 
ization law has been announced, and a considerable 
amount of political maneuvering is going on behind 
the scenes. Koiso has also informed the Japanese 
people—in a speech delivered before the Diet on 
January 21—that their country is on the dividing 
line between survival and death and that greater 
unity is needed, so that Japan can fight better, ‘‘no 
matter when or where the enemy may attempt to in- 
vade our land.” 

Actually the most immediate threat to Japan is 
not that of invasion, but rather the possibility of 
blockade and increasing air attacks. Possession of 
Luzon will bring American planes closer to southern 
Japan and will help the United States to cut the sea 
foutes from the Japanese homeland to South China, 
Indo-China and the territories in Southeast Asia that 
were seized so quickly after Pearl Harbor. A sea and 
ait blockade would become almost complete if—as 
the Japanese fear—American troops should follow 
up their actions in the Philippines with landings on 
the China coast or Formosa, or perhaps both. The 
Japanese empire would then be reduced to the home 
islands and the inner zone of Manchuria, Korea and 


JAPANESE CABINET SHAKEN BY DEFEATS AND INTERNAL CRITICISM 


North China. These continental areas, it is true, are 
of great importance, but would themselves be ex- 
posed to attack once Japan had been stripped of its 
outer defenses. 


WHAT WILL MOSCOW DO? Under the cir- 
cumstances it is unlikely that any Japanese cabinet 
can hope to enjoy a period of stability, especially 
since Japan’s European partner, Germany, is threat- 
ened with defeat. Russia’s massive drives into East 
Prussia and Silesia confront Japan with the possibil- 
ity that at some time in 1945 the full force of Amer- 
ican and British power will be free for use in thé 
Far East and that the U.S.S.R. may take a hand in 
the war in Asia, either this year or later. Recently the 
Russians have become increasingly outspoken in re- 
ferring to Japan, and Tokyo clearly is worried about 
Moscow’s intentions. 

The crucial test will come on or before April 13, 
1945, when four years will have passed since the 
Soviet-Japanese Neutrality Pact was signed. Accord- 
ing to the terms of that treaty—which was concluded 
for a five-year period—if either party wishes to 
terminate the agreement, notice must be given one 
year before the expiration date. Should notice not be 
given, the treaty would automatically be extended 
for another five years. The Japanese have stated that 
they expect Britain and the United States to do their 
utmost “in the coming weeks to secure at least Rus- 
sia’s moral co-belligerency in respect of the Pacific 
war, if not her full embroilment.” In this connec- 
tion, the forthcoming Anglo-American-Soviet discus- 
sions may play a significant role, for it is not impos- 
sible that Soviet-Japanese relations will come up 
for consideration, or that the decisions taken on 
Europe will affect these relations. 


FISSURES IN JAPANESE UNITY. Apart from 
the problems of diplomacy and the war fronts over- 


seas, Japan is faced by growing food difficulties at 
home, the need to evacuate people and industries 


eS oe 


7 
r} 
+6 
rt 
ik 
By 


{ 
a 


er te rat ket nn 


ow 


from large cities because of air raids, and the patent 
inability of Japanese industry—however it may stretch 
and strain—to compete with the industrial output of 
the United States. There are suggestions that, under 
the pressure of all these difficulties, some of the con- 
flicts of interest within ruling circles are becoming 
more pronounced. Important differences of opinion 
exist as to the desirability of strengthening economic 
controls. In the military sphere antagonism between 
the Army and Navy was hinted at on January 10, 
when General Masaharu Homma, former command- 
er-in-chief in the Philippines, declared in an inter- 
view following the American invasion of Luzon: “It 
is to be assumed that the Japanese Grand Fleet will 
now abandon its passiveness.”’ Politically, it is worth 
noting that, according to a report in the Moscow 
Pravda of December 29, some Japanese newspapers 
have urged the government to guarantee freedom of 
speech and press. This is perhaps symptomatic of 
popular discontent within Japan. 
The existence of difficulties and divided councils, 
however, should not be exaggerated or permitted to 


eT eS a ———___. = 


SS 


——e 
ee 


arouse false hopes in the nations fighting Japan. A}. 
though Japan faces a grim prospect, it retains great 
possibilities of resistance in view of the geographic 
obstacles to United Nations operations in the Far 
East. Moreover, in a period of grave crisis—but one 
in which disaster is not yet upon the nation—there 
will be a powerful tendency among Japan's rulers to 
subordinate all conflicts and establish the strongest 
kind of administration, to fight as effectively as pos. 
sible abroad and maintain order at home. 


These possibilities help to explain Foreign Minis. 
ter Shigemitsu’s statement of January 21 to the Diet 
that Japan and the U.S.S.R. are “maintaining very 
close contact’”” and that negotiations on “many pro. 
posed plans” are being carried forward. The Jap. 
anese, it should be remembered, agreed last March 
to yield their oil and coal concessions on northern 
Sakhalin and also retreated on other issues. Presum- 
ably they would be willing to go even further at the 
present time to keep relations with Moscow on an 
even keel. 


COMPREHENSION OF EASTERN EUROPE STRENGTHENS RUSSIA’S POLICY 


The announcement made in Washington by Direc- 
tor General Lehman on January 19 that the Soviet 
government will make available to UNRRA port 
and inland transportation facilities needed to take 
relief supplies into Poland and Czechoslovakia 
should set at rest, for the time being at least, reports 
emanating from various sources, including UNRRA, 
that Russia was proving uncooperative in the urgent 
task of distributing relief in Eastern Europe. With 
the opening of the Dardanelles by Turkey to com- 
mercial traffic, the Soviet government has informed 
UNRRA that Black Sea port reception facilities and 
inland transport are available for food, clothing, 
medical supplies and other relief goods consigned to 
Poland-and Czechoslovakia. The liberation of Polish 
territory, including Warsaw, from German rule 
should help to speed relief to the Poles—provided 
that the unresolved Russo-Polish controversy over 
territory and administration of liberated areas is 
handled in such a way as to avoid future stalemates. 
Insufficient appreciation, among some of the 
UNRRA officials, of Russia’s susceptibility, especial- 
ly in what concerns its relations with the Poles, 
proved one of the most serious stumbling-blocks to 
cooperation in past months. 

Westerners who have had to negotiate with the 
Russians about political, economic or military affairs 
agree, on the whole, on two points: first, that the 
task of obtaining Russia’s assent to any proposed 
measure is apt to take time, since much mistrust 
about the motives of other countries still persists in 
Moscow; and, second, that if patience and under- 
standing are displayed by the non-Russian negotia- 
tors, and an agreement is reached, the Russians are 


faithful in fulfilling their promises. These two points 
need to be borne in mind at a moment when Russia’s 
actions outside its own borders assume increasing 
importance for the rest of the world. 

EVENTS IN RUSSIAN-LIBERATED AREAS. 
Reports of developments in areas Russia has helped 
to liberate are not yet adequate, partly because Amer- 
ican correspondents have not received permission to 
visit some of these areas. Official information, how- 
ever, indicates that the Norwegians have been im- 
pressed with the treatment accorded to them by 
Russia in the far northern regions of Norway, where 
the Russians have urged Norwegian authorities to 
take over administrative tasks as soon as possible. 
Some Hungarians living in exile view with favor the 
government formed at Debrecen, which negotiated 
the armistice signed in Moscow by Russia on behalf 
of the United Nations on January 20. The Italians, 
who have ruefully noted Mr. Churchill’s statement in 
the House of Commons on January 18 that Britain 
does not need Italy, wonder whether Russia’s behav- 
ior in Rumania, a former satellite of Germany, is not 
preferable to that of the Western allies in Italy. 
And, in spite of reports that the government of 
President Benes, which is still in London, was dis 
turbed by Russian overtures to Ruthenia (a province 
of Czechoslovakia whose people have linguistic and 
ethnic affinities with the Ukrainians), the Czechs as 
sert that their friendship with Russia remains ut 
shaken. So far it is only from Bulgaria (if we e& 
clude the unsettled Polish question) that reports 
come of direct Russian intervention, which one 
American correspondent regards as inimical to pre 
vious pro-democratic tendencies in that country. 


———— 


RUSSI 
FUROPE 
Russia in 
calculate 
among R 
tage of tl 
gations a 
Even ass 
shrewd C 
tribution 
reach sO! 
But Russ 
desire to 
world. It 
ing of th 
ditions a 
and the 
hers Or 
i's poli 
ament ai 
with dist 
tually o% 
weaknes 
Britisher 
of the } 
somethir 
attitude 
ing refes 
statemer 
munists 
woid an 
describe 
Trotzky 
world tc 
than the 
asa trai 
champic 
in Gree 
cated th 
to belie. 
had suff 
serious 
JUST 
C 


Rep 


_—_—_—. 
en 


FOREIGN 
Headquarte 
second-clas: 
nN month 


> 18: 


japan. Al- 
aiNns great 
eographic 
1 the Far 
—but one 
on—there 
s rulers to 

strongest 
sly as pos. 


ign Minis. 
> the Diet 
ining very 
many pro- 
The Jap- 
ast March 
1 northern 
s. Presum- 
ther at the 
“OW ON an 


POLICY 
two points 
en Russia's 
increasing 


» AREAS. 
has helped 
ause Amer- 
rmission to 
ation, how- 
e been im- 
> them by 
way, where 
thorities to 
us_ possible. 
h favor the 
negotiated 
a on behalf 
he Italians, 
tatement in 
that Britain 
sia’s behav- 
nany, is not 
es in Italy. 
ernment of 
yn, was dis 
(a province 
rguistic and 
e Czechs as 
remains uf- 
(if we & 
that reports 
which one 
uical to pre 
country. 


—_ 


RUSSIA’S UNDERSTANDING OF EASTERN 
FUROPE. The “correctness” so far displayed by 
Russia in countries occupied by its armies may be a 
calculated effort to dispel the fear still prevailing 
among Russia's allies that Moscow will take advan- 
tage of the common victory to dominate neighboring 
gations and spread its economic and social doctrines. 
fven assuming that Russia’s policy is the result of 
shrewd calculation, it would still be a notable con- 
tribution’ to the efforts of the three great powers to 
seach some agreement about the future of Europe. 
But Russia's policy has deeper roots than the mere 
desire to make a good impression on the rest of the 
world. It is based on a far more intimate understand- 
ing of the issues at stake in this war, and of the con- 
ditions and needs of the peoples of Eastern Europe 
and the Balkans than is generally possessed by Brit- 
hers or Americans. The weakness of Mr. Church- 
ils policy in that region is not that he is by temper- 
yment and tradition a conservative who must view 
with distaste movements of resistance which are ac- 
tually or potentially revolutionary in character. Its 
weakness is the tendency, noticeable among some 
Britishers, to look on peoples who live on the shores 
of the Mediterranean, and east of Germany, with 
something like condescension, if not contempt. This 
attitude was very noticeable in Mr. Churchill’s slight- 
ing references to Spain and Italy, and in his puzzling 
statement about the prevalence of Trotzkyist Com- 
munists among the EAM in Greece—presumably to 
woid any danger of a clash with Russia if they were 
described as plain Communists. It is true that 
Trotzky had many ardent followers throughout the 
world to whom the Stalin régime is more abhorrent 
than the capitalist system, since they regard Stalin 
aa traitor to the cause of ‘‘permanent revolution”’ 
tampioned by Trotzky. But the political situation 
inGreece has for some years been far more compli- 
ated than Mr. Churchill’s statement would lead one 
tobelieve; and to dismiss the EAM, which obviously 
had sufficient strength and influence to cause Britain 
tious trouble, first as “brigands,”’ then as ‘‘Trot- 


Page Three 


JUST PUBLISHED 
CONGRESS AND FOREIGN POLICY 
by Blair Bolles 
ae 
25c 
January 15 issue of ForgIGN Po.icy REPORTS 


REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


a 


zkyists,” is to try to discredit this group instead of 
explaining it. 

The Russians, over the centuries, have done many 
things which have disturbed, shocked, or baffled the 
Western world. But they have one characteristic of 
major importance in our times—and that is their free- 
dom from contempt toward other races and peoples. 
It is true that the Russians, who have only recent- 
ly advanced beyond the stage of development 
reached by their neighbors in Eastern Europe and 
the Balkans, have had no reason to assume 
the attitude of superiority that some Britishers and 
Americans skilled in the techniques of industrial 
civilization occasionally show toward less advanced 
nations. This very similarity of experience is one of 
the secrets of Russia’s success in that area. The fact 
that the Russians, admittedly by ruthless and bloody 
methods, found it possible to build, in twenty-five 
years, an industrial and military system capable of 
inflicting defeats on Germany, gives hope to the 
peoples of Eastern Europe and the Balkans that they, 
too, perhaps in a less grueling way, may emerge 
from the low-level conditions in which they had 
been living on the eve of their conquest by the 
Nazis. It is in our interest, as much as it is in that of 
Russia, that this area south and east of Germany 
which proved so vulnerable to Nazi pressure should 
be strengthened materially and politically, in the 
post-war years. Instead of fearing or resenting Rus- 
sia’s influence in a region where the United States 
has never in the past played an important role, we 
may find that by collaborating with Russia in plans 
for relief and reconstruction we can contribute to 
the stability and recovery of Eastern Europe and the 
Balkans. 


VeRA MICHELES DEAN 


African Handbooks (1-6), edited by H. A. Wieschhoff. 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1948-44. 
$1.50 each. 

A series of concise, scholarly handbooks prepared under 
the direction of the Committee on African Studies, Uni- 
versity of Pennsylvania. Titles published to date include: 
“The Government of French North Africa,” by Herbert 
J. Liebesny; “The Mineral Resources of Africa,” by A. 
Williams Postel; “The Food Resources of Africa,” by 
T. S. Githens and C. E. Wood, Jr.; “The Languages and 
Press of Africa,” by Duncan MacDougald, Jr.; “Colonial 
Policies in Africa,” by H. A. Wieschhoff; and “Labor 
Problems of Africa,” by John A. Noon. 


Bombardment Aviation, by Keith Ayling. Harrisburg, Pa., 
Military Publishing Company, 1944. $2.00 


A practical flying authority explains for the lay reader 
what military bombing accomplishes. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 15, JANUARY 26, 1945. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y 
second-class matter December 2, 


w¢ month for change of address on membership publications. 


&> 181 


Dontaucad } 
Froaguced wna 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Legr, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


. Incorporated. National 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


er union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


“ he ee OR = 
~ See 


Washington News Letter 


In the few months since the liberation of France, 
French factories and armed forces have become im- 
portant elements in the war against Germany. French 
factories produce goods used by the United States 
forces on the western front, and the French First 
Army is fighting alongside ours in the region of 
Strasbourg. The new agreement for an increase of 
exports from this country to France—announced on 
January 15—represents an acknowledgment by the 
United States of the growing importance of France. 
American raw materials will enable French factories 
to increase their production, while American muni- 
tions will enable France to double the number of its 
troops in action against the Germans. 

DANGERS OF ECONOMIC WEAKNESS. A 
further reason for the export agreement between the 
United States and France is the danger that economic 
dislocations from which France currently suffers 
could lead to a political crisis unless they are 
checked. Political unrest would be harmful to the 
foreign policy of the United States, which counts on 
a strong and stable France to take a hand in main- 
taining the peace after the war. “We fully recognize 
France's vital interest in a lasting solution of the 
German problem and the contribution which she can 
make in achieving international security,” President 
Roosevelt said in his message to Congress on Jan- 
uary 6. 

Limited industrial operation is at the root of 
French economic difficulties, which include unem- 
ployment and unequal distribution of food and 
clothing. While many factories have been running, 
others remain idle, and these must be put into opera- 
tion if the economic health of France is to be main- 
tained. The cloth factories of northwest France pro- 
duce but a bare percentage of their potential capa- 
city. “Cotton reserves do not exist,” Robert Lacoste, 
Minister of Production, reported to the Consultative 
Assembly on December 20. A shortage of sulphur has 
also forced severe restrictions on the synthetic tex- 
tile industry. A scarcity of sodium carbonate has lim- 
ited operation of the glass factories. Lack of machine 
tools checks all French industry. The mines have not 
been restored to full activity. While the output of 
coal is as satisfactory as could be expected, the baux- 
ite mines of Hérault and Var have ceased operation. 

Serious problems of power and transportation ag- 
gravate France’s economic difficulties. The fighting 
destroyed transformers and electric power distribu- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


FRANCE SEEKS U.S. AID TO BOLSTER ECONOMY 


tion lines. This slowed down the restoration of 
factories, and today the power available is far beloy 
actual needs. France has an acute shortage of trucks 
gasoline, locomotives and railway cars, although the 
United States Army restored to the French gover. 
ment 1,700 locomotives and approximately 30,09) 
rail cars seized by the Germans. 

FRENCH IMPORT PROGRAM. Last autum 
France began to look abroad, especially to the United 
States, for assistance in its economic restoration, Op 
November 29 the French government made public 
the program of Pierre Mendés-France, Minister of 
National Economy, for the import of $700,000,00 
worth of four categories of materials: material and 
equipment for rebuilding ports; transportation ma. 
terials like tires, gasoline and trucks; raw produch 
such as rubber, cotton and wool; and food. France 
expects to pay for these imports rather than obtain 
them through lend-lease. 

To organize this program the French government 
sent to the United States two emissaries—Henri Bon 
net as Ambassador Extraordinary, who presented his 
letters of credence on January 1, and Jean Monnet 
as head of the French Supply Mission. The two men 
began their negotiations without the support of the 
Allied High Command in the European theater of 
war. Non-French military leaders hesitated to give 
up the shipping space that would be required fora 
French import program; they preferred to assist 
French industry and army through combined military 
channels. The French, on the other hand, sought the 
privilege of indicating directly to the United State 
government what supplies they needed. The French 
view prevailed, although the French were disappoint 
ed in their hopes that a certain number of Liberty 
ships would be turned over to them. Instead, each 


- month an amount of shipping from the Allied pool 


is to be allocated for French needs, as stated by 
French representatives, within the limits of what the 
Combined Shipping Board believes possible. 

The new export agreement, however, will no 
solve all French economic problems, whose adjust 
ment must await cessation of military hostilities o 
French soil. But the agreement to provide shipping 
and supplies does bolster France’s sovereignty. lt 
paves the way for the French to handle their own 
relief problem with a minimum of outside assistance, 
and it may forestall a political explosion. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


agenda 
Adviso 
tion of 
aspects 
ayear, 
While 
people 
it may 
remain 
acaderr 

To v 
of offi 
future 
Britain 
conside 
feparat 
people 

>, 
in the | 
tion o 
former 
who, i 
sion o! 
most oO 
and tl 
against 
a Cart 
the Ge 
minim 
uphold 
howev: 
cerning 
Poland 
that P 


