—— 
—$$$<—.__ 


mora, 
Azania 
made 
proxi- 
popu- 
WwW eX. 
ypular 
iS ad- 
» Cab- 
| with 
ft Re- 


rs of- 
Since 
ypular 
unists 
Inesty 
yment 
‘y ac- 
bola— 
iment 
10 de 
form. 
tribu- 
roved, 
orted 
April 


how 

The 
, May 
ncisco 
lunist 
on of 
inrest 


prev- 
y con- 
funds 
mated 
mon- 
| that 
> and 
; 106 
ia Gil 
\ction 
nent’s 
lead- 
m. 


SON 


New 


upport 


National 
, Editor. 
ur. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


Wot. XV, No. 30 May 22, 1936 


AUSTRIA ESTABLISHES A FASCIST STATE 
by Mildred S. Wertheimer 


What is Schuschnigg’s internal policy? 


Why is Austria the key to peace in Europe? 


September 25, 1935 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25¢ a copy 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
March 3, 1879 


-riodical Division, 
‘ibrary of Congress, i 


vashington, D. C. 


AUSTRIA FLOUNDERS IN 


EUROPEAN WHIRLPOOL 


HE bloodless coup of May 14, by which 

Chancellor Schuschnigg of Austria ousted his 
Vice-Chancellor, Prince von Starhemberg, from a 
reconstructed cabinet, marks one more step in the 
series of internal readjustments which Austria 
has undergone in an effort to preserve a modicum 
of freedom from simultaneous interference by 
Germany, Italy and the Little Entente. The im- 
mediate pretext for Starhemberg’s sudden down- 
fall was a telegram he had sent Mussolini on 
May 12, congratulating Jl Duce on his triumph 
over Ethiopian “barbarism” and “democratic 
hypocrisy.” This telegram, which brought pro- 
tests from Britain and France, also forced the 
resignation of the Foreign Minister, Berger- 
Waldenegg, a close friend of the Prince. 

The May 14 coup, however, was the climax of a 
conflict for power between the Chancellor, a de- 
vout Catholic and Christian Socialist leader, and 
Prince von Starhemberg, who served not only as 
Vice-Chancellor but as leader of the Fatherland 
Front, a non-party organization composed of all 
groups and individuals loyal to the Schuschnigg 
regime. The Prince was known for his devotion 
to Mussolini, who until the Ethiopian war had 
subsidized Starhemberg’s private army, the Heim- 
wehr. Mussolini seems to have double-crossed 
Starhemberg by demanding, at the Italo-Austro- 
Hungarian conference held in Rome on March 20- 
23, that Austria establish a conscript army of its 
own. On April 1, a week after his return from 
Rome, Chancellor Schuschnigg proclaimed the in- 
troduction of universal conscription, in defiance 
of the St. Germain Treaty of 1919 which had 
limited the Austrian army to a professional force 
of 30,000. Under the new decree all able-bodied 
men between the ages of 18 and 42 are liable to 
be called up for service “with or without arms,” 
not only in the regular army—which owing to 
Austria’s scant financial resources will probably 
be limited to 50,000—pbut also in labor battalions. 
Conscription, which Starhemberg had vigorously 


opposed, sounded the death-knell of private mili- 
— y organizations, including the Chancellor’s own 

Catholic Sturmscharen and Starhemberg’s Heim- 
wehr which, the Prince declared on April 26, 
would be disbanded only over his dead body. 
Despite these brave words, Schuschnigg indicated 
on May 15 that the Heimwehr would soon be dis- 
solved, and assumed leadership of the Fatherland 
Front, demoting Starhemberg to the post of 
patron of the Front’s section for women. 

The effect of these developments on Austria’s 
internal situation is still uncertain. Chancellor 
Schuschnigg is not a 100 per cent Fascist like 
Starhemberg, and seems at present anxious to 
conciliate the workers and peasant leaders with 
democratic sympathies. This might indicate 
willingness to abandon the harsher features of 
dictatorship and make concessions to the out- 
lawed Socialists—a program which would meet 
with favor in France and Britain. On the other 
hand, Schuschnigg is personally not friendly to 
socialism and has displayed no such marked hos- 
tility to Naziism as Starhemberg. It is believed, 
moreover, that he is not entirely opposed to Haps- 
burg restoration, which might serve as a bulwark 
against absorption of Austria by Hitler Germany. 

The extent to which Starhemberg’s downfall 
will affect Austria’s foreign policy is even more 
unpredictable. Mussolini has recently redoubled 
his efforts to hold Austria in Italy’s orbit. At the 
same time, Schuschnigg seems less susceptible 
to Italian influence than the Prince and more 
anxious to steer an independent course in foreign 
affairs. At present he apparently favors economic 
cooperation with the Little Entente. The prefer- 
ential trade treaty concluded with Czechoslovakia 
on March 10 promises some relief for Austrian 
trade, especially if it can be followed by similar 
improvement in Austria’s relations with the other 
two Little Entente states—Rumania and Yugo- 
slavia. Such a rapprochement, however, is doubt- 
ful as long as the Schuschnigg government does 


v 
ee 


not officially renounce all hope of Hapsburg 
restoration; for Rumania and Yugoslavia—unlike 
Czechoslovakia, which is directly menaced by Nazi 
Germany—fear the return of the Hapsburgs more 
than Austro-German union. Yugoslavia, more- 
over, resents Vienna’s subservience to Italy; and 
Mussolini did all in his power at the Rome con- 
ference to hamper a rapprochement between 
Austria and the Little Entente. The confused 
situation plays directly into the hands of Ger- 
many, which misses no opportunity to emphasize 
the unity of interests of the two German-speaking 
peoples. It is not without significance that one of 
Schuschnigg’s first moves following the ouster of 
Starhemberg was to confer with Herr von Papen, 
German Minister to Vienna, regarding improve- 
ment of Austro-German trade relations. The 
Hitler government, having failed to browbeat 
Austria into union with Germany, has apparently 
changed its tactics, and may yet win by concilia- 
tion what it lost in 1934 by violence. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


INDEPENDENCE FOR PUERTO RICO? 


“The atmosphere is unbelievably charged with 
resentment, hysteria and bitterness. The bill has 
aroused a wave of anti-Americanism such as has 
never been experienced here.” Such, according 
to a well-informed American in the island, has 
been the reaction to the measure for Puerto Rican 
independence introduced on April 23 by Senator 
Millard E. Tydings. 

The bill offers Puerto Ricans the opportunity 
to vote in November 1937 on the proposition: 
“Shall the people of Puerto Rico be sovereign and 
independent?” Should the ballot be in the affirma- 
tive, a convention is to draw up a constitution, 
which must be approved by the President of the 
United States and ratified by the people of Puerto 
Rico. Following these steps the island would 
enjoy commonwealth status for four years, and 
then become independent. During the common- 
wealth period, United States tariff duties would 
be progressively applied to Puerto Rican products 
until, finally, full rates would be in force. 

Puerto Ricans have long been almost unanimous 
in urging determination of a permanent status 
for the island, but have differed as to the exact 
character of that status. The majority coalition, 
in which the conservative Republicans and the 
trade-union Socialists have joined, favors contin- 
ued association with the United States, either in 
the form of statehood or a “home rule” régime. 
The Liberal party has had for some time a plank 
for independence in its platform, but within re- 
cent years has stressed the prior importance of 


Page Two 


economic improvement, through development of 
the reconstruction program fostered by the Roose- 
velt administration. The only out-and-out inde- 
pendence group is the Nationalist party, fanatical 
in its demand for political freedom, but almost 
reactionary in its economic and social doctrines. 
Led by Pedro Albizu Campos, Harvard graduate, 
it marshalled only 5,000 votes in the 1932 elec- 
tions, and has drawn its adherents chiefly from 
students and other youth. 

Balked in its efforts to attract mass support, the 
Nationalist party turned to terrorist tactics. From 
its ranks came the two young men who on Febru- 
ary 23 murdered Colonel E. Francis Riggs, island 
chief of police and an enlightened and popular 
official. Following arrest, the assailants were 
killed in the station-house by police. The death 
of Colonel Riggs and the difficulty of getting 
juries to convict those guilty of political assassina- 
tion confronted Washington with the possible ne- 
cessity of imposing martial law. The United States 
would thus have been cast in the rdle of a colonia! 
oppressor at a time when the approaching peace 
conference at Buenos Aires made friendly rela- 
tions with Latin America all-important. It was 
apparently hoped in Washington that an offer of 
independence would force Puerto Ricans to face 
the reality of their demands, undercut Nationalist 
propaganda and advance, in addition, the “good 
neighbor” program. Moreover, Puerto Rican in- 
dependence would relieve the United States of a 
considerable financial burden. The Federal gov- 
ernment has been spending approximately $1,- 
000,000 a month in relief, and Congress has voted 
$26,000,000 for a reconstruction program. 

Although the island’s poverty and overpopula- 
tion seriously cloud prospects for successful inde- 
pendence, the Puerto Rican people deserve a fair 
opportunity to vote on their future destiny. The 
conditions incorporated in the Tydings bill un- 
fortunately have led many Puerto Ricans to view 
that measure as an attempt to force the rejection 
of independence by coupling it with economic 
suicide. Puerto Rico normally sells 95 per cent 
of its exports to the United States and the closing 
of this market by tariff barriers, higher than 
those imposed on Cuba, would mean ruin for the 
island. Puerto Ricans also resent the bill’s fail- 
ure to offer any alternative to independence except 
continuation of the present “hated colonialism.” 
The alarming tension in the island calls for 
definite assurance from Washington that the 
Tydings bill, which is reported to have the sup- 
port of the administration, will not become law 
without ample opportunity for the consideration 
of needed amendments. (CHarLEs A. THOMSON 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 30, May 22, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lesure Bueit, President; Esther G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Vol 


