ON 


” 27th 
Policy 
to the 
; from 
1g oO 
-mber- 


k, Ox 


ology, 
rough 


)e wel: 
. $5.00 
ewen- 
: view 
rle be 


, New 


some 
Sritain 
mocra- 


York, 


struc 
; inner 
inister. 


Henry 
53.00 
ndent’s 
ditor’s 


National 
Vi iCHELES 
; a Yeat. 











POReie 4) Reem 
SOMBRAL | IN@ARY — a 
OMY. of mica 


Entered as 2nd class 
General Library 


Tl. ?¢ 


University of Michigan 


awe ed 


Ska y 7 59%R 


Ann Arbor, Michtcan 














FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





VoL. XXV, No. 48 


SEPTEMBER 138, 1946 





WILL GERMANY AGAIN PLAY EAST AND WEST AGAINST EACH OTHER? 


ECRETARY of State Byrnes’ address of Septem- 

ber 6 at a special meeting of Allied and Ger- 
man officials in the Stuttgart Opera House gave new 
precision to various aspects of American policy to- 
ward Germany which, although adumbrated in pre- 
vious government statements, had not in the past 
been sufficiently clarified. The core of Mr. Byrnes’ 
speech was that the United States is opposed not 
only to Germany's lack of economic unity, but also 
to the splitting up of its territory; that Germany 
must not become ‘‘a pawn or a partner in a military 
struggle for power between the East and the West”’; 
that a central administrative agency, a German Na- 
tional Council cornposed of “democratically respon- 
sible” officials, should be established as soon as pos- 
sible to assure unification of Germany; and that “‘as 
long as an occupation force is required in Germany 
the Army of the United States will be a part of that 
occupation force.” 


The American government had already indicated 
its determination not to withdraw from Germany 
for a long period, notably in Mr. Byrnes’ own pro- 
posal of April 29 for a twenty-five year alliance of 
the Big Four, which met with a cool reception in 
Moscow and Paris. Yet until now the rapid de- 
mobilization of American forces on the continent 
had caused many of our wartime allies, including 
Russia, to assume that, the moment the peace treaties 
with Germany, Italy, and the Axis satellites had been 
concluded, the United States would again disinterest 
itself in the affairs of Europe, using such military 
weight as it retains to bolster its interests in the 
Pacific and in the Western Hemisphere. The Stutt- 
gart meeting, staged with a view to its maximum 
effect on Russia, as well as on the Germans and the 
test of Europe, was an unmistakable warning to Mos- 
cow that the United States intends to stay on the 


continent as long as it may prove to be necessary. 


BYRNES BIDS FOR GERMAN SUPPORT. At 
the same time, Mr. Byrnes made a bid for the sup- 
port of the Germans comparable to that of Mr. 
Molotov on July 10*—and based on a similar ap- 
peal to the Germans’ ingrained desire to maintain 
the territorial unity of the Reich, Mr. Byrnes’ sug- 
gestion for reconsideration of Germany's eastern 
border brings into the open some extremely delicate 
questions. At the Potsdam Conference the Big Three 
agreed, “in principle,” to the proposal of the Soviet 
government concerning “the ultimate transfer to the 
Soviet Union of the City of Koenigsberg and the 
area adjacent to it,’ subject to expert examination 
of the actual frontier—and on this point, Mr. Byrnes 
said, ‘we will certainly stand by our agreement.” So 
far as Poland is concerned, however, the Potsdam 
Declaration stated that, ‘‘pending the final deter- 
mination of Poland’s western frontier,” certain speci- 
fied German territories, including the portion of 
East Prussia not placed under the administration of 
the U.S.S.R. and including the former free City of 
Danzig, ‘‘shall be under administration of the Polish 
State.” The use of the phrase “pending the final de- 
termination” clearly left the way open for review of 
this presumably transitional settlement, although the 
Poles, in effect, have considered the Potsdam deci- 
sion with respect to their western border as final, 
especially since cession of German territory to War- 
saw was promised by the Soviet government as com- 
pensation for its own occupation of eastern Poland. 
Now Mr. Byrnes declares that the United States will 
support revision of Poland’s northern and western 
frontiers in Poland’s favor. ‘““However,” he added, 
“the extent of the area to be ceded to Poland must 
be determined when the final settlement is agreed 





*See Foreign Policy Bulletin, July 19, 1946. 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 














ae a 








upon”—in other words, when the German peace 
treaty is taken up, which may not be until 1947. 
FUTURE OF REICH’S BORDERS. Many Amer- 
ican observers had long pointed out that it was 
illogical, to put it mildly, for the United States to 
acquiesce in the cession to Poland on grounds of 
security, of large areas of Germany rich in coal and 
agricultural resources, and yet deny to France the 
right to claim, on similar grounds, at least a share of 
control over the Ruhr, base of Germany's prewar 
industrial development. Some advisers in Washing- 
ton had therefore proposed that the two territorial 
issues should be dealt with more or less on the same 
terms, believing it would prove easier to induce 
France to abandon its claims about the Ruhr if com- 
parable treatment was proposed in the case of Po- 
land. It had been rumored, moreover, that Russia, 
not entirely satisfied by current trends in Poland, 
might itself offer the return of some of the territories 
temporarily assigned to the Poles, with the object 
of winning the support of a united German nation. 
What Mr. Byrnes proposes is that the Saar should be 
integrated with France; but he emphatically states 
that the United States ‘will not favor any controls 
that would subject the Ruhr and the Rhineland to 
the political domination or manipulation of outside 
powers.” From the point of view of assuring Allied 
collaboration, it would, of course, have been desir- 
able that any proposal to reconsider the eastern 
border of Germany should have been jointly formu- 
lated by the Big Three. If this approach was tried, 
it must be assumed that it proved unfruitful. In 
the form in which Mr. Byrnes’ suggestion is now 
couched, however, there should be no surprise if it is 
regarded by both Poland and Russia as an attempt to 
undermine their position with respect to Germany. 
The most striking aspect of Mr. Byrnes’ territorial 
proposal—and the one that was immediately and 


FAILURE OF MEDIATION CALLS FOR REVIEW OF U.S.-CHINA POLICY 


The sale of a million and a half tons of surplus 
property to the Chinese government at a time when 
General Marshall and American Ambassador to 
China, J. Leighton Stuart are seeking to revive the 
Kuomintang-Communist negotiations serves to em- 
phasize the fundamental dilemma of American 
policy-makers in China. For over a year the United 
States, while assuming the rdéle of an impartial 
mediator in China’s civil strife, has given invaluable 
material assistance to the Central government in its 
military struggle with the Communists. This ma- 
terial aid, taking such forms as postwar lend-lease 
supplies, American transportation of government 
troops, and the use of marines to guard sections of 
government-held railway track in North China, has 
served to strengthen the authority of Generalissimo 
Chiang Kai-shek. At the same time, by encouraging 
intransigent elements within the government, it has 


= Page Two = 











ee, 
ce 


sadly noted by the French—is that a little over, 
year after Potsdam the Big Three are vying with 
each other to gain the support of the Germans, fea. 
ing that a divided Germany will be used by eithe 
Russia or the West, as the Secretary of State put it 
in “a military struggle.” We thus see a repetition of 
the pattern set after 1919 when Germany was able 
to transform defeat into victory by first coming tp 
terms with outlawed Russia at Rapallo in 192, 
then, under Stresemann, turning to a Western orien. 
tation at Locarno; and subsequently shuttling bac 
and forth between West and East until the very out. 
break of the war, surprising the Western world a 
the last moment by its non-aggression pact with 
Russia. Today both Russia and the West, as repre. 
sented by the United States, would like to see a uni 
fied, industrially active Germany; Russia because jt 
needs Germany's manufactured goods, the Westen 
Allies because they do not want to keep on financi 
German economy, and are convinced that Germa 
production is needed for the rehabilitation of the 
rest of Europe. Where Russia and the West diffe 
is as to the kind of Germany they want to see achieve 
unity. The Russians would like to see Germany 
ruled by what they would consider ‘‘friendly” ele 
ments—a coalition primarily Socialist-Communist in 
composition. The Western powers would like to see 
a ‘“‘democratic’’ Germany, and hope that unification 
will avert the spread of Communist influence. 
Which of the two sides will win the support of 
the Germans? Most important of all, are the Ger 
mans, if unified, prepared to play an independent 
and responsible rdle in Europe—or will they, under 
either the Byrnes or Molotov program, merely be | 
come agents of whichever side seems to offer them| 
the greatest advantages ? 





VerA MicHELes DEAN | 
(The first in a series of articles on Germany in postwar Europe) 


impeded the success of the negotiations. 

TWO ASPECTS OF POLICY. The latest evi 
dence of Washington’s dilemma is particularly sig 
nificant. On August 31 it was announced in Shanghai 
that wartime surplus property, including ships, 
trucks, motors, steel and electrical goods, railway 
and radio equipment, prefabricated houses, and 
road-building machines, originally costing more than 
US $800,000,000, had been sold to the Chines: | 
government for a far smaller figure (estimated at 
one-fifth of the original price). While no weapons 
or other supplies that could be used directly in battle 
are involved, the items mentioned can be of great 











Chou En-lai, to agree to the establishment of a five | 


? 
Pe 
civil war significance. The arrangement was com) 4 
cluded in the very week when General Marshall | th 
and Ambassador Stuart were seeking to persuade | 1 
the Generalissimo and Communist negotiator, © 


st 























=} —— Page Three 
et a} man committee (consisting of two government rep- talks. Past history and the present alignment of 
With} sesentatives, two Communists and Mr. Stuart) to forces in China suggest a stalemate in which each 
fea} consider the apportionment of seats in a new State side will achieve some of its objectives, but there 
ithe | Council. This body, which has never been formed, will be no clear-cut decision. In such a situation 
ut it} is to be the highest organ of a new Chinese coali- the highly self-sufficient Communists may come out 
mof} ton government, embracing representatives of the in a relatively stronger position than the government, 
able| government, Communists, third-party elements and whose economic situation is likely to grow more 
ig to} non-partisans, under the Political Consultative Con- difficult despite American assistance, and whose 
922:} ference decisions of last January. military power is so dependent on our aid. 
tien} Even if established, the committee would be MOTIVES IN MEDIATION. Although no pol- 
back} a lifeless affair in the absence of an accord on icy-making official has ever said so in public, it is 
Out-} the cessation of hostilities and the apportionment clear that American actions in China are motivated, 
ld a} of political authority within the country. The as- first of all, by fear of Russian intentions and a be- 
with} signment of seats in a new government can hardly lief that the strengthening of Chinese Communist 
epre|} be decided or, if arranged, cannot be carried out, power would bring an extension of Russian influ- 
uni} while the government and the Communists are ence in China. Washington is also concerned over the 
se it} fighting in a number of key provinces and are in economic weakness of the Chinese government and 
stem! sharp disagreement regarding the character of the its lack of genuine popular support. These consid- 
ncing} political authority to be established in North and erations have resulted in a prolonged effort to pro- 
rmaj} Central China and Manchuria. The Communists in- mote peace in China, to encourage the Nanking 
f the} sist that agreement on a new military truce is the administration to correct some of its shortcomings, 
diffe} key essential of the present situation. They have and to back it strongly so that it can deal with the 
hieve} stated that they will establish a formally separate Communists without being submerged by them. The 
many} government of their areas, if they regard the pros- effect of our determined support of Nanking, how- 
ele s for peace as hopeless. ever, has been to strengthen the elements within it 
ist in} SHADOW OF CIVIL WAR. The continuance that are opposed to internal peace and democratic 
0 set} of negotiations should not conceal the fact that the reforms. Consequently, our aid has little effect in 
ation} current American effort at mediation has failed. bringing about true stability. 
The discussions are going forward not because the The alternatives in China are not easy for the 

rt of} Chinese participants really expect anything to come United States, but the time has plainly come for a 
Get-} out of them, but because the United States desires far-sighted review of our policy toward that coun- 
ndent | to see the talks continue, and in this situation neither try. It would be well to give attention once more 
inde} Chinese group is willing to take the onus for break- to the principle enunciated by President Truman in 
y be | ing them off. The chief government purpose is prob- his statement of December 15, 1945 when he indi- 
them| ably to clear the railways of North China, drive the cated that our aid to China would be conditioned on 

_ Communists from their main urban or semi-urban the achievement of democratic unity in that coun- 
AN | centers and then ask for renewed negotiations on the try. Fear seems to have prevented us from adhering 
wro)| basis of an improved military position. The Com- to this program, but the failure of the alternative 


y | munists’ objective seems to be to retain as much of 
their territory as they can to compensate for losses by 
striking the government at its weak points and, 


course that has been adopted suggests the desirabil- 
ity of returning to the President's original formula. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


; evi above all, to annihilate government troops, thereby (This is the first of two articles by Mr. Rosinger, who bas just 
he also improving their bargaining power in future reautaal from a three months’ visit to China.) 

ship,| VICTORIOUS LEFTISTS IN CHILE URGE MODERATE ECONOMIC REFORM 
ilway} That inflation has become a major political issue for employers and employees to negotiate cost of 


and} in Latin America was attested by the Chilean presi- 





living adjustments at semi-annually rather than 





than} dential election of September 4 and the food riots annually. 
ines | in Brazil on August 30 and 31. In both countries FOOD AND VOTES IN LATIN AMERICA. 
ed at| price controls have proved ineffectual, and an infla- Brazilians and Chileans had been prepared for a 
apons | tion psychology, compounded of hoarding, wild difficult transition to a peacetime economy, but the 
battle} spending and discontent, has taken hold of many problems they have encountered have not been pre- 
great} people. In Brazil, where demonstrators called for cisely what they anticipated. Although shipping facil- 
com; 250 per cent cut in prices, estimates of the rise in ities were made available to Latin American trade 
rshall | the cost of living between 1939 and the end of 1945 much sooner than had been expected, manufactured 
suade | tange from 85 to more than 200 per cent. Prices in goods to fill the ships could not be procured from 
iator, | Chile, which has a long history of inflation, are out- Britain and the United States in the desired quanti- 
| five: | Stripping wage increases, and it has become necessary ties. Thus one element in the inflationary rise of 





lie atl hatin a Aci eet see Mae 


Ut 


7 

t 
Mf,’ 
4) 

a 


eS 


he ig eget AG 


aot 


" : rea) mS 
Mes sh CS 7 
Sr ila Fr RI AR eR _ oe 


Faas 
wee 





Ss ee ee enn A . 

















prices, the shortage of imports, was not checked as 
quickly as Latin Americans had expected. In fact, 
since inflationary forces cannot be halted at national 
borders, the inability of the United States thus far 
to put its own economic house in order has impeded 
efforts of Latin American countries to stabilize their 
national economy. Such bugaboos of the war period 
as the fear that demand for the strategic raw ma- 
terials of Latin America would level off abruptly at 
the end of the war, or that foreign dumping would 
drive infant industries out of business, have failed to 
materialize. Yet domestic production has suffered 
either as a result of natural factors (1945 crops were 
generally disappointing), or of work stoppages and 
political disturbances. Local scarcities have been ag- 
gravated by graft and profiteering universally preva- 
lent in wartime. Political leaders in Latin America, 
as in other parts of the world, are aware that they 
will stand or fall on their economic records. 

CHILE RETURNS TO THE LEFT. Chile's dif- 
ficulties can be traced to political factionalism, ad- 
ministrative incompetence, and economic deteriora- 
tion. That the Chilean electorate does not attribute 
this situation to the left, although leftist govern- 
ments have been in power since 1938, is indicated 
by the victory of Senator Gabriel Gonzalez Videla, 
candidate of the coalition of the Radical, Demo- 
cratic, Authentic Socialist and Communist parties. 
While Senator Gonzalez does not have the absolute 
majority over his opponents required by the consti- 
tution, his lead of 50,000 votes over the Conserva- 
tive candidate, Senator Eduardo Cruz Coke, is large 
enough, his supporters believe, to induce Congress to 
ratify the electoral results rather than to hold the 
congressional election customary in this case. 

In the interval since the retirement of President 
Juan Antonio Rios in November 1945, the composi- 
tion of the victorious Democratic Alliance has been 
considerably altered. While the nominally leftist 
administration was tending further to the right, the 
leadership of the Radical party, balance-wheel of the 
Alliance, remained in the hands of the left wing. 
The stern treatment meted out by Acting President 





Just Published— 
INDIA’S PROBLEMS AS A FREE NATION 
by Grant S. McClellan 
25 cents 


September 1 issue of ForEIGN Poticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











Page Four 











a 
—— 


Alfredo Duhalde, a moderate Radical, to striking 
unions and their sympathizers at the time of the 
January-February labor troubles, pointed up the in. 
compatibility of the agrarian right wing and the col. 
lectivist-minded left wing of the party. At that time 
the Radical party withdrew from the government, 
along with the Communists, leaving the “dissident 
Radical’’ faction and the Socialists to form a new cab. 
inet. The two groups came to the final parting of the 
ways in August when the party directorate, in ag 
unprecedented step, drummed President Duhalde 
and the “‘dissident Radicals” out of the party. Mean. 
while, the wing of the Socialist party that supported 
Duhalde presented its own candidate, Bernardo 
Ibafiez, Secretary-General of the Federation of Labor, 

The divided condition of the Left as the campaign 
opened gave certain grounds for optimism on the 
part of the rightist Liberal, Conservative and Agrar. 
ian parties. Their inability to agree upon a common 
candidate, however, was a decisive factor in their 
defeat. After former President Arturo Alessandri 
withdrew from the presidential race, the Liberal 
party presented his son, Fernando Alessandri, candi- 
date of the Duhalde Radicals as well. The Conserva- 
tives’ candidate was the eminent physician and social 
philosopher Eduardo Cruz Coke who, in the words 
of one Chilean commentator, “lifted the face of the 
party.” The four candidates went before the people 
on fundamentally the same issue—the need to take 
drastic measures against the inflation which is mak- 
ing life for most Chileans an unrewarding struggle 
for existence. 

The core of Senator Gonzalez’ proposed solution 
to Chile’s economic difficulties is planned industrial- 
ization. In domestic policy he will, if elected, be 
faced with the delicate task of convincing the con 
servatives that the economic and social measures 
undertaken by the administration do not constitute 
a social revolution, while at the same time demon 
strating to Chile’s underprivileged that these long 
overdue reforms will actually be carried through. 
Senator Gonzalez will seek a policy of broad eco- 
nomic and political cooperation with the United 
States; and he believes that in the long-term interest 
of the United States this cooperation should be fully 
reciprocated. How successful the new administration 
will be in coping with the basic problem of economic 
unbalance depends in great measure on whether it is 
willing to develop sound fiscal and monetary policies 
and whether, in such an endeavor Chilean opinion 
can find a common meeting-ground. 

OLiveE HOLMES 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 48, SEPTEMBER 13, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; HELEN M. Daccett, Executive Secretary; VERA MICHELE 
Dean, Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Four Dollars a Yea 


Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Six Dollars a Year 
gp is: Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











Vou. 2 


Ol 


| 


a 


the re 
had t 
of St 
as a 
of Cc 
rally 


cannt 


