it Mr. 
iation 
arcely 
States 
» they 
war. 
laneu: 
is no 
uture. 
YNE 


TFOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Entered as second- 
| class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


You. XIX, No. 25 Apri. 12, 1940 


a 


FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS, written by experts, 
will help you interpret the European conflict: 
THE WAR AND AMERICAN SHIPPING 
THE NEAR EAST AND THE EUROPEAN WAR 
RUSSIA’S ROLE IN THE EUROPEAN CONFLICT 
THE BRITISH DOMINIONS AT WAR 
WAR AND U.S.-LATIN AMERICAN TRADE 


25¢ Each 


Dr. William W. Bishop 
% University of Michigan Library 
Ann Arbor, Wich. 


WAR IN SCANDINAVIA—-A SETBACK FOR GERMANY? 


a invasion and occupation of defenseless Den- 
mark, followed by a German attack on Norway 
on April 9, brings to a climax the struggle between 
Germany and the Allies for control of Scandinavia. 
Military action came after the Allies had taken de- 
cisive steps to tighten the blockade against Germany. 
Britain had concluded war-trade pacts with all the 
Scandinavian countries whereby Sweden, Norway 
and Denmark had agreed not to re-export to Ger- 
many vital imports from overseas and to restrict 
shipments of their own products to the Reich. On 
April 6-7 the British navy had entered Norwegian 
territorial waters and sown mines at three points in 
order to interrupt completely exports of Swedish 
iron ore from the Norwegian port of Narvik. This 
action had been taken despite protests of the Nor- 
wegian Foreign Minister Halvdan Koht, who 
warned the Allies on April 6 that any attempt to 
compel Norway to depart from its policy of strict 
neutrality would immediately involve his country in 
war. Perhaps even sooner than M. Koht anticipated, 
German troops landed on Norwegian soil. 

DRAIN ON GERMAN RESOURCES. Despite 
the military successes which Germany seems destined 
to achieve, extension of the war may constitute a 
setback for the Reich. From the very beginning the 
Nazis hoped to keep the hostilities on a small scale 
in order to conserve Germany's slender economic 
resources and man power. It is true that Germany 
will not need to strain all its energies to conquer 
Scandinavia. None of the Northern countries ex- 
cept Sweden undertook a significant armament pro- 
gram before the outbreak of the present war. Den- 
mark’s frontiers enjoyed only the flimsy protection 
afforded by the non-aggression pact of May 31, 1939 
which now has become one more scrap of paper; 
and the small Danish army has apparently retired 
without resistance. The Norwegian army, which has 
a war strength of 90,000 men and an air force of 


little more than 100 planes, may hold out longer 
behind the natural barriers afforded by mountains 


and a rugged coast line. Here German action will 
have to be swift in order to anticipate the landing 
of a large Allied expeditionary force in northern 
Norway. The Norwegian navy, consisting of four 
coast defense battleships, eight destroyers and nine 
submarines, as well as smaller craft, may prove a 
valuable adjunct to the British fleet. Germany may 
find its most formidable opposition in Sweden, 
which can mobilize an army of 600,000 men and has 
a fairly strong navy which may give the German 
fleet some trouble in the Baltic. Swedish equipment, 
however, has been seriously depleted by the Finnish 
war; and once Norway is conquered Swedish re- 
sistance will sooner or later collapse. 

Although the Germans may be successful on the 
battlefield, their strength will be sapped, not only 
because they are compelled to fight but because they 
will have to keep large bodies of troops in Scandi- 
navia to crush passive resistance and perhaps ward 
off threats of invasion by the Allies. The Getman 
front will be greatly extended and rendered corre- 
spondingly more vulnerable. In the long run the 
economic disadvantages to Germany may outweigh 
certain temporary gains. While the Reich will ac- 
quire complete control of Swedish and Norwegian 
timber and ore resources—particularly iron ore, 
some copper and a little nickel, tungsten and 
molybdenum—its food supply will suffer severely. 
The Scandinavian countries are large net importers 
of foodstuffs. They have exported considerable 
quantities of dairy products only because they have 
been able to import large amounts of grain and feed 
from overseas countries. Immediate application of 
the Franco-British blockade to Scandinavia will now 
deprive the dairy and livestock industry of vital 
supplies. 

BLOCKADE COMPELS REICH TO ACT. Un- 


——— $$$ === Lage Two 


der the circumstances, Germany may have been 
moved to act by two considerations—a desire to im- 
press the German people with a striking military 
victory, and a desperate need to safeguard access to 
the absolutely indispensable iron ore deposits of 
Sweden in the face of a tightening British blockade. 
Presumably the latter was the stronger motive. In 
contrast to the World War, when Germany con- 
trolled the iron ore supplies of Lorraine and the 
Briey basin, the Reich is now much more dependent 
on imports of ore from Sweden. During the first six 
months of the present war the risks of navigation 
along the r und coasts of Norway and the 
danger of interception by British warships had cut 
ore shipments to Germany through Narvik to 640,- 
000 tons, as compared with 2,250,000 tons during 
the corresponding period of the preceding year. 
While spring opened up the prospect of resumption 
of ore exports from the Baltic port of Lulea, the 
Germans knew that Sweden stood committed to 
send part of its supply to Britain. It is possible that 
Britain compelled Sweden, in a trade agreement 
concluded on December 28, to restrict its exports to 
Germany severely. In recent months several reports 
indicated that German industry was being seriously 
handicapped by a shortage of ore despite feverish 
attempts to exploit German deposits more inten- 
sively. Before the outbreak of war domestic ore and 
scrap supplied only about a third of the Reich’s re- 
quirements. 

War in Scandinavia may presage the extension of 
hostilities to still other areas. The Low Countries, 
wedged between the belligerents, may now be un- 
able to stay neutral. In the Balkans a trade battle 


BRITAIN AND FRANCE FORGE NEW WAR UNITY 


Without revealing secrets of policy, the brief, 
general declaration issued by the Allied Supreme 
War Council at the conclusion of its sixth meeting, 
held in London on March 28, has emphasized the 
extent to which Britain and France have coordinated 
their war aims and peace plans. The two govern- 
ments have affirmed their desire to enlarge the 
sphere of their cooperation. They have formally 
recorded an undertaking which must have been 
adopted long ago: that neither will cease fighting 
except by mutual agreement, or discuss peace terms 
until reaching an accord on conditions necessary for 
their permanent security. After the restoration of 

ce they have agreed to maintain “a community 
of action in all spheres for so long as may be neces- 
sary to safeguard their security,” and to build an 
international order, with the assistance of other na- 
tions, “which will ensure the liberty of peoples, re- 
spect for law and the maintenance of peace in 
Europe.” Since the War Council’s communiqué con- 
tains two complimentary references to Premier Paul 


similar to that which produced war in Scandinayy 
is being waged with all the resources at the com. 
mand of both sides. During the past week British 
Ambassadors and Ministers to all the countries of 
southeastern Europe have been conferring in Lop. 
don. On April 4 Sir John Simon, British Chancel. 
lor of the Exchequer, announced the establishmeny 
of an English Commercial Corporation designed ty 
outbid Germany for the control of Balkan trade 
In Rumania the Germans are desperately trying tp 
step up deliveries of oil which during recent month 
have fallen far behind the schedule of 160,000 tons 
per month laid down in the agreement of last De. 
cember. Now that the German military machine has 
again been set in motion, an adequate supply of oil 
is more vital than ever before. During January and 
February, however, Rumanian oil exports to Ger. 
many did not exceed 25,000 tons. Already Germany 
is reported to have demanded the right to police the 
Danube River with German troops in order to 
expedite transport of supplies. And if and when 
the Reich is compelled to extend its military fron. 
tiers, the U.S.S.R. may consider it necessary to o¢ 
cupy Finland completely and push into the Balkans 
in order to safeguard its interests. Under the cit. 
cumstances, Italy also may not remain aloof; during 
the past few weeks I/ Duce and the Italian press 
have repeatedly addressed warnings to the Italian 
people to prepare for any eventuality. Thus the 
German action opens up boundless possibilities. It 
marks the end of the passive war of attrition and 
may hasten the conclusion of the struggle. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


Reynaud and strongly reiterates the classical French | 
precept of security, it may have been framed t 
bolster the precarious position of the Reynaud gov- 
ernment on the French home front. Yet it is also 


significant in a broader sense, for it gives renewed 
expression to the determination of the two countries 
to cement their unity in the face of Germany's great | 
strength. | 

SPHERES OF COLLABORATION. In the | 
realm of military affairs the Allies had already | 
agreed to the principle of a united command before | 
the outbreak of hostilities. On October 11, 1939 | 
Leslie Hore-Belisha, then British War Minister, an 
nounced that the British army in France had been 
placed under the French High Command, while 
French naval forces work under direction of the 
British Admiralty. By frequent conferences between 
Ministers of the two countries, their foreign and 
military policies are kept in close alignment. Aa 
Anglo-French Parliamentary Committee headed by 
M. Yvon Delbos meets periodically to discuss the 


———— 


legislative 
education 
lic school 
the langu 


As not 
France m 
rmaner 
cial activ 
relatively 
four mo 
reached | 
supplies, 
force, bl 
rt. The 
hid by | 
ber 4, 1 
and estal 
policy wi 
A seri 
been esta 
lems, pf 
of supp! 
French € 
manship 
this com 
port an 
the two 
foreign 
sential 
States. 7] 
has beer 
agreeme 
many ct 
the imy 
against 
On Mai 
Colonia 
coopera’ 


INDI 


have als 


| leading 


and fo 


Federat 


tion Gé 
accord 
groups 


| individ: 


petitior 
turther 
their e: 


Bulletin. 
eee 
FOREIGN 
Headquart 
Entered as 


Bes 


LDE 


‘rench 
ed to 
1 gov- 
s also 
newed 
intries 
great 


n the 
lready 
before 

1939 


or, af | 


| been 
while 
»f the 
‘tween 
n and 
t. An 
led by 
ss the 


v—eo 


legislative aspects of cooperation. In the field of 
education, the curricula of British and French pub- 
lic schools are to be revised to require the study of 
the language and history of the other nation. 


As non-totalitarian nations, however, Britain and 
France must surmount great difficulties if they are 

rmanently to coordinate their economic and finan- 
cial activities, which have hitherto been subject to 
relatively slight governmental control. In the first 
four months of the war, the two governments 
reached agreement on joint action regarding food 
supplies, raw materials, armaments, oil, the air 
force, blockade, and the pooling of maritime trans- 

rt. The basis for close financial collaboration was 
laid by the Simon-Reynaud agreement of Decem- 
ber 4, 1939, which linked the franc to sterling, 
and established the principle of a common financial 
policy with respect to the rest of the world.* 


A series of six intergovernmental committees has 
been established to deal with specific economic prob- 
lems, principally those relating to the acquisition 
of supplies; and priorities are fixed by an Anglo- 
French Committee of Coordination, under the chair- 
manship of M. Jean Monnet. As one of its functions, 
this complex organization supervises the Allied ex- 
port and import policies, canalizing trade within 
the two empires wherever possible and husbanding 
foreign exchange resources for the purchase of es- 
sential munitions, particularly from the United 
States. Trade between the two countries themselves 
has been further facilitated by a general commercial 
agreement reached on February 17, which abolished 
many cumbersome formalities and relaxed many of 
the import restrictions applied by each country 
against the other's goods at the outbreak of the war. 
On March 16-18, moreover, the British and French 
Colonial Ministers conferred at Paris on problems of 
cooperation in colonial trade. 


INDUSTRY AND LABOR. Both governments 
have also encouraged direct agreement between their 
leading industrialists for cooperation in their own 
and foreign markets. Conversations between the 
Federation of British Industries and the Confédéra- 
tion Générale du Patronat Francais resulted in an 
accord published on March 9, in which the two 
groups undertake to promote arrangements between 
individual industries to eliminate uneconomic com- 
petition and maintain prices at fair levels. They 
further agree to support each other in maintaining 
their existing markets and developing export trade 

*J. C. deWilde, “The War on the Economic 


, Front,”’ 
Bulletin, January 5, 1940. 


Foreign Policy 


Page Three 


during the war; to secure imports, wherever possible, 
from their respective countries; to eliminate Franco- 
British competition in the purchases of raw ma- 
terials; and to foster special arrangements between 
competitive and complementary enterprises in the 
two countries. With its emphasis on cooperation 
rather than competition between industrial groups, 
the agreement apparently foreshadows a degree of 
cartellization between the industries of the two 
states which may well become permanent. Collabora- 
tion between them will be supervised by an Anglo- 
French Industrial Council. 


Labor groups, too, have engaged in conferences 
to harmonize their aims and policies. An Anglo- 
French Workers’ War Council has been set up by 
the British Trades Union Congress and the Con- 
fédération Générale du Travail. It is devoting its 
attention to such matters as prices and the cost of 
living, Nazi and Communist propaganda among 
workers, and the effect of war legislation on labor. 
Contact has been established between the British 
Labor party and the French Socialist party as well. 
After a conference at Paris, the two groups agreed 
on February 22 to maintain permanent liaison be- 
tween their organizations. 


As the conflict goes on, the bonds between the 
Allies continue to be tightened at an unprecedented 
pace. Originating in common defensive needs, 
Anglo-French collaboration may well survive the 
war as a counterweight to the Reich which, 25 
years after its last defeat, has already recovered suf- 
ficiently to meet the two Western powers on equal 
terms. If they can pool their energies and their 
post-war policies, Britain and France may not feel 
the need to apply Draconic measures against Ger- 
many in the event they are victorious—measures 
such as the dismemberment of Germany, which 
would all too probably sow seeds of hatred for the 
future. It is still too early to ascertain whether 
the Anglo-French association will develop, as Brit- 
ish and French statesmen have asserted it might, 
into a broader federation of nations, or whether it 
presages an exclusive imperial bloc which will chal- 
lenge other nations in the economic or political 
sphere. It is equally possible to envisage the decay 
of the Anglo-French tie once the pressure of war is 
removed and narrow, national self-interest again 
comes to the surface. But in any case, the war union 
of the two powers sets the stage for developments 
which may some day put an end to the doctrine of 
unrestricted national sovereignty. 


Davip H. PopPpEer 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 25, Apri, 12, 1940. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


isi 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHELES DEAN, BEdéifor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 

National Press Building 

Tuesday, April 9. The suddenness of the exten- 
sion of war to Scandinavia caught Washington by 
surprise this week, and compelled State Department 
officials and Administration leaders to re-assess their 
earlier calculations, both with respect to the course 
of events in Europe and the effect on American 
policy. The first news to reach the United States 
came early Tuesday morning in a diplomatic dis- 
patch from Mrs. J. Borden Harriman, our Minister 


at Oslo, announcing that Norway was at war with 
Germany. 


This momentous development, which is certain 
to have repercussions in Washington, completely 
overshadowed the victory won by President Roose- 
velt and Secretary Hull last Friday, when the Senate 
voted to extend the Reciprocal Trade Agreements 
Act without amendments for another three years. 

A PARTISAN VOTE. It would be premature to 
conclude that the action of the Senate terminates 
the tariff fight or represents a vote of confidence in 
the Administration’s conduct of foreign policy. The 
final vote of 42 to 37 followed party lines, with 
Senator Norris joining 41 Senate Democrats in sup- 
port of the resolution. The Republicans lined up 
solidly against the program and were supported by 
15 Democrats, mostly from the Western farm states, 
and the two Farmer-Labor members. It was this 
solid bloc (with additional recruits from Adminis- 
tration ranks) which waged the unsuccessful battle 
to amend the resolution by requiring Senate ratifica- 
tion of future trade agreements, or by other devices 
intended to nullify the program. 

Further evidence that the issue will be carried 
into the Presidential election campaign came from 
Republican leaders this week. On April 8 Represen- 
tative Treadway of Massachusetts introduced a reso- 
lution backed by House Republicans calling for a 
special committee to formulate “a permanent tariff 
and foreign trade policy,” to be administered “‘by an 
independent government agency in compliance with 
clearly defined instructions from Congress.” 

Washington observers attach less importance to 
this partisan maneuver than to the undercurrent of 
isolationist sentiment which has appeared to be gain- 
ing strength during the past few weeks. As yet, 
there has been no concerted attack on the Adminis- 
tration’s foreign policy, and most Congressional 
critics have hesitated to make political capital of the 
Nazi White Paper for the obvious reason that it 


would be likely to prove a boomerang. Nevertheless, 
there are definite indications of more active oppos. 
tion from all the diverse elements which mistry 
the President’s conduct of foreign affairs or question 
the assumptions on which he is proceeding. Theg 
elements range from Republican candidates on the 


right to the Socialist party and the C.I.O. on the left 


ISOLATION TREND. Indicative of the trend jy 
Republican ranks is the switch of Thomas E. Dewey 
to a strict isolationist position during his campaign 
trip through the Middle West. In Wisconsin o 
March 30 Mr. Dewey abandoned his earlier resery 
on foreign policy and asserted that “the only wa 
this country can remain genuinely neutral is for the 
government to give all its attention to procuring 
domestic recovery and keep its hands wholly out of 
the European war, and out of any negotiations tha 
may take place between warring nations, now or a 
any other day.” 

The national convention of the Socialist party, 
meeting in Washington this weekend, again nom 
inated Norman Thomas as its Presidential candidate 
on a platform strongly opposing American pattici 
pation in another World War. While the conven 
tion was divided on foreign policy, the majority 
point of view, which was supported by Mr. Thomas 
condemned measures “short of war” as leading t 
intervention in Europe. An equally strong stand 
against “any involvement in foreign war’ was taken 
by the Congress of Industrial Organizations in is 
legislative program, approved in January. 

It remains to be seen how this isolationist trend 
will be affected by the spread of the war to Scam 
dinavia. A possible key to sentiment in the Senatt 
may be found in the action taken on a resolution 
sponsored by Senator Bennett Champ Clark of Mis 
souri, calling for a sweeping investigation of props 
ganda in the United States. The intent of thi 
measure, which has the backing of Senator Vander 
berg and a strong anti-war bloc, was to open a flank 


attack on the pro-Ally policy of the erm :. 
e mrs 


| Narvik, 


The resolution was reported by the Foreign Relé 
tions Committee on March 27 without a dissenting 
vote, and its language is broad enough to caus 
much embarrassment to the State Department. It i 
now pending before the Committee on Audit ant 
Control, headed by Senator Byrnes of South Caro 
lina, whose approval is necessary if funds for tht 
investigation are to be forthcoming. The events 0 
this week may determine his decision. 
W. T. STONE 


{FOR 


An inter p 


SCA 


HE 

Gern 
marks a 
Europe. 
be firm! 
many Ww 
and No 
more th: 
of the r 
in Scan 
all of I 
forces Cz 
harry G 
tak, anc 
way bef 
many’s 
improve 
was stat 
on Nor 
points. 

SCA} 
incomp! 
Scandin: 
whether 
German 
of the i 
centers, 
vantage 
their m 


demons 
mining 
mans h 
Norwe: 
p qc 
aid, sic 
around 
Narvik. 


operatic 


