


ld 


he 
ce 
id, 


Ost 
ns. 
ve 
Se 


hat 
ble 


to 


ef 

of 
ves 
efi- 
| to 
‘ich 


*C0- 
t is 

his 
ttle 
ipa- 

At 

on 
pect 
ent 
iffi- 
ofa- 
ame 





| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





You. XIX, No. 18 


FEBRUARY 23, 1940 














a 


For a keen appraisal of the strategic, economic and 
neutrality problems confronting Scandinavia, read: 


THE OSLO STATES AND THE 
EUROPEAN WAR 


by A. Randle Elliott 


January 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports .... 25 cents 


tty Os 
.¥ ers » 
Yas yicnis® 
ann AFbOr’ 
HAp 4 
Hq 

PERIODICAL ROOM 

GENBRAL LIBRARY 
UNIV, OF MIGt. 











“ALTMARK” RAID AROUSES NEUTRALS. 





wn rescue of 326 British seamen imprisoned on 
the German ship Altmark effected in a Nor- 
wegian fjord by the British destroyer Cossack on 
February 17, and Soviet advances on the Karelian 
Isthmus, have once more focused attention on the 
plight of the Scandinavian countries. The Altmark— 
described by the Germans as a merchantman acting 
asan auxiliary of the Graf Spee, but listed in 1939 
by the International Union of Telegraphic and Wire- 
less Communication at Berne as a warship—had on 
board the crews of seven British ships sunk by the 
Graf Spee before that pocket battleship was scuttled 
off the coast of Uruguay. When raided by the 
Cossack, the Altmark was within Norway’s territorial 
waters after having been seized by another British 
destroyer, the Intrepid, on February 16 and released 
by Norwegian torpedo boats. According to a state- 
ment made on February 19 by Dr. Halvdan Koht, 
Norwegian Foreign Minister, the A/tmark had not 
entered the port of Bergen (as first claimed by the 
British), and therefore had not been examined by 
Norwegian authorities, which were apparently un- 
aware that the Altmark had British prisoners on 


board. 


THE BRITISH CASE. The British case against 
Norway is based on the argument that the Nor- 
wegian authorities were guilty of ‘gross negligence” 
in failing to conduct a thorough search of the 
Altmark when it put into Bergen (which Dr. Koht 
asserts it did not do), and releasing its British pris- 
oners. It is not by any means clear, however, that 
Norway neglected its duties as a neutral. Accord- 
ing to the Hague Convention of 1907 regarding the 
tights and duties of neutral powers in naval war, 
‘the neutrality of a power is not affected by the mere 
passage through its territorial waters of warships or 
ptizes belonging to belligerents.” The only provision 
of the Convention conceivably applicable to the 
Altmark case is that which specifies that “a prize can 


be brought into a neutral port only on account of un- 
seaworthiness, stress of weather, or want of fuel or 
provisions.” If a prize does not leave as soon as the 
circumstances that justified its entry are at an end, 
“the neutral power must order it to leave at once; 
should it fail to obey, the neutral power must employ 
the means at its disposal to release it with its officers 
and crew and to intern the prize crew.” International 
law authorities contend, however, that the extra- 
territoriality enjoyed by warships in foreign ports 
obtains in time of war; and that therefore prisoners 
of war on board do not become free by coming into 
a neutral port so long as they are not brought on 
shore. If the Altmark was merely passing through 
Norway’s territorial waters on its way to a German 
port, then the Norwegian government was under no 
obligation to take any action in this case. Its respon- 
sibility would arise only if the Altmark (which in any 
case was not a prize) was taking refuge in a Nor- 
wegian port for causes other than those specified by 
the Hague Convention. But even if Norway had 
failed to act under those circumstances, this would 
hardly justify British violation of its territorial waters. 
Lord Halifax, British Foreign Secretary, in his con- 
versation with Eric Colban, Norwegian Minister in 
London, admitted that there had been a “technical 
infringement” of the Norwegian maritime area by 
the British, but “that this was of little value com- 
pared with the fact that the Altmark had between 
300 and 400 prisoners on board under conditions 
that were not even worthy of a dog.” 

Britain's case would have been stronger if London 
had requested Norway to release the prisoners before 
attacking the Altmark. The British, however, con- 
tend that since Norway either could not or would 
not prevent violation of its neutrality by Germany, 
the British navy had the right and duty to intervene. 
Germany, for its part, asserts that the Cossack not 
only flagrantly violated Norwegian neutrality, but 











—_—_— 
A 





perpetrated a “bestial attack” by killing several Ger- 
man seamen in the course of the raid. The German 
Foreign Office immediately lodged a sharp protest 
with the Norwegian government, demanding re- 
muneration for the losses incurred. When the Nor- 
wegian Minister in London protested against the 
raid, asking for the return of the liberated seamen, 
the British Foreign Office indicated that it had no 
intention of complying with Norway’s demand. 
SCANDINAVIAN DILEMMA. The Altmark in- 
cident once more demonstrates the difficulties that 
confront neutral countries subjected to pressure from 
both belligerents. As the fortunes of war turned 
against Finland last week, when it was admitted in 
Helsinki that Soviet troops had captured some of the 
forts in the Mannerheim Line, Sweden and Norway 
found themselves slowly ground between the upper 
and the nether millstone. Public sentiment in the 
Scandinavian countries is strongly pro-Finnish. 
Sweden alone has already sent Finland $25,000,000 
in cash and $70,000,000 in materials, while volun- 
teers from Sweden, Norway and Denmark are either 
fighting with the Finnish army or replacing Finnish 
workers in factories. The Scandinavian countries have 
also permitted the passage of war materials and 
volunteers from other countries. Both Sweden and 
Norway, however, insist on preserving their neutral- 
ity. On February 16 it was reported that the Swedish 
government had refused Finland’s official request for 
military aid, and had also declined to permit the 
transit of organized foreign troops—as distinguished 
from volunteers — which might attempt to help 
Finland. These reports were reinforced on February 
19 when King Gustaf of Sweden, at an extraordinary 
session of the Crown Council, explained to the 
Swedish people why the Cabinet had decided not to 
give military aid to Finland. While expressing great 
admiration and sympathy for the Finns, the King 
said it was his “absolute opinion” that if Sweden 
should intervene in Finland it might not only be 
drawn into war with Russia but also into the war be- 
tween the great powers. Should such a situation arise, 
he said, it would be impossible for Sweden to give 
Finland “the aid it is now providing—aid which is 


Page Two 








— 
——— 


not small and which we also in the future are willing 
to give with all our hearts.” 

To many Americans the attitude of Sweden anj 
Norway, which lie in the path of Moscow's wes. 
ward drive, appears little short of suicidal. It mug 
be borne in mind, however, that the Scandinaviap 
countries, which have developed some of the mog 
advanced economic and social institutions in th 
world, are above all anxious to preserve their peoples 
from war. They are fully aware that, if the Sovie 
Union conquers Finland, it may attempt to seize 
Sweden’s iron ore mines or Norway's ice-free ports, 
but fear that open intervention on Finland's side 
might precipitate a German attack on their territory, 
Should such an attack occur, they believe that Franc. 
British aid might come too late to protect them from 
German invasion. Under the circumstances they re. 
sent Allied actions like the Altmark raid, whic 
threatens to involve them in war with Germany. They 
even suspect that the British may have staged this 
raid for the very purpose of provoking German te. 
taliation, which would then permit extension of the 
theatre of war to the Scandinavian countries. 

As the state of stalemate persists on the Westem 
front, it becomes increasingly obvious that both bel. 
ligerents are seeking to draw the neutrals within 
their orbit, by concessions or threats or both. This 
“war of nerves’ has already produced some signifi 
can rifts in neutral countries, notably in Belgium and 
the Netherlands, where after a series of war scare 
public pressure on the part of labor and liberal 
groups forced the resignation of the Belgian and 
Dutch Commanders-in-Chief on January 31 and Feb 
ruary 5 respectively, on the ground that they were 
encouraging the formation of dictatorial govem- 
ments favorable to the Allied cause. A similar in- 
ternal struggle may be impending in Sweden, where 
public opinion demands more active aid to Finland 
The efforts of European neutrals to escape being 
sucked into the maelstrom of war are approaching 
climax just as the United States is undertaking it 
“exploratory” study of peace prospects and sounding 
out the neutral countries regarding the possibility 


of post-war reconstruction. VERA MICHELES DEAN 





JAPAN STALLED ON WAR FRONTS IN CHINA | 


Reports in mid-February of Japanese military 
withdrawals from strategic points in China, and is- 
suance by the Japanese army of an unusual statement 
inviting Chiang Kai-shek’s surrender, have empha- 
sized Japan’s inability to exploit its earlier gains on 
the Chinese war fronts. The military deadlock in 
China increases the relative importance of steady 
criticism of the government in the Japanese Diet, 
which questions Japan’s capacity to shoulder the 
economic burdens imposed by prolonged hostilities. 


ON THE CHINA FRONTS. The recent Japanese 


offensives in Kwangsi and Inner Mongolia, after 
preliminary successes, had apparently spent thei 
force by the middle of February. Reports from the| 
north indicated that Japan’s troops were withdraw: | 
ing from western Suiyuan to the railhead at Paotou 
If these reports are confirmed, the threat of an ex 
tended Japanese drive southward into Shensi prov 
ince—directed at China’s line of communications 
with the Soviet Union—has been removed. 


In the south, where large-scale hostilities had o¢ 
curred earlier in the month, Japan’s high command 





— 


seems ¢ 
flicting 
ning | 
jpane 
been 1 
preven 
ning. F 
troops 
advan 
Chines 
ning, 
were P 
The 
south | 
of pre 
régime 
in Kv 
tance” 
ing nc 
pand | 
In cas 
necess 
annals 
procla 
tions | 
Cut 
edly 
powel 
vance 
prove 
It is 1 
the h 
Indo- 
Frenc 
tionir 
It’ 
clude 
has | 
armic 
tions. 
oper: 
ance 
prese 
prolc 
diffic 
of m 
are § 
tiatic 
read 
pare 


I} 
the 


yen | 


FORE 


Heada 
Entere 


@B 





i 


oF 


RRARAZE RF 


as 


fy. 


lity 


“tet 
ei! 


the 


ou. 
ex: 
ov 
ons 


ind 








a 
— 


gems to have given up the Kwangsi campaign. Con- 
ficting claims as to the battles northeast of Nan- 
sing had left the actual results in some doubt. 
Japanese sources asserted that enormous losses had 
heen inflicted on the Chinese armies, sufficient to 
revent a threatened counter-offensive against Nan- 
sing. Following these engagements, however, Japan’s 
troops effected a “strategic withdrawal” from their 
advanced positions in Kwangsi. By February 19 
Chinese forces had pressed forward close to Nan- 
ging, and some reports indicated that the Japanese 
were preparing to abandon the city. 

The proclamation issued on February 14 by Japan’s 
south China command represented a striking reversal 
of previous threats to drive the Chiang Kai-shek 
régime into Tibet. Declaring that Japan’s “victories” 
in Kwangsi had rendered ‘further Chinese resis- 
tance” futile, the manifesto concluded on the follow- 
ing note: “Therefore in the future we will not ex- 
pand our operations, but will await your offensive. 
In case you adopt this latter plan, we will resort to 
necessary tactics and add more pages to the war 
annals of the world.” The Chinese answered this 
proclamation by announcing plans to float a muni- 
tions and reconstruction loan of Ch.$500,000,000. 

Curtailment of the Kwangsi campaign undoubt- 
edly reflects an increasing strain on Japan’s man 
power. The military casualties incurred in the ad- 
vance to Nanning and subsequent engagements have 
proved much larger than had been anticipated. 
It is not at all certain that the results have justified 
the heavy costs. Continued bombing raids on the 
Indo-China railway, as well as a statement by the 
French authorities, indicate the line is still func- 
tioning. 

It would be premature, on the other hand, to con- 
clude that Japan’s military grip on occupied China 
has been materially weakened. Unless the Chinese 





| armies obtain much greater supplies of heavy muni- 


tions, they cannot undertake concerted offensive 
operations on a large scale. Yet indefinite continu- 
ance of hostilities on the mainland, even on the 
present scale, raises serious problems for Japan. A 
prolonged military deadlock would accentuate the 


| difficulties on Japan’s home front, where the reserves 


of men, materials and money, especially gold stocks, 
are steadily declining. Direct or indirect peace nego- 
tiations are unlikely at present, since neither side is 
teady to propose terms that the other would be pre- 
pared to consider. 


IN THE DIET. Criticism by Diet members during 
the past two weeks has centered on the 10-billion 
yen budget proposed for 1940-1941. The budget has 


Page Three 














been attacked on the ground that the shortage of 
commodities, especially coal and electric power, 
makes its fulfillment impossible. The “materials 
mobilization plan” of the Cabinet Planning Board, 
designed to answer these criticisms, has been in turn 
assailed for its failure to make due provision for 
consumers’ goods—lack of which is the underlying 
popular economic grievance. Evidence that the army 
hesitates to move too openly against popular opinion 
is afforded by the cautious handling of Takao Saito, 
the Minseito member who most boldly expressed the 
existing grievances. If Saito is expelled from the 
Diet, the other member from his constituency threat- 
ens to resign. A by-election would then be precipi- 
tated in which both men would probably be returned, 
thus widening the breach between the army and the 
public. Under these circumstances, disciplinary action 
on the Saito case is being delayed. 


In the field of foreign affairs, Japan’s denuncia- 
tion of its arbitration treaty with the Netherlands, 
announced on February 13, has received considerable 
publicity. It is difficult to view this step as anything 
more than a clever move to influence opinion abroad, 
so as to increase foreign apprehension over a pos- 
sible Japanese attack on the Dutch East Indies, and 
thus weaken any effort to apply economic pressure 
against Japan. If Tokyo really intends to invade 
the Dutch East Indies, its record on the Nine-Power 
Treaty indicates that an arbitration treaty would not 
be permitted to stand in the way. 


The agreement concluded on February 16 between 
the Shanghai Municipal Council and the local 
Japanese-sponsored government has more far-reach- 
ing implications. In effect, it provides a modus 
vivendi for cooperative policing arrangements in 
areas of disputed jurisdiction in Shanghai, and as 
such constitutes the longest step yet taken by the 
Western powers toward de facto recognition of 
Japan’s various puppet régimes. The Japanese au- 
thorities, moreover, have announced resumption of 
negotiations for the return of occupied areas of the 
International Settlement to the Municipal Council’s 
jurisdiction. These events followed an amicable 
settlement of the Anglo-Japanese controversy which 
had arisen in January, when a British warship re- 
moved 21 German nationals from the Asama Maru 
near Yokohama. In an exchange of notes published 
on February 6 Britain agreed to return nine of the 
seized men to the Japanese authorities, while Sir 
Robert Leslie Craigie, British Ambassador at Tokyo, 
offered a guarded apology for the wounding of 
Japanese susceptibilities by naval action twenty miles 
off the coasts of Japan. T. A. BIsson 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 18, Fepruary 23, 1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dornoruy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHerzs Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


81 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


ne a eens 





Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
Fes. 19.—In estimating the significance of Wash- 
ington’s recent diplomatic moves, it is important to 
bear in mind some of the underlying factors which 
apply almost equally to Europe and the Far East. 


TWO SCHOOLS OF THOUGHT. One of these 
factors is internal. During the past month Washing- 
ton observers have noted the re-emergence of two 
distinct schools of thought within the Administra- 
tion regarding our relation to the war. One school 
takes the position that there can be no peace in 
Europe until Hitler has been overthrown and Nazism 
destroyed, and hence that mediation at this time 
would be premature. The other school of thought 
contends that the last chance of securing a negoti- 
ated settlement may disappear if the present limited 
war becomes a total war. According to this view, the 
United States should seek a basis for mediation be- 
fore the conflict is intensified or spreads to new 
fronts in Scandinavia or the Near East. 


It would be misleading to label these points of 
view, or catalog individuals who may belong to one 
group or the other. Differences of opinion are to be 
expected in a democracy and need not imply weak- 
ness or indecision. What is significant today is that 
emphasis has begun to shift from the first to the 
second point of view. Until mid-January, the White 
House and the State Department gave no encourage- 
ment to talk of neutral mediation. At Christmas, 
when the President sent his peace message to Pope 
Pius XII, he stressed the fact that the time was not 
ripe for a successful peace move and implied that 
he was opposed to a temporary truce. The prevailing 
view was that any peace move launched on the basis 
of the existing military and political situation would 
consolidate Germany’s position and merely strength- 
en Hitler’s hand for continuation of the conflict at 
another time, more favorable to the Nazis. This view 
is still held by a number of responsible officials in 
Washington. But the emphasis on the second thesis 
has become more pronounced with the growing be- 
lief that extension of the war to new fronts is im- 
minent. Those who believe that a long and devastat- 
ing war would virtually eliminate all possibility of a 
negotiated settlement have been granted a hearing 
which was denied them earlier in the winter. 

It was the latter group which provided the real 
initiative for Sumner Welles’ “exploratory” journey 
to Rome, Berlin, Paris and London. They do not 
advocate a settlement which would accept peace on 


Germany's terms, but contend that the present stale. 
mate may afford the last opportunity for an exchang 
of views between the belligerents before the expected 
offensives begin. In approving the Welles trip, the 
President and Secretary Hull have sought to avoid 
commitments and have not attempted to define the 
terms on which the United States might be prepared 
to mediate. Presumably, they intend to be governed 
by the reports which Mr. Welles sends back from 
Europe. But even an exploratory mission involve 
some measure of responsibility, which would in. 
crease if any tangible basis for negotiations should 
be discovered. In that event, as some observers here 
have pointed out, the Administration would face 
the difficult task not only of defining the basis of 
mediation, but also of deciding whether it is pre 
pared to assume responsibility for the settlement 
which follows. 


EUROPE AND THE FAR EAST. Another under. 


lying factor is strategic. As long as the outcome of | 


the war in Europe is uncertain, those responsible for 
American foreign policy hesitate to take any action 
against Japan which might precipitate a major crisis 
in the Pacific. This does not exclude the possibility 
of Executive action, in the form of financial aid to 
China or increasing economic pressure on Japat, 
even to a point which would be regarded as danger- 
ous by many Administration critics in Congress. A 
further loan to China was made more likely last 
week by the action of the Senate in voting to increase 
the revolving fund of the Export-Import Bank by 
$100,000,000. The Executive, moreover, is free to 
apply countervailing duties or to cut off all imports 
from Japan under the provisions of the existing tariff 
act, and such steps may be contemplated under cer- 
tain circumstances. 

As long as there is any possibility that the nav 
may be required in the Atlantic, however, the Ad- 


ministration appears reluctant to take the decisive | 


step of urging Congress to pass the embargo resolu: 
tions now held in Committee. This was demonstrated 
again last week, when Senator Pittman was in- 
formally advised that the State Department did not 
desire to testify at this time. A poll of the Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee revealed that seven 
members tentatively favor the embargo measures, 
seven oppose action at present, and six are undecided. 
If the poll was an accurate reflection of committee 
opinion—as it seems to be—it would indicate that 
a word from the State Department would decide the 


issue either way. W. T. STONE 














