istance 
O COn- 
today, 
iscount 
verthe- 
| INev- 
ement, 
is well 


tion, a 
sh Em- 
remony 
t been 
ranean, 
power 
ow. AS 
ever, a 
e more 
almost 
manent 
way 
de and 
over, it 
1 ready 
litarian 


ir from 
sh, if it 
ig and 
[ONE 


FOREIGN 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


WS 


Arn 


Mies 94n 


POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vout. XX, No. 9 


—_—_—_ 


DECEMBER 20, 1940 


LAVAL’S FALL REVEALS NAZI AIMS IN FRANCE 


HE dramatic fall, on December 14, of Vice- 

Premier and Foreign Minister Laval, who is re- 
ported to be held in custody at the Chateau of Pelle- 
yoisin to which he had consigned Daladier, Reynaud, 
Gamelin and Blum, promises to have far-reaching 
effects on the course of the European war. So far as 
can be determined from reports filtering through the 
French censorship, M. Laval had hoped to displace 
Marshal Pétain, assume supreme power, and enter 
into closer collaboration with Hitler, both in France 
and Africa, than the Marshal had been prepared to 
consider. M. Laval was unpopular with the major- 
ity of the French people, but he had succeeded in 
becoming the Marshal’s right hand man (chiefly 
through being “available” at a time when other 
French leaders were either in flight or discredited by 
their participation in war cabinets); and had paved 
the way for personal dictatorship by his control of 
the radio, the press and the cinema. M. Laval, how- 
ever, had failed to convince Marshal Pétain that 
France might gain an important place in Hitler's 
“new order” by turning over its navy and African 
colonies to Germany for a knockout blow against 
Britain. While the Marshal, following an interview 
with Hitler on October 25, had agreed to collaborate 
with Germany in the reconstruction of Europe, the 
details of this collaboration were still being worked 
out by M. Laval with Nazi authorities in Paris. The 
coup d’état that M. Laval is reported to have con- 
templated was to have been staged in connection 
with the transfer from Vienna to Paris of the ashes 
of Napoleon’s son, the Duke of Reichstadt—a cere- 
mony which Hitler and Ribbentrop were reportedly 
planning to attend, and for which M. Laval vainly 
urged the Marshal to visit Paris. 

POSITION OF MARSHAL PETAIN. Whatever 
may have been M. Laval’s real intentions, his gen- 
eral attitude was well-known. As early as 1935 Laval 
had urged Franco-Italian cooperation in the hope 


of preventing German seizure of Austria, but had 
failed at that time to obtain the support of Britain, 
which sought to check Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia by 
the imposition of League sanctions. For this, or 
other reasons, M. Laval was bitterly anti-British, 
and had staked his political future on a German 
victory over Britain, and the consequent necessity 
for France to collaborate with Hitler's ‘“‘new order.” 
Had Laval seized power, he would probably have 
placed at Germany's disposal not only the French 
navy, but also French bases in Africa, for use against 
the British both on the Mediterranean and on the 
Atlantic. Such a move would have neutralized Brit- 
ish and Greek successes against Italy, and provided 
Mussolini with far more effective assistance than 
the transfer of German troops to the African theatre 
of war through the Balkans or France. 


Marshal Pétain, as well as General Weygand 
(who since late October has been on an “inspection 
tour’” of French North Africa), agreed with M. 
Laval last June that France could not continue the 
war, but they did not share his desire to join Ger- 
many against Britain. In fact, the more that becomes 
known of developments in France since the armis- 
tice, the more it appears that Marshal Pétain has 
stubbornly resisted any attempt by the Germans to 
force him into an anti-British course—even when 
the release of a million and a half French war pris- 
oners was held out as an inducement. The Marshal’s 
decision to accept the German armistice was taken 
in the belief, first, that he would be dealing with 
honorable army leaders who would show respect for 
the plight of a conquered country; and, second, that 
Britain was bound to be defeated in short order. 
When the Marshal discovered that his régime had 
to deal not so much with the German army, in any 
case subject to Nazi influence, as with the Nazi au- 
thorities and the Gestapo, and that the British not 
only refused to surrender but inflicted severe blows 


on Italy, his determination to preserve such degree 
of independence as the armistice terms allowed him 
was apparently increased. Following the ouster of 
M. Laval, with the aid of a new French guard, 
Groupes de Protection, under the orders of M. Pey- 
routon, Minister of the Interior, Marshal Pétain 
took measures to strengthen his régime. The radio, 
the cinema and the press, previously controlled by 
M. Laval, were attached directly to the office of the 
Marshal. A Consultative Assembly, composed of 
representatives of business and professional interests, 
is to be appointed shortly. A constitutional decree 
of July 12, which provided that the Marshal would 
be automatically succeeded by the Vice-Premier, was 
rescinded. Henceforth, should the Marshal be pre- 
vented from exercising his functions as Chief of 
State before the ratification of the new constitution, 
the Council of Ministers will designate his succes- 
sor by a majority vote. And former Premier Flandin 
succeeded M. Laval as Foreign Minister. 

WHAT ROLE WILL FLANDIN PLAY? The 
role that M. Flandin may play is not yet clear. M. 
Flandin was at one time regarded as an Anglophile; 
but he had no illusions concerning the military 
strength of Germany even in the early days of the 
Hitler régime, and warned Britain of the poten- 
tial threat of Nazism. Unlike M. Laval, Flandin did 
not publicly advocate re-insurance against Germany 
by an alliance with Italy. When he discovered that 
the British were slow to realize the Nazi danger, 
he favored reconciliation with Germany, and after 
Munich sent Hitler a telegram of congratulations. It 
would be difficult, therefore, to regard M. Flandin as 
anti-German; yet he may prove personally less ac- 
ceptable to the Nazis than M. Laval, a past master 
at political maneuvering. On December 16 German 
sources indicated Berlin was displeased with Laval’s 
ouster, and declared France and Germany were “still 
at war,” suggesting the possibility that the Nazis 
might occupy all of France; and Otto Abetz, German 
Commissioner to France, was sent to Vichy. 


NAZI AIMS IN FRANCE. The full implications 


BRITISH EXPEL ITALIANS FROM EGYPT 


Taking advantage of the defeats suffered by the 
Italian army in Albania and of the recent shake-up 
in Mussolini’s high command, British forces have 
struck a serious blow at Italy’s position in North 


What will be Moscow’s future course? Read: 


RUSSIA AND THE “NEW ORDER” 
IN EUROPE by V. M. Dean 
25c 


December 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


= Page Two 


of the crisis precipitated by the dismissal of Ki) 
Laval can be understood only in the light of Nayj : 
policy toward conquered countries. The principal 

weapon of the Nazis—and one that may be truly | 
described as their “secret” weapon, since its sig. | 
nificance is understood by each conquered country | 
only after its downfall—is the transformation of | 
what appears to be an international war into a ciyjj 

war. With an efficiency not yet appreciated in Britain 

and the United States, the Nazis systematically dis. | 
credit all existing leaders, Right, Left and Center; | 
undermine all ideas and systems; sow suspicion 

among all groups and classes; and finally achieye | 
their aim of disintegrating a country from within, 
and creating a state of chaos which then is held to | 
justify total German occupation and control. What | 
happened in Rumania was a portent, not an isolated | 
incident. It was part of a vast scheme for the sub- | 
jugation of any European country that shows the | 
slightest signs of resistance; and it would be ap | 


illusion to believe that what happened in Rumania | ! 


cannot happen in France. The most disastrous aspect | 
of this scheme, which is being applied with vari- 

ous degrees of severity in all occupied countries, is 

that the Nazis find support only among an infinitesi- 

mal minority of the population, usually men already 

discredited and sometimes corrupt, or else totally 

unknown. Then, when the populations display their 

repugnance for these puppet régimes, they are of- 

fered a choice between either accepting the Quis 

lings and the Lavals, or else being subjected to com- | 
plete German domination. Such a choice may nov | 
confront France; and the prestige of Marshal Pétaia, | 
who enjoys the confidence of the French, is the only 
safeguard against the country’s subjugation by Ger- 
many, which would mean use of French bases and 
the French navy in Hitler’s war on Britain. And this 
war, as stated by the Fuehrer in his speech at the 
Rehinmetall Brosig munitions plant on December 10, 
is a struggle between two worlds, one of which, he 
said, ‘must crack up.” 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


Africa. The stalemate which lasted three months has 
been broken by the first serious fighting in Africa 
since the outbreak of the war. 

The attack began on December 9 with a move 
ment in the western desert which British officials in 
Cairo described simply as a “great raid.’’ It soos 
developed, however, into a major offensive with 
ordinated action by mechanized and infantry units 
of the army, by planes of the R.A.F. and the Fleet 
Air Arm, and by ships of the Royal Navy. Using 
tactics reminiscent of the German blitzkrieg in Po 
land and France, the British first captured outposts 


—_, 


around 
thrust 
to the 
near FE 
tered 
frontie 


Com 
of Ital: 
less Sf 
pushec 
shal Ri 
stores 


| the pre 


prison 


Polish 
total o 
150,00 
Grazia 
shipme 
tion. F 
employ 
is sign 
seem t 
air. Of 
British 
droppe 

e on! 
tions it 


It is 
Cairo ; 
procee 
must t 
paired 
Italian 


Nation 
by E 
1939, 
A se! 

current 

experie 


From | 
Brail 
Ane 

peditior 

compar 

——_— 

FOREIGD 

Headquar 

Entered a 


= 


— 


of M. 

Nazi } 
Ncipal 
truly 
'S Sig. 
ountry 
on of 
a civil 
Britain | 
ly de 
nter; 
$picion 
chieve 
within, | 
eld to | 
What 
solated 
1e sub 
ws the 
be an 
amania 
aspect 
h vati- 
ries, is 


finitesi- 
already 

totally 
ry their 
are Of- 


e Quis 


to com- 
ay now 
Pétain, 
he only 
by Ger 
ses and 
ind this 
» at the 
nber 10, 
hich, he 


DEAN 


nths has 
1 Africa 


a move 
hicials in 
It soon 
with 
try units 
the Fleet 
y. Using 
g in Po 
outposts 


— Page Three 


around Sidi Barrani, the spearhead of the Italian 
thrust in Egypt. Then, sweeping around Sidi Barrani 
to the south, the fast-moving force reached the coast 
neat Buqbuq and rolled up the Italian posts scat- 
tered along the coast all the way to the Libyan 
frontier. 


Coming after the debacle in Greece, the collapse 
of Italian resistance was less surprising, but none the 
less spectacular. Within a week the British have 
pushed the well-trained desert fighters under Mar- 
shal Rodolfo Graziani back 75 miles, captured huge 
stores which had been laboriously accumulated for 
the projected drive on Suez, and taken at least 50,000 
prisoners. 


The British advance was not altogether unex- 
pected. Prime Minister Churchill told the House of 
Commons on November 5 that “precious weapons” 
and “scores of thousands of troops’ were moving to 
Egypt from England. Reinforcements of men from 
India, Australia and New Zealand, together with 
Polish and Free French units, helped to swell the 
total of Allied troops in North Africa to perhaps 
150,000, still well below the estimated 250,000 at 
Graziani’s disposal. Even more important were 
shipments of armored vehicles, guns and ammuni- 
tion. Hurricane fighters replaced the older models 
employed by the R.A.F. in the Middle East, and it 
is significant that in the recent advance, the British 
seem to have achieved temporary superiority in the 
air. Of great value, too, was the cooperation of the 
British naval units which, almost unopposed, 
dropped tons of shells on the narrow coastal plain, 
the only feasible route of supply for the Italian posi- 
tions in Egypt. 

It is reasonable to accept official caveats from 
Cairo and London that the present advance will not 
proceed much farther than the Libyan frontier. Lines 
must be consolidated, troops rested, and vehicles re- 
paired The same supply problems which held the 
Italians immobilized so long at Sidi Barrani will be- 


gin to operate against the British. Some time will 
probably elapse before these forces are ready for 
another offensive. 


REPERCUSSIONS. On the other hand, the reper- 
cussions of the British victory may be widespread. 
The Italian collapse removes the threat of an attack 
on the Suez Canal from the west, and Egyptians can 
breathe more freely. Graziani’s remaining forces 
must try to make another stand, with their morale 
lowered, their supplies seriously depleted, their trans- 
port lines across the Mediterranean constantly ex- 
posed to British attack, and their picked regiments in 
Egyptian prison camps. Hitler may decide to bolster 
up the sagging Fascist army by the dispatch of planes 
and supplies, but it is doubtful ~hether Italy would 
welcome reinforcement of the African army by 
German units. 

Within Italy itself, however lightly Fascist editors 
may treat the British successes, the news will con- 
tribute to the growing pessimism already in evidence. 
Elsewhere around the shores of the Mediterranean, 
reports of the Italian rout have already strengthened 
British prestige. Stocks rose on the Cairo exchange. 
Egyptians who want their government to abandon its 
equivocal policy in favor of outright war on the Axis 
gained increased influence, and Hussein Sirry Pasha, 
the new Prime Minister, appears more willing than 
his two immediate predecessors to take this step. To 
the westward, Graziani’s present embarrassment 
enables General Maxime Weygand, who still controls 
the French forces in North Africa, to assume a stiffer 
attitude toward the Axis. 

As a result of the startling British success in the 
western desert, the ultimate conquest of Libya dur- 
ing the winter comes within the realm of possibility, 
and such a victory might well lead directly or indi- 
rectly to Mussolini’s submission. British troops and 
naval units would thereby be released for service at 
home, where the war will finally be won or lost. 


Louts E. FRECHTLING 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Nationalism and the Cultural Crisis in Prussia, 1806-1815, 
by E. N. Anderson. New York, Farrar and Rinehart, 
1939. $2.50 


A series of essays on leading individuals and intellectual 
currents in the great national awakening which Prussia 
experienced after its military defeat by Napoleon «+ Jena. 


From England to America: A Message, by Henry Noel 
Brailsford. New York, Whittlesey House, 1940. $1.00 
An eloquent appeal for a declaration of war and an ex- 

Peditionary force from the United States, based upon a 

comparison of British and German aims in Europe. 


The Caribbean Danger Zone, by J. Fred Rippy. New York, 
Putnam, 1940. $3.00 


A reliable and readable history of United States diplo- 
macy in the Caribbean area, set in careful perspective 
against its strategic, political and economic backgrounds. 


The United States in World Affairs, 1939, by Whitney H. 
Shepardson, in collaboration with William O. Scroggs. 
New York, Harpers, 1940. $3.00 
The eighth in a notable series of yearbooks, this volume 

is an extremely valuable interpretative record of America’s 

role during a critical year of world history. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 9, DgceMBER 20, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lest, 


Secretary; Vera Micugtes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
Bw 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Desc. 16.—Washington stands on the threshold 
of momentous decisions. On his return to the capital 
this week, President Roosevelt finds an atmosphere 
of mingled tension and frustration in which deci- 
sions too long delayed are pressing urgently for 
action. The decisions are both internal and external. 


LAG IN DEFENSE PRODUCTION. The most 
critical internal decisions are those forced by the lag 
in defense production, now frankly acknowledged 
by the National Defense Commission. William S. 
Knudsen, in his forthright speech to the National 
Association of Manufacturers on December 13, re- 
vealed that while 85 per cent of the defense orders 
have been “placed,” actual production is running 
behind even the moderate schedules planned by the 
Commission a few months ago. Thus, instead of the 
1,000 planes a month planned for January 1, the 
total output of all types for the United States and 
Great Britain will not exceed 700. Guns and ma- 
chine guns are still in the tooling stage, and light 
tanks are being turned out at the rate of four a day. 

The reasons for this lag are more obvious than 
the remedy. It is apparent that mass-production 
cannot be accomplished overnight and speed can- 
not be attained by following the rules of “business 
as usual.” Up to the present, the government has 
been reluctant to enforce priorities and has tried to 
superimpose the huge defense load on the regular 
business load, while both capital and labor have 
clung to their accustomed privileges. But the reme- 
dies now foreshadowed promise to go beyond the 
measures suggested by Mr. Knudsen, such as the 
spreading of subcontracts, longer hours and a six- 
day work week. For putting the defense job “on a 
war basis” means something more than speeding up 
private enterprise. As the thirty-four members of the 
Princeton faculty stated on December 15 in urging 
President Roosevelt to declare a “state of emer- 
gency,” it means “total mobilization” of the indus- 
trial, military and naval resources of the nation, with 
the extension of full wartime powers over almost 
every phase of American life. 


The possibility of such a “proclamation of na- 
tional emergency” has been privately discussed in 
Washington for several weeks as one method of 
awakening the nation to the gravity of the crisis. In 
answer to those who assert that the President al- 
ready holds wide “emergency” powers, advocates 


‘ 


of the proclamation move contend that only by actu. 
ally exercising these powers can he bring the Ameri. 
can people to realize the perils of delay and accep 
the necessity for drastic action. 

Although President Roosevelt had made no public 
statement on the subject before his return to Wash- 
ington, his parting remark on leaving Warm Springs 
December 15—that he would be back in March “if 
the world survives’”—gave pointed emphasis to his 


own concern over the “complacency” of public opin. | 


ion. This concern is shared by Secretary Hull and 
many of the President’s executive advisers who are 
pressing for decisive measures. But it is doubtful 
whether the proclamation would advance the cause 
of “unity,” as it would be certain to alarm those ele 
ments which fear “collectivism” at home or direct 
involvement in the war abroad, thus further con 
fusing the issue at a time of crisis. Other steps which 
can and probably will be taken are, first, the appoint: 
ment of a much-needed coordinator for the National 
Defense Commission and, second, the application of 
ptiority powers as yet unused. 


EXTERNAL PRESSURES. The chief external de. 
cisions are closely related to these internal moves, 
and revolve around Britain’s needs in the course of 
the next three months. Despite the notable British 
victories in Egypt and Italy's setbacks in Albania, 
Washington is aware that the severest test is yet to 
come, perhaps in the form of another Nazi attempt 
at a knockout blow in the spring. And in such # 
test Britain’s ability to survive will depend in large 
measure on the aid forthcoming from the United 
States. 


Lord Lothian, in the last public statement he made 
before his death, put the question bluntly when he 
said: “You have already declared your interest it 
the survival of Britain. It is for you to decide whether 
it is to your interest to give us whatever assistant 
may be necesessary in order to make certain that 
Britain shall not fall.” The financial aid which & 
apparently being requested by Sir Frederick Phillip 
this week will be less vital during the next 90 days 
than ships and airplanes and naval collaboration 
It is in the sphere of active naval cooperation thi 
Washington’s most critical decisions lie. 


W. T. STONE | 


“INSIDE ENGLAND” is the subject of the FPA‘ 
broadcast on December 22; the speaker will be Jame 
Frederick Green. These broadcasts are given evet) 
Sunday, from 2:15 to 2:30 p.m., E.S.T., over the blu 
network of the National Broadcasting Company. 


Vou. X: 


a 
at 
gains if 
Americ 
voked | 
ligeren 
States. ¢ 
a day 
Roosev: 
of a fe 
board 
duction 
the WV 
warned 
sponde: 
of Axis 
ican ha 
use WO 
as a Ww: 
tation ¢ 
Shippit 
ous cor 
Britain 
tained. 
verging 
mitted 
lenge 
size to 
etnmen 
taneous 
of the / 
that the 
earlier, 
technic; 
plemen 
alluded 
ards of 


INV 
express 


