














Entered as 2nd class matter 
Dr. William #. Bishop De 
+ University of Michigan Library 
A 
| Ann Arbor, Mich. 5 
W 
’ = ‘ies , LBS 
a FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
id 
er 
7 An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
he FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
et 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
‘ Vou. XXI, No. 5 NovEMBER 21, 1941 
a SHOWDOWN APPROACHES IN THE PACIFIC 
ill | pak laraemeng: the Diet in emergency session at These statements by the Cabinet leaders at Tokyo 
he | Tokyo, the Tojo Cabinet has set the stage for carry on the ‘‘war of nerves” in the Pacific that has 
»¢- | the conversations which Saburo Kurusu, its special become even more intense since the new Japanese 
m- | envoy, has opened at Washington. While Mr. government entered office. They are, in part at least, 
on | Kurusu has kept the discreet silence of an experi- a reply to Prime Minister Churchill’s statement on 
ira | enced diplomat, the Cabinet leaders in Japan have November 10 that Britain would declare war “with- 
yas | continued to pitch their “demands” against the in the hour” if Japanese-American hostilities started, 
nd | United States on a high level. There is little evi- and to his significant warning that, with a large part 
his | dence, however, that these bargaining tactics have of the American navy in action against the ‘common 
ies | made a serious impression on Washington officials, foe,” Britain now fe!t “strong enough to provide 
fed | who maintain a noncommittal attitude regarding powerful naval forces and heavy ships, with the 
r,” | the negotiations and stress the unlikelihood of fur- necessary auxiliary vessels, for service, if need be, 
his | ther compromise with Japanese aggression. in the Indian and Pacific Oceans.” They are also an 
| answer to the frank speech by Secretary Knox at 
i DIET SESSION OPENS. The opening statements Providence on Armistice Day, when he declared that 
h | before the Diet by Premier Tojo and Foreign Min- the Pacific, no less than the Atlantic, calls for in- 
’ . | ister Togo have been particularly firm, showing few stant readiness for defense. In its dealings with 
_ | signs that Japan is prepared to alter the expansion- Japan, Knox said, the United States had been “long- 
_ | ist policy it has pursued for ten years. Speaking in suffering and patient to a degree almost unmatched 
a | his capacity as War Minister on November 16, Gen- in the history of international relations,” but a time 
. | etal Tojo stressed the efforts of Japan’s military comes “when to go further would mean that our lib- 
- forces to “‘crush the Chungking régime,” to ‘‘accel- erality and forbearance would be misunderstood.” 
7 erate construction” of Greater East Asia, and to The emergency Diet session has provided the 
are | complete all necessary preparations to meet any Tojo Cabinet with an excellent sounding board for 
the | ‘ventualities.” On the following day, speaking as its statement of the Japanese case. After passing 
m- | Premier, he declared that Japan was exerting the necessary financial bills, the Diet meeting is also 
on- | Utmost effort to prevent the spread of the European expected to demonstrate the “iron solidarity” of the 
i | War into East Asia, but coupled this statement with Japanese nation, for which Premier Tojo has called. 
two demands: first, that third powers “refrain from Instead of the criticism often voiced by previous 
| obstructing” a Japanese victory in China; and, sec- Diets, there will probably be smooth passage and 
ms | ond, that they “nullify” the “economic blockade” of unanimous approval of all measures. Yet the value 
ust | Japan and “refrain from presenting a direct military of this outward unanimity may be questioned. Under 
ney | threat” to the Empire. The only reference to the the present Cabinet, to a much greater extent than 
lM! | Axis alliance was made by Shigenori Togo, the For- previously, the Japanese Diet has been relegated to 
un | ign Minister, who stated that the three-power pact, the status of the German Reichstag. The fact that 
ace | “fortunately” established owing to the similarity of General Tojo had to take charge of the Home Min- 
ive | views between Japan and the Axis, had contributed istry, with its powerful levers of control over the 
to construction of new orders in Europe and East police system and local government, is a striking 
Asia and to “prevention of the spread of the war.” indication of the need felt for a strong hand on the 











=— Page Two 





home front. This necessity is not so much immedi- 
ate and actual as it is potential—reflecting the fears 
of an international crisis that may lie just ahead. 
PREPARATIONS FOR SHOWDOWN. As the 
conversations beg.n in Washington, both sides are 
making every effort to strengthen their military-naval 
positions against the threat of a final showdown in 
the Far East. The large-scale mobilization of addi- 
tional Japanese troops that began this summer is 
being steadily continued, with extensive reinforce- 
ments sent to Manchuria and to Indo-China. Con- 











—. | = 


terests in Japanese-occupied China, especially with,| ing. G 
in the International Settlement at Shanghai. They tional : 
number barely 1,000 officers and men, however, and | winter 
would obviously risk becoming hostages if war broke | tobacct 
out. Their withdrawal at this time emphasizes tha} der to 
the service which they might continue to render jj} which 
China is not considered worth the risk. Much more} before. 
significant, especially as regards the strategic cooy.| liquors 
dination of Anglo-American naval forces, was} houseb 
Churchill’s statement that Britain could provide} being | 
heavy naval vessels for action in the Far East. 








centrations in Indo-China have led to reports that a These military-naval preparations reflect the im. SIG. 
Japanese drive on the Burma Road is imminent— passe that has been reached in the Pacific. The trade 
presumably designed to coincide with a collapse of embargo, as well as the increasing unity of Anglo. . - 
the Washington negotiations. If such a move were American-Soviet policy, press Japan to take action om 
directed through Yunnan province, where it might before it is too late. Since no easy “opening’’ has pre. wl 
well be halted by Chinese troops operating in ex- sented itself, Tokyo hopes that the concessions it tet 
tremely mountainous terrain, its consequences might may offer will be sufficient to permit renewal of| a q 
not prove much more serious than recent Japanese trade, but does not give up the chance to take ag-| tblist 
campaigns in China and the action would amount to gressive action if a favorable opportunity arises| “ d " 
a face-saving device for the Tojo Cabinet. If the later. On these terms, Japan would continue to im-| “” , 
invasion swung more to the south, through Burma mobilize the better part of the American navy a ah 
or even through Thailand, there is every possibility Hawaii, a full Soviet army in eastern Siberia, and + a 
that a general conflict would speedily develop in the considerable British and Dutch forces in southeast oe ts 
Pacific. Asia. Merely staving off Japanese action now is| ig 
The gravity of the existing situation is indicated therefore not enough. The forces immobilized in the | om 
by Washington’s decision of November 15 to with- Pacific are desperately needed in the Atlantic and in) chile 
draw the American marines stationed at Peiping, Europe, and it is this urgency which must somehow) Alt 
Tientsin and Shanghai. Up to the present, these be met if a settlement with Japan is to emerge from) ool 
forces have greatly helped to protect American in- the Washington negotiations. T. A. BISsSON | si 
GERMANY FACES WINTER WITH DECLINING MORALE ork 


With its armies still far from ultimate victory in 
Russia, Nazi Germany is entering the third and 
worst winter of the war. Signs are multiplying that 
the German people are becoming discouraged at the 
prospect of an indefinite continuation of warfare 
and the privation it entails. The victorious conclu- 
sion which in the past has repeatedly seemed to be 
within their grasp now appears more remote than 
ever before. Government propaganda, through press 
and radio, has had to remind the people forcefully 
of the tragic consequences of defeat and to hold out 
a vision of future abundance as an incentive for 
perseverance. 


CHEERLESS PROSPECTS. Life in Germany this 





READ— 
LABOR PROBLEMS 
by John C. deWilde 


25¢ 


The fifth in a series of ForEIGN Poticy Reports on the de- 
fense economy of the United States examines the strike 
situation and the record of the Mediation Board. September 
15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPoRTS, which are published 
on the Ist and 15th of each month. Subscription, $5 a year; 
to FPA members, $3. 











tem, | 
winter will be drab and dreary. There will be slightly| econo 


less food than last year, since the 20 per cent cut} large 
in the meat allowance made last May will be con-} 29,00 
tinued and potatoes, the great German staple, will) out ¢ 
be rationed for the first time. Although rations will ing si 
remain sufficient to prevent serious malnutrition, | ties y 
particularly because vitamin pills will be distributed | jailm 
to school children, expectant and nursing mothets,| weak 
and workers who perform heavy labor, the German} dustr 
diet will be extremely monotonous. Provision has} gbilit 
been made for the distribution of only two cans of 

preserved vegetables per person for the entire winter | | Mi 
season, and one pound of fish twice a month. In con- is, ab 
trast, the British people will enjoy more bountiful longe 
Christmas dinners this year than last. Prime Min-| POPY 
ister Churchill could report to Parliament on No} *At 


vember 12 that “minimum food imports’ into| edge 
Britain would “now probably be achieved and even) a 
as 


slightly surpassed,” and that the Ministry of Food 
had been able to amass ‘‘stocks of bulky articles of} Josey 


our diet which amount to double what we had in — 


September 1939.” Headqt 


Entere 


In Germany the supply of consumers’ goods, ER 
which has never been large, is still steadily contract 


te we 








— 


th. 


ind 
Oke 
hat 


Ore 
Of 
vas 


ide 


ade 





itly 
cut 
On- 
vill | 


vill | 





has 








——__ 
— 





ing. German civilians have had to shoulder addi- 
tional sacrifices in order to clothe the army for the 
winter campaign in Russia. Beginning December 1 
tobacco, cigars and cigarettes will be rationed in or- 
der to insure sufficient supplies for the armed forces, 
which absorb 40 per cent of the output. A month 
before, heavier taxes had been imposed on tobacco, 
liquors and champagne. Such scant supplies of 
household articles and semi-luxuries as remain are 


being rapidly depleted 


SIGNS OF INFLATION. Although the German 
government is still in a strong position financially, 
indications of inflation have begun to worry officials. 
Lacking confidence in the future of the Reichsmark, 
many Germans have been purchasing anything of 
tangible value regardless of cost. Despite repeated 


| warnings, this type of inflationary buying has not 


ceased. To discourage spending, the Reich has es- 


| tablished “iron savings’ accounts on which workers 


and employees may make deposits and receive in- 
terest provided the accounts remain frozen until a 
year after the end of the war. Dividend payments in 
excess of 6 per cent have been subjected to prohibi- 
tive taxation, and corporations are expected to put 
sums ordinarily spent for replacements and repairs 
into “‘post-war investment balances” which, mean- 
while, will be at the disposal of the government. 
Although Germany has made remarkably efficient 
use of the limited economic resources at its disposal, 
stresses and strains are constantly evident. With the 
wat in Russia the burden on the transportation sys- 


| tem, long one of the weakest links in the Nazi war 


economy, has greatly increased. The conquest of a 
large part of the Soviet Union has added about 
20,000 to the 50,000 miles of German railways with- 
out correspondingly increasing the amount of roll- 
ing stock. At the end of October German authori- 
ties were compelled to order a further drastic cur- 
tailment in passenger traffic. Another source of 
weakness is the rapid depreciation of German in- 
dustrial equipment owing to constant use and in- 
ability to make essential repairs and replacements. 


MORALE DETERIORATING. The government 


| is, above all, anxious about public morale. The pro- 


longed campaign in Russia, which has never been 
popular, has added to the widespread discourage- 
ment. Recently the authorities have frankly acknowl- 
edged that popular confidence in ultimate victory 
was beginning to wane. In an article published in 
Das Reich early in November, Propaganda Minister 
Joseph Goebbels reiterated that Germany could and 


Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: WAR OR PEACE IN THE PACIFIC? 
Speaker: T. A. Bisson 

Date: Sunday, November 23 

Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over NBC 

For station, please consult your local newspaper 











would win, but only with the ‘gigantic application 
of the national energies of the entire people.” As 
the reward of success, he held out the prospect of 
“raw materials, freedom, nourishment, Lebensraum, 
the basis for social reform of our state and the op- 
portunity of full development for the Axis powers.” 


But it is significant that Goebbels dwelt much more 


extensively on the dire fate which defeat would have 
in store for the German people—the complete ex- 
tinction of their national existence. This fear of de- 
feat is unquestionably the strongest cohesive force 
today in Germany. It can hardly be combated by 
promising the Germans a fair and equitable peace, 
for the Nazi government reminds them constantly 
of the 14 points with which President Wilson ‘‘en- 
snared” Germany in the last war. In the end, Ger- 
man morale can be broken only by convincing the 
German people that they cannot win. As long as 
some hope of victory remains, Germany will stand 


firm. JoHN C. DEWILDE 


ANNUAL MEETING DATE CHANGED 


The Annual Meeting of the Foreign Policy Asso- 
ciation has been advanced to Monday, December 8, 
at 12:15 p.m., at the Hotel Astor, to correspond with 
the new date of the December luncheon which will 
take place at 12:45 the same day. 

Proxies for the Board of Directors (ballot printed 
in last week’s Bulletin) must be returned to National 
Headquarters not later than Friday, December 5. 





Berlin Embassy, by William Russell. New York, E. P. 
Dutton & Company, 1941. $2.50 


A chatty, informative account of everyday life in war- 
time Berlin written by an immigration clerk in our Em- 
bassy who was a keen observer. 


The Dragon Stirs, by Henry F. Misselwitz. New York, 
Harbinger House, 1941. $3.00 


A former Now York Times correspondent reviews the 
concluding ph. ses of China’s nationalist revolution as seen 
at first hand in 1927-29. 


Into China, by Eileen Bigland. New York, Macmillan, 
1940. $3.00 
Personal adventures and misadventures on a trip into 


China along the Burma Road, told with vigor, wit and 
charm. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 5, NoveMBER 21, 1941. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


| 
Seo 18 1 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 
FRANK Ross McCoy, 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Association, Incorporated. National 
President; DorotHy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera MicHeLtes Dean, Editor. 
Three Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Washington News Letter 











ad 












WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
Nov. 17.—The military and political consequences 
of revision of the Neutrality Act are plainly evident 
in Washington this week as Administration leaders 
prepare to meet the challenge of intensified naval 
warfare in the Atlantic and the test of a major 
diplomatic showdown with Japan involving the 
issue of war and peace in the Pacific. The immediate 
strategic consequences will be no less decisive be- 
cause of the narrow margin of the Administration's 
victory, which was recorded in the historic vote of 
212 to 194 by which the House adopted the Senate 
amendments of November 13. For, whatever the 
explanation for the closeness of the final division— 
and there can be no doubt that the vote was influ- 
enced in part by dissatisfaction with the Adminis- 
tration’s handling of the domestic labor issue—the 
fact remains that a clear majority of both Houses 
have now rejected the philosophy of passive defense 
in favor of the President's bold policy of action. 


STRATEGIC CONSEQUENCES. The first results 
are seen in the plans formulated by the Navy to im- 
plement the action of Congress. Even before Presi- 
dent Roosevelt signed the joint resolution on No- 
vember 17, the Navy had completed preparations 
for the arming of American ships at the rate of 
about 100 ships a month. In a statement issued a 
few hours after the action of Congress, Secretary 
Knox made it clear that the Navy had also worked 
out detailed plans for the coordination of American 
and British naval operations on the high seas so as 
to assure more effective delivery of war supplies. 
Colonel Knox declared that “both the ships and the 
men” will be available to deliver defense aid ma- 
terials wherever needed. 

Thus, for the first time since the beginning of the 
war, American vessels will be able to call at Halifax, 
the chief British supply port in Canada; to proceed 
directly to ports in the British Isles; and to pass 
through the former combat areas to the Russian port 
of Archangel on the White Sea. Presumably, Ameri- 
can crews will be available for British as well as 
American ships plying the ocean routes. 

But the results of last week’s action will have an 
even greater effect on Allied shipping policy and the 
projection of a joint American-British naval strategy 
in both the Atlantic and the Pacific. The basis for 
such a joint strategy has already been established in 
the working arrangements between the American 
Navy and the British Admiralty. Since President 







Roosevelt's “shoot-on-sight’” order of September 
American warships have been engaged in cog 
duty in the Atlantic. Up to the present time, he 
ever, units of the American fleet have patro 
North Atlantic waters only as far as Iceland, whee 
they establish contact with British warships whid 
take the convoys the rest of the way to British ports 
While this system has enabled the British to cop. 
centrate their naval strength in the area of greates 
danger, it has not proved entirely effective. The ney| "=~" 
American base in Iceland is well north of the shor. 
est shipping routes to Britain, and in winter weathe 
it is difficult for the convoy vessels to make conta¢ 
without dangerous delays. | 
No plan for joint naval command can be con. 
sidered as long as the United States is not an active 
belligerent. In the near future, however, it seems 
probable that the British and American fleets will be 
employed in accordance with a grand strategy 
worked out in consultation between the two coun. 
tries. Such a strategy would necessarily embrace both 
the Atlantic and the Pacific. In the Atlantic, Ameri 
can destroyers and other light surface vessels might 
be assigned to support the British Navy in protect ie 
ing the western approaches to the United Kingdom re Me 
and the northern route to Russia. Units of the Contir 
American Navy might also be assigned to service in 
the South Atlantic. WI 
With this extension of American naval forces in| w 9 
the Atlantic, Britain might be able to release a con) |. _ 
siderable number of vessels for duty in the Pacific) ;_ 
In fact, Prime Minister Churchill’s recent statement | in | 
that the British are in a position to transfer not only); 
battleships but also auxiliary vessels to the Far East) ,, . 
suggests that some such move may actually be unde: 
way. Whether or not this is so, it is an established) . 
fact that the United States and Great Britain have] 1.1 
between them over 30 capital ships, as compared ’ 
with 10 for Japan and not more than eight or nine, i 
for the Axis powers. The United States Navy has! 
kept secret the present disposition of its forces be 
tween the two oceans, but it is also a known fact 
that the American battle fleet is still based in the 
Pacific and that the land, naval, and air defenses of 
the Philippines have been greatly strengthened dur / 
ing the past year. Thus even a relatively small British 
fleet based on Singapore would fortify the position) p99 
of the Western powers and alter profoundly the) ),. 
naval balance in the entire Pacific area. Naz; 
These are the potential consequences of last week} ,4 


historic decision. WILLIAM T. STONE S} 


F 





HE 
Ma 
Vichy | 
yasion 

betwee 
the sun 
a conf 
versary 
are all 
patterr 
order” 





ment, 


Germ 
wher 
Mosc 
claire 
anno 
agair 
troor 








