





, 4 
. ey 
say 29 1942 


4 
Wir 


a 


AS. Whurfean/y 
wie, ~*Aui ie 


E-Timteawets 
veiversity 


Ann Arbor, Nich 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Bishop D 
2 


ichigan Library 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





these 
some 


ional 
ss the 

Lines 

than 
rolves 
meti- 
hould 
zandé 
er ad- 
Ir do 
y im 
face? 
-wave 
it” to 
r for 
ations 
agen: 
ations 
peact 
might 
» next 
pread 
initelr 
aiser’s 
ofore 
settle 
t arise 
>ment 
upos 
after 
of the 


ING 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 31 


—_- 


May 22, 1942 





AXIS STRAINS RESOURCES FOR VICTORY IN 1942 


HE attack launched by the Nazis in the Crimean 

peninsula on May 8, with the Caucasus across 
the strait of Kerch as its objective, countered by 
a powerful Russian drive toward Kharkov begun 
on May 12, heralded the beginning of what most 
observers regard as a supreme Axis effort to achieve 
“victory at any price” in 1942. For this effort the 
Nazis have rallied all resources of men and ma- 
terials available both in the Reich and in the coun- 
tries they have conquered since 1939. 

American correspondents interned in Germany 
and Italy after December 7, who reached Lisbon last 
week to be exchanged for Axis nationals repatriated 
from the Western Hemisphere, believe that the Ger- 
mans have massed 210 of their 300 army divisions 
on the Russian front, and estimate German casual- 
ties in the east up to date at 2,500,000, of whom 
750,000 are dead. (In special German language 
leaflets prepared for distribution by plane over Ger- 
man lines, the Soviet authorities estimate German 
casualties between December 1 and April 30 at 
1,100,000, comprising 800,000 killed and 300,000 
wounded, frostbitten and captured.) These losses 
in military man power, which in recent months 
have taken a particularly heavy toll of youths be- 
tween 17 and 21, cannot be satisfactorily replen- 
ished from “‘collaborationist’’ countries like Spain, 
Hungary, Rumania or Finland, and are impos- 
ing a heavy strain on the Axis home front. By 
draining men from fields and factories, the Nazis, 
according to reports from Lisbon, have increased 
their fighting services to about 12 million, of whom 
nearly 8 million are in the army, a million and a half 
in the air force and the navy, and 3 million in 
auxiliary services, including the labor corps. 

AXIS MAN POWER PROBLEM. The diversion 
of men from production to the fighting fronts has 
already affected the output of some categories of 
wat materials, notably planes. Returning American 


correspondents estimate that,Germany’s monthly 
plane production is somewhere between 1,100 and 
2,500, and that the Nazis now have 35,000 planes in 
all, many of which, however, are outmoded. (In 
their German language leaflets, the Soviet authorities 
claim that the Germans lost 16,000 planes and 
38,000 aviators in the first nine months of the Soviet- 
German war.) German efforts to develop war pro- 
duction in Italy, less exposed to British bombings 
than the Reich, have apparently not been particu- 
larly successful, due partly to Germany's failure to 
supply promised annual shipments of 1,000,000 tons 
of coal, accompanied by shortages of oil and other 
raw materials, and partly to the deterioration of 
working capacity resulting from longer hours of 
work, reduced rations, and passive resistance. To 
make up for the transfer of German workers to the 
front, Hitler has also mobilized over 2 million war 
prisoners and 2,500,000 foreigners to work in in- 
dustry and agriculture in Germany and the con- 
quered countries—and it is believed that the number 
of foreign workers, including women and even chil- 
dren, will have to be raised to 4 million by autumn. 


NO EASY VICTORY IN SIGHT. But great as 
are the losses of Germany and Italy in terms both 
of human lives at the front and of human comforts 
at home, it would be most dangerous for the Allies 
to underestimate the striking power still left in the 
Axis, or to anticipate an easy victory through the 
internal collapse of either country. Returning Ameri- 
can correspondents agree that the Italian people are 
war-weary, and disillusioned by the course of the 
war which has transformed Italy into a vassal of Ger- 
many. They regard Mussolini as a dupe of Hitler, 
and wait for a chance to throw off the yoke imposed 
on their country by the Nazi party and Gestapo. 
But it is agreed that the Italians will not get this 
chance until Germany has suffered a resounding 
military defeat. A similar view is taken of the situa- 





ee aE rap a 


— 


8 


Sgt yy, 

















tion in Germany. There, too, the people are tired of 
war and, above all, worried by the losses at the 
eastern front and the increasing remoteness of peace 
with victory. Hitler's declaration of war on the 
United States, whose industrial power is recognized 
by the Germans, came as a shock to the German 
people. But in Germany, too, it is believed that the 
people will not disavow Hitler unless the Reich 
suffers a complete military defeat, because they have 
become convinced that to yield now would be to 
invite a fate worse than that of 1918. 

A WAR OF LIBERATION. These reports, which 
confirm the impressions formed by objective students 
of international affairs in the United States, are par- 
ticularly valuable as a guidepost for the future. It is 
clear that the Allies cannot rely on the resistance, no 
matter how courageous or stubborn, of the con- 
quered peoples, or on the war-weariness of the Ger- 
mans and Italians, togencompass the downfall of the 
Axis leaders. They will have to make a supreme 
effort themselves, in military and industrial terms, 
to outmatch Hitler's supreme effort. But it is equally 
clear that, if they are going to win more than a mili- 
tary victory, they must offer the German and Italian 
people an alternative to the Nazis’ “new order.” 

British and American statesmen have, on the 
whole, been cautious in their discussion of post-war 
reconstruction, apparently on the assumption that 
there was little use in talking about the peace when 
we had not even begun to win the war. The first 


CRITICAL SHIPPING SITUATION FORCES U.S. RATIONING 


The inauguration of gasoline rationing in seven- 
teen eastern states on May 15, following closely on 
nationwide sugar rationing, has brought home to 
millions of Americans the seriousness of the ship- 
ping problem facing the United Nations. More than 
any other factor, the lack of merchant vessels is 
restricting the Allies’ war effort and will continue to 
limit its effectiveness for months to come. The 
tremendous burden of transporting men and ma- 
tériel from the United States and the British Isles 
to the Near and Far Eastern fronts, and military 
equipment to Russia via Murmansk or the Persian 
Gulf, has been placed on the overworked ships of 
the Allies’ merchant navies. In addition, huge quan- 


Page Two 





Since Pearl Harbor, it is announced, 191 United 
Nations ships have been sunk in American waters. 
Can we conduct an overseas offensive in the face 
of such losses? Read: 


U. S. Shipping and the War 
by Joseph W. Scott 


Vol. XVII, No. 21 of ForeIGN Po.ticy Reports (issued the 
Ist and 15th of each month. Subscription, $5 a year; to 
FPA members $3). 

















—— 


major speech devoted primarily to this subject—¢ 
livered by Vice President Henry A. Wallace at th 
Free World Association dinner on May 8—receive; 
strikingly little publicity at first. This is all the mox 
unfortunate because Mr. Wallace’s speech embodiej 
that vision of the future which is necessary to arous 
the enthusiasm of anti-Fascist elements in Ger 

and Italy who have become completely cynical aboy 
the struggle for power of their own Fascist leaden 
but do not yet trust the good intentions of Britaip 
and the United States. Mr. Wallace spoke in term 
which can seem revolutionary only to those wh 
still refuse to realize that, desirable as it might be 
it will be impossible to restore the world of 193 
at the close of the war. He proclaimed the twentieth 
century as “the century of the common man,” ig 
which “no nation will have the God-given right tp 
exploit other nations.” Most important of all, he 
declared that ‘the peace must mean a better stand. 
ard of living for the common man, not merely ig 
the United States and England, but also in India 
Russia, China and Latin America—not merely ip 
the United Nations, but also in Germany and Italy 
and Japan.” He proclaimed this war to be not merely 
a war of survival for the Western powers, which 
would be a negative cause to fight for, but a wat 
of liberation for all peoples, making them free tp 
build a new world order—a cause that can enlist the 
support of all those who reject totalitarianism. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 





tities of raw materials to feed American and British 
factories must be brought from the Americas, and 
sufficient bottoms must be allocated to carry essential 
requirements of manufactured goods to Central and 
South American countries. Shipping demands be 
come progressively greater as the Axis achieves fur 
ther conquests. Japanese domination of the oil fields 
of the East Indies and Burma, for example, has 
forced India, Australia and New Zealand to tum 
to Iran or the still more distant United States for 
supplies of essential petroleum products. 


SHIP CONSTRUCTION vs. LOSSES. The in 
tensive German U-boat campaign in Western Hemi 
sphere waters has further accentuated the shipping 
crisis. Apparently abandoning the well-guarded 
North Atlantic convoy routes, the Nazi underses 
craft, some of which are reported to have a 15,000 
mile cruising range, are concentrating on the rela 
tively unprotected coastal lanes in the western At 
lantic and the Caribbean. A daring submarine com 
mander penetrated the Gulf of Mexico and sank 
two ships on May 6; six days later an Americat 
vessel was torpedoed off the mouth of the Missi* 
sippi River. In another lightning stroke on May 11, 















— 
‘ 


t the 
eive 
More 
died 
rouse 


ba 
ders, 
ritain 
terms 
who 
at be 
1939 
ntieth 
, it 
ht to 
ll, he 
stand. 
ly in 
India 
sly in 
Italy 
nerely 
which 
a Wat 
ree {0 
ist the 


:AN 


ritish 
;, and 
ential 
al and 
ls be: 
s fur- 
fields 
> has 
» turn 
es for 


he it 
Hemi 
ipping 
Pied 
dersea 
5,000. 
> rela 
rn At 
> COM 
| sank 
erica 
M issis 
ay 1, 









—_—_ 
—_ 








a Nazi U-boat sent two ships to the bottom in the 
Gulf of St. Lawrence. 


Anti-submarine activity in coastal waters has ap- 
parently been delegated by the Navy largely to air- 
planes, blimps and small patrol vessels, as destroy- 
ers are needed in the eastern Atlantic and the far 
reaches of the Pacific. Unofficial estimates place the 
losses of United Nations vessels in American waters 
between mid-January and mid-May at 180, or about 
45 a month. In view of the Maritime Commission’s 
announcement on May 4 that 36 ships were delivered 
into actual service during April, it is obvious that, 
ship for ship, American production has not yet 
drawn abreast of sinkings in near-by seas, despite 
optimistic statements made in some Washington 
circles. As the year progresses and the Gulf and 
Pacific-coast shipyards, using revolutionary construc- 
tion methods, come into full production, ship de- 
liveries are expected by autumn to reach three a day. 
The Commission’s goal is 750 vessels, totaling 
8,000,000 tons by the end of this year, and 2,300 
vessels (23,000,000 tons) by the end of 1943. 


Some improvements have also been made in the 
operation of merchant vessels. After considerable 
delay, the War Shipping Administration took control 
of all essential ocean-going ships on April 18, 
thereby assuring centralized control over the load- 
ing and routing of all American vessels. The WSA 
has not yet, however, achieved a thoroughgoing 
agreement for pooling bottoms with the other United 
Nations and friendly neutral countries. The con- 
troversies over wages and working conditions of 
American seamen and officers have apparently been 
settled through the signing of a comprehensive 
agreement between the WSA and representatives of 
the maritime trade unions on May 14. 


GASOLINE AND SUGAR. The pressing prob- 
lem of Allied shipping is indicated in the shortages 
of two commodities — gasoline and sugar — which 
enter into general consumption. The United States 
produces ample supplies of petroleum, largely in 
Texas and California, whence shipments to the At- 
lantic seaboard and the Pacific Northwest are 
normally made by sea. A number of the tankers 
formerly in these services have been diverted to 
more essential foreign runs, and others have been 
the prey of submarines. The eastern coast, which 
received 98 per cent of its 1,400,000-barrel daily 
supply (1940) by sea, has recently been obtaining 
less than 400,000 barrels from tankers. While the 
tailroads are now bringing in 600,000 barrels daily 


Page Three 











On Sunday, May 24, from 12 to 12:15 p.m., E.W.T., 
Vera Micheles Dean, Research Director of the FPA, will 
speak over The Blue Network. 

Subject: WILL NAZIS GET THE 
CAUCASUS? 

We hope you will listen in and let us have your re- 

actions afterwards. 











in tank cars, the reserves in Atlantic-coast ports have 
been steadily dropping, leading to curtailment .of 
non-essential consumption of gasoline through the 
ration system, 

A similar situation exists with respect to our sugar 
supply. Although the country's average annual con- 
sumption of 7,000,000 tons has been increased by 
the use of cane sugar for industrial alcohol, and the 
United Nations which formerly secured sugar from 
the East Indies must be supplied from the Western 
Hemisphere, there are still abundant quantities of 
sugar available in Cuba, Puerto Rico, Hawaii and 
Peru to meet our import requirements. However, 
ships are lacking to carry these imports even from 
our neighbor, Cuba. 

The difficulties which have made rationing neces- 
sary are not insurmountable. The eastern states could 
be provided with normal gasoline supplies by con- 
structing new pipelines from Texas to the Atlantic 
coast. Plans have already been advanced for digging 
up and relaying pipe now in use, but this would be 
only a partial solution of the problem. The produc- 
tion of new pipe which could, perhaps within a year, 
provide the East with pre-war quantities of oil 
would necessitate the diversion of steel from tank 
factories and shipyards. By sending fewer cargoes to 
General MacArthur’s forces or to the Russians, we 
could bring in ample quantities of sugar—but this 
would seriously hamper our war effort. By accepting 
rationing as a vital part of the war program and by 
reducing consumption of scarce commodities to the 
lowest possible levels, American consumers can make 
a significant contribution to the winning of the 


conflict. Louis E. FRECHTLING 





Time Runs Out, by Henry J. Taylor. New York, Double- 

day, Doran, 1942. $3.00 

A modern Richard Harding Davis, who visited England, 
Germany and the neutral capitals of Europe just before 
America entered the conflict, presents some interesting 
sidelights on the Continent at war. He shows marked sym- 
pathy for the strong “leaders” like Pétain and Salazar, and 
believes that the failure of parliamentary democracy to 
safeguard the liberties and lives of the peoples of the 
Continental countries has dissipated all hope in the demo- 
cratic idea. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 31, 


May 22, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


1942. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Zu: 81 Produced und 





Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Secretary; Vera MicHEe.es DEAN, Editor; Davip H. PoppsEr, Associate Editor. 


Incorporated. National 


FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Wituiam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lust, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, 


er union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





ie 








Washington News Letter 

















May 18.—Despite the protests and veiled warn- 
ings issued on May 16 by Pierre Laval, Chief of 
Government at Vichy, the State and Navy Depart- 
ments have made plain their determination to con- 
tinue direct negotiations with Admiral Georges 
Robert, French High Commissioner in the West 
Indies. The United States is seeking to obtain ful- 
fillment of certain military and economic conditions 
laid down on May 9 in regard to the island of Mar- 
tinique. So far, these negotiations have resulted in 
an agreement with Robert—in which Laval appar- 
ently acquiesced—whereby the three French war- 
ships stationed at Martinique will be rendered unfit 
for naval action. According to the version of the 
American note given out in Vichy, the United States 
government insists that the measures of demobiliza- 
tion be carried out under American supervision. 
Whether this stipulation has been accepted by Ad- 
miral Robert has not been made known. 

Meanwhile, negotiations are continuing about an- 
other condition considered of great importance to 
this country: that the 150,000 tons of French mer- 
chant vessels and tankers now laid up at Martinique 
should be made available to the United States 
against equitable compensation to the owners. In his 
May 16 statement, Laval indicated that such a step 
would violate the terms of the French armistice with 
Germany, which forbade the transfer of French 
ships to any state fighting the Nazis, and implied 
that the ships might be scuttled, if necessary, to keep 
them out of American control. A possible solution 
might be to hand the ships over to one or more 
friendly nonbelligerent Latin American states—say, 
Mexico or Brazil. 


LAVAL’S POSITION. While the situation at 
Martinique remains full of uncertainty, the State 
Department is giving little evidence of concern over 
the obvious discomfiture of Laval. As to Laval’s 
real intentions, opinions differ in Washington. One 
group of observers holds that his every move is 
dictated by a desire to please his masters in Berlin. 
Others are inclined to feel that Laval’s personal 
vanity and thirst for power, as well as his aptitude 
for political maneuvering, do not mark him out for 
the role of Gauleiter (which would seem equivalent 
to political extinction) except as a last resort. This 
school of thought holds that he might in fact wel- 
come heavy pressure from the United States, such 
as results indirectly from the Martinique affair, to 
counterbalance Nazi pressure. Knowing the weight 
of American influence with the French people, Laval 


could plead with the Nazis his inability to do m 
than protest verbally against American deman 
Against this, the Germans are apparently threa 
ing to replace him with Jacques Doriot, French ex 
communist and leading pro-Nazi in Paris, but 
Doriot; as Chief of Government, would probably be 
even less palatable to Pétain and the French public 
than Laval. In any event, Washington is unlikely to 
modify the course of its present negotiations with 
Admiral Robert in Martinique. 


FREE FRENCH PARTICIPATION? If Robert, 
either on his own authority or that of Vichy, should 
reject the remaining American conditions, or pro- 
long negotiations unduly, the United States might 
be compelled, for its own security, to take direc 
action similar to that employed by the British—with 
our blessing—at Diego Suarez in Madagascar. 
Under the Havana Convention of 1940, the islands 
could then be administered by the United States 
alone, or by the American republics jointly. But 
the question would arise as to whether we should 
also enlist the cooperation of the Free French Na 
tional Committee in setting up such military and 
administrative controls, as the British government 
announced on May 13 it was doing in regard to 
Madagascar. So far, the State Department has com- 
pletely by-passed General de Gaulle, as well as 
Vichy, in the Martinique negotiations, on the ground 
that it was maintaining an established policy of 
dealing with French officials on the spot. 

Even if the Martinique situation should be funda- 
mentally changed, however, there is some doubt that 
the United States government would follow the 
British example in Madagascar. The impression pre 
vails that the State Department is not going out of 
its way to give encouragement to the de Gaulle 
movement—at least in its political phase. Free 
French leaders in this country are much disturbed 
by this evident frigidity on the part of the State De 
partment. They claim that General de Gaulle is the 
symbol of a large and growing French opposition to 
the Nazis, that he has no political ambitions for 
himself, and that he is concerned simply with mo- 
bilizing French support at home, in the colonies and 
abroad for the purpose of destroying Nazi tyranny 
over France. They regard the cause of the United 
Nations as their own. It would seem that the United 
States government might accept their support and 
enlist their services in those enterprises where it 
would be appropriate. Such an occasion may po® 


sibly arise in Martinique. WriL1amM P. MADDOX 














lent 
and 
for 


got 
tive 
the 


pla 
IS f 
ly « 


cou 


eta 


prc 
to 





