int 


n 


eeeseoce 


rated, as 


BRIGBDICAL & 


UnIY, oF MICs 


1945 


PENERAL LNAI 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


NOV 2 8 194§ 


FOREIGN 


POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vout. XXV, No. 6 


NOVEMBER 23, 1945 


Paris.—Developments in France since the collapse 
of June 1940 have been so obscured for Americans 
by doubts, inadequate information, prejudices, and 
conflicts among French groups in the United States 
during the war years that it is peculiarly difficult to 
give the American public an objective picture of 
what the French think, want and fear. Perhaps the 
most satisfactory way of describing the situation in 


oon France is to discuss certain misconceptions that have 


arisen in the United States. Among the most impor- 

tant of these misconceptions are the following: 

1. That “the French did not really mind the Ger- 
man occupation; the Germans were ‘correct’; 
from the material point of view, things were 
better then than now, and life was quite toler- 
able.” 

Many Americans on a visit to France get this im- 
pression because they spend most of their time in a 
small circle of what the French call the Aaute bour- 
geoisie, who in the past could afford to travel to 
the United States, who know English, and who enter- 
tained the Germans during the occupation with the 
same alacrity and the same lack of conviction with 
which they now entertain Americans. These French- 
men feared movements to improve the lot of indus- 
trial workers in 1936, regarding them as forerunners 
of communism, and welcomed the Germans as a 
bulwark against further demands from labor. Their 
behavior, and that of some members of the higher 
clergy, is described by the French as pas chic. They 
are discredited in France, are not representative of 
majority opinion in the country, and give visiting 
Americans—most of whom lack knowledge both of 
the language and the pre-war situation of France— 
a false picture of France’s wartime experience. It is 
nothing short of tragic that Americans nurtured in 
the tradition of Jefferson and Lincoln should so often, 
when they go abroad, spend their time and seek their 


FALSE IMPRESSIONS BECLOUD AMERICAN ATTITUDE TOWARD FRANCE 


sources of information among reactionary groups. 

2. That “the French did not suffer much during 
the war years, certainly less than the popula- 
tion of other countries occupied by the Ger- 
mans.” 

Visitors to Paris gain this impression because the 
incomparable beauty of the city has been scarcely 
touched by the war and, after years of absence, seems 
more glorious and moving than ever. But this beauty 
is a brave facade for indescribable misery and anxi- 
ety, suffered by most of the people in relative silence 
because the French, who have a strong sense of per- 
sonal dignity, have been reluctant to shout their sor- 
rows from the housetops and have acquired, during 
years when the resistance movement had to work 
underground, a reticence they themselves compare to 
that of the British. The fact that during the early 
months of the occupation the Germans tried to be 
what they called “correct,” and that many French 
men and women—stupefied by the suddenness and 
magnitude of their country’s collapse and willing to 
believe in the integrity of Pétain—d.‘ not begin to 
resist both the Germans and Vichy until much later, 
misled Americans into believing that the French re- 
ceived relatively good treatment from Hitler. Actual- 
ly, the Germans in France, as elsewhere, proceeded 
systematically to destroy the foundations of the na- 
tion by hounding political and intellectual leaders, 
by enforcing the separation of families through de- 
portations and transfers of French workers to Ger- 
many, and by gradual reduction of the French stand- 
ard of living to a point where the entire population 
found itself condemned to malnutrition. When the 
Germans now complain because they must live on 
rations providing 1500 calories daily, it is well for 
us to remember that the Germans forced the French 
to live on rations which during some periods dropped 
below 1,000 calories, and that even now French 


stents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


rations hover around 1500. The results of prolonged 
malnutrition are becoming apparent in a rapidly ris- 
ing rate of infant mortality, tuberculosis, rickets and 
general debilitation of the population, in addition 
to the sufferings inflicted by the Germans on the 
French in terms of mental and physical cruelty. The 
Germans systematically disorganized and looted 
French industry to such an extent that the revival 
of industrial production will require thoroughgoing 
re-equipment of the country’s principal enterprises. 
This will have to be done, in the first instance, large- 
ly through imports from other countries—especially 
the United States—and through such reparations in 


kind as France may find it possible to collect from 
Germany. 


3. That “most of the persons deported by the 
Germans were Jews, and workers drafted for 
work in Germany were only too glad to go be- 
cause they were paid high wages.” 


Some Americans visiting France have been uncon- 
sciously so affected by Nazi propaganda as to take 
the view that the deportation of Jews is in some way 
less harrowing or less reprehensible than that of 
non-Jews. This is in itself a sad commentary on the 
mentality we have developed during the war years, 
and on the efficacy of Nazi propaganda. But the im- 
pression that most of the persons deported by the 
Germans were Jews is in itself false because the Ger- 
mans sent many non-Jews, active in the resistance 
movement or openly opposed to collaboration with 
the Nazis, to the most notorious concentration camps 
in Germany and subjected them to treatment that de- 
fies the imagination. Only a handful of political and 
“racial” deportees—whose total number is estimated 
at 600,000—had sufficient stamina to survive the 
agonies of deportation and to return, usually in 
tragically enfeebled condition. Those who stood up 
best under the strain were the Communists and the 
fervent believers, whatever their faith, because they 
could take refuge in their inner life from the at- 
tempts of the Germans, through physical and mental 
torture, to force the total annihilation of human 
values. The ones who did return burn with an inner 
flame of faith in the immutable preciousness of 
human liberty that can only make those of us who 
did not undergo similar experiences humble in the 
face of true greatness. If we, who suffered relatively 
so little and had so few cruel moral decisions to 
make, fail to give our moral support to these French 
men and women, and instead listen to the defeatists, 
the collaborators, the men of little faith who brought 
France low even before its defeat by the Germans, 
we shall not deserve to see democracy preserved in 
our time. 

In addition to political and “racial” deportees, the 
Germans forced about 800,000 French workers to 


Page Two 


ey, 
- eee, 


work for them in Germany. It is false to say thy 
these workers went gladly or even willingly. A hand. 
ful, who were down and out because of the paralysis 
of French industry resulting from the occupation, 
did take this opportunity to earn something for them, 
selves and their families. But in order to cbtain the 
number of workers they wanted, the Germans had 
to stage periodic raids and seize workers by force 
Any notion that the work service was willingly under. 
taken is exploded by its very name, the Service 
volontaire de travail obligatoire. If one adds tp 
the list 1,800,000 French war prisoners held by the 
Germans throughout the five years 1940-45, the Ger. 
mans removed from France well over three mil. 
lion men and women, the majority of whom were 
in the active period of their lives when they could 
have contributed most to the political and economic 
rehabilitation of their country. Moreover, we must 
not forget that the French lost nearly one million 
men, women and children, both military and civil. 
ians, in the course of military operations and Ger. 
man executions on French soil. This loss, alone, 
approximates the total loss of war dead suffered by 
the United States, whose population is three times 
that of France. 


4. That “the French are not working hard 
enough, and that is why the country is still in 
such a parlous condition.” 


American visitors in France, who live in specially 
arranged billets where they have heat, hot water, 
and good army rations palatably prepared by French 
cooks, have no idea whatsoever of the conditions 
under which the French have to proceed with the 
reconstruction of their devastated and impoverished 
country. The French have to go about their tasks in- 
sufficiently fed, in homes and offices that went com 
pletely unheated last winter, and with little or no 
hot water. Transportation difficulties are almost un- 


It is t 
establis! 
to follc 
neither 
sustain 
has con 
Bidault 
eign 2 
and ag 
howeve 
to assu 
the res 
the me 
his pa 
favor < 
and Ft 
regard 
the Co 
any fo: 
Franco 
ever, f 

At | 
agains 


What t 
Carl 
G. lh 
Fou 

oursely 


believable. Hundreds of bridges were blown up dur: | 


ing the post-D-Day period, either by the Germans 
or by the Allies. Railway lines and railway material 


were wrecked in the course of air raids. Ports were | 


smashed, and locomotives, buses, trolley and freight 
cars were taken by the Germans out of France for use 
in military operations. In many areas France must 
start from scratch. To give only one example, work- 


ers in the shipyards of St. Nazaire, one of the ports | 


flattened by Allied air raids, must live in the coun 


try because no housing is available in the port itself. | 


They travel to work three hours in unheated trains, 
usually standing. When they arrive at the shipyards 
they are hungry and weary, and the procedure must 
be repeated when they leave at night. The situation 
could be improved if there were buses and gasoline, 
but neither of these luxuries is on hand. The miracle 
is that, under such primitive conditions, French work 


South 
York 
The 

Ameri 

books | 

tine ar 
Part I 
deserij 
the co 
search 

Argen 
Hou 
An 

colone 

undec: 

FOREIC 

Headqu 

second-« 

one mort 


> 


—=s 


say that 
. A hand. 
paralysis 
Cupation, 
for them. 
btain the 
nans had 
by force 
ly under. 
> Service 
adds to 
ld by the 
the Ger. 
iree mil. 
Om were 
ey could 
economic 
we must 
> million 
ind civil. 
and Ger. 
S, alone, 
ffered by 


ree times 


ng hard 
is still in 


specially 
>t water, 
yy French 
onditions 
with the 
overished 
tasks in- 
ent com- 
‘le or no 
most un- 
1 up dur- 


Germans 


material | 


yrts were 
d freight 
e for use 
nce must 
le, work- 
the ports 
he coun- 
yrt itself. 
-d trains, 
shipyards 
ure must 
situation 
gasoline, 
e miracle 
ich work: 


Page Three 


ers have the tenacity and will power to work at all. ization may not prove sufficiently effective to protect 
Actually, production in some enterprises has im- France, and therefore demand international control 

roved to a reasonable degree. For example, coal of the Ruhr with its rich resources of coal, and a sort 

roduction for September and October averaged be- of Franco-British-Dutch-Belgian condominium over 
tween 75 and 90 per cent of 1938. the Rhineland but not annexation by France. Such 
an arrangement, they insist, would only give Western 
Europe the protection against Germany already given 
at Potsdam to Eastern Europe by the separation from 
the Reich of East Prussia. There are sound reasons 
for the doubts concerning French plans for the 
Rhineland raised by Britain and the United States, 
which fear further fragmentation of Germany. But 
the project for international control of the Ruhr de- 
serves consideration by the Big Three. 


—_—_— 
— 


5. That “the French are intransigent in their 
foreign policy, especially with respect to Ger- 
many, and make things difficult for the Big 
Three.” 

It is true that General de Gaulle, in his effort to re- 
establish France's position in world affairs, has tended 
ty follow a policy of prestige which the country has 
neither the military nor industrial resources to 
sustain now or in the visible future. This tendency 


has complicated the task of Foreign Minister Georges 
Bidault, who has made every effort to conciliate for- 
eign governments which have been offended again 
and again by the General’s tactics. Fundamentally, 
however, all groups in France are united in their desire 
to assure the country’s security in the future against 
the resurgence of Germany. Where they differ is on 
the method of achieving this end. M. Bidault and 
his party, the Mouvement Républicain Populaire, 
favor a western association of nations led by Britain 
and France, and see no reason why Russia should 
regard such an association as a hostile bloc; while 
the Communists, supporting Russia’s attitude, oppose 
any formal western grouping and lean heavily on the 
Franco-Russian alliance. All political groups, how- 
ever, favor a strong international organization. 

At the same time, the French want reinsurance 
against the possibility that the International Organ- 


THE F.P.A. 


What the South Americans Think of Us: A Symposium, by 
Carleton Beals, Bryce Oliver, Herschel Brickell, Samuel 
G. Inman. New York, Robert M. McBride, 1945. $3.00 


Four experts in the Latin American field have us see 
ourselves as our neighbors see us. 


South America Uncensored, by Roland Hall Sharp. New 

York, Longmans, Green, 1945. $3.00 

The author, a newspaperman with many years of Latin 
American experience behind him, has really written two 
books in one. Part I is a strong indictment of the Argen- 
tine and Brazilian governments as fascist régimes; while 
Part II, “The Portrait of a Continent,” is an illuminating 
description of the geographic and economic realities of 
the continent especially directed at young Americans in 
search of new frontiers. 


Argentine Diary, by Ray Josephs. New York, Random 
House, 1944. $3.00 
An episodic account of the coming to power of the 
colonels’ clique by a reporter who was from the start 
undeceived as to its true character. 


The key question is whether the United States 
intends to stay in Germany as long as may prove 
necessary. If we do stay, then the French will not be 
so agonizingly preoccupied with the problem of se- 
curity as they are today. If we leave, then it is diffi- 
cult to see what right we have to prevent the French 
from assuring their security by whatever means seem 
to them most practicable. We are facing, under far 
more difficult conditions, exactly the same decision 
we faced in 1919: whether to guarantee the security 
of Europe by our active and continuous participation 
and thus allay France’s fears, or withdraw and thus 
justify intransigence on the part of the French. With 
two wars on the continent in our lifetime, it would 
be the height of folly to belittle, as some Americans 
are doing, the nightmare fear of Germany which 
stalks not only France but all Europe. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BOOKSHELF 


The Pan American Yearbook 1945. New York, Pan Ameri- 
can Associates, 1945. $5.00 
A compilation of basic facts about the Americas, in- 
cluding a “Who’s Who of Inter-America. Trade,” arranged 
both alphabetically and by industry within each country. 


The Argentine Republic, by Ysabel F. Rennie. New York, 

Macmillan, 1945. $4.00 

The best and most readable analysis of the Argentine 
crisis yet to appear, this history takes the reader from the 
founding of the Republic a century ago to the revolution 
of 1943, and contends that the democratic forces in Argen- 
tina gave the present nationalist government power by 
default. 


Economic Problems of Latin America, edited by Seymour 

E. Harris. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1944. $4.00 

The student, rather than the general reader, will de- 
rive profit from this discussion of major economic issues 
in Latin America and the country-by-country survey which 
follows. The main thesis of the introduction is that these 
countries are the victims of external forces which they 
are now seeking to control, with what degree of success 
the individual country studies endeavor to show. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 6, NovEMBER 23, 1945. Published weekly by the Foreign P Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MicHeLes DEgan, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ss 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


se 


Washington News Letter ined 


CAN U.S. BASE EFFECTIVE POLICY ON WEALTH AND ATOMIC POWER? 


The policy of the United States toward its two 
great wartime Allies, the United Kingdom and the 
Soviet Union, is shaped by American possession of 
two things which the rest of the world lacks and 
wants—a plentiful supply of dollars and the manu- 
facturing secrets associated with atomic fission. The 
determination to trade these riches for foreign sup- 
port of our views in world affairs became clear dur- 
ing the visit to Washington of Prime Minister Clem- 
ent R. Attlee. The United States assured Mr. Attlee 
that we would lend dollars to his government pro- 
vided Britain would seriously consider changing its 
international commercial policies and would accord 
us certain privileges in examining the financial posi- 
tion of the British Treasury. On November 15 Mr. 
Attlee and President Truman, with Canadian Prime 
Minister Mackenzie King, announced a proposed 
agreement for the sharing of secrets on the peaceful 
use of atomic energy, provided that “‘other nations’ — 
presumably the Soviet Union first of all—agree to 
abandon a policy of secrecy in scientific information 
and to grant the United Nations Organization the 
privilege of inspecting their industrial facilities. 

QUID PRO QUO POLICY. The direct use of 
our wealth as a bargaining counter in foreign affairs 
marks a distinct change from wartime practice. Dur- 
ing the period from March 1941 to August 1945, 
when we were sharing our material wealth with our 
Allies through lend-lease agreements, we asked noth- 
ing in exchange except a general commitment that 
lend-lease recipients would at some time in the post- 
war period jointly do what they could toward elim- 
inating artificial barriers to the free movement of 
international commerce. The Roosevelt Administra- 
tion rejected advice that it attach a specific guid pro 
quo to lend-lease, especially for lend-lease supplies 
sent to the Soviet Union, with the argument that the 
primary interest of the United States lay in. military 
victory and that the use of lend-lease supplies by our 
Allies contributed to that victory. The end of the 
war and the termination of lend-lease agreements 
destroyed that argument. 

The problem confronting the United States in 
the development of its guid pro quo policy is to de- 
termine how much to require of the potential bene- 
ficiaries of our wealth. The British negotiators for 
the loan agreement, Lord Keynes and the Earl of 
Halifax, for instance, have told their fellow-negotia- 
tors from the United States that the special privi- 
leges sought by this country are excessive. The 


negotiators, accordingly, referred the whole ques 
tion to the British government last week, and the 
attitude of one member of that government was te 
vealed on November 16, when Sir Stafford Cripps 
President of the Board of Trade, told the Map. 
chester Chamber of Commerce: “We will not be. 
come the economic fief of any other country.” The 
United States loan proposal asks for two per cent 
interest each year that Britain has a favorable dollar 
balance in its trade, and would permit the United 
States to determine annually whether Britain ha 
sufficient dollar balances to pay not only current 
interest but interest for any previous year in which 
payment was skipped. 

Can such bargaining in international affairs be 
considered practical policy if our price is too high? 
The answer to this difficult question may be supplied 
by the nature of the Soviet response to the Truman. 
Attlee-King atomic energy proposals. While Russia 
has not made public its reaction, a sentence from 
the address previously made in Moscow on No- 
vember 6 by Soviet Foreign Commissar Vyaches 
lav Molotov shows something of the Russian atti 
tude: “The discovery of atomic energy should not 
encourage . . . a propensity to exploit the discovery in 
the play of forces in international policy.” 

ALTERING THE UNITED NATIONS? The 
agreement states that Mr. Truman, Mr. Attlee 
and Mr. King “are not convinced that the spread- 
ing of the specialized information regarding the 
practical application of atomic energy, before it is 
possible to devise effective, reciprocal and enforce 
able safeguards acceptable to all nations, would con 
tribute to a constructive solution of the problem of 


the atomic bomb.” Acceptance of that preliminary | 


to the sharing could bring about a basic change in 
the nature of the U.N.O. Security Council, for the 
three men apparently consider the present authority 
of the Council to deal with aggression inadequate 
to “devise safeguards” against the threat to peace 
inherent in the existence of atomic weapons. The 
Administration is aware that other states might mis- 
read the position of the United States. To combat 
such construction, Secretary of State Byrnes, in an 
address in Charleston on November 16, said: ‘The 
suggestion that we are using the atomic bomb as 4 
diplomatic or military threat against any nation § 
not only untrue in fact but is a wholly unwarranted 
reflection upon the American government and 
people.” BLAIR BOLLES 


Vou. X 


HI 

Mz 
and tl 
phase, 
hostili 
ing ag 
States 
Gover 
at suc 
wangt 
shek’s 
pushe 
ultim< 
and t 
the Ci 
cent 1 
techn: 
ernm< 
preset 
States 
of Ch 
them 
ters Vv 
stretc 


N¢ 
accru 
aid, t 
tion ¢ 
withi 
almo 
strug 
by U 
at Ts 
lic Ol 
of th 
ing t 
strife 

Te 


