fancies il 


a. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XIX, No. 36 


JUNE 28, 1940 





eE7~_™ 


THE BRITISH EMPIRE UNDER FIRE 
by JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


A discussion of the origins of the present European war and 
of the British Empire’s chances of surviving it, with chapters 
also on the history and development of the Empire, on the 
self-governing Dominions, the Crown Colonies and India. 


Headline Book No. 24 


25 cents 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











Dr. Villian v. Bishop 


% Univers 
tcc dil Michigan 1 


library 
aan Artar, wr ch. 








—_—_ 





THE AXIS POWERS 


IMPOSE THEIR TERMS 





FRANCE tasted the bitterness of complete and 
humiliating defeat on June 22, when a small 
French delegation signed the conditions of armistice 
offered by Nazi Germany. The presentation of the 
German demands and their final acceptance both 
took place in the historic railway dining-car in the 
forest of Compiégne, where less than 22 years before 
the Allies dictated the terms of armistice to a van- 
guished foe. On June 24 the government of Marshal 
Pétain also signed an armistice with Italy, thus put- 
ting France completely at the mercy of the Axis 
powers. The French ceased fighting shortly after 
midnight on June 25. 

FRANCE REDUCED TO IMPOTENCE. The 
terms imposed by the conqueror were fully as severe 
as had been expected. Realizing that the British 
are resolved to carry on the war, Hitler and Mus- 
solini exacted from the French virtually every 
concession which could facilitate a successful cam- 
paign against Britain. German troops will occupy 
more than half of France, including the entire 
cast on the English Channel and the Atlantic 
Ocean. Within this area lie all the coal mines and 
virtually the entire war industry of France. The 
German occupying forces will be able to com- 
mandeer all factories, mines and transportation 
facilities. Italian troops are occupying Nice, Savoy 
and Corsica, and probably Tunis and Jibuti in Africa. 
The French government will retain only a small part 
of southern France which it may administer directly 
without the immediate supervision of an army of 
occupation. 

French naval, military and air forces are to be de- 
mobilized and disarmed with the exception of such 
ttoops as Germany and Italy will permit for the 
maintenance of order. All artillery, tanks, rifles, air- 
craft and other war equipment must be surrendered, 
and land and coast defenses in occupied territory 
must be handed over intact. The French navy, ex- 


cept that part needed to safeguard the French 
colonial empire, is to be collected in specified ports 
for demobilization and disarmament under German 
or Italian supervision. The German government has 
promised not to use the French Fleet that falls under 
its control except for minesweeping and coast sur- 
veillance. This undertaking will not necessarily ap- 
ply, however, to the French war vessels which fall 
into Italian hands. 

The last article in the armistice clearly reveals 
how sweeping the German victory has been. Under 
this provision the Reich reserves the right to de- 
nounce the terms of the armistice if, in Germany's 
judgment, the French government does not fulfill 
all its obligations. Thus, if all or part of the French 
Fleet continues to fight, or if any Frenchman, either 
in Britain or the French Empire, carries on the 
struggle against Germany, the armistice may be ter- 
minated at once. As an additional guarantee, the 
Germans will retain all French prisoners of war un- 
til the conclusion of peace, while France must rfe- 
lease all its prisoners and hand over all German 
subjects, particularly refugees, whom the Reich may 
designate. 

The latter stipulations are of considerable im- 
portance in view of the refusal of many Frenchmen 
to accept the armistice. Major General Charles de 
Gaulle, who was Under-Secretary for War in the 
Reynaud Cabinet for a ten-day period in June, has 
fled to London where he has repeatedly appealed to 
the French people to continue fighting. In a broad- 
cast on June 23 he repudiated the armistice and the 
Bordeaux government which accepted it, and an- 
nounced the formation, in agreement with the British 
Cabinet, of a “French National Committee” re- 
solved to carry on the war in alliance with Britain. 
According to London reports the French Com- 
mander-in-Chief in the Near East, General Mittel- 
hauser, also refused to lay down his arms. The gov- 





























erning authorities of French possessions in Africa 
were said to have shown a similar determination to 
continue the war; and the British government an- 
nounced on June 23 that it was “prepared to make 
the necessary financial arrangements to enable the 
French colonial empire to play its part.” 

WHY DID FRANCE SURRENDER? Under the 
circumstances it was surprising that the French gov- 
ernment chose to capitulate. Undoubtedly, the mili- 
tary situation in France proper was quite hopeless 
after the German army had broken through on the 
Somme-Aisne front north of Paris. The Germans 
pressed on swiftly and relentlessly, without giving 
the French opportunity to re-form their lines. By 
June 17, when the French sued for an armistice, the 
German Army had reached the Loire and outflanked 
the Maginot Line; and five days later the Germans 
were already beyond Tours and Lyon. Yet the 
French government could have followed the prece- 
dents set by the Polish, Dutch, Belgian and Nor- 
wegian governments. The fate of France might not 
have been much worse had it chosen to carry on 
from British soil or any of the French possessions. 
At the same time it might have kept the French 
Navy and a part of the French Air Force from fall- 
ing into the hands of the enemy. 

Although Prime Minister Churchill proposed to 
carry on the war in complete union with France, the 
French government chose to surrender in the ex- 
pectation of getting better terms from Hitler than 
would otherwise have been possible. Despite the 
severe conditions of the armistice, the Pétain gov- 
ernment, which is composed of elements who believe 
in the necessity of a pro-German orientation, still 
hopes that Germany may deal rather leniently with 
France at the conclusion of the war. For this reason, 
it will probably do all in its power to prevent outly- 
ing parts of the French Empire from continuing re- 
sistance. The day following the armistice Marshal 
Pétain added to his Cabinet two men—Pierre Laval 
and Adrien Marquet—who have been known for 
their marked pro-Nazi and pro-Fascist leanings. It is 
generally believed that Laval will soon take over the 
reins from the aged Marshal Pétain. Thus the Ger- 
mans may be able to foster the creation of a Fascist 
or near-Fascist government in France which will 
cooperate as a subordinate partner in a German- 
dominated United States of Europe. With the bitter- 


THE PLIGHT OF BRITAIN 


Now completely isolated from the Continent, 
Great Britain finds itself in a desperate position. 
Prime Minister Churchill, declaring on June 23 that 
he had learned of the armistice negotiations with 
“grief and amazement,” urged all Frenchmen out- 
side the conquered area to continue resistance and 
reiterated his confidence in an ultimate British vic- 


Page Two nn 








— 


ness now engendered between France and Britain 
such a government might even aid Germany actively 
against the United Kingdom. 

AXIS POWERS DOMINATE EUROPE. Othe, 
countries have shown the same reaction to Germany) 
success. Rumania, which long maintained a precayj 
ous balance between the Allies and the Reich, ha 
now definitely joined the totalitarian camp. Qh 
June 21 King Carol dissolved his own Nation, 
Renaissance Front, and supplanted it with a ney 
organization entitled Party of the Nation. While 
this party will likewise be under the personal qi 
rection of the King, it will include the members of 
the pro-Nazi Iron Guard and presumably derive it 
inspiration largely from this source. In Yugoslavia 
the Germans and Italians are also said to be pressing 
for the formation of a Fascist-minded government 
On June 14 the Belgrade government released fo. 
mer Premier Milan Stoyadinovitch, who had prey. 
ously been interned for his Nazi sympathies. 

In effect Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy noy 
control, directly or indirectly, virtually the entire 
European continent, with the Soviet Union as the 
only important continental power outside thei 
sphere of influence. Yet the Axis powers can tum 
their attention to Britain without much fear of 3 
“stab-in-the-back” from Soviet Russia. While the 
Kremlin may have belated regrets that it did nothing 
to halt the advance of the Nazi war machine, it ha 
neither the inclination nor the power to intervene 
in the war at this juncture. The military occupation 
of the three small Baltic countries reflects the So 
viet Union’s desire to strengthen itself vis 4 vis 
Germany; and rumors of clashes on the Russian: 
Rumanian border may presage a Soviet attempt to 
occupy Bessarabia which Rumania seized from Russia 
in 1918. Such steps, however, have been or may be 
taken with the acquiescence of Germany, and & 
not indicate that Moscow is prepared to undertake 
more extensive action. On June 22, Tass, the official 
Soviet news agency, categorically denied reports that 
100 to 150 divisions had been massed on the German 
border or that relations with the Reich had been 
aggravated owing to recent German successes in the 
West. A German-Russian clash may come some day, 
but for the immediate future Britain must face é 
whole continent alone. 

JOHN C. DEWILDE 


tory. Britain can win, however, only if it can with 
stand blockade and invasion this summer and thus 
gain time to mobilize the resources of its Empite 
and to secure supplies from the United States. Sinc 
Germany is apparently determined to utilize im 
mediately its advantages of superior preparation and 
its well-perfected techniques — speed, surprise and 





not dc 
can us 
cial re 
The e 
contai 
Chath 
merci 
and P 
Germ 
wise 
in Ir 
“fifth 
munic 
imprc 

non- 
its all 


meth« 
temp 
It is 
boats 
feren 
spars 
air f 
for i 
facto 
Brita 
Gern 
tinen 


most 





Fo FQ aR See FS ae Se i 


=. 


BRAS 4 


= = 


oe 


‘Ss Pao? Be B 


1a 


S 


ke 
al 
at 


he 


y, 








—_— 
= 


eficient coordination—the next few weeks may de- 
cide the fate of Britain. 

BRITAIN’S STRATEGIC WEAKNESS. By seiz- 
ing the entire Atlantic coast line of Europe from 
northern Norway to southern France, Hitler has se- 
cured a firmer foothold for his final struggle than 
Napoleon ever gained—even at the height of his 

wer. Like Napoleon, Hitler realizes that he can- 
not dominate the whole of Europe so long as Britain 
can use its sea power to blockade him and its finan- 
cial resources for organizing coalitions against him. 
The entire eastern and southern coasts of Britain— 
containing the naval bases of Scapa Flow, Rosyth, 
Chatham, Portsmouth and Devonport, and the com- 
mercial ports of Leith, Hull, London, Southampton 
and Plymouth—now lie within 20 to 390 miles of 
German-held territory. The west coasts would like- 
wise be endangered if Germany could win bases 
in Ireland, already weakened by dissension and 
“fifth column” activities. Britain’s maritime com- 
munications, furthermore, are jeopardized by Italy's 
improved position in the Mediterranean, Spain's 
“non-belligerency,” and Turkey's hesitancy to fulfill 
its alliance. 

Germany will probably combine two historic 
methods—direct attack and siege warfare—in at- 
tempting to duplicate its rapid triumph over France. 
It is believed to be preparing submarines, motor- 
boats and airplanes for landing troops at many dif- 
ferent points in the British Isles, especially in 
sparsely populated and undefended areas. The Nazi 
air force has already begun the preliminary work 
for invasion by systematically bombing air fields, 
factories, supply depots and communications, while 
Britain has kept up a steady air bombardment of 
German military and industrial centers on the Con- 
tinent. Britain, however, is peculiarly vulnerable to 
the paralyzing effects of air bombardment because 
most of its population and industrial areas are con- 





Page Three: 








centrated in small areas and connected by relatively 
few trunk-line railways. 

For its defense, Britain depends primarily upon 
its navy, which will have to repel attacks from every 
direction and strike at Nazi concentrations in Con- 
tinental ports, even at the risk of losing capital ships 
and aircraft carriers. While Mr. Churchill claimed 
on June 18 that Britain had 1,250,000 men under 
arms, in addition to 500,000 local defense volun- 
teers, a considerable proportion of these troops are 
not fully trained or equipped. Although the Churchill 
government has greatly increased production and 
removed many of the deficiencies inherited from 
the Chamberlain régime, it has not yet even ap- 
proached the output of airplanes and other arma- 
ments achieved in Nazi Germany, which can now 
draw on the resources of all of Western Europe. 

THE SIEGE OF BRITAIN. In its attempt to 
weaken Britain before delivering a final blow, Ger- 
many undoubtedly will expand its submarine and 
airplane blockade. In the World War, Germany— 
even without the conquest of Western Europe and 
the aid of Italy—brought Britain within a few weeks 
of starvation by use of the submarine. While Ger- 
many’s submarines in the present conflict have 
proved less successful, owing largely to effective re- 
sistance by destroyer and convoy forces, they will 
probably increase their efforts this summer, supple- 
mented by airplane attacks on British shipping and 
ports. Britain, furthermore, is now cut off from Eu- 
rope, which normally supplies 31 per cent of its 
imports and offers a market for 34 per cent of its 
exports, and is compelled to reorganize its com- 
merce and shipping. Such a complete shift in Brit- 
ain’s trade may create new problems for the United 
States, which would have to decide how far it is 
willing or able to help the British by furnishing sup- 
plies, ships and, possibly, convoys. 

JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Giddy Minds and Foreign Quarrels, by Charles A. Beard. 
New York, Macmillan, 1939. 50 cents 
A Foreign Policy for America, by Charles A. Beard. New 
York, Knopf, 1940. $1.50 
In September 1939 Professor Beard offered his views on 
“continental Americanism”’—as distinguished from iso- 
lationism—in brief, popular form. Now the eminent his- 


torical scholar documents his case in A Foreign Policy for 
America. 


How to Pay for the War, by John Maynard Keynes. New 
York, Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1940. $1.00 
A brilliant English economist sets forth the essentials 
of his compulsory savings plan to finance the war. Al- 
though written for British readers, this book can be read 
with profit by all Americans interested in the financial 
aspects of our national defense. 


The Fight for the Panama Route, by Dwight Carroll 
Miner. New York, Columbia University Press, 1940. $4.00 
This scholarly, microscopic account of the political and 

diplomatic maneuvering in Washington, Bogota, Paris and 
Panama which brought the Panama Canal to reality will 
be of more interest to the student of Pan-American rela- 
tions than to the general reader. Perhaps the greatest con- 
tribution of this work to the literature on the subject 
is the author’s analysis of the Colombian political position 
at the time of negotiations. 


Armies of Spies, by Joseph Gollomb. New York, Macmil- 
lan, 1939. $2.50 
A journalist’s collection of fast-moving stories about 
international intrigue since 1930. Although some of the 
tales incite well-grounded skepticism, the book is an inter- 
esting exposé of modern espionage, its extent and methods. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 36, JuNB 28, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dornotuy F. Lzzr, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


SB 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 




















Washington News Letter \~¥::: 


-_ vd '94N 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

JUNE 24.—Reacting quickly to developments in 
Europe, the Administration has redoubled its efforts 
to strengthen the economic and political defense of 
the Americas. Last week was marked by the follow- 
ing steps in this field: 

1. The State Department in its note of June 17 
warned Germany and Italy, as well as Britain, 
France and the Netherlands, that ‘the United States 
would not recognize any transfer and would not 
acquiesce in any attempt to transfer any geographic 
region of the Western Hemisphere from one non- 
American power to another non-American power.” 
The principal territories at stake are Greenland, the 
Guianas—from which the United States obtains the 
major part of its bauxite requirements — British 
Honduras, British, French and Dutch possessions in 
the West Indies, and St. Pierre and Miquelon. 

2. Both Houses of Congress passed a resolution 
reaffirming the Monroe Doctrine and containing a 
similar “hands off” warning. The resolution also 
stated that the United States would immediately 
consult with the other American republics on meas- 
ures necessary to protect their interests. 

3. Under-Secretary of State Welles announced 
on June 19 the calling of an emergency meeting of 
the Foreign Ministers of the American states. All 
the countries have accepted this call, and the meet- 
ing is expected to be held early next month, prob- 
ably at Havana. 

4. President Roosevelt announced on June 21, a 
broad plan for the “economic defense” of this hemi- 
sphere, embodying the creation of an “appropriate 
inter-American organization for dealing with cer- 
tain basic problems of their trade relations, includ- 
ing an effective system of joint marketing of the 
important staple exports of the American Repub- 
lics.”” In addition, the President stated the Admin- 
istration’s intention to'‘proceed promptly and vig- 
orously through many existing agencies to deal with 
various immediate difficulties now facing some 
American Republics.” 

5. Edwin C. Wilson, United States Minister to 
Uruguay, supplemented the President's pledge on 
June 23 at a luncheon in honor of the officers of 
the United States heavy cruiser Quincy, when he de- 
clared that it was the “avowed policy of my gov- 
ernment to cooperate fully, whenever such coopera- 
tion is desired, with all the other American Govern- 
ments in crushing all activities that arise from non- 
American sources and that imperil our political and 


economic freedom.”’ It is widely believed in Wash. 
ington that the visit of the Quincy to Montevideo, 
shortly after the discovery of an alleged Nazi plot 
to seize the country, is an expression of this policy, 
ECONOMIC DEFENSE PROBLEMS. The de. 
tails of the plan announced by the President remain 
to be worked out by his economic advisers in Wash- 
ington. There is, however, general agreement on the 
need for emergency measures to deal with the prob- 
lems of Latin American surplus commodities, pre. 
sumably through the creation of a trading corpora- 
tion or cartel having complete control over the 
marketing of Western Hemisphere products. Such 
an organization would probably require a capitaliza. 
tion of from $1,000,000,000: to $2,000,000,000 in 
order to deal with the vast quantities of Latin 
American goods normally sold outside the Wester 
Hemisphere.* In addition, plans for a long-term 
Latin American development program are being ex. 
amined, the ultimate goal being the more complete 
economic integration of the Western Hemisphere, 
The immediate purpose is clearly that of shielding 
Latin America from Nazi economic pressure and 
political penetration, evidently by purchasing all 
Latin American export commodities. These would 
be utilized first to fill the needs of the Wester 
Hemisphere, and the surpluses would either be kept 
off the market or sold abroad on terms and under 
conditions which do not jeopardize the safety of the 
hemisphere. Assistant Secretary of State Berle has 
pointed out that Europe will require the products of 
the Western Hemisphere to clear up its ‘‘staggering 
accumulation of misery and hunger and need,” thus 
implying the use of surpluses as a bargaining 
weapon. It remains to be seen how a German: 
dominated Europe will pay for these products. 
Whatever the final shape of the program, it car 
ries vast significance for future inter-American re- 
lations. Under the shadow of a greater menace— 
dramatized by the Uruguayan revelations—the Latin 
American nations have subordinated their fears of 
“Yankee Imperialism” to the interests of hemisphere 
defense. In the long run, however, the United 
States must be prepared to provide more than arma- 
ments and emergency economic support to prevent 
the rise of German influence in Latin America. 
Meanwhile, there is some danger that the United 
States may be making commitments in the Wester 
Hemisphere, which have already aroused German 
anger, without being fully prepared to make them 


effective on short notice. How aARD J. ‘TRUEBLOOD 


*Cf. Foreign Pelicy Bulletin, June 14, 1940. 


| 


aan 


[N th 
im} 
in the 
advan 
larger 
power 
Asia, 
Indies 
Minis: 
visage 
milita 
great 
island 
group 
woulc 
the uw: 
direct 
off” + 
TH 
effecti 


| East | 


exten 
tions 
are b 
main 
Britis 
With 
tariar 
lead 
tepla 
more 
domi 
prock 
foste 
may 
cal n 
powe 
On 


secre 








