== 
de toward 
seneral de 
; for aid in 
trative off. 
, Chinese 
an forces, 
China and 
+ the coun- 
mediation 
ctory solu- 


EAKNESS,. 
in his con- 
gence with 
ript to the 
to Hitler's 
established 
that heard 
chy régime 
its own ad- 
nbers were 
syrabol of 
rshal and a 
ical leaders 
> war, and 
ate French 
the war— 
h point of 
in proving 
arly appro- 
ibsequently 
nt by Gen. 
day Amer- 
apan. 


. HADSEL 


n. New York, 
s, 1945. $3.00 


in Asia, par- \ 


\dix contains 
ns from Sep- 


|. Rowe. New 


for military 
least twenty- 
ry unlikely to 
; her to rely 
her security.” 
ig on Chinese 


National 
Editor. Entered as 
ise allow at least 


rated. 


PERIORICAL ROEM 


Geaeral Library 
que s(t MRARY Udiversity of Hichigan 


SEP 8 1945 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


Aun Awhaw Mi cht can 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vor. XXIV, No. 46 


Aucust 31, 1945 


CHINESE-SOVIET PACT FOSTERS BIG-FOUR UNITY IN FAR EAST 


HE thirty-year Chinese-Soviet pact of friendship 

and alliance, whose terms were made public on 
August 26, will have far-reaching effects on the de- 
velopment of post-war Asia. The most significant 
features of the treaty and its six supplementary 
agreements are the recognition of a special Soviet 
position in Manchuria and the explicit pledge of the 
signatories ‘“‘to act according to the principles of 
mutual respect for their sovereignty and territorial 
entity and non-interference in the internal affairs of 
both contracting parties.” The latter point receives 
further emphasis in an Agreement on Government in 
which Foreign Commissar Molotov declares that the 
US.S.R. ‘is ready to render China moral support and 
assistance with military equipment and other ma- 
terial resources, this support and assistance to be 
given fully to the National Government as the Cen- 
tral Government of China.” Since the treaty ap- 
parently was drawn up on the assumption that the 
war with Japan was still to be fought, it is impossible 
to say whether there will be any occasion for the 
sending of Soviet “military equipment’ to Chung- 
king, but the meaning of the passage is unmistak- 
able: the U.S.S.R. intends to deal only with the 
Chinese Central government and will not extend aid 
or recognition to the Chinese Communists at Yenan. 

RUSSIA AND BORDER AREAS. The agreements 
do not restore the Russians to the exact position 
they held before the Russo-Japanese war of 1904-05, 
because the rights granted are much more limited 
than those possessed by Tsarist Russia and do not, 
of course, include extraterritoriality. The terms in- 
volve rather an application of the techniques of 
Soviet-Chinese relations in Manchuria during the 
1920's to the rights enjoyed by Russia in the early 
part of the century. There is to be joint control of 
the Chinese Eastern Railway and South Manchuria 
Railway, which are now to be combined under the 


single name of the Chinese Changchun Railway. But 
the partnership applies only to those properties in 
which the Russians previously had an interest, and 
other lines will apparently come under complete Chi- 
nese control. Port Arthur, which has been the focal 
point of so many international differences in the 
past, is to be utilized jointly as a naval base “at the 
disposal of the battleships and merchant ships of 
China and the U.S.S.R. alone,” while near-by Dairen 
is to be ‘a free port open to trade and shipping of 
all countries.”” In Dairen various piers and ware- 
houses will be leased to the U.S.S.R., and no import 
or export duties will be levied on goods passing 
directly to or from the Soviet Union through the 
port. In both Port Arthur and Dairen the civil admin- 
istration is to be Chinese, but there will be a large 
measure of Soviet authority, especially in the former. 
In comparing the situation with that before 1905, it 
should be noted that Tsarist Russia had complete 
control of both cities as well as the tip of the south 
Manchurian peninsula of which they are a part. 
The unequivocal declaration is made that dur- 
ing the negotiations “the Soviet Government regard- 
ed the three eastern Provinces as part of China and 
again confirmed its respect for China’s full sover- 
eignty over the three eastern Provinces and recogni- 
tion of their territorial and administrative integrity.” 
More concretely, an annex carefully defines the 
scope of Soviet authority in Manchuria during the 
period of military occupation; while, according to a 
minute appended to the treaty, Premier Stalin 
pledged that Soviet troops would begin to withdraw 
three weeks after Japan’s capitulation, the withdraw- 
al to be completed within three months at the most. 
With regard to Outer Mongolia, which is non- 
Chinese in language, population and historical back- 
ground, but in theory has been under Chinese sover- 
eignty, it is agreed that if a plebiscite confirms the 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


—————— 


H 


Rta ere 
one = ° 


i 
i 
: 
; 


people’s desire for independence, China will recog- 
nize Outer Mongolia’s independent status. The re- 
sult of the plebiscite may be taken for granted, and 
it is worth noting that in an address of August 25 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek declared that recog- 
nition of Outer Mongolia’s independence was not 
only necessary for friendship, but would also be in 
harmony with the Kuomintang’s principles of the 
equality and freedom of peoples. In connection with 
Sinkiang, a border area in the far northwest in which 
the Russians exerted great influence from 1934 to 
1942, Mr. Molotov stated that the Soviet Union “has 
no intention to interfere with China’s internal af- 
fairs.” The declaration referred specifically to “the 
latest events in Sinkiang,” i.e. presumably to re- 
ported clashes between Central forces and local in- 
surgents. 

WASHINGTON-MOSCOW COMPROMISE. 
The consequences of so broad an agreement cannot 
be assessed fully at the moment of its announcement, 
but a few main consequences already are clear. The 
first of these is that the Soviet Union has greatly 
strengthened its position in northeastern Asia and 
has fulfilled its desire to secure the use of a year- 
round port at Dairen. The second is that Moscow 
has emphasized at a moment of critical importance 
that it is following a policy of nonintervention in 
Chinese affairs. This is not so important for its ma- 
terial effects—since no one has charged the U.S.S.R. 
with giving material aid to the Chinese Communists 
in the war years—as for the added prestige it gives 
to the government of Chiang Kai-shek. Thirdly, the 
treaty establishes a basis for cooperation among the 
U.S.S.R., the United States and Britain in a large part 
of East Asia. Since the pact was concluded with ac- 
tive American support, it represents, in part, a com- 
promise between Washington and Moscow. This 
compromise recognizes both the security needs of 
the Soviet Union and the concern of the United 
States for China's territorial integrity and the preser- 
vation of the Central government as the country’s 
leading political force. 

The pact should not be interpreted as giving 
Chiang Kai-shek ‘‘a free hand” in Chinese affairs, for 
the possibility of Soviet intervention has been only 
one of the pressures upon him. Not only does the 
United States continue to desire a peaceful adjust- 
ment of Chinese differences, but the smooth execu- 
tion of the present accord requires the creation of a 
united China. Moreover, the Chungking liberals, who 


Page Two 


ee 
———; 


have been vigorous advocates of cooperation with the 
U.S.S.R., should find their position strengthened as q 
result of the pact. Most important of all, since the 
Chinese Communists throughout the war have relied 
solely on their own strength, they will retain signifi. 
cant bargaining power. They will, however, face a 
central régime that has been bolstered diplomatically, 
and the treaty’s influence unquestionably will be felt 
in the scheduled conferences between Chiang Kai- 
shek and Mao Tse-tung, leader of the Chinese Com. 
munists. Although other Kuomintang-Communist 
parleys in recent years have failed, it is significant 
that political discussion is still possible and that 
Chiang and Mao, meeting for the first time since 
1927, will have an opportunity to go over the issues 
personally. In the meantime—and this is a fact that 
should not be overlooked—Chungking and Yenan 
have accelerated their efforts to enter the leading 
cities of China. The Central government already re. 
ports its troops inside Shanghai, Canton, Hankow 
and Nanking, the pre-war capital. The Communists 
have also announced advances, but apparently have 
been hampered in part by the Japanese, who are re. 
fusing to surrender to any but Central troops and 
are even attempting, in the Peiping area, to make 
political capital out of China’s internal differences. 

It is not difficult to see a certain division of labor 
between Moscow and Washington in adjusting the 
Chinese situation, a division based on the necessity 
of compromise between the two powers. The Soviet 
action may be interpreted as constituting pressure on 
Yenan, although Moscow will certainly welcome 
any moves by Chungking toward a settlement. At the 
same time the United States, which in recent months 
threw the weight of its support behind Chungking, 
now seems to be exerting pressure on the Central 
government, as well as Yenan, for the establishment 
of unity with the Communists. It may be assumed 
that American advice played a part in Chiang Kai- 
shek’s tendering three invitations to Mao Tse-tung, 
and it is especially significant that Ambassador Hur- 
ley flew to Yenan to accompany Mao on the trip to 
Chungking. The result of these developments is to 
improve the prospects for international agreement on 
the Chinese situation. It would be unwise to idealize 
the Soviet-Chinese pact or to assume that difficulties 
will not arise in its application. But one of its first 
fruits is to clarify many of the issues affecting Chi- 
nese unity. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


WILL U.S. USE ITS ECONOMIC POWER TO AID DEMOCRACY ABROAD? 


The sudden cessation of military hostilities has left 
all nations dazed by their new-found freedom to turn 
to tasks other than war. We are like prisoners who, 
emerging from long confinement, feel dazzled and 
frightened by the complexities of life outside the 


prison gates. Yet these complexities must be faced if 
we are to reconstitute something resembling peace- 
time life in Europe and Asia. 

CAN WE ESCAPE VICIOUS CIRCLE? Once 
more, as the iron controls of the war years are fe 


—— 


laxed, W 
Foreign 
of Com 
security, 
nomic f 
sential | 
and esp 
United 

cratic. Y 
ahead ¢ 
case of 
Labor’s 
icans im 
nomic a 


| result it 


tion of 
United 

the tern 
of such 
of near 
ain sho 
tion of 
and the 
tO aSSU. 
tO put 
throug! 
cerning 

The 

16, ‘‘st 
cisions, 
affect « 
the gle 
all abc 
own p 

ployme 
standa 

in afta 
timely. 
ing or 


litical 


’ anothe 


The 
to fos 
and ir 
we mi 


| politic 


with | 
Easter 
demo 
Hung 
kind ¢ 
Both 

ments 
uled t 
alate 
free € 


————— 
——$$— 


on with the 
hened as q 
» Since the 
have relied 
ain signifi. 
ver, face a 
omatically, 
will be felt 
hiang Kai. 
inese Com. 
Communist 
significant 
» and that 
time since 
t the issues 
a fact that 
ind Yenan 
he leading 
already re. 
1, Hankow 
ommunists 
‘ently have 
vho are re. 
troops and 
1, to make 
ifferences, 

yn of labor 
justing the 
e necessity 
The Soviet 
>ressure on 
y welcome 
ent. At the 
ent months 
chungking, 
he Central 
ablishment 
Ye assumed 
hiang Kai- 
> Tse-tung, 
sador Hur- 
the trip to 
nents is to 
reement on 
to idealize 
difficulties 
of its first 
ecting Chi- 


LOSINGER 


ROAD? 


be faced if 
ling peace 


“LE? Once 
ears are fe 


a 


eae 
a 


laxed, we face the vicious circle mentioned by British 
foreign Secretary Bevin in his address to the House 
of Commons on August 20: lack of trade endangers 
secutity, and lack of security endangers trade. Eco- 
nomic reconstruction of the liberated areas is an es- 
sential prerequisite to their political reconstruction, 
and especially to the development of institutions the 
United States and Britain would regard as demo- 
cratic. Yet economics cannot be divorced from or put 
ahead of politics. We have seen this clearly in the 
case of the British elections when, the moment 
Labor's sweeping victory became known, some Amer- 
icans immediately questioned the advisability of eco- 
nomic aid to a country where political changes might 
result in limitations on free enterprise. The termina- 
tion of lend-lease aid to Britain, announced by the 
United States on August 21, was in accordance with 
the terms of the law, which provided for termination 
of such aid at the end of the war. But the feeling 
of near-despair that this action has produced in Brit- 
ain shows—if evidence were needed—that ratifica- 
tion of documents like the United Nations Charter 
and the Bretton Woods agreements are not enough 
to assure world security and stability. We now have 
to put concrete content into these documents 
through consultation with other United Nations con- 
cerning our mutual needs. 


The United States, as Mr. Churchill said on August 
16, “stands at the summit of the world.’ Our de- 
cisions, as well as our indecisions, will profoundly 
affect economic and political developments all over 
the globe. It is natural that we should think first of 
all about ourselves—about the resumption of our 
own production, the alleviation of our own unem- 
ployment problems, and improvement of our living 
standards. But it would be unfortunate if absorption 
in affairs at home should cause us to forget that 
timely, well-considered aid now to countries teeter- 
ing on the verge of economic breakdown and po- 
litical anarchy would go far to avert the danger of 


another costly conflict. 


The very fact that we possess the economic power 
to foster or delay the reconstruction of devastated 
and impoverished areas raises the question of how 
we might use this power to promote and strengthen 
political democracy. Mr. Bevin appeared to agree 
with Mr. Churchill that conditions now existing in 
Fastern Europe and the Balkans are not favorable to 
democracy. In fact, commenting on the situation in 
Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria, he said that “one 
kind of totalitarianism is being replaced by another.” 
Both the United States and Britain criticized arrange- 
ments for the Bulgarian elections—originally sched- 
uled to be held on August 26 but now postponed “to 
alater date” —on the ground that they did not insure 
ftee expression of the wishes of the people; and both 


Page Three 


have indicated that they intend to see to it that the 
references to democracy contained in United Nations 
documents from the Atlantic Charter to the Potsdam 
Declaration do not remain a dead letter. 

HOW CAN WE ADVANCE DEMOCRACY? 
How can the Western powers most effectively carry 
out their pledges to liberated peoples in Europe and 
Asia? Today there is no more pretense in Washing- 
ton and London, as there was in the days of the 
Spanish civil war, that the Western democracies are 
pursuing a policy of ‘‘nonintervention” and, like 
Pilate, can wash their hands of the internal affairs of 
other nations. Today the United States and Britain 
are committed to intervention on behalf of democ- 
racy, against totalitarianism of both Right and Left. 
When American and British spokesmen criticize 
Russia’s activities in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, 
then it must be assumed that they oppose not Russia's 
intervention per se, since the United States and Brit- 
ain also claim the right to intervene, but the fact 
that Russia is said to support individuals or groups 
which the Western powers regard as inimical to de- 
mocracy. 


THE “OVERWORKED WORD.” This “very 
much overworked word,” as Mr. Bevin has said, “‘ap- 
pears to need definition.” There is little doubt that 
the Russians, in all the countries they helped to lib- 
erate from the Nazis, have directly or indirectly fav- 
ored the workers and peasants, who in these coun- 
tries form a majority of the population, against 
former government administrators, landowners, and 
owners of factories, mines and other large-scale 
property. This, certainly, is not political democracy 
as we know it in the United States and Britain. But 
neither is it political democracy in our sense of the 
term when, as has frequently happened in the past, 
the United States and Britain tend to deal with own- 
ers of land and factories who in Eastern Europe and 
the Balkans represent a minority of the population, 
and show little or no concern for the welfare and 
interests of the rest of the population. We deplore, 
and quite rightly, the excesses that have accompanied 
liberation of many nations in Europe. But we forget 
that both we and the British passed through revolu- 
tions and civil wars before we succeeded in establish- 
ing stable democratic institutions. 


The questions we, along with the British, are ask- 
ing about elections in Eastern Europe and the Bal- 
kans, sound more convincing now that the United 
States has begun to question dictatorships of the 
Right, as well as the Left. Nelson Rockefeller, in his 
swan-song speech before the Pan-American Society 
in Boston on August 24, flayed the abuses of the 
Farrell government. Yet these abuses were known to 
the State Department in April, when the United 
States recognized that government and vigorously 


urged Argentina’s admission to the San Francisco 
Conference in opposition to Russia’s demand for 
postponement. It must be hoped that the appoint- 
ment of Spruille Braden, Ambassador to Buenos 
Aires who has been critical of the Argentine govern- 
ment, as Assistant Secretary of State in charge of 
Latin American affairs, succeeding Nelson Rocke- 
feller, will harmonize our policy of intervention on 
behalf of democracy in Europe with our policy in 
Latin America, which has seemed unduly tolerant of 
dictatorships. 


There is no simple answer to any of these ques- 
tions. Too many emotions, fears, and prejudices are 
clustered about the word “democracy,” as the Big 
Three have been using it, to permit of dogmatic defi- 
nitions. But if by democracy we mean in essence a 


THE F.P.A. 


Freedom and Civilization, by Bronislaw Malinowski. New 
York, Roy Publishers, 1944. $3.50 


The renowned Polish anthropologist presents in this 
book, published posthumously, his analysis of human cul- 
ture and freedom. Sketching the history of freedom, the 
author pleads for clear definition, treats of the relation 
between freedom and restraints, and argues that in the 
future the continuance and further development of free- 
dom depends on the elimination of collective violence. 


Postwar Monetary Plans and Other Essays, by John H. 
Williams. New York, Knopf, 1944. $2.50 


A collection of papers by the vice president of the Fed- 
eral Reserve Bank of New York. The recent essays deal 
specifically with the problems inherent in the Bretton 
Woods proposals for post-war monetary institutions. In- 
sisting that the major problem ahead is the maintenance 
of domestic stability within the major industrial countries, 
Williams advises a less formalized approach to interna- 


tional currency stability than that embodied in the Bretton 
Woods plan. 


International Monetary Cooperation, by George N. Halm. 


Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina Press, 1944. 
$4.00 


Approving the International Monetary Fund, drafted 
last July at Bretton Woods, Mr. Halm evaluates the pre- 
liminary White and Keynes plans and discusses various 


criticisms which have subsequently been directed at the 
Fund. 


Fabian Colonial Essays, by Rita Hinden, ed. London, 
George Allen & Unwin, Ltd., 1945. 8s 6d. 


Under the auspices of the Fabian Colonial Bureau, a 
dozen experts discuss various aspects of the colonial prob- 
lem in this volume, touching on the socialists’ attitude to- 


ward empire, land questions, food, literacy and self- 
government. 


Toward the Understanding of Europe, by Ethan T. Colton. 
New York, Association Press, 1944. $1.00 


The author, after twenty years of travel and residence 
in Europe, writes with the idea of making Americans think 


decisively regarding what can be done to bring about 
lasting peace. 


Page Four 


ee | 
—— 


way of life that makes it possible for human beings 
of all races, creeds, and economic conditions to work 
together with as little deference to economic or po. 
litical privilege as it is humanly possible to achieve— 
then it is not impossible for the Big Three eventually 
to find a common meeting ground for their respective 
aspirations. We must not let such embers of freedom 
as existed in Eastern Europe and the Balkans be 
extinguished in the hour of liberation. But we cap 
fan them into a steady flame only if we ourselves 
are determined to play no favorites and to see to it 
that free elections lead to, and not away, from eco. 
nomic and social reforms. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The second in a series of two articles.) 


BOOKSHELF 


World Economic Development, by Eugene Staley. Mon- 
treal, International Labour Office, 1944. $1.75 
One of the recent excellent volumes prepared for the 
I.L.O. series on international economic objectives. Staley 
discusses the many problems which will arise under pro- 


jected plans for the industrialization of presently unde- / 


veloped countries. Special attention is given to the Teper- 
cussions of such development on the older industrialized 
nations. 


International Currency Experience, by the Economic, Fi- 
nancial and Transit Department of the League of Na- 
tions. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1944. $3.26. 


(In the United States this work is distributed by In- } 


ternational Documents Service, 
Press, New York.) 


A survey of international monetary relations between 
the two wars which examines the operation and break- 
down of the gold exchange standard, the emergence of 
currency groups, and the rise of exchange stabilization 
funds. 


The Road to Serfdom, by Friedrich A. Hayek. Chicago, 
University of Chicago Press, 1944. $2.75 
The Austrian economist, now a member of the faculty 
of the London School of Economics, outlines the case 
against planned economy. The author brings a wealth of 
detail from the German experience to prove that planning 
leads to totalitarianism. 


Columbia University 


Social Policy in Dependent Territories. Montreal, Interna- 


tional Labour Office, 1944. $1.50 


An outline prepared by Wilfrid Benson of the I.L.0, 
stressing economic and social developments affecting work- 
ers in dependent areas from World War I through the 
present. 


Political Handbook of the World: Parliaments, Parties and 
Press, as of January 1, 1945, edited by Walter H. Mal- 
lory. New York, Harper & Brothers, for Council on 
Foreign Relations, Inc., 1945. $2.75 


Another issue of the valuable annual that gives back- 
ground facts necessary to an understanding of politics i 
all countries—except six not listed because their govern- 
ments are “temporarily destroyed.” 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 46, AuGust 31, 1945. 


second-class matter December 2, 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FranK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lert, Secretary; VeRA MICHELES Dean, Edi‘ 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. National 
r. Entered as 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


1, the 
tered 
Secret 
to bri 
Japan 
stead 
tween 
of At 
Augu 
the p 
appat 
Wasl 
politi 
Al 
entire 
the ¢ 
genu! 
come 
ican 
Secre 
the a 
other 
the c 
out | 
hope 
askec 
atom 
porte 
ward 


