



Lh hei 





nt 


jui- 
ore 
ant 
nia 


to 


vill 
ion 
Mr. 
ign 
10t 
ish 


W- 


the 
ck 
1in 


id- 


ice 
re 
1a- 


oil 
nt 


CAL ROOM 
i LIBRARY 












Entered as 2nd class matter = 
General Library gs ote 
University of Michigan woo 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 














An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vout. XXIII, No. 50 


SEPTEMBER 29, 1944 





HE approach of military victory in Europe has 


“| * forced the Allies, after what seem regrettable de- 


lays, to focus their attention on the use to be made 
of victory. And this, in turn, should cause us all 
furiously to think. What kind of a Europe do we 
hope to see emerge from the war? What future do 
we envisage for Germany? 


IS U.S. READY FOR RECONVERSION? But 
before we answer these questions, let us first ask this: 
at a time when our resources of industry and man- 
power are promising us victory over our enemies, are 
“we sure we have won a victory over ourselves—over 
our shortsightedness, our selfishness, our sloth? We 
are talking of reconversion from war to peace, of 
beating tanks into vacuum cleaners. But have we 
learned to reconvert human relations? Do we know 
any more than we did before 1939 about the frictions 
and conflicts that generate wars among nations? Are 
we better prepared than we were at that time to play 
an active part in any effort that may be undertaken 
by all the nations to alleviate such frictions and con- 
flicts in the future? 

To give a blunt “no” to these questions would be 
to resign ourselves to the idea that any attempt at 
improvement is foredoomed to failure. And resigna- 
tion is not in the temper of tradition of the American 
people. But to answer confidently ‘‘yes” would be to 
mislead ourselves, our allies, and our enemies. Most 
of us have remained, throughout this war, too far 
from direct experience of suffering and terror to look 
squarely at a future which may not be all rosy. There 








is still a predisposition to hope that the major opera- 
tions necessary to transform a war-torn world into a 
world fit for human beings to live in can be per- 


; formed in some remote, antiseptic operating room, 
nN 





| with no other shock to our sensibilities than the neces- 


sity of having to share in paying the bill. 
PITFALLS TO WATCH. The danger of per- 
petuating such illusions is so great that it seems im- 








IS U.S. WORKING WITH DEMOCRATIC FORCES IN EUROPE? 


perative to point out some of the pitfalls we should” 
be on watch for in these critical days when every 
move we make determines the character of the post- 
war period: 


1. Most Americans still regard events in Europe as a 
spectacle—thrilling to some, disheartening to others. 
act as if they do not realize that those who are being ki 
there—including our own men—are living human beings, 
not characters in novels. There is still an astonishing feel- 
ing of unreality here about what has been going on in 
Europe for five heartrending years. 

2. This feeling of unreality leads many of us to view 
our part in the European war once more as a 
experience—an interlude of arduous military effort in the 
midst of otherwise uninterrupted material progress. It has 
not yet been felt as an experience shared in common with 
other, less fortunate, peoples. We have gone overseas to do 
a certain job—but plan to come back, and come back to a 
country that has remained intact. “Overseas” has not 
become our permanent concern. In this attitude lie the 
seeds of renewed isolationism. 

3. The United States, since the Civil War, has achieved 
the closest approximation to popular democracy of any 
great nation, with the least internal disturbances. If this 
achievement were correctly reflected in our policy toward 
other nations, the United States would enjoy today a posi- 
tion of en unchallengeable by Russia or Britain. 
For reasons it is difficult to analyze fully—cross-currents of 
opinion, administrative bottlenecks, economic misapprehen- 
sions, and so on—the inherently democratic temper of our 
people is by no means always communicated to other na- 
tions, except at the lower “levels,” as they are called in 
diplomacy, of our official representatives. 

It would have been heartening to those Europeans who 
are striving to find a democratic way out of the ruins of 
Hitler’s “new order” if the United States, at this historic 
moment, could send to the liberated countries representa- 
tives symbolizing the concepts of democracy for which we 
believe, and assert, we are fighting: men who would be 
ready to associate not only with the handful of wealthy 
and irresponsible socialites found in every country—many 
of whom proved easy prey to Nazi blandishenents-— iii also 
with the men and women, perhaps unkempt, perhaps un- 
used to drawing-room graces, who have been the rank and 
file of our true allies within conquered Europe. The 
pointment of such representatives—and surely many can 

















found in this country—to diplomatic posts in Europe would 
eloquent evidence of our attitude than scores of 
documents or dozens of after-dinner speeches about our 
devotion to democratic principles. 

4. What is said of our attitude toward the forces of de- 

can also be said of our attitude toward the Roman 
Catholic Church in Europe. This is a delicate subject to 
broach. Yet it has been broached so insistently by certain 
newspaper correspondents writing from Rome that it can 
no longer be regarded as a diplomatic secret. It is entirely 
understandable that, in seeking to find institutions that 
might bridge the gap between totalitarianism and the re- 
vival of popular government, Britain and the United States 
should see in the Vatican, which has survived the storms 
of centuries, a bulwark against anarchy. 

The Church has played, and will continue to play, an 
important part in European affairs. But the Church itself 
is not monolithic. It, too, is composed of diverse elements, 
some liberal, some reactionary. It so happens, for a number 
of reasons, that the hierarchy of pote: European countries 
—notably France—has displayed a clearer understanding 
of the issues at stake in the crisis of our times than has 
been expressed, on occasion, at the Vatican or among some 
Catholics in the United States. It would be a curious paradox 
if this country, for the sake of achieving order in Europe, 
should drift into the position of supporting on the conti- 
nent Catholic policies which represent the less enlightened 
elements among European Catholics. Order is highly desir- 
able. But it will not be achieved by attempts to stifle the 
demands of those who have resisted Fascism and Nazism 
for improvement in the lot of the masses. 

5. All these considerations have a direct bearing on our 
attitude toward Germany. Such decisions as may have been 
reached by the United States, Britain and Russia in the 
Euro Advisory Commission, or by President Roosevelt 
and Mr. Churchill at Quebec, are not known to the public, 
but rts from London and Washington cannot be de- 


e 


— Page Two = 4 
















convince us that the reason war came within a quarter of 4 t pa 
century was because the Allies did not agree among them.’ ee P 
selves at the outset concerning their policy toward Germany, aus 
and made no effective attempt to create a strong interna. | S!4 S ‘ 
tional organization that could have checked the rise of q} and t 
militant Germany. We could, of course—because we shall} grad. 
have the military power at our command—adopt a “hard” unde: 
policy. We could dismember Germany, destroy its indus Reed 
tries, keep its people in subjection for many years, and force - 
them to live at a low standard of living in small agricul} 4) 
tural communities—but at the end of the next twenty-five} Lenit 
years we would be no nearer to averting war than we} of af 
were in 1939. Why? Because we would have dodged once} ajso . 
more the central issue. We would have furnished the Ger. their 
mans with every possible incentive to engage in war. Yet 
we would have created no machinery by which war might dens 
be prevented through the orderly adjustment of conflicts | indu: 
that we know to be inevitable among human beings; nor , tenth 
would we have altered the climate of ideas in which Nazi} there 


propaganda flourished. as fi 
A subsequent article will discuss possible ways of urp 
dealing with Germany. The essential thing to bear we 


in mind is that, unless we have convictions of our high 
own about.the future of Europe, we shall be unable TI 
to make intelligent—or intelligible—choices between —_ 
alternative policies that may be submitted to us at} 4... 
any point. True, we cannot reach decisions alone} j,,,, 
We must find a basis of agreement with Britain, 
Russia, and other countries. But unless we know our 
own minds, how do we expect to influence the minds 
of others? We believe in democracy, and urge others 
to practice it. Yet some of us shrink from it when we] _ 
meet it in other lands, raw-boned, and unadorned am 
by the trappings of tradition. If we do not want to}... 


wort 
its « 
193° 
$3,0 


scribed as anything but disquieting. There is an almost ir- see the revival of Nazi ideas in Germany and on the step 
resistible tendency on the part of human beings who recog- continent, we must have the courage of our convic dou 
nize they made a mistake in the past to adopt exactly the tions—we must learn to recognize those who share] ;_, 
opposite policy when a similar situation presents itself once our political faith and help them, instead of discour- 
more. Many people believe that the reason Germany re- = aging them by lukewarm indecisiveness. a 
sorted to war in 1939 is because the policy of the Allies in Gina Secret Devil app 
1919 proved too “soft”—if not in intention, at least in , that 
execution. So now they urge a poticy of extreme harshness. (The fourth in a series on Europe's problems as seen by t 
Yet even a superficial study of the inter-war years should from the United States.) F 
TERMS FOR AXIS SATELLITES BOLSTER RUSSIA’S SECURITY istic 
With Finland, Rumania and Bulgaria—the three with territorial settlements that strengthen its stra- - 


Axis satellites that have been torn away from Ger- 
many within the past three weeks—engaged in fight- 
ing the Nazis, the end of the war in the east has been 
brought one step closer. This turnabout by Germany’s 
former partners, resulting from the Allies’ demand 
for cooperation against the Nazis as a preliminary 
condition for an armistice, may be of considerable 
military importance in the immediate fucure. Of 
longer range significance, however, are the territorial 

visions in the various armistice arrangements, for 
they help fill in the picture of eastern Europe as it 
will emerge from the war. In the terms of the arm- 
istices which the Russians, acting with the approval 
of the other Allies, have signed with their three small 
neighbors, one recurrent theme is found. This is 
Russia’s intention to emerge from World War II 





tegic position on the Baltic, the Black Sea and in the 
Balkans. - 
FINLAND AND THE BALTIC. The U.S.S.R.’s } “°f 





determination to secure mastery of the Baltic Sea, | °" 
which has been virtually under German control since Bla 
World War I, is the main consideration underlying the 
the territorial provisions of the armistice Russia and Ru 
Britain made with Finland on September 19. In terms } 
roughly comparable to those offered last spring, the * 
Russians require the Finns to give them a long-term * 


lease for a naval base on the Gulf of Finland. Instead 
of the Hangoe Peninsula, however, which the Rus- } 5. 
sians obtained on a 99-year lease at the end of the } Hea 
1940 war and to which they now renounce all rights, | ““° 
the U.S.S.R. secures a 50-year lease to the more east- 
erly Porkkala Peninsula that commands the narrow- } « 








rna- 
of 4 


shall | 


ard” 
dus. 
Orce 
icul. 
-five 

we 
once 
Ger- 
Yet 
ight 
licts 
nor 
Nazi 


; of 
ear 
our 
ible 
een 
; at 
ne, 
ain, 
our 
nds 
ers 
we 
ned 


t to” 


the 
vic 
are 
ur: 





of a 
1em- | 
any, | 








a 





ne 


> ee 








armistice based on strategic considerations are Rus- 
sia's claims to the nickel mines and port of Petsamo 
and the northern and western approaches to Lenin- 
rad. From the Russian point of view these are easily 
understandable demands, since German submarines 
based on Petsamo attacked Allied supplies on the 
way to Murmansk, and the Nazis’ long siege of 
Leningrad was materially aided by the possibility 
of approaching the city from Finnish soil. But it is 
also clear why the Finns should consider the loss of 
their easternmost region as one of the heaviest bur- 
dens of the armistice, for this area includes the most 
industrialized part of Finland and more than one- 
tenth of the nation’s total population. Although, 
therefore, the Finnish armistice may be characterized 
as fundamentally strategic rather than punitive in 
purpose, since it permits Finland to retain the major 
bases of its wealth, Russia’s security is purchased at a 
high cost to Finland. 

The reparation bill charged to the Finns has 
aroused comment chiefly because it has been whittled 
down to half that mentioned in earlier negotiations. 
However, even at its present figure of $300,000,000 
worth of goods, to be paid over a period of six years, 
its collection will present many problems. Before 
1939 Russia annually took only approximately 
$3,000,000 worth of Finnish goods. To pay the re- 
quired amount, Finland would not only have to re- 
orient its trade almost entirely in the direction of 
Russia, but it would also have to take other drastic 
steps. In most of the defeated countries it seems 
doubtful that a national government—unless sub- 
jected to Allied controls—could remain in power if it 
tried to carry out such measures. Finland, however, 
appears so determined to avoid Russian supervision 
that it may be able to enforce the policies demanded 
by the reparation program. 

RUMANIA AND THE BLACK SEA. The arm- 
istice with Rumania which the U.S.S.R., Britain and 
the United States signed on September 12 also reflects 
the Russians’ concern with their strategic position. 
According to its terms, Russia reclaims Bessarabia, a 
former part of the Tsarist empire and an area of 
considerable military importance because it flanks the 
Black Sea port of Odessa. In 1941, it will be recalled, 


| the Germans’ capture of Odessa was facilitated by 


Rumania’s partnership with the Axis. However, in 
compensation for the loss of Bessarabia and adjoin- 
ing northern Bukovina—and in an apparent effort to 
nullify all territorial settlements made by the Axis— 
Rumania is promised the return of almost all of 


Page Three 
rest part of the Gulf of Finland. Other portions of the 








Transylvania, which it was forced to cede to Hun- 
gary at Hitles’s dictation. Like the Finns, the Ru-— 
manians are also required to pay Russia $300,000,000 
reparation—a sum that apparently would have been 
larger if Rumania had not agreed to join the Red 
Army — and an additional amount, not yet deter-. 
mined, to the other Allies. 

BULGARIA AND THE BALKANS. Although 
Russia’s four-day war with Bulgaria ended on na 4 
tember 9, the Bulgarians have not yet received 
nite armistice terms. Despite this delay, however, Bul- 
garia continues to hope that its penalties will be 
light, for the great majority of its people remained 
so strongly pro-Russian throughout the war that the 
government in Sofia never felt it possible to declare 
war on the Soviet Union and had to content itself 
with sending “volunteers” to Hitler. Moreover, the 
Bulgarians realize that their country does not lie at 
one of the important gateways to Russia. Aside, there- 
fore, from possible demands for Black Sea bases, the 
U.S.S.R.’s attitude toward Bulgaria will not be 
shaped by strategic considerations. Instead, Russia 
may be expected to follow a policy designed to culti- 
vate the traditional pro-Russian sympathies of this 
Balkan nation. 

In describing Russia’s plans to insure its security 
through the territorial changes it has imposed—with 
the consent of its Western allies—on Finland and 
Rumania and may require of Bulgaria, it is only fair 
to point out that these terms remain essentially the 
same as those Russia made in 1939-40, before it won 
the great military victories that followed the Battle 
of Stalingrad. Moreover, while the Soviet Union has 
worked out a peace settlement on its western borders 
which rests on territorial guarantees, it has also co- 
operated with Britain and the United States in creat- 
ing an international security organization at the 
Dumbarton Oaks Conference. 

WINIFRED N. HADSEL 
ANNUAL FORUM 

On Saturday, October 7, the annual Forum of the 
Association will be held at The Waldorf-Astoria on 
the theme, “Program for Security.”” Among the speak- 
ers at the Forum will be Dr. James B. Conant, who 
will discuss at luncheon the effective disarmament of 
Germany and Japan; Mr. C. W. Taussig, Miss Craig 
McGeachy and the Hon. L. B. Pearson reporting on 
functioning international organizations at the morn- 
ing session; and the Hon. Harold B. Butler, the Hon. 
Henri Hoppenot and the Hon. Harry D. White 
speaking on future international cooperation at the 
afternoon session. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 50, SEPTEMBER 29, 1944. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


National 


Incorporated. 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. ¥Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micuetes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at lease 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








































ee ee EY gee th was ae " 
eee ene - 


4 


Washington News Letter | 








sttter, 








U.S. TAKES REALISTIC VIEW OF CHINA’S PLIGHT 


When the coming campaign to defeat Japan was 
discussed at the Quebec conference, President Roose- 
velt and Prime Minister Churchill probably did not 
overestimate the part Chinese troops can play in that 
undertaking. For while the United Nations scored 
remarkable successes in Europe and in the Pacific 
during the summer, the armies of China have fallen 
back slowly before Japanese advances except in 
Burma and in Yunnan. Late in May the Japanese 
armies in China opened a drive south of Yochow 
toward Changsha, the capital of Hunan province, 
and within little more than three weeks that town 
fell. Mounting Allied victories in other quarters dis- 
tracted attention from the enemy’s determined pro- 
gress below Changsha until mid-September, when the 
approach of the Japanese caused the United States 
Army's 14th Air Force to evacuate its base at Kweilin. 

The Kweilin evacuation, although serious, appears 
to have resulted in no major changes of plan by the 
highest military and political officers of the United 
Nations. For a variety of reasons strategy planners 
had expected the war with Japan to be bitter and 
long, as Under Secretary of the Navy Ralph A. Bard 
indicated on’ September 21 in a talk at Princeton. 
They anticipated Chinese misfortune, and wondered 
that the Japanese had moved no more swiftly in their 
advance along the rail line through Hunan. 

CHINESE DEFEATS DISTURBING. Neverthe- 
less, the use of Chinese territory is essential for the 
Allies in defeating Japan, and the present short- 
comings of the Chinese Army are deeply disturbing 
to Washington, even though the shortcomings have 
been apparent for a long time to close observers of 
the war on the Asiatic continent. Yet the Chinese 
will to resist is far from extinct. “As long as we con- 
tinue our struggle resolutely and do not falter, I can 
assure you that militarily there is no real danger,” 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek told the third plen- 
ary session of the People’s Political Council in 
Chungking on September 5. Although the Japanese 
hold the great seaports of China as far south as 
Canton long, undefended portions of the coast are 
possible landing places at some future date for Allied 
troops who might commence the task of rolling back 
the Japanese. 

Chinese defeats are explained by the many prob- 
lems besetting the Chinese armies, which number 
several million soldiers. These forces are dogged but 
tired in their eighth year of war. Only a small num- 


FOR VICTORY * BUY 








ber of them are adequately equipped. Most of the 
units lack artillery heavier than mortars. Some of the 
provincial troops are without rifles. For supply 
armies depend on inadequate domestic industry and 
on foreign materials imported by an airline from 
India which carries only 15,000 tons of goods a month, 
Their officers, except those fighting in the Burma and 
Yunnan forces; are poorly trained, and methods of -— 
conscription are deplorable. Political problems weak. }|—— 
en the highest leadership of the Army. The division 
between the Kuomintang in Chungking and the Com- 
munists in north and central China continues, al 

though some encouragement for the settlement of] W 
this costly difference came during the session of the}. 
People’s Political Council. There spokesmen for bo 
sides aired their positions, and the Council passed 








<_< 
° 
r 









munist areas. 


UNITED STATES CONCERNED. Chinese mili: }phas 
tary difficulties have an international political mean |live— 
ing for the United States, whose government is req 
sponsible for the fact that China is represented 


transport to China remains severely limited. 


On September 6 Maj. Gen. Patrick J. Hurley are 
rived in Chungking to make observations on Chinese} 7! 
military problems that he will report to Presidenfjssu 
Roosevelt. With him was Donald Nelson, former ufc 
chairman of the War Production Board, who on hig }4s 
return on September 24 announced that he hadyian 
reached an agreement with Chiang Kai-shek on plang jmilii 
for the wartime expansion of China’s industries. The)}®P* 
United States also plans to send some consumers 45° 
goods, chiefly cotton cloth, to China at the earliest po# had 
sible moment. Although the Chinese government is #/*5P 
dictatorship, there are recent indications that it hag this 
relaxed its strict censorship of political discussion)}¥* 
“The Chinese people want to be the inhabitants of # Ger 
democratic country with a constitutional govern jt 
ment,” the newspaper Ta Kung Pao said on Septenr tabi 
ber 16. “As such we demand national unity, political” l 
freedom and economic equality.” The realization of} Y 
the Ta Kung Pao’s aims would improve the prospects )DEI 
for real Chinese influence in the post-war world. thai 
anc 
ce 


BLaiR BOLLES 


UNITED STATES WAR BONDS ‘hig 


