ee, 
———— 


conduct of 
rever firm. 
y be today, 
part of an 
cial to the 


NFORMA. 
ATOUSE sus- 
he United 
rmen from 
wyer in St. 
ed a sense 
ut Russia’s 
ither tends 
S ON access 
iment may 
incerity of 
freely with 
tion to the 
»f the Aus. 
d that the 
‘tiendly to 
stria might 

a govern- 
Vest in the 
‘a lasting, 
n earnestly 
ssian poli- 
. Whether 
uccessfully 
ig. that de- 
of Allied 
ears ahead, 


; Harcourt, 


ent outlines 
s future by 
ran acquisi- 
il, but little 
internation- 
within the 


am H. Bev- 
5 


n the Social 
rinciples of 
ving closely 
oyment, his 
e enterprise 
of industry 
ridge’s plan 
‘ol the loca- 
ity of labor. 


ted. National 
itor. Entered as 
: allow at least 


Genera) 


Ie hap 


JUN 8 1945 


Lib, now 40 Entered as 2nd class matter 
> ‘ary AG 7 1} LONE 
Wt YUAN 
of 
+an 


Yiah. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vor. XXIV, No. 33 


JUNE 1, 1945 


LACK OF CLEAR OBJECTIVES HAMPERS U.S. IN EUROPE 


En Route from San Francisco to New York—Now 
that the conference of 49 nations on problems of 
international organization is drawing to a close, 
it becomes increasingly apparent that its most val- 
uable accomplishment will have been the oppor- 
tunity it provided for a sharply etched re-appraisal 
of the world situation in the wake of the European 
war, before the victors had to define the concrete 
terms of the peace settlement. The conference, out- 
wardly preoccupied with technical questions of pro- 
cedure, became from the start a sounding-board for 
existing or potential conflicts the war had held in 
abeyance. The Charter it is drafting will represent 
the lowest common denominator on which agree- 
ment could be reached at this time. To many people 
who had hoped for more exalted achievement, the 
Charter may prove in some respects disappointing. 
But it is far better for all the United Nations to 
know approximately where they stand now than to 
keep on seeking unattainable objectives spun of noth- 
ing more substantial than wishful thinking. 
U.S.-RUSSIAN CONFLICT NOT INEVITABLE. 
The most disquieting development at the confer- 
ence was the tendency to believe that a conflict be- 
tween the United States and Russia is becoming in- 
evitable. This tendency was greatly inflated and 
encouraged by some irresponsible commentators and 
reporters who seemed more interested in the con- 
flicts that are bound to flare up among nations than 
in determined day-to-day efforts to arrive at agree- 
ment on controversial issues. There is, obviously, a 
wide range of matters on which the United States 
and Russia do not see eye to eye in Europe, but so 
far there is no fundamental reason why the two coun- 
tries should not find a workable basis for post-war 
cooperation. The chief difficulty is that while Russia 
has a very clear idea of the ways and means by 
which it intends to achieve security on the continent, 


this country still has no clearly defined objective in 
Europe beyond that of keeping the continent from 
becoming the theatre of another war in which the 
United States would once more be bound to inter- 
vene. We therefore tend to let matters drift until 
the Russians have taken some positive action—and 
then react against Russia’s decisions, instead of tak- 
ing the intiative ourselves. As a result, our policy 
assumes more and more the character of opposition 
to Russia’s aims in Europe when, in reality, if we 
were to reach our own conclusions about disputed 
matters like the régimes of Poland and Austria we 
might find that our views and those of the Soviet 
government concerning the future of Eastern Eu- 
rope and the Balkans are not as far apart as they 
seem. To reach well-thought-out conclusions, how- 
ever, we need a much larger staff of officials con- 
versant with the problems of that area, and familiar 
with Russia, than is at present available in the State 
Department. Dramatic improvisation by special emis- 
saries in moments of acute crisis does not take the 
place of the knowledge and experience which should 
be brought to bear on our negotiations with Russia. 

BRITAIN’S NEW BALANCE OF POWER. 
Our relations with Russia have come to depend, 
to a degree that at San Francisco was revealed as 
dangerous, on our relations with Britain. The Brit- 
ish, whose political influence and economic position 
have been undermined by the war, are necessarily 
playing from weakness. Some British officials give 
the impression that they would like to keep the 
United States and Russia apart—not to an extent 
that would threaten the security of Europe, but to 
the extent that would permit Britain to develop a 
new policy of balance of power between its two 
mighty wartime associates. It would be regrettable, 
however, if the United States which, under Presi- 
dent Roosevelt, succeeded in mediating between 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


Churchill and Stalin, should drift more or less un- 
consciously into a position where it would have to 
back Britain against Russia on the continent. Presi- 
dent Truman’s decision, announced on May 24, to 
send Joseph C. Davies, former Ambassador to Mos- 
cow, to canvass the situation with Prime Minister 
Churchill, while Harry Hopkins simultaneously can- 
vasses it with Stalin, indicates that a firm attempt 
will be made to dispel the serious malaise which has 
developed in Europe during the Conference. 

Just as the United States must define its positive 
objectives with respect to Russia, so it must define 
them with respect to Britain. It is difficult to be- 
lieve that the American people will want to support, 
in Europe, the policy of opposition to Leftist elements 
and: sympathy for monarchy frequently expressed 
by Mr. Churchill, or will want to abandon the hope 
that, ultimately, dependent peoples will be prepared 
by the nations that control them for some form of 
independence. Yet our fear of Russia, and our own 
desire to obtain control of strategic bases in the 
Pacific may, if unchecked, lead us to adopt a course 
that could be regarded by other peoples as reaction- 
ary. And it is at this very point that Russia, which 
certainly cannot claim to have assured the peoples 
under its control either a full range of human rights 
or what we in the Western world would regard as 
independence, could nevertheless continue, along 
the course set by Molotov at San Francisco, to as- 
sume the leadership in world affairs which the United 
States has failed to exert. 

FRENCH PLANS FOR SECURITY. In the 
midst of the tensions generated among the Big Three 
by the end of war in Europe, France has indicated 
its readiness to act as a connecting link between the 
Western powers and Russia. The French do not 
believe that either Britain or the United States will 
stay long in Europe—some of them put the period 
of Anglo-American occupation at less than two 
years. They are therefore preparing themselves for 
the eventuality of having to face Germany alone 
once more. Their plan of action is four-fold: occu- 
pation of the Rhineland by French forces; establish- 


Page Two 


ay 
—— 


ment of an international commission, including 
France, to control the Ruhr, with the expectation 


that Germany would thus be shorn of 70 per cent } 


of its coal, and consequently of the possibility of 
producing steel in sufficient quantities for modern 
warfare; creation of a network of security pacts, the 
Franco-Russian pact to be matched in the West by a 
similar pact with Britain; and participation as one of 


the Big Five in the United Nations organization, , 


The Anglo-French alliance has been delayed partly 
because the French, before they negotiate it, want 
to have definite assurances concerning the role they 
are to play in the occupation and administration of 
Germany, and partly because of frictions between 
France and Britain, notably in Syria and Lebanon, 
where riots occurred last week on the arrival of 
French troops. 

These problems are only symptoms of the vast 
upheavals that are shaking Europe and the Near and 
Middle East now that the danger of German domi- 
nation has been removed. It had long been evident 
that the end of hostilities would merely mean the 
beginning of arduous efforts to resolve the problems 
which brought about this war, and which the war 
itself has not solved. The United States, now mili- 
tarily and industrially the most powerful nation in 
the world, has the opportunity to play as great a 
role in the making of the peace as it has in the wag- 
ing of the war. This country alone among the great 
powers is not suspected of having territorial designs 
on the continent, and is by tradition committed néi- 
ther to reaction nor revolution. It is therefore peculi- 
arly well qualified to keep the balance between the 
conflicting interests of other nations, which have 
suffered far more than we have from the devastation 
of war, and are naturally even more anxious than 
we are about the character of the peace. In assuming 


our post-war responsibilities it is essential that we | 


should all realize that the maintenance of peacetime 
relations requires qualities of patience and under- 
standing far greater than those we were called on 
to display in time of war. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BRITISH ELECTIONS TO HINGE ON RECONSTRUCTION ISSUES 


which has successfully concluded the European phase | 


Facing its first general election since 1935, Britain 
has entered a political campaign which will bring a 
new Parliament and perhaps a new government to 
Westminster. The present Parliament, the longest 
in modern British history, has undergone many 
changes in the last ten years. First, the leadership 
veered from the nationalist government of Stanley 
Baldwin to that of Neville Chamberlain during the 
ill-fated appeasement period. At the time of the in- 
vasion of the Low Countries in 1940, the “Cassan- 
dra” of the Conservative party, Mr. Churchill, came 
to the Premiership to form the coalition war cabinet 


of the war. With the resignation of the Prime Min- 
ister and his Cabinet on May 23, the two major pat- 
ties have now to contest the election at the polls on 
July 5 to determine which of them shall conduct the 
final phase of the war against Japan, set the stage 
for post-war reconstruction at home, and chart Brit 
ain’s future course in foreign affairs. 


FOREIGN POLICY DIFFERENCES. Considera- 
tions of foreign policy will not figure prominent: 
ly during the campaign, although the Chamber 
lain policies of the Conservative party will doubt 


=——— 


less be 
Churchi 
spirit in 
much oO: 
ment tai 
announ< 
with a 
jster ha: 
ressed 
in Unite 
Labo: 
fewer < 
dinatin; 
Europe. 
for coo 
ties wit 
contine! 
of exte 
greater 
While 
minion: 
ties for 
be plac 
breakin 
policy 


» ence la 


the 19: 
could c 


agreed 
foreigr 


| propos 
| of Brit 
| consid 
will be 


few Br 
the na 
Both f 
the ex) 
is to re 


, that h: 


ing th 
CON 
The 


tinuin 
politic 
At th 
includ 
prope 
East. 

or on 
will r 
in As: 
with | 
imme 


—— 
ee 


including 
xpectation 
) per cent 
sibility of 
rt modern 
pacts, the 
West by a 
| aS one of 
ranization, 
yed partly 
> it, want 
role they 
tration of 
s between 
Lebanon, 
arrival of 


f the vast 
Near and 
nan domi- 
nn evident 
mean the 
- problems 
n the war 
now mili- 
nation in 
iS great a 
1 the wag- 
‘the great 
al designs 
nitted nei- 
ore peculi- 
tween the 


hich have | 


levastation 
cious than 
| assuming 
il that we 


peacetime | 


nd under- 
called on 


s DEAN 


S 

ean phase 
rime Min- 
major pat- 
e polls on 
onduct the 
- the stage 
chart Brit- 


Considera- 
prominent: 

Chamber- 
vill doubt 


| 
| 
| 


——EEEEes 


| 


——— 
—_—_ 


less be aired at length by Labor candidates. Mr. 
Churchill has so successfully personified Britain's 
spirit in resisting its enemies during the war that 
much of the bitterness against the earlier appease- 
ment tactics of his party may have been dispelled. In 
announcing that the election would not interfere 
with a meeting of the Big Three, the Prime Min- 
ister has not only struck a confident note but has ex- 
ressed Britain’s intention of retaining its position 
in United Nations councils. 

Labor spokesmen can face the electorate with 
fewer qualms than the Conservatives about coor- 
dinating British and Russian policy—especially in 
Europe. For the Labor party has consistently pressed 


| for cooperation with the Soviet Union and closer 


ties with Leftist groups which have emerged on the 
continent. Aside from these divergences in the field 
of external affairs, the Labor party will express 
greater differences with respect to imperial relations. 
While favoring continued cooperation with the Do- 
minions, Labor does not propose closer institutional 
ties for Commonwealth unity. Greater emphasis will 
be placed on the necessity of colonial development, 
breaking the deadlock on India, and reversing the 
policy regarding Palestine. At its London Confer- 
ence last year, the Labor party suggested revision of 
the 1939 White Paper so that Jewish immigration 
could continue, the size of Palestine be increased and 
Arab populations transferred to other areas. 

DOMESTIC ISSUES REAL. Most observers are 
agreed that the election will turn, not on issues of 
foreign policy, but on plans already executed or 
proposed for the economic and social reconstruction 
of Britain after the war. Again, in so far as economic 
considerations affect Britain’s foreign position, there 
will be little disagreement between the parties. For 
few Britishers, regardless of party, are unmindful of 
the nation’s precarious foreign economic situation. 
Both parties view with favor plans for expansion of 
the export trade on which Britain must depend if it 
is to recoup the wartime loss on external investments 
that have always played a significant role in balanc- 
ing the nation’s international payments. 


CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATE SHARPENS 


The military problems arising from China’s con- 
tinuing disunity have been obscured by European 
political issues and the San Francisco Conference. 
At the same time sensational air attacks on Japan, 
including devastating raids on Tokyo, have quite 
properly won the spotlight in the news from the Far 
Fast. But Japan will not be defeated by one nation 
or one method alone, and in the months ahead we 
will need all the support we can get from our allies 
in Asia. The achievement of political unity in China, 
with all the resulting military advantages, is a major 
immediate requirement in the war against Japan. 


Page Three 


It is rather on the domestic angle of this program 
that the sharpest clash will occur. During the debates 
on the Full Employment White Paper last year, it 
was Clearly revealed that both parties were in agree- 
ment on its aims—reviving the export industries and 
increasing the export trade. But the Labor party 
has maintained that to do this necessitates a prograrna 
involving greater public ownership of the basic in- 
dustries and services than the White Paper has indi- 
cated. Both groups agree, however, that—as a mini- 
mum—great state intervention and control of 
economic life will be necessary. 

Although this is the same debate—public owner- 
ship vs. free enterprise—which has continued in 
Britain since World War I, the issues are sharper 
today because the area of debate has been pushed 
considerably closer to actual goverr nent ownership 
than before. The state has exercised full economic 
controls during the war and, in rebuilding British 
industry, rehousing bombed-out families, and city 
planning, it will have to exercise vast controls anew. 
Distribution of industry is to be planned, the land 
necessary for city planning virtually pre-empted, and 
labor directed to those areas where it is needed. 
Health and educational facilities are to be expanded, 
along with increased social security benefits. 

The coalition government presented these plans in 
a series of White Papers during 1943 and 1944. 
A majority of the White Papers have not yet been 
implemented by legislation and those which have 
been interpreted in law have not satisfied most Labor 
members of Parliament, who have felt free to criti- 
cize them. Laborites will doubtless go to their con- 
stituencies on issues involving these domestic mat- 
ters, and it is expected that housing especially will 
prove a rallying point in the campaign. Thus, despite 
much agreement on foreign policy, the Labor party 
can contest the election with real hope, for the do- 
mestic issues are sharp and close to each voter's 
personal knowledge. On the other hand, the Con- 
servatives can count on Mr. Churchill’s unrivaled 
personal prestige deriving from his astute leader- 
ship during the war. GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


POLITICAL DIFFERENCES IN CHINA 


It is true that there has been an improvement in 
the military position of the Chungking government 
and that the cities of Foochow and Nanning are 
again in Chinese hands. The Chinese Communist 
armies also report highly successful spring operations 
in the northern and central provinces. But the Chung- 
king forces remain sorely in need of strengthening 
from within, and China needs an end to the Kuo- 
mintang blockade of the Eighth Route Army’s head- 
quarters area in the Yenan region. Yet the political 
factors responsible for military disunity seem fur- 
ther than ever from settlement. 


a ’ “ 
a ce we a 
LS ee ae - 

er ~ 


i 


eet ge 


Se a eae 
. 
Fi aarp aay Clie 


———— 


TRENDS IN CHINA. At present there are three 
main currents in Chinese politics (1) Chungking 
is planning to adopt a constitution, despite the ab- 
sence of political unity; (2) Yenan is expanding 
and consolidating the liberated areas under its con- 
trol; (3) liberal groups in Chungking territory are 
becoming increasingly dissatisfied with the course 
taken by the Central government. All these tenden- 
cies are influenced by the policies of the great pow- 
ers, especially that of the United States as formu- 
lated by Ambassador Patrick J. Hurley. 

A resolution to hold a constitutional convention 
in November 1945 was adopted at the Sixth Na- 
tional Congress.of the Kuomintang, whose meetings 
ended on May 21. American discussion of this move 
has tended to regard constitutionalism and popular 
government as synonymous terms. Yet it is well 
known that, while virtually all the independent 
countries of the world have constitutions, very few 
existing states can be considered democratic. In 
judging Chungking’s plans, it is therefore necessary 
to see what kind of a document the proposed con- 
stitution is, how it is to be adopted, and what the 
probable effects of its promulgation will be. 

CONSTITUTION WITHOUT DEMOCRACY. 
Even a cursory examination of the Draft Con- 
stitution, which the Chungking government pro- 
poses to adopt this year, raises serious questions as 
to whether the text contains the framework of a 
popular régime. The Draft provides for a National 
Congress which would normally meet one month in 
every three years, unless it was found necessary to 
lengthen a session for an additional month or to 
call an extraordinary session. The most important 
function of the National Congress would be to elect 
the President of the Chinese Republic and certain 
other high government officials. Not one of the lead- 
ing officials of the central régime would be chosen 
by direct, popular election. It seems improbable that 
a congress meeting so infrequently could serve as 
more than a rubber stamp for rule by executive ac- 
tion. In effect, China under this constitution would 
lack any body genuinely resembling a national legis- 
lature. 

The constitutional convention, it is true, will pos- 
sess the right to make changes in the Draft; but in 
view of current political conditions in Chungking 
territory, there is no reason to expect the majority 
of delegates to display a spirit of political inde- 
pendence. None will have been popularly elected, 
and the core of the congress probably will consist of 


Page Four 


—— 
ane 


current Kuomintang leaders and delegates chosen 
by the Kuomintang nine years ago for a constitu. 
tional convention that was postponed because of the 
outbreak of the present war with Japan. 

There was a time several years ago when the 
adoption of a constitution by a reasonably represen. 
tative body might have promoted Chinese unity and 


helped the war effort. But that was in a period when 
the relations of Chungking and Yenan were better 
than an armed truce. Today the deterioration is s9 
marked that, unless outstanding political questions 
are settled soon, moves to adopt a constitution 


threaten to crystallize existing differences. | 
CONGRESS AT YENAN. The fact that Chung. 


king was planning to press for a constitution very 
likely influenced the convening of the Seventh Na. 
tional Congress of the Chinese Communist party at 
Yenan in the latter part of April. The discussions at | 
this Congress indicate that Yenan has been consoli- 
dating and expanding at a very rapid pace. In fact, 
Mao Tse-tung, leader of the Chinese Communists, 
declared that the areas liberated by the Eighth Route 
and New Fourth armies now contain more than 95, 
000,000 people. Especially significant was Mao's 
suggestion that “a conference of people’s representa- 
tives from all parts of liberated China should be 
called in Yenan as soon as possible to discuss meas- 
ures for unifying the activities of all liberated areas, | 
giving leadership to the anti-Japanese democratic 
movement among the people in Kuomintang-con- 
trolled areas and the underground movement of the 
people in occupied areas, and promoting the unity 
of the entire country and the formation of a coali- 


tion government.” This suggests that Yenan may 
be planning political moves of its own to anticipate 
Chungking’s action on the constitution. 

In these circumstances the attitude of non-Kuo 
mintang, non-Communist minority groups in Chung: 
king territory is extremely important. A number of 
these minority groups, organized in the Democratic 
League, have shown marked apathy toward consti 
tutionalism without democracy. According to Carson 
Chang, a leader of one of the groups in the League 
and a member of the Chinese delegation at San 
Francisco, “the urgent need for unity demands that 
a coalition government be established immediately.” 
Another leader of the Democratic League, Li Hwang, 
who is also on the San Francisco delegation, has at 
tacked the arrangements for the constitutional com 
vention as undemocratic and dictatorial. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


| 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 33, JuNE 1, 1945. Published weekly by the Foreign Pelicy Association, Incorporated. Nationd 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Sereet, New York 16, N. Y. Pranx Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dean, Editer. Entered # 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at lem 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


to oo 181 


—— 


1918 


HE 

less 
it also 
er in tl 
fluence 
that hi 
troops 
Prime 
quest C 


suffere 


| whethe 


British 
Londo: 
and A 
his pr 
indicat 
discuss 
Lebanc 
ing his 
met of 
can A: 
with tl 

FRA 
Levan 
the m: 
since ° 
tiation 
atrans 
Frencl 
treaty, 
War ¥V 
capitu 
East « 
Britist 
promi 
the e 
questi 
have | 


