






SRPARRBRE ARES Ld J 


ue 


fODICAL 


You. XIX, No. 22 





TEOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current internatiynal events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


BQBMGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
Sal LIGMARW West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
OF MICH. 





MaRcH 22, 1940 





“AX 9D = 2, 1921, at the Post 
~2 [94h Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 

of March 3, 1879. 














Will Germany and the U.S.S.R. launch an offensive 


in the Near East? Read: 


THE NEAR EAST and the EUROPEAN WAR 


by Philip W. Ireland 


Department of Government, Harvard U niversity 


March 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports . . . . 25 cents 


EE 





General Library 
University of Michigan 





Ann Arbor, Michigas 








——— 





HITLER PLAYS HIS ACES 








HE dramatic two-and-a-half-hour conference be- 

tween Premier Mussolini and Chancellor Hitler 
at the frontier village of Brennero on March 18 in- 
dicates that Nazi Germany has acted quickly to 
capitalize on the Russo-Finnish peace. Now that the 
threat of a large-scale war in the North has been 
diminated, the German government is concentrat- 
ing its entire energy on the creation of an economic 
and diplomatic bloc capable of dictating a settle- 
ment of the Western European conflict in the near 
future. In this coalition Germany hopes to unite 
Italy and the Soviet Union, together with South- 
eastern Europe. 

“PACIFYING” THE BALKANS. For the Nazis 
the termination of the Finnish war was unquestion- 
ably a great triumph. The Germans are now deter- 
mined to nip in the bud any Allied designs to start 
a war in the Balkans or the Near East.The rumors 
centering about Rumania during the past ten days 
indicate which way the wind is blowing. While 
Bucharest has denied the reports that Germany had 
offered to guarantee Rumania’s borders in return 
for sweeping economic concessions, the Reich is un- 
doubtedly anxious to persuade King Carol’s govern- 
ment that its safety depends solely on Moscow and 
Berlin. The fate of Finland has made a deep im- 
pression on the Balkan countries. It has once more 
driven home the lesson of Poland and Czecho- 
slovakia—that small nations lying in the shadow of 
Nazi Germany or Soviet Russia cannot rely for pro- 
tection on distant powers like France or Britain, no 
matter how strong the latter may be. Although the 
Rumanian Premier, George Tatarescu, asserted on 
March 17 that his government was exclusively pre- 
occupied with strengthening the country’s army and 
fortifications, he and his colleagues know that Ru- 
mania, with its limited economic and military re- 
sources, cannot defend itself successfully. The re- 
lease of virtually all of the 800 imprisoned members 







































of the pro-Fascist Iron Guard, announced on 
March 16, may indicate that Rumania is pr 

to entrust its future to Germany and Italy. On the 
other hand, Foreign Minister Gafencu again de- 
clared on March 18 that his government would not 
permit the country’s national wealth to serve the 
war aims of any power. 

The success of the Reich's efforts to ‘‘pacify” the 
Balkans will depend in large part on Moscow's 
attitude. The Nazis hope that the Soviet Union will 
abandon for the time being its plans to recover Bes- 
sarabia from Rumania or to establish control of the 
Bosporus and Dardanelles at Turkey's expense. 
Since France and Britain may seize on any overt 
act of aggression in this area to attack the Russian 
oil fields in the Caucasus, the Kremlin may perhaps 
consider it expedient to fall in with Germany's plans. 
The inducement to remain strictly on the defensive 
may be all the greater if the U.S.S.R. becomes con- 
vinced that the prospect of war in the Near East is 
remote. For the moment it appears unlikely that 
Turkey will allow the Allies to use its terfitory as a 
base for operations against the Soviet Union. 

GERMANY COURTS ITALY. Here Italy's posi- 
tion is also of paramount importance. Since the 
beginning of the war the Italian government and 
press have repeatedly expressed Rome’s desire to 
see peace preserved in the Balkans. At the same 
time, they have bitterly opposed any encroachments 
by Russia in this region. It may have been Hitler’s 
mission at Brennero to point out ways of reconcil- 
ing Russian, Italian and German interests in South- 
eastern Europe. The Germans have recently formu- 
lated a scheme for a tremendous continental bloc 
of “revolutionary” powers, comprising Italy, Ger- 
many and the U.S.S.R. which together might peace- 
fully share the Balkans and the Near East and prove 
a decisive counterweight to the Franco-British com- 
bination. In such a grouping Italy would play an 





rericabeeioae aeeaaae 











important réle. By virtue of its strong strategic posi- 
tion in the Central Mediterranean, Albania and 
Libya, it might thwart any Allied attempt to pro- 
voke war in the Near East. While Hitler probably 
realizes that I/ Duce will not definitely commit him- 
self to military intervention on the side of Germany, 
he hopes that Italy’s attitude will remain sufficiently 
equivocal and threatening to immobilize Allied 
troop concentrations in the Near East. In return, 
Hitler may have promised to include the satisfac- 
tion of Italian ambitions in his war aims. 

The object of these German maneuvers is to con- 
fine the war to Western Europe and nullify the effect 
of the Franco-British blockade. Germany is confi- 
dent that it can withstand the strangulation of its 
overseas trade as long as it is not compelled to dis- 
sipate its limited economic resources and man power 
in extensive hostilities. The Nazis are even con- 
vinced that time is on their side, particularly if they 
can carry out their designs for the formation of a 
continental economic bloc. Meanwhile, they hope 
to break down the morale of the Allies by depriving 
them of opportunities for sensational victories and 
by constantly harassing British shipping and naval 
bases from the air. 

While the Germans may be over-optimistic about 
the success of such tactics, there are signs that the 


MOSCOW ACHIEVES ITS GOAL IN FINLAND 


The peace treaty concluded in Moscow on March 
12 by Finland and the Soviet Union marks one more 
setback in the losing struggle of small countries to de- 
fend their territory against encroachments by neigh- 
boring great powers. As far as can be determined, 
the Soviet government first approached Britain on 
January 22—the week the Red Army won its first 
important military victory at Summa—with an offer 
of negotiations addressed to Finland. When Britain 
declined to act as “postman,” Moscow on Janu- 
ary 29 made a similar approach to Sweden, which 
transmitted the Soviet note to the Finns but warned 
the U.S.S.R. that it would intervene on Finland’s be- 
half unless a peace settlement was reached. Nego- 
tiations were officially opened in Moscow on 
March 7, and concluded a week later. The Finnish 
Diet ratified the peace treaty of March 15 by a vote 
of 145 to 3. 

WHAT FINLAND LOST. Under the Moscow 
peace treaty Finland ceded to Russia the Karelian 
Isthmus, including its second largest city, Viborg, 
and its famous Mannerheim Line fortifications; it is 
reported that in this area the Soviet government 
plans to construct fortifications of its own, to be 
known as the Voroshilov Line. Finland also sur- 
rendered the entire shore of Lake Ladoga, the larg- 
est lake in Europe, which now comes entirely under 
Russian domination, as well as a section of its 


Page Two 


q 








—= 


French and British peoples have been deeply 
troubled by recent developments. For the first time 
they have begun to realize that the Reich canny 
perhaps be starved out by a purely passive war of 
blockade. Many are chafing under prolonged ing. 
tion and are urging more vigorous prosecution 
of the war. In Britain the Opposition is becoming 
increasingly articulate in its demands for renova 
tion of the Chamberlain government. Popular sep. 
timent may compel France and Britain to engag 
Germany more actively in the future. Since a lan{ 
offensive against the Westwall seems destined tp 
be fruitless, air warfare on a vast scale may be the 
only answer. Even here, however, the Allies may not 
be able to bring about a decision. Not only is the 
German air force reported to be still superior to the 
Franco-British fleet, but it remains to be proved 
that the air arm can decisively influence the cours 
of the war. Yet the Allies are still determined tp 
carry on. They are fighting not so much for the re. 
construction of Poland and Czechoslovakia, as fo 
security against the recurrence of aggression. The 
French and British are eager enough to put an end to 
this war, but only on the condition that the United 
States underwrites and guarantees the peace. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


Arctic Coast, which will give Russia strategic con 
trol of the Finnish warm-water port of Petsamo 
Finland, moreover, leased to Russia for thirty years 
the Hangoe peninsula on the Gulf of Finland— 
which it had refused to sell or lease before the out 
break of war—at an annual charge of 8 million 
Finnish marks; this peninsula is to become a Soviet 
naval and military base. In addition, Finland agreed 
to have a railway built this year across its territory, 
running from the White Sea in Russia to Kemi 
jaervi on the Finnish-Swedish border; to permit the 
passage of Soviet goods, duty-free, through its Ar 
tic region from Russia to Norway; and to give up 
the right to maintain warships or submarines—othet 
than coastal vessels—in its Arctic waters. The areas 
surrendered to the Soviet Union contain important 
industrial and agricultural resources. Of the Finns 
living in these areas only one per cent decided to 
remain, so Finland is faced with the difficult prob 
lem of resettling more than 400,000 refugees i 
the territory it is now attempting to reconstruct. 
Moscow’s final peace terms were definitely more 
severe than its original demands. For the time be 
ing, the Kremlin has apparently decided to deal 
with the present Finnish government of Premief 
Risto Ryti, and has not insisted on acceptance by 
the Finns of the “People’s Government” it had s¢t 
up in Terijoki at the beginning of the war. But now 








— 


that Fi 
will ol 
whene" 
the Fir 
flict Wé 
agains! 
Finlan 
now b 
attack 
reache 
been « 
Aclant 
Union 
that it 
Europ 
WI 
the M 
ern cc 
—for 
forcec 
many 
is cles 
tem h 
some 
the 
troop 
resist 
force 
land 
tities 
super 
man 
ister, 
force 
of la 
persi 
surre 
the * 
navis 
trooy 
T 
ansv 
peac 
the 
aid | 
read 
ficia 
the 
but 
the 
Eve: 
min 
cate 
FORE 


Head 
Enter 


< 








— 
———— 


that Finland has been shorn of its fortifications, it 
will obviously be easy for the Soviet government, 
whenever it wishes, to make additional demands on 
the Finns. Moscow’s principal objective in this con- 
fict was to assure the strategic security of Leningrad 
against hostile attack from a base on the Gulf of 
Finland by Germany or the Allies. This objective has 
now been achieved. But if Russia’s fear of Western 
attack persists, it may come to the conclusion once 
reached by Peter the Great that its security has not 
been definitely assured until it controls Norway's 
Atlantic coast. On March 18, however, the Soviet 
Union gave Sweden formal diplomatic assurances 
that it has no further territorial demands in Northern 
Europe. 

WHY FINLAND YIELDED. Announcement of 
the Moscow peace shocked and disheartened West- 
ern countries almost as much as the.Munich accord 
for today peace, the kind of peace that has been 
forced on Czechoslovakia and Finland, appears to 
many people far more dangerous than war. Yet it 
is clear that Finland had no choice. Its defense sys- 
tem had suffered a grave blow on January 22, when 
some of the best divisions of the Red Army pierced 
the Mannerheim Line at Summa, just as the Finnish 
troops were coming to the end of their physical 
resistance, with no hope of being relieved by fresh 
forces. Britain, France and Sweden had sent Fin- 
land airplanes, arms and munitions, but in quan- 
tities clearly insufficient to offset Russia’s military 
superiority. And what Finland needed most was 
man power. As Mr. Tanner, Finnish Foreign Min- 
ister, said in a broadcast on March 13, Finland was 
forced to surrender on Russia’s terms not because 
of lack of courage or unity among its people, which 
persist even in the midst of defeat. It was forced to 
surrender because it is a small country, and because 
the Western powers, as well as Finland’s Scandi- 


navian neighbors, were unable or unwilling to send 
troops. 


THE ISSUE OF ALLIED AID. This criticism was 
answered on March 12, just before the Moscow 
peace was signed, by M. Daladier, who said that 
the Allies had decided as early as February 5 to 
aid Finland, and that 50,000 troops were being held 
ready for embarkation the moment the Finns of- 
fcially asked for help. The difficulty, according to 
the Allies, was not their reluctance to send troops, 
but the refusal of Norway and Sweden to allow 
the passage of these troops through their territory. 
Even if the Allies had been united in their deter- 
mination to aid Finland—and reports would indi- 
cate that this move, advocated by France and by some 





Page Three 








British leaders, notably the former War Secretary, 
Mr. Hore-Belisha, had been opposed by Mr. 
Chamberlain—the 50,000 men referred to by M. 
Daladier would probably have been inadequate to 
stem the Russian advance. Moreover, it now appears 
that the Allies did not officially approach Sweden 
and Norway about the passage of troops until 
March 2, just before Soviet-Finnish negotiations 
opened in Moscow—although the British had been 
informed of Russia’s peace terms as early as Janu- 
ary 22. This eleventh-hour offer must be regarded 
less as a genuine measure of assistance than as an 
attempt by the Allied governments to salve their 
consciences, and possibly to prolong the Soviet- 
Finnish conflict in the hope that a new theatre of 
war might thus be created in Scandinavia. 

Meanwhile, Sweden and Norway believed that 
the chief object of Allied intervention was not to 
defend Finland, but to bar Germany from access to 
Swedish iron ore and facilitate an Allied attack on 
Germany. They were convinced, rightly or wrongly, 
that if they permitted Allied troops to cross their 
territory, they would be exposed to German retalia- 
tion. Having witnessed the fate of Czechoslovakia 
and Poland, the Scandinavian countries feared that 
Allied aid would be neither sufficiently prompt nor 
sufficiently effective to ward off a swift German 
blow on their territory. 

For the time being, developments in Scandinavia 
fit perfectly into Hitler’s plans for the pacification 
of Northern and Eastern Europe, and the exclusion 
of Anglo-French influence from that entire area. 
The Nazis also hope that, once Moscow is at peace, 
it will ship to Germany the foodstuffs and raw ma- 
terials—especially oil, which Russia has been con- 
suming for war transport—which are needed by 
the Reich to alleviate the effects of the British naval 
blockade. It may now prove possible to carry out the 
Soviet-German agreement of February 11, which 
provides for the exchange of goods over a period 
of years at a level exceeding that attained in 1931, 
when trade between the two countries totaled 1,066 
million marks. And, if the Allies should undertake 
military operations in the Balkans and the Near 
East to bar Germany from Soviet oil fields, Russia 
would now be free to use its army in this region. 
While there is no doubt that Moscow shares the de- 
sire of Hitler and Mussolini for the break-up of 
the British Empire, its conduct of the war in Finland 
would indicate that, so far, its expansion has been 
directed at least as much against future German 
encroachments on the Baltic as against the Allies. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 22, MarcH 22, 1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dornorny F. Lugr, Secretary; Vera Micuetes Dran, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Biv 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 












Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


Mar. 18.—The President’s declaration, in an 
international broadcast on March 16, that an endur- 
ing peace must banish militarism, secure the integrity 
of small nations, and permit free religious worship 
and interchange of ideas, has emphasized once 
more the divergent trends of thought within the 
Administration on problems of foreign policy. Mr. 
Roosevelt’s speech has been welcomed by those 
circles in Washington which believe that, unless 
Germany is defeated and Nazism destroyed, no 
lasting peace can be achieved in Europe. This group 
has made no secret of its fear that the Sumner 
Welles mission might be used to prepare the ground 
for a negotiated settlement, more or less on Hitler's 
terms. Just what rdle Mr. Welles has actually played 
in the intense diplomatic maneuvers now reaching 
a climax in Europe is still unknown. But the Presi- 
dent’s pronouncement indicates that the Adminis- 
tration is not yet prepared to support efforts to end 
the war by compromise on the basis of the status quo. 


BLOCKADE TALKS MAKE PROGRESS. In 
another quarter, meanwhile, the United States is 
cooperating with Allied representatives to iron out 
the difficulties arising from the Anglo-French block- 
ade of Germany. Since March 4 Frank Ashton- 
Gwatkin and Charles Rist, technical advisers on 
economic warfare to the British and French govern- 
ments, have been in Washington and have held 
lengthy conversations with American officials re- 
garding Allied contraband control, the embargo 
against German exports, censorship of American 
mail and the war trade barriers which have seri- 
ously restricted American agricultural exports. The 
Allied experts, in a statement issued on March 12, 
implied that their governments were unwilling to 
make basic changes in the measures already adopted, 
but would consider special arrangements to minimize 
unnecessary inconveniences and loss. 

At one time this winter, there was some intra- 
Administration pressure for firm action to combat 
blockade and trade restrictions, possibly by car- 
rying overseas mail to Europe in naval vessels 
or threatening to bar sales of aircraft to Britain and 
France unless the Allies resumed their normal agri- 
cultural purchases. Actually, however, such drastic 
steps were never seriously considered by responsible 
officials. The State Department has now apparently 
decided to seek the best possible modus vivendi with 
the Allies rather than make repeated but probably 





useless protests. Such a policy can be justified by |” 


broad political considerations. It can also be de 
fended on the ground that our total trade with the 
Allies has sharply increased since the outbreak of 
war. In the five war months September to January, 
Canadian, French and British purchases here were 
$150,000,000 greater than a year ago. 


TRADE PACTS AND THE SENATE. Meap. 
while, the Allies continue to impose war regulations 
which furnish ammunition to opponents of the te. 
ciprocal trade program, whose renewal is about to be 
debated in the Senate. On March 19, for example, 
British imports of canned and bottled fruits were 
halted indefinitely. Senators who oppose renewal re. 
gard the trade pacts as “useless” if they permit the 
belligerents to take advantage of war escape clauses 
in shutting off American exports, while binding the 
United States to comply with all provisions of the 
agreements. State Department authorities point out, 
however, that the trade agreements mechanism can 
be used in certain circumstances to protect American 


interests during the emergency. Thus, under a sup }i 


plementary pact with Canada effective January 1, 
a quota imposed on imports of silver fox furs now 
unmarketable in Europe has saved an American in- 
dustry from serious loss. More recently the Canadian 
government, in applying quotas on purchases of 
fresh pork, has accorded American shippers an allow 
ance based on their exports to Canada during the 
first nine months of 1939—a figure far in excess of 
exports for any previous year since 1923. 

The whole question of Allied war purchases may be 
thoroughly debated, possibly in sensational fashion, 
during the course of a Congressional investigation 
of airplane sales to foreign countries beginning 
March 20. The inquiry was provoked by a War De 
partment request for additional funds to carry out 
its aircraft procurement plans, with the implication 
that foreign buyers are bidding up prices and it 
terfering with the American defense program. A 
mild furor has also been created by the revelation 
that Allied agents have been permitted to negotiate 
for the latest and fastest fighter models produced 
in this country. The Administration, however, denies 
the rumor on prices and stresses the progress if 
mass production methods being made by American 
manufacturers as a direct result of sales for expott. 
This progress is regarded as a defense asset worth 
far more to the United States than a stock of planes 
with a very limited military life. 

Davip H. Popper 


REY 
nation 
sas 
which 
ment, 
dispate 
ment ¢ 
feat fc 
head t 
goverr 
daring 
the Ce 
agains 
its fai 
the S 
appea 
embar 
tation 
of the 
vote | 
defini 
cided 

Th 
quire 
Strat 
i 
Germ 
termi 


perso 








