wc 4 1S 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


my. Os General uibrary 
" fr , 

ry Valversity Of Michican 

ae Ann Arbor, Mich. 

:2e| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 

free Ching 

enter first 

e, and mil. 

1 drive the : ; age 

e. Even if An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 

var, it will FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 

. China a 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
ected, will | You XXIV, No. 41 JuLy 27, 1945 
lan regime, aes 
the United} WILL BIG THREE RECONCILE FUNDAMENTAL AIMS AT POTSDAM? 
oer HE lack of information about other than social persons involved, and the possible basis for com- 
fested cook | activities at the Potsdam conference has brought promise between conflicting views. Too many fe- 
2 ae Ping. understandable complaints from newspaper report- porters still look on discussions among nations as if 
5’ Political es gathered in Berlin for this occasion—understand- they were sport events, asking all the time “who 
ed coopera able because the task of reporters is to obtain news. won ?”’—not, as they should, ‘what chance is there 
1 July 9 he Yet it is difficult to see how problems of the mag- for agreement ? : , 

eted his a nitude and delicacy of those being discussed by the PEACE MAIN GOAL OF US. The chief con- 

Big Three could be satisfactorily considered in the cern of the United States at this moment is to see to 
prospect of full glare of daily publicity without arousing prema- it that the adjustments which must be made if the 
nited States | Mt and perhaps destructive controversy. We do not military victories of the United Nations are to be 

e grim days expect business executives, or labor leaders, or heads translated into peacetime collaboration are appor- 
of the ed: | of educational institutions, to transact their affairs or tioned more or less equally among the Big Three. 
said iam settle their conflicts at press conferences or before This is a natural concern, and President Truman ex- 
ykinawa ai microphones. Why should we expect this of political pressed it well in his brief speech of July 20 in Ber- 
some col leaders and diplomats ? What is important is not that lin when he said: “Let us not forget that we are 
indirectly negotiations should be carried on in public, but that fighting for peace and for the welfare of mankind. 
an has.ai the results of these negotiations should be communi- We are not fighting for conquest. There is not one 
ramatic tum | @ted frankly and promptly to the peoples of the piece of territory or one thing of a monetary nature 
nall condi world, for their discussion and criticism. that w e want out of this war. We want peace and 
., if nobody ) RESPONSIBLE PRESS ESSENTIAL. With time, prosperity for the world as a whole.” 

: as we all become more accustomed to working to- There is an inevitable tendency on our part to feel 
ories of Ml gether in international agencies, and as all the that this country is bearing a large share of the bur- 
co eve a United Nations, we must hope, achieve the degree dens of the war, especially now in the Pacific, and 
| leaders of freedom of discussion and freedom of the press to fear that our partners in the Big Three, Britain 

difficult for | Sting in Western Europe, Britain, the United or Russia, will ask for more than we think is their 
that eal ) States, and the Dominions, it will become possible due in terms of power and, at the same time, may 

“ke of ta to discuss openly an increasingly wider area of prob- act in their relations with other peoples in a way 
looked for kms affecting all nations. But this objective can be which would not win public approval here. It would 
between iil ultimately attained only if a high degree of respon- be dangerous, however, to foster the impression that 
. hand, a sbility in presenting and analyzing the news is main- we alone are virtuous, while others are either actually 
‘n misunder | uted by the press of the world. At San Francisco, or potentially wicked. True, we have no territorial 
China welll for example, there was a disturbing tendency on the or financial designs on Europe, or Africa, or the 
of Japan part of even seasoned commentators to fall prey, all Near and Middle East where the security interests 
rope woul 00 easily, to moods of depression about the pros- of Britain or Russia or both are more directly at 
e advan pects of the conference, to criticize this or that na- stake than our own. But territorial and financial 

tion, to exaggerate controversial issues, often with- aspirations are not the only national aspirations that 
= Boies ae sufficient appreciation of the historic background can disturb other nations. When the British or 

of the problems under discussion, the motives of the Russians hear Americans insisting on a dominant 
ON DS Contents of this BULLETIN may be rebrinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


position with respect to civil aviation, merchant 
shipping, special trade advantages, access to oil in 
this or that area, and control of islands in the 
Pacific regarded as necessary for this country’s secur- 
ity, they feel they are justified in making comparable 
claims, or in retaining comparable factors of power 
they already possess. 

BIG THREE AT WORK ON BALANCE SHEET. 
Each of the Big Three at Potsdam has something to 
gain, and each looks to its partners to compensate 
it for such concessions as it is asked to make on some 
points by concession on others. The United States 
wants two things above all: termination of the war 
in the Pacific at the earliest possible moment by a 
decisive victory over Japan, and stabilization of Eu- 
rope and Asia to an extent that will make it possible 
for the world to look forward, as President Truman 
said, “to the greatest age in the history of mankind.” 
The aid of Britain and Russia is essential for the 
achievement of both objectives: for it is clear that, 
while we and the British are inflicting defeats on 
Japan at sea and in the air, we shall need Russia’s 
land forces to oust the Japanese from the mainland 
of China; and unless an agreement can be reached be- 
tween the Big Three concerning a joint policy with 
respect not only to Germany, but also to the liberated 
countries, Europe could remain a seething cauldron 
for years to come. Britain, like the United States, 
wants termination of the war in the Pacific, so that it 
can turn to the urgent tasks of domestic reconstruction 
—a reconstruction which is an essential preliminary 
to even partial recovery of Britain’s role in world 
trade and finance; and, like the United States, Britain 
seeks peace and stability in Europe, having learned at 
the cost of two bitter wars that conflict on the conti- 
nent will sooner or later engulf the British Isles. 
Whatever else may be said of Russia’s plans in Eu- 
rope and Asia, the Soviet government, too, needs a 
long period of peace during which it can proceed 
with the reconstruction of the country’s devastated 
areas, and the creation of a peacetime industry that 
could supply at least the minimum consumers’ re- 


Page Two —. 


quirements of the Russian people. 

From the point of view of some Americans and 
Britishers, the pacification of Europe is threatened 
by Russia’s attempt to foster the establishment, ip 
countries along its western border, of governments 
it describes as “friendly.” The Western powers are 
consequently pressing for the holding of what would 
be regarded by their standards as “free, unfettered 
elections” to determine the will of the peoples ig 
these countries, and for the admission of newspa 
correspondents who could accurately inform Britaip 
and the United States concerning the situation jp 
Eastern Europe and the Balkans, areas which Russia 
regards as essential for its security. From the point of 
view of the Russians, the pacification of Europe is 
threatened by the continued existence of régimes 
like that of Franco in Spain, and the non-removal, of 
return to power, in some of the countries of wester 
Europe of individuals or groups whom they describe 
as “Fascist.” Similarly, in Asia, some Americans and 
Britishers regard the Chinese Communists as an ob. 
stacle to the unification of China, which is essential 
for the successful prosecution of the war and the 
future stabilization of Asia, while the Russians see 
certain elements in the Chungking government of 
Chiang Kai-shek as inimical to such unification. 


When all is said and done, it is not the territorial, 
or financial, or trade issues that present the greatest 
difficulties at Potsdam. The most difficult issue is 
that of bringing to a conclusion the unfinished war 
that has been raging since the Bolshevik revolution 
of November 1917 concerning the political, social 
and economic shape the modern world is to take. 
It is as if continuous communication had to be estab- 
lished between two hitherto closed vessels of water, 
until the water in the two vessels can reach the same 
level. The problem is not insoluble, but it calls for 
more than territorial or financial adjustments. It 
calls for mental and emotional adjustments on the 
part of both of the Western powers, and of Russia. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FRANCO BENEFITS BY LACK OF UNITED OPPOSITION 


Since V-E Day, when General Francisco Franco 
lost his Axis support, the Caudillo has made repeated 
efforts to present to the world the picture of a re- 
formed Spain, in the hope of improving his coun- 
try’s relations with the Allies. Highlights of Franco’s 
recent attempts along these lines have been the 
termination of diplomatic relations with Japan on 
April 12, and the conclusion of two air agreements 
with the United States which concede transit rights 
to United States airlines reaching Spain and give the 
Air Transport Command permission to construct an 
airport for Allied occupation and relief supplies at 
Barajas, outside Madrid, which some Spaniards caus- 


tically label the American Gibraltar. In addition, 
Franco has made some moves toward easing present 
political restrictions within Spain. If the new “Bill of 
Rights,” approved on July 13, is typical of these re 
forms, however, these measures seem instead to con 


solidate the autocratic power of the State, while | 
setting certain limitations on its application which | 


can be lifted at will. The conclusion is inescapable 
that Franco’s “reform” program — including the 
waiver of political and civil charges resulting from 


the civil war, the restoration of some civil liberties | 


and freedom of the press, the promise of municipal 
and provincial elections, and so forth—is a temporaty 


attempt t 
side Spai 
the régim 
NEW 
concessio 
where ™ 
changes. 
Franco f 
that Gen 
jnate Sof 
ment. It 
sibly sur 
United | 
Franco 2 
the worl. 
the Span 
jntentior 
§panish 
the Fala 
The : 
tion in t 
of the n 
composi 
posedly 
cabinet 
support 
of any ¢ 
changes 
Germar 
cede so 
sentativ 
divided 
If th 
to the 
the mo 
| the Fal 
| gardins 
fruitles 
of Kir 
in 193 
er, the 


JUS 
T 


ricans and 
threatened 
shment, in 
vernments 
DOWerS are 
vhat would 
unfettered 
peoples in 
Newspaper 
rm Britaip 
tuation jp 
ich Russia 
1€ point of 
Europe is 
f régimes 
emoval, or 
of wester 
y describe 
ricans and 
as an ob 
S essential 
r and the 
ISSians see 
rment of 
cation. 


territorial, 
le greatest 
It issue is 
ished war 
revolution 


cal, social 
s to take. 
> be estab- 
of water, 
1 the same 


t calls for | 
‘ments. It | 
its on the 
of Russia. 


$s DEAN | 


addition, 
1g present 
w “Bill of 
- these re 
ad to con | 
ite, while 
on which } 
escapable | 
iding the 
ting from 
| liberties | 
municipal 


femporaty 


attempt to assuage public opinion within and out- 
side Spain rather than a genuine effort to liberalize 
the régime. 

NEW FALANGE RESHUFFLE. That the recent 
concessions do little to fulfil popular demand is no- 
where more apparent than in the recent cabinet 
changes. As the date of the ninth anniversary of the 
franco régime drew near, it was widely believed 
that General Franco would take this occasion to elim- 
inate some of the party’s influence in the govern- 
ment. It was thought that the régime could not pos- 
sibly survive the Axis downfall, especially after the 
United Nations at San Francisco had barred the 
Franco government, as Axis-supported, from joining 
the world security organization. In his July 17 speech, 
the Spanish leader, however, unexpectedly stated his 
intention of eventually restoring the “traditional 
Spanish monarchy” and reaffirmed the position of 
the Falange movement. 

The new cabinet, which supposedly will func- 
tion in the period leading up to the re-establishment 
of the monarchy, is still predominantly Falangist in 
composition. On the other hand, although five sup- 
posedly monarchist sympathizers were appointed to 
cabinet positions, none of them is said to have the 
support either of Don Juan, the heir-presumptive, or 
of any other monarchist groups. In short, the cabinet 
changes appear intended to remove notoriously pro- 
German Falangists, on the one hand, and to con- 
cede some participation in the government to repre- 
sentatives of the strongest conservative groups in 
divided Spain, on the other hand. 

If the Caudillo is indeed giving serious thought 
to the feasibility of establishing a royal successor, 
the monarchy would be only a puppet régime, with 
the Falange manipulating the strings. Speculation re- 
gatding a possible figurehead for such a régime is 
fruitless. Except in the case of Don Juan—third son 
of King Alfonso XIII who renounced the throne 
in 1931—-widely regarded as the legitimate pretend- 
er, the claims of other aspirants to the throne are 


Page Three 


JUST OUT— 
THE SAN FRANCISCO CONFERENCE 
WITH TEXT OF CHARTER 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


Order from 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION 
22 East 38th St., New York 16 


hopelessly involved. Don Juan himself on March 23 
issued a manifesto disapproving Franco’s internal 
and foreign policies and calling on him to relinquish 
wer in favor of constitutional monarchy. 
FRANCO’S POWERS OF SURVIVAL. If Franco 
is strong today, his strength lies mainly in the divi- 
sion among his opponents, both those who remained 
in Spain and those who live in exile. Only a few 
months ago, dissident Spaniards believed that the 
Generalissimo, with or without the Falange, could 
not outlast an Axis defeat, and that the transition to 
representative government could even be effected 
without further civil war. Now it appears that the al- 
ternative to his going may be a recurrence of that 
internecine strife which has so tragically punctuated 
the past century of Spanish history. The present ré- 
gime is well aware that the exiled leaders of the 
Left have been no more able to compose their differ- 
ences than they were during the period of the bel- 
ligerent Republican Government. It would not be 
surprising if, during their long period of exile, the 
former leaders find that, in their concern over the 
formalist structure of the government-in-exile, they 
have drifted away from their supporters in Spain. 
Added to this dispersion of leadership is the separ- 
atist tendency of the Catalan and Basque states 
which, however well-founded, further complicates 
the task of achieving unity within the opposition. 
~ Abroad, too, Franco’s position does not seem to 
have been undermined by the end of the European 
war. Although the United States and Britain have 
urged the Spanish leader to adopt more liberal 
domestic policies, neither of the great powers ap- 
pears inclined to force the issue of Franco’s future 
status. It has been Britain's traditional policy to cul- 
tivate Spain, which lies athwart the Atlantic ap- 
proaches to the Mediterranean, and its need for 
Spanish iron ore has strengthened this close relation- 
ship. While United States trade with Spain is of little 
significance, this country is interested in Spain as an 
important entry point for its burgeoning air traffic 
with Europe and, in general, seems willing to follow 
British policy with regard to that country. As its vote 
at San Francisco on the question of Spain’s admission 
to the United Nations demonstrated, the United 
States does not approve of Franco’s foreign policy; 
yet it considers that the question whether Franco is to 
stay or go is purely a domestic problem, to be de- 
cided by the Spanish people themselves, with the 
least possible amount of civil disorder. 
O.LivE HOLMES 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 41, Jury 27, 


1945. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dornotmy F. Lurr, Secretary; Vara Micue tes Daan, Aditor. Eatered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


one month for change of address on membership pwhlications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


EB 


Predaced under umen conditions and comspesed and printed by union labor. 


ag PSS eS 


eee ee a 
Se SSeS 


mugen = ere 


Se aS aie 


arise ee 


i) 


| 
{ 


Se ee 


” _ aaa 
~ _-. = - a 


1918— 


Washington News Letter 


UNRRA CRISIS REVEALS NEED TO UNIFY RELIEF AGENCIES 


Confronted with the possibility of widespread 
starvation in Europe during the coming winter, the 
United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Adminis- 
tration at this critical moment lacks the money, sup- 
plies and authority it requires in order to give relief 
to the war-battered populations of Europe. Shipping 
is now available, but UNRRA more than once has 
been unable to obtain the goods needed to fill the 
holds of vessels bound for the eastern European area, 
where it is directly responsible for relief. A well- 
intentioned regulation which provides that UNRRA 
should hand over the distribution of supplies to local 
political agencies has resulted, in Greece at least, in 
distribution based on favoritism rather than need. 
Moreover, UNRRA has no food resources of its own. 
It can only beg its member countries to contribute 
the commodities for which Europe is calling. As a 
result, the problem of relief needs abroad is certain 
to confront Americans with a difficult decision. 
UNRRA Director General Herbert H. Lehman, 
speaking in Rome on July 10, suggested that full 
satisfaction of the relief program “may cause tighten- 
ing of belts in the United States,” but on the same 
day the new Secretary of Agriculture, Clinton P. 
Anderson, said that the United States cannot feed 
the world. 

CONFUSION OF RELIEF AGENCIES. At the 
present time UNRRA competes for materials with 
two other agencies that are providing relief abroad— 
the Army and the Foreign Economic Administration. 
UNRRA has relief jurisdiction over only six south- 
ern and Eastern European countries — Albania, 
Czechoslovakia, Greece, Italy, Yugoslavia and Po- 
land. FEA, through lend-lease, is supplying relief to 
Britain, the Soviet Union, France, Belgium, the 
Netherlands, Norway, Australia and China, while 
the Army Civil Affairs Division has charge of relief 
in Germany, Austria and the United States opera- 
tional areas in the Far East. A vital need is central- 
ization of relief work either by some sort of consol- 
idation of the three undertakings, as suggested by 
Representative Everett M. Dirksen, Republican of 
Illinois, in hearings of the House Appropriations 
Committee on June 14; or by the creation of a super- 
relief council that can give authoritative orders to 
governments to cooperate with UNRRA on a broader 
scale than present standards make possible, as sug- 
gested by Sir Arthur Salter, former UNRRA deputy 
director, in a letter to the London Times on April 16. 


FOR VICTORY °* 


BUY UNITED 


The appropriations assigned to UNRRA are small 
compared with the amounts allotted the lend-lease 
relief programs. Its authorized budget is. $2,500,000. 
000, a sum it has not yet received in full. The United 
States is pledged to contribute more than any other 
single country—$1,350,000,000, of which $793,000, 
000 has been made available—as compared with te- 
lief estimates totaling $913,000,000 for the six coun- 
tries of eastern and southeastern Europe for the sec. 
ond half of 1945. In addition, UNRRA has the costly 


tasks of caring for and directing homeward displaced | 


persons in Europe, and of operating refugee camps 
in North Africa. 

By contrast, FEA during the fiscal year that began 
on July 1 plans to lend-lease $750,000,000 worth of 
food for Britain and $500,000,000 for the Soviet 
Union (Asiatic areas), as well as funds for liber 
ated western European countries and areas of the 
Pacific. The needs of western Europe are obviously 
great. British rations have gone down since V-E Day, 
and the London housewife can now obtain only one 
ounce of fat a week for frying purposes. The caloric 
consumption in France today is but 2,150, Belgium 
1,795, Holland 1,650, and Norway 1,115. Mean- 
while, severe droughts have seriously reduced wheat 
supplies in French North Africa, and especially in 
Australia. Nor is food the only relief problem in 
Europe, ranking in order of gravity behirid coal, 
transportation, housing and communications. 

UNRRA LONDON CONFERENCE. The world 
will have an opportunity to reconsider the whole 
problem of relief in August, when UNRRA holds its 
third general conference in London; the first was in 
Atlantic City in November 1943 and the second in 
Montreal in September 1944. To any suggestion 
made in London for consolidation of relief, the 
objection may be raised that the functions of 
UNRRA, lend-lease and the Army are distinct—that 
the first distributes relief gifts to countries unable to 
finance their own program, the second supports coun- 
tries where civil order is necessary for American re- 
deployment and which are assisting, or will assist, us 
in the Pacific, and the third is administering a bare 
subsistence program as an integral part of military 
operations, either combat or occupation. Yet in es- 
sence all three perform the same task. All three feed, 
clothe and medicate men, women and children. They 
can do it better in unity than in competition. 

BLA BOLLES 


STATES WAR BONDS 


Ee 
Yo. X X11 
—————— 


HE re 
July 2 
yhelmin; 
wice bef 
men have 
before hz 
in Parlias 
the vote! 
srvative 
governm 
In doing 
dynamic 
though < 
populari 
Attlee, | 
take his 
ore of 
the post 
ame L¢ 
leader 
Hugh D 
lor of tl 
designat 
LAB 
tion wit 
cussions 
August 
Parliam 
will be 
the Kin 
terms tl 
may el: 
it the 
pursue, 
questio 
party 


Which 
adeq ua 


