US 


‘ork, 


hose 
veral 
ripts 


not 
after 


pear 


rial. 


ining 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Enrered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under che act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Vot. XV, No. 15 


FEBRUARY 7, 1936 


* bad STUDENTS bd s 
in high schools or colleges 
JOIN THE F. P. A. 
Our special membership offer for second semester 
60 cents 
will bring you 
Foreign Policy Bulletin—each week, February 1-June 1 


Headline Book, Dictatorship 
Special admittance to F. P. A. Discussions 


9 
oo Yih 
F2B -38 WS: 
Periodical Division, 
Library of Congress, 
Yas! if L Ne D. Se 


-_— 


CLOUDS ON THE CENTRAL AMERICAN 


HORIZON 


HREATS of civil strife have recently agitated 
both Honduras and Nicaragua. In Honduras 
the ambition of President Tiburcio Carias to ex- 
tend his term of office has promoted discord, while 
in Nicaragua apprehensions have been stirred by 
the Presidential candidacy of General Anastasio 
Somoza, commander of the National Guard. 
President Carias, elected in October 1932 for a 
four-year term, seeks to nullify a constitutional 
provision against re-election. Although the pres- 
ent constitution prescribes that amendment can 
be effected only by a two-thirds majority in two 
successive legislatures, Congress ordered elections 
to be held on January 26 for a constitutional con- 
vention. These resulted in the choice “without 
opposition” of 59 Nationalists, all members of 
the President’s party. The convention is to meet 
on March 8. Should revision include the Agrarian 
Law, which is attached to the constitution, the 
way would be opened for expansion of banana 
production by the United Fruit Company along 
the republic’s eastern littoral, where existing 
legislation prohibits sale of land to the company. 
Although Honduras has enjoyed a substantial 
measure of peace in recent years—the elections 
of 1928 and 1932 were free and fair—the Presi- 
dent’s re-election maneuvers have led to dissen- 
sion. Carias’ program is combated both by the 
opposition Liberals and by a faction in his own 
party. But protest has been met by repression. 
Newspapers have been silenced and congressmen 
expelled from the country. Prominent in the op- 
position are two former Presidents—Miguel Paz 
Barahona and Vicente Mejia Colindres. The for- 
mer has resigned his post of Minister in Wash- 
ington; the latter has taken refuge in Costa Rica. 


Nicaraguan elections will be held in November 
of this year to choose the successor of Dr. Juan 
B. Sacasa, who has governed the republic since 


January 1933, when the military intervention of 
the United States came to an end. On the with- 


drawal of the marines the National Guard, which 
they had trained, was entrusted to General So- 
moza, a nephew by marriage of President Sacasa. 
When a year later General Sandino was seized by 
Guard members and shot in cold blood—despite 
a safe-conduct from President Sacasa—General 
Somoza acknowledged responsibility for the act. 

Under the terms of the Nicaraguan constitu- 
tion, Somoza is barred from the Presidency by 
his relationship to the President as well as by his 
position in the National Guard. When these facts 
were pointed out by Dr. Sacasa in a newspaper 
interview of January 11, Somoza’s partisans de- 
clared that his candidacy represented “the popu- 
lar will,” which should prevail over the dead hand 
of the law. The Guard chieftain is backed in his 
campaign by former President Moncada and by a 
considerable portion of the Liberal party. He 
also claims the support of General Emiliano 
Chamorro, the dominant figure in the Conserva- 
tive party. Vice-President Rodolfo Espinosa, a 
rival for the Liberal nomination, has threatened 
civil war if “General Somoza persists in a can- 
didacy which is legally impossible.” 

Somoza’s control of the National Guard has 
greatly increased his political strength. During 
the United States intervention, Guard officers en- 
joyed a certain extraterritorial status; the Guard 
regulations were admittedly contrary to the Nic- 
araguan constitution. As a result of this heri- 
tage from American interference, the Guard has 
continued in practice to be a state within the state, 
its commander exercising more actual power than 
the President of the republic. Somoza’s rivals 
charge that Guard members are active in the 
present campaign, favoring their commander at 
the expense of other candidates. A number of 
opposition journalists have been attacked. 

Somoza’s partisans demand that his candidacy 
be legalized by a complete revision of the repub- 
lic’s basic law. But constitutional amendment is 
as difficult in Nicaragua as in Honduras. 


Should General Somoza decide to override con- 
stitutional prohibitions by the strength of the 
Guard, that product of United States intervention 
will prove an effective instrument for the estab- 
lishment of dictatorship, as has been the case in 
the Dominican Republic. 

Two other Central American countries — 
Guatemala and Salvador—are already under 
military dictatorships. In Salvador General Mar- 
tinez retired from the Presidency in 1934 for a 
period sufficiently long to permit his re-election 
in accordance with constitutional norms. In 
Guatemala a constitutional amendment of July 11, 
1935 extended General Ubico’s term from 1937 
to 1943. 

In Costa Rica, whose maintenance of demo- 
cratic institutions contrasts sharply with the 
practice of neighboring states, Presidential elec- 
tions are scheduled for February 9. The two lead- 
ing candidates are both civilians—Leén Cortés, 
Minister of Public Works, and Octavio Beeche, 
formerly Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. 
The Communists, who recently have developed 
considerable strength in Costa Rica, are expected 
to poll between 10 and 15 per cent of the total vote. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


POLITICAL DEADLOCK IN GREECE 


The death on January 31 of Marshal Kondylis, 
Greece’s “king-maker,” has further confused the 
political situation created by the National As- 
sembly elections of January 26, in which the lib- 
eral Venizelist party obtained 144 out of 300 
seats. The Venizelists—who had previously sup- 
ported the republic and fought restoration of 
George II—altered their attitude following the 
King’s return on November 25, after Venizelos, 
an exile in Paris, had declared that he opposed 
dictatorship but not constitutional monarchy. 
George II also won republican sympathies by his 
amnesty decree of December 1, pardoning 758 
Venizelists imprisoned as a result of the anti- 
monarchist revolt of March 1935,' and annulling 
sentences against 400 exiles, including Venizelos, 
who is now free to return to Greece. The amnesty 
decree was bitterly contested by Kondylis and 
his military followers, who feared reinstatement 
of Venizelist officers, which would have displaced 
Kondylis appointees. The Kondylis forces, how- 
ever, obtained no satisfaction from the neutral 
Demerdjis cabinet, formed on November 30 
chiefly for the purpose of effecting political recon- 
ciliation and carrying out the fairest and most 
unhampered elections in recent Greek history. 

In these elections the Venizelists won a striking 


1. ‘“Civil Strife in Greece,"’ Foreign Policy Balletin, March 8, 1935. 


Page Two a 


victory, but failed to secure a majority in the Na. 
tional Assembly, where they are deadlocked with 
141 anti-Venizelists, divided intotwomain factions: 
the moderate wing of the Popular party, led by 
former Premier Tsaldaris; and the extreme wing 
headed before his death by the ex-Venizelist 
Kondylis, who favored dictatorial, not constitu. 
tional, monarchy. The balance of power between 
the two principal parties is held by fifteen Com. 
munists, the largest group ever elected to the 
Assembly. It was expected at first that Themis. 
tocles Sophoulis, leader of the Venizelists in the 
absence of the “grand old man” of Greece, would 
be invited by the King to form a coalition govern- 
ment with the support of the Tsaldarists. M. 
Tsaldaris, who seemed to favor such a coalition, 
joined the Kondylists on January 31 in opposing 
Venizelos’ return and reinstatement of Venizelist 
officers. Yet the anti-Venizelists are too divided 
among themselves to form a coalition cabinet. 
Nor is Sophoulis anxious to accept the Communist 
offer of cooperation, fearing such a move might 
provoke widespread opposition in the country. 
As a result of this deadlock the Demerdjis cab- 
inet, which had handed in its resignation on 
January 29, has been asked by the King to remain 
in office, possibly until the National Assembly 
convenes on March 12. 


Greece’s internal situation is complicated by a 
conflict on foreign policy. King George appar- 
ently wishes to model his government on that of 
Britain, and to strengthen the ties between the 
two countries. Greece has already promised that 
it will give Britain naval assistance in case the 
British fleet is attacked by Italy as a result of 
League sanctions.? It has been reported that, in 
return for this support, Britain might cede to 
Greece the island of Cyprus which it occupied in 
1878, and assist Athens in recovering the Dodec- 
anese Islands, largely inhabited by Greeks, which 
Italy wrested from Turkey in 1912. The King’s 
pro-British policy is opposed on the one hand by 
Venizelos, who has been credited with pro-Italian 
sympathies, and on the other by the followers of 
Kondylis, at one time regarded as an admirer of 


Mussolini. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


2. ‘“‘Iealy Advwances—League Reconnoiters,’’ ibid., January 31, 1936. 


Powerful America, by Eugene Young. New York, Stokes, 
1936. $3.00 
A plea for a Pax Americana. 


Federal States and Labor Treaties, by William Lonsdale 
Tayler. New York, 405 W. 117th St., the author, 1935. 
$2.00 cloth; $1.00 paper. 

Timely and valuable in view of membership of the 

United States in the International Labor Office. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 15, Fesruary 7, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOnD Lesttg BugLt, President; EstHern G. Ocoen, Secretary; Vera Micuetes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


An 


