tk 


— 


m be 
re Was 
avoid 
far as 


a COM: 
patent 
of the 
ion of 
| other 
lously 
ure of 
1€ dis. 
11 the 
ich all 
TOCess 
| Com- 
yy Mr. 
rocess 
under 
ark on 
ion of 
patents 
‘arben- 
olders. 
ite the 


IGER 


nal and 


account 


Wu and 
3, 1940. 


rnment, 
n China 
ie west 


ll. New 


. of the 
> thinks 
future. 


National 
F. Last, 
Jew York, 


* William w, pres Entered as 2nd class matter 


De 


5 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXI, No. 25 


Aprit 10, 1942 


—" 


NATIONALIST SENTIMENT OBSTRUCTS HITLER'S “NEW ORDER” 


eames both the Axis powers and the United 
Nations stepped up the pace of air warfare in 
Furope and Asia, growing activity was reported 
from the “‘silent’ front of Europe’s conquered 
countries, which may play an increasingly important 
part as German forces are drawn off to the Russian 
theatre of war. News from Berne on April 3 indi- 
cated that the efforts of M. Laval, former Vice 
Premier and Foreign Minister in the cabinet of Mar- 
shal Pétain, to regain a post in the Vichy govern- 
ment and resume his policy of “collaboration” with 
Hitler had ended in failure. M. Laval’s own state- 
ment, issued on April 2 in the face of complete si- 
lence on the part of the Marshal, gave the impres- 
sion of bitterness and frustration. The Marshal's 
teluctance to comply with his former Minister's 
terms has been attributed by Laval supporters to the 
influence of the United States, which only ten days 
before announced that it had reached an agree- 
ment with Vichy on outstanding questions, and had 
resumed shipments to North Africa. 

The hope of the State Department that, by main- 
taining relations with Vichy, it would prevent all-out 
Nazi domination of France, is about to be subjected 
to a decisive test. The decision has been hastened 
not only by fresh tension in France itself, but also 
by the activities of General de Gaulle, leader of 
the Free French movement. On April 1, at a luncheon 
of the British National Defense Committee, Gen- 
eral de Gaulle demanded recognition by the “united 


democracies” that the real France is the France of 


London, and not of Vichy. He made no specific 
teference to any country, but his speech was clearly 
directed at the United States, since Britain has rec- 
ognized de Gaulle’s National Committee, and has 
no diplomatic relations with Marshal Pétain. 

U.S. RECOGNIZES FRENCH IN AFRICA. 
The United States, which maintains relations with 
Vichy France, has at the same time adopted the policy 


of recognizing local Free French authorities which 
display ‘‘manifest effectiveness” in protecting their 
territories ‘from domination and control by the 
common enemy.” Acting on this policy Washington, 
on March 2, recognized the Free French as being in 
effective control of France’s island colonies in the 
Pacific—notably New Caledonia—and French forces 
in these colonies have been placed under the com- 
mand of General MacArthur. On April 4 the United 
States similarly recognized Free French control over 
the Cameroons and French Equatorial Africa, and 
announced that an American consulate general would 
be established at Brazzaville, capital of French 
Equatorial Africa. To make confusion worse con- 
founded—while Britain recognizes de Gaulle’s Na- 
tional Committee, Canada, a British Dominion with 
a large population of French origin, recognizes the 
Vichy government, and receives an envoy from Mar- 
shal Pétain. All these tergiversations have aroused 
the indignation of the Free French, who demand 
clarification of their status as an ally of Britain and 
the United States. 

Their demands assume all the greater importance 
because, meanwhile, the passage of time and the 
cooling of war emotions have also clarified the atti- 
tude of many people in Vichy France. The Riom 
trials, originally designed to relieve the French na- 
tion of responsibility for the war by fixing war guilt 
on Daladier, Blum and other leaders of the Popu- 
lar Front, were unexpectedly transformed into an 
absorbing discussion between the judges and the 
defendants as to why France was not adequately 
prepared for war with the Reich. Enough has now 
been revealed to indicate that the obsolete methods 
of the French High Command, the non-cooperation 
of French industrialists, and the pacifist preachings 
of some French intellectuals were at least as re- 
sponsible for France’s military unpreparedness as 
the Popular Front leaders. 


TUG OF WAR IN BALKANS. The situation in 
France reveals one of Hitler’s basic difficulties in 
dealing with conquered countries. From the begin- 
ning, the Nazis appear to have been primarily con- 
cerned with the economic exploitation of these coun- 
tries for the benefit of the German war machine. In 
each of the occupied territories they had hoped they 
would find men who, for one reason or another, 
would be ready for a policy of collaboration, and 
that the transition to the ‘‘new order’’ would thus 
be effected with a minimum of economic disturb- 
ance. So far, this has not by any means proved to 
be the case, «ven in countries that stand to benefit 
by German victory—notably Hungary and Bulgaria. 
The centuries-old territorial conflicts between Hun- 
gary and Rumania, on the one hand, Rumania and 
Bulgaria on the other, have recently been envenomed 
by mutual denunciations, which the Nazis have not 
yet succeeded in suppressing; and Berlin’s demands 
for additional troops from Hungary, Rumania and 
Bulgaria for the Russian front have been countered 
in all three countries by territorial claims at one an- 
other's expense. 


Following reports that Dr. Ladislaus de Bardossy, 
Hungarian Premier, had attempted suicide rather 
than yield to Hitler’s demands for troops, Nicholas 
von Kallay, former Minister of Agriculture, formed a 
new cabinet on March 10. This change, however, did 
not improve Hungary's relations with Berlin. On 
April 2, in a message to the Hungarian army, Re- 
gent Nicholas Horthy (who in the near future is to 
be succeeded by his son) painted a dark picture of 
Russia’s guerrilla warfare and Hungary's unpre- 


AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY AND INTERNATIONAL PATENT AGREEMENTS 


The controversy between Assistant Attorney Gen- 
eral Arnold and the Standard Oil Company of New 
Jersey, centering on the corporation’s pre-war col- 
laboration with the Nazi-controlled super-trust I. G. 
Farbenindustrie, has entered a new phase. 

The original charge made by Mr. Arnold before 
the Truman Committee of the Senate was that an 
“illegal conspiracy’ aiming at the “suppression of 
independent experimentation, production and dis- 
tribution’’ of synthetic rubber had existed between 
the Standard Oil Company and the German trust. 
This charge was denied on April 1 by W. S. Farish, 
president of Standard Oil, who declared that his 
company had given extensive information on its 
butyl process to the Army and Navy Munitions 
Board as early as January 1939. According to Mr. 
Farish, the Administration refused in 1940 a com- 
pany offer to build synthetic rubber factories with 
government financial assistance. 

A new issue was injected into the controversy on 
April 3, when two high government officials de- 


— Page Two 


—— 


paredness to fight Russia, in terms of both men apj 
material. Some observers believe that even if Hyp 
gary did have larger forces at its disposal, it woulj 
prefer to keep them at home for possible use againg 
Rumania, where anti-Hungarian sentiment is in th 
ascendant. 

Rumania’s military dictator, General Antonesq, 
had hoped that, by sending King Carol into exile jy 
1940 and admitting members of the pro-Fascist, anti 
Semitic, nationalist Iron Guard into his cabinet, he 
would prevent the establishment of a German pro 
tectorate over Rumania and possibly recover som 
of the territory that Carol had been forced to sup 
render to Hungary and Bulgaria. The report lay 
week-end that Rumania, on March 10, had cop. 
cluded an agreement with Slovakia and Croatia, with 
the blessing of the Chetnik guerrilla warriors of 
Yugoslavia, against Hungarian expansion may ip 
dicate that General Antonescu has lost hope of Nazj 
aid for his plans. Earlier it had been reported tha 
Bulgaria and Hungary, in defiance of Hitlet’s wishes 
had signed an agreement on March 23 pledging 
themselves not to yield the territories they had te 
covered from Rumania in 1940. Meanwhile, German 
pressure on King Boris of Bulgaria to declare war on 
Russia has created serious tension in that country, 
many of whose people are pro-Russian. Following 
Boris’s return from a visit to Berchtesgaden, the Sofia 
Parliament was adjourned until October. Like othe 
conquerors in Europe’s history, Hitler is discovering 
that it is easier to win military victories than to 
pacify conquered peoples who retain national aspira 


tions and ambitions. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


clared before the Truman Committee that Standard 
had refused to halt sales of aviation gasoline to two 
Axis-controlled air lines operating in South Ameria 
until the State Department threatened to blacklist 
the Brazilian subsidiary of Standard Oil which solé 
the gasoline to the Axis lines. Standard Oil's « 


sponse was a press statement by Mr. Farish to the) 


effect that no deliveries had been made except 
in conformity with the policy of the State Depart 
ment. Standard Oil, its president asserted, had a¢ 


Will Japan’s conquests in Asia solve her raw ma- 
terials problem, or will the scorched-earth policy 
and guerrilla warfare prevent this solution? Read: 


Japan as an Economic Power 
by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25c 


April 1 issue of FOREIGN Poticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 


Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


—— 


— 


tually v 
by the 
break it 


$0 as SC 


DILE 
ing of | 
mittee h 
more cl 

ratio 
terest. | 
can foll 
strength 
enter in 
consent 
on the 
sult W 
and, ev: 
think o 
remune 
sibilitie: 
conside 
their de 
be pro 
20 cent 
though 
agreem 
ducers, 
seemed 
the ma 
hesitate 
a prodt 
placed 
plants 


Japa: 
cate th: 
the dri 
throwi1 
and th 
taches 
has be; 
recent] 
Malay: 
Islands 
connec 
States. 

By « 
gain cc 
and so 
industt 
order” 
their t 
the pe 
territo 
depriv 


—> 


en and 
f Hun. 
would 
a gaing 
in the 


onescy, 
xile ip 
st, anti. 
net, he 
iN pro. 
r some 
to sur. 
rt last 
d con 
a, with 
iors of 
lay in- 
yf Nazi 
od that 
wishes, 
edging 
rad te 
serman 
war On 
ountry, 
lowing 
1e Sofia 
e other 
overing 
han to 
aspita 
YEAN 


ENTS 


andard 
to two 
\merica 
lacklist 
ch sold 
il’s re 
to the 
except 
Depart 
had ac 
me 
olicy 


Read: 


r 


nth. 


—_ 
— 


tually wished to be placed under some compulsion 
by the State Department in order to be able to 
break its relations with the Axis companies. It did 
so as soon as the government issued its threat. 


DILEMMA OF U.S. CORPORATIONS. The air- 
ing of Mr. Arnold’s charges in the Truman Com- 
mittee has helped the American people to understand 
more clearly the difficulties confronting private cor- 

rations in matters that involve broad national in- 
terest. Nazi-controlied trusts like the I. G. Farben 
can follow only one course: they are compelled to 
strengthen Germany’s military power. They cannot 
enter into any international agreement without the 
consent of their government. American corporations, 
on the other hand, are not legally obliged to con- 
sult Washington about their foreign arrangements 
and, even if they feel inclined to do so, they cannot 
think only in terms of war, but must also consider 
remunerative prices and post-war production pos- 
sibilities. In the last analysis, purely commercial 
considerations must play a paramount part in 
their decisions. Synthetic rubber, for instance, could 
be produced in large quantities at a cost of 
20 cents a pound or less. But natural rubber, al- 
though sold recently at about 15 cents, due to 
agreements between the Dutch and British pro- 
ducers, could be sold for 5 cents a pound if it 
seemed desirable to drive artificial rubber out of 
the market. Naturally, therefore, private companies 
hesitate to invest large sums in the manufacture of 
a product which after the war might easily be dis- 
placed by competition. The government-controlled 
plants of the Axis, working exclusively for war 


Page Three 


l 


needs, are not confronted with such decisions. 
Questions of competition and prices might also 
have been at the core of the problem of magnesium 
production mentioned in last week’s Bulletin. (Due 
to an unfortunate mistake in that issue, the esti- 
mated present German production of magnesium 
was given as 100 million instead of 100 thousand 
tons.) The Dow Chemical Company, which first de- 
veloped production of magnesium in the United 
States, originally had difficulty in finding a market 
for this product, because of the reluctance of Army 
and Navy men to use the lighter metal. This reluc- 
tance, however, might have been due in part to the 
high price fixed by the group which had pooled the 
fabricating patents — the Aluminum Company of 
America, Dow, and I. G. Farben. Last year an in- 
dependent, government-financed plant was estab- 
lished in California to produce cheaper magnesium. 
THE REAL ISSUE. It is evident that the Truman 
Committee study will be of real service to the na- 
tion. The basic issue which emerges from the mass 
of testimony may be stated in these terms: Is it 
possible for private groups in the United States, op- 
erating, quite legitimately, on the profit motive, to 
enter into agreements with corresponding industries 
in totalitarian states without endangering the inter- 
ests of this country? If the answer to this question 
is in the negative, steps must be taken to bring the 
foreign policy of all American corporations into 
harmony with that of the nation. As the investiga- 
tion demonstrates, such steps can be effective only 
if they include government registration and approval 


of international patent agreements. E. S. HEDIGER 


U.S. FACES NEW RAW MATERIAL PROBLEMS 


Japanese moves in Southeast Asia appear to indi- 
cate that Tokyo has abandoned, at least temporarily, 
the drive on Australia from the East Indies and is 
throwing its main forces into the battle for Burma 
and the Bay of Bengal. Particular significance at- 
taches to the activities of the Japanese Navy, which 
has begun harassing the eastern coast of India from 
recently acquired bases at Singapore and Penang in 
Malaya, Rangoon in Burma, and the Andaman 
Islands. It may also interrupt the main supply routes 
connecting India with Australia and the United 
States. 

By driving farther westward in Asia, the Japanese 
gain control over additional sources of raw materials 
and some production facilities to bolster the empire’s 
industrial resources. They gain converts for the “new 
order” in Asia, especially among the Burmese, and 
their threats of future advances cause unrest among 
the peoples of Asia still living in British-controlled 
territories. Moreover, they are quietly but effectively 
depriving the United Nations of sources of materials 


vital for their own war effort. A nation like the United 
States, rich in most of the minerals and agricultural 
products needed to sustain a large industrial system, 
finds it difficult to understand the significance of a 
blockade. By now, however, it should be apparent 
that the Axis has to some extent turned the tables 
on the Allies and is applying an economic blockade 
against us: the “have-not’’ countries are becoming 
the “haves.” 

ASIA’S RAW MATERIALS. In this light, the 
latest Japanese moves have a direct bearing on the 
world-wide struggle for raw materials. By pushing 
north into Burma, Tokyo expects to sever the routes 
to Free China, thereby not only cutting off the sup- 
ply of arms to the Chinese but also depriving the 
United States of commodities designated by the 
Army and Navy Munitions board as strategic or 
critical in nature. As late as 1940, the United States 
received 950 tons of tungsten ore (metal content) 
or over 33 per cent of its total imports from China. 
Tungsten is an essential element in the manufacture 


of high-speed tool steels, armor plate, and armor 
piercing projectiles. In the same year, China sent us 
14.5 per cent of our silk imports—except for Japan, 
the only important source of the fiber which is used 
in making parachutes and powder bags for heavy 
guns. Almost 95 per cent of our imports of tung 
oil, a fast-drying constituent of paints, came from 
China; fortunately substitutes are available, although 
at a higher price. 


Interruption of shipping from the Far East has 
caused serious dislocations in some of our war in- 
dustries, especially in products imported from India. 
That country is the source of 90 per cent of our 
supply of high-grade mica films and splittings, 
which are vital for the manufacture of electrical 
equipment, including motors, radio tubes and con- 
densers, and spark plugs. There are few sources of 
fine mica other than India, and outside that country 
there are very limited numbers of skilled workmen 
who can process the raw mica as it comes from the 
earth. India provided the United States with 7.4 per 
cent of its manganese imports and 5.5 per cent of 
its chrome ore imports in 1940. The shortage of 
both of these steel-alloying minerals is causing seri- 
ous concern in Washington for, as consumption in 
steel-making rises, the sources of supply have be- 
come fewer and more distant. Steps have recently 
been taken to exploit low-grade ores in the western 
part of this country and in other parts of the West- 
ern Hemisphere, but since substantial tities of 
the minerals will not become available for some 
time, we are still dependent on foreign supplies. In 


THE F.P.A. 


Mission to Moscow, by Joseph E. Davies. New York, Simon 

and Schuster, 1942. $3.00 

The United States Ambassador to the U.S.S.R. from 
1936 to 1938, who remains a firm believer in the system of 
private enterprise, gives a sympathetic portrayal of Rus- 
sia, with special emphasis on its industrial development 
and military preparations. The value of the book is en- 
hanced by the inclusion of many of Mr. Davies’ confidential 
dispatches to the State Department, which under ordinary 
circumstances would not have been published for a number 
of years. 


Nazi Europe and World Trade, by Cleona Lewis, assisted 
by J. C. McClelland. Washington, Brookings, 1941. $2.00 
Through a careful statistical study of international 

trade in the pre-war years, the authors conclude that al- 

though the Nazis now dominate most of continental Eu- 
rope (excluding Russia in the calculations), they still lack 
many essential raw materials and foodstuffs. 


A Faith to Fight For, by John Strachey. New York, Ran- 
dom House, 1941. $1.75 
A noted Leftist discovers the need for a passionate be- 
lief of sorts if England is really to defeat Nazism. 


Page Four 


| 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: WHAT INDIA MEANS 
TO THE ALLIES 
Speaker: David H. Popper 
Date: Sunday, April 12 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 


For station, please consult your local news paper 


the field of vegetable fibers, the United States 
already lost its principal source of Manila hemp j 
the Philippines. India has produced some hemp anj 
about 98 per cent of the world’s output of jute, used 
in strong bags and other wrappings. Curtailment of 
our imports of jute would cause further difficultie 
in the war effort. 


OFFENSIVE REQUIRED. If the Axis were tp 
succeed in cutting off the traffic between India ané 
the United States, after having caused serio 
shortages in rubber, tin and other products formerly 
obtained from the East Indies and Malaya, the 
could hamper the rapid expansion of our industrig 
producing essential machines and supplies of war 
Even if the Axis does not obtain immediate contrd 
over the resources of India and China, they ca 
seriously embarrass the United Nations’ shipping 
position by making our vessels, already overtaxed 
travel over longer and more devious routes. There 
is thus an additional reason for the Allies to take 
the offensive as soon as possible, in order to proted 
their remaining resources and at least hold shipping 
lanes to their present lengths. 


Louts E. FRECHTLING 


BOOKSHELF 


Charles de Gaulle, by Phillipe Barrés. New York, Double 
day, Doran, 1941. $2.00 
The best account yet to appear of de Gaulle and th 
Free French movement. 


Free Yugoslavia Calling, by Svetislav-Sveta Petroviteh 
Translated and edited by J. C. Peters. New York, Grey 
stone, 1941. $3.00 
An interpretative review of Nazi oppression and the 

spirit of revolt in Czechoslovakia, Poland and Yugoslavia 


European Colonial Expansion Since 1871, by Mary & 
Townsend with the collaboration of Cyrus H. Peake 
Philadelphia, Lippincott, 1941. $4.00 
Designed as a college text, this is a very useful one 

volume survey of European imperialism in Africa aml 

Asia from 1871 to the present war. It is packed with it 

formation and illustrated with many maps. 


The Kremlin and the People, by Walter Duranty. Ne 
York, Reynal and Hitchcock, 1941. $2.00 
A well-known reporter tries to clarify the Russia 
“enigma,” and expresses confidence in Russia’s power # 
resist. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 25, Aprit 10, 1942. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Frank Ross McCoy, President; Witutam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lam 


— 


National 


Secretary; Vera MicuHeres Dean, Editor; Davw H. Poppsgr, Associate Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Ago. 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


WwW" 
re 
Delhi, | 
the Péta 
the vas 
the Brit 
by obse 
ment di 
Middle 
ward th 
driving 
The » 
taining 
springb 
tensity | 
by light 
man mi 
Crete— 
Nazi of 
Fast. It 
of the § 
most a 
telative 
proceed 
DEC 
develop 
the nec 
The us 
after P 
that th 
éspecia. 
the Pac 
country 
tors co 
sympat! 
Chines. 
strategi 
trolled 
of Hay 


