ering 


thus 


ining | 


rmaf- 
x 

it Car: 
in fe 
ace— 
Latin 
urs of 
sphere 
Jnited 
arma- 
revent 
1erica. 
Jnited 
ester 
erman 
them 


OD 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XIX, No. 37 Juty 5, 1940 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Dr, Willian Y. Pi sh 


S20p 
just Published * University of wraps, a 
—— * S400l fan Library 
AMERICA’S DILEMMA IN THE FAR EAST| = “"" Arbor, tien, 5 
by T. A. BISSON 
25¢ 
July 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 
JAPAN MOVES TOWARD DOMINANCE IN ASIA 


anal 


the last fortnight, Japan has taken a series of 
important steps toward establishing its hegemony 
in the Far East. From Tientsin to Indo-China, the 
advance has been marked by a daily succession of 
larger or smaller gains wrested from the Western 
powers. Tokyo’s broader aim of dominance in East 
Asia, including Indo-China and the Netherlands 
Indies, was reiterated in a radio address of Foreign 
Minister Hachiro Arita on June 29. Mr. Arita en- 
visaged a new world order in which one dominant 
military power would control each of the earth’s 
great regions; declared that East Asia and the 
islands in the South Seas formed a closely related 
group of territories; and clearly intimated that Japan 
would serve as the “‘stabilizing force” to bring about 
the unity of all the satellite states of that area. In- 
directly, the statement was intended as a “hands 
off” warning to the West. 


THE OUTLOOK IN THE FAR EAST. As the 
effective strength of the Western powers in the Far 
Fast declines, Japan is seizing every opportunity to 
extend its control and influence. The Western posi- 
tions in the concession areas at Shanghai and Tientsin 
are being increasingly undermined, and continued 
maintenance of French rule over Indo-China and 
British control of Hongkong are both threatened. 
Within Japan successful organization of a totali- 
tarian party, headed by Prince Konoye, may well 
lead to the overthrow of the present Cabinet and its 
replacement by a new government in which the 
more extreme military-fascist groups will become 
dominant. Under these circumstances Japan’s rap- 
prochement with Germany and Italy, now being 
fostered by a good-will mission under Naotake Sato, 
may take the form of a close alliance. At this criti- 
cal moment, the United States fleet remains the most 
powerful single restraining influence on the Japanese. 
On June 24 it had suddenly left Hawaii under 
secret orders, but six days later it returned to its 


Hawaiian base after what was termed “a routine 
training exercise.” 


TIENTSIN AND SHANGHAI. After prolonged 
Anglo-Japanese negotiations an agreement on dis- 
puted issues at Tientsin, which had remained un- 
settled for more than a year, was finally concluded 
on June 19. The settlement covered both the French 
and British Concessions and affected silver, currency 
and policing questions. Ten per cent, or £300,000, 
of the Chinese government’s silver deposits in the 
foreign banks of the two Concessions was allocated 
to relief expenditures, while the remainder was 
sealed pending its final disposition, presumably at 
the end of the Sino-Japanese war. The Japanese- 
sponsored currency of the so-called Federal Reserve 
Bank in North China was permitted to circulate in 
the Concessions on a par with the Chinese national 
currency. Japanese authorities were accorded certain 
police rights in the Concessions, especially affecting 
the arrest of Chinese deemed hostile to the new 
régime. The scope of these policing rights was not 
fully defined, but was left for subsequent negotia- 
tions in Tientsin. As a result of these concessions, the 
local Japanese military authorities lifted the block- 
ade of the Concessions on June 20, although this 
provision had not been technically included in the 
Craigie-Arita agreement signed at Tokyo on the 
previous day. 

New difficulties arose at Tientsin on June 27, 
when Japanese police officials, ignoring the fact that 
the local authorities had still not reached agreement 
on the exact scope of the new policing rights, moved 
into the two Concessions and established offices by 
force majeure. In Shanghai, on the same day, French 
Concession authorities signed an agreement permit- 
ting the Japanese Army to extradite Chinese suspects 
and participate in military searches within the Con- 
cession. Three days earlier the French authorities 
had surrendered to Japan a part of the defense sector 


of the International Settlement and the French Con- 
cession which had been held by French troops since 
August 1937. Although loss of this sector jeopar- 
dized the defense of the Settlement, the French 
officials ignored their obligation to consult with the 
British and American authorities before making a 
change in provisions affecting defense of the foreign- 
administered areas. 


INDO-CHINA AND HONGKONG. Mean- 
while, Japan had also launched a concentrated diplo- 
matic offensive against the French position in Indo- 
China. On June 20 M. Charles Arsene Henry, French 
Ambassador at Tokyo, signed a statement pledging 
respect for Japan’s “military necessities” in China, 
the phraseology of which was identical with the 
Craigie-Arita formula of July 24, 1939. Signature of 
this statement was immediately followed by an agree- 
ment dealing with Indo-China, by which France un- 
dertook not to allow petroleum, trucks and other 
materials to be carried into China on the Haiphong- 
Kunming railway. Japanese inspectors, consisting of 
military officers and diplomats, are to be stationed at 
Hanoi, Haiphong and other points in Indo-China, 
with the right “to examine the stocks of materials 
and to control the transportation of goods.”’ French 
customs officials are obligated to submit all necessary 
data for such inspection and control. 

At Chungking this agreement was denounced as 
violating French treaty commitments, made to China 
in a convention signed in 1930. On June 23 the 
Chinese Foreign Minister, Wang Chung-hui, de- 


THE SOVIET UNION STRIKES IN THE BALKANS 


King Carol placed himself virtually under the pro- 
tection of Nazi Germany on July 1, after the Soviet 
Union had seized Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina 
and Rumania was threatened by attack from several 
quarters. Russia struck in the Balkans less than two 
weeks after occupying Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, 
where the Soviet armies dictated the formation of 
governments completely subservient to the Kremlin. 
By extending its strategic frontiers, the Soviet Union 
sought to fortify itself against the consequences 
of an unqualified Nazi victory in Western Europe. 

After massing troops on the Rumanian border, 
the Soviet government on June 26 served an ulti- 
matum on Rumania demanding the immediate trans- 
fer of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina. The Ru- 
manian government, although trying to gain delay 
for the evacuation, yielded on June 28. The Ru- 
manian army could not hope to hold out against the 
superior Soviet forces and King Carol evidently 
realized that war with Russia would only invite at- 
tack from Hungary and Bulgaria, both of which 
covet large slices of his dominion. 

BESSARABIA AND BUKOVINA. The Soviet 
government justified its claim to Rumanian territory 


— Page Two 


i 
— 


clared that if an “armed Japanese invasion of Indo. 
China” occurred, the Chinese government “ would be 
constrained to take such measures in self-defense a 
might be deemed necessary to cope with the situa. 
tion.” The threat of Chinese military intervention 
implied in this statement, if carried out, may lead tp 
an extension of the Sino-Japanese conflict into Indo. 
China. Units of the Japanese fleet are already patrol. 
ling sections of the Indo-China coast and Japaneg 
military forces are driving overland from Nanning 
to the Indo-China frontier, but the Japanese have not 
yet occupied Indo-China territory. 

The concessions made by Britain on the Tientsin 
issue proved to be of no avail in forestalling addi. 
tional Japanese demands. On June 25 the Japanese 
Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs summoned jt 
Robert Craigie, British Ambassador, to the Foreign 
Office and requested the British government to take 
“effective measures” to stop all movement of su 
plies to China by way of Burma and Hongkong 
These demands were supported by a transfer of 
Japanese troops to Hongkong’s mainland boundary, 
where the local British authorities dynamited bridges 
spanning the Shumchun River on June 26. Three 
days later, they decided to evacuate British women 
and children from the isolated colony. On June 30, 
amid reports that Britain’s Far Eastern naval forces 
were concentrating at Singapore, United States of- 
ficials warned Americans in Hongkong to escape the 
impending crisis by sailing for Manila on the liner 
President Coolidge. T. A. Bisson 


on the ground of historic and national ties. Bes 
sarabia, a poor and backward province with an ares 
of 17,151 square miles, belonged to Russia from 
1812 to 1918. For a brief period from 1856 to 1878 
the southwestern districts were part of Moldavia 
which, together with Wallachia, became the new | 
state of Rumania. In 1918 Rumania took advantage 
of revolution and civil war in Russia to seize the 
entire province. The Soviet government consistently 
refused to recognize this fait accompli, even though 
the territory has always been inhabited primarily by 
Rumanians. According to the 1930 census the ne 
manians constitute 55.8 per cent of Bessarabia’s | 
population, which totals more than 3,100,000 people | 
today. The Ukrainians and Russians together make 
up only a quarter of the population. In Bukovina, | 
which was part of Austria before 1919, the situa: | 
tion is somewhat different. In two departments of 
this province—Cernauti and Storojinet—the Ukraini- 
ans and Russians constitute at least half of a popw 
lation amounting to 476,000. 

SOVIET FEAR OF GERMANY. The primaty 
motivating factors in Russia’s action were strategic. 
The Kremlin has been surprised and disturbed by 


—— 
——— 


the swee 
Union, w 
werful 
with the 
toric Dra 
West is « 
secure un 
is of vita 
gives acc 
cause it | 
new ind 
occupatic 
frontier 
step in : 
control lis 
future, } 
Dobruja, 
Rumania 
people h 
the Sovic 
Sea dow 
be induc 
wark w« 
pansion 
For t 
alarmed 
possibili 
to reali: 
as well 
and nav 
move. 
ance Wi 
plays it 
control 
itself ex 
many ai 
and Br: 
has not 
cause i 
especia. 
on the 
bring t 
Now t 
greatly 
Germa 
Soviet 
the lat 
for a | 
Alth 
cern, i 
inspire 
occupa 
easy s 


FOREIG] 
Headquai 
Entered : 


>! 


1 area 
from 
. 1878 
ldavia 
> New | 
intage 
ze the 
tently 
hough 
ily by 
e Ru- 
-abia’s 
eople 
make 
ovina, 
situa- 
its of 
craini- 
popu: 
‘imaty 


itegic. 
ed by 


—_— 
— 


the sweeping victories won by Hitler. The Soviet 
Union, which does not relish the prospect of an all- 

werful Germany as its neighbor, must now reckon 
with the possibility that Hitler may resume the his- 
toric Drang nach Osten as soon as the war in the 
West is ended. In particular, Soviet Russia wants to 
secure undisputed control of the Black Sea. This sea 
is of vital strategic importance, not only because it 
gives access to the great Russian oil fields, but be- 
cause it lies within striking distance of many of the 
new industrial centers of the Soviet Union. The 
occupation of Bessarabia, which pushes the Russian 
frontier to the Danube, may therefore be the first 
step in a Soviet drive toward the Turkish Straits 
controlling the entrance to the Black Sea. In the 
future, Moscow may help Bulgaria to recover the 
Dobruja, the southern part of which was lost to 
Rumania in 1913. Together with Bulgaria, whose 
people have always had a strong affection for Russia, 
the Soviet Union wouid then control the entire Black 
Sea down to the Turkish border. If Turkey could 
be induced to unite with Russia and Bulgaria, a bul- 
watk would be erected against further German ex- 
pansion to the East. 

For the time being, however, Turkey appears 
alarmed by the occupation of Bessarabia and the 
possibility that Bulgaria may seize this opportunity 
to realize its irredentist ambitions against Turkish 
as well as Rumanian territory. It has taken military 
and naval precautions in anticipation of a Bulgarian 
move. Yet Turkey may still be won over to an alli- 
ance with the Soviet Union provided the Kremlin 
plays its cards cleverly and does not demand direct 
control of the Straits. Like Russia, Turkey considers 
itself endangered by the Axis powers. Fear of Ger- 
many and Italy drove it into an alliance with France 
and Britain last October. The Turkish government 
has not fulfilled the terms of this treaty, partly be- 
cause it was afraid to join the losing side, but 
especially because the Kremlin apparently objected 
on the ground that Turkey’s intervention would 
bring the war into the Balkans and the Black Sea. 
Now that France has been defeated and Britain 
greatly weakened, Turkey must either jump on the 
German bandwagon or fall back on an alliance with 
Soviet Russia. The Ankara government may choose 
the latter course, if only for the reason that it was 
for a long time on very good terms with Moscow. 

Although Nazi Germany has expressed uncon- 
cern, it obviously does not like the motives which 
inspired the latest Russian move in the Balkans. The 
occupation of Bessarabia puts Russian troops within 
easy striking distance of the Rumanian oil wells, 


Page Three: 


from which the German war machine draws part of 
its supplies. Moreover, the Russian action threatens 
to precipitate a general war in an area on which 
the Axis powers depend for foodstuffs and raw ma- 
terials. Hungarian forces have moved up to the Ru- 
manian border, ready to march into Transylvania 
and the adjoining districts of Crisana and Matra- 
mures, which Hungary has long coveted. Fearing 
disintegration of his entire country, King Carol of 
Rumania ordered complete mobilization on June 28, 
and apparently appealed to Germany for assistance. 
German and Italian diplomats have evidently been 
striving feverishly to prevent a widespread con- 
flagration in the Balkans. Hungary, however, may 
get out of hand. The Budapest government not only 
wants to take advantage of the “collapse” of Ru- 
mania, but fears that the Soviet Union, in seeking 
to form a United Ukraine, will take over the Car- 
patho-Ukraine which Hungary seized in March 1939. 

NAZI GERMANY CONFIDENT. It would be 
exaggerating to say that the German government is 
excessively alarmed by the attitude of the Soviet 
Union. While Berlin has been unable to oppose 
Soviet expansion in the Baltic and the Balkans, it 
is probably confident of its ultimate ability to deal 
with the Russians. In private, the Nazis have boasted 
that they can easily push back the Russians the mo- 
ment the war in the West is liquidated. Nor do they 
fear that Moscow will launch a direct attack on 
Germany. By joining the war now, the Soviet Union 
would expose itself to the full fury of a German at- 
tack if and when Britain is defeated. On the other 
hand, if it stays neutral, it may one day have to face 
Germany entirely alone. At the moment Soviet Russia 
is apparently still determined to stay out, particu- 
larly because it is not equipped to engage in any 
offensive against a major power. In the future, it may 
rely on its new strategic frontiers and the vastness 
of its territory to keep Germany at bay. 

Meanwhile, Germany is anxious not to be diverted 
from its primary objective—the destruction of Brit- 
ish power. For Hitler, Britain is now the arch-enemy 
which has repeatedly tried to thwart Germany's 
“legitimate” expansion. For the first time in its his- 
tory, Germany is in a position to strike a death blow 
at the British Empire and establish its own hegemony 
for good. Hitler may still be willing to entertain a 
peace proposal from Britain, but only if it comes 
from a government willing to take a pro-Nazi orien- 
tation similar to that which is taking shape in France 
under the leadership of Pierre Laval and Adrien 
Marquet. 

JOHN C. DEWILDE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 37, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Sis 


Jury 5, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; VERA MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


National 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JuLy 1.—American foreign policy and defense will 
probably become major issues in the coming national 
election, even though Wendell Willkie is more 
nearly in accord with President Roosevelt's policies 
than any of his former rivals for the Republican 
nomination. Both the platform and the Vice Presi- 
dential nominee, Senator McNary, are notable con- 
cessions to the “isolationist’’ wing of the party. The 
national defense plank represents a compromise be- 
tween the “interventionists” and the “‘isolationists.”’ 
After declaring the party to be “firmly opposed to 
involving this nation in foreign war,” the plank con- 
demns the Administration for “unpreparedness” and 
deplores “explosive utterances by the President di- 
rected at other governments which serve to imperil 
our peace.” Without mentioning Great Britain, the 
plank expresses sympathy to “nations whose ideals 
most clearly resemble our own,” and—without ref- 
erence to neutrality—urges “such aid as shall not be 
in violation of international law or inconsistent with 
the requirements of our own national defense.” 


Senator McNary, who has strongly opposed both 
the Hull trade program and the Administration’s 
foreign policy, voted against repeal of the arms em- 
bargo last October. Mr. Willkie, on the other hand, 
has approved the Hull agreements—while admitting 
that recent events have rendered them temporarily 
useless—and advocated assistance “short of war” to 
the Allies. In an address in Brooklyn, N. Y., on 
June 18, however, he shifted his emphasis to non- 
intervention, declaring that “despite our sympathy 
for the Allied cause we must stay out of war.” While 
the Republican position will be influenced by Euro- 
pean developments as well as campaign strategy, it is 
possible that the Administration may be charged 
with both “‘warmongering’” and “unpreparedness.” 


THE HAVANA CONFERENCE. Meanwhile, 
Washington is engaged in feverish preparation for 
the emergency meeting of the twenty-one American 
republics, to be held in Havana beginning July 20. 
Since the Panama Meeting of Foreign Ministers dur- 
ing the first weeks of the war, the emphasis has 
veered sharply from neutrality and measures to ease 
trade dislocations toward actual defense of the West- 
ern Hemisphere. The collapse of France and the fear 
that Britain will not be able to withstand the full 
weight of German attack give this hastily convoked 
meeting an importance far exceeding that of any 
previous Pan-American conference. With defense the 


keynote, the meeting is expected to deal with “fifth 
column” activities, military cooperation—especially 
in the joint use of naval and air bases—the future 
status of European possessions in the Western Hemi. 
sphere, and the cartel plan for “economic defense,” 

The chief problem at Havana may be that of pre. 
serving a “united American front’’ in the face of 4 
dominant Germany and fears on the part of South 
America—aside from the Caribbean countries—that 
the United States is not prepared to offer adequate 
military protection and economic support. While 
there has been no actual defection, the attitude of 
Argentina and Uruguay, where the outburst of anti 
Nazi feeling seems to have subsided during the past 
week, suggests that German warnings on post-wat 
trade may have had some effect. The Havana meet. 
ing is expected to approach this problem by consid. 
ering the cartel, or marketing board, plan announced 
on June 21 by President Roosevelt.* The specific 
details, however, probably cannot be worked out at 
the conference. 


Another thorny question on the agenda is “the 
Study of the problems which may confront the 
American republics in case the sovereignty exer- 
cised by non-American states over geographic regions 
of the Americas is relinquished, lapses, or is ma- 
terially impaired.” It seems clear that the United 
States would prevent, by force if necessary, the 
transfer of Dutch, British or French possessions, 
and it is highly improbable that Germany would 
attempt such action. It is more likely that the pos 
sessions will be allowed to remain in the hands of 


Nazi-dominated puppet states, thus giving Germany, | 


indirectly, a political and economic stake in this 
hemisphere without violating the letter of the Mon 
roe Doctrine. Cuba is expected to offer a solution 
to this problem by advocating that all European pos 
sessions in the Western Hemisphere be made inde- 
pendent, or, where this is not feasible, that they be 
placed under Pan-American mandate. 

The Havana Conference will doubtless be the 
target of intensive German propaganda, designed to 
frighten or woo Latin America away from the 
United States. Those countries which have found 
their major markets in Europe—Argentina, Uruguay, 
Chile, Peru, Bolivia and even Brazil—may be in- 
clined to weigh both the course of the war and the 
economic help they may receive from the United 
States before closing the door firmly on Germany. 

J.F.G.—H.J.T. 


*Cf. “Washington News Letter,” Foreign Policy Bulletin, June 28, 1940. 


ORE 


An inter pre 


a. | 
the | 
destroy » 
pire bef. 
indicate 
the Eur 
action a. 
versatio! 
bardme: 
BRIT 
povernt 
the tra 
Italy. 1 
House 
that Fr 
harbors 
its trea 
miral ] 
it woul 
two lis 
efs an 
tefuge 
mande 
Mers-¢ 
in com 
— to 
for a 
or sub 
Indies 
crippl 
Prove 
stroye 
was | 
sister 
being 
ship 
pend: 
squac 
porte 


