






s 8 i 


o 
ess 


& 


on 
ibe 


Be 8 


tep 5 
1918— 





RE- 


yer, 
irly 
ices 

an 


her 


year 
after 








ee 
—-———— 
National 
s DBAN, 
; a Yeat 


| 


1946 


1946 


ony. oF 


(SAL KR 
4 LInAt 


a 
MIC! 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


ee 


2eneral Library 














An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 46 


Aucust 30, 1946 





STRAITS PROBLEM REVEALS NEED FOR UN CONTROL OF WATERWAYS 


OLLOWING consultations with the United 
States, Britain and France, the Turkish govern- 
ment on August 22 rejected the proposals made on 
August 7 by the Soviet Union for a new régime in 
the Straits which link the Black Sea with the Medi- 


terranean. 


RUSSIA’S HISTORIC AIMS. Ever since Cath- 
arine the Great, in the Treaty of Kutchuk-Karnardji 
in 1774, won the right for Russian merchant ships 
to enter the Straits in time of peace, successive Rus- 
sian governments have sought by war and diplomacy 
to win further concessions from the Turks. In 
this struggle France or Britain, or both, have usu- 
ally backed the Turkish government against the 
Russians. The peak of Russian influence was reached 
in 1833 under the Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi when 
the Sultan, weakened by the revolt of Mehemet Ali, 
invited the Russians to protect him, and secretly 
agreed to prevent any other foreign warships from 
entering’ the Straits. In 1841, however, the Sultan 
negotiated with the Big Five of that day (Russia, 
Prussia, Austria, Britain and France) a Straits Con- 
vention which remained the fundamental rule gov- 
ering the Straits until 1914. According to this 
agreement, which was reaffirmed in the Treaty of 
Paris in 1856 and again in the Conference of Lon- 
don in 1871, the Turkish government was to admit 
no foreign warships to the Straits in time of peace. 

Russia’s lowest ebb came after its defeat in the 
Crimean War in 1856 when the Tsar was denied 
a fleet on the Black Sea and arsenals on its shores, 
a restriction which was removed in 1871. Dur- 
ing World War I, when Turkey joined the Ger- 
mans, the Russians asked and by secret treaty ob- 
tained the agreement of Britain, France and Italy 


| to annex Constantinople and the Dardanelles. The 


| 


Russian Revolution, however, supervened and the 


Bolsheviks renounced Tsarist claims. 


THE MONTREUX CONVENTION. After 1919 
a weakened Soviet Russia and a victorious Britain 
reversed their traditional policies. The Russians 
hoped to achieve security by closing the Straits to 
foreign warships, while the British, who had previ- 
ously sought to hem the Russians in, now advocated 
opening the Straits to warships as well as merchant 
vessels. Under the able leadership of Mustapha 
Kemal, a revitalized Turkey profited from this sit- 
uation. Although a new Convention in 1923 de- 
militarized the Straits and placed them under an 
international commission, the Turks used the rising 
threat of Germany and Italy to persuade the other 
powers at Montreux in 1936 to terminate the inter- 
national commission and turn its functions over to 
Turkey. The 1923 agreement had opened the Straits 
to all ships at all times except that, if Turkey were 
at war, only neutral ships could have free passage. 
At Montreux, however, Turkey won the right to 
remilitarize the Straits and to close them to all for- 
eign warships when it was at war or in imminent 
danger of war. 

The Soviet Union now seeks to modify the Mon- 
treux Convention. Its right to do so was specifically 
agreed to by the Big Three at the Potsdam confer- 
ence in August 1945. Its present proposals should 
occasion no surprise, since similar suggestions were 
made by Foreign Minister Molotov to Turkish Am- 
bassador Selim Sarper in Moscow over a year ago. 
In anticipation of Soviet claims, Secretary of State 
Byrnes last November 2 proposed to Turkey that 
(1) the Straits should be opened to merchant ves- 
sels of all nations at all times, (2) the Straits 
should be opened to warships of Black Sea powers 
at all times, (3) warships of non-Black Sea powers 
should be granted passage only in cases specially 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 




















provided for, and (4) the Montreux Convention 
should be modernized by such changes as the sub- 
stitution of the United Nations for the League of 
Nations, and the elimination of Japan as a signatory. 

CONFLICTING PROPOSALS. On the surface 
the United States proposals provide security for the 
Soviet Union, particularly since they modify that 
part of the Montreux Convention which authorized 
Turkey to close the Straits in case it was at war or 
in imminent danger of war. In fact, three of the 
five Soviet proposals to the Turks coincide with 
American views. The Russians, however, taking into 
consideration the possibility of war between Russia 
and the West, cannot overlook the fact that on 
October 19, 1939 Turkey signed a treaty of mutual 
assistance with Britain and France. Russia has also 
charged that during World War II Turkey allowed 
German warships to use the Straits. The Turkish 
note rejecting Soviet proposals to revise the Mon- 
treux Convention, made public on August 24, was 
in large part devoted to refuting this accusation, 
but Turkey admitted that some German auxiliary 
war vessels got through, disguised as merchant ships. 
The Russians conclude that their only security 
lies in Soviet control of the Straits. Therefore the 
proposals handed to Turkish officials on August 7 
included two additional requests—that the admin- 
istration of the Straits should be in the hands of 
“Turkey and the other Black Sea Powers,” and that 
Turkey and the Soviet Union should “organize by 
joint means the defense of the Straits.” 

It was to these two ideas that the United States gov- 
ernment objected in its note to the Russian Chargé 
d’ Affaires, Fedor Orekhov. The American note em- 
phasized that “Turkey should continue to be primarily 


Page Two 








—— 
— 


responsible for the defense of the Straits,” and also 
rejected the Soviet request for control of the Straits 
by the Black Sea powers. The United States pro. 
posal that the Dardanelles régime “should be 
brought into the appropriate relationship with the 
United Nations” does not seem sufficiently definite 
or constructive, in view of our insistence that Tur. 
key should be the defender of the Straits. What we 
are asking is that Russia abandon its historic policy 
on the Dardanelles. From the point of view of the 
Soviet Union, however, its need for control of the 
Straits is no less imperative than that of the British 
at Suez or the Americans at Panama. 


INTERNATIONAL CONTROL. One fact stands 
out clearly. Russia's position in the Straits has varied 
in direct proportion to its strength as a great power, 
Today the Soviet Union is second only to the United 
States. In this situation the American proposal that 
Turkey should continue to be primarily responsible 
for the defense of the Straits must appear inade- 
quate to Moscow. Moreover, a solution along these 
lines would strengthen Egypt’s case for demanding 
single-handed, responsibility for the defense of Suez. 
Yet Suez and the Straits are clearly international 
problems requiring international solutions. The 
Straits Convention of 1923, which was superseded 
by the Montreux agreement, set a precedent for an 
international commission for the Straits and worked 
reasonably well. An international commission has 
presided for many years at another of the Mediter- 
ranean gateways, Tangier. Perhaps what is needed 
is a Mediterranean Commission under the United 
Nations to regulate all Mediterranean waterways. 





VERNON McKAy 


PARIS CRISIS FORCES U.S. TO WEIGH LONG-TERM POLICY 


The point-counterpoint of mutual recriminations 
which to an increasing degree has marked relations 
between the wartime Allies during the past year is 
assuming a tone of unrelieved bitterness at the Paris 
peace conference. In the course of verbal exchanges 
about alleged British misdeeds in Greece and al- 
leged Russo-Yugoslav aggressive tactics on Trieste, 
the line between former enemies and former allies 
has become practically indistinguishable. While 
Italy and the Axis satellites wait in the wings for 
their cues, hoping for alleviation of their plight 
through the sympathy of one or other of the United 
Nations, the Big Three continues to struggle, with 
no holds barred, for the attributes of power they 
but recently wrested from Germany, which does not 
even figure in the cast of characters. This prolonga- 
tion of the war into the period of would-be peace 
threatens to fulfill Hitler's hope that, if Germany 
were militarily defeated, it might at least, in its 
downfall, encompass the destruction of the victors. 

NEED FOR INFORMATION. So confused has 


the European picture become as a result of these 
various Allied denunciations that it sometimes seems 
impossible to identify such facts as may exist behind 
the facade of sensational headlines. Without access 
to confidential documents and private conversations 
between top diplomats, the most that one can do is 
to seek interpretation of conflicting versions of the 
same occurrence through knowledge of the past his- 
tory, the character, and the ascertainable motives of 
given nations. The political representatives who con- 
duct tedious negotiations in the full glare of pub- 
licity understandably grow weary of the incessant 
scrutiny to which they are subjected by the news- 
paper-reading public, and begin to sigh once more 
for the relative quiet of secret diplomacy. Yet if 
citizens are to play any part other than that of sheep 
led to the polls or to the slaughterhouse, they must 
have a modicum of information about the aims and 
methods of their governments in world affairs. 
Otherwise ignorance will eventually lead to apathy, 
and apathy to fatalistic acceptance of whatever pro- 


! 


— 


gram i 
sumpti 
vidual 


IS 
dange: 
that € 
it has 
and tc 
other 
on At 
in Gr 
durin 
menti 
obser’ 
Britis 
Britis 
the cé 
soil f 
ranea 
icy as 
aria 
wa 
tory | 
Sin 
fring 
craft 
when 
' It wo 
ican 
num 
Tito, 





territ 
| bid 
| swer 
figh 
| vicin 
mon 
age 
Eure 
may 
lies, 
truce 
Yug 
Gre 
tinu 
tion: 
| take 
slav 
at t 
Rus 
exa 





i R 
| Cha 
Aus 
| nat! 





TO- 


Lite 


tish 
nds 


ver, 
ited 
hat 
ible 
ide- 
ese 
ing 
1€2. 
nal 


ded 
an 


ked 


ter- 
ded 
ited 


wn 


1ese 
ems 
ind 
cess 
ons 
O is 
the 
his- 
; of 
on- 
yub- 
sant 
WS- 
lore 
t if 
eep 
yust 
and 
ifs. 
thy, 
>f0- 


aye 





—— 
 ——— 





gram is proposed by an energetic Fiihrer, on the as- 
sumption that it is beyond the power of the indi- 
yidual to influence the course of events. 


Is WRONG ALL ON ONE SIDE? The most 
dangerous aspect of any period of ripening crisis is 
that every government tends to present the position 
it has taken in the most favorable light possible, 
and to discredit or disbelieve the contentions of the 
other side. When the Ukrainian delegate in Paris 
on August 24 renewed the charges against Britain 
in Greece which he had already made in January 
during the United Nations Assembly in London, he 
mentioned a number of points on which impartial 
observers from other countries, as well as many 
Britishers, would be in agreement with him. Yet the 
British Labor government can convincingly justify 
the continued presence of British troops on Greek 
soil for reasons of security in the eastern Mediter- 
ranean—and few can quarrel with Mr. Bevin’s pol- 
iy as long as Russian troops are quartered in Bul- 
gatia which, although an Axis satellite, now de- 
mands, with Moscow's support, the cession of terri- 
tory by Greece. 


Similarly, few reasonable people would regard the 
fring by Yugoslav fighter planes on American air- 
craft as anything but an unfriendly act, especially 
when committed by one recent ally against another. 
It would be useful to know, however, whether Amer- 
an planes, which obviously are far superior in 
mumbers to any aircraft at the disposal of Marshal 
Tito, had made a practice of flying over Yugoslav 
territory after the Belgrade government had for- 
bidden such flights, and to have Washington’s an- 
swet to Marshal Tito’s charge that reconnaisance 
fights had been made by American planes in the 
vicinity of the Morgan Line. It is a matter of com- 
mon knowledge that espionage and counterespion- 
age are being practiced by all the great powers in 
Furope—and probably by small nations as well. This 
may seem a lamentable state of affairs among Al- 
lies, but as long as the present conditions of uneasy 
truce prevail, incidents of the kind that occurred in 
Yugoslavia (and are reported from the disputed 
Greek-Albanian border) may be expected to con- 
tinue. It is entirely possible that Yugoslavia’s ac- 
tions were inspired by Russia. But it would be a mis- 
| take to discount the intense nationalism of the Yugo- 
lavs, already displayed a quarter of a century ago 
at the Paris peace conference of 1919 from which 
Russia was excluded. This nationalism has been 
exacerbated by the controversy over Trieste, since 








Page Three 





— 
a 





even Yugoslavs favorable to Western democracy 
find it difficult to understand why Britain and the 
United States pay heed to the wishes of Italy, whom 
they regard as an old opponent. 


Disturbing as the situation in Europe is bound to 
be for the United States, it may prove salutary if it 
convinces us of the need for giving unremitting 
thought to long-term policy and to the methods of 
implementing whatever policy we decide to follow. 
In the past we had too often assumed that this coun- 
try had fulfilled its international role by sending 
armed forces to Europe in time of crisis and, once 
hostilities were over, by helping to succor the vic- 
tims of war. Now we are forced to realize that, if 
we are to play a part in shaping the future of Eu- 
rope, we must not merely counsel action to others, 
but be prepared to take action ourselves. Even if the 
fear of the most extreme pessimists should be justi- 
fied—that Russia wants war—it remains imperative 
for the United States to know what it is we want 
beyond the obvious human desire to be left in peace. 
In weighing the course ahead, we must bear in mind 
that Russia has been gravely weakened by war, both 
as to manpower and material resources. Its people, 
according to the most trustworthy reports, are weary 
of fighting, and long to obtain some of the good 
things of life. Yet Russia's reconversion to peace- 
time production, judging by purges and renewed 
resort to “self-criticism,” is fraught with difficulties. 
It is very doubtful that the Soviet government would 
want to embark on war. But neither is it ready ap- 
parently to acquiesce in a peace that might diminish 
the position it had achieved at the high-water mark 
of victory over Germany. Its present policy is remin- 
iscent of the policy of “no war, no peace’ advo- 
cated by Trotzky when the Soviet régime found 
Germany's peace terms unacceptable, and stalled for 
time, finally acquiescing in the treaty of Brest- 
Litovsk. At the Paris conference the Western powers 
have tended to remain on the defensive, letting Rus- 
sia take the lead and reap the resulting publicity— 
which, on the whole, has been unfavorable to Mos- 
cow. The time has come for the United States to 
assume stronger initiative, not in the sense of im- 
posing its will upon other countries or merely 
thwarting Russia, but of defining as broadly as pos- 
sible this country’s views on a peace settlement that 
would take cognizance of the profound changes 
wrought in Europe by war and accompanying civil 
strife. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


PERON BARGAINS FOR GREATER ROLE IN WORLD AFFAIRS 


| Ratification by the Argentine Senate of the Act of 
|Chapultepec and the United Nations Charter on 
August 19 was effected in an atmosphere of intense 
| nationalism. The packed galleries and crowds in the 


Plaza before the National Congress made their op- 
position to any step regarded as limiting Argentine 
sovereignty so evident that it was necessary to post- 
pone action on the two pacts by the Chamber of 








o£Es 


Mes sa Sa 


2g oe ae 


my ees 


ee ee nnn 


Ree Ne A eet 


Se ae 
SE MS 


oa sae aehiiepinainciaale er 


beth bealagel= he ae 


Sad 


SO Se nee RANE 


moe 
s te 














Deputies. While designed to strengthen Argentina 
in its projected great power role, this step in the 
direction of international cooperation also has con- 
siderable domestic significance. For the ill-assorted 
groups which support the Perén government, it may 
have the effect of thrusting old-line nationalists out 
of the peronista following and giving greater prom- 
inence to the moderates in the Labor party and the 
“dissident Radical” faction. To enlist middle class 
support for the revolution has long been the objec- 
tive of the Argentine Caudillo. Similarly, the rati- 
fication suggests that under pressure of international 
events Argentina is tending toward greater modera- 
tion in its foreign policy; and arouses speculation 
whether the long-awaited reconciliation with the 
United States may not be at hand. 


ADVANTAGES THROUGH COOPERATION. 
Unreserved adherence to the principle of interna- 
tional cooperation would mark a radical departure 
in Argentine policy which by tradition has been 
tinged with isolationism. This would be particularly 
true with respect to relations with the inter-Amer- 
ican system, which previous Buenos Aires govern- 
ments desired to subordinate to the League of Na- 
tions. Presumably General Perén now believes that 
material advantages would accrue to Argentina from 
full participation not only in the United Nations— 
where the Latin American nations will exercise con- 
siderable influence through their combined voting 
power—but also in the inter-American community. 
If the strategic, political and economic concepts of 
the military revolution are to be developed, the 
Buenos Aires régime requires military equipment 
in order to place its armed forces on a par with those 
of Brazil, and heavy machinery to diversify Argen- 
tine industry which until now has been deficient in 
the production of capital goods. Perén’s recent over- 
tures of friendship to Washington might be ex- 
plained as an effort to influence the difficult nego- 
tiations currently underway between London and 
Buenos Aires over extension of the meat contract, 
the fate of British-owned railways in Argentina, and 
the disposition of Argentine blocked sterling. In 
view of Perén’s attempt last spring to pit Russia 
against the United States in the bargaining over the 
linseed oil price, the supposition is plausible that in 
this instance the Argentine government is attempt- 
ing to play the British and American competitors 
for its markets against each other for such imme- 
diate benefits to the national economy as may be 
forthcoming. That President Perén may be taking a 


Page Four 















—= 


longer view of Argentina's foreign relations, hoy. 19} 
ever, is indicated by a statement he made to » 
American newspaperman on August 1, when he sai! 
that, in any future conflict, “Argentina will be foun; 
ranged alongside the United States and the othe 
American nations.” 


The United States, however, having fared badly 
in previous negotiations with the Argentine natiop 

alist government, now makes military aid contip 
gent on limited but effective action against forme 
Axis agents and industral holdings in that county, 
In return for Argentine control of six ‘spearhead’ 
German industries and holding companies, publi 
sale of some 30 secondary industries, closure of the 
remaining German schools, and legal action againg} =— 
a small number of German agents—among whom 
Ludwig Freude, a key figure in Axis underground 
activities and a member of the inner circle of the 
present administration, is not listed—this goven. 

ment is reported to be willing to provide armaments W 
and send a mission to train the Argentine army, 


PERON AT A TURNING POINT. In three shot} and 
months of administration, the energetic Argentine| bers 
President has swept much of the old conservative} peal 
order out of existence. At home, the government has| bets 
established authority over well-nigh the entire po| for 
litical, economic, social and educational structure of} hav 
the nation through such decrees as the reorganiz-| its | 
tion of political parties, nationalization of the Cen-| at | 
tral Bank, extension of federal control over the uni S 
versities, and the creation of a Ministry of Labor} lon 
Abroad, Argentina, which enjoys the status of a! Chi 
creditor nation for the first time in its history, is| the 
being courted by the diplomatic and commercial rep | ing 
resentatives of the three great powers. For a not too _ pre 
heavy price Buenos Aires can effect a rapproche| Pe 
ment with Washington which would ease the op; Po 
pressive inter-American atmosphere and enable Ar} for 
gentina to resume its seat in international councils} ed 
The structure of the new authoritarian order in| th 
Argentina is almost completed; but the issue of how} be 
it is to be used remains in doubt. Possessing extraor| be 
dinary powers, President Perén can temper the ex| C 
treme nationalist and isolationist sentiment that pre} of 
vails in Argentina, or he can fan it for destructive} m 
purposes. The new government, which holds a man- 
date from the laboring people of Argentina to catty) }, 
out a social and economic revolution, is confroatall 
by the need to take critical and far-reaching dec 
sions on both foreign and domestic policy. fe 











OLIVE HOLMES P 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 46, AuGust 30, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; VERA MIcHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as second-class 
matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least one month 


for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


es! 





ti 
0 


| 
| 
| 
| 


