-hungking 
€ required 
assistance 
| those af. 
or a differ. 
OMe arms 
» and New 
conduct 4 
nese. The 

March 8 
list armies 
r captured 
ind block. 
ding toa 
the Com. 
1 Japanese 
Ss to make 
munitions 


. A policy 

by the cen 

Inist Nego- 

irmies dut- 

roment an- 

hment of 

or reorgal- 

e question 

Communist 

ing equal 

Army offi 

suggested. 

munist ne 
ject of the 
Communist 
ommunists 
quish their 
nt becomes 
de will go 
‘ continues. 
f war, not 
eat Chinese 
sonably ef 
an on Chr 
ht aid the 
g in China. 
der of the 
China coast 
pan. Such 4 
ided China. 
2 BOLLES 


IN DS 


PERIGUDICAL Roem 
@GNBRAL Line ARY University 
UAV. OF Mice : 


RB IAB 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Yo. XXIV, No. 23 


Marco 238, 1945 


AMERICAN NATIONS SEEK COMMON GROUND IN POSTWAR PLANNING 


by Olive Holmes 


who has just returned from the Mexico City conference, which 
she attended as the accredited press representative of the 
Foreign Policy Association. 


HE Inter-American Conference on Problems of 

War and Peace marked a turning-point in rela- 
tions among the American states. Those who had 
tad into hemisphere events of recent months a de- 
tetioration of this delicately balanced system of in- 
temational cooperation were given strong reason to 
believe that from the gathering of the Foreign Min- 
iters of twenty New World countries a sense of 
doser identity in the post-war period would result. 
That the American states were able at last to 
mme together and discuss common problems was in 
iself an important factor in clearing the atmosphere. 
These problems were numerous and complex, and 
represented the accumulation of many months dur- 
ing which the consultative procedures so carefully 
daborated in successive Pan-American conferences 
lid been almost entirely inactive. Out of the ple- 
hora of resolutions presented to the Mexico City 
mnference one salient fact emerged: to the Latin 
American representatives, at least, the period of 
ansition from war to peace presented more uncer- 
luinties than had the war period itself. 

They were concerned chiefly with economic prob- 
kms and looked to this country to assist them, not 
merely to reconvert to peacetime economic bases but 
0 proceed with programs of industrial development 
which had been interrupted by the war. Possibly the 
Main preoccupation of the United States, on the 
ther hand, was the maintenance of a united front 
Wainst the eventuality that the Axis underground 
hight consolidate what is, in Washington’s view, its 
potential bridgehead in Argentina. To this end, the 
United States was prepared to give such specific as- 
uurances of close economic and political cooperation 


as were consistent with its world economic policies 
and its participation in the proposed security organ- 
ization. This awareness of interdependence was evi- 
dent in all the deliberations of the conference, and 
placed the participants on an equal footing. Neither 
the United States nor its Latin American neighbors 
gave the impression of laying down terms or asking 
favors. 

ECONOMIC TENSIONS LESSENED. The Eco- 
nomic Charter presented by the United States dele- 
gation sketched the lines of development in Latin 
America. It will remain for future conferences—in 
particular, the Inter-American Technical Economic 
Conference scheduled for next June—to give these 
plans substance. While fundamentally in agreement 
with the long-term objectives of the program, Latin 
American delegates would have liked more concrete 
indication of what the United States might do to 
soften the blow resulting from termination of its 
wartime buying of strategic materials, as well as 
definite assurance that a fair share of American pro- 
duction of capital goods would be allocated to Latin 
America. The American delegation made general 
assertions that adequate notice of the lapse of war 
contracts would be given, that Congressional ap- 
proval would be sought for the maintenance of raw 
material stockpiles in order to facilitate continued 
purchases of these commodities; and promised that, 
as long as war controls were maintained, Latin 
American countries would receive their quotas of 
the commercial exports of this country. But Wash- 
ington’s delegates did not feel prepared to commit 
the American people to special favorable treatment 
for Latin America beyond this. In general, it was 
our position that while we would do what is feasible 
to ease the transition for them, no nation could hope 
to escape post-war economic readjustments scot-free. 

As regards the broad principles of the Economic 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


q 
f 


Charter, moreover, considerable rephrasing was nec- 
essary to reconcile the United States objective of 
achieving multilateral trade with the Latin American 
goal of industrial development, encouraged and pro- 
tected, if necessary, by nationalistic tariff and mon- 
etary policies. It was the opinion of Latin American 
delegates that their countries, at the present stage of 
development, cannot afford the degree of economic 
liberty to which the original draft of the Charter 
would have committed them. Thus, the final resolu- 
tion contained certain reservations with regard to 
progressive reduction of tariff barriers, elimination 
of controls on the activities of foreign business in- 
terests in the various countries, and the establish- 
ment of state enterprises for the conduct of trade. 
But Latin American delegates did not return to their 
countries empty-handed. Assistant Secretary William 
Clayton was able to allay their worst fears—that the 
United States would assume no economic obligations 

in the hemisphere—while at the same time he main- 
- tained a scrupulous respect for the over-all aims of 
American economic policy. 


CHAPULTEPEC AND ARGENTINA. Give- 
and-take characterized the political, as well as the 
economic, discussions. Here, however, the Latin 
American countries definitely assumed the initiative. 
The Act of Chapultepec,* hailed by the Latin 
American press as the continentalization of the Mon- 
roe Doctrine, was the end-product of draft resolu- 
tions presented by Colombia, Brazil and Uruguay 
to guarantee the political independence and terri- 
torial integrity of the American states. It is not sur- 
prising that the terms of these draft resolutions 
varied in forcefulness in direct relation to the respec- 
tive country’s proximity to Argentina — for it is 
from that quarter that a threat to:the peace of the 
hemisphere might be expected to materialize. The 
State Department may have anticipated that future 
problems of this nature would be tackled under the 
new consultative powers on political matters recom- 


*See Foreign Policy Bulletin, March 9, 1945. 


Page Two ———__\ 


mended for the Pan American Union, but the reaj 
uneasiness manifested by close neighbors of Argen. 
tina made it imperative that effective ae be 
established immediately. 

The Act of Chapultepec, therefore, was the Mex. 
ico City decision on the vexatious Argentine prob. 
lem, which never came up for discussion in the open 
sessions. The only direct reference to that country jp 
the Final Act of the Conference was a rather concilj. 
atory resolution deploring the fact that the “Argen. 
tine Nation” had not yet found it possible to take 
the necessary steps that would have permitted jts 
participation, and formally expressing the hope that 
Buenos Aires would adhere to the Declaration of the 
United Nations, as well as to the decisions taken a 
Mexico City. These measures, if resolutely effected 
would lead to war with Germany and Japan. §o, 
while the Farrell-Per6n government cannot misinter. 
pret the tenor of the Act of Chapultepec, it finds the 
door left open tc reentry into the comity of American 
nations—and can take this action without too great a 
loss of national prestige. 


UNFINISHED BUSINESS. Only a_ beginning 
was made at Mexico City toward the solution of 
many of these continental problems. At the San 
Francisco conference the regional objectives of 
Chapultepec must somehow be harmonized with the 
general aims of world security organization. The far- 
reaching recommendations for increasing the powers 
of the Pan American Union will have to rest until 
the regular Pan-American Conference at Bogota in 
1946, for the Mexico meeting of Foreign Ministers 
had no authority to make decisions regarding the 
Union. In addition, the future of Latin American 
economic development and inter-American trade 
prospects ultimately depend on the trade policies 
evolved by the major industrial powers. The histor. 
ical significance of the Mexico meeting lies in the 
fact that the American nations, in contrast to the 
experience after 1918 when war-fostered unity cob 
lapsed like a spent balloon, expect to continue and 
strengthen cooperative procedures in the New World 


WILL PEACEMAKERS OF 1945 AVOID ECONOMIC PITFALLS OF 1919? 


Realizing that economic stability in the post-war 
period is just as important as provisions for political 
security, the United Nations have sought to outline 
plans designed to rehabilitate war-devastated areas, 
expand world economy, and offer greater facilities 
for the normal functioning of international trade. It 
is instructive, therefore, to compare the present pro- 
gram with that contemplated at the time of the 
Paris Peace Conference after the last war. For Con- 
gress is now considering the Bretton Woods mon- 
etary proposals, and the forthcoming United Nations 
conference in San Francisco must pass on the various 
plans for future economic security. 

PEACEMAKING—1919. Unlike the situation in 


1919, when President Wilson insisted that the 
League of Nations Covenant be incorporated in the 
treaty of Versailles, both the present political pro 
posals outlined at Dumbarton Oaks and the Bretton 
Woods monetary plans were drafted separately and 
are also being considered apart from the final terms 
to be imposed on the Axis under the unconditional 
surrender formula. The contrast in the economic 
field is perhaps less striking than in the realm of 
world political organization, for in 1919 the peace 
makers at Paris were reluctant to tackle economit 
problems at all, much less on a world scale. 

The Versailles treaty did include lengthy provi 


sions with respect to reparations, both in money and 


— 


kind, whi 
matter, < 
tions faci 
be incluc 
Without 
apparent 
taken the 
After the 
from Ge 
it is who 
in terms 
rather mi 
are to be 
total wat 
harassed 
problem 
lease me 
which th 
allow of 
tion than 
portion fe 
is certain 
the mast 
will be r 
remain 1 
after the 
settlemer 
merce. 
That t 
tor in the 
week's vi 
priations 
sore of 
measure. 
misunde: 
However: 
consonar 
tion of 


What 


histori 


A clea 
and an 
formati 
barton 


Foreig: 


—_—_ 
_—_—_—_—_——_ 
FOREIGN 
Headquarter 
second-class 
one month 


iss 


— 
ad 


t the real 
of Argen. 
hinery be 


the Mex. 
ine prob. 
the Open 
-Ountry in 
ef concilj. 
>“ Argen. 
le to take 
mitted its 
hope that 
ion of the 
s taken at 
y effected, 
japan. So, 
t misinter- 
t finds the 
American 
OO great a 


beginning 
dlution of 
t the San 
sctives of 
d with the 
1. The far- 
the powers 
. rest until 
Bogota in 
1 Ministers 
arding the 
American 
ican trade 
de policies 
The histor- 
lies in the 
rast to the 
| unity cob 
ntinue and 


lew World. 


1919? 

1 that the 
ated in the 
litical pro- 
the Bretton 
arately and 
final terms 
.conditional 
e economic 
e realm of 
) the peace 
le economic 
ile. 

gthy prov 


| money af 


a 
_—_—— 


kind, which were to be obtained from Germany. This 
matter, alone among present economic considera- 
tions facing the victorious Allies, will probably also 
be included in the terms imposed on the Reich. 
Without pursuing the contrast to its extreme, it is 
apparent that the present peacemakers have under- 
taken their tasks in a strikingly different manner. 
After the futile experience in collecting reparations 
from Germany in the years following the last war, 
itis wholly natural that the Allies should think less 
in terms of exacting huge sums from Germany, and 
rather more of the manner in which such payments 
gre to be made. This problem is related to that of 
total war costs, but this time the Allies will not be 
harassed with the difficult and burdensome war-debt 
problem which resulted from the last war. The lend- 
lease mechanism and reverse lend-lease system, by 
which the war costs have been so largely financed, 
allow of a much speedier and more feasible solu- 
tion than was the case after 1919. Doubtless a major 
portion of the lend-lease debts will be cancelled; this 
iscertainly the assumption underlying Article VII of 
the master lend-lease agreement. Whether payment 
will be required for those lend-lease materials which 
main unused and enter into international trade 
after the war is yet to be determined, but the final 
settlement is to be one that will not burden com- 
merce. 

That this issue may become a major political fac- 
tor in the United States cannot be doubted after last 
week’s vote on the renewal of the lend-lease appro- 
ptiations in the House of Representatives, where a 
sore of Congressmen voted in the negative on the 
measure. Their votes can only indicate in reality a 
misunderstanding of the purposes of lend-lease. 
However, if the final lend-lease settlement is to be 
gnsonant with the assumptions made at the initia- 
tion of the system, then Congress will appreciate 


What will United Nations delegates discuss at the 
historic April 25 meeting? Read 

AFTER VICTORY... 

by Vera Micheles Dean 
A clear, brief survey of world organization in question 


and answer form. Cuts through the mass of technical in- 
formation now being published. Includes text of Dum- 


barton Oaks agreement. 
25¢ 


Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 E. 38th St., New York 16 


Page Three 


that in financing the war in this fashion we have 
bought our own defense both in theory and in fact 
by supplying our Allies during the war. In insisting 
that the final terms be such as will aid future eco- 
nomic expansion, we shall also relieve the United 
Nations of inter-Allied pressure for debt collections. 
In the interwar years this meant pressure for repa- 
ration collections, which in turn led to American 
loans to Germany for purposes of activating what 
became a vicious financial circle. 

PRESENT ECONOMIC PEACE TERMS. No 
greater contrast exists between present proposals for 
dealing with post-war international economic prob- 
lems and those provided by the Versailles settlement 
than in the case of the International Monetary Fund 
and the Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 
Currently under consideration by Congress, the Bret- 
ton Woods schemes have occasioned much opposi- 
tion; but it is now expected that the plans will be 
adopted in major conformity to the draft prepared 
by the 44 nations last July. Certain critics have tend- 
ed to regard the adoption of these plans as putting 
the cart before the horse, arguing that there is 
neither assurance of future political security, nor as- 
surance of an expanding world trade—an atmos- 
phere necessary for the proper functioning of the 
mechanism of the Fund and Bank. Yet drafting the 
Bretton Woods proposals separately from those of 
Dumbarton Oaks testifies to their importance, and in 
considering them alone the United Nations and the 
American Congress is considering an interdependent 
part of the future world security structure. 

The Versailles peace comprised no such compre- 
hensive program. True, the Paris Peace Conference 
did create the International Labor Office and pro- 
vided for economic advisers to the League Secre- 
tariat. Present plans go much further, however, and 
the Dumbarton Oaks scheme proposes the creation 
of an Economic and Social Council—responsible to 
the General Assembly—which shall have power to 
coordinate the work of various economic agencies 
erected after the war or now in existence. The ex- 
perience of the interwar period testifies to the need 
for a Council with such powers of coordination. 


Charged with creating conditions of economic stabil- 
ity and furthering world economic expansion, the 
Council represents a marked advance over the pre- 
war period when each country, confronted by eco- 
nomic stress or world depression, reacted by restric- 
tive unilateral action that led only to a worsening 


of the problem for all nations. 
GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 23, MARCH 23, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 


Association, 


Incorperated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FxanKk Ross McCoy, President ; DornotHy F. Lugt, Secretary; Vera MicuHeLes Dan, Editor. Entered as 


scond-class matter December 2, 
oe month for change of address on membership publications. 


Bom 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


BOMBING ALONE WILL NOT DEFEAT JAPAN 


The conquest of Iwo Jima—on which only scat- 
tered remnants of the Japanese forces were left— 
paves the way for more frequent air raids involving 
increasing numbers of planes against Japan. The 
tiny island provides the United States with a base 
for B-29s only 760 miles south of Tokyo, and also 
deprives the Japanese of a base which they used suc- 
cessfully for assaults against B-29 fields at Saipan, 
717 miles south of Iwo Jima. The forthcoming 
heavier air bombardment will make a valuable con- 
tribution to our progress toward victory unless the 
civilian population of the United States relaxes in 
the mistaken belief that to bomb Japan is to defeat 
Japan. With Japan as with Germany, tanks, guns, 
rifles and foot soldiers, rather than planes, will be the 
climactic agents of victory. The bomb dropped from 
above is a harrassing and disorganizing missile, but 
not decisive in itself. 

OPTIMISM ON BOMBINGS. The decline of 
full faith in the power of concerted strategic air at- 
tacks against the enemy's industrial emplacements 
has been slow. When Prime Minister Churchill vis- 
ited Washington in May 1943, he told Congress 
that while opinion was divided as to whether the use 
of air power alone could bring about a collapse in 
Germany or Italy, it was an experiment worth trying 
if other measures were not excluded. In those days 
the newspapers were filled with exhilarating ac- 
counts of panic in Essen, Duisburg, Dortmund and 
Wuppertal, similar to reports now being printed 
about panic and fires in Tokyo. Official belief that 
years of block-buster attacks had seriously crippled 
German industry led some high military and political 
authorities in the summer of 1944 to think the war 
might be concluded by autumn. The error lay in the 
failure of Allied economic intelligence to appreciate 
the enemy's ability to reconstruct factories and to 
wage a war based on decentralized, even scattered, 
industry. 

The U.S. Army Air Forces are making no inflated 
claims for their bombing assaults against Japan. The 
bombing operations fit into the broad picture of the 
developing pincers against the Asiatic enemy: naval 
disruption of his shipping with the Indies, Sing- 
apore, Thailand and Indo-China, and interference 
with sea communications between Japan and China; 
the military defeats being meted out to Japanese land 
forces in Iwo Jima, the Philippines and Burma; and 
the plan for directly engaging the major portion of 


FOR VICTORY ° 


the Japanese Army through invasion of easter 
China from the sea and eventually of Japan itself 
Strategic air operations are in their pioneer stages 
There has been but one raid using as many as 1,009 
planes; most frequently the attack involves 399 
planes, and some use only 50. These are small num. 
bers. 

JAPAN MORE VULNERABLE. On the other 
hand, Japanese anti-aircraft fire has been unable to 
prevent low-level bombing, and incendiary bombs 
dropped on Japan are more destructive weapons 
than the Allies possessed during the period of stra. 
tegic air attack against Germany. In the long mn, 
the bombing of Japan may produce a more direct 
effect than the bombing of Germany, for Japan's 
industrial efficiency cannot be expected to match that 
of its Axis partner. 

Furthermore, Japanese political stability is more 
shaken by the raids and other adverse military devel. 
opments than the stronger German tyranny. As Ad. 
miral Seizo Kobayashi pressed for the organization of 
a new political party on March 8, he remarked that 
Japan’s mainland ‘‘is now virtually turned into a 
battlefield.” In Japan there are more opportunities 
than in Germany for public protest against official 
policy, and as long ago as January 15 Domei, the Jap- 
anese news agency, reported a “demand by the nation 
for a stronger internal structure to meet the growing 
seriousness of the war.” The Diet recently has been 
the scene of a long debate on the question whether 
Japan was improving its combat airplanes adequately 
to cope with the increasing menace of the B-29. 

In February Japan began to take steps to frustrate 
industrial destruction from the air. On February 13 
the Tokyo radio said that aircraft factories and other 
vital war plants were being moved to Manchuria, 
but this may mask a program for scattering the 
plants around the Japanese islands instead of over 
the Asiatic mainland. Moreover, the instances of 
factionalism which the Japanese radio spreads before 
the world may represent an effort to mislead us into 
thinking the task of victory for the Allies in the 
Pacific simpler than it is. Over-optimistic interprets 
tion of the effect of the bombings would play into 
the hands of the makers of such a propaganda. The 
Administration in Washington is prepared for 4 
long war, that will end only when Japan’s ground 
forces can struggle on no longer. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


Fe 


—— 
Vou. XXI 
—— 


HER 

cedu: 
tation of 
Franciscc 
the forc 
most of 
which a 
tween n 
well-inte 
Nations 
letter un 
allay the 
among t 

MON 
ous tO £ 
from th 
from ce! 
detected 
by neut: 
the zero 
most st 
‘concern 
about t 
against 
would | 
justify 
totalitas 
hope th 
pose no 
for that 
Nation: 
ful, hov 
be reali 
force h 
years w 
have et 
and the 
Church 


