


ave 








GEABRAL *! 
UNIV, OF 


PERIGDICAI. ROee 


Ann Avhae, Mirhioan 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIV, No. 20 


MarcH 2, 1945 





PARLIAMENT BACKS CHURCHILL ON YALTA DECISIONS 


INCE the commitments undertaken at the Crimea 

Conference are’of such far-reaching importance, 
many difficulties can be expected to arise in con- 
nection with their application despite the degree of 
Big Three whity manifested at Yalta and the cohe- 
sion of the Allied armies as they close their grip on 
the Nazis. This will be particularly true with re- 
spect to the plans, which are given only in outline 
form, for the joint occupation of Germany. But of 
greater immediate concern are the proposed estab- 


> lishment of a new Provisional Government for Po- 


land, and the question of France’s relationship to the 
Big Three—problems that indicate the difficulties still 
to be met in implementing the Yalta Declaration. 

BRITAIN’S REACTION TO YALTA. Britain is 
particularly interested in the Polish and French 
questions, for the Polish Government-in-Exile resides 
in London and Britain bears special responsibility in 
devising a method whereby various elements of that 
group may be brought together in the new pro- 
visional régime. Britain is also greatly concerned 
over Anglo-French relations and the eventual status 
of France in Allied councils. It has been left largely 
to British statesmen to acquaint French officials with 
the import of the Yalta decisions. 

In Britain most of the decisions taken by the three 
Allied leaders at Yalta have met with general ap- 
proval. There is great satisfaction over the unity 
which the conference reflected, and both Mr. 
Churchill and Mr. Eden reported its achievements 
to Parliament in a full debate on foreign affairs 
on February 27-28. The Prime Minister asked for 
and received a vote of confidence from the House of 
Commons to demonstrate Britain’s approval of the 
Crimea decisions. 

On any vote concerning the Yalta commitments, 
the Churchill coalition expected to encounter little 
Opposition. But there has been much anxiety among 
Conservatives in Parliament about the decisions con- 


cerning Poland. Some of these members hoped that 
the confidence issue would not be framed directly, 
so that opinion opposed to the Polish solution could 
be expressed fully and openly. Poland figured promi- 
nently in the debate and, while few Conservative 
members were found in final opposition, they have 
consistently been unable to give their wholehearted 
support to the policy which has developed with re- 
spect to Poland. 

COMPROMISE ON POLAND. The Crimea 
Conference provided for the setting up of a com- 
mission, consisting of Foreign Commissar Molotov 
and the British and American Ambassadors in Mos- 
cow, which would be charged with the task of con- 
sulting Polish leaders concerning formation of a 
new Provisional Government of National Unity for 
Poland. Once this commission is established, it 
must determine which of the Polish leaders now in 
London are to be asked to visit Moscow for the 
purpose of organizing the new government. That it 
will be difficult to achieve representation of the 
Government-in-Exile is forecast by the’ complete re- 
pudiation of the Yalta solution which the present 
Premier, M. Arciszewski, has expressed. 

M. Mikolajczyk, former Polish Prime Minister 
and leader of the Peasant party, has also been re- 
luctant to accept the proposed solution. While wel- 
coming the pledge of the Yalta Declaration that a 
strong, free; independent and democratic Poland 
will be established, he has viewed the results of the 
conference respecting Polish borders largely as a 
national defeat. Having reached a definite agree- 
ment through compromise, however, Allied leaders 
will hardly brook opposition in the organization of 
a Polish government consisting of both London 
Poles and members of the Lublin group. The British 
attitude toward the Polish problem appears to re- 
semble the view Prime Minister Churchill recently 
expressed in connection with the reconstruction of 

















the Yugoslav government. At that time Churchill 
announced that if the exiled King Peter did not 
agree to the reforms undertaken, royal assent would 
be presumed. While many Conservatives may find 
it difficult to concede that Russia carries great weight 
in Eastern European affairs, it has been Churchill’s 
consistent policy during the war to accommodate the 
rise of Soviet power in that area, and most Britishers 
will hail with relief the Yalta solution of the Polish 
issue which has so long irritated Allied relations. 

FRANCE AND THE BIG THREE. In the Par- 
liamentary debate, Franco-British relations were 
also discussed, for there is concern in Britain 
lest the projected alliance with France be delayed. 
Moreover, there is no doubt that France expects fur- 
ther clarification of its status with the Big Three 
before the opening of the United Nations confer- 
ence in San Francisco. French reaction to the Yalta 
Conference was clouded first by the fact that Gen- 
eral de Gaulle was not invited to the meeting. Since 
the conference an important section of the French 
press has been critical of de Gaulle’s refusal to meet 
with President Roosevelt at Algiers—the Communist 
press in particular differing on this issue with the 
General for the first time in the field of foreign af- 
fairs. Most Frenchmen, however, have backed de 
Gaulle in his insistence that France be considered 
in all arrangements respecting the final occupation 
of Germany. 

It appears that French reaction to the proposed 


Page Two 








et 
es 


United Nations Security Council is closely relate 
to the alliances France has with Soviet Russia and, 
presumably, will sign with Britain in the near fy. 
ture. The Franco-Soviet pact of December 10, 1944 
unlike the Anglo-Soviet pact of 1942, does not pro- 
vide specifically that the alliance will be reviewed 
in light of arrangements agreed on in a world ge 
curity system. The French alliance with Russia was 
originally conceived as an automatic guarantee. Noy, 
however, the U.S.S.R. appears to approve referring 
the pact to the United Nations organization. Since 
Britain favors the closest relations with France, jt 
devolves on Mr. Churchill and Mr. Eden, who have 
long supported France’s revival, to assure France of 
its future role in Europe and in the world security 
system. 

The British are anxious to conclude a binding 
agreement with France and probably with other na. 
tions across the English Channel. However, they in. 
sist, first, that any such regional arrangements are not 
incompatible with the Dumbarton Oaks proposals 
and, second, that they are not designed as counteralli. 
ances against Russia. Contrary to the expectations of 
many, British reaction to the Franco-Soviet pact was 
favorable—on the ground that Britain’s desire for 
closer ties between the Western European countries 
could not be looked on as anti-Russian if the Soviet 
Union were also tied to the Western countries by 
agreements similar to the 20-year alliance between 


Russia and Britain. GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


LIBERATED ITALY MOVES TOWARD MORE INDEPENDENT STATUS 


The first concrete action toward restoration of 
sovereign independence for liberated Italy has now 
been taken by the Allies. Mr. Harold Macmillan, 
president of the Allied Commission, announced on 


February 24 a series of drastic changes affecting the 


relations between the Commission, which has hith- 
erto enjoyed complete jurisdiction over Italian af- 
fairs for all practical purposes, and the Italian gov- 
ernment, which has had only the most shadowy 
wers. 
WHAT ALLIED ACTION DOES FOR ITALY. 


The significant content of this document can be 


very briefly summarized. It foreshadows a substan- 
tial reduction both of the personnel of the Commis- 


sion and of the sphere of its active operation. The 
Commission will cease to exercise “control” except 
in those military zones along the battlefront where 
AMG will continue to function. For the remainder 
of liberated Italy, which is defined as all of the 


peninsula south of the northern boundaries of Vi- 
terbo, Rieti and Termano provinces, including Sar- 
dinia and Sicily, the Commission will serve in 
relation to the Italian government in a purely con- 
sultative and advisory capacity. 

Specifically, this means that the Italian govern- 


ment regains its freedom to conduct its foreign pol- 
icy with Allied and neutral states, to issue laws and 
decrees without securing the consent of the Com. 
mission, and to make all appointments of personnel 
in the administration on its own responsibility, 
These important concessions must be read, however, 
in conjunction with Mr. Macmillan’s simultaneous 
statement that “the requirements of the Italian cam 
paign and overriding military needs must be pro 
tected and the rights of the Allied Governments 
will be held in reserve in the matter of day-to-day 
administration.” In other words, the Italian govern 
ment’s freedom of action, as one would rightly sup 
pose, is made contingent on the degree to which 
that action may conform with military necessities 

An arrangement such as this has been long fort 
shadowed. On September 26, 1944 President Roose 
velt and Prime Minister Churchill issued jointly 
from Hyde Park a declaration in which they prom 
ised to review Italy’s political and economic situe 
tion. Part of that declaration dealt specifically with 
the establishment of a new relationship between tht 
Italian government and the Allied Control Com 
mission, henceforth to be called the Allied Com 
mission in anticipation of its altered charactet. 


, 








suri 
crisis 
Bono 
the ¢ 
a ne’ 
six L 
but t 
lem 

boliz 
comp 
act ni 
reasc 
Italic 
accol 


that 





$82? 2f 28 il 


li. 
of 
was 
for 
ries 
viet 


por 
and 
om- 
inel 
lity. 
vet, 
-OuS 
am 
pro- 
ents 


efi- 
sup 
hich 
ties. 


‘Ore: | 


Ose: 
intly 
rofl 
itua- 
with 


[om 
om- 
ctet. 


“ 








———— 
— 


Weeks and months passed, however, without signs 
that this promise was being implemented. Early in 
January 1945, there was word from Rome that im- 
portant decisions affecting the status of the Allied 
Commission were pending, but these, too, were 
premature. There were difficulties which had to be 
surmounted. One of these grew out of the political 
crisis which had precipitated the collapse of the first 
Bonomi government in November. Not only did 
the circumstances surrounding the establishment of 
anew Bonomi government, with only four of the 
six Liberation parties cooperating, interpose delays; 
but the differences in approach to the Italian prob- 
lem between the United States and Britain, sym- 
bolized in Britain’s veto of Count Sforza, had to be 
composed. The mere fact that the Allies see fit to 
act now in Italy's behalf indicates both that they have 
reasonable confidence in the stability of the present 
Italian government and that they have reached an 
accord between themselves on future policy toward 
that government. 





From the Italian point of view the February 24 an- 
nouncement is important chiefly for three reasons. 
First, it represents an abandonment of close tutelage 
which has been humiliating and psychologically de- 
pressing. In this sense, it will raise public morale 
and increase the prestige of the government. Sec- 
ond, it will probably protect the Italians against the 
recurrence of such actions as the British interven- 
tion to prevent the naming of Count Sforza as Prime 
Minister or Foreign Minister of the government. 
It would be possible, of course, to undertake such 
intervention on the ground of military necessity, 
but this will be difficult. In other words, a substan- 
tial amount of internal political independence will 
have been gained. Third, the action of the Allies 
will help clear the way toward solution of much 
more pressing questions, particularly in the field of 
economics and finance, which have been under ne- 
gotiation for some time. 


WHAT REMAINS TO BE DONE. The prob- 
lem of food is still the most urgent. Supplies of 
basic necessities are tragically inadequate and the 
black market continues to flourish. Some relief is 
promised by the application on March 1 of a more 
generous bread ration, a daily increase of 300 grams, 
guaranteed by the Allies in accordance with prom- 
ises made by President Roosevelt as early as Octo- 
ber 1944. The difficulty in finding shipping facili- 
ties with which the Allies can support this policy, 
while making other materials available, will remain, 


Page Three 


jcc —. MARK 1 ¢ (34 








however, so long as Western Europe is an active 
theatre of war. 


At the same time, inflation continues and living 
costs mount. The Bonomi government has been try- 
ing to meet this situation but so far without much 
success. During the middle of February sweeping 
financial reforms were projected, including the abolli- 
tion of bread subsidies, the simultaneous raising of 
wages and salaries, increased taxes, a kind of forced 
loan, and the confiscation of excess wealth accumu- 
lated since 1922. Such measures would tend to bring 
governmental expenditures and expected revenues 
closer into line with each other and at the same time 
help to halt the inflationary process. But, in the final 
analysis, this problem cannot be solved until there 
is a substantial arrangement with the Allies, whose 
military and occupation costs remain a first charge 
—and a heavy charge—on the Italian government. 
Eliminating or reducing these charges may be pos- . 
sible only in case the Allies are prepared to take 
Italy into a new political relationship with them- 
selves, that is to say, to terminate Italy’s status of 
“non-belligerency.” 


Technically, Italy remains a cobelligerent and is 
no closer than before to full membership in the 
United Nations, a goal which all Italian patriots 
hope to realize. Even more, they have long desired 
and long agitated for the publication of the Armis- 
tice terms and their modification. But these are still 
intact and still secret, and there is no indication of 
any intention to change them in the recently an- 
nounced Allied policy. 


The Italian problem continues to be an acute and 
difficult one. But progress is being made toward its 
solution, and the Allies’ recent action is an impor- 
tant step in the right direction. Rumors still persist 
that a ‘provisional peace,” first suggested in July 
1944, is being contemplated; and there are clear 
signs that important economic and financial agree- 
ments with Italy are in the offing. 


C. Grove HAINES 


a ee 


The Presidency and the Crisis, by Louis W. Koenig. New 
York, King’s Crown Press, 1944. $2.00 
Analyzes the use of the President’s power from Septem- 
ber 1939 to December 1941, in the severe testing period 
preceding our entry into the war. 


Navies in Exile, by A. D. Divine. New York, E. P. Dutton, 
1944. $2.75 
Dramatic stories of the navies that would not acknowl- 


edge defeat and that made such a valuable contribution 
to the Allies. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 20, MascH 2, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. ¥Y. PRanx Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micug.es Daan, Editor. Batered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


on¢ month for change of address on membership publications. 


1 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under unton condhiens and composed and printed by union labor. 








a — - a 


Washington News Letter 














WILL U.S. LOCAL INTERESTS BLOCK MEXICO WATER TREATY? 


Action by the Senate will soon disclose whether 
one state, California, can cause the defeat of a treaty 
that is of interest to the nation as a whole. The 
Senate Committee on Foreign Relations favorably 
reported the proposed United States-Mexico Water 
Treaty on February 23, but Senator Tom Connally 
of Texas, committee chairman, will not press for 
approval by the full Senate until the close of the 
conference of American Republics now taking place 
in Mexico City. The time interval may enable the 
Administration to bring the country to some under- 
standing of the high meaning of the treaty in our 
international relations. For this is only one in a 
series of agreements with other governments that 
will require Senate ratification in the years ahead. 
If narrow, local interests are able to use the two- 
thirds rule on treaties to prevent a constructive, na- 
tional solution of issues between the United States 
and Mexico, the effect will be most harmful on our 
relations with Latin America as a whole. 

PROBLEM OF THREE RIVERS. The need for 
the treaty lies in the fact that the United States and 
Mexico share the waters of a number of rivers which 
rise in the United States: the Colorado, which flows 
for the last few miles of its length through Mexico; 
the Tijuana, which reaches the sea through Mex- 
ico; and the Rio Grande, which divides Texas from 
Mexico and whose course below Fort Quitman, 
Texas, is fed mainly from Mexican streams. A treaty 
allocation of United States waters to Mexico from 
the Rio Grande above Fort Quitman has been in 
force satisfactorily since its proclamation on Janu- 
ary 16, 1907. The three rivers flow through dry re- 
gions that require irrigation for successful agricul- 
ture, and for irrigation both the United States and 
Mexico need a reasonably steady flow of water. 

On August 19, 1935 Congress passed an Act au- 
thorizing the State Department to study with the 
Mexican government the question of dividing the 
waters from the three rivers. The treaty resulting from 
those studies was submitted to the Senate on Feb- 
ruary 15, 1944. It would guarantee to Mexico 1,500,- 
000 acre-feet of water a year from the Colorado, 
allocate to the United States about half the water 
in the Rio Grande below Fort Quitman although 
far more than half of it originates in Mexico, and 
authorize an inquiry into the best means of con- 
serving, using and allocating the waters of the Ti- 
juana. The treaty would be administered by the 


International Boundary Commission, which was or 
ganized in 1889. 

The chief advocates of the treaty in the United 
States have been the Administration and the Com. 
mittee of Fourteen and Fifteen of the Colorady 
River Basin States (Arizona, California, Colorado, 
Nevada, New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming), whic 
seek a definition of the extent of Mexican rights 
to the use of Colorado River water. The Committee 
fears that, in the absence of a treaty, Mexico might 
use Colorado River water to an extent affecting the 
interests of the United States adversely. In Mexico 
“the irrigated acreage and the use of water both 
have been expanded” since the erection of Boulder 
Dam, Jean S. Breitenstein, attorney for the Colo. 
rado Water Conservation Board, wrote in a memo 
randum last September 20. “If this situation should 
continue and the Mexico development progress, a 
condition would exist in Mexico similar to that 
which the upper basin feared would take place in 
Southern California.” 


CALIFORNIA ARGUES AGAINST TREATY. 
California, on the other hand, says that it fears 
Mexico will get too much water if the treaty goes 
into effect. Governor Earl Warren told the Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee on February 5 that 
war veterans would be unable to take up public 
lands that would be irrigated by Boulder Dam water 
if Mexico shares the water. Yet the water “wast 
ing through Mexican territory into the Gulf of 
California” amounts to 7,000,000 acre-feet a year, 
according to Secretary Stettinius. 

Much of California's Colorado River water flows 
through the All-American Canal and feeds the Im 
perial Irrigation District. The District, an opponent 
of the treaty, has been selling water to Mexico for 
purposes that would be satisfied by the 1,500,000 
acre-feet alloted under the treaty. Evan Newes, presi 
dent of the District, told the Senate Foreign Re 
lations Committee on February 20 that revenues 
from sales of water to Mexico in 1944 were $299- 
240. The District is ‘afraid’ that those revenues 
would be cut off if the treaty is ratified, Senatot 
Connally said on February 12. Thirty-three votes 
against the treaty would kill it; it remains to be seen 
whether that many votes can be mobilized in sup 
port of a local view when the national interest calls 


for ratification. BLAIR BOLLES 


FOR VICTORY * BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 








191 


— 
VoL. | 
— 


M 
whic 
confe 
to on 
indus 
ets b 
all w 
intols 
the 

Brita 


S of re 


comn 
threa 
DI 
tion, 
we t 
the | 
coun 
sibili 
guar 
ment 
stabl 
raw | 
or to 
Ye 
to se 
the 
their 
ence. 
them 
imag 
bility 
that 
inter 
some 
alloy 
tions 


Axis 





