Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


University of MichigatC » 9 
"Yap 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


nged to | Vor. XX, No. 8 


ies; and | 
ely used 
Britain's 
not ex- 
t recent 
ish and} 
y $169. 
to only 
rse, does | 
1ases in| 
advance 
riborhood 
itish are 
insion of 
other mu: | 
» of their | 
an trade. 
n is that} 
e present 
n months 
the Em 


at Britain 
‘al, rather 
mic field, 
ted State 


mut repeal 
ple, could 


int expalr 
sity. The 
d to bu 
ht extent 
rith Grea 
are being 


the dired 
repared 
war effort 
may wel 
‘ashingto® 


'. STONE 


—_—__ 


DECEMBER 13, 1940 


ORLD attention has been diverted from 

German raids on British cities and shipping to 
the Mediterranean theatre of war by the shake-up 
effected in the Italian high command over the week- 
end of December 7; the continued advance of the 
Greeks, who on December 8 captured the Italian 
base at Argyrokastron; and reports of food and raw 
material shortages in Italy. In a series of changes 
apparently designed to prepare a counter-thrust 
against the Greeks in Albania and the British Medi- 
terranean fleet, Mussolini assumed supreme com- 
mand of the armed forces and accepted the “resig- 
nations” of older and perhaps more cautious war 
leaders. General Badoglio, who is reported to have 
opposed the Albanian campaign, was replaced as 
Chief of Staff by the younger General Cavallero, re- 
garded as an ardent Fascist. General de Vecchi, who 
had participated with I/ Duce in the March on Rome, 
was succeeded as governor of the Dodecanese 
Islands by General Bastico, a veteran of the Ethi- 
opian and Spanish wars. Admiral Riccardi, who has 
the xeputation of being a brilliant officer familiar 
with coordination of air and naval forces, was ap- 
pointed naval Chief of Staff and Under-Secretary of 
the Navy, replacing Admiral Cavagnari; while Ad- 
mitral Jacchini was given the title of “Commander 
of the Fleet on the Sea.” 


These rapid changes presage a vigorous Italian 
attempt to stem the tide of the Greek advance. Gen- 
etal Metaxas, the Greek Premier, is fully aware of 
the fact that the victories of his forces can be main- 
tained only if Greece is supplied with airplanes and 
military equipment to resist the anticipated Italian 
counter-attack, and his appeal to President Roosevelt 
indicated the urgent character of his country’s needs. 
At the same time, Italy’s contemplated counterattack 
in Albania may be hampered by the offensive which 
the British launched against the Italian forces in 
Egypt on December 9. 


ITALY GRAPPLES WITH MILITARY AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS 


ITALY’S ECONOMIC PROBLEMS. In reorgan- 
izing its Albanian campaign, moreover, Italy is con- 
fronted not merely with military but also with eco- 
nomic difficulties. Italy was relatively unaffected by 
the first ten months of the European war, since, as a 
non-belligerent, it could maintain communications 
with overseas countries, notably the United States 
and Latin America. When Italy entered the war in 
June 1940, Britain promptly extended its blockade 
to the Mediterranean; and the British blockade has 
disorganized Italy’s economy to a far greater degree 
than have military operations, as pointed out by Wil- 
liam N. Hazen in a report recently issued by the 
United States Department of Agriculture. 


It is estimated that, in peace time, 84 per cent of 
Italy's imports arrived by sea, of which 80 per cent 
had to pass through Gibraltar and 5 per cent through 
the Suez,Canal, both controlled by Britain, with an 
additional 5 per cent passing through the Darda- 
nelles. Under normal circumstances, Italy received via 
Gibraltar and Suez 80 per cent of its cotton imports, 
90 per cent of its wool imports, all of its rubber and 
jute, 70 per cent of its cereal grain imports, two-thirds 
of its fats and oil imports, and all of its foreign pur- 
chases of coffee and meats. Since its entrance into 
the war, Italy has been cut off from overseas sup- 
plies of fats, oils and meats—the three food prod- 
ucts in which, despite Mussolini’s self-sufficiency ef- 
forts, it is most deficient. As a result, the Fascist 
government has prohibited consumption of coffee; 
has introduced rationing of sugar, fats, spaghetti and 
rice; has adulterated flour; has designated four days 
of the week when no beef, veal or chicken can be 
sold; and may be expected to inaugurate further 
restrictions in the near future. 


The Italian people are confronted not only with 
rationing of essential foodstuffs, but also with a 
sharp rise in prices: (estimated at well over 30 per 
cent even before Italy entered the war), which the 


government authorities have failed to control. 
Fascist calculations in June were apparently based, 
first, on the assumption that the war would prove of 
short duration; and then, when Britain did not sur- 
render following the collapse of France, that Italy 
might be able to replenish its food resources with 
imports from Spain, Portugal, Scandinavia and the 
Balkans. The food reserves of the continental coun- 
tries, however, have been for the most part appropri- 
ated by Germany; and far from sharing these re- 
serves with Italy, Berlin is apparently pressing the 
Italians for additional deliveries of food. On De- 
cember 5 it was disclosed that Italy had signed an 
agreement with Germany undertaking to increase 
food exports to the Reich, notably fruits and vege- 
tables, by intensifying its farm production and giv- 
ing aid to farmers, while the Reich promised to 
stabilize agricultural prices by eliminating “specu- 
lative” competition on world markets. That these 
measures will necessitate increasingly drastic control 
of Italy’s farmers was indicated on December 7, 
when the government announced its decision to im- 
pose heavy penalties on farmers who withhold their 
produce from compulsory stozage, as well as on mine 
owners who fail to speed up operations. 


SHORTAGE OF RAW MATERIALS. In addi- 
tion to food problems, Italy is also experiencing a 
shortage of strategic raw materials such as rubber, 
cotton, wool and jute. The Hazen report states that 
Italy's cotton reserves will be depleted by the end 
of 1940, and declares that on September 1, 1940 
the Pirelli rubber company (Italy's largest producer 


Page Two 


——l 
~~ 


of rubber goods), indicated it ‘would soon be com. 

pelled to reduce its activities drastically because of ’ 
lack of supplies.” It also suggests that the Italiag | 
drive into Egypt, launched in September, may haye | 
been undertaken, among other things, ‘for the pur. | 
pose of replenishing Italy's diminishing supplies of | 
cotton and vital foodstuffs.” Italy, moreover, is be. | 
lieved to be suffering from a shortage of oil, and its 

war with Greece may deprive it of between 100,009 | 
and 200,000 tons of crude oil which Italian refinerie 

had been annually importing from Albania. | 


While military reverses and economic privations 
may shake the morale of the Italian people, who | 
have shown little or no enthusiasm for the war, jt 
would be hazardous to anticipate an internal col. 
lapse in Italy. The Italians are being subjected t 
rapidly increasing economic pressure, but they are | 
by no means on the verge of starvation; and unde 
a revitalized military command Italy may still prove | 
capable of striking a heavy blow at Greece and a 
British forces in the Mediterranean. Moreover, im | 
portant as the Mediterranean theatre of war appears | 
at the moment, it should not divert world attention 
from the British Isles, on which Germany continue 
to center its attacks. For if British industrial produc j 
tion should be seriously slowed down by German| 
air raids, and British sea communications jeopardized | 
by German and Italian submarines, Anglo-Greek 
successes against Italy would prove a hollow victory, 
which might leave both Britain and Italy at the] 
mercy of the Reich. | 

VERA MICHELES DEAN | 


SPAIN EXACTS PRICE FOR PEACE 


Britain’s renewed efforts to coordinate its military 
operations with simultaneous moves on the diplo- 
matic front are strikingly illustrated in Spain. On 
December 8, after more than a month of negotia- 
tions between London and Madrid, the British gov- 
ernment announced that it had granted facilities for 
shipping to Spain 6,000 tons of manganese ore, ur- 
gently needed by the Spanish steel industry. Half of 
this ore, as well as a large quantity of jute, is to be 
imported from India. The British Broadcasting Cor- 
poration announced on December 8 that Britain was 
also investigating the practicability of sending a 
large supply of wheat to Spain, where there is an 
acute shortage of whole flour, milk, meats and other 


JUST OUT! The first of a series of reports on the 


military defenses of this country. 


THE U.S. ARMY IN TRANSITION 
by David H. Popper 


25c 


December 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


essential foodstuffs. A trade agreement involving 
the importation of foodstuffs, in fact, is the subject 
of negotiations which Madrid is now conducting 
with both Britain and the United States. 


ANGLO-AMERICAN-SPANISH TRADE, 
TALKS. A preliminary step toward a comprehensive 
commercial arrangement between Spain and Britain 
was taken at Madrid on December 2, when the two 
countries signed a payments agreement giving Spail 
the right to use frozen credits totaling several hur 
dred thousand pounds for purchases in the United 
Kingdom and the sterling area. The following da 
British authorities agreed to grant without delay 
navicerts for shipment of a million tons of wheat t0 
Spain, and promised to issue additional permits # 
soon as the Spanish government obtains Americal 
credits for the purchase of other supplies, whid 
would probably include wheat, frozen meat, gase 
line, cotton and rubber. Officials of the United State 
Embassy in Madrid participated in informal cot 
ferences with British and Spanish trade experts lat 
in October; and it was reported from the Spanisl 


—— 


capita 
the U: 
hope | 
war. J 
owing 
demot 
tion Vv 
the rij 
ica. O 
onstra 
trade 
On D 
that tl 
for a 
puted! 
definit 
it was 
the A 
lion d 

BRI 
appare 
Spain 
Britair 
plies t 
recent 
Kingd 
space 
Minis} 
restric 
furthe 
Spain 
its ex] 
Britist 


The Re 
Miffi 
A ra 
keen ar 
impres 
lutiona 


“21 to 
You, 
New 


Two 
ism, th 
ment t 
pects f 
useful 


Siam 3 
Univ 
The 

develoy 

heaval 
and cu 
pendic 

_—_—_—_—_ 

FOREIG 

Headqua: 

Entered 


ei 


€ Com. | 
use of | 
Italian 
y have | 
1¢€ pur 
lies of 
_ IS be. 
and its 
00,000 | 
fineries 
al 
Vations | 
€, who | 
war, it 
al col. | 
cted to 
1ey ate | 
1 under | 
I prove | 
and at | 
rer, im- | 
appears 
ttention 
yn tinues 
produc 
Serman 
ardized | 
o-Greek 
victory, 
at the 


EAN 


volving 
+ subject 
iducting 


“RADE) 
ehensive| 
| Britain 
the two 
1g Spat 
ral hue 
United 
ying day 
it delay 
wheat t0 
‘rmits a 
\ merical 
;. whid 
at, gase 
ed States 
nal com 
erts late 
Spanish 


capital on November 12 that Britain had requested 
the United States to provide Spain with food in the 
hope of inducing General Franco to stay out of the 
war. At that time the negotiations proved fruitless, 
owing to vigorous Spanish press attacks and student 
demonstrations against the United States in connec- 
tion with reports that Washington was to acquire 
the right to use naval and air bases in South Amer- 
ica. On November 21, however, anti-American dem- 
onstrations suddenly ceased, and the three-cornered 
trade talks proceeded in a more cordial atmosphere. 
On December 7 Secretary of State Hull indicated 
that the Spanish government has asked this country 
for a substantial loan to purchase foodstuffs — re- 
putedly at least $100,000,000 — but said that no 
definite agreement had yet been reached. Unofficially, 
it was reported that Washington was ready to permit 
the American Red Cross to give Spain several mil- 
lion dollars’ worth of food supplies. 


BRITAIN, SPAIN AND THE WAR. Britain is 
apparently determined to make every effort to keep 
Spain from entering the war on the side of the Axis. 
Britain’s agreement to facilitate the shipment of sup- 
plies to Spain is all the more significant in view of 
recent curtailments of food imports into the United 
Kingdom itself. In order to conserve vital shipping 
space for essential war materials, the British Food 
Ministry between November 26 and December 2 
restricted imports of eggs and meat, and banned 
further imports of all fruit except oranges. Since 
Spain pays for its purchases from Britain largely with 
its exports of oranges to the United Kingdom, the 
British government has bought this year’s entire 


Page Three 


crop of Spanish bitter oranges, and is now negotiat- 
ing for large shipments of sweet oranges. British 
trade concessions to Spain reflect the importance that 
London attaches to Spanish neutrality, and indicate 
Britain’s apparent conviction that Madrid can be 
prevented from giving military support to the Axis 
only if it receives from Britain supplies it cannot 
obtain from Germany and Italy. At the same time, 
London is forced to consider the danger of strength- 
ening a potential enemy, as it helped strengthen 
Italy prior to Rome's entry into the conflict last June. 


The Spanish people clearly want to avoid another 
war in the wake of their bitter civil strife, but Spain’s 
territorial aspirations in Africa, Gibraltar and south- 
ern France can be fulfilled only as a result of a final 
Axis victory. On December 8 the newspaper Arriba, 
official organ of the Spanish government party 
Falange Espafiola, warned France that Spain’s terri- 
torial claims were irrevocable, and that the Vichy 
government would be called on to prove the sin- 
cerity of its professed friendship. Berlin and Rome, 
in turn, may expect Franco to give them active 
aid — rather than mere friendly support — if Spain 
is to profit from an Axis victory. Since Gibraltar 
could be attacked successfully only from Spanish 
territory, Spain might eventually be dragged into 
the war by Germany and Italy despite Britain’s ap- 
parent willingness to pay a high price for Franco's 


neutrality. A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 


FOR A penetrating analysis of Germany’s internal situa- 
tion, listen in next Sunday to John C. deWilde, who will 
broadcast on the FPA’s radio program from 2:15 to 
2:30 p.m. E.S.T. 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The Revolution is On, by M. W. Fodor. Boston, Houghton 
Mifflin, 1940. $2.75 
A rather superficial and hastily written book in which a 
keen and experienced European journalist gives his personal 
impressions of the Blitzkrieg and his thoughts on the revo- 
lutionary character of Nazism, Fascism and Communism. 


“21 to 35”: What the Draft and Army Training Mean to 
You, by William H. Baumer, Jr. and Sidney F. Giffen. 
New York, Prentice-Hall, 1940. $1.00 


Two West Point instructors describe the draft mechan- 
ism, the organization of the Army, the process of assign- 
ment to units and basic military training, and the pros- 
pects for personal improvement and advancement. A very 
useful manual for the selective service trainee. 


Siam in Transition, by Kenneth Perry Landon. Chicago, 
University of Chicago Press, 1939. $2.50 


The most detailed and authoritative study on recent 
developments in Siam, covering the 1932-33 political up- 
heaval and current trends in economic, political, social 
and cultural fields. A set of substantial documentary ap- 
pendices enhances the value of the book. 


Suez and Panama, by André Siegfried. New York, Har- 
court, Brace, 1940. $3.00 


An eminently readable and well-illustrated account of 
the history of the two great inter-oceanic canals, with an 
examination of their political and commercial importance 
today. 


Hitler’s War and Eastern Europe, by M. Philips Price. 
New York, Macmillan, 1940. $1.25 
A British Laborite M.P. gives a rather sketchy account 
of the historical and economic background of the rivalry 
of the great powers over Poland and the Balkans. His 
concluding chapters have been invalidated by the passage 
of time. 


Treaty Relations of the British Commonwealth of Nations, 
by Robert B. Stewart. New York, Macmillan, 1939. $5.00 


A scholarly analysis of legal relationships existing 
among constituent parts of the British Empire, with 
special emphasis on the progress which the Dominions and 
India have made toward independence in conducting their 
own foreign policies. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 8, DecemMBErR 13, 1940. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


e181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotuHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicuHeiges Dran, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Nationa! 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


sttbes, 


peed ebag 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Dec. 9.—As Treasury officials of Britain and the 
United States begin their formal conversations on 
the financing of British war purchases, it is important 
to make a clear distinction between technical eco- 
nomic questions on the one hand, and the funda- 
mental political issue on the other.* 

The conversations between Sir Frederick Phillips, 
Undersecretary of the British Treasury, and Secre- 
tary Morgenthau were opened last week on the tech- 
nical plane as a first step toward determining the 
status of Britain’s financial resources in this country. 
Also conducted on a technical basis were simultane- 
ous negotiations with a British Shipping’ Mission 
which is seeking rapid expansion of American ship- 
building facilities to offset tonnage losses at sea 
and reduced production in British yards. Both of 
these problems and many others—the rate of air- 
plane deliveries, priorities on critical war materials, 
and expansion of plant capacity—traise difficult and 
sometimes debatable questions. Yet Washington is 
well aware that all of these technical problems are 
subordinate to, and determined by, the fundamental 
political issue. 

THE PARAMOUNT ISSUE. It is doubtful 
whether the average American realizes how much 
the political issue has been sharpened in recent 
weeks. Since Germany's failure to carry out its 
threatened invasion of the British Isles, the conflict 
has become a war of aitrition in which Britain’s 
ability to continue depends far more directly on the 
United States. This was made perfectly clear by Lord 
Lothian on his return from London, and has been 
underlined emphatically by other official British 
spokesmen. They have left no doubt that they are 
prepared to throw everything into the balance, and 
are teady to wage a long war; but they have not 
hes .ated to point out that their own ability to plan 
for the future rests on decisions which can be taken 
only in the United States. In effect, therefore, the 
United States has already become the decisive factor, 
not merely for 1941 but for the years ahead. 


In the immediate future, it may still be possible 
to contemplate greater industrial, financial and diplo- 
matic aid to Britain without affecting the political 
formula of measures short of war. This appears to 
be the position taken by Mr. Joseph P. Kennedy, who 
announced his resignation as Ambassador to Lon- 
don in order to “help the President keep the United 


*For a discussion of the economic questions, cf. Washington News Letter, 
Foreign Policy Bulletin, December 6, 1940. 


States out of war.” It is also the position taken by 
others among the President’s advisers who belieye 
that we should support the British in order to gain 
time for our own defense effort, but oppose direct 
military intervention as disastrous for this country 
and futile for Britain. The difficulties of this posi- 
tion will increase, however, as British needs begin 
to conflict with the long-term defense needs of the 
United States, especially since the American economy 
continues to function at a peace-time rather than 
a wartime pace. In fact, the National Defense Com. 
mission is already struggling with this dilemma, 
since its mass production program will not reach a 
peak before the spring of 1942, while Britain is 
calling for mass deliveries in 1941. 

But the political issue cannot be postponed in- 
definitely for, if Washington should hesitate too 
long, Britain may be compelled to choose other al- 
ternatives. In the next few months Britain may be 
placed in an extremely serious position by Germany's 
airplane and submarine campaign, and require over- 
night far greater assistance and promise of assistance 
than most Americans have yet been willing to con- 
template. A negotiated peace is not in sight today, 
and responsible quarters here continue to discount 
the undercover talk of new peace feelers. Neverthe. 
less, the prospect of a long war of exhaustion inevi- 
tably raises the question of a negotiated settlement, 
in which the interests of the United States as well 
as Britain would be directly involved. 

On the basis of the present military position, a 
negotiated peace might seem to leave the British Em- 
pire intact while recognizing Germany's hegemony 
on the continent. British sea power has not been 
destroyed in either the Atlantic or the Mediterranean, 
and Hitler has failed to demonstrate that air power 
alone is capable of delivering a knockout blow. As 
several commentators have pointed out, however, 4 
“peace” with Hitler would be likely to involve more 
than German dominance in Europe. It would almost 
certainly mean that Germany would gain permanent 
access to submarine and air bases from Norway 10 
Spain, and increased power to press its trade and 
colonial demands outside of Europe. Moreover, it 
would presuppose a government in London ready 
and willing to work in harmony with the totalitarian 
masters of Europe. 

To the United States such a prospect is far from 
palatable. But the alternative is equally harsh, if it 
involves American participation in a long and 


bitter war. W.T. STONE 


HE 


Pret 
ported 
yoisin t 
Gamel 
effects | 
can be 
French 
Marshz 
into cl 
and Af 
conside 
ity of 
becomi 
throug’ 
French 
their p 
the wa 
the rac 
ever, | 
France 
“new 
colonie 
Britair 
with 
with C 
details 
out by 
coup < 
templ: 
with t 
of Na 
mony 
plann: 
urged 

PO: 
may | 
eral at 


had v 


