






















the 


Ut, 


on, 


ines 








fn inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


ROUM 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


te 


A mia?’ 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


pict 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





Yo. XIX, No. 23 


MarcH 29, 1940 





ee 


Forthcoming FPA Meetings 
March 30 New York Where Does Our National Interest Lie? 
April 1 Worcester The Struggle for the Balkans 
April 2 Baltimore Problems in the Far East 
April 9 Utica The United States and the Strife of Europe 
April 12 Baltimore Europe at War 
13 Albany Canada in World Affairs 
Elmira Toward a World Federal Government 
26 Springfield The British Empire under Fire 





Entered 


as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at che Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under che act 
of March 3, 1879. 











APR 1 1949 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 








April 
April 23 
April 





—_ 


— 


THE ALLIES AND GERMANY COME TO GRIPS 





§ Sumner Welles returns from his mission, the 
European belligerents are girding themselves 
for a test of strength. In France Paul Reynaud has 
taken over the reins of a new government committed 
to “fight and win.” In Britain popular demand for 
more vigorous conduct of the war has produced a 
determination to press attacks on Nazi Germany 
from the air and on the sea. And in Rumania the 
Allies and Germany are once more coming to grips 
ina struggle for control of oil and food supplies. 
REYNAUD DISPLACES DALADIER. The resig- 
nation of the Daladier Cabinet on March 20 came 
as a surprise to the outside world. The secrecy 
which had surrounded sessions of the French Parlia- 
ment, together with the rigid censorship of news 
dispatches, concealed the development of a govern- 
ment crisis. The Russo-Finnish peace, marking a de- 
feat for Allied diplomacy, apparently brought to a 
head the growing, but ill-defined criticism that the 
government was not sufficiently enterprising and 
dating in its prosecution of the war. The Right and 
the Center, which have always been anxious to crusade 
against the Soviet Union, attacked the Cabinet for 
its failure to support Finland more actively; while 
the Socialists, the largest party in the Chamber, 
appeared to have taken advantage of the Cabinet's 
embarrassment to press their demands for represen- 
tation in the government. On March 19 a majority 
of the Chamber abstained from giving Daladier a 
vote of confidence. Although but one vote was 
definitely cast in opposition, the government de- 
cided to force the issue by resigning. 

The new French Premier, Paul Reynaud, ac- 
quired a reputation for great vigor and ability by 
Straightening out the country’s disordered public 
finances. An uncompromising opponent of Nazi 
Germany, he is expected to be unyielding in his de- 
tetmination to carry on the war. While taking over 
personal direction of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 





he has left Edouard Daladier in charge of the War 
Office. Many of the Ministers of the previous Cab- 
inet remain, although an effort to broaden its base 
was made through the inclusion of three Socialists, 
notably Georges Monnet, who has become Minister 
of Blockade. It is significant that M. Reynaud 
dropped Daladier’s Minister of Justice, Georges 
Bonnet, who as Foreign Minister was identified with 
the ill-starred Munich agreement. 

The Reynaud government survived its first test 
in the Chamber by a majority of only one vote which, 
by subsequent changes, was increased to 17. The 
Right, and part of the Center, frankly criticized the 
participation of the Socialists. While M. Reynaud 
was determined to preserve the democratic and pat- 
liamentary character of the Cabinet, the Right ex- 
pressed preference for a government which would 
less obviously reflect the predominant political com- 
position of the Chamber. At the same time, a con- 
siderable number of Radical Socialists abstained 
because of resentment that their chief, Daladier, 
had been unjustly maneuvered out of the Premier- 
ship. While these political intrigues reveal that the 
social schism in France has not been fully bridged, 
they have not endangered the continuation of par- 
liamentary government, even in the critical war 
period. Exacerbation of internal strife may ultimate- 
ly handicap the country’s military efforts, but for 
the moment virtually the entire French people still 
desire to fight the war to the bitter end. 

BRITAIN TIGHTENS THE SCREWS. In 
Britain Prime Minister Chamberlain has so far man- 
aged to stave off demands for the infusion of new 
blood into his Cabinet. The popular cry for more 
action was partly satisfied, however, by a series of 
air raids on the German seaplane base at the Isle 
of Sylt on March 19. This prompt reprisal for the 
German bombardment of Scapa Flow buoyed up 
public morale, even though subsequent reports by 





— ———_ — 


eee 
2 an ete a I eR nm 














—————————— Page Two 


neutral observers cast doubt on the claims that much 


damage was done. Such raids may become more fre- 


quent as larger deliveries of American planes help 
the Allies to overcome the small margin of superi- 
ority which the Germans still retain in the air. 
The blockade against Germany is also tightening. 
If protests from Oslo are any indication, the British 
are becoming less scrupulous about entering Nor- 
wegian territorial waters to check on the movement 
of German merchantmen. On March 22 a British 
submarine penetrated the Kattegat and torpedoed 
a German freighter carrying Swedish iron ore; and 
two days later a German collier was sunk off the 
Danish coast. Oliver Stanley, Britain’s War Minis- 
ter, may have announced a new policy on March 20 
when he declared: “We have learned it is the per- 
son who ignores the rights of the neutrals who gets 
the advantage.” 

NEW TEST IN RUMANIA. Allied influence 
will be subjected to a severe test in the negotiations 
between Germany and Rumania which began on 
March 22 after the arrival in Bucharest of Dr. Karl 
Clodius, the Reich’s “traveling salesman.” In the 
previous round of the struggle for Rumanian trade 
the British won at least a partial victory, but ter- 
mination of the Russo-Finnish war in the meantime 
has brought a shift in the balance of power. The 
German government may promise to protect Buchar- 
est from the fate which befell Finland, provided 
Rumania adjusts its economic life to serve the war 
needs of the Reich. Dr. Clodius is anxious to im- 
plement the German-Rumanian agreement of 


GANDHI WINS VICTORY IN ALL-INDIA CONGRESS 


The fifty-third annual meeting of the All-India 
Nationalist Congress ended at Ramgarh on March 
20 with a vote of plenary powers to Mahatma 
Gandhi. After five years in political retirement, Mr. 
Gandhi has emerged to lead the Congress once 
more in its efforts to wrest independence from Great 
Britain. Throughout the sessions of the Congress 
he advocated moderation and compromise as the 
best methods for winning independence, and on 
several occasions defeated the left-wing bloc, 
headed by Subhas Chandra Bose, which favored a 
more vigorous policy. As a prelude to further ne- 
gotiations with the British Viceroy, Mr. Gandhi de- 
manded strict party discipline and allegiance to his 
principle of non-violence. ““We must break the bond 
of slavery,” he declared, “but if I am your general 
you must accept my conditions.” 

CONTINUANCE OF DEADLOCK. Mahatma 
Gandhi's return to open leadership in the Congress 

is a new and important development in the 
struggle which has been going on since the outbreak 
of war in Europe.* On November 5 the Viceroy, 


***India Asks for Freedom,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, November 3, 1939. 











March 1939 in which Rumania undertook to step y 
its production of goods that Germany lacks. jy 
cently the Bucharest government has repeatedly », 
pressed its intention to raise the output of industy 
mining and agriculture, although denying the ip, 
plication that this increased production was to } 
earmarked for the Reich. Germany has built up, 
sizeable clearing balance in its favor through th 
delivery of machinery and equipment, and oy 
wants to capitalize on its investments by drawi 
more extensively on Rumania for oil, fibers and food 
Dr. Clodius faces many difficulties. By keeping 
about 1,600,000 men under arms Rumania is & 
nuding its farms of much-needed labor. The jy 
efficiency of the Rumanian system of administratis, 
is another obstacle to the improvement of transpo, 
tation facilities and an increase in production. }. 
pectations of any significant rise in Rumanian gj 
output also seem doomed to disappointment. Th 
progressive exhaustion of the country’s oil reserva 
is reflected in the publication of production figure 
for 1939, which reveal a total of 6,154,000 metric 
tons compared with 6,600,000 tons the preceding 
year. On the other hand, the political constellation 
is certainly more favorable to Germany. The pres 
tige of the Allies in the Balkans has sunk to a ney 
low; and the prospect of closer cooperation be. 
tween Moscow, Rome and Berlin has its effect m 
every Balkan capital. The Allies will have to a 
promptly and effectively to counteract this growing 
German influence. 
JOHN C. DEWILDE 


Lord Linlithgow, announced that his conference 
with Indian leaders had failed and that he would 
resort to his emergency powers. By November 1}, 
the ministries in the eight provinces controlled by 
the Congress party had resigned, leaving the provin- 
cial Governors to rule by decree. The Viceroy’s te 
peated offers to include representatives of the Con 
gress party and the Moslem League in his Executive 
Council for the duration of the war were rejected 





by both groups. The Viceroy, speaking at Bombuy 


on January 11, pledged eventual Dominion status to | 


India in a conciliatory speech which, according to 


Mr. Gandhi, “contained the germ of a settlement.” | 


A conference between Lord Linlithgow and Mr 
Gandhi on February 5 proved fruitless, however, 
and on March 1 the Congress Working Committee 
passed a resolution threatening to renew civil dis 
obedience. 

The negotiations of recent months have broken 
down largely on the issue of Hindu-Moslem rela 
tions. The All-India Moslem League, headed by Ali 
Jinnah, insists that the 77,000,000 Moslems of India 
receive adequate rights and a proportionate shatt 














— 


in bot! 
der an 
gress 
Congr 
as Spo 
for b 
rove 
4 Mo: 
ptesid 
gover: 
toric 
prerec 
consis 
ent ct 
cern | 
a desi 
East. 
G/ 
the I 
alizec 
work 
depei 
legia 
split 
wher 
Gan 
denc 
drasi 








@ Pad we SS 


BS Fa Bos 2 Oe 


amRSeSarekws 8 


i0n 
res, 


ala 
Ali 


are 








—_—_ 
—_ 





in both the central and provincial governments un- 
der any future constitution, and denies that the Con- 
gress party represents the Moslem minority. The 
Congress party, on the other hand, assails Mr. Jinnah 
as spokesman for the Moslems, and claims to speak 
for both the Moslem and Hindu populations. To 
prove its point, the Congress on February 15 chose 
a Moslem, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, as its new 
president, succeeding Rajendra Prasad. The British 

vernment, meanwhile, has insisted that the his- 
toric Hindu-Moslem conflict must be settled as a 
prerequisite for self-government. The British have 
consistently upheld the Moslems through the pres- 
ent constitutional crisis—partly out of genuine con- 
cern for the rights of a minority and partly out of 
a desire to win Moslem support throughout the Near 
East. 

GANDHI'S TACTICS. The difficulty of solving 
the Hindu-Moslem controversy has long been re- 
alized by Mahatma Gandhi, who has persistently 
worked for national unity as a basis for national in- 
dependence. His present demand for complete al- 
legiance to his leadership, however, results from a 
split within the Congress party itself. Since 1938, 
when Subhas Chandra Bose was forced by Mr. 
Gandhi's collaborators to resign the Congress presi- 
dency, the radical wing has been demanding more 
drastic opposition to Britain and a program of so- 


Page Three 
cialism for India. Mahatma Gandhi, adhering to his 














life-long program of non-violence, has refused to 
sanction any policy that might provoke bloodshed, 
but has found i difficult to hold back his younger 
and more impatient followers. To make sure that 
any new mass movement for Indian we eH 
is limited to non-violent action, he is therefore com- 
pelled to consolidate his leadership and demand 
party discipline. 

The next few months will probably find both the 
British Government and the Congress party play- 
ing for time and maneuvering to find some work- 
able compromise. Mahatma Gandhi would probably 
be satisfied if the British would pledge Dominion 
status, effective at the end of the present Euro- 
pean war, and to make some immediate conces- 
sions. Such an offer would satisfy most of the 
Congress party and yet avoid any possibility of vio- 
lence. The British would insist upon protection for 
the various minorities and the Native States, and 
upon safeguards covering defense and commerce. 
Although the breakdown of the 1935 constitution 
makes a compromise far more difficult, some work- 
ing agreement is desirable, particularly so that the 
provincial ministries may return to office and the 
central régime may develop federation and self- 


overnment. 
é JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The Voice of Destruction (Hitler Speaks), by Hermann 
Rauschning. New York, Putnam’s, 1940. $2.75 
The record of these conversations with Hitler seem des- 
tined to rank with Mein Kampf as an index to the Ftihrer’s 
political philosophy. 


International Security, by Eduard Benes, Arthur Feiler, 
Rushton Coulborn, and edited by W. H. C. Laves. Chi- 
eago, University of Chicago Press, 1939. $2.00 


The Harris Foundation lectures given in July 1939. 
With rare insight into human factors which determine 
foreign policy, the authors review post-World War efforts 
to assure peace. If any one generalization can fit the views 
of three independent observers, it might be that the value 
of collective security has not been disproved, but rather 
that collective security has temporarily ceased to function 
for want of support by individualistic governments of the 
great powers. 


Political Handbook of the World, edited by Walter H. Mal- 
lory. New York, Harpers, for Council on Foreign Rela- 
tions, 1940. $2.50 
An indispensable source of reference for information on 

the governments, parties, leaders and press of all countries. 

Completely revised to January 1, 1940. 


For What Do We Fight? by Norman Angell. New York, 
Harpers, 1940. $2.50 


A realistic and stimulating discussion of the factors 
underlying the present discussion of war aims and peace 
aims. The author argues that “the supreme grievance of 
every state is absence of security. Until that is redressed, 
the redress of none other counts.” 


The Fate of Man, by H. G. Wells. New York, Alliance 
Book Corp., 1939. $2.50 
The New World Order, by H. G. Wells. New York, Knopf, 
1940. $1.50 
A world-famous pamphleteer and prophet addresses 
minds which have suddenly become “alarmed and open 
and inquiring” because of the war. The Fate of Man—a 
philosophy of realistic pessimism—bespeaks an urgent need 
for human adaptation to changed conditions; The New 
World Order points the way through social revolution, 
scientifically planned and legally executed, based on re- 
spect for individual freedom. 


Finland, by J. Hampden Jackson. New York, Macmillan, 
1940. $2.00 


A well-written historical and interpretative study, con- 
taining most of the answers to questions which constantly 
arise over news from Finland. 


You Americans, edited by F. P. Adams. New York, Funk & 
Wagnalls, 1939. $2.50 
Fifteen correspondents of leading European, Asiatic and 
Latin American newspapers—accustomed to describing 
America for foreign readers—now tell Americans what 
they think of this country. Both revealing and instructive. 


Kodo: The Way of the Emperor, by Mary A. Nourse. New 
York, Bobbs-Merrill, 1940. $3.50 


A history of Japan’s development since the earliest 
times, written in a popular and readable style. The intro- 
ductory chapters on the origins of Japanese culture and 
civilization are especially interesting and valuable for the 
lay reader. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 23, March 29, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Legr, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dgan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


<> 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 





vee 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Mar. 25.—When Under-Secretary Sumner Welles 
returns to Washington this week he will find that 
the official atmosphere has undergone a subtle 
change during his absence in Europe. Whatever he 
may be able to report to the President and Secretary 
Hull on the results of his fact-finding mission, he 
will encounter a deeper suspicion of any peace move 
and a stronger resistance to further diplomatic ac- 
tion by the United States at this time. 


PRAISE FOR WELLES—REBUKE TO CROM- 
WELL. In every quarter there is genuine praise for 
the manner in which Mr. Welles conducted himself 
in Europe, and even those who were most critical 
of his journey at the outset are ready to concede 
that he carried out a difficult assignment with un- 
usual skill. But these tributes to the Under-Secre- 
tary’s professional ability do not entirely conceal the 
apprehensions of that section of Washington opin- 
ion which is most opposed to any negotiated settle- 
ment under existing conditions. Despite the appar- 
ent failure to find a practicable basis for negotia- 
tions, this group believes that another effort to end 
the war will be made, if and when Germany suc- 
ceeds in uniting Italy and the Soviet Union in a 
bloc capable of dictating a settlement. 

Presumably Mr. Welles will be able to give the 
President a full account of the feverish diplomatic 
maneuvering which accompanied the conference be- 
tween Hitler and Mussolini at the Brenner Pass on 
March 18. Last week, however, State Department 
officials professed to be mystified by reports of an 
alleged 11-point program carried in newspaper dis- 
patches from Rome, and Washington joined Ber- 
lin, London and other capitals in denying any 
knowledge of this particular proposal. Neverthe- 
less, the haste with which the White House sought 
to repudiate the story, and to minimize the possi- 
bility of peace proposals, gave further evidence of 
the Administration’s desire to steer clear of involve- 
ment at this stage. Mr. Roosevelt made this evi- 
dent at his press conference on March 19 when, 
without referring directly to the 11-point program, 
he cast doubt on the authenticity of all such reports 
from Europe and remarked that the “peace head- 
lines” seemed very empty. The President’s com- 
ments left no doubt in the minds of Washington 
observers that the Administration is not prepared to 
guarantee or underwrite any proposal for ending the 
war on Hitler’s terms. 


In sharp contrast to the praise for Mr. Welles 
was the public rebuke administered to James H. R. 
Cromwell, our newly appointed Minister to Canada, 
for his Toronto speech on March 20. As might have 
been expected, Mr. Cromwell’s outspoken criticism 
of the isolationist attitude of the United States and 
his strong expression of sympathy for the Allies 
aroused a storm of protest in Congress, with Sena- 
tors and Representatives of both parties demanding 
that the American Minister be recalled or otherwise 
disciplined. While the sentiments expressed by Mr. 
Cromwell may be shared by many officials in Wash- 
ington, the White House indignantly denied reports 
that the speech had been approved in advance by 
President Roosevelt. Secretary Hull in his reprimand 
made it clear that the address “contravened stand- 
ing instructions to American diplomatic officers” 
which forbid public discussion of controversial poli- 
cies of other governments without prior knowledge 
and permission of this government. This rebuke ap- 
parently satisfied most of Mr. Cromwell’s critics, 
but for some it leaves unanswered the question 
whether important posts should be entrusted to po- 
litical appointees without diplomatic experience of 
any kind. 

PLANES FOR THE ALLIES. Meanwhile, the Ad- 
ministration has tentatively approved a new aircraft 
export policy which will permit the Allies to purchase 
the most modern American warplanes without de- 
lay. Under the new plan, as worked out by the War 
and Navy Departments, the Allies will be allowed 
to buy a limited number of new planes now under 
construction for the Army and Navy. In addition, 
they will be permitted to place orders for the latest 
experimental types, hitherto withheld, provided that 
no “‘secret military devices” are released with the 
planes. 

This policy, which is certain to encounter opposi- 
tion when it is presented to the House Military Af- 
fairs Committee this week, is defended on the 
ground that the expansion of American aircraft pro- 
duction facilities far outweighs any possible loss 
from sale of the newest designs. As a result of orders 
already placed, it is said that United States pro- 
duction of aircraft has tripled during the past year. 
And if the plan is approved, it is expected to pave 
the way for Allied purchases totaling a billion dol- 
lars within the next 18 months. For the present, 
only a small minority is asking about the possible 
economic consequences of such a war boom. 


W. T. STONE 





Ws 
Vv 
were Vv 
French 
main li 
have a 
decidec 
financii 
since tl 
wat W 
opiniot 
seem | 
volvin; 
that ir 
leaks i 
the bl 





| dashes 
| bellige 
| not ul 
| many 
| interfe 
WI 
OF X 
the A! 
ore ai 
in 19 
000,01 
tons 
port 
port 
ing tl 
Baltic 
naval 
Allie: 
throu 
Norv 
do, a 
of M 


| justic 








