l 

ee 

nay well 

ding sys. 
foreign 

LVe to be 

ayments 


$s to per: 


aN press 
1 On the 
ng prac- 
y scheme 
) Impose 
l IM ports 
ver, that 
ress and 
ld cotton 
greatest 
ghly de. 
ould run 
ling eco- 
the new 
rcussions 
for the 


entirely 
s on the 
ld prices 
e United 
evel per- 

suitable 
threat of 
‘kets will 
> idea of 
ut of all 
n wheat 
ne much 


for new 


re rather } 


owerful 
s on the 
re which, 
eral im- 
axes are 


mstances 
its made 
eadfastly 
rove less 
a stag: 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Vout. XVIII, No. 25 


APRIL 14, 1939 


_ 


For a review of our economic experience in the World 
War, foreshadowing probable developments in the 


event of another world conflict, read... . 


ECONOMIC PROBLEMS OF U.S. NEUTRALITY 
IN WARTIME 


by Winthrop W. Case 


April 15 issue of FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS .. . 25 cents 


PERIODICAL ROOM 
GENBRAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF MICH. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


General Library 
University of Michigas 


Ann Arbor, Michigafi 


! 


ALBANIAN COUP SHAKES BALKANS 


— the lightning mobility made familiar by 
the Rome-Berlin axis, Mussolini invaded Al- 
bania on April 7, just as the world’s attention was 
focused on the possibility of a German coup against 
Poland. The resistance offered by the insignificant 
army of this small, predominantly Moslem, country 
proved futile, and on April 8 the realm of King Zog, 
who had fled to Greece, was officially taken under 
the protection of King Victor Emanuel, Emperor of 
Ethiopia, by Count Ciano. 


WHY DID ITALY INVADE ALBANIA? The 
Italian press took unusual pains to justify the in- 
vasion of Albania, which occurred only two days 
after Rome had assured Britain that no drastic action 
was contemplated. The most probable explanation 
is that Mussolini, finding France adamant regarding 
his claim to Tunisia and Hitler lukewarm about a 
general war on behalf of Italy, decided to seize Al- 
bania as the least dangerous form of compensation 
for the territorial successes achieved by his German 
partner. This move was foreshadowed by Mussolini's 
speech of March 26, when he said that Italy's inter- 
ests were “‘preeminent’’ in the Adriatic, but “not 
exclusive as regards the Slavs’’—obviously a sop to 
Yugoslavia. The possible repercussions of the Al- 
banian coup appear to have been discussed at Inns- 
bruck on April 4 by General Keitel, chief of the 
German High Command, and General Pariani, 
Italian Undersecretary for War, who had served as 
principal military adviser to the Albanian army from 
1927 to 1932. Italy’s invasion of Albania not only 
seemed to offer no opportunity for effective opposi- 
tion by Britain, preoccupied in Eastern Europe, but 
provided a strategic base for any operations the 
axis may undertake in the Balkans. It coincided with 
the announcement that General Franco, on March 27, 
had signed the anti-Comintern pact, thus assuring 


Germany and Italy of support against Britain in the 
western Mediterranean. 


ITALY’S ALBANIAN STAKE. Albania has long 
been considered, most of all by Britain, as an Italian 
sphere of influence. When the Albanians, in 1912, 
proclaimed their independence from Turkey, Italy 
joined Austria-Hungary in preventing Serbia from 
securing control of Albania. Under the terms of the 
London treaty of 1915, by which Italy entered the 
war at the side of the Allies, Italy was to obtain a 
protectorate over a part of Albania, including the 
strategic port of Valona, which it had occupied at the 
outbreak of the war. At the Paris Peace Conference 
Italy demanded a mandate over Albania, but was 
overruled by President Wilson, who insisted on es- 
tablishing an independent Albanian state. 

In 1922, following a period of political strife, 
Ahmed Zogu, a Moslem chieftain, became Premier 
of Albania. Having failed to obtain financial as- 
sistance from the League of Nations, which Albania 
had entered in 1920, Zogu turned to Italy. Begin- 
ning in 1925 Italy granted Albania a series of loans; 
inaugurated a program of public works under the 
supervision of an Italian development corporation 
known as SVEA; and appointed Italian officers to 
reorganize the Albanian army. In 1926, with the ap- 
proval of Britain, Italy signed the treaty of Tirana, 
designed to prevent any disturbance of Albania’s 
status quo. A letter accompanying the treaty gave 
Italy the right to intervene, on Albania’s request, in 
the country’s foreign and domestic affairs. 

After Zogu, with Italy's support, had proclaimed 
himself King Zog I in 1928, an Italian company re- 
ceived a concession for the extraction of oil, poor in 
quality, which was refined at Bari, and proved of 
considerable value to Italy during the Ethiopian cam- 
paign. Several recent incidents, however, indicated 


that Italian domination was not entirely palatable 
to Zog. His growing resistance, coupled with the 
intrigues of tribal chieftains who had opposed his 
rise to power, were probably the immediate causes 
of his downfall. 


WHAT DID ITALY GAIN? Italy's gains in 
Albania must be measured not in economic terms, 
but in terms of prestige and strategic advantage. 
Italy is already the principal market for Albanian 
exports of oil, wool and dairy products, and furnishes 
the bulk of that country’s imports of manufactured 

. While Rome may now intensify development 
of Albanian resources, it may be doubted that ex- 
ploitation of that mountainous country can do much 
to relieve Italy’s economic problems. 


By the establishment of a protectorate over Al- 
bania, however, Mussolini is in a position to use 
force or threat of force against Yugoslavia, Greece, 
Turkey and Egypt, which has territorial jurisdiction 
over the Suez Canal coveted by Italy. Should I/ Duce, 
like Hitler, adopt the slogan of “self-determination,”’ 
he may find it useful to launch a Great Albanian 
movement for the recovery of 100,000 Albanians in 
Greece, 500,000 in Yugoslavia, and smaller groups 
in Bulgaria and Turkey. 


THE OUTLOOK FOR THE BALKANS. The 
outlook for the Balkan countries is by no means 
cheerful, either for them or for their would-be pro- 
tector, Britain. On April 10, following the visit to 
Turkey of M. Gafencu, Rumanian Foreign Minister, 
it was indicated in Bucharest that the Balkan entente, 
by which Greece, Rumania, Turkey and Yugoslavia 
guaranteed the security of their Balkan frontiers, 
would be applied in case of need. But these countries 
are so divided among themselves, and so preoccupied 
by. internal problems, that it is doubtful they could 
make common cause against the axis, even if assured 
of British support. 


Page Two 


es 
—— 


Yugoslavia, still rent by the post-war conflict be. 
tween Serbs and Croats, is now threatened on the 
north by Germany—which offers the best market for 
its products—and on the south and west by Italy. The 
Yugoslav Regent, Prince Paul, is pro-British in sym. 
pathy, but the Belgrade court has long been hostile 
to the U.S.S.R., and it seems improbable—short of 
a revolution—that it would join any coalition which 
included Moscow. Greece, which allowed France and 
Britain to use its harbors during the World War, 
is on the whole anti-Italian, and resents Italy's con- 
trol of the predominantly Greek Dodecanese islands 
—ostentatiously visited by Goebbels late in March, 
King George II, restored to the Greek throne with 


British aid, might favor cooperation with Britain, | 


but his influence is counterbalanced by that of the 
dictator-Premier, General Metaxas, who favors a 
pro-German orientation. Turkey, like Greece, fears 
the extension of Italian influence in the eastern Medi- 
terranean, but is becoming more and more dependent 
on the German market. Germany and Italy, more- 
over, can disrupt the Balkans by encouraging the re- 
visionist aspirations of Bulgaria, Germany's World 
War ally, which lost territory to Greece, Yugoslavia 
and Rumania. 

Against this powerful combination of internal 
strife, economic needs and national minority prob- 
lems, which plays directly into Hitler's hands, Britain 
has only two things to offer—cash, and the threat of 
war—if the Rome-Berlin axis advances east of Al- 
bania. Britain, which at Munich gave Germany a 
free hand in Eastern Europe, can hardly expect the 
Balkan countries to have much confidence in its as- 
sistance, unless it shows actual determination to stop 
Hitler and Mussolini by force. If Britain can demon- 
strate that it is now in earnest, it might either succeed 
in checking the dictatorships at the zero hour or, 
should war come, might then possibly swing the 


BRITISH COALITION MEETS OBSTACLES 


Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain’s belated 
plan to mobilize the nations of Eastern Europe in an 
anti-aggression bloc was dealt another serious blow 
when Italy seized the initiative and occupied Al- 
bania. The vacillating states of ‘that area have been 
given one more convincing demonstration that Brit- 
ain and France would hardly be able to render them 
quick and effective assistance in case of attack. The 
Italian action came at a time when the British project 
had already struck a snag. Perhaps this latest chapter 
in British diplomacy may again have to be captioned 
“Too Late.” 

AN ANGLO-POLISH ALLIANCE. Britain did 
succeed last week in persuading Colonel Beck, Polish 


Foreign Minister, to enter into a defensive alliance. 
As announced in the House of Commons by Prime 
Minister Chamberlain on April 6, the agreement will 
“assure Great Britain and Poland of mutual assist- 
ance in the event of any threat, direct or indirect, to 
the independence of either.” Apparently Poland 
would be allowed to judge when its own independ- 
ence would be sufficiently jeopardized to warrant 
military resistance. Yet the accord has not been 
signed. Its completion awaits the settlement of many 
details, particularly regarditg the methods by which 
the two countries would aid each other in case of 
war. Meanwhile, the Reich government is leaving 
no stone unturned to “impress” Warsaw with the 


—— 


flict be. 
on the 
rket for 
ily. The 
in sym- 
hostile 
hort of 
1 which 
nce and 
d War, 
y S con- 
islands 
March. 
ne with 
Britain, 
of the 
avOrs a 
e, fears 
n Medi- 
pendent 
, more- 
' the re- 
World 
poslavia 


internal 
YY prob- 
_ Britain 
hreat of 
- of Al- 
many a 
pect the 
n its as- 
tO stop 
demon- 
succeed 
10ur Of, 
ing the 
DEAN 


alliance. 
y Prime 
ent will 
il assist- 
lirect, to 
Poland 
depend- 
warrant 
ot been 
of many 
yy which 
case of 
leaving 
with the 


—_— 
—_— 


jnadvisability of implementing this agreement “in 
principle.” Despite Warsaw’s cautious and repeated 
assurances that the Polish-German accord of 1934 
remains unaffected, Germany has made it clear that 
it would regard conclusion of the Anglo-Polish alli- 
ance aS an unfriendly act which would involve de- 
nunciation of its non-aggression pact with Poland 
and turn the Reich into a highly disagreeable neigh- 
bor. Subjected to this pressure, Poland may yet be in- 
duced to reconsider its course. 


IS IT TOO LATE? Meanwhile, Britain has made 
little progress in other directions. The British gov- 
ernment itself is sufficiently alarmed by the prospects 
of continued Italo-German aggression to carry its 
new policy to a logical conclusion. Last week it ap- 
parently even offered to guarantee the independence 
of Hungary, which had been regarded as already in 
the German camp; and Colonel Beck is said to have 
been given the mission of persuading the Hungarian 
government, with which Poland has close relations, 
to join the anti-German coalition. 

All these maneuvers, however, appear belated. 
While many Hungarians fear German hegemony, the 
present Budapest government—its appetite whetted 
by recent territorial acquisitions—still looks to the 
Reich for support of its ambition to recapture Tran- 
sylvania. Rumania, menaced by both Germany and 
Hungary, is apparently willing to accept a British 
guarantee, but reluctant to give in exchange a pledge 
which might provoke rather than ward off an attack. 
The Rumanian Minister of Foreign Affairs, Grigore 
Gafencu, is scheduled to visit London and Paris to- 
ward the end of April, but significantly enough he 
has accepted a German invitation to stop first at 
Berlin. Since about 60 per cent of Rumania’s for- 
eign trade is controlled by the Reich, the German 
government would find it easier to apply economic 
screws should this country presume to follow an in- 
dependent policy. Yugoslavia and Greece are also 
immobilized, particularly now that they are flanked 
by an Italian-controlled Albania. And Turkey, while 
maintaining friendly relations with Moscow and 


Page Three 


London, is compelled to sit on the fence by virtue of 
its economic ties with Germany, which now takes 
more than half of its exports. Realizing the inability 
of these countries to commit themselves, the British 
Cabinet decided on April 10 that any attack on 
Greece, Turkey or any other Eastern Mediterranean 
nation would be considered an “unfriendly act.” 


WHAT OF THE SOVIET UNION? While Brit- 
ain and France may still be able to act in the Mediter- 
reanean, they alone cannot sufficiently offset Ger- 
many’s economic and military predominance in East- 
ern Europe. Strategically they will be unable to rush 
troops and materials to this area in case of German 
aggression. Britain and France are ill-equipped to 
wage offensive warfare in Poland or the Balkans, 
just as the Rome-Berlin axis can hardly risk a frontal 
attack on the Western European powers. Because of 
their superior economic resources and their greater 
naval strength, they might ultimately bring Germany 
and Italy to terms, but meanwhile German troops 
would overrun eastern Europe. Only the active par- 
ticipation of the Soviet Union in the anti-German 
front might block such a development. 


So far British efforts to enlist Soviet cooperation 
have met with considerable difficulties. The Polish © 
and Rumanian governments, tied by an old anti- 
Soviet alliance, are reluctant to call in Russian troops 
who might ultimately exploit the undoubted poten- 
tialities for social revolution existing in both coun- 
tries. Moreover, Moscow is displaying no haste to 
join, now that considerations of self-interest have 
induced Britain and France to turn to it for -aid. 
Confident of its ability to defend itself unaided, the 
U.S.S.R. apparently expects to be more assiduously 
courted before it can be persuaded to act. Under 
these circumstances the countries of Southeastern 
Europe may reluctantly prefer to dispense with out- 
side guarantees and take the chance that they may be 
able to satisfy German aspirations without sacrificing 
at least their nominal independence. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


THE F.P.A. 


Britain and the Dictators, by R. W. Seton-Watson. New 
York, Macmillan, 1938. $3.00 


A detailed analysis of British foreign policy from the 
Paris Peace Conference to the annexation of Austria ‘in 
March 1938, by an authority on Central European affairs. 
Professor Seton-Watson urges Britain and France to 
create a coalition of pacific countries, including the Soviet 
Union, and then attempt a general settlement with Ger- 
many. 


BOOKSHELF 


Diplomatic Relations Between the United States and 
Japan: 1895-1905, by Payson J. Treat. Stanford, Cal., 
Stanford University Press, 1938. $3.50 


The third volume in a thorough study of Japanese- 
American diplomatic relations since 1853. Like the pre- 
ceding volumes, this authoritative work is based mainly 
on State Department archives. Extensive quotations from 
diplomatic papers, published and unpublished, make it an 
invaluable reference work for students of the Far East. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 25, APRIL 14, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporaced. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesim Busi, President; Dorotuy F. Last, Secretary; Vara MicHELES DRAN, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Fw 181 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, ‘Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


pred bing 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Apri 10.—If the purpose of the Neutrality 
hearings now proceeding at both ends of the Capitol 
is to clarify American policy in the face of the fast- 
moving European crisis, the testimony of the past 
week has contributed little toward that end. The 
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, with virtually its 
full membership present, has heard a former Secre- 
tary of State, Mr. Henry L. Stimson, urge amend- 
ment of the existing law to give the President wider 
discretion to defend “the vital interests of the United 
States” by throwing its moral and material resources 
against the aggressive action of “three of the seven 
most powerful nations of the world.” It has heard 
another expert witness, Mr. Bernard M. Baruch, for- 
mer chairman of the War Industries Board, offer 
the opposite advice that the best way for America 
to keep out of war is to make its goods and supplies 
available to all belligerents, without discrimination, 
as provided in the “cash and carry” plan sponsored 
by Senator Pittman. But it is still far from agreement 
on any general formula capable of application in the 
threatening European show-down or the potential 
crisis in the Far East. 


SENATE OPINION DIVIDED. From the gen- 
eral tenor of questions asked during the first few 
days, it is apparent that few opinions have been 
changed. Despite Mr. Stimson’s strong endorsement 
of the Thomas amendment, not more than two or 
three members are likely to vote for economic em- 
bargoes against aggressor states. Outright repeal of 
the present law has even less support. The only ap- 
parent choice lies between the Pittman resolution 
and retention of the present law, and on this central 
issue (which will determine whether American sup- 
plies are to be placed at the disposal of Britain and 
France) the committee is almost equally divided. 
Senator Pittman can probably count on eight or nine 
votes at the present time, while Senator Borah, who 
is leading the fight for retention of the existing law, 
is assured of almost the same number of votes. 

The Administration has not yet been heard from, 
and it is possible the State Department may find 
another formula or throw its full weight behind the 
Pittman resolution. But as twelve votes will be re- 
quired to assure a majority of the committee, the final 
decision will probably rest with three or four Sena- 
tors who have reserved their opinions and taken no 
active part in the debate. 


EXECUTIVE POLICY STIFFENS. Meanwhile 
as the crisis in Europe deepens, the position of the 
Executive is rapidly crystallizing. The division of 
opinion which existed inside the State Department 
before Munich has entirely disappeared, and there js 
now virtual unanimity among the President’s ad. 
visers. While hopes of averting a general war have 
been dimmed by events of the past month, the con. 
viction has spread through Administration circles 
that the vital interests of the United States are di. 
rectly threatened by the unchecked expansion of the 
axis powers. This conviction, warmly supported by 
Mr. Stimson before the Foreign Relations Commit. 
tee, was given even more dramatic expression in an 
“authoritative” summary of the President's views re. 
vealed to correspondents at Warm Springs on April 8. 

In this statement—the second inspired story issued 
by the anonymous White House spokesman within 
the past two weeks—the United States was pictured 
as faced with three possible courses of action imposed 
by the extension of the Nazi-Fascist economic system: 

1. Adoption of the “Chinese wall” policy, calling for 

withdrawal from all foreign trade with heavy losses in 

national income. 

2. Establishment of export subsidies, a course which 


would involve heavy Treasury payments and sharp tax 
increases. 

3. A general lowering of living standards, through 
longer hours of work and reduced wages, to enable 
American exporters to meet the competition of low- 
wage foreign nations operating under the barter system. 


An int 


On economic grounds, these artificial alternatives | 
failed to impress many competent observers. Wash- 
ington correspondents, however, were not left in | 


doubt about the diplomatic objectives of the Adminis- 


tration. These objectives—merely implied in Secre- | 
tary Hull’s statement on the same day denouncing the | 


“forcible and violent invasion of Albania’ — are 
based on the clear determination to offer the fullest 
economic and diplomatic support to Great Britain 
and France. In the minds of Administration leaders it 
is clearly to the advantage of the American people to 
see that France and Britain are not reduced to the 
status of second-rate powers. At the same time, there 
is general agreement that the United States should 
not make any military commitments, and cannot do 
much to restore the balance of power in Eastern 
Europe destroyed so completely last September. The 
immediate task is to steer a middle course which will 
serve as a warning to the axis powers without giving 
a blank check to London and Paris. 


W. T. STONE 


— ee ee 


