APR 19 1944 


payin General Library Entered as 2nd class matter 
University of Michigan 
' 7—1944 
. , 9 Ann Arbor, Michigan 
ane | 
uld keep 
‘on wil! FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
ation and 
legal dis. ; 
of arms: 
a of An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
dl rb FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
€ th hi 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
ch nation | Vole XXIII, No. 25 Apri 7, 1944 
and pro- 
ice of the} POLITICAL TIMETABLE FOR ITALY UPSET BY STALEMATE BELOW ROME 
pe niet RESERVING a united political front among the Italian régime would not arrive until Rome was 
le siseal Allies is becoming an ever more pressing problem taken. Then, on March 13, Badoglio’s announce- 
. fight ho as the Red Army advances in Rumania and Britain ment that Russia was going to exchange Ambassa- 
a ee and the United States perfect plans for the invasion dors with his government created so much confusion 
a. ned of Western Europe. If the present alliance is to fare among observers in London and Washington that 
Po better than earlier coalitions of history, both in ex- popular debate on the broad question of what politi- 
> the pediting the war and preserving the future peace, cal policy should be pursued in Italy was eclipsed 
- ~ . there must be greater agreement among the United by discussion of what Russian recognition portended. 
5, Oe States, Britain and the U.S.S.R. on the concrete prob- Amid the welter of interpretations, a predominant 
‘ine tal lems now before them. Among these questions, one one was that the Kremlin had decided to recognize 
, ‘| of great importance is the political disposition of Badoglio in order to indicate to the Balkan and 
ati a Italy. other neighboring states that even governments far 
ces AGREEMENT ON THE GOAL. At the Moscow _to the right might be satisfactory to Moscow. 
er ‘a Conference last October decisions were taken that DISAGREEMENT ON TIMING. The sensation 
a ‘aaa of looked toward joint action in Italy on the part of the created by this apparent approval of a government 
— dig. United States, Britain and the Soviet Union, all three under former fascist leaders by the communist home- 


| 


‘essure for 


agreeing that their goal was ‘based upon the funda- 
mental principle that: fascism and all its evil influ- 
ence and configuration shall be completely de- 


land was just dying away when Izvestia reopened 
the whole issue by declaring on March 30 that the 
U.S.S.R.’s step was intended to register Soviet dis- 


comes not} stroyed.”” To implement this statement of aims, am- satisfaction with the operations of the Allied Ad- 
sident and} bitious consultative machinery was set up in the visory Council for Italy. According to the official 
who have, form of an Allied Advisory Council for Italy on organ of the Supreme Soviet, in offering the first 
past. The| which the Big Three were represented. This organ- Russian explanation of the Kremlin’s new Italian 
up by Hal} ization, from its inception, had to compete, however, policy, the British and American members of the 
Republican with other bodies, such as AMG and the Allied Con- Council had merely “informed” the Russian delegate 
. He said:| trol Commission, which are purely Anglo-American instead of “consulting” with him about political de- 
t silence.” | in composition. cisions affecting Italy, and pursued a policy that did 
1 i But in the five months since Moscow, little pro- not meet with Moscow's approval. Calling for im- 
1 President | 


ction put | 
ecific pol- ) 
rticles will 
policy on 
tic Charter, 4 
\ dministta- | 
laboration. | 


_BOLLES 


NDS 


gress has been made toward securing a more demo- 
cratic Italian government. During this period, dis- 
Satisfaction has been keen not only in Italy—where 
on March 12 three Leftist political parties denounced 
the King and Badoglio at a mass meeting in Naples 
—but among numerous private persons in the United 
States and Britain. It was generally assumed, how- 
ever, that criticism was limited to unofficial circles, 
while all three major Allies agreed with Prime Min- 
ister Churchill’s declaration in the House of Com- 
mons on February 22 that the time for changes in the 


mediate action to make the Badoglio régime more 
democratic by the inclusion of representatives of 
Italian forces “prepared to fight against Hitler and 
Mussolini,” the Russian editorial disputed British 
Foreign Secretary Eden’s statement to the House of 
Commons on March 22 that the Soviet government 
had not expressed dissatisfaction with the Council’s 
decision to retain the present Italian government un- 
til Rome had been captured. According to Izvestia, 
therefore, Russia decided to send representatives to 
Badoglio because the Kremlin wished to establish its 


a = Pare Te 


own sources of information in Italy, comparable to 
those the United States and Britain have through 
consuls in South Italy, as a step toward effecting 
changes in the Marshal's cabinet. Far from carrying 
any approval of the present Italian government—as 
would American recognition, if it were to come— 
Russia's establishment of ‘‘factual relations’ was in- 
tended to aid the U.S.S.R. in modifying the very 
régime it recognized. 

ANGLO-AMERICAN POLICY NEEDS RE- 
VISION. With the three major Allies united on 
their political goal in Italy but in disagreement on 
the timing of actions required for attaining that aim, 
there is need for Britain and the United States to re- 
consider their policy of awaiting the fall of Rome 
before changing the Badoglio government and re- 
moving King Victor Emmanuel. In the realm of local 
administration, as a matter of fact, AMG is now 
carrying out political changes on a large scale. In 
Naples Province alone—according to an announce- 
ment of March 28—690 Italians suspected of fascist 
views have been suspended from their posts. But 
action comparable to these purges in provincial cir- 
cles is still needed in connection with the national 
government. 

A decision to implement the inter-Allied promise 
of last October—to rid Italy of fascists—by making 
changes at the top of the present régime could be 
expected to give a boost to Italian morale both in 
southern Italy, where observers report that the honey- 
moon phase of the occupation is waning, and in the 
area north of the Gustav line, where pro-Allied guer- 


ee 


rillas have rallied under anti-fascist leaders. Hen 

F. Grady, ranking American member of the Allied 
Control Commission in Italy which is working close. 
ly with AMG, confirmed this view on March 31 by 
asserting that there was “complete unanimity’ among 
the people of occupied Italy on the need of ousting 
the present King. Moreover, the decision to await 
the fall of the Italian capital before making changes 
in the Italian government needs to be reviewed in 
the light of the military stalemate on the road 
to Rome. This delay has upset the Allied time. 
table on which present policy is based. Above all, 
agreement among the Big Three on the timing of 
major political changes must be achieved before new 
life can be breathed into the Allied Council for 
Italy. One obstacle in transforming the present 
Badoglio government, it must be confessed, has been 
the refusal of the Italian liberal and democratic par- 
ties to cooperate with the Marshal on even a purely 
temporary basis. But this difficulty might be overcome 
if there were Allied agreement that political changes 
must be made now and that the only practical way 
to secure them is by altering the Badoglio régime 


through a series of shifts in the cabinet. The decision { 


of Britain and the United States to work with Russia 
in modifying the Italian government in the immedi- 
ate future, therefore, would not only take into ac- 
count present political and military realities in Italy 
but would strengthen the unity of the Big Three and 
bring them into greater harmony for both the war 
and post-war periods. 
WinirreD N. HADSEL 


UNITED NATIONS EXPLORE NEW REGIME FOR AIR TRANSPORT 


Preliminary discussions to explore the possibility 
of a world air agreement were initiated during the 
last week of March with bilateral talks between 
American and Canadian officials in Montreal. As- 
sistant Secretary of State Adolf A. Berle and Edward 
P. Warner, Vice Chairman of the Civil Aeronautics 
Board, who represented the United States in Canada, 
are now in London for conversations with spokesmen 
for the British government. It is expected that a Rus- 
sian delegation will arrive in Washington within ten 
days to meet an American group led by Joseph C. 
Grew, special assistant to the Secretary of State, and 
L. Welch Pogue, chairman of the CAB. Conversa- 
tions with China and Brazil are also anticipated be- 
fore an international gathering is held this summer 
as the last step prior to a full-dress United Nations 
air conference. 

A NEW AIR LAW. In these bilateral conversa- 
tions, as in the prospective international meetings, the 
central problem will be to reach agreement on the air 
régime which is to govern post-war operations of in- 
ternational air transport. During the pre-war period 
international air services were subject to the principle 


of the “closed sky.” Special permission was required 


charging and taking on passengers and cargo, as 
well as for refuelling or repairs, but also for enter- 
ing or passing through a nation’s air space. As a fe- 
sult, commercial airlines were able to operate over 
most of the world—with the exception of Latin 
America where foreign air companies received many 
concessions directly from the governments—only af- 
ter hard bargaining between nations on the basis of 
reciprocal rights. But it is now widely believed, both 
in this country and abroad, that the old air law will 


—— 


the p 
wher 
venti 
territ 
vices, 
Com 
or fre 
summit 
York 
open 
let af 
terve’ 
close 
woul 


‘ but a 


of su 
trol 
stand 
held 
great 
inter: 
State 
posit 
TI 
of tl 
thou 
Unit 
tion 


wide 


mine 
servi 
at th 
pose 


lines 
| thro 
not only to land on foreign soil for purposes of dis- | 


| 


not be suitable to rapid expansion of air transport | 


after the war because of the delays and friction it 
would entail. A search is therefore being made for a 
system under which the legitimate aspirations of each 
of the United Nations can be more easily reconciled. 

Although United States policy has not been offi- 
cially enunciated the American position, as defined 
in the speeches of Chairman Pogue of the CAB, dif- 
fers considerably from that already taken by Canada 
and from what is now known of the British position. 
The essence of Pogue’s proposals is his insistence on 


C. 
pres 
calls 
dom 
lets. 
con 


] 


—= 
s. H 
le Allied 
ng close. 
ch 31 by 
Fe among 
; Ousting 
to await 
Changes 
iewed in 
he road 
ed time. 
Dove all, 
ming of 
fore new 
incil for 
present 
has been 
atic pat- 
a purely 
yvercome 
changes 
ical way 
) régime 
decision 
h Russia 
immedi- 
into ac- 
in Italy 
hree and 
the war 


ADSEL 


T 
required 


s of dis- | 


argo, as 
or enter- 
As a fe 
ate over 
»f Latin 
ed many 
-only af- 
basis of 
ed, both 
law will 
transport 
‘iction it 
de for a 
; of each 
conciled. 


een ofhi- 


- defined 
‘AB, dif- 
Canada 
position. 
tence on 


—— 
—— 


the principle of freedom of commercial air transit, 
whereby all nations adhering to an international con- 
yention would have the right of transit over foreign 
territory and the use of all necessary technical ser- 
vices, including the right to land for fuel or repairs. 
Commercial outlets, the right to pick up passengers 
or freight, would be left to bilateral negotiation. As- 
suming world-wide agreement on air transit, a New 
York-to-Moscow airline, for example, could be 
opened on the mere negotiation of a commercial out- 
let agreement. The complicated negotiations with in- 
tervening countries which were the rule under the 
dosed-sky would be unnecessary. Such a system 
would need supervision by an international air body, 


‘ but apparently under Pogue’s proposal the authority 


of such a body would be limited to matters like con- 
trol of competitive practices and rates, uniform 
standards and coordination of navigation aids. It is 
held by its supporters that free transit would be of 
great advantage to countries which plan extensive 
international air operations—particularly the United 
States, which is in a relatively weak geographical 
osition for air bargaining. 

The British government has indicated its approval 
of the principle of freedom of air transit, but is 
thought to be anxious to go much farther than the 
United States in granting jurisdiction to an interna- 
tional air authority. This body, according to a view 


| widely held in Britain, should have power to deter- 


mine the allocation of routes and the frequency of 
services, in order to prevent unrestricted competition 
at the close of the war. In addition, it has been pro- 
posed that an international agency take over the air- 


‘ lines now operated by the enemy and those passing 


through areas of vital security interest. 

Canadian policy, set forth in a draft convention 
presented to the House of Commons on March 17, 
calls for a multilateral agreement combining free- 
dom of transit and the granting of commercial out- 
lets. It proposes that the opening of air services be 
conditional on permission of an international air au- 


Page Three 


Just published— 


ECONOMICS AND PEACE 
by Herbert Feis 


25c 


April 1 issue of FOREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


TT 


thority, for Canada does not wish to relinquish its 
geographical position under the closed-sky without 
assurance that in the new régime it will gain a fair 
share of transoceanic air services. But, with the 
special circumstances of American-Canadian rela- 
tions in mind, Canada proposes that services between 
contiguous countries should not come under the 
jurisdiction of an international air transport board. 


“CHOSEN INSTRUMENT” DEBATE. Whether 
or not these differences are reconciled in the current 
discussions, it is unlikely that the Administration will 
commit itself until the Senate Commerce Committee 
has held open hearings on our post-war aviation 
policy, and a decision is reached concerning the ques- 
tion of competition among American airlines them- 
selves. Pan-American Airways, long the outstanding 
United States foreign carrier, favors the policy of a 
single “chosen instrument” to operate all American 
international services, and to date has also backed 
the closed-sky system under which it became firmly 
established in many parts of the world. It is support- 
ed in this attitude by United Airlines, one of the 
largest domestic companies. But in opposition are the 
sixteen remaining domestic airlines—many of them 
now flying internationally under the Army Air Trans- 
port Command—including American Airlines which 
has just purchased American Export, Pan-American’s 
only American rival in commercial Atlantic services. 
Until the United States resolves its national air pol- 
icy—and it may possibly be resolved by the estab- 
lishment of several chosen instruments—this country 
can hardly reach final agreements with the other 
United Nations. 

HowarpD P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


Journey into War, by John MacVane. New York, Appleton- 
Century, 1943. $3.00 
Exciting account of the American compaign in North 
Africa. Bitterly critical of the State Department’s 
handling of the political angle. 


Political Handbook of the World: Parliaments, Parties and 
Press, as of January 1, 1944. Edited by Walter H. Mal- 
lory. New York, Harpers, for the Council on Foreign 
Relations, 1944. $2.75 
An invaluable annual review of information necessary 

to understand the changing political picture throughout 

the world. 


War and Postwar Policies, by Bernard M. Baruch and John 
M. Hancock. Washington, American Council on Public 
Affairs, 1944. $2.00 cloth, $1.00 paper. 

The text and related documents of the official report to 

James F. Byrnes, Director of War Mobilization, in a form 

convenient for reference use. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 25, APRIL 7, 


1944, 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Luger, Secretary; Vena Micueies Dean, Béitor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


QS 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


Apri 3.—Should the United States recognize the 
French Committee of National Liberation? Although 
there are many important questions in American 
foreign policy, the French matter illustrates better 
than any other single issue the difficulties confronting 
the Washington Administration in the management 
of international relations. Would recognition violate 
the legitimist principle that nations shall be free to 
choose their own governments? The Committee’s 
capital is outside metropolitan France and its leader, 
General Charles de Gaulle, was chosen by a relative- 
ly small group. Although the United States, Britain 
and the Soviet Union do not recognize the French 
Committee as a “government,” de Gaulle declared 
on March 18 that the French Committee of National 
Liberation is “in charge” of French sovereignty and, 
as such, responsible for safeguarding public order 
and the lives of the French people when the Allied 
invasion occurs. 

MILITARY NEEDS CONTROL POLICY. Ad- 
ministration officials expect that de Gaulle will prob- 
ably occupy a high, perhaps the highest, position in 
France at the French people’s will when their coun- 
try is freed. Yet a year ago authorities here feared 
him as an extreme chauvinist and possible dictator. 
But his speeches and his conduct in recent months in 
the practical administration of affairs, and in temper- 
ing his own wishes to the desires of the Provisional 
Consultative Assembly, have indicated to Washing- 
ton that he takes democratic responsibilities seriously. 

Nevertheless, the Administration reports that it 
will recognize a French government only when one 
is duly and popularly constituted on French Euro- 
pean territory. It is inflexibly determined not to ex- 
tend the limited recognition which, in company with 
Britain, it granted to the Committee last August 26 
at the Quebec Conference. The Quebec formula rec- 
ognized the Committee as the trustee of French ter- 
ritory overseas, and the Moscow Conference subse- 
quently gave the organization a voice in continental 
affairs to the extent of allowing it representation on 
the Italian Armistice Control Commission and the 
Advisory Council for Italy. 

The dominant consideration guiding the Adminis- 
tration in its French policy is military. President 
Roosevelt, the War Department and General Dwight 
D. Eisenhower, Allied commander in the European 
theatre, have evolved the policy, with the State De- 
partment playing simply an advisory part. Mr. Roose- 
velt emphasized this situation on March 18, when he 


FOR VICTORY ° 


told his press conference that he had decided on the 
role the Committee would play when France is jp. 
vaded. The President sent his decision to General 
Eisenhower, who at the time of invasion is to explain 
to General de Gaulle the limits of his authority jp 
France until the country is in a position to make q 
political decision of its own. 

The day-to-day decisions respecting almost every 
foreign question is at present controlled by the mili. 
tary, which above all wants governmental stability ip 
areas close to Allied operations. That outlook ex. 
plains in large measure the American policy toward 
Spain and King Victor Emmanuel, and temporary 
American noninterference with the British White 


Paper policy in Palestine. When the State Depart. | 


ment and the military disagree, the military view 
usually prevails. 

FACTIONS IN FRANCE. General Eisenhower 
is said to fear that recognition of the French Com. 
mittee now might contribute to instability in France 
and inspire noncooperation with the invasion on the 
part of those Frenchmen in France who oppose de 
Gaulle but support the Allies. The basis for this 


view appears to be the belief that France today is | 


divided into factions. On the one hand, there is the 
resistance movement that unites communists, Cath- 
olics—including priests—and many other shades of 


191 


) 


political opinion. Although it is difficult to deter- 


mine whether the resistance movement is solidly ; ‘ 
united behind de Gaulle, as the French Committee | 
alleges, its members clearly oppose Allied interven- | 


tion in what they consider purely French affairs. The 
clandestine newspaper, La Democrate, on March 14 
quoted a resistance leader: ‘““We will appoint our 


prefects and our ministers ourselves; we will hold | 


elections ourselves.” 


The conservative and collaborationist segments of | 


France, on the other hand, are openly divided. On 
the extreme fascist side is the clique of Marcel Déat, 
new Minister of Labor and National Solidarity in 
the Vichy government. He scorns the milder collab- 


Orationists Who have been controlling Vichy, whose | 


“revolution” he considers false and reactionary. New 


inspiration for these elements to hold fast to their 


cause came in the trial and execution in Algiers of 

Pierre Pucheu, for what happened to him might befall , 

them if they abandon collaboration with Germany. 
BLAIR BOLLES 


(This is the second in a series of four articles on 
American foreign policy.) 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


——— 
— 
oh 


re 
| th 


