



































to 


nt 
er 


at. 
on 
)S- 
on 


1b- 


he 
Ost 
ty 
[0- 
tal 
ect 
nat 
the 
sal 
ing 
| at 
nu- 
ted 
Ov: 


her 
ris 
tell 
vill 


me 


pec 30 1943 


Entered as 2nd class matter 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 








Vou. XXIII, No. 10 


DecumBer 24, 1948 





— 


‘ge trial by a military tribunal in Kharkov of 
three Germans and one Russian accused of war 
atrocities, and their execution on December 19 fol- 
lowing admission of guilt, represent the first official 
attempt on the part of any one of the United Nations 
—as distinguished from guerrilla groups—to carry 
out the warning of the Moscow conference regard- 
ing war criminals. It will be recalled that the Moscow 
accord of November 1 was accompanied by a “‘State- 
ment on Atrocities’ signed by President Roosevelt, 
Prime Minister Churchill and Premier Stalin. This 
statement declared that, ‘‘at the time of granting of 
any armistice to any government which may be set 
up in Germany, those German officers and men and 
members of the Nazi party who have been respon- 
sible for or have taken a consenting part’ in atroci- 
ties, massacres and executions “will be sent back to 
the countries in which their abominable deeds were 
done in order that they may be judged and punished 
according to the laws of these liberated countries and 
of free governments which will be erected therein.” 
Without waiting for an armistice, the Soviet author- 
ities acted in accordance with the Moscow provision 
that war criminals ‘will be brought back to the scene 
of their crimes and judged on the spot by the peoples 
whom they have outraged.” 

The Moscow statement was designed to serve not 
only as a basis for the subsequent trial of war crim- 
inals, but also as a solemn warning to Nazis and 
ther Germans who, there is ample ground to fear, 
may wreak vengeance for their military setbacks 
upon defenseless civilians in the areas they are forced 
lp evacuate. No one, least of all the Russians, would 
daim that the three Germans executed at Kharkov 
were the original instigators of the crimes of which 
they were accused. On the contrary, one of the main 
purposes of the Kharkov trial was to obtain from the 
«cused an indictment of their superiors—Himmler, 
Rosenberg and Hitler were mentioned—who had 





RUSSIANS TAKE LEAD IN TRYING WAR CRIMINALS 


planned the brutalities they had perpetrated. Against 
these and other Nazi leaders the Russians, along with 
the governments of all occupied countries, have long 
been preparing elaborate lists of accusations, based 
on evidence collected from a great variety of sources. 
The Allied governments are submitting their lists to 
the United Nations Commission for the Investiga- 
tion of War Crimes, established on October 21, 1943, 
on which the United States and the U.S.S.R. are 
represented. The Soviet government, as early as No- 
vember 1942, appointed its own commission for this 
purpose. 

WHAT GERMANS ARE RESPONSIBLE? The 
Kharkov trial, aside from its immediate purpose of 
intimidating future German war criminals, has far- 
reaching implications for the larger problem of 
United Nations policy toward Germany. Today two 
schools of thought are becoming vocal in the United 
States—both, not altogether surprisingly, being most 
violently represented by spokesmen of German ori- 
gin. One school contends that Hitler and his Nazi 
associates are alone responsible for all the suffering 
the Germans have inflicted on other peoples; that 
German generals and industrialists, who allegedly 
wanted nothing but peace, were coerced into sub- 
mission to Nazi plans; and that rank-and-file Ger- 
mans were as much victims of Nazi terrorism as the 
conquered peoples of Europe. The other, equally ex- 
treme school of thought, avers that all Germans are 
either criminals or madmen, and should be treated 
as if they were suffering from incurable viciousness 
or from dementia praecox. 

Neither theses can be regarded as tenable, and 
neither offers a constructive approach to post-war 
relations with the Germans. No people can be held 
completely free of responsibility for the activities 
of their leaders. It is true, of course, that there is no 
known method of bringing a whole nation to trial. 
But individuals who have claimed to represent a na- 








May aS OS RTS = 














tion at a time when such representation was for them 
advantageous can and should be held responsible for 
the acts they either did themselves or ordered to be 
done by others. Many of them, especially the small 
fry, will doubtless be disposed of by the Germans 
themselves, or by self-appointed avengers among the 
conquered peoples. But others must be punished in 
some way if international morality is ever to be estab- 
lished not merely on the formal plane of diplomatic 
documents but on the plane of personal responsibility. 

NEED FOR PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY. In 
what manner, however, can acknowledged war crim- 
inals be tried ? To pretend that any trial to which they 
may be brought will resemble the legal processes 
familiar to a stable society in times of peace—even 
if it were held with the use of of defense counsel— 
would be a travesty of peacetime justice. It is for 
this reason that the suggestion made by Charles 
Warren, well-known expert on international law, that 
such persons should be punished not on the basis of 
law, but of policy, appears to be sound. The punish- 
ment of Nazi leaders would be a matter of policy, 
not of law—for one thing because, so far, there is 
no known law on the subject. That such law is needed 
becomes increasingly evident—but until it has been 
formulated and generally accepted, it would be a 
disservice to the normal processes of justice to invoke 
them for this purpose. The question may be asked 
whether officers and soldiers carrying out the orders 
of their superiors, no matter how brutal, can be le- 
gally held accountable for their deeds. But an army 
in which orders for such atrocities as are known to 
have been committed by Germans, especially in East- 


WILL BRITISH COMMONWEALTH EXTEND TO WESTERN EUROPE? 


The suggestion made by the London Daily Sketch 
on December 17 that Belgium might become a 
member of the British Commonwealth—a suggestion 
which was cautiously sanctioned by Belgian officials 
—has given new emphasis to the “explosive” speech 
delivered in London on November 25 by Jan Chris- 
tiaan Smuts. Speaking to the United Kingdom branch 
of the Empire Parliamentary Association, Smuts ten- 
tatively proposed that Britain should seek closer ties 
in Western Europe to enable it to play an equal role 
in the “great trinity of powers’—United States, So- 
viet Union and Britain—which will assume leader- 
ship in the post-war world. 

THE SMUTS PROPOSAL. The South African 
Premier, advocating a peace based on power, ex- 
plicitly rejected an Anglo-American political axis as 
impracticable and, by implication at least, excluded 
an Anglo-Soviet hegemony in Europe. He envisaged 
the peace as the product of a balance between the 
power and interests of the Big Three. But since the 
partnership must be a union of equals and Britain 
has depleted its resources during the war, it may be 


Page Two 








ee 
—— 


ern Europe and Russia, can hardly be regarded x 
conforming with the accepted rules of war. 


The question of war criminals raises an even mog 
fundamental problem. While no sane person woul 
contend that it would be desirable, even if it wep 
practicable, to punish all Germans for what has beg 
done in their name, there is soundness in the Ry 
sian argument that the Germans should be mak 
to repair—literally make reparation for—destructiog 
wreaked in their name upon other peoples. Neithe 
in Britain nor in the United States would there ly 
much sympathy, after the war, for any attempt jp 
use Germans as slave labor on reconstruction tasks jp 
Russia, or other devastated areas of Europe. But if, 
program for the orderly utilization of German skills 
under the supervision of an international commissigg 
on which Germans would be eventually represented 
could be worked out, there would be a real advantage 
in having German civilians see for themselves wha 
the German Army and the Nazis have done to othe 
peoples. True, the Germans are now learning from 
their own experience what they did to Coventry and 
Rotterdam. But they are as yet far from learning wha 
their fellow-Germans did in Kharkov and Kiey, ip 
Belgrade and Warsaw. Personal acquaintance with 
these acts of brutality, and personal responsibility for 
their reparation—to the extent that they can be phys 
cally repaired—would do more to impress upon the 
Germans the lesson that war does not pay than any o 
the elaborate programs for post-war re-education 
now being discussed by American educators. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


necessary, he said, that Britain add to its strength by 
associating itself with ‘the smaller democracies i 
Western Europe’’—presumably Norway, Hollané 
and Belgium. The Empire and Commonwealth, kt 
continued, because they are largely extra-Europeas, 
cannot give Britain the strength needed in a continent 
where war developments will have removed thre 
great powers—Germany, Italy and probably Franc 
—and raised Russia to a position in Europe neve 
held in peacetime by any single nation. 

Although the British government, in answer to pio 
tests from Algiers at the slighting reference to Franc, 
denied that Smuts spoke for Britain, his proposal ap 
pears to have crystallized, perhaps too precipitately, 
the thinking of influential circles in Whitehall # 
well as in the exiled governments of Norway, Hol 
land and Belgium. Britain’s stock with these govett 
ments is high as a result of over three years’ coopett 





tion in wartime London, and they appear to belie 
that their security needs and economic interests af 
tied closely with those of Britain. Neutrality havitl 
failed them, military arrangements with Britain a 





a log 
nomic 
States 
doubt 








t to 
S i 
if a 
ills 
$100 
ted, 
tage 
vhat 
ther 
rom 


what 
y, if 
with 
y for 
hysi 
1 the 
ry of 
ation 


AN 


th by 
eS if 
lland 
a, he 
peal, 
inent 
three 
rane 
never 


) pio 
ance, 
al ap 
ately, 
all 

Hol 
vert 
pert 


elievt 





ts 
avin 





ae 
— 





a logical alternative. Moreover, should British eco- 
nomic policy diverge sharply from that of the United 
States or other nations, these countries would un- 
doubtedly line up at Britain’s side. Final decisions on 
such questions, however, can hardly be made until 
the Norwegian, Dutch and Belgian peoples have 
had the opportunity to support or oppose them. At 
the same time, forthright adoption by the British gov- 
ernment of a policy along the line proposed by Smuts 
is unlikely for several reasons. 

OBSTACLES TO REALIZATION. Recent re- 
ports from London indicate, in the first place, that 
there is concern lest such a policy be—or appear to 
be—directed against the Soviet Union. True, the Lon- 
don Times suggested on November 19 that Britain 
might share in the maintenance of joint bases on the 
continent, and added that “the Anglo-Russian alli- 
ance presupposes that Britain will not intervene in 
eastern Europe except in agreement with Russia, any 
more than Russia will intervene in western Europe 
except in agreement with Britain.” But the danger 
of Anglo-Russian rivalry—with Germany holding the 
balance of power in Europe under such circumstances 
—has already been mentioned as a factor which will 
restrain Britain from pursuing a clear-cut sphere of 
influence policy in Western Europe. 

The exclusion of France from the Smuts proposal 
also evoked considerable comment in London. If this 
scheme is to assure effective security, French partici- 
pation would appear to be essential. Moreover, for 
lack of it, the colonies of a British-led bloc would sur- 
round France’s African territories, and this might 
well lead to serious friction. It should not be for- 
gotten, however, that Prime Minister Churchill's 
1940 offer to the French of full citizenship and equal- 
ity within the British Commonwealth has never been 
withdrawn. France may feel that for reasons of secur- 
ity in Europe and its colonial interests in Africa and 
Asia, support for—if not actual membership in—a 
system of this kind would be to its advantage. 


Page Three 





What effect will the United States attitude toward 
the tariff, shipping, rubber, foreign lending and 
lend-lease have in influencing Britain’s post-war 
trade policy? READ— 
BRITAIN’S POST-WAR TRADE AND 
WORLD ECONOMY 


by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


December 15 issue of FOREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members $3. 

















A British policy of rigid obligations in Europe 
would probably meet with considerable opposition 
in the Dominions, particularly Canada. While the 
members of the Commonwealth have always wished 
to see Britain strong, they have preferred that its 
strength should not be based on continental ties. The 
New York Times of December 19 reports from 
Ottawa that the Smuts proposal for maintaining the 
strength of the Commonwealth, even to the inclusion 
of new members, has received support in the Cana- 
dian capital, but the reaction in Quebec and in 
Western Canada cannot be expected to be so favor- 
able. Certainly there is little desire in Canada to 
follow a further suggestion made by Smuts—namely, 
Dominion participation in colonial administration on 
a regional basis. But South Africa, and probably Aus- 
tralia and New Zealand, view this question in a dif- 
ferent light, and the Commonwealth is undoubtedly 
flexible enough to adjust itself to this further di- 
versity. 

The reaction of the United States to the fulfill- 
ment of Smuts’ scheme would probably be mixed. In 
view of American influence in Latin America it is 
doubtful if this country could legitimately object to 
the development of a British sphere of influence in 
Western Europe. If, however, Holland were to join 
the Commonwealth and bring its empire into the 
organization, this would lead to increased popular 
suspicion of British “imperialism,’ and probably 
some official concern lest a rigid system of imperial 
preferences enclose almost all of South East Asia. 
This suspicion might be reduced, however, by exten- 
sion of the more progressive colonial policies already 
announced by the Dutch and British governments, 
and the fear of commercial conflict removed by the 
reconciliation of British and American trade policies. 

Although formal adherence of the Western Euro- 
pean democracies to the British Commonwealth may 
never come about, it should be clear that Smuts, how- 
ever bold he appeared, was doing no more than pro- 
ject into the future a development which is al- 
ready under way. Just as the governments of these 
countries were forced to turn to Britain during the 
war, so they may be expected to turn to it in the tasks 
of post-war reconstruction. They are separated from 
Germany by hatred, from the United States by dis- 
tance, and from the Soviet Union by both distance 
and differences in political and economic institutions. 
Regardless of the form it takes, their association with 
Britain—and Britain’s with them—is bound to influ- 
ence the shape of post-war Europe and the post-war 
world. HOWARD P. WHIDDEN, JR. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 10, Dscpmpgr 24, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FrRaNK Ross McCoy, President ; DorotHy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


ome month for change of address on membership publications. 


ie 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





| 


i 
i 


| 
) 


Washington News Letter 











Dec. 20.—With the Senate’s rejection of the 
Green-Lucas military voting bill, some sort of prac- 
ticable absentee balloting system for men and women 
in the armed services remains to be worked out be- 
fore the Presidential election next November. The 
9,000,000 persons of voting age who are expected 
to be in the armed services at that time could hold 
the balance in the electoral decision, and play a lead- 
ing part in determining whether the United States 
actually follows a foreign policy of international 
collaboration. 


TEMPTATION FOR POLITICIANS. The issue 
of the soldiers’ vote has been snowed under by more 
spectacular events on the battlefronts and by the con- 
ferences at Cairo and Teheran, but the important ques- 
tion remains: Are the persons who are fighting to 
defend the country to be permitted to have a voice 
in its running? The Green-Lucas bill for federal su- 
pervision of the voting was defeated on December 4, 
when the Senate, 42 to 37, approved an inadequate 
substitute measure which simply expressed the wish 
that the individual states would facilitate balloting 
by soldiers, sailors, the overseas personnel of the 
Merchant Marine, and the USO, American Red 
Cross, Society of Friends, Women’s Auxiliary Ferry 
Service and Women’s Air Force Society Pilots. The 
states failed to make adequate arrangements for vot- 
ing by those persons in 1942 and this year, and there 
is no reason to think they will do so in 1944. In an 
attempt to guarantee the soldier an opportunity to 
vote, Representative Worley of Texas, Chairman of 
the House Committee on Election of President, Vice 
President and Representatives in Congress, has intro- 
duced a bill to enable fighting men and women to 
cast their ballots through cooperation of the federal 
and state governments. 

Politicians work in the dark, however, when they 
try to anticipate the soldiers’ vote. Nobody knows 
how the great body of military men and women think 
about today’s international issues. The general un- 
official view is that, at this stage, the fighting men 
are less interested in great questions like foreign pol- 
icy than in simple matters directly affecting them. The 
problem for the soldier and sailor is: Will I have a 
job when the war is over? 

EDUCATING THE SOLDIERS. The likelihood 
that soldiers and sailors will vote wisely, however, 
is enhanced by the educational and information 
advantages provided for them by the Army and 





Navy in order to make them more intelligent fighters. 
These programs give the military personnel a bette; 
opportunity than that enjoyed by many rank-and-file 
citizens to acquaint themselves with the nature of the 
events and problems of the times, both in domestic 
and foreign affairs. Selected members of the services 
are now being polled by the Army and Navy Depart. 
ments for their opinions on current affairs. These 
polls are not designed to serve any political end, but 
to show whether the Army’s extensive educational 
programs are achieving results. 

The services’ programs are divided into three parts 
—orientation, education, information. The objective 
of the War Department's orientation program is to 
give the soldiers an opportunity to understand the na- 
ture of the war, its meaning to them, and their place 
in it. Orientation officers, who receive special school. 
ing in their tasks, elucidate both the military and 
political objectives of the United Nations, as well as 
the background of the war. The course deals only in 
fundamentals, with emphasis on military questions, 
and is given but one hour a week. 

The educational program gives the men an oppor. 
tunity for discussion with one another. With a guid. 
ing officer present, they exchange views on topics of 
the day. This intellectual exercise is elective, and is 
regarded as recreation. As a basis of discussion the 
leader makes available pamphlets which the War 
Department sends out, whose preparation is arranged 
by agencies like the American Historical Associa 
tion. The material supplied by the services is objec 
tive and deals with fundamental issues. 

The information program provides news and 
graphic background information for the military per 
sonnel. The War Department distributes a weekly 
newsmap and, through the Army News Service, re 
ports of current happenings. The news feature mag: 
azine, Yank, is essentially a War Department pub 
lication. The Armed Forces Radio Service provides 
broadcast news for soldiers and sailors overseas. Lt 
Col. Frank Capra has completed for the Army five 
background motion pictures on the theme, “Why 
We Fight,” for showing to soldiers, and magazines 
such as Time, Newsweek and Readers Digest print 
overseas editions for distribution among the armed 
forces. Nevertheless, the front lines get the news only 
in small doses, and the men in the thick of the fight 
ing on land and sea are often in the dark about world 
events which they help to shape. 


BLair BOLLES 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 











191 


