1efi- 
; fe. 
for 
ther 
pen- 
der- 
the 
)per- 
ap 
latic 

ac- 
cide 
r of 
long 
obli- 
pay- 
for 
con- 
ding 
print 
with 


nerfi- 


vern- 
sides 
sible. 
rand- 
<ico’s 

time 
com- 
omes 


OR 


National 
Edstor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vout. XVII, No. 47 SEPTEMBER 16, 1938 





READ: Strife in Czechoslovakia 

by Karl Falk 
For the post-war political development of Czechoslovakia. 
For the economic aspects of the Sudetic problem. 


For the grievances of the German minority. 


March 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 





Entered as second 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at’ New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 




















NO WAR-BUT NO PEACE—SAYS HITLER 





f \HANCELLOR HITLER'S anxiously awaited 

speech of September 12 at the Nazi party con- 
gress in Nuremberg did nothing to ease the crisis. 
After a week of extreme tension, during which France 
and Britain, following Germany's example, had mo- 
bilized their military and economic resources in daily 
expectation of an incident, Hitler refrained from 
irrevocably committing Germany to war on behalf 
of the Sudeten Germans. But neither did he hold 
out any hope of appeasement so long as the Sudetens 
remain within the boundaries of Czechoslovakia. 
The situation of the Sudeten Germans, he said, was 
monstrous and intolerable, and ‘“‘we should not de- 
serve to be Germans if we were not willing to adopt 
such an attitude and bear the consequences in this 
or that way arising from it.” 

When it came to specifying these consequences, 
which his Nazi audience, pitched to a point of frenzy, 
must have expected to be nothing short of war, 
Hitler adopted a less strident tone. He passed on to 
a discussion of the war preparations undertaken at 
his orders on May 28—a week after the Czech 
mobilization—and boasted that German fortifica- 
tions in the Rhineland were being rapidly completed 
by 270,000 workers under the command of Dr. Todt, 
builder of Germany’s famous military roads. These 
fortifications, he said, would be finished “before the 
beginning of winter,” thus fixing an ominous dead- 
line for the efforts of the Western powers to settle 
the Sudeten problem, but also confirming the im- 
pression abroad that, despite its blustering, Germany 
does not yet feel ready for a major conflict. 

This statement, taken in conjunction with Hitler's 
speech of September 6, when he told his followers 
that Germany need fear no blockade, and Goering’s 
assurances of September 10 regarding the country’s 
teserves of food and raw materials, seem to serve 
two purposes: to heighten Britain’s fear of war and 





its consequent desire to avert it by further Czech 
concessions; and to reassure the Germans, who have 
been increasingly worried by food restrictions and 
military requisitions. Such assurance must come as 
welcome relief to the rank and file of the civilian 
population in the Third Reich. But it must also raise 
in their minds the question whether Germany need 
undergo such drastic economic sacrifices if war is 
not imminent. 


The only concrete point in Hitler's speech was his 
emphasis on the right of Sudeten Germans to self- 
determination, which indicated that he might demand 
a plebiscite. The Czechoslovak Ambassador in Lon- 
don, Jan Masaryk, had already warned the British 
government on September 12 that a plebiscite would 
be unacceptable to Prague because it would endanger 
the security of the republic. On September 13 the 
Prague government proclaimed martial law in sev- 
eral Sudeten German districts. The Henlein party 
immediately presented an ultimatum demanding re- 
peal of martial law and withdrawal of Czech police 
from the Sudeten region; otherwise, the party dis- 
claimed responsibility for all further developments. 
The Prague Cabinet refused to consider this ulti- 
matum, on the ground that a political party could not 
dictate to the government. 


Until Hitler’s speech, negotiations between the 
Henlein party and Prague were continuing on the 
basis of the latest plan worked out with the collabora- 
tion of the Runciman mission. This plan proposed to 
divide the country into a number of self-governing 
districts; and to apportion all public jobs, district and 
national, as well as government contracts, among the 
nationalities in accordance with population ratios. 


This plan, which the Prague government regarded 
as the limit of the concessions it could safely make to 
the Sudetens, had already aroused the apprehensions 




















of Czechs and German Democrats, who feared that 
the government had conceded too much under British 
pressure. While the British, last weekend, had indi- 
cated that the Czech proposals, subject to further 
“elucidation and modification,” went a long way to- 
ward meeting Sudeten demands, the Chamberlain 
government once more considered the possibility 
either of a plebiscite in the Sudeten region, or out- 
right cession of this territory to Germany in the hope 
of placating Hitler. 


In appraising the weeks of tension which lie ahead 
in Europe, it might be well to keep a few salient 
points in mind. There is no doubt that at Versailles 
the Wilsonian doctrine of self-determination of na- 
tions was misused on several occasions to fit the po- 
litical and strategic needs of Czechoslovakia, Ru- 
mania and Yugoslavia which, according to France's 
calculations, were to block renewal of Germany's 
drive to the East. There is equally little doubt thar, 
under normal circumstances, the principle of self- 
determination should be applied to Germans no less 
than other national groups in Eastern Europe. Cir- 
cumstances were not normal in 1919, nor are they 
normal today. In the post-war period, when conces- 
sions were possible, Czechoslovakia, which found 
an ally in France, failed to make those adjustments 
which might have averted the present conflict over 
the rights of the Sudeten Germans. What Germany 
was unable to obtain from Prague by peaceful means 
it is now on the point of obtaining by threat of force. 


To this extent Hitler's thesis may be sustained. But 
in territory settled by so many overlapping national 
groups as Eastern Europe it is impossible to apply 
the yardstick of self-determination without creating 
grievances in one quarter or another. The most that 
can be done is to assure a maximum of economic and 
political equality to the diverse groups in multina- 
tional states, of which Czechoslovakia is only one, 
although the most extreme, example. Now that the 
Prague government has shown its readiness to make 
concessions, and that Britain’s intervention holds out 
assurance these concessions will not prove fictitious, 
the tone adopted by Hitler can only envenom a sit- 
uation which would be difficult under the best of 
circumstances. What Europe needs is patience and 
goodwill, not threats and misrepresentations. Hitler 
has a case; but he can only ruin his case in the eyes 
of the world by methods which cause those who for 
years fought the charge of German war guilt to 
believe that Germany is guilty of paving the way for 


another war. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


Page Two 








WASHINGTON MAINTAINS SILENCE 

In line with the policy of silence invoked by Secre. 
tary Hull, Washington declined to comment on 
Hitler's Nuremberg speech. Recent statements, how- 
ever, leave unchanged the atmosphere of doubt 
which has shrouded the foreign policy of the United 
States throughout this European crisis. A few weeks 
ago, on the eve of the German army maneuvers, the 
Administration issued two pronouncements in tones 
which were clearly intended to be significant. Secre- 
tary Hull’s radio broadcast of August 16 underlined 
the obvious fact that the United States is bound to 
be directly and seriously affected by war in Europe. 
The President's speech at Kingston, Ontario, two days 
later warned that this country would not “stand idly 
by” if Canada were invaded by any foreign power, 
Although they contained no new commitments, both 
carried the implication that the United States should 
not be disregarded in the coming show-down in Eu- 
rope and that its influence would in all probability 
be exerted on behalf of the European democracies. 
Three weeks later, at his press conference on Septem. 
ber 9, Mr. Roosevelt went out of his way to deny 
that the United States was allied in any way with 
the European democracies. The “impression” that 
this government was pledged to aid Great Britain 
and France in a “stop-Hitler” movement, he said, 
was erroneous. If such an impression existed, it was 
created by the interpretations of columnists and news- 
papers and not by the utterances of responsible gov- 
ernment officials. The President declined an invita- 
tion to set forth the specific policy of the government 
with respect to the existing crisis in Europe. 

This atmosphere of doubt is partly deliberate, 
partly involuntary. It is the deliberate intention of 
the State Department to leave Hitler in doubt as to 
the action of the United States. For the past six 
months Washington officials have taken every op- 
portunity to impress on Europe, and particularly on 
the dictatorships, that the neutrality of this country 
in a major war cannot be taken for granted. They 
have also cautioned Britain and France—although 
less sharply—not to count on American intervention. 
But much of the uncertainty of American policy flows 
from the inability of the Administration to make 
commitments in the name of the American people. 
The Executive is still uncertain about the attitude of 
Congress or public opinion. As a result, the President 
and the Secretary of State are left with the difficult 
task of trying to exert the influence of the United 
States by veiled pronouncements without committing 
their people to any decisive line of action. 

W. T. STONE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 47, SepremBer 16, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Leste BuELt, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHEeLes Dsan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


aon 





F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


FC 


An 


VoL. 


Will 
the 


July 


rer 
do 


ce 





