


ls, 
ent 
ef 
the 
ites 
‘ull 
for 

of 
ific 
the 


sels 
eri- 
sale 
orld 
avy 
on 
ith- 
0 


Seé- 


‘ests 
real 
will 
ther 
1 in 


[E 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of curfent international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 Wesr 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XIX, No. 43 Avucust 16, 1940 





Entered as second- 
l December 
AUG 17 4, . a 2 the Post 
Office at New York, 


N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


SECOND CLASS MAIL 











General Library 





_ 


AMERICA’S CHOICE TODAY 
by W. T. Stone and the F.P.A. Research Staff 


Cataclysmic events have brought the Western Hemisphere to the 
threshold of fateful decisions. This pamphlet examines the military, 

litical and economic problems which may confront the United States 
in the event of a German victory. 


Major George Fielding Eliot says: “It ought to be read by every 
American.” 


July issue of World Affairs Pamphlets . . 25 cents 


-_— 


University of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, Michtecan 
-~ 
PERIODICAL ROS 


RARY 
BR AL LIB 











JAPAN PRESSES FORWARD 


IN EAST ASIA 





bags counting on a direct Nazi invasion of 
the British Isles to provide the opportunity for 
a far-reaching advance, Tokyo has swiftly capitalized 
on every weakness of its Far Eastern opponents dur- 
ing recent weeks. Japan’s major gains have included 
the closing of the Burma Road and the growing 
control exercised by its military and diplomatic 
agents in Indo-China. At the same time, Japan has 
brought strong pressure against the positions of the 
Western powers in the foreign concessions along the 
China coast. To the Anglo-Japanese settlement of 
issues at Tientsin, concluded on June 19, has now 
been added the withdrawal of the remaining British 
military forces at Shanghai, Tientsin and Peiping. 

THE SITUATION AT SHANGHAI. Most of 
the 2,850 British troops affected by the War Office 
order, announced in London on August 9, were sta- 
tioned at Shanghai, and the effects will be felt most 
seriously at this strategic center of Western interests 
in China. The British action, apparently taken as a 
result of Japanese diplomatic pressure, reflects 
Britain’s continuing effort to smooth the path of its 
telations with Japan. From a strictly military point 
of view, the concentration of British forces at Hong- 
kong and Singapore is probably justified. From the 
diplomatic point of view, however, this continuance 
of the British retreat in the Far East will not neces- 
sarily lead to a diminution of Japanese pressure. 
On the contrary, if past experience is a guide, it 
may stimulate Tokyo to advance further demands. 
While the controversy over the arrests of nationals 
of Britain and Japan in their respective territories has 
not yet been settled, the stronger attitude adopted 
by London in this case seems to have had a restrain- 
ing effect on Tokyo. 

Withdrawal of the British forces from Shanghai, 
moreover, will add new difficulties to an already 
explosive situation. Through the agency of the 
Nanking régime, Japan issued orders in mid-July for 


the expulsion of 84 Chinese, six Americans and one 
Briton from the International Settlement. Samuel H. 
Chang, one of the Chinese listed for expulsion and a 
member of the board of directors of the American- 
owned Shanghai Evening Post, has since been as- 
sassinated; Hallett Abend, correspondent of The 
New York Times, but not on the blacklist, was as- 
saulted in his apartment on July 19; and the other 
listed Americans have found it necessary to employ 
personal bodyguards or wear bullet-proof vests. 
These events have also been accompanied by a series 
of semi-official Japanese demands that, in order to 
safeguard the “neutrality” of Chinese soil, the forces 
of the European belligerent powers stationed in 
Shanghai should be evacuated. The British with- 
drawal may be followed shortly by evacuation of the 
French and Italian contingents, but so far there is no 
indication that the United States will transfer its 
troops. While the chief responsibility for defense of 
the Settlement now rests on the 1,600 American 
marines of the Fourth Regiment, it is not likely that 
Japan will want to become involved in a serious 
controversy with the United States at this time. On 
August 9 Sumner Welles, Acting Secretary of State, 
declared that the marines at Shanghai, as well as 
the smaller American forces in the north, will remain 
in China, at least for the present. 

THE FATE OF INDO-CHINA. The number of 
Japanese agents in French Indo-China, which al- 
ready exceeds 100 at Hanoi, seems to be steadily 
increasing. Japanese army planes carrying these of- 
ficials to and from Tokyo make free use of the Hanoi 
airport. In addition to their nominal function of 
supervising traffic with China, the members of the 
Japanese mission are engaged in economic and ge- 
ographic surveys, and the mapping of strategic com- 
munication routes leading into China. Important 
negotiations, which may decide the fate of the col- 
ony, are meanwhile taking place between French 




















and Japanese officials. The chief Japanese delegate, 
General Issaku Nishihara, after conferring with 
Premier Konoye in Tokyo, has returned to Hanoi to 
complete the negotiations. Japan’s demands, accord- 
ing to French informants, concern chiefly the right 
to establish naval and military bases in Indo-China, 
to move troops, and secure a new trade agreement 
favorable to Japanese interests. 

Should the first of these demands be granted, the 
new bases will be of greater value in opening a land 
route through Siam to the Singapore base than in 
facilitating a direct invasion of Yunnan province. 
A Japanese advance into China via the Hanoi-Kun- 
ming railway may be attempted, but it will doubt- 
less prove an extremely difficult operation. In the 
mountainous area traversed by the railway even 
small Chinese defense forces would be exceedingly 
effective, while the destruction of bridges and tun- 
nels would quickly put the railway out of commis- 
sion. There is no certainty, moreover, that the 


- Chinese army command will choose to remain on the 


defensive along the Yunnan border; statements from 
Chungking have indicated that Chinese troops will 
move in from the north to “protect” Indo-China as 
soon as Japanese forces of occupation are established 
and give signs of undertaking an offensive. 


AMERICAN POLICY. While Japanese official 
and unofficial spokesmen have broadly hinted that 
reprisals may be expected to follow recent American 
actions looking toward an embargo on export of war 
supplies, it appears that the actual steps thus far 
taken by the United States have not seriously curbed 
Japan’s access to the American market. President 
Roosevelt's original proclamation of July 2, taken 
under the authorization of the new Act to Expedite 
National Defense signed the same day, listed a 
group of products which could be exported only 
after a government license had been obtained. On 





Page Two - —— 





—— 


July 26, by Presidential proclamation and accom. 
panying regulations, three’ more items—aviatiog 
gasoline, iron and steel scrap of the Number | 
grade, and tetraethyl lead—were added to the origi. 
nal list. None of the new products thus specified 
was definitely embargoed at the time, and appar. 
ently licenses are still being granted for most of the 
items on the list. 

On July 31, however, President Roosevelt applied 
a specific embargo to the shipment of aviation gaso- 
line to any country outside the Western Hemisphere, 
This action led to the first official Japanese protest, 
delivered by Ambassador Horinouchi to the State 
Department on August 3. The text of the note was 
not made public, and the same reticence was ob- 
served in the case of the American reply, handed to 
the Japanese Ambassador on August 9 by Sumner 
Welles. It was learned, however, that Japan's pro. 
test was restricted to the issue of aviation gasoline, 
indicating that licenses have probably been forth. 
coming for the other listed items, including steel 
scrap. In any case, only 20 per cent of Japan’s pur. 
chases of American scrap consist of the Number | 
grade, so that denial of an export license would still 
leave the bulk of Japan’s imports of this product 
untouched. 

Decision on the larger issue in the Far East, 
especially as it affects the Dutch East Indies, will 
almost certainly await the progress of Hitler's ex 
pected Blitzkrieg against Britain. As this Blitzkrieg 
develops, the full extent of Japan’s ambitions in the 
South Seas should rapidly become apparent. It is 
clear that the struggle in this area is narrowing down 
to one between Japan and the United States. 
America’s dilemma in the Far East thus promises to 
become even more acute, for pending the outcome of 
a Nazi offensive against Britain it will not be easy 
to send American naval vessels to Asiatic waters. 


T. A. Bisson 


ITALY STRIKES IN AFRICA 


As waves of German bombers, on August 11 and 
12, carried out their most devastating raids on the 
British Isles since the outbreak of war — perhaps 
preparatory to the German Blitzkrieg—the second 
week of Italy's intensified campaigns in Africa found 
the Italians advancing against stiff British resistance. 
Britain, compelled to keep its greatest strength con- 
centrated at home to beat off the awaited German in- 
vasion, faced the prospect of waging a rear-guard ac- 
tion against Italy's superior numbers and equipment. 

ITALIAN PLAN OF ATTACK. Italy’s military 
activity against the British is concentrated mainly in 
three zones: British Somaliland, the Anglo-Egyptian 
Sudan, and Egypt. Its objectives in the African cam- 
paigns are to gain freedom from the Mediterranean 
through the Suez Canal and Red Sea, and to aug- 


ment its colonial holdings at Britain’s expense. The 
Italians scored their first important success in the 
present campaigns on August 5—one day after the 
beginning of the drive into British Somaliland— 





when they took the seaport of Zeila. This port over | 


looks the Gulf of Aden where, with heavy artillery | 


and naval support, it could command entrance into 
the Red Sea. By the end of the week three Italiaa 
columns were surrounding the capital city of Ber- 
bera, a leading port of entry for supplies from India. 
Although the British had prepared to retain, if possible, 
a foothold in East Africa for eventual counter-attack 
on the Italians, they apparently intend to avoid 4 
costly struggle over Somaliland. If Italy's East Afri 
can forces conquer all of this colony, they will still 
be cut off from any possible reinforcements except 











st, 
ate 


ner 

















= Page Three 


by air. The British apparently have decided on 

errilla warfare in this region, and on the piece- 
meal destruction of Italian units as their supplies of 
munitions become exhausted. South African troops, 
with their own mechanized infantry, artillery, air 
force, medical corps and engineers, have advanced 
northward into Kenya Colony to engage the Italians 
from the south. 

Since Britain still controls the Red Sea and 
Indian Ocean, Italy's two main bodies of troops 
could effect a junction only through the Anglo- 
Egyptian Sudan. The second area of Anglo- 
Italian hostilities, therefore, is developing along the 
frontier between the Sudan and Italian East Africa. 
On July 5 Italian forces from Eritrea and northern 
Ethiopia took Kassala, eastern gateway for the rich 
cotton plantations of the Upper Nile valley, but 
fighting along this front recently has been seriously 
handicapped by seasonal rains which have made 
much of the country impassable. Before the Italians 
could reach Libya from East Africa, moreover, they 
would have to pierce vast jungles and extensive 
deserts, where temperatures rise to 120 degrees 
Fahrenheit, rifle barrels cannot be touched in mid-day, 
and water is exceedingly scarce. 

Along the Libyan-Egyptian front, where Italy has 
concentrated over half of its total African army of 
about 500,000 white and native soldiers, desert con- 
ditions are equally difficult. The Italian forces in this 
zone, like the British, have ample water supplies 
near their own bases, but will have to overcome pre- 
carious shortages as they move out into the open. 
Despite these obstacles, however, Italy's eagerness 
to oust the British from the Suez Canal and their 
base at Alexandria—from which Britain controls the 
Eastern Mediterranean—has led to extensive prep- 
arations for an Italian invasion of Egypt. On Au- 
gust 5, Italian and British planes began a series of 
air battles along the Mediterranean coast of Libya 
and Egypt. The Egyptian government—allied with 
Britain ever since Egypt achieved independence in 
1922—has maintained its neutrality in the conflict, 
but has permitted Britain to use Egyptian territory 








as a base of operations against Italy, and a British 
military mission has supplied the Egyptian army of 
22,500 men with mechanized equipment of the latest 
British pattern. Whenever the Italian army actually 
invades Egypt, that country will apparently be pre- 
ere the overwhelming number of Italian 
orces—to enter the war immediately against Italy. 
DOMINION STATUS FOR INDIA? As Italy 
consolidated its strength along Britain’s traditional 
“lifeline” to India, the British government made a 
new bid for wartime support from Indian leaders. 
On August 8 the Marquess of Linlithgow, Viceroy 
of India, offered to expand his present Executive 
Council to include representative Indians, and pro- 
posed to set up a new War Advisory Council which 
would directly associate “the national life of India 
as a whole” with the British war effort. Last Oc- 
tober, action on the same proposal had been made 
conditional on cooperation among the major parties 
in the provinces, but now the government indicated 
its readiness to expand the council immediately. 
The Viceroy also stated that the government “will 
most readily assent” to the formation of a represen- 
tative assembly after the war, to devise the frame- 
work of a new constitution. Lord Linlithgow indicated 
somewhat more definitely than ever that Britain was 
prepared to grant India dominion status, although 
he did not reveal when this step would be taken. 
By offering the promise of a “free and equal part- 
nership in the British Commonwealth,” the London 
government apparently hopes to win the immediate 
backing of India’s great wealth and vast population. 
India, which could be of great assistance in the Afri- 
can campaigns, might unite to support Britain rather 
than face less desirable domination by Germany or 
Italy. On August 11, however, the President of the 
All-India National Congress said that the British 
offer would be refused because it still falls far short 
of the Nationalist demand for full independence. 
But as the Congress will not give its formal reply to 
the Viceroy until after its working committee meets 
on August 18, Britain hopes to win India’s support 
while there is yet time. A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


This Is Our China, by Madame Chiang Kai-shek. New 
York, Harper and Brothers, 1940. $3.50 
Letters, speeches and commentaries on the new China 


as it has developed since the years immediately preceding 
the Japanese invasion. 


The March of the Barbarians, by Harold Lamb. New York, 
Doubleday, Doran and Company, 1940. $3.75 
A vivid account of the origins of the Mongol empire un- 


der Genghis Khan and of its later stages in China, the 
Middle East, and Russia. 


North Pacific Fisheries, by Homer E. Gregory and Kath- 
leen Barnes. New York, American Council, Institute of 
Pacific Relations, 1939. $3.00 


A thoroughgoing analysis of the American salmon and 
halibut industries in the North Pacific, embracing such 
factors as conservation, marketing, prices, investment, pro- 
ducing firms, labor, and foreign trade. The concluding 
chapters deal with the place of fisheries in the Alaskan 
economy, and the international problems which the indus- 
try has created in the relations between the United States, 
Japan and the Soviet Union. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 43, Aucust 16, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lazer, Secretary; Vera MicuHe.es DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


is Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


a 


| 














Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


AUG. 16.—The appeal issued by former President 
Herbert Hoover on August 11 for prompt and 
realistic action to organize relief in Holland, Bel- 
gium, Norway and Poland, raised a critical issue 
which, unless clearly understood, threatens to divide 
American opinion. Mr. Hoover declared that there 
would soon be “wholesale starvation, death and 
disease in these little countries unless something is 
done about it.” He said he could not understand 
what the Washington administration ‘‘means by 
statements that they do not have the facts’ regard- 
ing the European crisis, and criticized the recall of 
John Cudahy, Ambassador to Belgium, who on Au- 
gust 6 had been quoted in London as saying that 
the situation in Europe would be “worse than hell” 
next winter. 

PROBLEM OF EUROPEAN RELIEF. The es- 
sence of the European relief problem is that the 
Continent is not self-sufficient in foodstuffs, and 
normally must import grains, sugar and other prod- 
ucts from overseas countries, notably the United 
States and Latin America. According to Mr. Hoover, 
Belgium normally imported -70 per cent of its food, 
Holland 40 per cent, Norway 20 per cent, and the 
German-occupied part of Poland 30 or 40 per cent. 
Now that Britain has extended its blockade of Ger- 
many to cover all countries under Nazi rule, Europe, 
with the exception of the Soviet Union, is cut off 
from direct access to overseas markets, and must 
rely solely on its own resources. Estimates as to crop 
prospects for this year vary widely. The Nazis as- 
sert that they have sufficient food reserves for their 
own needs, and that the crops of the Balkan coun- 
tries, on which they presumably plan to draw, are 
expected to be close to normal, in spite of cold 
weather and the harvesting problems created by 
large-scale mobilizations this summer in Rumania 
and Hungary. The situation in Holland is also re- 
garded as relatively bearable. Belgium and France, 
however, have suffered severely, both because a 
considerable portion of their territory served as a 
battlefield during the harvest season, and because 
their agricultural workers were not demobilized as 
promptly as in Holland. The situation of France is 
particularly threatening. The destruction of many 
bridges, the shortage of gasoline, and the difficulty 
of restoring communications between occupied and 
non-occupied regions, have disrupted transportation, 
creating serious shortages of certain commodities, 
notably butter and milk. 


THE GERMAN VIEW. The position taken by 
the German government is that the countries which 
fought the Reich did so at their own risk, and must 
now bear the responsibility for feeding themselves, 
without expecting any assistance from the Nazis 
At the same time, the German authorities are ham. 
pering local efforts to improve the food situation b 
stripping occupied countries of foodstuffs and other 
products, in return for special paper marks issued 
at greatly devalued rates—a procedure tantamount 
to confiscation. Reports indicate that, while the Ger. 
man forces in occupied countries have behaved well, 
they have consumed on the spot or sent back to the 
Reich many products of which Germany had de. 
prived itself during the years of remilitarization. 

Under these circumstances Britain, now engaged 
in a life-and-death struggle with Germany, in which 
its blockade of the continent remains one of its most 
powerful weapons, is definitely opposed to any 
measure that would provide food for European 
countries and thus, indirectly at least, alleviate Ger. 
many’s economic problems. Nazi propaganda is at- 
tempting to create the impression in the United 
States that the British are “cruel” in not permitting 
relief of Holland, Belgium, Poland, Norway and 
France, and at the same time, is seeking to convince 
the people now under German rule that their real 


enemy is not Germany, but Britain. No issue is more | 


calculated to move the American public. And if the 
question were solely one of relief, every argument 
would support the need of providing food and other 
supplies for European countries which have already 
suffered such great hardships and, unless assisted 
now, may go through an even more brutalizing 
process than that of Germany after the World War. 

The answer to this difficult problem has perhaps 
been given most adequately by Mr. Hoover himself, 
who in his statement of August 11 said that his re- 
lief plan depended on fulfilment by Germany of 
certain basic conditions. Germany, he said, must 
agree to take none of the domestic produce of the 
countries which would be given relief; to furnish an 
equivalent of any food already taken; to permit im- 
ports from Russia and the Balkan states; and to 
permit adequate control of distribution by a neutral, 
non-governmental organization, “so as to enable it 


to assure that those guarantees are carried out.” It | 


seems doubtful that the German government will 
undertake to give the guarantees outlined by Mr. 
Hoover; and unless it does, it is impossible to expect 
that Britain will lift the blockade. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 





An ii 


VoL. 


For 


Eur 


\\ 


Brit 
whi 


sug, 


lish 
ind 


on 

tal’ 
Bri 
Isle 
net 
str 
for 


the 
rer 





