retary } 


Eaeze Lol \\ J 


| 90 «a 
Be 


POO 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


Univer oct 12 1943 


si Hy ~t . = 
s+ty of Michigan 


Ann Arbar, Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vout. XXII, No. 51 


Ocroser 8, 1943 


THREE-POWER MEETING SEEKS ALTERNATIVE TO BALANCE OF POWER 


AS the three-power conference between the For- 
eign Ministers of Britain, Russia and the United 
States draws near, it becomes increasingly evident 
that its success or failure will determine the shape of 
the post-war world. Not only is the conference bound 
to raise a host of territorial and economic questions 
which the war had submerged but, what is far more 
important for the future of Europe and the world, 
it is bound to reveal the extent of agreement among 
the three great powers concerning the political fate 
of both Axis and conquered Europe. 


DIVERGENCES NOT HOPELESS. It would be 
a dangerous illusion to assume that there exists today 
an identity of views in Washington, London and 
Moscow regarding war and post-war problems. But 
it would be equally dangerous to jump to the conclu- 
sion that there is no basis for agreement among them. 
The task of the conferees is to look below the surface 
of platitudes about international collaboration for 
the essence of the issues that divide them, and to 
reconcile their divergent points of view. 

Such divergences as are known to exist result from 
the different degree of interest of the three powers 
in European affairs. Russia is, geographically, a part 
of Europe, and cannot, as some Nazi ideologists had 
urged, be thrust back into Asia. One thing that is 
needed is that Russia should become politically and 
economically, as well as geographically, knit together 
with Europe—and every move recently made by the 
Soviet government, such as its repeated intervention 
on behalf of the French Committee of National Lib- 
eration, indicates that it is, in fact, Moscow’s de- 
termination to take an active part in the post-war 
teorganization of the continent. 

Britain, by contrast, has throughout its history been 
interested in Europe primarily because a continent so 
close to its shores might become a threat to its safety 
if it came to be dominated by a single power that 
might try to unite the continent against the British— 


as France under Napoleon and Germany under Hit- 
ler unsuccessfully tried to do. It has been Britain's 
policy to intervene in the affairs of Europe when- 
ever one nation seemed on the point of achieving 
hegemony. On such occasions Britain tipped the 
scales against the potential victor by joining a coali- 
tion of its opponents. 


BALANCE OF POWER RULED OUT. Resump- 
tion of this policy, as the British realize, will no 
longer prove feasible after the war, for two major 
reasons. First, now that the airplane has become a 
deadly weapon, Britain can no longer count on the 
possibility of withdrawing into “splendid isolation” 
once its intervention has been crowned with success; 
as it has tried to do on previous occasions, with con- 
stantly diminishing returns. Second, the whole politi- 
cal map of Europe has been altered by the emergence 
of Russia as a great power, which could hardly be 
counterbalanced immediately after the war by any 
Anglo-German coalition—especially since one of 
Britain's avowed purposes is to make it impossible 
for the Reich to become a strong military power in 
the future. Today Britain is not in a position to estab- 
lish a new balance of power on the continent. The 
alternatives it faces are either a bilateral agreement 
with Russia, dividing the continent into respective 
spheres of influence, and accepting the idea that East- 
ern Europe and the Balkans fall within Moscow's 
sphere; or—what it would prefer—a_ three-power 
agreement between Britain, Russia and the United 
States which would have, as its principal objective, 
the establishment of a world organization with suf- 
ficient military and economic power at its disposal to 
assure the reconstruction of Europe. 

In contrast to both Britain and Russia, the United 
States has no direct territorial or strategic interest in 
Europe. But, like the two other great powers, it is 
concerned to prevent the recurrence of conflicts that 
would precipitate a general war from which, as our 


Sc yl sss 


experience in 1917 and 1939 incontrovertibly proves, 
we could not hope to remain aloof. In that sense, any 
post-war reorganization of the continent that can 
alleviate the causes of war should have the active 
support of the United States. While the British, in 
the short run at least, might find a division into 
spheres of influence satisfactory, such an arrange- 
ment would be repugnant to public opinion in this 
country, especially if it involves acquiescence in ab- 
sorption by Russia of small countries which had en- 
joyed independence before 1939. On the other hand, 
a European federation, which might offer the small 
countries an alternative to becoming satellites of 
Russia or Britain, and would be welcomed in the 
United States, has been hitherto viewed with sus- 
picion by Moscow, which sees in any such proposal 
the makings of an anti-Soviet coalition. 


Similar diversity of views exists on the crucial 
problem of the political complexion the conquered 
countries might take following liberation. It is im- 
possible to expect that any of the three great 
powers will advocate abroad what it opposes at 
home—that Britain and the United States will advo- 
cate communism in Europe, or Russia capitalism. 
The majority of Americans and Britishers would not 
welcome Communist-inspired revolutions on the con- 
tinent. On the other hand, the Soviet government 
would oppose the re-establishment of governments 
known to hold reactionary, and especially anti-Soviet 
views. But is a choice of these alternatives inescapa- 
ble? As a matter of fact, such information as can be 
gleaned from underground sources would indicate 
that most of the peoples of Europe, while determined 


BALKAN DIFFERENCES TEST ANTI-AXIS UNITY IN EUROPE 


As British and American forces in southern Italy 
outflank Nazi defenses in the Balkans, the stage 
appears to be set for increased Allied collaboration 
with the Yugoslav guerrillas who now occupy most 
of “Italian” Slovenia and the Dalmatian coast. 
Under these circumstances, the long-deferred and 
perplexing problems concerning the future of 
Yugoslavia and Greece, and the relations between 
Britain, the United States and the USSR in those 
countries, call for prompt answers based on a frank 
recognition of former mistakes and present obstacles. 

RELATIONS WITH PARTISANS. For the past 
two years the Soviet Union and its two Western 
Allies have followed distinctly different Balkan poli- 
cies, and little effort has been made by either side to 
achieve a compromise. From Moscow the Yugoslavs 
and Greeks have been constantly advised to take im- 
mediate military action against the enemy, whenever 
and wherever possible and at any price, in order to 
relieve German pressure on the eastern front and to 
hasten the end of the war. In line with these instruc- 
tions, the Yugoslav Partisans, under their Commun- 


not to return to the pre-war state of things, are no, 
by any means committed to acceptance of a system 
patterned on that of the Sovjet Union. Here a dis 
tinction must be drawn between the countries of 
Western and Northern Europe, and those of Eastem 
Europe and the Balkans whose political, economi 
and social conditions in 1939 resembled those of 
Russia in 1917, and might produce similar upheavals 
once the pressure of war has been lifted. Britain and 
the United States will have to recognize the neces. 
sity for fundamental changes in this area, and not 
oppose them, in the hope that, if they are unopposed, 
they may be effected through adjustments between 
clashing groups rather than by bloody revolution, 
That does not mean that Russia alone should haye 
a free hand in that area. The Soviet government, 
for its part, might bear in mind that such anti. 
democratic movements as had developed in the in 
dustrialized and politically advanced countries of 
Western: Europe had tended to take the form of 
fascism, rather than communism, and not revive 
this trend by open hostility to democratic institu- 
tions. The strong support given by Moscow to the 
French Committee of Liberation, whose accent is on 
nationalism, not on communism, shows that the 
Soviet government may be closer to understanding 
the forces at work in Europe than Britain and the 
United States. And despite all divergences, the three 
great powers agree on one thing—the need for se 
curity against future aggression. The main question 
is by what methods can security be most effectively 
achieved ? VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The fourth in a series on the outlook for the future of Europe.) 


ist military leader, ““Tito’’ (whose real name is Josip 
Brozovich), have forced the Nazis out of large sec- 
tions of the country, and Greek guerrilla forces 
have also carried on almost constant warfare and 
wrested important areas from their Axis conquerors. 

In contrast to the Partisans, the Greek and Yugo- 


slav governments-in-exile have warned against hasty | 


action and urged their countrymen to await the at 
rival of the Allies before risking armed opposition 
to the enemy. Mikhailovich, the Yugoslav Minister 


— 


—— 


to shift th 
lish milit: 
vich. To 
is known. 
Partisans, 
recently L 


WHO 
disturbin; 
Anglo-As 
of post-v 
pre-war 
posed of 
cal and s 
Washing 
many inc 
tatorial 1 
represen 
ernment: 
out afte: 
George 
similar t 
in the f 
ism” mi 
his since 
of the G 

In Yi 
been do 
between 
because 
The Yt 
over the 
and the 
try's na 
on any 
unity, t 
ernmen 

leading 
were Ci 

have a 

In 0} 


Ani 


of War and leader of the “official’’ Chetniks, is ap- | 


parently in accord with his government on this point, 
for he is reported to have remained inactive against 
the Nazis since October 1941. Meanwhile, the Yugo- 
slav Cabinet has either ignored the Partisans or de 


manded that they seek unity with the Chetniks, and | 


although King Peter, on September 30, gave Tito his 
belated approval, there is as yet no indication that 
the members of the Cabinet—now in Cairo—agree 
with the monarch. The inability of the Yugoslav 
government to come to terms with as valuable 4 
military force as the Partisans has caused the British 


sition 
nister 
is ap 
point, 
painst 
Y ugo- 
yr de- 
, and 
to his 
. that 
agree 
roslav 
ble a 
sritish 


—— 
————— 


to shift their attitude toward Yugoslavia and estab- 
lish military liaison with Tito as well as Mikhailo- 
yich. To date, however, the United States as far as 
js known, has taken no step toward recognizing the 
Partisans, and the reputation of the Chetniks has only 
recently been subjected to scrutiny in our press. 


WHO REPRESENTS THE PEOPLE? Even more 
disturbing differences between the Russian and 
Anglo-American Balkan policies appear in the realm 
of post-war questions. The USSR has urged that the 
pre-war fascists in Yugoslavia and Greece be dis- 

sed of before liberation and that important politi- 
cal and social changes be effected now. London and 
Washington, on the other hand, continue to consider 
many individuals who were associated with the dic- 
tatorial régimes in these countries as the legitimate 
representatives of their people and, through the gov- 
ernments-in-exile, propose that all changes be carried 
out after the war ends. However, inasmuch as King 
George returned to the throne in 1935 on a platform 
similar to the one he now submits, only to discover 
in the following year that the “threat of commun- 
ism” made it necessary to establish a dictatorship, 
his sincerity has been questioned by representatives 
of the Greek Partisans. 


In Yugoslavia King Peter’s intentions have also 
been doubted, not only because of past connections 
between the royal house and dictatorships, but also 
because of the nature of the present government. 
The Yugoslav officials in exile have been at odds 
over the type of social order the nation should have 
and the relations that should exist among the coun- 
try's nationalities, and are therefore unable to agree 
on any program of reforms. In an effort to secure 
unity, the King formed the present “‘non-party’”’ gov- 
etnment on August 10 but, in actual fact, most of its 
leading members, including Prime Minister Puritch, 
were connected with the pre-war dictatorship and 
have a strong Serbian bias. 

In opposition to the Greek and Yugoslav govern- 


Announcing 


TEAMWORK IN THE AMERICAS 
By Delia Goetz 


This new FPA publication is a simple lively narrative 
for young readers (12 to 16) describing past and 
present cooperation among the Americas. Illustrated in 
color by Aline Appel. 

Order from 


Foreign Policy Association, 22 East 38 St., New York 16 


Page Three 


==={nanuaeaeam>= 


ments-in-exile, with their vague promises of reform 
and unpopular members, there are committees in 
both countries which have set forth democratic post- 
war programs and include well-known citizens. 
These organizations, according to their critics, are 
mere creatures of the Kremlin's foreign policy— 


embryos of the national governments the USSR 


wants to set up as protective satellites after the wat in 
case effective world organization is not created. Al- 
though some of the members of these groups are 
Communists and the prestige of the victorious Red 
Army is enormous in the Balkans, there is evidence 
that these organizations are not dominated by Mos- 
cow. The Yugoslav “People’s Liberation Movement,” 
which was organized in 1942, draws its 65 members 
from various occupations, all national groups and 
pre-war political parties, and, according to a state- 
ment made last February, wants to establish “truly 
democratic rights and liberties” for “all peoples” of 
Yugoslavia, and to maintain ‘private property, with 
full opportunity for initiative in industry and the 
economic field.”” In Greece the Partisan political or- 
ganization follows the same general pattern, and 
its willingness to cooperate with the Western powers 
is attested by the presence in London of a special 
emissary. 

WHAT IS AT STAKE. Because of the wide gulf 
that obviously exists between the régimes recognized 
by Britain and the United States and large numbers 
of Yugoslavs and Greeks, London and Washington 
need to reconsider their political policy toward south- 
eastern Europe before invasion begins, lest the peo- 
ple they come to liberate fight their returning “gov- 
ernments.” Finally, when the time for military inva- 
sion comes, it will be essential that Britain, the 
United States, and the USSR have a common Balkan 


policy. WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


ANNUAL FORUM AND 25th ANNIVERSARY 

On Saturday, October 16, the annual Forum of the 
Association will be held at The Waldorf-Astoria to 
discuss ““Today’s War—Tomorrow’s World.” At the 
luncheon session there will be a message from the 
President of the United States. Among the speakers 
at the Forum will be The. Honorable Sumner Welles 
at luncheon, The Honorable Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., 
Admiral Thomas C. Hart and Dr. Harry Gideonse at 
the morning session, and The Honorable Harold B. 
Butler and Mr. James Y. C. Yen representing Britain 
and China at the afternoon session, as well as a 
speaker on Russia. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 51, Ocroser 8, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dean, Editor. Envered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


GB 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor 


Washington News Letter |: 


Oct. 8.—By creating the Mediterranean Commis- 
sion, the leading Western powers among the United 
Nations have taken the first real step toward setting 
up a political machinery of alliance. Lack of machin- 
ery in the past has contributed to misunderstandings 
between Russia and its Allies, and has inhibited con- 
certed action on the problems that arise every time 
victorious Allied armies free new territory. If the 
Commission takes full advantage of its opportuni- 
ties, it can lay the foundation for a workable system 
of collective security in the post-war world. 

The Commission, which is to sit at Algiers, is to 
be composed of representatives of the United States, 
Great Britain, the Soviet Union, and the French Com- 
mittee of National Liberation, as announced by Mr. 
Churchill in the House of Commons on September 
20. Except for the Combined Chiefs of Staff Com- 
mittee, which is a monopoly of the United States and 
Britain, the United Nations have so far had few 
permanent bodies dealing with high policy. This is 
also the first time that Russia will sit on an Allied 
committee. Russian membership in the Mediter- 
ranean Commission gives the Soviet government a 
channel for obtaining regular information concern- 
ing the views of its partners in the war and regular 
expression of its own views. 


RUSSIA GAINS VOICE FOR FRANCE. French 
representation on the Commission reflects Russian 
influence. It was on the request of the Soviet gov- 
ernment that the French were invited to participate. 
The French, however, have yet to choose their repre- 
sentative. The British have named Harold Macmil- 
lan, Minister to North Africa, and the Russians 
Andrei Y. Vishinsky, envoy to the French Liberation 
Committee and former Vice Commissar for Foreign 
Affairs. The Mediterranean is of special interest to 
the Russians because of their concern for the future 
of the Balkans, and the prospect that, once the Ger- 
mans have been ejected from Greece and Bulgaria, 
Russia may receive supplies from the Allies through 
the Dardanelles and the Black Sea. President 
Roosevelt last week designated Edwin C. Wilson, 
now U.S. Ambassador to Panama, formerly counselor 
of embassy in Paris in 1935-39, as this country’s rep- 
resentative. 

The exact nature and scope of the Commission's 
work are yet to be fixed. The task defined for it at this 
time is to serve as a clearinghouse for the military 
and political views of the four. powers concerning 
Mediterranean territory occupied by the Allies. Italy 


obviously offers the most pressing immediate proh 
lem. , 

For lack of machinery of alliance—of some cem 
tral continuing organization for the exchange of 
views—the future of Italy has caused differences be. 
tween Moscow and the West which the forthcoming 
three-power conference of Foreign Ministers is in. 
tended to bridge. A particular point at issue has been 
the operation of AMG. On September 2 the Moscow 
organ, War and the Working Class, attacked the 
British-American plan to use AMG for governing 
Italy during the transition between its status as 4 
conquered enemy country and its eventual restoration 
to the Italian people, and contended that AMG was 
undemocratic. 


CRUCIAL MEDITERRANEAN PROBLEMS. 
Italy is but one Mediterranean question. The Com 
mission will in time have to face the problem of 
Yugoslavia, which is divided internally by hatred of 
Serb for Croat and by rivalry between Partisan and 
Chetnik. Will Greece and Albania want to welcome 
back their exiled kings—King George and King 
Zog? What of the Dodecanese, those strategically 
valuable islands which Italy obtained from the Turks 
in 1912? A suggestion was reported from Washing. 
ton on September 4 that strategic islands taken from 
the enemy be placed under the control of joint inter 
national governing bodies. If this suggestion should 
develop into a policy, the unilateral mandate system 
established under the League Covenant, which 


helped to strengthen Japan for its present war in the} 


Pacific by giving it a hold on strategic islands, may 
be discarded. 

The Mediterranean Commission is not designed 
to make decisions of its own. It can only report views 
to the member governments. But its existence is im 
portant. It stresses the understanding in Washington, 


London and Moscow that the Allied powers have | 
equal interest in the politics of a great area wheft} 


their economic stake is unequal. For centuries the 


Mediterranean has provided a setting for political | 


rivalries; now an attempt is being made to substitute 
joint action for rivalry. The pattern of concerted 
action in that area can point the way to concerted 
action in other regions. The Mediterranean Commis 
sion could grow into a European Commission, and 
then into a World Commission. Its establishment 
reflects the desire of the United Nations for unity 
and stability in world affairs. 
BLAIR BOLLES 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


F 


Vou. XX] 
JOINT 
DN 


conferen 
same get 
war once 
United | 
the inte 
statesme 
cuse Frz 
must pr 
out arm 
the frui 
and don 
the ind 
dubitabl 
the Unit 
of safet 
alone, o 
other r 


possible 


CAN 
—a trie 
sought 
the past 
joining 
incorpo: 
tiers, o1 
sphere « 
tic state 
joint Ax 
example 

Quite 
tices ar 
Nations 
and the 
ties, it s 
the secr 
mere e: 
protecti 


