

































all 
into 
by a 
e of 
illed 
vail- 
Aad. 
mer. 
im 
Paris) ™ 
ance 


vent 
trol: 
rica: 


unts 

suc: 
urely 
itary 
ring: 
gave 
xtent 
> Te 


f de 


in in, 


ce of 
itler. 
vals 


l @ 


gate | 


nited 
hless 
tates 
indet 
n fe 
ue if 
spect 
s fe 
asing 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


2 1942 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y 





Vou. XXI, No. 28 


May 1, 1942 





—_—_— 


IS ALLIED STRATEGY APPROACHING OFFENSIVE STAGE? 


EPORTS of restrained optimism in Washington 
regarding the progress of the war, coupled with 
Adolf Hitler’s admission that Germany’s armies 
must face another winter of battle, indicate that a 
new phase in the conflict may be approaching more 
rapidly than had been expected at the beginning of 
the year. After the attack on Pearl Harbor, Japan's 
success in Opening up new fronts in Southeastern 
Asia had seemed to condemn the Allies to a long 
period of defensive combat, until they could pro- 
duce and transport the trained man power and equip- 
ment needed to stabilize the lines and unleash the 
ultimate counter-offensive. Official sources fre- 
quently spoke of 1942 as a year of preparation, and 
of 1943 as the year of victorious decision. While this 
analysis has hitherto proved valid, there are many 
signs that Allied counter-offense will develop on 
several fronts long before this country observes the 
first anniversary of its involvement in the war. 

A SECOND FRONT IN EUROPE? Particularly 
significant is the obvious preoccupation, in both 
Britain and the United States, with tne untolding of 
Allied strategy in Europe during the months im- 
mediately ahead. If the European sector is regarded 
as predominant at this time, it is not because there 
is any disposition to write off the Far East. It is be- 
cause, of all the United Nations, the Soviet Union 
alone has an army in being, engaged against the 
enemy and ready for decisive conflict in 1942. In 
an address in New York on April 23, Lord Beaver- 
brook, now British Lend-Lease Coordinator in Wash- 
ington, called on Britain to establish a second front 
in the West in order to divide the German armies. 
Many observers agree with his thesis that even if 
it were reckless for Britain to establish a continental 
bridgehead which might be wiped out, this maneuver 
should still be undertaken to aid the U.S.S.R. 

Since most of the military data on which the issue 
of a Western European front depends must re- 





main secret, it is impossible to judge the practicabil- 
ity of Lord Beaverbrook’s suggestion. Reports from 
British sources close to the War Office, however, 
suggest that a more cautious view prevails there— 
that shipping and supplies are too scarce and the 
wastage of man-power reserves too dangerous to 
make the establishment of a second front advisable 
now. An attempt, however, is already being made 
to provide a substitute for a second front by diver- 
sionary R.A.F. and Commando raids. 

The appointment of Marshal Karl von Rundstedt 
as commander of German troops in Western Europe, 
and Nazi reports of new fortifications and mobile 
defenses along the coasts suggest that the British 
efforts are meeting with some success. It must be 
remembered, however, that the German moves may 
have been caused by fear of an all-out British of- 
fensive and increasing unrest in the conquered ter- 
ritories, rather than by what the British have actu- 
ally done so far. In any event, it wou!d appear that 
Hitler's war of nerves technique is now being turned 
against him by the flood of conjecture on the sub- 
ject. German uncertainty must be heightened by 
such developments as the visit of General George 
C. Marshall, United States Army Chief of Staff, to 
the British Isles, where he remarked that “the time 
for action is near,” that American troops would in- 
evitably join the Commandos in their raids, and 
that American air forces would be based in Britain. 

JAPANESE GAIN IN BURMA. Meanwhile, in 
the Far Eastern military theatre of war, the Japanese 
have been consolidating their gains while the Allies 
fight a delaying action and await the necessarily 
slow arrival of men and material. Resistance at 
Corregidor; on Panay, Cebu, and Mindanao in the 
Philippines; and in Timor and other areas is prov- 
ing troublesome to the invaders. Instead of striking 
still farther afield, at India, as had been expected, 
the Japanese have been pushing back outnumbered 





mee ee eee 





——————————————————Sa ss Page Two 


and weary British and Chinese troops in Burma. 
Japan’s operations on these battlefronts has 
given a breathing spell to the United Nations con- 
tingents under command: of General Douglas Mac- 
Arthur. While the military installations of Northern 
Australia are being improved and manned, Allied 
air forces have been harassing the Japanese advance 
positions on New Guinea and New Britain in a 
series of punishing raids. The defense of Port 
Moresby, in southern New Guinea, has become 
the key to the security of Australia, while protection 
of New Caledonia — where, according to a State 
Department announcement of April 25, American 
troops are now stationed — serves to maintain the 
maritime route to Australia and New Zealand. 


PROBLEMS OF UNITED COMMAND. The 
problems confronted by the Allies on the war fronts 
are not merely military but also political. Joint op- 
erations by the forces of more than one sovereign 
nation inevitably raise questions of precedence 
and subordination which cannot always be solved 
without friction. One example of these difficulties 
is the long delay between General MacArthur's ar- 
rival in Australia, on March 17, and his formal as- 
sumption of the Southwest Pacific Command on 
April 19. For weeks, military leaders and statesmen 
had debated such matters as the composition of 
MacArthur's staff, the mechanism of command for 
forces of mixed nationality, the claims for priori- 
ties for the Southwest Pacific front as compared with 
other war sectors, and the territories to be placed 
under the General’s control. On the last of these 
points, it may be noted that New Zealand, despite 


BRITISH DEFINE ASPIRATIONS FOR POST-WAR ORDER 


Declaring that more “‘socialism’” and more “‘gov- 


. ernment planning” in Britain would be necessary 


when the war is over, Captain Oliver Lyttelton, Min- 
ister of Production, told a British audience on 
April 26 that ‘the State will have to take the initia- 
tive and responsibility on whatever scale is necessary 
in improving capital assets, common services, and 
amenities of our country.’’ His statement, reflecting 
the views of the young Conservatives, echoes in 
broad outline many statements on the shape of 
Britain’s post-war structure recently made by repre- 
sentatives of the government, labor, the Tory group, 
and the Church. 


WAR SHAPES BRITISH FUTURE. Today pro- 





F.P.A. BRANCH CONFERENCE 
National Headquarters 
FRIDAY, MAY 8, 1942 


At this conference, Branch representatives and officials 
of the National Organization will discuss ways and means 
of furthering F.P.A. activities. 























ee 
ae 


the publicly expressed preference of its Premier 
has been placed under a- separate South Pacific 
naval command headed by Vice Admiral Robert [. 
Ghormley, U.S.N., as a result of decisions made jp 
Washington—perhaps by the Pacific War Coungijl, 

Such inter-Allied conflicts of view, inevitable 4s 
they are, place the United Nations at a certain dis. 
advantage in comparison with their opponents. Ip 
some cases, particularly where the Soviet Union jg 
involved, effective machinery for composing them 
has not yet been devised. At the other pole stands 
the structure of Anglo-American collaboration, now 
functioning more smoothly than ever before. Evep 
here, however, much remains to be done. Despite the 
existence of organisms for joint military planning, 
and for coordination of shipping, munitions assign. 
ments and raw materials, it has been intimated that 
new committees will have to be formed to supervise 
industrial production and the use of foodstuffs 
to a greater degree. Nor are the existing controls 
completely efficacious. Although establishment of 
the joint Anglo-American shipping committee was 
announced on January 27, Harry L. Hopkins noted 
on April 20 that “real” pooling of merchant ships 
must be achieved. It will probably be necessary, 
moreover, to reallocate some Allied naval forces to 
meet the submarine menace which has developed 
off the coast of the United States. Thus new crises 
make new demands on the heads of the United 
Nations, who must modify old methods of na- 
tional procedure and develop instruments of in- 
ternational cooperation if the war is to be brought 
to the swiftest possible conclusion. Davm H. Popper 


posals for political and social changes which would 
have been considered revolutionary two years ago 
are accepted as almost commonplace by Britons who 
have already seen their society undergo radical re 


organization under the impact of total war. In a few , 


short months, the Luftwaffe raids and the threat of 
imminent invasion wrought changes in the nations 
outlook which otherwise might have taken years to 
achieve. Americans who have recently been in Britain 
agree that the class consciousness of the British 
people is rapidly disappearing, as persons from all 
ranks of society work closely together, sharing the 
dangers and the sacrifices of the war. Heavy taxa 
tion “is leveling out the differences of wealth, and 
is redistributing the nationai income in a way that 
our fathers would have thought inconceivable,’ 
Lord Halifax, British Ambassador, told the St. 
George's Society of New York on April 23. 

Fiscal policies in wartime Britain have lowered 
the standard of living of the rich, while the work 
ing class families have experienced an increase i 
income. Sir Kingsley Wood, in introducing the 





budget 
per cen 
the pay 
of peo 
($2,00 
ome 
imposi 
cent 
the inc 
of 50 | 
on the 
the sat 


throug 
dustry, 
efficier 
Briton 
some 
vantag 
major 
sion Pp 
suranc 
comm 
day m 
gram 

war pt 
LA! 
party 

in the 
annua 
gresst 
Natio 
prelin 
be no 
in wl 
exper 
of Br 
for c 


Gern 
tion 

statet 
the 
| dicta 
past. 
had 

gene 
auth 
espe 
+ tenc 
Goe 
Hitl 
Chic 
prer 


Jud: 








oi 


2 


eB aS Fees mew 


ips 
ry, 


Ded 
Ses 
ted 


na- 


ght 
PER 


uld 
ag0 
vho 

re- 
few 


y's 
; to 
tain 
tish 

all 
the 
1Xa- 
and 
that 
le,” 


St. ; 


red 
ork- 
> in 


the 





— 





budget for 1942-43 on April 14, revealed that 85 

scent of the country’s net purchasing power after 
the payment of income taxes would be in the heads 
of people with gross incomes of less than £400 
($2,000) a year. The Chancellor of the Exchequer 
proposed raising the taxes on beer and tobacco, and 
imposing a levy on luxury articles of 66 2/3 per 
cent of their value. He made no increase in 
the income tax, which now stands at a basic rate 
of 50 per cent, rising to 97.5 in the highest brackets, 
on the ground that such taxes have already reached 
the saturation point. 

The “socialization’”’ of Britain has been advanced 
through government controls established over in- 
dustry, trade, and transportation to promote the most 
dficient use of the nation’s productive facilities. 
Britons are beginning to ask themselves whether 
sme of these controls would not have their ad- 
vantages in peacetime as well. In the midst of a 
major struggle, the government has liberalized pen- 


sion provisions, and unemployment and health in- 


surance benefits. The establishment of government 
communal restaurants, health centers, and public 
day nurseries indicates that the social security pro- 
gram will probably have a wider scope in the post- 
war period. 

LABOR PARTY PROGRAM. Since the Labor 
party showed indications of indecision and debility 
in the pre-war years, it is significant that the party’s 
annual congress on May 25-28 will discuss an ag- 
gressive program for reconstruction of Britain. The 
National Executive of the party has submitted a 
preliminary report which states that “there must 
be no return to the unplanned competitive world . . . 
in which a privileged few were maintained at the 
expense of the common good.” Instead, the. basis 
of British democracy ‘‘must be planned production 
for community good, in which the workers must 


Page Three 








be given the opportunity to develop their capacities 
and to share in the making of rules under which 
they work.” It asks for the extension of social services 
and full educational opportunities for all. ,Al- 
though these objectives might suggest the use of 
radical methods, the Laborites make it plain that 
they intend to operate within the framework of the 
British constitution, excluding no person from the 
full enjoyment of civil rights and seeking no acqui- 
sition of property without just compensation. 


Other groups in Britain give general approval to 
the principle of a better social order, but are less 
precise in their statements. Lord Halifax, who repre- 
sents the “enlightened Tory” group, stated in his 
New York speech that “in the Britain we mean to 
build we shall be determined to do everything we 
can to give full and equal opportunity to all our 
citizens.’” This may be compared with the statement 
given by the newly installed Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, Dr. William Temple, who told the Association 
of Christian Communities on April 26 that in the 
ideal economy goods should be produced for use 


and ‘“‘not for the sake of additional gains in wages 
and dividends.” 


The future alone can tell whether the British 
people can organize a productive system with a large 
measure of state control and supervision, and at the 
same time preserve the vital and traditional English 
political freedoms. Their success thus far in mobil- 
izing for war and the apparent resolution of most 
responsible leaders to build a progressive democracy 
when peace comes are strong indications that they 
can succeed. The British politico-economic system 
which will emerge after the war is bound to have a 
marked influence not only on other Anglo-Saxon 
countries, but also on the reconstruction of Europe. 


Louts E. FRECHTLING 


HITLER’S SPEECH REVEALS INTERNAL STRAINS 


The core of Hitler’s review of the war before the 
German Reichstag on April 26 was not reitera- 
tion of his version of world history but his frank 
statement that, to meet the hardships of warfare on 
the eastern front, he had to obtain even greater 


| dictatorial powers than those he has exercised in the 


past. In an announcement of December 21, Hitler 
had already taken authority out of the hands of his 
generals; in his speech of April 26 he similarly took 
authority out of the hands of civilian officials, and 
specially judges, whom he reproved for mild sen- 
tences. The statement presented by Field Marshal 
Goering and adopted by the Reichstag proclaimed 
Hitler as “Fuehrer of the Nation, Commander-in- 
Chief of the Army, Chief of the Government, Su- 
preme Holder of the Executive Power, Supreme 
Judge and Leader of the Party,” and granted him 





the power, “without recourse to the Legislature,” 
to compel every German “‘to fulfill his duty,” and 
in case of neglect of duty “to punish him . . . with- 
out regard to so-called ‘duly acquired’ rights.” This 
further whetting of Hitler’s weapons against his 
own people coincided with reports of drastic pun- 
ishment meted out to German industrialists accused 
of not fulfilling production quotas or violating ra- 
tioning regulations. It is also believed that Hitler 
may use his new powers against the Army, in favor 
of the secret police. 

While outlining a program for a three-pronged 
offensive—air reprisals against the British Isles, ia- 
creased submarine warfare against the United States, 
and fresh efforts to destroy the ““Bolshevist colossus” 
—Hitler once more presented the main themes of 
Nazi propaganda designed to disturb, dishearten or 





























disunite Germany’s opponents. He appealed to sur- 
vivors of “appeasement’’ in Britain; to fears of 
Russia in Britain and the United States; to anti- 
Semitism everywhere. He gave the impression that 
a “melting-pot of European peoples” is aiding the 
Germans in their struggle against Russia—although 
Spain, Hungary and France have reluctantly sent a 
few thousand men to the eastern front, while 
Italians and Rumanians have for the most part gone 
only under duress. He implied that Germany had 
nothing against the United States, and that this coun- 
try had become involved in war only through its 
clash with Japan—thus seeking to dissociate the war 
in Europe from that in Asia. This is not without sig- 
nificance: for the former isolationist press in the 
United States, while rallying behind the war in the 
Far East, has been inclined to regard the conflict in 
Europe as not being “our war.” 


Hitler's speech, taken in conjunction with several 
other straws in the wind, might presage the peace 
offensive against which Archibald MacLeish, di- 
rector of the Office of Facts and Figures, warned at 
the annual luncheon of the Associated Press on 
April 21. Such an offensive would be logical at this 
time, when Hitler is seeking to consolidate his gains 
on the European continent, and to prove—as in the 
case of Laval—that Europe has reconciled itself to 
his ‘new order.” 


WILLKIE STRESSES U.S. RESPONSIBILITY. 
The success of such a drive appears less probable 
today than it might have been a few months ago, 
when Americans knew about total war largely by 
hearsay. Our familiarization with the realities of 
war has brought a new desire for service and sac- 
rifice, and a new sense of responsibility—responsibil- 
ity not only for one’s family, or community, or nation, 
but for human society as a whole. This changed 
attitude toward life was reflected in the speech made 
by Wendell Willkie at the University of Rochester 
on April 22, when he said that, while the world 
needs the United States, ‘equally the United States, 
if it is to preserve freedom, needs the world,” and 
that “if we are to have freedom we must share 
freedom.” Mr. Willkie did not draw up blueprints 
of a post-war Utopia, but indicated that the way 
to reconstruction would be a hard way—through 
education in international affairs and through work 
with other peoples for “a common end,” on a basis 
of “real equality between races.” 


This feeling of responsibility was also expressed 
in the resolution adopted by the Republican Na- 


Page Four 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: WHAT ARE WE FIGHTING FOR? 
Speaker: William P. Maddox 

Date: Sunday, May 3 

Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 








For station, please consult your local newspaper 





tional Committee in Chicago on April 20, on the 
basis of a draft submitted by Mr. Willkie. The Com. 
mittee’s action came after The Chicago Tribune, 
leading isolationist organ, had declared that Mr, 
Willkie had no influence in the Republican party 
and had predicted defeat of his resolution. In the 
resolution the Committee stated its belief that 
after the war “the responsibility of the nation will 
not be circumscribed within the territorial limits 
of the United States,” and that ‘“‘our nation has ap 
obligation to assist in the bringing about of an up. 
derstanding, comity and cooperation among the na. 
tions of the world in order that our own liberty may 
be preserved.” The new platform of the Republican 
National Committee does not mean that isolationist 
sentiment is dead in the United States. But it does 
show the emergence of a group of political leaders 
who, irrespective of party labels, recognize that the 
great industrial and military power of the United 
States has, as its corollary, responsibility for the use 
of that power in time of peace. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 





The Setting Sun of Japan, by Carl Randau and Leane Zug. 
smith. New York, Random House, 1942. $3.00 


Just before the beginning of the war in the Pacific, the 
authors returned from a long trip to Japan, China, and 
the whole of the ABDA area. Their description of these 
territories on the verge of the struggle is enormously 
enlightening and unfailingly interesting. 


Planning for America, by George B. Galloway and Asso 

ciates. New York, Henry Holt, 1941. $3.00 

A series of provocative essays by advocates of planning in 
the spheres of natural resources, investment, public health, 
welfare, defense, etc. The authors look forward to 4 
steady and permanent increase in government control over 
the machinery of investment and credit, the management 
of basic industries, the distribution of labor and the diree- 
tion of foreign trade. They tend to ignore, however, the 
political obstacles to efficient functioning of government 
planning. 


Inside Latin America, by John Gunther. New York, Har > 


pers, 1941. $3.50 


Mr. Gunther has again demonstrated his ability as 4 
topnotch reporter. He has managed to pack in a single 
volume an extraordinary amount of pertinent information 
about Latin America, its statesmen and _ politicians. 
Though marred by a few errors, his panoramic survey of 
our neighbors to the south is one of the best. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 28, May 1, 1942. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


S's 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRaNK Ross McCoy, President; Witttam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lagt, 
Secretary; VERA Micuuces Dean, Editor; Daviy H. Poppzr, Associate Editor, Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 


National 


Incorporated. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 














