|FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XIX, No. 1 


—— 


NEW F.P.A. RADIO PROGRAM 
Starting Sunday, October 29, 1939, at 3:15 p.m. 


OCTOBER 27, 1939 


The President, General McCoy, inaugurates the Foreign Policy 
Association’s new weekly radio program on Foreign Affairs 
§unday, October 29. This new program will be broadcast over 
N.B.C. every Sunday from 3:15 to 3:30 p.m. 


—_—_— 
—_ 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Ofice at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Noy 
19 

] 
Dr. William w#. Bishop 439 


ersity of Michigan Library 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 


PACT WITH TURKEY 


STRENGTHENS ALLIES 


HILE the French were withdrawing their 

advance forces from German territory in an 
fort to strengthen their positions against attack, 
the Allies won a striking diplomatic victory on Oc- 
ber 19 by signing a 15-year alliance with Turkey. 
This pact, which had been hanging fire ever since 
Turkey and Britain exchanged provisional pledges 
of mutual assistance last May, was concluded after 
prolonged negotiations for a parallel Russo-Turkish 
agreement had broken down. It will help the Allies 
to counteract German pressure on the Balkans, and 
provides an additional insurance that Italy will re- 
main neutral. 

Under the terms of the alliance France and Britain 
will unreservedly protect Turkey against aggression 
with all the means at their command. The Allies 
and Turkey will come to each other’s aid the mo- 
ment they are involved in a war in the Mediterranean 
resulting from an act of aggression by any Euro- 
pean power. Turkey will assist the Allies in carry- 
ng out their unilateral undertakings of last April 
protect Rumania and Greece against attack, and 
agrees to engage in immediate consultations and 
‘observe at least a benevolent neutrality’’ whenever 
France and Britain are the victims of an act of ag- 
gression by a European power outside the Mediter- 
anean. Consultations will also take place in the 
event of an attack on any other European nation 
which has been guaranteed by one or several of the 
contracting powers or whose security is essential to 
their safety. A protocol annexed to the treaty speci- 
fes that Turkey can under no condition be com- 
pelled “to take action having as its effect or involv- 
ing as its consequence entry into armed conflict with 
the U.S.S.R.” 

TURKEY’S FEARS ALLAYED. In signing this 
pact, Turkey, which was allied with the Centra! 
Powers in the World War, has tried to safeguard 


itself from any possible German, Russian or Italian 
menace. The Turks have never forgotten that Italy 
coveted Southern Anatolia and deprived them of 
Libya and the Dodecanese Islands. They have heard 
Mussolini tirelessly reiterate Italian claims to ex- 
pansion in the eastern Mediterranean, and consid- 
ered themselves threatened by Italian bases on the 
Dodecanese Islands close to Turkish shores. Re- 
cently the more immediate danger has come from 
other quarters. Germany's political and economic 
offensive in the Balkans threatened to make Turkey 
a victim of this Drang nach Osten which had already 
captured half of the country’s foreign trade. When 
the Soviet Union joined Germany in claiming an 
exclusive voice in settling the fate of the Balkans 
and began to press for control of the Straits lead- 
ing to the Black Sea, Turkey was also compelled to 
reconsider its policy of friendship toward Moscow. 
While the new alliance protects Turkey against the 
Soviet Union, as well as Germany and Italy, it still 
leaves the way open for a reinsurance agreement 
with the Kremlin. 


By means of this pact the Allies have considerably 
reinforced their position in Eastern Europe. With 
Turkey providing a base of operations and permit- 
ting Allied warships access to the Black Sea, France 
and Britain can shield Rumania and the other 
Balkan states much more effectively against attack 
by Germany. In the future the Balkans will have 
greater strength to resist German efforts to monop- 
olize their supplies of foodstuffs and raw materials. 
Nor do the Allies now need to buy Italian support. 
Italy has indicated its displeasure with the agree- 
ment by renewed expressions of friendship with 
Germany. It may also have been significant that Italy 
chose October 21 to conclude a final agreement with 
the Reich providing for the repatriation of about 
10.0) German citizens in the Italian Tyrol, but 


permitting the 200,000 Germans of Italian citizen- 
ship to remain if they wish. Italy is now unable to 
affect the outcome of the war decisively. It can at 
best only utilize its neutrality to recover some of its 
former influence in the Balkans. 


A SETBACK FOR RUSSIA. For the Russians the 
Turkish agreement is also a serious blow. In the 
negotiations with the Turkish Foreign Minister, 
Shukru Saracoglu, they pressed the Turks in vain 
to close the Straits and the Black Sea to foreign war- 
ships and influence Rumania to cede Bessarabia 
to Russia and Southern Dobruja to Bulgaria. Al- 
though these objectives happened to coincide with 
Germany's interest, the Kremlin was playing an ex- 
clusively Russian game. In the west and northwest 
it had secured itself against Germany by establish- 
ing military protectorates over the Baltic states and 
annexing the Ukrainian parts of Poland. In the 
southeast Russia wanted to safeguard itself against 
French and British intrusion by turning Turkey into 
the Russian gatekeeper of the Black Sea. The return 
of Bessarabia would also have given it strategic 
control over the mouth of the Danube. When these 
demands were refused, Moscow declined in turn to 


NORTHERN NEUTRALS DIG IN 


The meeting of the Scandinavian rulers at Stock- 
holm on October 18-19 was an important milestone 
on the rough path traveled by neutral Europe. In 
the present war, the northern states find themselves 
in the unenviable position of being wedged between 
a Russian drive to the west on one hand, and a pos- 
sible German advance to obtain vital supplies on 
the other. To complicate the matter further, the 
British blockade impairs their freedom of commerce, 
while the German U-boat campaign threatens the 
very existence of their merchant marine. It was to 
discuss these problems, and especially to consider 
the immediate threat to Finnish independence in- 
volved in the Russian advance, that King Gustav 
invited King Christian of Denmark, King Haakon 
of Norway, and President Kallio of Finland to con- 
fer in Sweden. 


Accompanied by their respective Foreign Minis- 
ters, the Scandinavian sovereigns met at Stockholm, 
where they reaffirmed their strict neutrality and 
pledged close cooperation in dealing with the prob- 
lems thrust upon them by the war. After discussing 
the difficulties to which their neutral shipping had 
been subjected by both Germany and Great Britain, 
they decided to continue consultations aimed at main- 
taining their right to carry on normal commercial 
relations with all states, including belligerent pow- 
ers. These were essentially the decisions arrived at 
earlier when the Prime Ministers and Foreign Min- 
isters of the four states met at Copenhagen on Sep- 


Page Two 


— 


subscribe to a simple mutual assistance pact with 
Turkey, if only because it feared that the Allig 
might use such an agreement to embroil Russi, 
with Germany. Distrusting all powers, the Kremliy 
has played a lone hand. It is simply and exclusively 
interested in making the Soviet Union impregnabk 
against any attack, whether from Germany, Frang 
or Britain. All the steps which it has recently takep 
might be characterized as an aggressive policy of 
self-defense. 

It remains to be seen how Germany and Russiy 
will counter this latest move of the Allies. Both 
powers dislike to see another theatre of war develo 
in southeastern Europe, which they have defined gs | 
their sphere of influence. The Germans have staked | 
everything on a one-front war and will not extend 
their military operations to the southeast unless their 
access to supplies in the Balkans is seriously ob | 
structed. They may prefer to rely on Russia as q| 
counterweight to the Allies in the east, while the 
continue the struggle in the west. For the time being 
the Germans are apparently content to stay on the 
defensive against the French while striking at Britain 
from the air and the sea. JouN C. pEWILpE 


tember 19. The policies laid down at Stockholm 
were strongly reminiscent of those pursued during 
the years 1914-1918 when, with firm cooperation, 
the Scandinavian states managed to remain neutral 
in spite of the hardships to which they were sub- 
jected. 

FINLAND GIRDS FOR DEFENSE. With regard 
to the most urgent matter on the agenda — the 
Russian threat to Finnish independence—no definite 
commitments were made. None the less, the Finns 
were bolstered by the strong moral support displayed 
by the northern powers, and were encouraged to | 
insist on complete freedom of action when they re 
newed negotiations with Russia this week. The Fi- 
nish government has discreetly refused to publish 
the Russian “proposals” submitted to Helsingfors 
on October 12, but from the manner in which con | 
versations have dragged on until this week, it would | 
appear that the Soviet demands are harsher than an 
independent Finland can accept. Informed neutral | 
circles, on various occasions, have reported that de 
mands include the following items: | 

1. At least a share for Russia in the fortification 

of the Aland Islands, which Sweden and Fin 

land had begun to fortify early this year prior to 

Russia’s demand that the status quo be maitt 

tained. 

2. Military, air, and naval bases at Hango which, 

with Dagoe Island—controlled by Russia since 

its treaty with Estonia of September 28—com 


That 
indicat 
fense 
$9,500 
bade t 
militat 
in the 


The Ba 
the | 
Inte 
Pres 

Southe 
prep 
Insti 
Uni 
Thes 

dange! 

format 

Night 
Yor! 
Two 

Septer 

gate t 

presti; 


ckholm 
during 
-ration, 
neutral 


re sub- 


regard 
1 — the 
definite 
> Finns 
splayed 
ged to 
hey te- 
he Fin- 
publish 
ingfors 
ch con- 


would | 


han an 
neutral 
hat de 


fication 
id Fin 
rior to 

miain- 


which, 
a since 
—com- 


———— 
 — 


mands entrance to the Gulf of Finland. 
3. Cession by Finland of a number of small islands 
near the central Russian naval base at Kronstadt. 
4, Extraterritorial privileges for Russia in the ice- 
free port of Petsamo, the ancient Russian settle- 
ment of Pechenga now a part of Finland. In ad- 
dition to its commercial value, Petsamo Bay is 
large enough to harbor a sizable naval establish- 
ment. 
5. Exclusive right for Russia to work the large 
Finnish nickel deposits, to release the Soviet Union 
from its dependence on the British Empire for 
that important metal. 
That Finland was not contemplating a retreat was 
indicated on October 21, when it floated a new de- 
fense loan of 500,000,000 Finnish marks (about 
$9,500,000). On October 23 new restrictions for- 
bade travel in Finland’s frontier districts without a 
military pass, and the Aland Islands were included 
in the provision. 


Page Three 


After Finland the next logical move in the Soviet 
drive might be to Norway's great ore-shipping port 
of Narvik, through which the bulk of Swedish iron 
is sent, and which is used extensively even when - 
the northern Baltic ports of Sweden are frozen over. 
In the face of a Soviet threat to their own security, 
Norway and Sweden—if not Denmark--can be ex- 
pected to give Finland a measure of support which 
would not normally be anticipated in view of 
their comparative military weakness. If worst comes 
to worst, it is conceivable that they may be forced 
into war on the side of Britain and France—a 
course far from desirable but offering their only 
hope of emerging from the conflict as independent 


nations. A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 


MRS. DEAN will speak over WEAF from 1:30 
to 1:45 p.m. on Monday, October 30. Her subject 
will be: “Behind Europe’s Headlines.” 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The Baltic States: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, prepared by 
the Information Department of the Royal Institute of 
International Affairs. New York, Oxford University 
Press, 1938. 7s. 6d. 

Southeastern Europe: A Political and Economic Survey, 
prepared by the Information Department of the Royal 
Institute of International Affairs. New York, Oxford 
University Press, 1939. $2.00 
These extremely valuable surveys of two of Europe’s 

danger zones contain detailed political and economic in- 

formation presented in an unusually compact form. 


Night Over England, by Eugene and Arline Léhrke. New 
York, Harrison-Hilton Books, 1939. $2.00 
Two American writers effectively describe the crisis of 
September 1938 as it affected a Sussex village, and casti- 
gate the Conservatives for weakening British power and 
prestige. 


The Day of the Liberals in Spain, by Rhea Marsh Smith. 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1938. 
$3.50 
A rather dull, uninspired account of the establishment 

of the Spanish Republic. 

War Without Violence: A Study of Gandhi’s Method and 
Its Accomplishments, by Krishnalal Shridharani. New 
York, Harcourt Brace, 1939. $2.50 


A detailed analysis, somewhat repetitious, of the Satya- 
graha (non-violence) movement, written by a participant. 
Mr. Shridharani relates the Gandhi program to Indian 
tradition and recommends it for the western world. 


Security: Can We Retrieve It? by Sir Arthur Salter. New 

York, Reynal and Hitchcock, 1939. $3.50 

An outstanding British economist and M.P. comments 
on the international crisis, criticizes the Chamberlain gov- 
ernment’s delay and inefficiency in civilian defense, and 
offers a program for negotiation with Germany. While 
the volume is diffuse and poorly organized, it contains 
many sound and useful proposals as well as several in- 
formative but restrained sketches of Cabinet personalities. 


Commodity Flow and Capital Formation, by Simon Kuz- 
nets. New York, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
1938. Vol. I. $5.00 
A comprehensive study of changes in the stock of capital 


goods which should prove useful primarily to the pro- 
fessional economist. 


World Economy in Transition, by Eugene Staley. New 
York, Council on Foreign Relations, 1939. $3.00 
The author makes a persuasive plea for intelligently di- 
‘rected efforts to foster international trade. Of greatest 
interest is the section of the book examining the reper- 


cussions of domestic economic controls, or “planning,” on 
world trade. 


Slump and Recovery, by V. H. Hodson. New York, Oxford 
University Press, 1938. $4.25 
A useful, but rather dull, economic history of the de- 
pression which fails to draw any conclusions from the 
diversified experience of many countries in combatting 
the slump. 


Merchants of Peace, by George L. Ridgeway. New York, 
Columbia University Press, 1938. $3.75 
A history of the post-war attempts of the International 
Chamber of Commerce to develop international economic 
cooperation. 


Historia de Cuba, by Herminio Portell Vilé. Jesus Mon- 

tero, Editor. Havana, 1938. 

A work of major importance by a Cuban scholar on the 
relations between Cuba and the United States, based on 
State Department archives as well as original Cuban, 
Spanish and Mexican sources. 


The Evolution of Finance Capitalism, by George W. Ed- 
wards. New York, Longmans, Green and Co., 1938. $4.00 
The author traces the rapid rise of security capitalism 

in the major countries of the world and points in conclu- 


sion to the immediate necessity of further “comprehensive 
and intelligent private and public control.” 


POREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, 


XIX, No. 1, OcroBer 27, 1939. 


New York, N. Y. Franx Ross 


McCoy, President; 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Dorotny F. Laexr, Secretary; 


Incorporated. National 
Vera Micue.ces Dean, Editor 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


B41 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


vibben, 


pred eengy 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 23.—As the long debate on neutrality re- 
vision draws to its close in the Senate this week, 
leaders on both sides are turning their attention to 
the House, where the fight over repeal of the arms 
embargo will continue for at least another fortnight. 
That the Senate will approve the Administration 
bill with its modified shipping regulations and its 
tightened credit restrictions by a majority of ap- 
proximately 25 votes is now conceded by opposition 
spokesmen. Private polls in the House show a much 
closer division and leave the outcome still in doubt. 

Meanwhile, Washington observers are watching 
the effects of three significant moves by the Execu- 
tive branch of the government. These moves are 
(1) the speech of United States Ambassador Joseph 
C. Grew at Tokyo; (2) the recent plea of President 
Roosevelt for maintenance of peaceful relations be- 
tween Soviet Russia and Finland; (3) the President's 
proclamation barring submarines of belligerent na- 
tions from American ports and territorial waters. 


DIPLOMATIC FRANKNESS. In his speech be- 
fore the American-Japanese Society in Tokyo on 
October 18, Ambassador Grew bluntly declared that 
the American people “regard with growing serious- 
ness the violation and interference with American 
rights by Japanese armed forces in China in disre- 
gard of treaties and agreements.” Mr. Grew addec 
that what he had to say “came straight from the 
horse’s mouth,” and that the American people had 
been “profoundly shocked” by the widespread use 
of bombing in China. To them, Japan’s “new order 
in East Asia” appeared to include depriving Ameri- 
cans of their “long established rights in China.” 

While the text of this outspoken statement was 
not submitted to the State Department in advance, 
and was not made public here, responsible officials 
left no doubt that it faithfully reflected the views of 
the government. Its primary purpose, in the opinion 
of most Washington observers, was to bring home 
to all moderate elements in Japan the urgent neces- 
sity for an adjustment of Japanese-American rela- 
tions. This was not possible as long as the military 
group in Japan was able to persuade the Japanese 
people that the United States was sympathetic to 
their aims in East Asia. But with the strengthening 
of moderate elements following the Soviet-German 
pact, plain speaking became possible without en- 
dangering relations between the two countries. The 
Opportunity was seized by Mr. Grew at the earliest 


possible moment after his return from a prolonged 
visit to the United States. 

Several factors undoubtedly contributed to the de. 
cision to speak bluntly at this time. One was the 
obvious desire of Japan to negotiate a new treaty of 
commerce to replace the commercial agreement of 
1911, denounced by the United States last June, 
which is due to expire on January 26, 1940. By regis. 
tering its concern over treatment of American na. 


tionals in China, the State Department was able to | 


indicate that a new treaty must not only accord 
reciprocity but must be based on respect for Ameti- 
can rights in the Far East. And by stressing the trend 
of American public opinion, Mr. Grew was able 
to imply that failure to reach a settlement might 
possibly lead to an embargo on shipment of war 
supplies to Japan. If other factors included the new 
situation created by the European war, these have 
not yet been disclosed in Washington, but the quiet 
strengthening of American air and naval forces in 
the Pacific suggest an awareness of the balance of 
power in the Far East. On September 15 fourteen 
long-range bombing airplanes were sent from 
Hawaii to the Philippines for neutrality patrol duty. 
On September 24 the aircraft carrier Langley arrived 
in Manila to join other vessels assigned to a neu- 
trality patrol of Philippine waters. On October 5 the 
bulk of the scouting force of the United States fleet 
sailed from San Diego to Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, 
several months in advance of the annual maneuvers. 


BALTIC DEMARCHE. President Roosevelt's per- 
sonal message to President Kalinin of the Soviet 
Union, expressing the “earnest hope” that peaceful 
relations would be maintained between Russia and 
Finland, brought a friendly but not entirely reassur- 
ing response from Moscow on October 16. The re- 
ply stated that the “sole aim” of the negotiations 
was the “strengthening of friendly cooperation be- 
tween both countries in the cause of guaranteeing 
the security of the Soviet Union and Finland.’’ Wash- 
ington is still watching. 

The third Executive move—President Roosevelt's 
proclamation forbidding submarines of belligerent 
nations from entering the ports and territorial waters 
of the United States—drew both praise and criticism. 
The purpose of keeping submarines from American 
waters was generally applauded, but the failure to 
take similar measures against armed merchant ves- 
sels, as provided in the same section of the Neu- 
trality Act, raised questions which may be pressed 


in Congress. W. T. STONE 


FOR 


An inter, 


tinues 
industri 
to cont 
since th 
—the 2 
was ren 
In 193 
tion pi 
the Lit 
for fo: 
Adelar 
to pov 
eral Pa 
The 
of dor 
advant 
on Qu 
to ente 
eral g 
using 
rights. 
often 
charge 
lessne: 
probak 
and tk 
the pa 
The 
leader 
port | 
War, : 
cabine 
victor 
Frencl 
patior 
in the 


