Lol \\_] 





iz. 


|, was. 
ofense 
irthest 
States 


th the 
means 





N and 
id the 
naval 
zland. 
is be- 
when- 
fense, 
f the 
tO ac- 
iment 
ft. In 
, will 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 








FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Vou. XX, No. 29 May 9, 1941 
| BRITISH CABINET RESHUFFLED IN SHIPPING CRISIS 
address of April 27, indicated the crucial importance 


oe new campaigns were developing in the 
| Mediterranean theatre and the Battle of the 
Atlantic was becoming increasingly serious, Prime 
Minister Winston Churchill on May 1 sought to im- 
rove British efficiency by reshuffling several members 
of his government. Lord Beaverbrook, Canadian-born 
newspaper publisher and an energetic administrator, 
was appointed Minister of State without Portfolio— 





) help 
ostile 


TEM- 
1s, by 
vould 
ments 
\bina- 
ly be 
ravel- 
merce 
$ lim- 


while remaining a member of the War Cabinet—and 
apparently was empowered to coordinate Britain’s 
wat production, with which the public is still dissatis- 
fed. (One English periodical, in fact, suggested last 
autumn that every government department needed a 
‘brief dose of Lord Beaverbrook.” ) Although Lord 
Beaverbrook, as Minister of Aircraft Production, had 
secured a remarkable acceleration of output in the 
critical months of last summer, he was reported re- 
cently to be in disagreement with both officials of the 
Air Ministry and airplane producers. 

Another significant change involved merging the 
Ministries of Shipping and Transport, which super- 





arcely 


yainst 
le ef- 
these 
r CON- 
lin a 
vide) 
nt in , 
fully | 
o the | 
1 has 


TT 





vised maritime and railroad transportation respective- 


‘ ly, into a Ministry of Wartime Communications. The 


new Ministry is to be headed by Frederick James 
Leathers, a prominent self-made business man with- 
out previous political experience. This amalgamation 
was made necessary by the recent air raids on British 
ports, which have disabled docks, cranes, warehouses 
and railway facilities and created severe congestion. 
With its Channel harbors virtually closed to traffic, 
Southampton badly damaged, and Plymouth declared 
an evacuation area, Britain is compelled to rely on 
only three main ports. Mr. Ronald H. Cross, whose 
work as Minister of Shipping had been under heavy 
fre in Parliament and the press, was “kicked up- 
stairs” to become High Commissioner to Australia; 
and the former Minister of Transport, Lieut. Col. 
|.T.C. Moore-Brabazon, was appointed Lord Beaver- 
brook’s successor as Minister of Aircraft Production. 

These Cabinet changes, like Mr. Churchill’s radio 


of the production and transportation of war materials 
during the next few months. Chancellor Hitler also 
stressed this aspect of the conflict in his address to 
the Reichstag on May 4, when he called upon Ger- 
many for even greater armament production and de- 
clared: “If the German soldier already possesses the 
best arms in the world, he will receive still better ones 
this year and the next.’’ While Hitler’s speech was 
devoted primarily to a survey of the Balkan cam- 
paign, in which German casualties were placed at 
5,328 ( Britain claimed they were 75,000), it contained 
at least two significant sections designed for foreign 
consumption. Not only did Hitler omit any specific 
reference to the American government, except to 
imply that he had no quarrel with the United States, 
but he also refrained from his usual attack on Britain 
and the Empire, confining his remarks to bitter de- 
nunciation of Mr. Churchill personally and to ridi- 
cule of his ‘‘amateur strategy’"—an obvious attempt 
to undermine the prestige of the Prime Minister, 
who had called for a full debate and vote of con- 
fidence this week on the Greek campaign. 

THE SHIPPING PROBLEM. Meanwhile, the 
critical problem of shipping continues to disturb 
both London and Washington, for the losses of 
British, allied and neutral vessels—totaling 6,000,000 
tons since the outbreak of war, according to British 
statements, but placed at 11,000,000 tons in German 
claims—averaged about 346,000 tons monthly be- 
tween October 1940 and March 1941. Although it is 
generally believed that the rate of losses is steadily 
increasing, recent figures are not available, since 
the Admiralty now releases its statistics on a monthly 
rather than weekly basis. While the rate of sinkings 
has only rarely approached that of April 1917, the 
cumulative effect of Germany’s sea and air attacks has 
been greater in this conflict, since the losses of the 
last 19 months exceed those of the first 29 months of 
the World War. For every two ships sunk, moreover, 























probably one is temporarily forced out of service for 
repairs. 

The shipbuilding facilities of the British Empire 
and the United States are at present unable to keep 
pace with these losses, especially since many yards 
are constructing warships rather than merchant ton- 
nage. British mercantile construction, which is re- 
ported to average between 750,000 and 1,000,000 
tons annually, is undoubtedly being hampered by 
Germany's concentrated air raids on the Glasgow 
and Clyde area, normally responsible for 37 per cent 
of Britain’s shipbuilding, as well as Liverpool, Bel- 
fast and other cities. While the United States is pre- 
paring to build 444 ships under its emergency pro- 
gram, in addition to orders from both the Maritime 
Commission and private companies, American pro- 
duction will not become really effective until 1942. 
According to the New York Journal of Commerce, 
the completion of ships in the United States is 
scheduled as follows: January-March 1941 (actual), 
126,300 tons; remainder of 1941 (estimated), 790,- 
000 tons; January-March 1942, 765,000 tons. The 


IRAQ OUTBREAK WEAKENS BRITAIN IN MIDDLE EAST 


British and Allied troops in the eastern Mediter- 
ranean region, already outnumbered at least two to 
one by their Axis foes, were forced to divert their at- 
tention to Iraq when on May 2 Iraqi troops attacked 
the British air base at Habbaniya, 65 miles west of 
Baghdad. Reinforcements were rushed by air and land 
from Palestine and from the contingents recently 
landed at Basra, 350 miles down the River Euphrates 
near the head of the Persian Gulf. They face a native 
army of 40,000 trained troops who lack modern 
equipment, possessing only a few tanks and about 
100 airplanes. 

Hostile action by the Iraq régime was expected 
after Rashid Ali Beg Gailani seized control of the 
government on April 4 and ousted the pro-British 
Regent and Premier. The coup d'état and the subse- 
quent uprising against the British apparently took 
place with the encouragement of the Axis pow- 
ers, who have long attempted to win over the Arab 
world through radio propaganda, trade relations, 
and personal appeals by official agents. The Iraqis 
who have come under Nazi influence are attracted, 
not by the ideology of an Aryan “‘super-race,” but by 
the hope that they may obtain aid in throwing off 
entirely British control. 

Anglo-Iraqi relations have been uneasy ever since 


Page Two 





SPECIAL OFFER 
5 Foreign Policy Reports $1.00 


WAR IN THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN 
INDUSTRIAL CAPACITY OF THE U. S. 
AUSTRALIA IN THE WORLD CONFLICT 
AMERICA’S NAVAL PREPAREDNESS 
JAPAN’S “NEW STRUCTURE” 

















——_ 


foreign shipping seized in American ports on Marg 
30, or liable for seizure under legislation now beip 
debated in Congress, probably does not excee 
500,000 tons—the equivalent of perhaps six weeks 
losses. 


The effect of recent Washington efforts—  reatiog 
of a pool of ships totaling 2,000,000 tons, diversion 
of American oil tankers to British use, and extensiog 
of naval and air patrols in the Atlantic—cannot yet| 
be judged, although many observers believe that they 
will not adequately safeguard Britain’s supply lines 
The arrival of 26 ships with American war materials 
at Suez—according to an unconfirmed report from 
Vichy on May 3—suggests, however, the importance 
of President Roosevelt's action in opening the Red 
Sea to American commerce. If the Administration's 
present policies do not insure the safe transportation 
of “aid to Britain,” the government and the public | 
will have to decide whether to use even more drastic | 
and hazardous methods, including naval convoys, 





JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


Britain assumed in 1920 a League mandate for Iraq, 
formerly part of the Turkish empire. Afer a period 
marked by frequent outbursts against the mandatory 
power, Britain finally granted Iraq its independence in 
1932, but at the same time obtained a pledge of per- 
petual alliance and a treaty provision that, in case of 
war or threat of war, the Iraqi king would furnish the 
British “‘all facilities and assistance in his power, in- 
cluding the use of railways, rivers, ports, airdromes 
and means of communication.” The British also| 
secured the right of maintaining air bases at Hab- 
baniya and Basra. 





British interests in Iraq are primarily concerned 
with the petroleum resources and strategical position 
of that country. The Mosul oil fields produced 25 mil- | 
lion barrels in 1940, of which about half was pumped 
by pipeline to Haifa, Palestine, there refined, and 
supplied to British navy and army depots in the 
eastern Mediterranean. The oil wells and pipelines 
have probably been damaged in the Iraqi outbreak 
While the British may be temporarily inconvenienced 


at Haifa, the loss is not crucial. Iraq accounted for 


only 1.2 per cent of the world’s oil production in 
1940, and the British possess an alternate source ot 
Middle Eastern oil in the Iranian fields. Iraq is also 
important strategically, since it lies across the com 
munication routes linking Europe, Asia and Africa 
The principal air line to the Far East runs through 
Palestine across Iraq and down the Persian Gulf. The 
rail line from Haidar Pasha (opposite Istanbul) t 
Basra, completed in July 1940, constitutes an alter 
nate route for British supplies to Turkey now thal 
the Nazis control the Aegean. If the Germans can ¢& 





— 


March 
exceed 
weeks’ 


reation 
Version 
Tension 
not yet 
at they 
y lines, 
aterials 
t from 


Irtance | 


1e Red 


‘ation’s | 
rtation | 


public 
drastic 
voys, 


.EEN 


ot Iraq, 
period 
datory 
ence in 
of per: 
case of 
ish the 
ver, in- 
dromes 
h also 
t Hab- 


icerned 
osition 


ted for 
tion in 
urce of 
is also 
e COM: 
Africa. 
hrough 
1f. The 
pul) to 
n alter 
yw that 
can 




















——_—{ Page Three — 


eEo— 


tablish themselves in Iraq, they could then threaten 
Palestine and the Suez Canal and, at the same time, 
interfere with British communciations to India and 
the Far East. 

The German aid requested by Rashid Ali can come 
only by air, starting from the Italian bases in the 
Dodecanese Islands and stopping en route in Syria. 
Conditions in this French mandate are extremely con- 
fused. Food and essential commodities are very scarce, 
and Syrian Nationalists have exploited the general 
unrest to agitate for the independence promised by 
the French government in 1936. Only some 30,000 
troops remain to assert Vichy’s uncertain authority. 
Thus, although the Germans would meet no deter- 
mined resistance in Syria, neither would they obtain 
much aid. 


The political significance of the anti-British out- 
break in Iraq extends far beyond the borders of the 
kingdom, slightly smaller than Montana and with 
a population equal to that of Chicago. Fifteen mil- 
lion Arabs and Moslems in the Arabian peninsula 
and many more through the Middle East watch de- 
velopments with interest. Britain had hoped to keep 
the Arab states neutral in this conflict, demanding 
nothing from them but the use of certain territories 
and carefully avoiding any provocative acts. In con- 
formity with this policy, London has refused Jewish 
pleas for unrestricted immigration into Palestine and 


for a large, well-armed Jewish army. Despite these 
measures, however, Iraq has taken up arms and:anti- 
British demonstrations are reported elsewhere in the 
Moslem world. Some quarters in London now de- 
mand a revision of the ‘“appeasement’’ program in 
the Middle East, urging a stronger policy against the 
pro-Axis elements and the arming of the Jews in 
Palestine. Louis E. FRECHTLING 


DAVID POPPER TO STUDY IN LATIN AMERICA 

On May 1 David H. Popper, defense expert of the 
FPA research department, left for Latin America on 
a traveling fellowship of the Rockefeller Foundation. 
In connection with his studies for the Association on 
military and refugee problems, he will visit Cuba, 
Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, the 
Virgin Islands and Trinidad. As his primary task, 
Mr. Popper will undertake a survey of the political 
institutions and economic development of Argentina, 
where he will spend five or six months. Later he will 
fly to the West Coast of South America and spend 
a month each in Chile and Colombia. 





F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: LATIN AMERICA LOOKS AT THE WAR 
Speaker: John I. B. McCulloch 

Date: Sunday, May 11, 1941 

Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 

Station: NBC, blue network 











THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Blood, Sweat, and Tears, by Winston S. Churchill. New 
York, Putnam, 1941. $3.00 
A collection of the eloquently phrased public utterances 


made by England’s great war leader during the last three 
years. 


Labor and National Defense. New York, The Twentieth 
Century Fund, 1941. $1.00 


A very timely and lucid analysis of a complex problem, 
remarkable for its objectivity and thoroughness. The con- 
clusion contains a series of constructive recommendations 
on policy by a committee of distinguished experts. 


Approach to Battle, by Major Leonard H. Nason. New 
York, Doubleday, Doran, 1941. $1.50 


Although the author is sensationally alarmist regard- 
ing the possibility of a direct invasion of this country, he 
makes some severe and partly justified criticisms of the 
United States Army as it exists today. 


Speeches on Foreign Policy, by Viscount Halifax. Edited 
by H. H. E. Craster. New York, Oxford University Press, 
issued under the auspices of the Royal Institute of Inter- 
national Affairs, 1940. $4.00 


Fifty speeches, with introductory notes, by the new Am- 
bassador to the United States, providing valuable source 
material on British foreign policy from the Disarmament 
Conference in 1934 through the first months of the war. 





The Pope Speaks: The Words of Pius XII. New York, Har- 
court, Brace, 1940. $2.75 


Brief biography and collection of the stirring peace pro- 
nouncements of the wartime Pontiff. 


The Strategy of Terror, by Edmond Taylor. Boston, 
Houghton, Mifflin, 1940. $2.50 


The author draws on first-hand experiences as European 
correspondent of the Chicago Tribune to show how the war 
of nerves and propaganda affected people in Europe dur- 
ing the fateful years leading up to the war and the early 
stages of armed conflict. 


Inflation and Revolution: Mexico’s Experience of 1912- 
1917, by E. W. Kemmerer. Princeton, Princeton Uni- 
versity Press, 1940. $2.50 
Professor Kemmerer, who functioned as adviser to the 

Mexican government for some time, gives a lucid analysis 

of Mexico’s disastrous financial experiences during revo- 

lutionary years. 


The International Gold Standard Reinterpreted 1914-1934, 
by William Adams Brown. New York, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, 1940. 2 vols. $12.00 
A monumental and definitive work which views in ex- 


cellent perspective the gradual disintegration and collapse 
of the gold standard. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 29, May 9, 1941. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Bw 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membershin, Five Dollars a Year 














[ Washington News Letter 


fi 











if 
: 
i WASHINGTON BUREAU = present crisis, there is a growing conviction that some. 
i National Press Bullding = thing more drastic is required. 


May 5.—While public attention has been focused The shortcomings of the voluntary system are 
almost exclusively on the issue of convoys, respon- frankly admitted by many defense officials. For ex. 
sible Washington officials have been deeply con- ample, agencies charged with meeting the demand 
cerned with another aspect of the shipping problem for strategic defense materials complain that these 
which may prove to be equally decisive in relation to essential products are piling up cn the docks at for. 


the total defense program and the impending show- eign ports, while non-essential goods find shipping 
down in the Atlantic. This vital, if less dramatic, space in American vessels. One result is that the gov. 





—_—— 
VoL. 
—_— 


issue is whether American shipping is to be subjected ernment’s stockpile program is lagging, and many 
to complete government control, with rigid enforce- firms working on defense orders are faced with po- 
ment of priorities on cargoes, allocation of all ship _ tential shortages of critical raw materials. The pinch 
routes and fixing of rates. It will come to a head this is felt most acutely in the Far Eastern trade, where X 
week at a series of meetings scheduled by the Mari- non-defense articles like tapioca and sugar are com. | . . 
time Commission with leading representatives of the peting for space with tungsten, chrome, manganese, Bt 
shipping industry. rubber and other strategic materials. Moreover, many “A 


con: 
of ( 
fror 


cargoes from the Far East are still being sent through 
the Panama Canal to East Coast ports, while valuable 
time might be saved by delivery to Pacific ports for 


ALL-OUT SHIPPING CONTROL? Despite the 
urgent demand for ships and cargo space, and the 


a a ons Sethe mant ape transshipment by rail. Latin American trade has also om 
tend its n- te American-flag vessels. Up to sess re ~ mP ae AF sereen Nee pa rm reas 
this time, the Administration has been most reluctant 9 preg he: eonmagaay ee ee “ne 
to use its emergency power to requisition any vessel SO the 
needed for national defense. Instead, it has sought to . While these shortcomings are now tacitly admitted, T 
meet the crisis on a basis of voluntary cooperation it 1S by no means clear that the remedy will be found MA 
between the government and the shipping companies. in President Roosevelt's call for a vast shipping pool neg 
Under the act of 1936, the Maritime Commission has to meet the emergency. In his letter of April 30 to | p., 
authority to allocate the routes and generally super- Admiral Land, the President asked the Commission ann 
vise lines operating under federal subsidy. It also has “to secure the service of at least 2,000,000 tons of | 
power to supervise sales, charters and transfers of | merchant shipping,” and to plan its operation so as | .,.; 
registry. But short of requisitioning, the Commission to make this cargo space “immediately effective in ac rie 
has very little authority over the independent lines complishing our objective of all-out aid to the democ | (,, 
which still control the bulk of American cargo-carriers, facies.” Theoretically, the United States has ample | , 4. 
particularly in the coastwise and intercoastal trade. tonnage to create such a pool. On April 1 the Amer: | ¢.; 
As yet, the Commission has no power to enforce ican merchant fleet consisted of 1,207 vessels, total | ,, 
priorities on independent shippers. ing 6,399,930 tons. These were distributed as fol- to 
If the crisis were less acute, a good case might be lows: foreign trade, 368 ships of 2,249,919 tons; | anc 
made for continuation of the voluntary method. The coastwise, 286 ships of 1,185,912 tons; intercoastal, Fre 
Maritime Commission has managed to transfer ship- -~ 8 ~ . ~ ee a. and Great Lakes, “a ces: 
ping to vital trade routes with a minimum of disloca- Shape Of 2,512,5 oo ae — Own past expen 4 tha 
tion. Whereas only 21 American-flag vessels were demonstrates that this tonnage cannot be mobilize sug 
operating on Asiatic routes in September 1939, no effectively without resort to priorities and strict gov- | p,, 
less than 82 ships are serving this area today. On the ER SERRE ene Rese yes, f 
South African run, 51 vessels are operating today as The attitude of the Administration will be judged | 5ri 
compared with 13 in September 1939. Credit for by its support of a bill (H.R. 4583) introduced by | fre 
these results must be given to Admiral Land, Chair- Representative Bland last week. This measure would | §s 
man of the Commission, and H. Harris Robson, give the Maritime Commission the necessary powets| § 
head of the division of Emergency Shipping created to enforce priorities and dominate all American | Ma 
last February. But the fact remains that persuasion shipping. sta’ 


alone has not met the problem. In the face of the W.T. STONE | mi 





