





—— 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XIX, No. 51 


OcTOBER 11, 1940 





oct 

Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 


PERIODICAL ROOM of March 3, 1879. 


DENERAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF MICK. 











SECOND CLASS MAIL 





—_ 


NEW TIME FOR FPA RADIO PROGRAM 


Beginning Sunday, October 13, the “America Looks Abroad” 
series will be presented from 2:30 to 2:45 E.S.T. On that date 


David H. Popper will discuss Conscription and Our Defenses. 


May we have your comments on FPA’s radio program? If 
you have not been able to hear the broadcasts, please urge your 


jocal station to carry them. 


Genera) Library 
Univers: 
*Versity of Nichizan 


Ann Arhor, y: he 
Hin ior aK 











AXIS PREPARES TO STRIKE AT MEDITERRANEAN 





— meeting of Hitler and Mussolini at the 
Brenner Pass on October 4, described by the 
oficial communiqué as a “cordial conference . . . in 
line with a routine exchange of views,” inaugurated 
the fourth phase of the war. During the first phase 
— from September 3, 1939 to April 9, 1940 — the 
Allies, relying on the effect of the economic block- 
ade, continued ‘‘business as usual,” while Germany, 
having conquered Poland, started to reorganize the 
continent east of the Rhine in accordance with Nazi 
concepts of a ‘‘new order.” During the second phase, 
beginning with the invasion of Denmark and Nor- 
way on April 9 and ending with the armistice of 
Compiégne on June 22, the Reich launched a steam- 
toller offensive, occupied the Atlantic Coast from 
Norway to Spain, seriously weakened British influ- 
ence on the continent, and announced its plans for an 
early invasion of the British Isles. During the third 
phase, profoundly influenced by increasing Ameri- 
can aid to Britain, Germany delivered smashing air 
attacks on London, and brought Japan into the Axis, 
presumably to checkmate the United States. 


When Britain’s resistance stiffened, and the R.A.F. 
carried the war into Italy, Germany and German- 
occupied territory, reports from Berlin and Rome 
began to indicate that the Axis powers were prepar- 
ing for a second winter of war. In this fourth phase, 
Germany apparently hopes to wear Britain out by 
gradual destruction of its shipping and industrial 
plants and, at the same time, shift the main theatre 
of war to Africa and the Near East, where climatic 
conditions are more propitious for winter operations. 
This would also make it possible for Germany to 
use its army, now idle for the most part, in assisting 
Italy's African campaign. The belief that strategic 
problems were considered at Brenner Pass was 
strengthened by reference in the official communiqué 
to the presence of General Field Marshal Wilhelm 
Keitel, chief of the Supreme Command of the Ger- 


RPDS Or ORR a A a eee — Oe ee rs Sa 


man armed forces; and by reports that Marshal 
Graziani, commander of Italian troops in Africa, had 
visited Rome on the eve of the conference. 


WAR PROSPECTS IN MEDITERRANEAN. 
The objective of the Axis powers in the Mediter- 
ranean is two-fold: to oust Britain from Gibraltar 
and strike at the Suez Canal, thus breaking Britain’s 
blockade of the Mediterranean; and to seize the oil 
fields of the Near East, needed to replenish the oil 
reserves of the totalitarian powers. To achieve this 
double objective, the Axis forces might seek to close 
in on the Suez Canal in a pincer-like movement, 
favored by Nazi strategists, with the Italians ad- 
vancing eastward from Libya into Egypt, and the 
Germans advancing southward through Hungary, 
Rumania, Bulgaria and Turkey into Syria and Pal- 
estine. Simultaneously, an attempt might be made to 
attack Gibraltar, with the consent, if not the active 
participation, of Spain, which has apparently suc- 
ceeded for the time being in preserving its status of 
non-belligerent. The success of these far-flung opera- 
tions would depend on five principal factors: an 
Italian victory over the British in Egypt; the acqui- 
escence of the Balkan countries, Turkey, French and 
Syrians in Syria, Arabs and Jews in Palestine; the 
extent to which the British fleet could disorgan- 
ize the troop movements of the Axis and bring rein- 
forcements to the Near East; the attitude of the 
Moslem world; and the course adopted by Russia. 

1. Following the invasion of Egypt on September 12, 
Italian colonial troops on September 16 occupied Sidi 
Barrani, 55 miles inside Egyptian territory. Since then, 
hampered by heat and the difficulty of obtaining water, and 
harassed by the British fleet and air force, the Italian army 
has been digging in at Sidi Barrani in preparation for fur- 
ther advances. Now that the desert is cooling off, it is ex- 
pected that the Italians may resume operations. Meanwhile, 
the Egyptian government has been divided on giving Britain 
military support, as was indicated on September 21, when 


members of the Saadist party who favored active prosecution 
of the war resigned from the Cabinet. 











aa 




















2. Both Germany and Italy are putting pressure on 
Balkan countries which are still outside the Axis orbit, but 
would presumably prefer to avoid an open conflict, since 
war in the Balkans would deprive the Axis powers of an 
important source of foodstuffs and raw materials. Italian 
troops have been massed on the border of Greece, already 
threatened with Bulgaria’s territorial demands, and Italy 
denounced Turkey's “‘servility” to Britain; while Germany, 
having rewarded its satellites, Hungary and Bulgaria, with 
Rumanian territory, moved troops into Rumania on October 
6, ostensibly for the purpose of protecting the oil fields from 
the British. On the same day General Antonescu, Rumania’s 
Premier, proclaimed himself commander of the Iron Guard, 
whose activities he had hitherto attempted to restrain. Thus 
legitimized, the Iron Guard rapidly proceeded with its plans 
for the confiscation or reorganization of foreign-owned 
properties in Rumania, notably oil fields controlled by 
British, American and Dutch interests. The British, for their 
part, have sought to disrupt Italian preparations in the 
Eastern Mediterranean by lenhey Italian bases on the 
Dodecanese Islands, and have encouraged resistance to Axis 
demands on the part of Greece and Turkey. 


3. An Italian military mission is now in Syria, and is re- 
ported to have presented far-reaching demands to the French 
authorities, which are divided between loyalty to the Pétain 
government and the desire, apparently shared by some Syri- 
ans, to resist Italian encroachments. 


4. Reports of Moslem reactions to the war have filtered 
chiefly through Cairo, and may therefore be colored by British 
censorship. Some observers, however, believe that the Arabs, 
much as they might wish to throw off British rule and 
achieve independence, recall the fate of Libya and have 





Page Two a, 





—— 


little interest in substituting Italian for British domination, 

5. The Soviet Union continues to maintain an attitude of 
watchful waiting. The re-shuffling of the British Cabing, 
however, with the disappearance of Russia's arch-enemy, 
Mr. Chamberlain, and the increased influence of the trade 
unions, has produced a favorable impression in Moscow, If 
Russia can be convinced that the advocates of ‘‘appeage. 
ment,”” who might have ultimately collaborated with Hitle 
in an attack on Russia, have been definitely eliminated, jt 
may adopt a policy of benevolent, instead of malevolent, 
neutrality toward the British Empire. And its policy may 
have an important effect not only on Turkey, but on coun. 
tries of the Near East like Iran and Iraq, as well as on India. 

To sum up, the Axis powers may be confronted 
in the Mediterranean with military, political and 
economic problems more baffling and complex_than 
those they have so far encountered on the continent 
They will also, for the first time in the course of this 
war, be scattering their forces on a number of fronts, 
leaving at their back occupied territories whose popu. 
lations, judging by reports from Holland and Nor. 
way, are not yet resigned to Nazi rule. The Axis 
powers, however, have the advantage of operating 
from a centrally located base, which can supply them 
readily with reinforcements; while the British, who 
will also be obliged to scatter their man power and 
matériel, thus possibly weakening home defenses, 
must operate on the periphery. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


CHAMBERLAIN RESIGNATION STRENGTHENS WAR CABINET 


Following the resignation of Neville Chamberlain 
as Lord President of the Council on October 3, Prime 
Minister Churchill undertook a fairly extensive re- 
organization of his government. He enlarged his 
War Cabinet from five to eight members by adding 
Ernest Bevin, Minister of Labor; Lord Beaverbrook, 
Minister of Aircraft Production; Sir Kingsley Wood, 
Chancellor of the Exchequer; and Sir John Ander- 
son, the new Lord President. Herbert Morrison, 
former Minister of Supply, became Home Secretary 
in place of Sir John Anderson, who had been widely 
criticized for his failure to provide adequate, deep 
air-raid shelters and for excessively strict internment 
of aliens. Mr. Morrison, in turn, was replaced by Sir 
Andrew Duncan, president of the Board of Trade 
under both Chamberlain and Churchill. 

These changes, which signified a shift of personali- 
ties rather than policies, were dictated mainly by 
party considerations, since the coalition government 
comprises Conservatives, Liberals, and Laborites. 
The enlargement of the War Cabinet is otherwise 
difficult to understand, since Mr. Chamberlain was 
constantly criticized because his inner cabinet of nine 
members was too large, especially in comparison to 
Lloyd George's four or five member cabinet during 
the World War. Mr. Chamberlain resigned for gen- 
uine reasons of health, but his departure was wel- 
come to a large part of the public which felt uneasy 


because this symbol of appeasement remained in the 
War Cabinet. Another member of the Chamberlain 
régime, Viscount Caldecote (formerly Sir Thomas 
Inskip) was moved from the Dominions Office to 
the non-political post of Lord Chief Justice. 

The elimination of these two Conservative leaders 
was balanced by the elevation of Wood and Ander 
son, both Conservatives, to the War Cabinet. The 
increasing prestige of Ernest Bevin, who probably 
ranks second only to Churchill in popularity, is in- 
dicative, however, of the striking social changes 
which air raids, evacuation and wartime taxation are 
effecting in Great Britain. The Conservatives, who 
have governed — except for two brief intervals — 
since 1922 and who have a large majority in Parlia- 
ment, are still powerful and are giving way vety 
slowly, but the war is gradually broadening the po- 
litical and economic base of Britain’s social structure. 

DOMINION ASSISTANCE. Every American te 
porter and broadcaster in London pays tribute to 
British morale and praises the maintenance of indus 
trial production despite air raids. It must be remem 
bered, however, that the chances of a British victory 
depend not only on the home front but also on the 
rest of the Empire. Men and materials are being fur 
nished by the Dominions, India, and the colonies it 
increasingly great quantities, but the Empire's vast 
resources will probably not be fully utilized until 





| 





evi 


tin 





@émaseResB il 


pu- 
lor. 
LXis 
ing 


vho 
and 
Ses, 


the 
lain 
nas 


lers 
Jer- 
[he 
bly 


ges 
are 
vho 


‘lia- 
ety 


ure. 

re 
+ to 
Jus- 
em- 
tory 


fur- 
5 if 
vast 
ntil 











—_ 
—_ 





late 1941. Canada, for example, has 167,000 men 
under arms, of whom 53,000 are overseas—in Eng- 
land, Iceland, Newfoundland, and the West Indies 
—and is beginning conscription for home service this 
month. The most spectacular part of Canada’s 
preparations, the training of pilots and building of 
planes, may eventually play a decisive part in the 
conflict. The Commonwealth Air Training Plan al- 
ready has 4,500 men training for active service, in 
addition to 7,500 student mechanics and maintenance 
men. Canadian industry is reportedly producing 
about 130 air frames a month, chiefly for training 
planes, but has to depend on American engines. 

Both Australia and New Zealand have speeded 
up military and economic mobilization, and are said 
to have sent “tens of thousands” of troops to Eng- 
land and the Near East. Australia has placed 184,000 
men under arms; and New Zealand secured 81,000 
volunteers, of whom 23,000 have been sent abroad, 
before starting conscription in June. Both are con- 
centrating on air power, with 33,000 men train- 
ing in the Australian air force and 15,000 in New 
Zealand. Australia is producing light training planes 
at the rate of three a day, and is manufacturing all 
its own light arms and ammunition, in addition to 
exporting some naval armaments and stores to Brit- 
ain and the other Dominions. 

Although the situation in the Union of South 
Africa is more obscure, there are indications that 
enthusiasm for the war has increased since hostili- 
ties shifted to Africa. General Hertzog, who resigned 
as Prime Minister in September 1939 when the 
House of Assembly voted down his motion for neu- 
trality by 80 to 67, has continued to oppose the war. 
Prime Minister Smuts defeated another Hertzog 
peace move on August 31 by 83 to 65, and continued 
to push his defense preparations, with 100,000 men 
under arms. South African troops have moved into 
Kenya and Tanganyika. 


BRITAIN’S AIMS. If Great Britain can resist 
aerial bombing and prevent invasion this autumn, it 
will have won its first military victory of the war. 
It will then have to undertake the second and even 
more arduous task of gaining back territory and 
eventually taking the offensive against Germany. 
Such a campaign would require, in addition to con- 
tinued control of the seas, far greater contributions 
of men and machines than any of the Dominions 
are sending now or are planning to send—possibly 
even more than they can provide. If Britain can hold 
out until 1941, however, American production of 
airplanes and munitions will be going into high gear. 


Page Three 








In the first eight months of 1940 American exports 
of arms to the United Kingdom totaled $86,154,000, 
including $56,306,000 in airplanes and parts. The 
fact that August exports of airplanes constituted 
over half the eight-month total suggests that Ameri- 
can assistance is being rapidly accelerated, although 
this high August figure was composed partly of 
machines diverted from shipment to France. 


Britain’s control of the sea will remain a vital 
factor this winter, when Germany is expected to in- 
crease its submarine warfare. After relatively small 
losses in July and August, Britain suffered the sever- 
est submarine attacks of the war during the week 
of September 15-22, in which sinkings totaled 131,- 
857 tons of British shipping and 27,431 tons of 
Allied and neutral. The British Minister of Ship- 
ping, Ronald H. Cross, claimed on September 24, 
however, that Britain had.lost only 8 per cent of 
its pre-war mercantile tonnage, and had more than 
offset this loss by new construction, captures and 
transfers from foreign flags. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





Statement of the Ownership, Management, Circulation, Etc., 
Required by the Acts of Congress of August 24, 1912 and 
March 3, 1933, of 


Foreign Policy Bulletin 


Published weekly at New York, N. Y. for October 1, 1940. 
State of New York, County of New York, ss. 


Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State and county aforesaid, 
personally appeared Vera Micheles Dean, who, having been duly sworn ac- 
cording to law, deposes and a that she is the Editor of the FOREIGN 
POLI BULLETIN, and that the following is, to the best of her knowledge 
and belief, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the afore- 
said publication for the date shown in the above caption, required by the 
Act of August 24, 1912, as amended by the Act of March 3, 1933, em- 
bodied in ion 537, Postal Laws and Regulations, printed on the re- 
verse of this form, to wit: 

1. That the names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing edi- 
tor, and business managers are: 

Publishers—Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 22 East 38th Street, 
New York, N. Y. 

Editor—Vera Micheles Dean, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 

Managing Editor—None. 

Business Managers—None. 

2. That the owner is: 

Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, the principal officers of which 
are: Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorothy F. Leet, Secretary; both of 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y.; and William A. Eldridge, Treasurer, 
70 Broadway, New York, N. Y. 

3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holders 
owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, 
or _— securities, are: 

one. 


4, That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners, 
stockholders and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stock- 
holders and security holders as they appear upon the books of the company, 
but also, in cases where the stockholder or security holder appears upon the 
books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, the name 
of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting, is given; also 
that the said two paragraphs contain statements embracing afhant’s full 
knowledge and belief as cto the circumstances and conditions under which 
stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of the 
company as trustees hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of 
a bona fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any other 
person, association, or corporation has any interest, direct or indirect, in the 
said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by her. 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated. 
By VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 27th day of September, 1940. 
[Seal] CAROLYN E. MARTIN, Notary Public. 


New York County, New York. County Clerk’s No. 329. (My commission 
expires March 30, 1941.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 51, Ocroper 11, 1940. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


EB 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FrRaNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lget, Secretary; VERA MiIcHELES Dgan, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


National 


under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


ees 








NEL 
awe : w= 





Washington News Letter 


















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 7.—As Congress prepares to depart for its 
brief campaign recess, it leaves near completion a 
remarkable legislative record which includes not 
only the largest national defense program ever 
adopted in peace time, but also the widest grant of 
executive power ever given to any President when 
the country was not actually at war. 


THE LEGISLATIVE RECORD. No one has yet 
had time to sift and analyze the entire mass of legis- 
lation passed during the nine months of this un- 
precedented session, but even a brief resumé of the 
major statutes reflects the sweeping changes which 
have been brought about by the emergency. The 
following summary indicates the outstanding results: 


NATIONAL DEFENSE 


1. Regular and supplemental appropriation acts provide 
$8,623,336,784 in direct appropriations and $3,804,582,009 
in contract authorizations for the Army and Navy—a total 
of 12.4 billion dollars available in the fiscal year ending 
June 30, 1941. These figures top the actual war expenditures 
during the year 1918, when the total military and naval 
outlay amounted to about 8.4 billion dollars. 


2. Act to Expedite the Strengthening of National De- 
fense, approved July 2, 1940, authorizing the President 
(a) to embargo export of any materials or equipment neces- 
sary for defense of United States; (b) to construct or equip 
new plants which may be operated by the government or 
leased to private concerns; (c) to commandeer privately 
owned plants, utilities, transportation and storage facilities 
if necessary in the interest of defense; (d) to finance ex- 
pansion of privately owned plants through government 
loans or capital investments; (e) to sell or transfer “‘obso- 
lete’’ or surplus war materials to foreign countries subject to 
approval of the Chief of Staff and Chief of Naval Oper- 


ations. 


3. National Guard Act, approved August 27, authoriz- 
ing President to call up the National Guard and Reserve 
Officers for one year’s active service in Western Hemisphere 
or United States possessions. 


4. Compulsory Military Training and Service Law, ap- 
proved September 16, authorizing President to select and 
induct into land and naval forces for training or service as 
many men between 21 and 35 as he considers necessary for 
national defense. 


5. Naval Expansion Act, approved July 19, authorizing 
a “two-ocean” Navy by 70 per cent increase in under-age 
combat ships and expansion of naval aircraft. 


6. Civil and Military Aircraft Training Act, approved 
June 27, to provide primary training for 45,000 new student 
pilots by July 1941, and secondary training for 9,000 ad- 
vanced students. 








ECONOMIC DEFENSE MEASURES 


7. Reconstruction Finance Corporation, under amend. 
ments approved June 25 and September 16, authorized to 
aid national defense by loans for acquiring reserve stocks of 
strategic and critical materials, and to increase domestic pro. 
duction of manganese, chromite, tungsten, or other strategic 
minerals considered of value to the United States in time of 
war. Lending authority of RFC increased by $1,500,000,000, 

8. Export-Import Bank, under amendments approved 
September 26, authorized to make loans “for the develop. 
ment of the resources, the stabilization of the economies 
and the orderly marketing of the products of the countries 
of the Western Hemisphere,” with lending authority in. 
creased by $500,000,000 from RFC. Previous limitations on 
aggregate amount of loans to any one country removed. 


9. Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act, approved April 12, 
extended for three years. 


10. Department of Agriculture authorized to investigate 
possibility of producing rubber and other strategic materials 
in Latin America; War and Navy Departments authorized 
to assist governments of American Republics to increase 
military and naval establishments. 


REFUGEES AND ALIENS 


11. Neutrality Act amended, August 27, to permit Amer- 
ican vessels to evacuate refugee children, provided “safe 
conduct” is granted by all belligerents. 


12. Registration of aliens, authorized in Act of June 
28, with extensive provisions for deportation of aliens con- 
victed of carrying arms, advocating overthrow of govern- 
ment, or other subversive activities. 


Despite the broad grant of emergency power to 
the President in carrying out the national defense 
program, Congress is still jealous of its constitutional 
prerogatives and fearful of unlimited executive con- 
trol. In opposing the Administration’s earlier plan 
to force adjournment until January 1941, and insist: 
ing on returning to Washington after a short elec- 
tion recess, Congress again has sought to affirm its 
joint responsibility in the conduct of foreign rela- 
tions and to safeguard its final authority as the sole 
agency of the government with power to declare 
war. Faced with new uncertainties resulting from 
the extension of war in Europe and Asia, however, 
Congress has virtually abandoned its previous oppo- 


sition and given the President the free hand he has 
asked. 


Whatever the future holds in store, it is apparent 
that the final authority now rests with the President 
as Commander-in-Chief and on his foreign policy 
advisers. On their judgment and sense of responsi- 
bility depends the course this country will pursue in 
the critical weeks ahead. WTS 








| 





