



als 


nel 


mona: 
itor 





FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 
Research Sta 
Subscription, One lar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL. XV, No. 10 JANUARY 8, 1936 





The CUBAN REVOLUTION: REFORM and REACTION 
by Charles A. Thomson 


This issue covers the political and social revolutions 
initiated by the fall of Machado, and the decisive role 
played by the Roosevelt administration in Cuban affairs. 
Both revolutions have failed, and the forces of protest 
have been driven underground—whether to disappear 
or to reappear in more aggressive form, the future alone 
will decide. 


January 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25c. 





Entered as second 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
OMce at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 











Fashincton, dD. Ge. 











CHINESE STUDENT UPRISING BLOCKS JAPAN 





OR the first time since the Shanghai hostilities 

of 1932, the nationalist sentiments of the 
Chinese people are threatening to break through 
the restrictions imposed by the Nanking govern- 
ment. Despite Nanking’s government edict of 
June 10, 1935, which prohibited all anti-Japanese 
activities, the Chinese students have presented a 
nation-wide demand for resistance to Japan’s ag- 
gression. In midwinter, and facing brutal police 
assaults, the students have rallied to mass demon- 
strations which surpass those of 1919 and 1925 
in extent and numbers. The elemental force of 
this movement has defied suppression by the Nan- 
king authorities and measurably slowed down the 
rate of Japan’s progress in north China. 

As in 1919, the movement originated in north 
China and its first demands were directed against 
China’s rulers. Last October eleven universities, 
colleges and middle schools in Peiping and Tien- 
tsin formed a students’ federation. On Novem- 
ber 1 the leaders of this body addressed a mani- 
festo to the students of the nation, urging the 
necessity for organization and solidarity. At the 
same time they dispatched a petition to the Kuo- 
mintang plenum, which was then meeting at Nan- 
king. Decrying Kuomintang absolutism, this peti- 
tion demanded freedom of press, speech, organi- 
zation and public assembly, as well as guarantees 
against the arrest of students without due process 
of law. These demands were supported by an im- 
pressive indictment summarizing characteristic 
features of the Nanking dictatorship: student dis- 
cussion groups closed down, and their members 
arrested; student dormitories of Peiping univer- 
sities secretly raided by the police; publications 
suppressed and burned; 300,000 Chinese youths 
executed since 1927, while the number abducted 
and imprisoned was “beyond calculation.” When 
the Japanese-sponsored “autonomy” program de- 
veloped in north China, the student federation 
launched the protest movement which has since 
swept the country. 


—_—m 


Inauguration of the Hopei-Chahar “autonomy” 
council—arranged by General Ho Ying-ching, 
Nanking’s Minister of War, with the Japanese 
military—was temporarily postponed by the 
strength of the Peiping student demonstrations of 
December 9-11. The nationalist reaction against 
Nanking’s non-resistance policy was intensified by 
the cabinet reorganization of December 13. Gen- 
eral Chang Chun, a Hupeh militarist educated in 
Japan, was made Foreign Minister. The Ministry 
of the Interior went to Chiang Tso-pin, Chinese 
diplomatic representative at Tokyo for the past 
three years. Wu Ting-chang, Tientsin banker 
who headed the recent Chinese Economic Mission 
to Tokyo, became Minister of Industry, with the 
task of furthering “Sino-Japanese economic co- 
operation.” The Shanghai banker, Chiang Chia- 
au, became Minister of Railways—another key 
post, in view of Japanese railway projects in 
north China. All of the new ministers were edu- 
cated wholly or partly in Japan; while the entire 
cabinet, it was reported, secretly agreed to sup- 
port a program of “Sino-Japanese cooperation.” 
The bitter feeling provoked by these cabinet 
choices was demonstrated on December 25 when 
Tang Yu-jen, newly appointed Vice Minister of 
Railways, was assassinated in the French Conces- 
sion at Shanghai. Tang Yu-jen had previously 
been Wang Ching-wei’s assistant in the Foreign 
Ministry, serving as chief go-between in the nego- 
tiations with Japan. At the time of his death he 
was conferring in Shanghai with Major-General 
Rensuke Isogai, Japanese military attaché. 


These events have blocked Japan’s plans for the 
peaceful annexation of north China. For the 
time being, all talk of a five-province “autonomy” 
project has ceased. The new Hopei-Chahar coun- 
cil has been officially inaugurated, but owing to 
the nationalist uprising it has proved impotent to 
further Japanese plans in north China. Unwill- 
ing to risk a large-scale intervention, the Japanese 


HY ~G Joes of March 3, 1879. 
> 
ote 
Periodical Division, “4 
v. ! K “a 4 
Library of Congress, oe” 







































































military have been reduced to two expedients. On 
the one hand, they have encouraged the piecemeal 
expansion of Yin Ju-keng’s “autonomous state” in 
the districts of northern Hopei and eastern Chahar. 
On the other hand, they have sent small forces of 
Japanese troops into the Mongol areas of Chahar 
in order to set up an Inner Mongolian state under 
Japanese auspices. At the same time, renewed 
clashes have occurred on the Outer Mongolian- 
“Manchoukuo” border. The warnings delivered 
by Outer Mongolian officials now visiting Mos- 
cow, however, indicate that Japanese aggressions 
directed against the Mongolian Peoples’ Republic 
will meet with strenuous resistance. 

Although Japan’s attempt to control north 
China through a puppet régime has been tem- 
porarily side-tracked, the danger has by no means 
passed. There is every indication that the new 
Nanking cabinet has pledged the establishment of 
a north China government through which Japan’s 
program of “Sino-Japanese cooperation” may be 
realized. This outcome can only be prevented 
by the broadening of the Chinese student move- 
ment into an effective national demand for united 
resistance to the Japanese invaders. 


T. A. BISSON 


TRADE PROGRAM GAINS MOMENTUM 

With the conclusion of trade agreements with 
Honduras and the Netherlands on December 18 
and 20 respectively, the trade reciprocity program 
of Secretary Hull is beginning to make more rapid 
progress. The nine countries with which trade 
pacts have now been signed supplied about 36 per 
cent of the United States imports in 1934. Nego- 
tiations are being actively pursued with nine other 
states and a number of agreements, including one 
with Spain, are to be concluded in the near future. 

The agreement with Honduras is of minor im- 
portance. Our exports to Honduras in 1934 
amounted to $5,866,000 as compared with $12,- 
719,000 in 1929; and our imports during 1934 
were $7,791,000 as against $12,833,000 for 1929, 
Since 99 per cent of the products we buy from 
Honduras are exempt from duty, the chief con- 
cession granted by the United States is to keep 
on the free list such products as coffee, bananas 
and cocoa beans. In addition, reductions in duty 
are accorded on balsams, pineapples, mango and 
guava pastes and pulps, and prepared or preserved 
guavas. Honduras in return concedes substantial 
duty reductions on smoked and canned meat prod- 
ucts, condensed, evaporated and dried milk, 
canned and dried fruits, cotton shirts, and certain 
soaps, medicines and pharmaceutical products. 
Rates on a number of other products are bound, 
and certain articles are to be kept on the free list. 


Page Two 











ee 
— —$—<— 


The agreement with the Netherlands, which be. 
comes effective on February 1, is second only to 
the Canadian pact in the volume of trade con- 
ducted under its general provisions. In 1934 we 
sold to the Netherlands and its colonial posses. 
sions goods valued at $74,285,521, while our im- 
ports amounted to $80,655,075. The United States 
will lower its tariff duties on 41 products. Most 
important are the reductions on cigar wrapper 
tobacco from $2.275 to $1.875 per pound (and af- 
ter June 30, 1936 to $1.50), and on all flower bulbs 
except narcissus from $6 to $3 per thousand. Sig- 
nificant reductions are also accorded on Holland 
gin, prepared cocoa, and chocolate and potato 
starch. The United States further agrees to keep 
on the free list a wide variety of products in- 
cluding ammonium sulphate, quinine sulphate, 
caraway seeds and oil, and certain spices. The 
chief concession made by the Netherlands is an 
undertaking to buy American milling wheat or 
flour in quantities equivalent to 5 per cent of its 
domestic consumption, provided the price and 
quality are competitive with other foreign offer- 
ings. Since its import duties are relatively low, 
the Nether!ands only agrees not to raise rates on 
many American products and to keep certain 
others on the free list. Special import monopoly 
fees, however, are lowered on some commodities, 
and enlarged or “clarified” quotas are granted for 
a number of American manufactures. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 





Japan’s Policies and Purposes, by Hirosi Saito. Boston, 
Marshall Jones, 1935. $2.50 
The Japanese Ambassador to the United States presents 

Japan’s case on contemporary issues in the Pacific. 

Quack, Quack! by Leonard Woolf. New York, Harcourt, 
Brace, 1935. $2.00 
Brilliant excoriation of political and intellectual quack- 

ery. 

I Change Worlds, by Anna Louise Strong. 
Holt, 1935. $3.00 
A modern American pioneer gives the story of the new 

life she achieved in the Soviet Union. 

Theodore Roosevelt and the Japanese-American Crisis, 
by Thomas A. Bailey. Stanford University Press, 1934. 
$3.00 
The most thorough study of an important episode. 

Monetary Mischief, by George Buchan Robinson. 
York, Columbia University Press, 1935. $2.00 
A series of disjointed articles on finance, written from a 

conservative point of view. 

Tobacco under the AAA, by Harold B. Rowe. 
ton, Brookings, 1935. $2.50 

Wheat and the AAA, by Joseph S. Davis. 
Brookings, 1935. $3.00 
The two most exhaustive studies of the AAA that have 

yet appeared. The AAA is held to have been quite suc- 

cessful in its tobacco program, but the conclusions regard- 
ing the operation of the wheat program are generally 
unfavorable. 


New York, 


New 


W ashing- 


Washington, 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 10, JaNuary 3, 1936. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
RayMOND Lestig Bug.t, Pressdent; EstHeR G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Edsior. 


Nationa! 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


P) 





<i 


