stration 
ld have 
1, Lowa, 
ple and 
ral war. 
vith the 
3, which 
Pproach 
inter to 
tary of 


on May t 


Britain 
epresen- 


ly will 


the cur- 


istration } 


V anden- 
the Re- 
solution 
for col- 
is coun- 


leading } 


>oke on 
on ona 
hile Lt. 
road in- 
f objec- 
e peace 
indidate 
rr John 
yvereign 
ace but 


ILLES 


DS 


wERIOBICAL Room 
@eNBRAL LIBRAI 
~1944 “uty, oF MICH. 


DUN 24 1944 | 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
Geaeral Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Nichigan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIII, No. 36 


JUNE 28, 1944 


ALLIED GUARANTEE OF ELECTIONS: WAY OUT OF FRENCH IMPASSE? 


HE Battle of France, in which the Germans are 

experiencing the full weight of Allied power on 
land, sea and in the air, has a political counter- 
part in the controversy now raging about the future 
government of France. It would be a sad paradox 
if, at the moment when the prospect of crushing 
Nazism appears at last within reach, the United Na- 
tions should succumb to the very kind of dissension 
among themselves which made Hitler’s initial tri- 
umphs possible. 


FRENCH, TOO, PAY FOR VICTORY. At the 
tisk of repetition, it may be useful to recapitulate 
some of the points that are causing most friction be- 
tween the United States and the French Committee 
of National Liberation in Algiers. The Allied High 
Command selected France as the first of the con- 
quered countries through which to strike at Nazi 
Germany. This decision, presumably, was dictated 
not by sentiment, but by purely strategic considera- 
tions. The fact that the first battle for Western Eu- 
rope is being fought on French soil means that the 
French people are suffering loss of life and property, 
not only at the hands of the Germans but, most trag- 
ically, at the hands of their allies and liberators. 
The predicament in which we are thus placed was 
part of Hitler’s design for defense of his ‘new 
order.” Thinking Frenchmen realize that there is 
no other way of liberating France than by trans- 
forming it once more into a battlefield. At the 
same time, Americans should not expect abject grati- 
tude from the French. True, we too are losing lives 
and property in France. Yet if a debt of gratitude 
exists between the two countries, it is surely a self- 
liquidating debt. For if it had not been for the re- 
sistance of the conquered peoples under conditions 
of suffering and terror most of us cannot even 
imagine, neither Russia, nor Britain, nor the United 
States would have much chance today of breaching 
Hitler's ‘fortress of Europe.” 


WHOM WILL FRANCE CHOOSE? General 
de Gaulle believes and claims that the resistance. 
movement in France supports the French Committee 
of National Liberation which he heads, and wants 
Britain, the United States and Russia to recognize 
his Committee as the provisional government of 
France until such time as the French people have had 
an opportunity to express their choice in free elec- 
tions. He apparently hoped that such recognition 
would be accorded not later than D day, and his dis- 
appointment at Washington’s refusal to alter its 
policy explains his derogatory remarks of June 10 
concerning Allied preparations for the civilian ad- 
ministration of France during the period of hostil- 
ities. These remarks, in turn, unquestionably hard- 
ened Washington in its determination to proceed 
with the course it had previously mapped out. 

Washington’s non-recognition of de Gaulle, how- 
ever, does not solve the problem of our relations 
with France. The chief issue, as indicated before,* 
is that President Roosevelt is convinced the French 
anti-Nazis are by no means overwhelmingly in favor 
of de Gaulle, and prefers to leave the choice of a 
government to the untrammeled decision of the 
French people. So far as can be determined, the 
President's views, which are opposed by many or- 
gans of opinion in Britain and the United States, 
have won the acquiescence of Prime Minister 
Churchill, but not of Foreign Secretary Eden. The 
practical difficulty presented by Washington’s policy 
—and one emphasized by de Gaullists—is that a 
considerable period of time may elapse before elec- 
tions can be held in France. Although de Gaulle has 
promised woman's suffrage, voting is still restricted 
to men, and at the present time nearly two million 
Frenchmen are prisoners of war in Germany, and 
probably two million more are working there at 


*See ‘‘French Political Issues Unresolved as Allied Armies Advance,’’ 
Foreign Policy Bulletin, June 16, 1944. 


= ea — > ee eet eo ee ne 
_— a. a ima SS ne oa mepnce ap actin - 
SO ee ee ee ee ee Re ee oe rag eee oe 


saaiaiaialamneen 


forced labor. Until these men have been repatriated, 
and have had an opportunity to vote, some interim 
regime must be entrusted with authority if France is 
not to fall prey to chaos, or be placed under the 
administration of an allied governing commission. 


The President, Secretary of State Hull, and Gen- 
eral Eisenhower have indicated, in a series of state- 
ments, that they are ready to have representatives of 
the French Committee of National Liberation assist 
the Allies in the re-establishment of civilian admin- 
istration, but have not recognized the Committee as 
the exclusive source of authority. This partial con- 
cession is not acceptable to General de Gaulle. What 
other elements may the Allies find to work with as 
they proceed into France? Washington may hope to 
reconstitute what it would regard as legitimate au- 
thority by restoring to power President Lebrun, who 
has not left France, and certain prominent political 
leaders such as Edouard Herriot, whose death has 
been alternately reported and denied. But in any 
such regime General de Gaulle and his supporters 
(some of whom previously either held office in 
France or have been members of Parliament) would 
doubtless play a part. Leaving aside any sentimental 
or legal considerations, it would seem expedient not 
to alienate irretrievably the French Committee. 


On the other hand, in fairness to the United States, 
it should be said that the French, as so often in the 
past, are by no means in agreement among them- 
selves (so far as can be judged by those living in 
exile) concerning the regime they want to see estab- 
lished following liberation. It is also regrettable 
that some extremist newspapers in Algiers, in the 
heat of conflict, have attributed Washington’s non- 
recognition policy to imperialistic motives. It is con- 
ceivable that, once an international organization has 
been created, it might be thought desirable to inter- 
nationalize certain strategic key points all over the 
globe, among them Dakar. But there is no indication 
that this country has any desire either to acquire, or 
exercise influence over, any of the French colonies. 

One point, however, must be mentioned in this 
connection. France, obviously, was not prepared in 
1939 to defend either its empire overseas or its own 
territory in Europe against enemy attack. It could 
be argued from this that France, on the eve of this 


Page Two 


"tl 
eT 


war, was no longer a great power, and must expec 
to be treated as a country which requires outside 
protection. The French, however, do not want to be 
regarded as charity wards of the Western powers. 
They know that the British, too, were not prepared 
to defend Singapore, nor the Americans Pearl Har. 
bor. The French want to play a part in post-war 
Europe commensurate not with their physical re. 
sources—which in terms of manpower, industrial 
development, and military preparation are admitted. 
ly not those of a great power—but with the spiritual 
influence France has so long and so effectively exer- 
cised throughout the world. In the final analysis, 
perhaps the crux of de Gaulle’s controversy with the 
United States lies right here. Considering himself 
the trustee of a prostrate country, he refuses to ac. 
cept on its behalf a role he does not consider worthy 
of its brilliant past, or of the future he believes it 
can anticipate. Personal ambition may well be, as 
some critics claim, the key to his character. But at 
some points personal ambition becomes inextricably 
intertwined with his ambitions for France. 


IS THERE A WAY OUT? If the United States 
and Britain should decide to recognize the French 
Committee of National Liberation as the provisional 
government of France, it would be desirable, in 
fairness to non-de Gaullists, to make recognition 
subject to an Allied guarantee that free elections will 
be held as soon as practically possible. In view of 
de Gaulle’s intransigence in previous negotiations, 
however, it is doubtful that he would acquiesce in 
this condition. Yet only some such guarantee could 
reassure American officials who fear that the French 
Committee of Liberation, once recognized as a pro- 
visional government, might indiscriminately punish 
all Frenchmen who, willingly or unwillingly, worked 
with the Vichy regime. The existing dilemma is 
made all the more poignant by reports that many of 
the Frenchmen met by the Allies of Normandy have 
become prey to political apathy after four years of 
German rule. It thus seems equally in the interest of 
de Gaulle, and of Britain and the United States, that 
an agreement about civilian administration of France 
should be reached at the earliest possible moment, 
as the first step toward the country’s reconstruction. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


WILL U.S. GAINS IN PACIFIC OFFSET JAPANESE DRIVES IN CHINA? 


The most impressive aspect of the bombing of 
Japan by B-29 Superfortresses, the landings on 
Saipan in the Marianas, and the shooting down 
of over 300 Japanese planes which attacked our 
supporting task force in that area on June 18, 
is that these actions have been executed almost 
simultaneously with the invasion of western Europe. 
Our ability to strike effectively in both theatres 
at the same time is a tribute not only to the 


United States armed forces, the American produc- 
tion line, and the war effort of our Allies, but also 
to the judgment of those top political and military 
leaders who, in the darkest days, adhered firmly to 
the strategy of concentrating first of all on the defeat 
of Germany. 

This firmness in the midst of near-disaster lies 
behind the calm assurance of President Roosevelt's 
statement of June 12 that, by “carrying out our orig- 


detail 
that ° 
tion 
that 
ago. 


os 
am] 
© 
a> 


———7 
t expect 
Outside 
nt to be 
powers, 
repared 
url Har. 
OSt-war 
sical re. 
dustrial 
mitted. 
spiritual 
ly exer. 
analysis, 
with the 
himself 
S to ac 
worthy 
lieves it 
| be, as 

But at 
‘tricably 


d States 

French 
visional 
able, in 
>gnition 
ons will 
view of 
tiations, 
iesce in 
e could 
- French 
S$ a pro 
- punish 
worked 
mma is 
nany of 
dy have 
years of 
‘erest of 
tes, that 
f France 
noment, 
‘ruction. 


DEAN 


A? 

produc- 
but also 
military 
irmly to 
e defeat 


ster lies 
osevelt’s 
ur orig 


—_— 
 — 


jnal strategy of eliminating our European enemy 
frst and then turning all our strength to the Pacific, 
we can force the Japanese to unconditional surrender 
ot to national suicide much more rapidly than has 
been thought possible.” There was, it is worth not- 
ing, a long period of a'year and a half or more after 
Pearl Harbor when a different view of strategy was 
advanced in many quarters—when some military 
men, members of Congress and average citizens con- 
tended that America’s real war was the war against 
Japan. This demand was also backed by the isolation- 
ist section of the press, which regarded the “Japan- 
first” issue as an opportunity for sowing distrust of 
Britain and Russia and criticising the war policies of 
the Administration. Today it is only proper to record 
that the strategy adopted by the high command has 
proved correct, and that by taking the road to Berlin 
we have also moved much closer to Tokyo. 

PROGRESS AGAINST JAPAN. A glance at the 
details of the military situation in the Pacific reveals 
that we have now entered the stage of aerial attri- 
tion against Japan, and that our position is similar to 
that we occupied with respect to Germany two years 
ago. But there is a difference, for even though the 
June 15 bombings of Japan’s largest steel mills at 
Yawata cannot be expected to lead to daily attacks 
on the Japanese homeland for some time to come, 
the general outlook is incomparably more favorable 
to our side than when we began to launch our aerial 
offensive against Germany. 

The invasion of Saipan on June 14 is our strong- 
est challenge so far to the Japanese Navy, which 


‘after long avoiding combat may now come out to 


‘ 


fight. Saipan has stiff defenses and, according to pre- 
liminary estimates, may contain upwards of two 
Japanese divisions, but American troops have al- 
feady captured an airdrome and made important 
advances. Once the island is in our hands, however, it 


| will furnish a valuable base for air attacks on Japan 


(Tokyo is 1,465 statute miles distant), and possibly 
prove a springboard for further incursions into Jap- 
anese island outposts. Mindanao in the Philippines 
lies 1,470 statute miles to the southwest, and For- 
mosa 1,663 statute miles to the northwest. These are 
great distances, but the United States Navy has a 
vast range, as indicated by the fact that Saipan is 
over 1,100 statute miles from Eniwetok in the Mar- 
shalls, hitherto our most advanced central Pacific 
base. We have learned to overcome distances in a 
far more decisive fashion than ever seemed likely in 


the days when the virtues of island-hopping were a 


subject of popular debate. 


Page Three 


CHINA HARD-PRESSED. The gloomy part of 
the Far Eastern front is on the Asiatic continent. It 
is true that the Japanese are being pushed out of 
India, worn down in northern Burma and driven 
back by the Chinese in Yunnan, the province of the 
Burma Road, But in central China the enemy has 
taken the important economic and communications 
center of Changsha, according to a Chinese an- 
nouncement of June 20. It is still too early to say 
whether the Japanese will be able to retain the city, 
but the situation is grave. For, as American striking 
power grows, Tokyo seems determined either to 
knock China out of the war or to make the use of 
Chinese territory by the United Nations as difficult 
as possible. The capture of Changsha may deprive 
Chungking of vital areas, strengthen Japan’s hold on 
the south China coast where the United States Navy 
hopes ultimately to effect landings, and cause the 
loss of advanced American air bases on the central 
China front. 

Yet it is possible to be overly pessimistic, for the 
situation in China, although serious, must be judged 
in terms of the war as a whole. Nothing seems more 
unlikely than that the Chinese armies and. their lead- 
ers who have kept themselves in the ring on both 
feet for seven years will give up the fight when vic- 
tory is in sight. The Chinese know that, however 
dificult coming months may be, Japan cannot win. 

JAPAN ON THE DEFENSIVE. Whatever of- 
fensives the Japanese may carry through in China, 
it must be recognized that Tokyo is basically on the 
defensive. Although there is no justification for com- 
placency on our part, history may well record of 
Japan—as in previous years of its enemies—that its 
chief weakness is expressed in the phrase, “too little 
and too late.” The drives that have been launched in 
China might have brought catastrophe to the United 
Nations’ cause, if they had taken place in the sum- 
mer of 1942 in a swift follow-up to Tokyo's seizure 
of southeast Asia. Now, two years later, no such out- 
come is possible. What is at stake is not victory, but 
the length of time necessary for the United Nations 
to achieve it and the condition in which China will 
emerge from the conflict. These considerations, how- 
ever, are appreciated in both Washington and Lon- 
don, and it may be expected that Japan will con- 
tinue to feel the maximum weight we can throw 
against it. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


Washington Broadcast, by the Man at the Microphone. 
Garden City, Doubleday, Doran, 1944. $2.50 
Gossip of well-known and less well-known persons. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 36, Jung 23, 


1944, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera Micueces Dean, Editor. Entered as 
wcond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


ne month for change of address on membership publications. 


Ee ai 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


POLISH PREMIER MAKES GOOD IMPRESSION 


The Polish government in London is following here that the Polish government in London desires 
with special interest the development of Washing- the annexation of East Prussia and Upper Silesia, 
ton’s official attitude toward General de Gaulle, for The Russians have already indicated, in their state. 
the Poles see a similarity between their differences ment of January 11, 1944,* that they favor giving 
with the Soviet Union and de Gaulle’s differences East Prussia and Upper Silesia to Poland. The chief 
with the United States. Both Poland and France are issue at stake between the Russians and the Poles jg 
counted among the United Nations. Both are battle- that Moscow disapproves of some Polish officials, 
fields in the final Allied drive to crush the Nazis. notably Minister of National Defense Kukiel, who 
The groups which consider themselves the author- was responsible for the accusation of April 16, 1943 
ities of Poland and France—the Polish government that Russians had murdered Poles at Katyn; Min. 
in London and the French National Committee in ister of Information Kot, who was Polish ambassa- 
Algiers—are not recognized by the nations whose dor to Russia in 1941; and General Kazimier 
military forces are advancing across territory over Sosnkowski, the Polish commander-in-chief. The 
which the two groups respectively claim jurisdiction. Poles, for their part, feel that Moscow’s open dis. | 
The Polish government is eager to obtain from the approval of these officials constitutes interference in 
Soviet Union an agreement on civil administration their affairs. The Polish Cabinet, meanwhile, has yet 


Home ee te 


= 


=e 


a ee 
- ate 


———— 
or 


gah OS OE 


Rita ss ce 


| 
| 
hy 
if 
i 


ae aa Tlie 


during hostilities, just as the French National Com- 
mittee is eager to obtain such an agreement from the 
United States and Britain. 


CONCILIATORY SPIRIT REPORTED. The 
prospect for the Poles is not bright, although the nine- 
day visit here of Polish Prime Minister Stanislaw 
Mikolajczyk brought his government and the Wash- 
ington Administration into closer harmony. On the 
one hand, the scrupulous attention the White House 
and the State Department paid to the protocol de- 
mands of the visit—in tendering the Prime Minister 
a state dinner and granting him long audiences with 
our highest officials—pleased the Poles and may im- 
press the Russians. On the other hand, the reason- 
ableness Mikolajczyk displayed concerning the dif- 
ficult problems involved in re-establishing diplo- 
matic relations between his government and Russia 
pleased Washington. 

The Prime Minister correctly understood that the 
United States will not jeopardize its relations with 
Russia by a split over the Polish question, and he 
accepted that attitude. The decision about Poland’s 
future lies with Russia. 

The Russian-Polish controversy hinges on the 
question of sovereign relations between states rather 
than on specific boundary questions. The Russians— 
who are said to have been impressed by the support 
the Polish underground gives the exiled government 
—are reported willing to reach a compromise about 
their proposal of January 11, 1944 for a boundary 
drawn on the basis of the Curzon Line; and willing 
also to permit Poland to retain the city of Lwow and 
the oil and potash fields southeast of that city. 
Premier Mikolajczyk made it plain during his visit 


FOR VICTORY °* 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


to act on a resolution submitted by the National 
Council in London on May 17, 1944, barring Sos- 
nkowski from succeeding to the presidency. Miko 
lajczyk, on his return, may seek a purge of the Po. 
lish government, but it would be easier for him if 
his action could appear as voluntary, and not as 
taken under Russian pressure. 

PROBLEM OF THE UNDERGROUND. Miko- 
lajczyk himself is persona grata with Moscow, ac- 
cording to Oscar Lange, University of Chicago pro- 
fessor who visited the U.S.S.R. with Father Orle 
manski. Lange sought and obtained a conference 
with Mikolajczyk while the Prime Minister was here. 
Mikolajczyk, who comes from Poznan, in western 
Poland, lacks the deep-rooted distaste for Russia felt 
by eastern Poles, who recall the days when the Rus 
sians were their masters. 

For Mikolajczyk, the part the underground is to 
play in coming events overshadows every other con- 
sideration, including the reestablishment of diplo- 
matic relations with Russia. A ‘‘General Tabor” of 
the underground arrived here from Poland almost 
simultaneously with Mikolajczyk, and conferred with } 
Admiral William D. Leahy, the President's chief of 
staff, and other high military officials about the pos- 
sibility of arming the Polish forces in Poland. But 
the status of the underground, like the future of 
diplomatic relations, is a matter for Russian, not 
American, determination. The Washington Admin- 
istration can do no more than hope that the Russian 
and Polish governments will find a basis for coop- 
eration. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


*See * ‘Russia Proposes Polish Border Settlement,’ 


J 4, ’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, 
anuary 1 1944. 


