



































| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN mnt 
wat is An interpretation of eat international events by the Research Staff ine cP regs Pris te o7 
ough Subscription, Two Dollars a Year way. ‘mich. Office at New York, 

. ; N. Y. der the act 
Mere FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of Mach 3 WP. 
ht no 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
ard us 
Sut at} Vou. XVII, No. 25 Apri. 15, 1938 
-— THE STRUGGLE OVER SPAIN 
7 by John C. deWilde General Library 
i The role of European powers in the Spanish war is se c4a 0 Sei 
fora analyzed in this timely report, which surveys the efforts University of Michigan 
1S Was rs the pr agg st he ogg ream to stop the 
ow of men and munitions, reviews the Deutschland m Wi 
en he incident and the campaign against “piracy,” and sum- Ann Arbor, Mich. 
e CON. marizes the charges and counter-charges concerning 
of the foreign intervention. 
April 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents a copy 

hat of == 
di 
- CAN DALADIER STEADY FRANCE? 
ustria, : ‘ . 
nagn WENTY-TWO months after the formation of ular Front predecessors, fell because it could not 
conces| ~ its first government, the French Popular Front _ persuade Parliament to grant it the extraordinary de- 





relpi has been rent asunder and has fallen from power. 
. On April 8, after 26 stormy days as leader of the 
is p fourth Popular Front government, Léon Blum re- 
£ Spaia signed. Two days later, while Germans went to the 
polls to ratify the annexation of Austria—an act con- 
Fran} Swmmated during the previous French government 
crisis—Edouard Daladier, Radical Socialist leader, 
. formed a new cabinet. ; 
Although it is not the national union cabinet which 
. Hite} Virtually all Frenchmen desire—but on whose com- 
i position the Left and Right cannot agree—the 
demoe| Daladier ministry may possibly muster sufficient sup- 
mich} Pott to deal with the grave problems confronting 
y France today. Surviving a well-nigh fatal political 
setback in February 1934, when he was blamed for 
sanguinary riots in the streets of Paris, Daladier has 
won new prestige by his excellent performance as 
War Minister under all four Popular Front govern- 
ments. His present position at the most conservative 
wing of the Popular Front makes him peculiarly 
suitable to direct the gradual swing to the Right 
which the new government, composed of twelve 
Radical Socialists and seven recruits from the Center, 
seems destined to attempt. In the search for measures 
of fiscal control which will do least violence to the 
concepts of economic liberalism, Daladier will be 
aided by the presence of three former Finance Min- 
isters in his cabinet. All three—Paul Marchandeau, 
Paul Reynaud and Georges Bonnet—are members of 
a special “inner council’ of six, in whose hands the 
direction of public affairs is apparently to be central- 
ized. As Foreign Minister, moreover, Bonnet is ex- 
pected to follow the British lead with respect to 
fon-intervention in Spain and rapprochement with 
the European dictators. 


The Blum government, like two of its three Pop- 














cree powers believed necessary to meet the desperate 
budgetary situation. From the beginning, observers 
had predicted that it would meet with stiff opposi- 
tion from the Senate, which had administered the 
coup de grace to the first Blum ministry in June 1937. 
In a preliminary test of strength on March 24, the 
Socialist Premier suffered a decisive defeat when the 
Senate refused to raise the limit of advances from 
the Bank of France to the Treasury by the sum of 
9 billion francs—an inflationary measure, but. one 
which would temporarily replenish the state’s empty 
coffers. Instead, the upper house reduced the increase 
to 5 billions. 


Reluctant to go down to defeat on a minor issue, 
Blum accepted the change. He then formulated a 
comprehensive plan for the financial and economic 
rehabilitation of the country. Frankly admitting that 
he had been “led to abandon a liberal régime,” the 
Premier pointed to an indicated budget deficit of 
37 billion francs, and a flight of capital totaling 
80 billions at present valuation, as justification for 
the following proposals: 


1. A capital levy on fortunes of 150,000 francs and more, 
with graduated rates ranging from 4 to 17 per cent—ex- 
pected to yield 20 billion francs in 10 annual instalments. 

2. Suspension for two years of amortization of the public 
debt—providing 5.4 billions each year. 

3. Centralization of foreign exchange transactions in the 
Bank of France, to discourage speculative dealings and the 
drain of capital. 

4. Revaluation of the gold reserves of the Bank of France 
at their present market value—with a profit estimated at 
22.5 billions. 

5. Increased tax rates on incomes, inheritances and im- 
ports, together with imposition of a special excess profits 
tax On private munitions firms, and a move to decrease tax 
evasion by abolishing bearer securities and requiring their 
registration in the name of the owner. 








































—————— 














6. Modification of the 40-hour-week law to permit in- 
creased production in defense industries. 

7. Various social and economic measures providing, 
among other matters, for encouragement of the tourist in- 
dustry, price control, and an old-age pension system. 


Obstacles at once beset the path of these Popular 
Front proposals. An atmosphere of tension was en- 
gendered by spreading sit-down strikes which in- 
volved 100,000 workers seeking collective bargaining 
contracts in metallurgical, automobile and aviation 
plants. Popular Front supporters demonstrated in 
the streets of Paris. Sensitive to pressure from the 
French middle class, the Radical Socialist ministers 
in the Blum Cabinet took exception to the proposed 
capital levy and other portions of the program. 
When the demand for decree powers reached the 
voting stage in the Chamber of Deputies, on April 6, 
the Radical Socialist delegation split. Blum’s plan 
was approved, but only by a truncated Popular Front 
majority of 311 to 250. 


In the Senate, Joseph Caillaux led the forces of 
the Right in an onslaught on the government's pro- 
posals. Conservative critics termed them inflationary 
and particularly burdensome to the peasants, whose 
tangible property could not escape the capital levy. 
Others pointed out that disproportionately small sac- 
rifices were imposed on the workers. On April 8 the 
Blum government toppled under a crushing defeat 
by the conservative Senate, 223 to 49. And, in the 
course of his downfall, Blum adroitly set the stage 
for a major constitutional crisis. He challenged the 
power of the Senate, an indirectly elected body in 
which Right-wing and rural elements are dominant, 
to thwart the popular will as reflected in the more 
democratically chosen Chamber. 


Blum’s defeat should not be construed as a protest 
against the award of extraordinary powers to a 
French cabinet. It is, rather, a demonstration of 
Right-wing hostility to the social and political plat- 
form of the Popular Front. Sacrifices must be made 
before France can find stability. The question to be 
determined is how these sacrifices shall be appor- 
tioned among the nation’s classes. On that issue the 
conservatives and social reformers seem almost ir- 
remediably split. And so closely balanced are the 
two factions that progress in either direction is in- 
ordinately difficult. The Right can scarcely undo the 
work of the Popular Front as long as the parties of 
the Left retain their dominant position in the Cham- 
ber and in the country at large. The Left has proved 
impotent to solve the problems created by its social 
measures—problems which find their expression in 
the slackening of business activity and the flight of 
capital. The question at the moment is whether 
Premier Daladier can present a middle-course pro- 
gram to the country, giving full powers to his gov- 
ernment on terms which will win the support of both 


Page Two 








i 





the Socialists on his left and the Center elements op 
his right. ~ Davi H. POPPER 


THE “AYES” HAVE IT IN GERMANY 


The plebiscite of April 10, held on the question of 
Austria’s inclusion in the “Greater German Reich” 
—already accomplished in fact on March 15—gave 
Hitler the anticipated overwhelming majority of 
99.02 per cent in Germany and 99.72 per cent in Aus. 
tria. Out of a total of 49,279,104 ballots cast, only 
452,170 were in the negative, and 75,347 were held 
invalid; while 220,159 registered voters stayed away 
from the polls, in spite of spectacular efforts t 
achieve hundred per cent unanimity. The official sup- 
port given to Anschluss by the Austrian Catholic 
hierarchy played an important rdle in Austria? 
where the retraction obtained from Cardinal Innitzer 
in Rome on April 6 was not allowed to be published 
by the Nazi-controlled press. 


The Anschluss plebiscite, designed to impress the 
outside world with the totalitarian support enjoyed by 
Hitler, could not fail to gain the approval of a people 
whose national pride, crushed by the terms of the 
Versailles peace, has found satisfaction in Germany's 
absorption of Austria. By his appeal to German na 
tionalism, Hitler has astutely relegated to the back- 
ground those economic and political issues on which 
some Germans, at least, might conceivably oppose 
him. So long as German national sentiment is kept at 
fever pitch—and the alleged grievances of Germans 
outside the Reich provide ample fuel for future dem 
onstrations—such disaffection as may exist in Ger 
many behind the facade of totalitarian rule will per 
force be subordinated not merely to considerations of 
personal safety, but to those of patriotism. For Hit 
ler, in the pre-plebiscite campaign, emphasized not 
only his belief that he was the instrument of the 
Divine will—a reference thought to indicate a 


lesife 
for reconciliation with the Catholic church—but his 
conviction that, by swallowing Austria, Germany had 
won the war it had thought lost at Versailles. The 


Anschluss represents more than the climax of Hit 
ler’s personal success story. It is the fulfillment of 
Bismarck’s unrealized dream of an Austria ruled 
from Berlin. 


On the eve of the plebiscite the United States, fol 
lowing the example of Britain and Czechoslovakia, 
recognized Anschluss in two notes of April 6 aé 
dressed to the German government. In the first note 
this country based its acceptance of Austria’s absorp 
tion on the notification by Mr. Prochnik, former 
Austrian Minister to Washington, that Austria “had 
ceased to exist as an independent nation.” The Aus 
trian situation, in this respect, is held to differ from 


*Cf. “After Austria, What?’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, April 8, 1938. 
(Continued on Page 4) 





mn of 
ich” 
gave 
y of 
Aus- 
only 
held 
Away 
S$ to 
sup- 
holic 
ria,* 
LICZer 
shed 


s the 
ed by 
2ople 
f the 
any’s 
n na 
back- 
vhich 
> pose 
=pt at 
mans 
dem- 
Ger 
| pet: 
ns of 
- Hit 
d not 
f the 
Jesite 
it his 
y had 

The 
- Hit 
nt of 


ruled 


s, fol 
vakia, 
6 ad 
t note 





Washington News Letter 

















mes 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


ApriL 12—The informal conversations among the 
representatives of five leading American nations, 
held at Rio de Janeiro on April 11, are one indica- 
tion of the trend toward closer political association 
for the countries of this hemisphere. The Foreign 
Ministers of Argentina and Brazil joined with diplo- 
mats from the United States, Chile and Peru in dis- 
cussing means for finally winding up the Chaco dis- 
pute, lowering immigration bars for European refu- 
gees and insuring united action toward the success 
of the Lima conference. With this Pan-American 
gathering less than eight months off, Washington 
oficials are giving increased attention to its program 
and possibilities. More effective political cooperation 
among the American states, it is expected here, will 
daim the center of the stage. Events in Europe and 
the Far East have apparently strengthened the ten- 
dency of the nations in this hemisphere to draw closer 
together, if not to seek some form of “continental 
isolation’’ from the rest of the world. It is possible 
that the United States proposal for a permanent con- 
sultative commission, shelved at Buenos Aires, may 
be revived at Lima. 


Britain’s oil protest. It is no secret that a desire 
to keep the inter-American horizon clear of clouds 
was one of the principal reasons for Washington’s 
conciliatory attitude in the Mexican oil controversy. 
The bad feeling created by the suspension of silver 
purchases was counteracted by Secretary Hull’s recog- 
nition of Mexico’s right to expropriate the oil prop- 
erties; as well as President Roosevelt's reported 
intimation that the compensation demanded might 
be calculated on the basis of actual money invested, 
less depreciation. Calmer sailing seemed assured, 
when on April 8 Britain delivered at Mexico City a 
protest terming the oil expropriation “a denial of 
justice.” It had been expected here that Britain would 
in general follow the lead of the United States, and 
its decision to step out in front occasioned some sur- 
prise. Various factors have been advanced in ex- 
planation. Britain needs Mexican oil more crucially 
than the United States. Should supplies from the 
Near East be cut off in time of war, its navy’s prin- 
cipal recourse would be the fields of Mexico and 
Venezuela. Moreover, the expropriation move cost 
the British companies almost double what it cost 
their American associates. In the background, also, 
were the extensive land seizures in the Laguna region 
during the fall of 1936. British nationals were the 


chief sufferers, but to date London’s protests have 
failed to bring them compensation. The petroleum 
note may prove equally unavailing. Eventually it may 
be backed by attempts to boycott Mexican oil or other 
forms of economic coercion, but London is not likely 
to carry pressure on Mexico to a point where it might 
endanger possible cooperation from the United States 
in wider spheres. By contrast with Britain’s action, 
the American position appears conciliatory to the 
Mexicans. 

Meanwhile, conversations in Mexico City and 
Washington have brought no definite settlement of 
the differences between the two capitals. Before com- 
pensation can be made, agreement must be reached 
regarding the value of the oil properties and the man- 
ner of effecting payment. The only feasible means 
seems to be in oil, and on April 6 the Mexican gov- 
ernment ordered segregation of one-fifth of the pro- 
ceeds from exports for this purpose. But the com- 
panies condemned such a proposal as entirely inade- 
quate, and were standing pat in their demand for 


return of the properties. Cartes A. THOMSON 


The Philippine riddle. A partial answer to the 
Philippine riddle was found last week in an interest- 
ing exchange of telegrams between President Roose- 
velt and President Manuel Quezon of the Philippine 
Commonwealth. Some two months ago—on January 
11—Mr. Roosevelt surprised and mystified Wash- 
ington correspondents by announcing at his press 
conference that the economic ties between the United 
States and the Philippines would be continued until 
1960, or 14 years beyond the date of complete inde- 
pendence. The statement was promptly accepted in 
Washington and Manila—and also in Tokyo—as a 
significant straw in the wind, but the precise form of 
the proposed arrangement remained a mystery. From 
what the President said at that time, it was not at all 
clear whether he meant that the plan would go into 
effect at once, whether it would supersede the eco- 
nomic provisions of the Independence Act, or wheth- 
er it would merely be grafted on the provisions of 
the existing law. 

From the recent exchange of telegrams it is clear 
that the new agreement will modify but not super- 
sede the terms of the Independence Act. Mr. Roose- 
velt reaffirms the willingness of this government to 
approve a “general plan by which the elimination of 
trade preferences would proceed by uniform annual 
accretions of 5 per cent, from 25 per cent at the date 
of independence,” but he insists that, except for cer- 
tain modifications, ‘the export tax provisions of the 











Independence Act should remain substantially intact 
as constituting a necessary part of the program of 
Philippine economic adjustment.” This decision deals 
a blow to the Filipino members of the Joint Prepar- 
atory Commission who have held out for many 
months against the export tax provisions, under 
which the Commonwealth is required to levy a tax 
on all articles shipped to the United States after No- 
vember 15, 1940. It ‘is also a blow to Mr. Quezon, 
who has been maneuvering to secure a preferential 
status for the Islands, similar to that accorded to 
Cuba, while blowing hot and cold on the political 
issue of independence. But in his telegram to Mr. 
Roosevelt, Mr. Quezon reluctantly accepts the Pres- 
ident’s plan, thus breaking the deadlock between 
American and Filipino members of the Joint Com- 
mittee and paving the way for a final report in the 
near future. 


Whatever the recommendations of the Joint Com- 
mittee, the report itself is not likely to solve the 
Philippine problem. Any change in the terms of the 
Independence Act must be approved by Congress, 
and at present Congress is in no mood to grant sub- 
stantial concessions or to modify its position on in- 
dependence. On the other hand, there are those here 
who suspect that Mr. Quezon may have given way 
on the question of export taxes in the expectation 
that the plan will be brushed aside, and that future 
events in the Far East will eventually force reconsid- 
eration of the whole independence question. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 


THE “AYES” HAVE IT IN GERMANY 
(Continued from Page 2) 
that of Ethiopia and Manchoukuo, where the ousted 
rulers refuse to acknowledge loss of their territories. 
Recognition of Anschluss, according to the State De- 
partment, consequently leaves unaltered the Amer- 
ican policy of refusing to recognize territorial 
changes effected by resort to war. In a second note, 
the United States declared “it will expect” that Aus- 
tria’s indebtedness will be recognized by Germany, 
“and that service will be continued by the German 
authorities which have succeeded in control of the 
means and machinery of payment in Austria.” Aus- 
trian debts to this country total $64,493,480, of which 
$26,005,480 is owed to the United States govern- 
ment for post-war relief loans, the balance consisting 
of debts to private American citizens represented by 
nine different dollar-bond issues floated in the United 
States by Austrian provinces, municipalities and 
public utilities. It is expected that Germany will ac- 
knowledge its obligation to shoulder this indebted- 


Page Four 











| FC 








An 





ness, but will adopt the practice established with » 
gard to its own foreign debts by making arrang 
ments with creditors for partial payment in “blockeq@l@?™ 
marks. ‘ A 
Meanwhile, without waiting for the foregone mf 

sults of the plebiscite, Germany has proceeded, is} You. 
its usual thoroughgoing manner, to incorporate Ay} ~ 
tria’s financial, economic and military resources ing} CHI 
those of the Third Reich. General Goering, during 
his stay in Vienna, indicated that the Nazi gover 
ment would undertake intensive development of 
Austria’s iron ore, timber, magnesite and potash 
gearing Austrian production to the needs of Ger 
many's Four-Year Plan for economic self-sufficieng| 
German finances will be bolstered by Austria’s te} Apri 
serves of foreign exchange, which on February 28 
on the eve of Anschluss, totaled $33,523,800, as com ~ 
pared with the $2,021,000 in foreign exchange held 

by the Reichsbank on that date. Austrian troops wil} —— 
be integrated into the German army machine, whog [ 
access to Czechoslovakia has been greatly facilitated} 4 ] 
by the incorporation of Austria. The Reich Com} gigr 
missioner for Austria, Josef Buerckel, has deployelf to } 
every resource of propaganda and material induce} gy, 
ment to enlist the support of the Austrian workem} the 
who are promised employment and leisure activitie} ond 
in the “Strength Through Joy” movement. This pte} yas 
gram of exploitation of Austrian resources has beet} gha. 
accompanied by repression of all opposition, the mos} yj; 
spectacular move being the issuance, on March 2} fy», 
of a warrant for the arrest of Archduke Otto of 
Habsburg—living in Belgium—on charges of high} 1 
treason because he asked foreign powers to proted| thr 
“oppressed Austria.” The easy-going Austrians—inj met 
cluding the Nazis, who had apparently expectel) ing 
greater rewards for their efforts on behalf of Ap} effe 
schluss—seem to have been jolted by the rapid Ger} tog 
manization of Austria. It is too early to predict m} ma 
what extent promises of jobs and the ‘‘spiritual} set 
satisfaction of belonging to a Greater Germany will] fur 
compensate Austrians for the loss of their identity} dra 
One thing seems clear. Such opposition to Anschlusi} jeo 
as may develop in the future must come from with} in| 
in Austria itself if it is to prove effective. ma 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 7 



















American Foreign Policy in Canadian Relations, by Jame} . 
Morton Callahan. New York, Macmillan, 1937. $4.00 | @' 
A comprehensive and thoroughly documented survey @ ou 

an important subject, beginning with the American Rew the 

lution and ending with the reciprocal trade agreement @ an 

1936. It is a useful volume, although occasionally 7 es 

gi 





uneven writing and excessive adherence to the chronolo pos 
approach without ample clarification of issues. abl 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 25, Aprit 15, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nation San 


cip: 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasim Bugit, President; Vera Micuge.es Daan, Editor. Entered as second-class mat®) of 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at Nery York, N.°Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. Bri 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year life 








