





f Of 


fear 
ynce 
ited 
mis- 
may 
osal 

the 
tion 

the 
iga- 

the 


BS 








wNly. OF MICH. 


BRIOMIGAL ROOM 
—1945 +ENHRAL LISRARY 


General Library 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


University of Wichigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan JAN 4 = 1946 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 10 


DecemBer 21, 1945 





TRUMAN MAKES LONG-TERM AID TO CHINA CONDITIONAL ON REFORM 


HE decisive influence of the United States in 

determining whether civil strife in China can be 
settled peacefully is indicated by the new hopes for 
a Chungking-Communist agreement arising from 
President Truman’s policy statement of December 
15. This declaration has received the general ap- 
proval of Chinese government and Communist 
spokesmen and has been greeted by the American 
press as a welcome clarification of the United States 
position on Chinese affairs. It is noticeable, however, 
that many Chinese and American observers tend to 
stress those parts of the statement that express their 
particular point of view, while slurring over or com- 
menting in a minor key on parts with which they 
disagree. The statement must therefore be read as a 
whole, to reveal how it departs from, or reaffirms, 
recent American policy in China. 


HURLEY’S POLICY MODIFIED. The Pres- 
ident’s views signalize first of all, the development 
of a trend away from the methods employed by 
former Ambassador Hurley. This is not surprising, 
for it has been apparent for some time that the pol- 
icy of giving unconditional support to the Chinese 
government has failed and, if persisted in under 
civil war conditions, could only result in increasing 
our military involvement in China’s internal affairs. 


Such a prospect could hardly recommend itself 
to responsible policy-makers—especially in view of 
the emergence of serious American and Chinese 
criticism, and the obvious self-interest of the United 
States in effecting the speediest possible unification 
of the various Chinese parties and groups. Moreover, 
the situation in China has threatened to impede the 
improvement of American-Russian relations; for 
while Moscow and Washington seem to be following 
harmonious policies toward Chungking at the mo- 
ment, occasional statements by the Russian press and 


radio indicate significant differences beneath the sur- 
face. 

OUR AID LINKED TO CHINESE UNITY. The 
manner of Ambassador Hurley’s resignation and his 
inability to sustain the charges he made against the 
State Department before the Senate Foreign Rela- 
tions Committee may also have stimulated the ten- 
dency to search for new methods in China. It is 
clear, at any rate, that our support of the Chung- 
king government has now become conditional; for 
after emphasizing in the early part of his statement 
that we recognize ‘the present National government 
of the Republic of China as the only legal govern- 
ment in China,” the President concludes with the 
declaration that we will be prepared to aid in China's 
military and economic rehabilitation, “as China 
moves toward peace and unity along the lines de- 
scribed above.” This is a reference to the assertion 
that the United States considers it “essential” for 
Chungking, the Communists and other armed opposi- 
tion elements to cease hostilities, as well as for the 
major political elements to hold a national confer- 
ence to bring about unification. 

The President’s declaration also includes a number 
of realistic observations about Chinese political con- 
ditions, notably that Chungking “is a ‘one-party 
government,’ ’’ which should be broadened so that’ 
other political elements will receive ‘‘a fair and ef- 
fective representation.” He also comments on the 
crucial military aspect of China’s political differences 
with the remark that “the existence of autonomous 
armies such as that of the Communist Army is incon- 
sistent with, and actually makes impossible, political 
unity in China. With the institution of a broadly 
representative government, autonomous armies 
should be eliminated as such and all armed forces in 
China integrated effectively into the Chinese Na- 
tional Army.” 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 














tion of the President’s stand on the most widely dis- 


cussed feature of current policy: the presence of 


some 50,000 marines on Chinese soil. 


“The United States,” Mr. Truman declares, “has 


assumed a definite obligation in the disarmament 


and evacuation of the Japanese troops,” and the 
“marines are in North China for that purpose.” The 


policy of helping the Chinese government to achieve 
these objectives is to continue, but ‘United States 
support will not extend to United States military in- 
tervention to influence the course of any Chinese 
internal strife.” There is no indication in the Pres- 
ident’s remarks as to whether this indicates a change 
in the manner of using the marines, whose activities 
have been generally recognized as having an impor- 
tant political effect in China, or whether in the course 
of pending internal negotiations with the Commuv- 
nists and other groups Chungking can count on the 


kind of marine support it has received in recent 
months. 


No declaration of policy can be more than a 
prelude to action, and it is largely on General Mar- 
shall, who will be in China during the Chinese polit- 
‘ical discussions, that the task of translating this 
statement into effective diplomacy will fall. Presum- 
ably the Presidential directive to the General, which 


Page Two 

MARINES WILL STAY. The political and eco- 
nomic aspects of the statement suggest a return, at 
least in part, to the views of General Stilwell and 
former Ambassador Gauss: namely that our coopera- 
tion with Chungking cannot be unconditional, but 
should depend on the degree of unity established in 
China and the nature of the policies advanced by the 
Central government and the Communists. But this 
modification of position is combined with a reaffirma- 








nae 
SS —~4 


has not been published, goes into detail on 
issues. For example, it is not clear from the public 
announcement whether the conference of leadin 











Chinese groups that is about to take place in Chung. 
king is regarded as meeting the President's reques 
for a national conference. More important, the def. 
nition given to “fair and effective representation” of 
all elements in the government could be a crucial 
factor in the outcome of the negotiations. So far, 
political power in China has rested on military force, 
and it is unlikely that any group will yield its armies 
unless convinced that it will have the possibility of 
political survival without them. This means that 
China now faces the extraordinarily difficult task of 
making the transition from a military to a parliamen. 
tary approach to politics. 

The manner in which the United States conducts 
its China policy in the months ahead will be of far. 
reaching significance for the Chinese people as well 
as for our relations with them. It is no secret that the 
presence of American marines in the North China 
civil war theatre has been deeply resented by some 
sections of Chinese opinion—for example, by influ- 
ential student groups in various cities under the Cen- 
tral government. At the moment almost 20,000 stu- 
dents are on strike in Kunming, where they are de- 
manding the cessation of civil war, withdrawal of 
American troops, establishment of a coalition gov- 
ernment for China, and other changes. The existence 
of these views in circles that are probably for the 
most part neither Communist nor Kuomintang em- 
phasizes the deep desire of the Chinese people for 
progressive policies, as well as the complexity of the 
situation that faces General Marsha.l on his delicate 


mission. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


BYRNES SEEKS TO RECONCILE ALLIED VIEWS ON GERMANY 


The decision of the Preparatory Commission of the 
United Nations Organization, now meeting in Lon- 
don, to establish UNO’s headquarters in the United 
States was reached on December 15 in spite of argu- 
ments by Britain and a number of other nations 
which contended that this proposal would hasten the 
withdrawal of the United States from European af- 
fairs. Long before the truth or falsity of this argu- 
ment has been demonstrated, however, this coun- 
try will have indicated by its actions in Germany 
whether it is again going to turn its back on Europe 
as it did after World War I, or participate in the 
reconstruction of the continent. At the present time 
tendencies toward recognition of this country’s obli- 
gations and opportunities in Germany exist side by 
side with a marked trend toward speedy withdrawal 
from the continent, and the success of the policy of 
“seeing the job through” appears to be a matter of 
touch and go. 

BYRNES CLARIFIES U.S. POLICY. The position 


of those who believe that American military suc- 
cesses in Europe must be followed up with construc 
tive political and economic measures has been 
strengthened by Secretary of State Byrnes’ statement 
of December 11 concerning United States economic 
policy toward Germany. Issued on the eve of the 
meeting of the Big Three Foreign Ministers, which 
opened in Moscow on December 15, this statement 
seeks to remove certain ambiguities and uncertainties 
that have heretofore surrounded American views on 
the future of the German economy. 

Various American spokesmen have, at different 
times, outlined economic programs for Germany that 
range all the way from virtual annihilation of the 
Reich as an industrial nation to restoration of the 
German industrial machine to its 1932 level of pro 
duction. From the Quebec Conference in August 
1944, when President Roosevelt used the famous 
Morgenthau Plan as the basis of his discussions on 
Germany with Prime Minister Churchill, through the 


—_ 


Many | meeting 


piding 


| many 4) 


e. F 
Pi, the 
assing | 
ican tro 
ing ord 
ment at 
“battle 
disease. 
Simil. 
define | 
standar 
the rest 
and the 
United 
Germar 
an €x 
Univers 
living 1 
ing the 
Germat 
did not 
States. 
this rer 
fully re 
pear as 
a ‘soft 
from tl 
Alth 
its 193, 
where | 
has bee 
aware | 
fumore 
ment | 
point 
should 
the am 
collect 
tated z 
comeb: 
tential 
thus de 
ture ec 
Byrnes 
termin 


EU] 
most ; 
that it 
‘bard’ 


POREIG!] 
Headquas 
eeoad-cl 
one mont 


> 





i mn Te eT OTe oO fehClUdE 


Pn rn wm 


of 


C- 
nt 
iC 
ne 
nt 
yn 
nt 
at 
ne 
he 


ist 


yn 
he 








—_—— 





meeting of the Big Three at Potsdam last July, the 
guiding principle of American policy toward Ger- 
many appeared to be the imposition of a “hard” 

e. Faced with the actual day-to-day job of feed- 
ing the Germans, however, as well as the embar- 
gassing possibility that rapid demobilization of Amer- 
ican troops might complicate the task of maintain- 
ing order among a hungry people, military govern- 
ment authorities have become disturbed about the 
“pattle of the winter’ against starvation, cold and 
disease. 

Similarly, certain efforts by American officials to 
define the Potsdam provision that the Germans’ 
standard of living should be no higher than that of 
the rest of Europe (excluding the United Kingdom 
and the U.S.S.R.) have seemed to indicate that the 
United States was altering its earlier policy toward 
Germany. The proposal of the committee of Amer- 
ian experts headed by Dr. Calvin Hoover, Duke 
University economist, that the German standard of 
living in 1932 be used as the yardstick for determin- 
ing the amount of production and foreign trade 
Germany should be permitted to have in the future 
did not represent the “official” view of the United 
States. But the fact that the conclusions reached in 
this report leaked out, instead of being directly and 
fully reported, made the committee's suggestions ap- 
peat as an attempt to swing American policy toward 
a “soft” peace which would be at the other extreme 
from the Morgenthau Plan. 


Although the proposal for restoring Germany to 
its 1932 standard of living won approval in Britain, 
where concern with economic conditions in Germany 
has been growing as the British become increasingly 
aware of their own desperate need for markets, the 
mored terms of the Hoover report roused vehe- 
ment protests in the Moscow press. From Russia's 
point of view, it was unthinkable that the Allies 
thould even suggest a step that would not only limit 
the amount of reparations-in-kind the Russians could 
collect from Germany to restore their own devas- 
lated areas, but might permit Germany to make a 
wmeback as a strong industrial and therefore a po- 
tntially military power. An inter-Allied stalemate 
thus developed over the key question of Germany’s fu- 
ture economy, and in his December 11 statement Mr. 
Byrnes attempted to find a new formula for de- 
ttmining the proper standard of living for Germany. 


EUROPE AS A WHOLE CONSIDERED. The 
most significant aspect of Mr. Byrnes’ proposal is 
that it takes as its point of departure neither the 
hard” peace line of the Morgenthau Plan nor the 


ee 


Page Three 














“soft” peace which might have resulted from adop- 
tion of the Hoover report. The main objective of his 
plan is a settlement with Germany that will empha- 
size not so much the elimination or rebuilding of the 
German economy, as the reconstruction and devel- 
opment of Germany's neighbors. Moreover, by sug- 
gesting that the liberated countries should be given. 
a head start over Germany on the road toward the 
economic recovery of Europe, Mr. Byrnes’ proposal 
may be expected to appeal to the British. At the 
same time, the provision that Germany should be re- 
quired to make “the maximum possible contribution 
to recovery” in areas once occupied by the Nazis 
should reassure the Russians on the question of repa- 
rations. The United States has thus come forward 
with a proposal which recognizes the main aspects of 
the complex “German problem” — the Germans 
themselves, Europe as a whole, and the interests of 
the non-European major powers. 


WILL U.S. RETREAT FROM EUROPE? States- 
manlike as Mr. Byrnes’ statement on Germany is, it 
leaves unanswered the crucial question that beclouds 
the future of the Reich and Europe—the question of 
what the United States is willing to do in concrete 
terms and over a considerable period of time to back 
up its verbal pronouncements. 

American occupation of Germany has labored un- 
der two handicaps — redeployment of experienced 
military government men and arrival of new troops 
who lack interest and training for what is admit- 
tedly a laborious job. This is already a thrice-told 
tale. Yet the seriousness of these handicaps calls for 
repetition as long as there is little indication of a 
civilian administration capable of replacing the de- 
pleted Army forces. As General MacArthur has dis- 
covered in his attempts to secure first-rate specialists 
from private life to aid in carrying out occupation 
policies in Japan, it is extremely hard to recruit 
civilians for tasks abroad now that business and pro- 
fessional men are preoccupied with their own prob- 
lems of reconversion. Yet so long as Americans re- 
gard the occupation of Germany merely as an onerous 
and disagreeable duty, they cannot reasonably hope 
to see the suggestions made by the Secretary of State 
for the future of Europe, however wise they may be, 
carried into effect. The danger is that the United 
States will lose by default one of the essential politi- 
cal rights it gained through its military successes in 
Europe—the right to participate in continental affairs 
before they reach such a critical stage that this coun- 
try must become inevitably involved in their settle- 


ment by force. WINIFRED N. HADSEL 





® month for change of address on membership publications. 


]> 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 10, Ducumpgr 21, 1945. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
arters, 22 East 38th Sereet, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Laer, Secretary; Vara MicHeLes Dagan, Eéiter, Entered as 
Woead-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











Washington News Letter 











U.S. EXPENDITURES ABROAD CONTRIBUTE TO NATION’S SECURITY 


When Congress in January begins to consider the 
agreement signed on December 6 for lending 
$3,750,000,000 to the United Kingdom, members of 
the House and Senate, as well as interested citizens, 
will certainly ask how much money and what value 
in goods this country already has sent abroad since 
enactment of the Lend-Lease law in March 1941. 
The total seems impressive when we lump grants, 
loans, relief expenditures and investments for eco- 
nomic development, and when we realize that figures 
available now are tentative and represent less than 
the final totals will show. Yet while our people may 
well be proud of the great part their money has 
played in winning the war and in the programs of 
post-war rehabilitation, to consider the use of that 
money as simple generosity would be misleading. 
Lend lease hastened victory by aiding our Allies who 
were in the forefront of combat during most of the 
war; expenditures on economic development abroad 
were designed to increase our industrial and agricul- 
tural strength for the conduct of the war; appropria- 
tions for relief represent a contribution toward res- 
toration of world stability; and the loans we now 
make will bring us a financial return both in interest 
payments and expansion of exports. 

UNITED STATES MONEY ABROAD. Accord- 
ing to available figures, lend-lease expenditures come 
to at least $42,000,000,000. For foreign relief Con- 
gress had appropriated $1,350,000,000 for UNRRA, 
and on December 17, subject to Presidential ap- 
proval, a similar sum was voted for 1946. Under 
President Roosevelt’s order of November 10, 1943, 
the Army distributed relief worth $52,556,900 to 
civilians overseas during the fiscal year 1944-45, 
and received an appropriation of $294,149,000 
for the same purpose in 1945-46. Since the Army 
submits bills for relief to countries that have the 
means to pay, the exact amount the United States 
spent on programs designed to prevent “disease and 
unrest”’ cannot be determined. The Navy has spent 
funds on the rehabilitation of natives in islands 
formerly belonging to Japan. The Foreign Eco- 
nomic Administration (and its predecessor, the 
Board of Economic Warfare) spent at least $3,000,- 
000,000 on the purchase of strategic materials from 
foreign countries, and on the development and ex- 
pansion of production abroad of materials essential 
to us for the conduct of the war. 

Despite the self-interest that inspired expenditures 
abroad, the decision to make them on the great scale 





undertaken required a sound understanding of the 
interdependent relationship of nations in the mod. 
ern world. If we took the view that lend-lease aid 
for instance, was simply a financial transaction, we 
would try to collect payment for the lend-lease goods 
we sent abroad, of which the United Kingdom te. 
ceived $29,000,000,000 worth and the U.S.S.R. $10. 
000,000,000. On the contrary, President Truman op 
August 30 said that to try to collect on lend lease 
might plant “the seeds of a new world conflagration" 
and he commented that, “although the nations rich. 
est in resources made larger contributions in absolute 
terms, the financial costs of war for each will be rela. 
tively the same.” The policy suggested by the Pres. 
ident is being applied in lend-lease settlements. Bel- 
gium, whose reverse lend-lease to the United States 
exceeded the value of goods received from this coun. 
try, has received from us in settlement materials 
worth about $42,000,000 that were on order when 
lend-lease was terminated on August 21, and surplus 
war equipment worth $45,000,000 which was already 
in Belgium. The lend-lease settlement with Britain, 
provided for in the loan agreement, writes off about 
$25,000,000,000 worth of goods. 

UNITED STATES LENDING. The United States 
is ready to make its money available to the world 
as a contribution toward international stability 
through three main sources: the International Mon 
etary Fund, to which the United States is to sub 
scribe $2,750,000,000; the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development, of whose sub 
scribed capital the United States will take $3,175, 
000,000; and the Export-Import Bank, with lending 
authority of $2,800,000,000. Neither the Interna 
tional Fund nor the International Bank has been e- 
tablished, but the Export-Import Bank has under- 
written a loan of $20,000,000 to Denmark, to be re 
paid in 30 semi-annual instalments at 344 per cent; 
has lent $50,000,000 to the Netherlands; $45, 
000,000 to Belgium; and $550,000,000 to France, to 
enable those countries to pay for materials they had 
on order from lend lease when the latter arrange: 
ment was ended. Brazil has obtained a loan of $38, 
000,000 for the purchase of 14 cargo ships, Chile 4 
loan of $33,000,000 for the construction of steel 
mills. The bank has also lent $100,000,000 for the 
purchase of 800,000 bales of cotton from the United 
States by eight countries—Belgium, Czechoslovakia, 
Denmark, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway 
and Poland. BLAIR BOLLES 











appea 


side V 


uled 

with 

cially 
rathe! 
catior 
not, 

of vi 
By D 
used 

“live 
first t 
extre: 
Evide 
ranks 
noun 
Peop 
milit 
Four 
but « 
affai: 
early 
Indo 
was 

Briti 
polic 
deci: 
cem| 


LEN 
vest 
food 
islar 
Yor 


