Dr. Willian V . LL) ae oe ee . 
Z - . _ 2 we % 2 way Library 
ee 


<r ‘Qa4 
DEC 3 u 134} Entered as 2nd class matter 
sealed De 


. 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


do 
ed 7 An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
eC 
ion of FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
ve that 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
to the jor. XXxI, No. 10 DECEMBER 26, 1941 
© most ~~ 


FAR EASTERN FRONT REQUIRES UNIFIED COMMAND 


In his ” the third week of the Pacific war, it becomes 
ngress | clear that Japan is steadily filling in the outlines 
ed the |of its bold strategic conceptions. While the assault on 
- other | Pearl Harbor failed to “knock out” the Pacific Fleet, 
ar. To jit has barred that fleet from effective interference 
‘whole | with the more vital operations in Southeast Asia. 
cember | Until sufficient planes and capital ships reach Hawaii, 
~vealeq the mid-Pacific as close in as Midway Island will be 
sched. | contested by Japanese air and sea power. By its steady 
k, and |seties of attacks on our island outposts, and by the 
k. This threat of another blow at Hawaii, the Japanese com- 
t least mand has continued to hold the offensive in a region 
‘mount | Where the American navy has been thought supreme. 
And meanwhile the gains which Japan has been reg- 


andi istering in the South China Sea stand out much more 
ominously than might have been expected on De- 
vill be cember 7. 
Output | JAPAN’S SOUTHWARD DRIVE. The plight of 
f war. Hongkong, where the British garrison is being swift- 
on the ‘ly overwhelmed, illustrates the cardinal feature of 
$ Over | japan’s successful drive into Southeast Asia. From 
om. the formosa to Indo-China, the sea lanes which supply 
ashing: japan’s expeditionary units have been virtually im- 
- Some Pune from attack, save possibly by submarines. Al- 
al and | lied naval and air strength has proved insufficient to 
1 pave disrupt these vital Japanese’ lines of communication 
North or to relieve beleagured Hongkong—a base which, if 
$ drive | maintained, could seriously threaten Japan’s extended 
upply routes and help to isolate its expeditionary 
s must | forces farther south. The Japanese command has thus 
y field. } been enabled to concentrate full attention on the task 
facili | of reducing the great bastions of Allied strength in 
single | Malaya and the Philippines. 
he Far In these regions, Japan—unlike Germany in Eu- 
ion of ftope—did not possess the great advantage of having 
he war | its forces poised on frontiers contiguous to the enemy. 
It was seemingly confronted everywhere with the 
ILDE difficult tactical problem of a sea-borne invasion. 


Only in Malaya, the most crucial section of all, did 
the quick surrender of Thailand immediately open 
an overland invasion route. Except for the early land- 
ings near Kota Bharu on the northeast coast, there 
have been no further successful attempts to carry Jap- 
anese units into Malaya by sea. Instead, Japan’s main 
forces were rushed through Thailand from Indo- 
China, and then rapidly deployed along the whole 
northern frontier of Malaya. Air bases in southern 
Thailand had apparently been prepared in advance 
for the reception of Japanese planes. The overland 
route, moreover, permitted the transport of heavy 
mechanized equipment, including tanks, in sufficient 
quantity to transform the Japanese divisions into a 
formidable striking force. Two weeks after reaching 
the frontier, these divisions had pushed roughly 100 
miles down the west coast, occupying Kedah, Welles- 
ley Province and the island fortress of Penang. On 
the east coast, an advance of some 45 miles had 
straightened out the Japanese lines on a front stretch- 
ing across northern Malaya approximately 300 miles 
from Singapore. The energy and determination of 
this Japanese offensive had confronted the British 
command with a critical situation, as it mobilized the 
full strength of its forces to check the advance and 
stabilize the front. 


In the Philippines, Japan was forced to cope with 
the onerous tasks of a sea-borne invasion. Surprise 
landings on the first day established bridgeheads at 
Vigan and Aparri in northern Luzon, supplemented 
later by the occupation of Legaspi in the south, while 
a fourth invasion force was landed at Davao, in 
southern Mindanao. All these points are sufficiently 
distant from Manila, center of the vital Philippine 
defense zone, to constitute no immediate threat, al- 
though Japan’s superior numbers may eventually ex- 
pand even peripheral areas into a threat of general 
encirclement, especially if air bases can be estab- 
lished. Following destruction of the Haruna, the Jap- 


Sa I aoe : 


eer a 


tener ee eer ss 


5. ty 
St 
Pat 
au 
Pa) 
’ 
tT 
Pa 
i 
4 
a 
bee) 
i 
i 
t 


. 
oH 
i 
5 
* 
t 
A 
4 


< es 


————————————————————______ 


anese command hesitated to bring its naval vessels 
into close proximity to the Philippine coast. Lingayen 
Gulf, from which the Manila defenses can be most 
easily approached, was the scene of an abortive land- 
ing attempt on December 10, but a far larger and 
more serious effort was being undertaken at this point 
on December 22. Should this second attempt succeed, 
the military position of Manila would immediately 
become critical. While Netherlands Indies territory 
was still uninvaded, Japan had made a preliminary 
approach to the East Indian archipelago by occupying 
the oil-producing sections of Brunei and Sarawak, in 
northern Borneo. Reports indicated that the oil wells 
and refineries had been destroyed, but this region also 
offered the strategic possibility of reinforcing Japan’s 
air strength in the lower reaches of the South China 
Sea. 


ALLIED DEFENSE NEEDS. Japan's swift suc- 
cesses have faced the American, British and Dutch 
forces with acute problems. The most urgent need is 
for reinforcements of all kinds, but especially of 
planes and man power. In Malaya a large-scale battle- 
front has rapidly developed, while in the Philippines 
the disparity of forces renders impracticable the de- 
fense of the many threatened points in the archi- 
pelago. Air power can most easily redress the balance, 
since it can be used equally to repel landing attempts, 
support ground troops, and prevent the multiplication 
of Japanese air bases, especially in the island regions. 
Fighters as well as bombers are needed, but while the 


Page Two 


long. Only in Australia and India are planes apd) structior 
men readily available as reinforcements, and the} Americ 
number of planes which these countries can supply publish 
is limited. Naval vessels can be transferred more eas. politica 
ily to the Far East but, without effective shore-based| country 
air support, their contribution is apt to prove costly, | of the 


Establishment of a unified Allied command ip United 
Southeast Asia, where American, British, Chinese and _— 
Dutch forces are directly participating in the current mee, 
operations, is equally urgent. Staff conversations dur.| > 
ing the months preceding the war had created a mini. vl " 
mum basis of Anglo-American-Dutch cooperation al- Christi: 
ready evident, for example, in the activities of Dutch Rie] 
submarines off the Malayan coast. These conversa. raphic 
tions are now being carried further at Singapore, 4 abc 
while British, Australian and Chinese representa-| pasic ir 
tives are conferring in Chungking. The Roosevelt.) coc. 
Churchill conferences at Washington will have to ad-| 
just the Pacific front to the requirements of global 


strategy, but unified action on the spot in the Far East] agairg 


is first need. An over-all strategic plan, affecting) »onth 
both operations and supply, is more imperative in| 799 00 
Southeast Asia at the present moment than in any} month 
other theatre of the war. Japan’s preparations for the} book, 
current drive have been carefully made, and its cam-) thusias 
paign is being ruthlessly pressed forward by a single’ 

command. Delay in achieving effective ABCD unity] 

of command prolongs Japan’s advantage, and might} Out of 


easily lead to disastrous setbacks at the very outset! —s 
! A W 


as a ct 


latter can be flown to the Far East, the former must of the Pacific conflict. i. t 
be carried in convoys over routes some 10,000 miles T. A. Bisson | change 
the wé 

THE FPA IN THE WAR | a 

The W 


With the outbreak of war, the task of educating 
American public opinion on international affairs to 
which the Foreign Policy Association has been con- 
tributing for twenty-three years assumes greater 
scope and importance than ever before. In the present 
emergency the Association is performing a twofold 
public service. It is lending members of its staff to the 
government on urgent special assignments; and it is 
expanding its services to meet the needs of the armed 
forces and of adult education groups of all kinds for 
trustworthy material on international problems. 

Three members of the FPA staff have been granted 


Can Portugal preserve its economic, political and 
strategic equilibrium between the powers at war? 


Read— 
PORTUGAL: BELEAGUERED NEUTRAL 
by A. Randle Elliott 


25¢ 


December 15 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy Reports, which are 
published on the 1st and 15th of each month. Subscription, 
$5 a year; to FPA members, $3. 


leaves of absence varying in length to serve the gov-| New 
ernment. General McCoy is a member of the five-| The 
man board appointed by President Roosevelt to in-| °76) | 
vestigate the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, and is | wentur 
rendering many other services to the Administration. _ hope t 
William T. Stone has joined the Board of Economic , “Yi 
Warfare as chief of the British Empire Division. China 
James Frederick Green is on the staff of the Office of | Hon 
Coordinator of Information. During the emergency | “ae 
Professor William P. Maddox, on leave from the deo}, 
Political Science Department of the University of ments 
Pennsylvania and a member of the executive commit: } — 
tee of the Philadelphia branch of the FPA, will carty, ~ 

on Mr. Stone’s work in New York, and will act as) The A 


, Uni 
assistant to General McCoy. Mrs. Anne Hartwell | “a 
Johnstone, Education Secretary, will serve as acting) jgang 


Washington representative of the FPA. Other addi-| tures, 
tions to the staff will be announced in the near future. / —— 

Working in close cooperation with government a 
and private agencies, the FPA is planning to issue} tscereg 
a series of RepoRTs and HEADLINE Books dealing) gp, 


with the problems of the war and of post-war recon- 


— 


nes and 
and the 
supply 
OTe eas. 
re-based 
costly, 


land ip 
1ese and 
Current 
ons dur. 
a mini- 
ition al- 
£ Dutch 
onversa- 
igapore, 
resenta- 
osevelt- 
re to ad- 
f global 
Far East 
iffecting 
ative in| 

in any 
; for the 
its cam- 
a single| 
D unity} 
d might 
y outset 


ISSON 


the gov- | 
he five- 
it to in-| 
r, and is | 
stration. 
conomic 
Division. 
Yffice of 
er gency | 
‘om the 
rsity of 
commit: } 
ill carry 
1 act as 
[artwell | 
5 acting 
er addi- | 
- future. ; 
-rnment 
to issue 
dealing 


r recon-) 


——— 
— 


struction which are of immediate concern to the 
American people. The first Report in this series, to be 
published on January 1, is a survey of the strategic, 

litical and economic problems confronted by this 
country, which has been jointly prepared by members 
of the Research Department under the title, The 
United States at War. The weekly BULLETIN will be 
devoted to searching analyses of current develop- 
ments, presented in the long-term perspective of his- 
tory, and will carry a larger amount of material on 
Latin America than in the past. Two HEADLINE 
Books—Germany at War, by Joseph Harsch of The 
Christian Science Monitor, and Russia at War, by 
Vera Micheles Dean—will answer in brief and 
raphic form the principal questions every one is ask- 
ing about these two countries. Another will present 
basic information about United States territories and 
possessions overseas. 


The growing importance of the HEADLINE Books 
as a channel for popular education on international 
affairs is indicated by the fact that orders for the 
months of November and December, totaling 
220,000 copies, topped the record of sales for a two- 
month period since the series was started. The latest 
book, The Struggle for World Order, has beer en- 
thusiastically received, and FPA members have placed 


THE F.P.A. 


Out of the People, by J. B. Priestley. New York, Harper, 
1941. $1.50 
A well-known British novelist, now equally well-known 
as a broadcaster, gives a warm-hearted account of the 
changes in the temper of the British people wrought by 
the war, and of the effect this may have on post-war 
reconstruction. 


The World’s Iron Age, by William Henry Chamberlain. 

New York, Macmillan, 1941. $3.00 

The author of Russia’s Iron Age presents the thesis that 
since 1914 the world has been experiencing the collapse 
of the predominantly liberal civilization of the nineteenth 
century. His realistically gloomy analysis closes on the 
hope that, in the midst of the chaos of our times, a new 
civilization may be in the making. 


China Fights On, translated by Frank Wilson Price. Vol. I. 

Hongkong, China Publishing Co., 1941. 

Vigorous and effective translations of Generalissimo 
Chiang Kai-shek’s war messages covering the period from 
October 10, 1938 to January 23, 1940. These public state- 
ments offer an excellent source of information on many 
aspects of China’s struggle, as well as an illuminating in- 
sight into the mind of China’s national leader. 


The American Empire, edited by William H. Haas. Chicago, 
University of Chicago, 1940. $4.00 
An informative survey of the outlying territories and 
island possessions of the United States—their physical fea- 
‘ures, economy, history, and social characteristics. 


Page Three 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: KEYS TO THE PACIFIC WAR 
Speaker: T. -A. Bisson 

Date: Sunday, December 28 

Time; 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over NBC 
For station, please consult your local newspaper 


quantities of small orders for extra copies to be given 


to their friends, or distributed to students and adult 
education groups. 


The FPA is not only planning to continue its work 
on all fronts, but to expand its services as rapidly as 
possible—provided the necessary funds can be se- 
cured for a task which today represents a major pub- 
lic service. In its publications, as well as in its weekly 
radio program, the FPA will be guided by President 
Roosevelt's statement of December 16 that “such 
forms of censorship as are necessary shall be admin- 
istered effectively and in harmony with the best inter- 
terests of our free institutions.’’ It will endeavor in 
every way to assist in the task of rebuilding world 
order which, according to the President's broadcast of 
December 9, must be begun ‘‘by abandoning once and 
for all the illusion that we can ever again isolate our- 
selves from the rest of humanity.” 


BOOKSHELF 


Uncle Sam’s Pacific Islets, by David N. Leff. Stanford Uni- 
versity, Stanford University Press, 1940. $1.00 
A scholarly and extremely useful survey of the small 
American-owned islands in the Pacific Ocean. 


Two-Way Passage, by Louis Adamic. New York, Harper, 

1941. $2.50 

A distinguished student of the problems created by the 
assimilation of European immigrants into American life 
proposes that the men and women who have settled the 
New World should, in turn, contribute to the solution of 
Europe’s conflicts. The somewhat exaggerated form in 
which this proposal is couched does not detract from its 
stimulating quality. 


Boundaries, Possessions, and Conflicts in Central and 
North America and the Caribbean, by Gordon Ireland. 
Cambridge, Harvard University, 1941. $4.50 


An extremely valuable companion volume to the stand- 
ard work on Boundaries, Possessions, and Conflicts in 
South America, by the same author. 


The Armies March, by John Cudahy. New York, Scribner, 

1941. $2.75 

Mr. Cudahy writes with feeling of his experiences as a 
diplomat and reporter in war-torn Europe. It is apparent 
from his book that he became a non-interventionist not be- 
cause of any sympathy for Hitlerism, but because he was 
convinced that Nazi Germany could be defeated, if at all, 
only in a prolonged and bloody war which would cost the 
American people far more, in his opinion, than they were 
prepared to pay. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 10, DECEMBER 26, 1941. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Beis! 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Largt, Serr*tery; 
Entered as 3econd-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 


National 
Vera Micuertes Dgan, Editor. 
*. Three Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union lator 


F. P. A. Membership, including Foreign Policy Bulletin, Five Doilars a Year 


lreengepeends: rac tects! Sees FE 


eaters 


ame ae 


~ pee pone a 6 


PALE oe 


ee, oe at 


gee eas 


¢ fen oe 


pee ree Ree 


ae! ian as » — = - — 
pe Reon Stes ee 2 SENS SS 


Se 


on eed 


38 
ee: 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 

National Press Building 

Dec. 23.—With war in the Pacific, this country 
must reckon with the possibility that it may be cut 
off from access to many raw matexials hitherto ob- 
tained in East Asia, Oceania and India. From these 
areas the United States has drawn all or a very large 
proportion of its supplies of rubber, tin, jute, manila 
hemp, silk, kapok, mica, graphite, coconut and palm 
oil, tung oil, tea, tapioca, pepper and nutmegs, as 
well as significant quantities of chromite, tungsten, 
manganese, sisal, wool, and tanning agents. The list 
seems imposing, but includes many materials which 
are obviously not of strategic importance and others 
for which alternative sources of supply may be found. 


RUBBER. About 98 per cent of our crude rubber 
comes from areas now invaded by Japan or in danger 
of attack. Although at the beginning of December, 
stocks in this country amounted to about 600,000 
tons and shipments of 125,000 tons were under way 
(of which part may be lost), total consumption of 
crude rubber is expected to attain a record of nearly 
750,000 tons this year. Beginning January 4 all rub- 
ber products will be subject to rationing, which will 
reduce civilian consumption of crude rubber from 
47,000 to 10,000 tons a month, thus effecting an an- 
nual saving of 444,000 tons. 

Conservation and rationing will be supplemented 
by the development of other sources of supply. The 
use of reclaimed rubber, which has already risen rap- 
idly during the past year, can be further expanded, 
although the amount made available through recla- 
mation must ultimately decline unless new supplies 
of crude rubber are imported. The output of synthetic 
rubber will probably increase from 12,500 tons in 
1941 to 30,000 tons in 1942, and completion of four 
private and four government plants is expected to 
raise this annual capacity to 80,000 tons by the end 
of next year. The construction of additional capacity, 
which will take a minimum of 18 months, is now 
contemplated by the RFC. The extraction of rubber 
from guayule shrubs grown in Mexico and the south- 
western part of the United States is also feasible, but 
no yield can be expected until the fifth year after 
planting. On December 17 the Under Secretary of 
Agriculture approved a plan for the planting of 
45,000 acres from which, however, only 5,000 tons 
of rubber a year can ultimately be derived. The De- 
partment of Agriculture has also been encouraging 
the cultivation of rubber in Latin America, but that 
region can hardly supply us with more than about 
25,000 tons of rubber annually for many years. We 


shall have to rely primarily on drastic rationing tg 
insure that supplies cover essential defense needs fog 
three to four years. 


TIN. At the end of November stocks of tin totaled 
about 114,000 tons, as compared with a record an. 
nual consumption of 100,000 tons. On December 1g 
the government took over control of all supplies, 
which will henceforth be subject to rationing. Con. 
siderable savings in tin consumption can be effected 
through the substitution of silver in solder, and the 
use of glass and other containers. In an emergency, 
12,000 tons of tin might be recovered annually from 
detinning old tin cans, although at extremely high cost, 
With the completion of the government smelter in 
Texas in the near future, the United States will also 
be able to rely on Bolivian ore for an annual supply 
of 18,000 tons of refined tin. Under these circum- 
stances, we should be able to dispense with further 
imports from the Far East for a minimum of three 


T HE 

ing 
of the | 
confere 
in Mos 
comma 


years. 


OTHER MATERIALS. The Far East has been| 
supplying about half of our imports of tungsten, | 
which is used primarily for hard tool-steels. It should | 
prove possible, however, to rely more heavily on 
Latin American and domestic production, and to em- 
ploy molybdenum as a substitute. The Far East has | 
also contributed about a third of this country’s con- 
sumption of chromite, which is needed for refractory 
bricks in furnace linings and for special armament 
steels. Latin America can supply only chromite of re- 


fractory grade. Stocks in this country are rather large | 


and should last for several years if supplemented by | 
increased domestic production and imports from 
Africa. Supplies of mica splittings, used for insula- 
tion in electrical apparatus, are also considerable, al- 
though the cessation of imports from British India 
and Madagascar would create serious, but not insur- 
mountable difficulties. Owing to the danger of com- 
plete interruption of trade with the Philippines, the 
government has already imposed drastic restrictions 
on the sale of manila hemp which is essential for 
marine cordage. Supplies of silk appear to be sufli- 
cient for essential military uses, such as powder bags. 
As far as the remaining materials are concerned, 
cessation of imports would for the most part create 
no insuperable problems. By and large, this country 
need not suffer any serious impairment of its wat 


effort even if trade with the Far East is entirely cut | 


off, provided existing stocks are carefully husbanded 
and every effort is made to develop new sources of 


supply. JOHN C. deWILDE 


| has set 


United 
tiation: 
on Dec 
ures née 
ler Ge 
comple 
gressic 
British 
views 
securit 
allay | 
regard 
| NA 
cow ¢C 
Stalin 
efforts 
dissip: 
decisi 
are pt 
grad t 
large 
still « 
Soviet 

} chara 
Th 
stabil 
) had ¢ 
Dece: 
the a 
reliev 


in-Ch 


