against 
a large 
industry 
don and 
tensively 
ors Ken- 
crisis in 
ring, the 
ly far to 
S$ are ac 
Juropean 
ources— 
an it is, 
icked be. 
t for the 


small for 


egin this 
cation of 
ny event, 
tion will 
h it does 


>OPPER 


ies would 
ind, Ger- 
in South- 
t of raw 
ir export, 
vernment 


ort trade, 
d. 


the major 
's for set- 
it have a 
herto ob- 
rat it has 
ork to pay 
of which 
10,000,000 
tside Get 
such as t0 
the Nazis 
er than 4 
refugees. 
re a wide 
ent would 


difficulties 


E WILDE 


ted. National 
Dean, Editor. 


ir. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XVIII, No. 14 


—_— 


JANUARY 27, 1939 


DIPLOMATIC BACKGROUND OF MUNICH ACCORD 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


A lucid and revealing picture of the diplomatic develop- 
ments leading up to the Munich accord—from the occupa- 
tion of Austria by German troops in March to the oppressive 
days of September, when events followed each other with 
dizzying rapidity, culminating in the “peace” of Munich. 


January 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents each 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


NAZI 


RADICALS STRENGTHEN CONTROL 


HAT the Nazi extremists are in the saddle in 

Germany was again conclusively demonstrated by 
a series of rapid developments during the past week. 
On January 20 Chancellor Hitler dismissed Dr. 
Schacht, conservative head of the Reichsbank, and in- 
stalled in his place Dr. Funk, Nazi Minister of Eco- 
nomics, whose task will now be to transform the cen- 
tral bank “into a German bank of issue uncondition- 
ally subject to the sovereignty of the state, in con- 
formity with National Socialist principles.” The fol- 
lowing day the radical, brown-shirted Nazi storm 
troops, which had been more or less in eclipse since 
the “purge” of June 30, 1934, were entrusted with 
the ‘‘defense education and training” of all German 
men over seventeen years of age who are not under- 
going military service or are not members of either 
the Elite Guard or the Nazi Flying Corps. Simultane- 
ously the government dealt the conservative, aristo- 
cratic army oligarchy another blow by practically dis- 
solving the Reich League of German Officers and re- 
quiring all reserve officers to join the Nazi-led Reich 
Veterans League. Of his own accord Hitler is now 
carrying out the program which Captain Roehm and 
other Nazi extremists sought, at the cost of their 
lives, to carry out in June 1934. 


The departure of Schacht had long been expected. 
Like many other conservatives, he originally put his 
services and financial acumen at the disposal of the 
Nazis in the hope of guiding their economic program 
along reasonable lines. As head of the Reichsbank 
and Acting Minister of Economics he strove to keep 
public expenditures within bounds and arrest the 
growing trend toward regimentation of business 
necessitated by the Nazi determination to achieve 
rearmament and economic recovery within the frame- 
work of a closed economy. Although anxious to safe- 
guard private initiative, Schacht himself was com- 
pelled to take many of the measures which enlisted 


industry, agriculture and foreign trade in the service 
of the state. After his resignation as Minister of Eco- 
nomics in September 1937, he still remained head of 
the Reichsbank. 


For a while he appeared successful in his efforts to 
moderate the financial policy of the Nazis. In the 
spring of 1938 the government abandoned its poten- 
tially inflationary practice of financing part of its 
needs through short-term bills which could be repeat- 
edly extended and were not recorded in the Reich 
debt returns. Instead, it undertook to issue six-month 
Treasury or “delivery” certificates which had to be 
retired on maturity from the proceeds of taxes or 
long-term loans. The acquisition of Austria and 
Sudeten Germany, however, and the cost of mobiliza- 
tion in September imposed a heavy additional burden 
on the Reich Treasury. The amount of Treasury cer- 
tificates issued—some 3 billion Reichsmarks—far ex- 
ceeded the total originally contemplated. In 1938 
alone loans aggregating 6.7 billion marks had to be 
issued. In addition, it is rumored that the government 
has again permitted the drawing of short-term bills 
in payment for state orders. At the end of November 
1938 the total volume of money in circulation was 19 
per cent higher than a year before, even after dis- 
counting the increase due to Austria and Sudeten 
Germany. Since industrial production during this 
same period rose only a little more than 6 per cent, 
fears of possible inflation revived. 

Undoubtedly Schacht, who has never been cautious 
in expressing his opinions, protested vigorously 
against this ‘reckless’ financial policy and the rapid 
increase in the public debt. On his last visit to Lon- 
don in December he may have exposed too frankly 
Germany’s financial and economic weaknesses. Pos- 
sibly he also deplored the recent anti-Semitic ex- 
cesses, if only because they would produce a further 
drop in German exports at a time when the country’s 


trade deficit was already critically large. Hitler ap- 
parently thought it dangerous to keep such a poten- 
tial opponent in an office which is necessarily privy to 
the state’s financial secrets. Although retained as a 
member of the Cabinet and reserved for the “‘solu- 
tion of special tasks,” Schacht has now lost all prac- 
tical influence. The capitalists have lost their leading 
“advocate at court”; they will increasingly feel the 
heavy hand of the Nazi state. 


Whether the Reichsbank, which will be under the 
active direction of Rudolf Brinkmann, State Secretary 
in the Ministry of Economics, will now adopt a frank- 
ly inflationary policy is a matter for conjecture. In 
his letter entrusting Funk with the nominal leader- 
ship of the Bank, the Fuehrer sought to dissipate 
such fears by stressing the maintenance of price and 
wage stability as one of his primary tasks. Possibly 
the Nazis believe, however, that they can continue to 
offset the effects of increased money circulation by 
Draconic measures against rises in wages and prices. 
Unless the government is prepared to scale down its 
financial requirements — which seeems unlikely — 
monetary inflation may become inevitable. Public 
subscription to the last long-term loan of 1.5 billion 
marks, which closed on January 9, is said to have 
been disappointing, and the Reich is reported to have 
met a maturity of Treasury certificates on January 20 
only with great difficulty. Germany's public debt— 
50 to 55 billion exclusive of Austria—is not alarm- 
ingly large, but the rate at which it can be increased 
is limited. 

Significantly, the removal of Schacht as an obstacle 
to the establishment of a complete “war economy” 
practically coincided with announcement of the new 
measures to keep the entire adult male population 
physically fit for military service at any time. Hence- 
forth all young men are to get some pre-military 
training and all those who have discharged their 
army service will become members of the defense or- 
ganization of the Nazi storm troops in order to “pre- 
serve their spiritual and physical strength.” Thus the 
more radical Nazis entrenched in the storm troops 
will greatly strengthen their control over the coun- 
try’s military forces. The old-type army leaders, who 
tend to be conservative in both foreign and domestic 
policy, will see their influence further diminished. 
Their separate organization for officers, long dis- 
trusted as a possible center of opposition and the 
stronghold of a hated aristocratic caste, has now 
been relegated to the rank of a welfare institution, 
and its members compelled to join the Nazi veterans’ 
association. Clearly the National Socialists have 
again ridden roughshod over all opposition in their 
ruthless campaign to “coordinate’’ everything and 
every one for the prosecution of their “forward” 


policies. JoHN C. DEWILDE 


Page Two — 


MR. CHAMBERLAIN’S TROUBLES 

The diplomatic lull that has followed Prime Min. 
ister Chamberlain’s recent visit to Rome suggests that 
the British government is watchfully waiting devel. 
opments in both Spain and Central Europe. A new 
test of Mr. Chamberlain’s appeasement policy would 
be created by a Franco victory in the Spanish conflict, 
which seems imminent as the Insurgents advance 
toward Barcelona. The British government's willing. 
ness to accept a Loyalist defeat has been based on 
three considerations: that General Franco's con- 
servatism will safeguard investments and trade, that 
the nationalism of his supporters will preclude per- 
manent occupation by the Germans and Italians, and 
that his economic weakness will require British finan- 
cial assistance. Although Mr. Chamberlain is prob- 
ably less able now than at any previous time to sur- 
round a victorious Franco with “non-intervention” 
arrangements, he will certainly attempt to divert 
Mussolini eastward with minor concessions elsewhere 
in the Mediterranean. 

For the time being at least, Britain is following 
Germany’s lead in diplomacy, armaments and trade. 
Widespread fear of a new international crisis in 
March or April has accelerated government activity 
for military preparation and civilian defense. Much 
of the bureaucratic delay and confusion persists, be- 
cause the government is still unwilling to shift Brit- 
ish economy from a peace-time to a wartime basis 
by imposing rigorous regimentation and civilian reg- 
istration. Plans are being drafted for emergency 
evacuation of congested regions and settlement of 
children in rural areas; and the Civilian Defense 
Minister, Sir John Anderson, proposes the expendi- 
ture of £20,000,000 for steel to reinforce homes and 
offices against air raids. Sir Auckland Geddes, adviser 
to Anderson, has urged housewives to store food 
supplies as soon as possible. Reorganization of the 
army and expansion of the Territorials is continuing, 
while production of arms and munitions is being 
gradually speeded up. The first of 200 new Lockheed 
bombers is soon to arrive from California, where 
they are being produced at the rate of 25 a month. 
Germany’s insistence on construction of new cruisers 
and submarines, permissible under the 1935 and 1937 
naval agreements, will probably cause expansion of 
the British building progam. 

Germany is also setting the pace in commercial 
competition, for Britain hesitates to adopt Nazi 
methods except as a last resort. Threats of a trade 
war have been issued by Mr. R. S. Hudson, Secretary 
of the Board of Overseas Trade, as British and Ger- 
man industrialists prepare to discuss an agreement to 
divide world markets or avoid price-cutting. Al- 
though Britain’s import balance for 1938 was £43,- 
000,000 under that of 1937, thus strengthening the 

(Continued on Page 4) 


5 


me Min. 
ests that 
ig devel. 
. A new 
y would 
conflict, 
advance 
willing. 
yased on 
o's con. 
ade, that 
ude per- 
ans, and 
sh finan- 
is prob- 
e tO sut- 
vention” 
o divert 
lsewhere 


ollowing 
id trade, 
crisis in 
t activity 
e. Much 
sists, be- 
rift Brit- 
me basis 
lian reg- 
nergency 
ment of 
Defense 
expendi- 
mes and 
, adviser 
re food 
n of the 
itinuing, 
is being 
ockheed 
1, where 
| month. 
’ cruisers 
ind 1937 
nsion of 


nmercial 
pt Nazi 
a trade 
Secretary 
and Ger- 
ement to 
ing. Al- 
vas £43,- 
ning the 


Washin gton News Letter 


sibbee, 


——_ 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

JAN. 23.—Brazil and the United States. The 
forthcoming visit to Washington of Brazil’s Foreign 
Minister, Dr. Oswaldo Aranha, indicates that the 
United States is determined to follow up the general 
if somewhat vague gains made at Lima by attack on 

ific problems. Foreign Minister Aranha, who 
until late in 1937 was Brazil's Ambassador at Wash- 
ington, is the outstanding friend of the United States 
in the administration at Rio. His abilities, however, 
have placed him, it is reported, in a somewhat equi- 
vocal relationship with President Vargas; for in some 
quarters he is considered the Number One political 
rival of Brazil’s present dictator. 

Brazil is the most important single country in all 
Latin America. The largest in territory, with an area 
exceeding that of continental United States, its popu- 
lation is more than three times that of Argentina. Its 
wealth of natural resources, its 40,000,000 people 
representing the greatest potential market in Latin 
America, and its exposed geographical position make 
it at the same time the most tempting and the most 
accessible prize in the Western Hemisphere. Brazil 
has been traditionally the best friend of the United 
States among the Latin American nations. Yet for a 
time Nazi penetration cut deeper there than in any 
other Latin American country. At Lima the Brazilian 
delegation gave signs of wavering in the country’s 
traditional alignment with the United States. It was 
a Brazilian representative, widely regarded as the 
mouthpiece of President Vargas, who more than any 
other delegate at the Conference took apparent pains 
to defend German and Italian interests. Although 
Brazil has moved within the past year to check Nazi 
propaganda activities within its own borders, the Ger- 
man commercial offensive has continued with un- 
abated vigor. Despite Brazil's large favorable trade 
balance with the United States, German imports into 
the country exceeded American, both for 1936 and 
1937, and during 1938 the rival nations have been 
tunning neck and neck. Germany has become the 
most important customer for Brazil's low-grade cot- 
ton, and also takes considerable coffee. 


Both the State and Treasury Departments at Wash- 
ington, and the Federal Reserve authorities as well, 
are making careful preparations for the projected 
negotiations. Observers expect the conversations to 
run the whole gamut of political and economic issues 
affecting the two countries. While cooperative de- 
fense against external aggression may be touched 


upon, the talks are expected to turn most decisively 
on economic matters. Washington’s reported plans 
for a new program of loans to Latin American coun- 
tries, designed to stabilize currencies, increase ex- 
change facilities and improve trade relations, will 
meet their first detailed test. There seems little doubt 
that Brazil would welcome loans and credits, among 
other purposes for the possible establishment of a 
Central Bank. But two obstacles stand in the way of 
further economic assistance. Brazil is now in total de- 
fault on the approximately $150,000,000 of dollar 
bonds included in the national government's external 
debt. The Export-Import Bank has made it an admin- 
istrative policy not to advance credits to countries in 
total default; and considerable opinion—particularly 
that of persons holding defaulted bonds—supports 
this course. In the second place, friction has arisen 
over exchange. In a supplementary provision to the 
1935 reciprocal trade treaty between the two coun- 
tries, Brazil pledged itself to supply sufficient ex- 
change for imports from the United States. But com- 
pensation agreements with Germany and Italy, and 
particularly a heavy rearmament program, have 
cut into purchases of American goods. Accord- 
ing to some reports, Brazil has pledged itself to 
a $100,000,000 expenditure for arms, with Germany 
supplying the bulk of material for the army. Nego- 
tiations will have to find a way over or around these 
hurdles before the way is clear for constructive steps 
toward closer Brazilian-American relations. 

The Nazis’ most powerful weapon in their Latin 
American trade offensive has been use of compensa- 
tion agreements to force the countries in that area to 
balance German purchases of their exports by ab- 
sorption of an equal quantity of German goods. But 
the Reich closed 1938 with a 432,400,000-mark trade 
deficit, a fact which may not be unrelated to Berlin's 
recent announcement that coffee imports would be 
reduced by 25 per cent. Such a policy would weaken 
Germany’s position in Brazil. 

German Advance in Mexico. Meanwhile, how- 
ever, German and, to a lesser degree, Italian com- 
mercial influence is reported to be gaining ground 
in Mexico. As a consequence of the $25,000,000 
oil barter deal with Germany — with which the 
Cardenas administration is reported to be not en- 
tirely satisfied — Mexico is being flooded with Ger- 
man goods, to the point that its authorities are 
now discussing the peddling of blocked marks and 
German products to other Latin American countries. 
A barter agreement with Italy will bring Mexico sev- , 


f 
r¢ 
14 


——— 


ae roe ae 


ee 


ee Sa te 


eral tankers in exchange for 4,000,000 barrels of oil. 
Italy is to share with Japan in a rayon yarn barter of 
two or three million dollars. United States trade with 
Mexico has meanwhile declined from $100,000,000 
for the first eleven months of 1937 to $56,000,000 
for the same period in 1938. Authorities agree that 
with British, French, Dutch and American markets 
largely closed to Mexican oil, the development of 
trade with the fascist powers is likely to continue. 
Settlement of the petroleum controversy, which 
would carry with it reopening of world markets, is 
regarded as the only fundamental solution of this 
growing problem. The rumored visit to Mexico of 
Donald Richberg as representative of the oil interests 
is viewed by some observers as a hopeful sign. 
Colonel Batista of Cuba is also reported to cherish 
the ambition of serving as mediator in the oil ques- 
tion during his projected visit to Mexico City. 
CHARLES A. THOMSON 
MR. CHAMBERLAIN’S TROUBLES 
(Continued from Page 2) 

position of the pound, the need for new export mar- 
kets becomes increasingly imperative. The Federa- 
tion of British Industries urged last week that the 
government stand ready to back exporters by threats 


= Page Four —. 


— 


of retaliation against countries that employ unfair 
trade practices. Since the most powerful weapon in 
such a trade war—abolition of the most-favored-na. 
tion clause in British treaties—would violate the new 
Anglo-American agreement, it is unlikely that the 
government will take any drastic action at the 
moment. 

To add to the many embarrassments of the Cham. 
berlain government, Irish nationalists undertook on 
January 16 to place bombs and placards in key cities 
throughout the British Isles. While defective fuses 
prevented widespread destruction, many of the 
bombs damaged strategic electrical plants and com- 
munication lines. Special guards protected the Cab- 
inet in London, as police tracked down the terrorists, 
believed to be members of the “Irish Republican 
Army.” These Sinn Fein enthusiasts, apparently dis. 
satisfied with the moderate and conciliatory program 
of Premier De Valera, seek to drive the British out 
of Ulster and to unite north and south Ireland under 
a republican régime. Although the present bomb- 
ings will hardly accomplish their purpose, they serve 
to warn the British that—as in 1916—trouble may 
again arise in their backyard in the event of a Euro- 


pean conflict. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Inside Europe, by John Gunther. New York, Harper, Re- 
vised Edition, 1938. $3.50 
The “peace” edition of this perennial best-seller on 
Europe’s diplomatic affairs carries the chronicle of inter- 
national events through the conclusion of the Munich 
agreement. 


Marihuana, America’s New Drug Problem, by Robert P. 
Walton. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott, 1938. $3.00 


The most comprehensive and scholarly survey of the 
technical aspects of the hashish problem yet published. 
Valuable as a reference book for those interested in the 
sociological, medical and chemical aspects of marihuana. 


World of Action, by Valentine Williams. Boston, Hough- 

ton, Mifflin, 1938. $3.50 

The delightful autobiography of an English journalist- 
soldier-novelist, covering such diverse subjects as pre-war 
Europe, the War and Peace Conference, the opening of 
Tutankh-Amen’s tomb, the Moroccan revolt, and the Amer- 
ican depression. There are interesting conversations with 
many famous personages, including Presidents Coolidge 
and Roosevelt. 


The German Reich and Americans of German Origin. New 
York, Oxford University Press, 1938. $1.50 


This collection of excerpts from documents on the Third 
Reich’s propaganda activities abroad is sponsored by a 
group of fourteen Americans. The material relating to the 
United States consists of a few pages of excerpts almost 
entirely from publications of the German-American Volks- 
bund. The volume would tell a far more coherent story if 
it contained more background material. 


American Labor, by Herbert Harris. New Haven, Yale 

University Press, 1938. $3.75 

Although it contains little that is new, this book pro- 
vides in a single volume not only the oft-told story of the 
growth of the American labor movement but more detailed 
studies of such giant unions as the United Mine Workers 
of America, the International Ladies Garment Workers’ 
Union, and the railway brotherhoods. Throughout the 
author maintains a detachment that is all too seldom 
found in popular books on the subject. 


Full Recovery or Stagnation? by Alvin Harvey Hansen. 
New York, W. W. Norton, 1938. $3.50 
A competent, expert discussion of the theory of the bus- 
iness cycle, accompanied by some interesting chapters ex- 
pressing the belief that investment outlets are becoming 
more difficult to find. 


Roads to a New America, by David Cushman Coyle. Bos- 
ton, Little, Brown, 1938. $2.75 


An interesting and moderate statement of New Deal 
economics, particularly the theory of large government 
expenditures. 


The Baltic States, by the Information Department of the 
Royal Institute of International Affairs. New York, Ox- 
ford University Press, 1938. $3.00 


This comprehensive survey of the political and economic 
structures of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania derives special 
importance from the fact that these small countries lie in 
the path of a possible conflict between Germany and the 
Soviet Union. The book contains much useful statistical 
data. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 14, January 27, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Laesiig Bugit, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHeLtes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


E81 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Febri 


