rican 
by all 
ne, 
an ob- 
[avana 
ily 20, 
of the 
aS not 
‘esting 
n that 
g with 
it COn- 
ent of 
ugh it 
ion is 
in the 
France 
A siatic 
might 
. order 
ile the 
French 
zis fot 


€ pro 
sponse 
in the 
| by a 
out, in 
States 
} COMm- 
e. The 
suaded 
ch an 
en eX: 
in the 
in the 
peace, 
o faith 
blems. 


»PER 


|FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XIX, No. 39 


_—__ 


JULY 19, 1940 


How did the Allies gear their economic machines for 
yar? Read: 


WARTIME ECONOMY OF BRITAIN AND FRANCE 
by D. H. POPPER and J. C. deWILDE 


25¢ 


July 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


. ROWUA Entered as second- 
PERIODICAL ARY class matter December 
GEMERAL LIBR 2, 1921, at the Post 

wniv. OF MICH. Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 
JUI 
. 9 
fj 104 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ram AYbsr. Wich oan 


PETAIN SETS UP NEW ORDER IN FRANCE 


tee seventy years of popular government, the 
French nation has again placed its destinies in 
the hands of an authoritarian régime. The Third 
French Republic, born of a humiliating defeat in 
1870-71, has vanished as a result of another military 
débacle. In four days of parliamentary activity at 
Vichy, in southern France, it was superseded by a new 
political system, embodying many of the institutions 
of its victorious fascist neighbors. The change was 
effected with due regard for legal formalities. On 
July 9 Parliament approved a draft resolution giv- 
ing Marshal Henri Philippe Pétain full power to 
create a new constitution for the French state, by a 
landslide vote of 395 to 3 in the Chamber of Depu- 
ties and 229 to 1 in the Senate. On the following 
day the two houses, sitting together as a sovereign 
National Assembly, formally enacted the resolution 
by 569 votes to 80, although dissident legislators 
succeeded in inserting a provision for a plebiscite on 
the new charter. On July 12 Marshal Pétain pro- 
claimed the new organic law by personal decree and 
appointed a cabinet responsible only to him. As 
Chief of the French State, he now employs the royal 
“we” in all government decrees. 

AUTHORITARIAN FRANCE. Only the broad- 
est outlines of the new political structure are revealed 
in the first basic acts of the Pétain régime. The 
Chief of State names the cabinet and is the reposi- 
tory of executive authority. He exercises full law- 
making powers pending the formation of a new 
legislature, and whenever he considers that foreign 
tension or serious internal crisis renders it necessary. 
Although he cannot declare war without the assent 
of the newly created assembly, he does have full 
command of the armed forces and may proclaim a 
state of siege. 

Reports from Vichy indicate that the functions of 
the future Parliament will be purely advisory. It 
will probably be organized on a corporative basis, 


following patterns established in Italy and Spain, 
with a lower house representing various branches of 
production and commerce and an upper chamber 
composed of a cross-section of the new French élite. 
Under these circumstances, its réle will doubtless be 
similar to that of Europe’s other totalitarian legis- 
latures—principally a sounding board for pronounce- 
ments on policy. 

PROGRAM FOR RECONSTRUCTION. From 
the vague statements thus far issued, it is apparent 
that many of the government’s fundamental doc- 
trines are still in a state of flux. The factions in con- 
trol at Vichy, like many others, are agreed that the 
old system of multi-party rule, which encouraged 
disunity and fostered irresponsible government by 
unstable cabinets, must not be resurrected. They are 
in accord as to the need for great concentration of 
authority in order to restore normal life and rebuild 
devastated areas. In referring to an “immense broth- 
erhood movement” in France, Marshal Pétain pre- 
sumably had in mind a widespread desire to supplant 
the war and post-war spirit of defeatism and pas- 
sivity with a revitalized concept of national solidar- 
ity. This sentiment the government is trying to crys- 
tallize by replacing the “liberty, equality, fraternity” 
slogan of the Republic with a new trilogy—a guar- 
antee for the “rights of labor, family and father- 
land’”—although the content of these abstract 
“rights” is still far from clear. 

In the economic sphere, the new régime has pro- 
claimed its allegiance to the principle of controlled 
economy. Strikes and lockouts will be forbidden; 
corporative groups of workers and employers will be 
formed under government supervision, as in Italy; 
and “international doctrines” and efforts to stimulate 
class consciousness, specifically by Left-wing activities 
will be suppressed. Youth is to be trained and in- 
doctrinated by the state. Public power will be exer- 
cised to prevent the spread of “intellectual and 


moral perversity.” A decree restricting important 
office to persons of French parentage appears to 
foreshadow an anti-Semitic program, while reports 
of numerous arrests indicate that doctrinal opposi- 
tion will be forcibly stifled. Finally, the new rulers 
of France assert that the country must “be integrated 
within the continental system of production and 
exchange” and “return to her agricultural and peas- 
ant character primarily’—a broad intimation that 
they will accept a position of subordination to Ger- 
many as a rural appendage of that nation’s projected 
European Grossraumwirtschaft. 

MEN AROUND PETAIN. Whatever the ulti- 
mate popular reaction, the government's prospects 
for survival remain problematical. Although the 
Pétain régime has courted German favor by signing 
the armistice, denouncing Britain, and proposing to 
move the seat of government to Paris and Versailles 
in the occupied area, it is regarded with suspicion 
by the Nazi press. In France it will always be stig- 
matized as the government which assented to defeat; 
and in the economic crises that loom ahead it will 
inevitably be held responsible for France’s difficulties. 

What is still more important, the men around 
Pétain are not new leaders but old ones, who had 
participated in the political life of the Republic they 
now condemn. With few exceptions they are the 
men who favored the Munich accord and flirted with 
fascism as a possible counterweight to the measures 
of the French Left. Some, it was rumored, opposed 
the declaration of war last September and afterward 
sought to initiate peace negotiations with the enemy. 
The new cabinet, moreover, is far from homogene- 
ous in its political doctrine. One group, headed by 
Marshal Pétain and his Defense Minister, General 
Maxime Weygand, represent an extreme Right-wing 
Catholic and anti-Communist circle, standing for 
authority and hierarchy in the long tradition of 
French conservatism. A second group in the new 
government is represented by Vice-Premier Pierre 
Laval, designated successor to Pétain, who assumes 
active direction of French public affairs. This group 
speaks for the Right-wing parties of pre-war days, 
closely affiliated with large economic interests and 
opposed to social legislation which interferes with 
free enterprise. 

Finally, a third political group, composed of radi- 
cal, semi-fascist elements, has as its chief cabinet 


AXIS POWERS AND RUSSIA REORGANIZE EASTERN EUROPE 


While Britain, according to Mr. Churchill’s speech 
of July 14, prepared for war not only in 1941, but 
also in 1942, the nations on the European continent 
continued, in varying degrees, to acquiesce in the 
reconstruction plans mapped out by Hitler and Mus- 
solini. To Mr. Churchill’s firm statement: ‘““We shall 
seek no terms; we shall tolerate no parleys,” Virginio 


Page Two 


——— 


spokesmen Adrien Marquet, Minister of Interio, 
and Jean Ybarnégaray, Minister of Youth apj 
Family. Marquet was a leader in the dissident go. 
cialist movement which organized the Neo-Socialig 
party in 1933, dedicated itself to “order, authority, 
nation,” assailed parliamentary institutions, and ey. 
pressed admiration for Hitler’s success; while 
Ybarnégaray acted as a spokesman of the fascig 
Croix de Feu in the Chamber of Deputies. Dis 
patches reaching this country via Berlin report the 
formation of a so-called “French uniform party” by 
members of this radical group, under Marcel Déat 
whose pacifism in pre-war diplomatic crises was 
epitomized in his statement that he did not want 
to “die for Danzig.” Such an organization, if given 
a monopoly of political and educational activity by 
the state, might perform the task of establishing full 
totalitarianism in France, serving as a counterpart 
to the Nazi and Fascist parties of the Axis. 
Although the full story of the French collapse 
cannot yet be told, certain points are clear. Faulty 
military leadership was only a surface manifestation, 
No individual was responsible for the French defeat, 
and no single movement. The French system of 
government, which encouraged factionalism and 
made stable, responsible rule difficult, was doubtless 
partly to blame. Unimaginative and even corrupt 
bureaucrats and parliamentarians could not supply 
the drive and efficiency needed for competition with 
the fascist states on equal terms. More fundamental 
still, France was paralyzed for years by bitter social 
strife and never achieved the union sacrée of the last 
war. The war effort was not whole-hearted: Com- 
munists on the Left conducted anti-war propaganda 
at Moscow’s behest, while extremists on the Right 
turned a willing ear to fascist propaganda. In earlier 
years, the Socialists cut down production by ‘raising 
labor standards too far above those in neighboring 
countries; and capitalist interests weakened the state 
by letting industrial plants grow obsolete while they | 
sent their liquid funds abroad for safekeeping. 
Consequently, the French economic structure lost its | 
vitality and was never reorganized for the needs of 
totalitarian war. Despite these failings, the French 
did make a worthy war effort, which is too fre: | 
quently underrated. Their experiences may provide | 
important object lessons for Americans. | 


Davin H. Poppsr 


Gayda, usually a spokesman for I/ Duce, wrote on | 
July 15 that the final drive against Britain would be 
launched in a few days, but that the British might be 


given one more opportunity to participate in “the | 


renovation of Europe’—on Axis terms. If Britain is 
to prevent this “renovation,” it will have to do more 
than repel German invasion. It will have to break 


— 
=—_— 


“the hold 


on the co 
APPEA 
events of 
that Hitl 
subsidiary 
objective, 
ing all | 
European 
spread Oo 
cut off tl 
endeavor 
Balkans, 
of oil a 
Munich ( 
ently tol 
and Fore 
torial cl 
satisfied 
meanwh: 
voking a 
trate on 
harvest. 
Simila 
Bulgaria 
tories lo: 
wars of 
many's 
in the | 
Britain | 
an expl 
the Na: 
spread 
to serve 
great fo 
pated o 
and Bu 
halted 1 
Union, 
of the 
It is by 
might ¢ 
and stré 
tion th 
terms, ‘ 


RUS! 


| This pc 


has pro 
hold o: 


| Latvia 


teady ¢ 
its mili 
ritories 
rr 
FOREIGN 


Headquart 
Entered a: 


See 


social 
e last 
Com- 
panda 
Right 
-arlier 
aising 
ring 
- State 
> they 
ping. 
st its 
ds of 
‘rench 
> fre- 
‘ovide 


PER 


a 
_ — 


on the continent. 

APPEASEMENT IN THE BALKANS. The 
events of the past week make it increasingly clear 
that Hitler does not intend to be diverted by any 
subsidiary clashes on the periphery from his main 
objective, which is that of crushing Britain and end- 
ing all possibility of British intervention on the 
Furopean continent. Just as the Nazis “prevented the 
spread of war’ to Scandinavia, which might have 
cut off their imports of iron ore, so now they are 
endeavoring to check the spread of war to the 
Balkans, which might interfere with their supplies 
of oil and foodstuffs. At the conference held in 
Munich on July 10, Hitler and Count Ciano appar- 
ently told the Hungarian delegates, Premier Teleki 
and Foreign Minister Czaky, that Hungary’s terri- 
torial claims against Rumania would be ultimately 
satisfied under a post-war peace settlement, but that 
meanwhile the Hungarians should abstain from pro- 
voking a conflict in the Danubian area, and concen- 
trate on the far more pressing task of getting in the 
harvest. 

Similar advice appears to have been given to 
Bulgaria, which hopes to obtain the return of terri- 
tories lost to Rumania and Greece during the Balkan 
wats Of 1912-1913 and the first World War. Ger- 
many’s insistence on maintenance of the status quo 
in the Balkans for the duration of its war with 
Britain has had the effect of temporarily stabilizing 
an explosive situation. From the point of view of 
the Nazis, it would be disastrous to have war 
spread to the Balkan countries, which may have 
to serve as the granary of Europe at a time when 
great food stringency, if not actual famine, is antici- 
pated on the continent. Suspension of Hungarian 
and Bulgarian claims, moreover, has temporarily 
halted the advance into the Balkans of the Soviet 
Union, which would doubtless have claimed a share 
of the spoils in any reorganization of this region. 
It is by no means impossible, however, that the Nazis 
might permit Moscow to obtain additional territory 
and strategic ports on the Black Sea, in the expecta- 
tion that, once Britain is crushed or brought to 
terms, Germany can easily oust Russia. 

RUSSIA STRENGTHENS HOLD ON BALTIC. 


| This possibility is not excluded by Moscow, which 


has profited by the lull in the East to consolidate its 
hold on the Baltic. On July 14 and 15 Lithuania, 
Latvia and Estonia, where the Soviet Union had al- 
teady obtained air and naval bases and established 
its military control, voted for inclusion of their ter- 
titories in the U.S.S.R., after the leaders of opposi- 


Page Three 
‘the hold the Axis powers and Russia have obtained 


tion elements had either fled or been placed under 
arrest. This vote coincided with new Soviet threats 
against Finland, and with reports in Moscow that 
Finnish workers were expressing dissatisfaction with 
deterioration in economic conditions, due in large 
part to the hardships and territorial losses suffered 
by Finland as a result of its war with the Soviet 
Union. It may be expected that, as Germany extends 
its economic control over Denmark, Norway and 
Sweden, Moscow will similarly extend its control 
over what remains of Finland, thus acquiring valu- 
able nickel and lumber resources. 

As the triple process of German, Russian and 
Italian expansion proceeds in Europe, several main 
trends become increasingly defined. The small coun- 
tries which had achieved independence in the course 
of several centuries as a result of the gradual break- 
up of the Holy Roman, the Hapsburg, and the Ro- 
manov Empires, are now being again absorbed into 
the new empires recreated by the Germans, the 
Italians and the Russians. Their fate demonstrates 
that self-determination, unless accompanied by in- 
tegration of great and small powers into a broad 
federation based on the principle of mutual assist- 
ance, ultimately proves suicidal for weak countries, 
which are unable to resist the political and economic 
pressure of powerful neighbors. As a result of this 
process of re-absorption of small countries into great 
territorial empires, the concept of national sov- 
ereignty, which had proved the principal stumbling- 
block to the formation of any European union or 
federation, is being rapidly obliterated. At the same 
time, the civil conflicts superimposed on international 
conflicts are undermining the concept of nationalism, 
which was such a powerful force in the formation of 
national states on the European continent. 

Out of the immense travail which Europe is now 
undergoing new political and economic forms are 
bound to emerge, no matter what may be the final 
result of the war. Most Western observers had as- 
sumed for decades that sooner or later Europe would 
have to achieve unity or perish in the course of 
suicidal wars. Their principal mistake was to assume 
that Europe could be unified only under the leader- 
ship of the Western democracies, and on lines pat- 
terned after Anglo-Saxon institutions. Today Ger- 
many and Russia are both ready to impose their pro- 
grams of political and economic unification on Euro- 
pean countries. The principal question is whether 
these two programs will converge, or whether a 
victorious Germany will eventually mobilize the rest 
of Europe in a thrust against Russia. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 39, Juty 19, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy. F. Lust, Secretary; Vera MicHELEs Dgan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


> 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News £. etter 


sibber, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

JuLy 15.—With the Democratic National Con- 
vention and the Battle of Britain monopolizing the 
spotlight, official Washington has nevertheless re- 
served a large share of its attention for developments 
in Latin America. The size and caliber of the Ameri- 
can delegation to the Havana Conference, announced 
on July 13, indicate both the importance Washing- 
ton attaches to the meeting and the direction in 
which its efforts will be concentrated. 

The delegation is headed by Secretary Hull, who 
will be seconded by Assistant Secretary of State 
Berle, regarded as the chief proponent of the cartel 
plan for economic defense of the Western Hemi- 
sphere. Other members of the delegation include 
William Dawson, Ambassador to Panama; Green 
H. Hackworth, the Secretary of State’s legal adviser; 
Leo Pasvolsky, special assistant to the Secretary of 
State; Laurence Duggan, Chief of the Division of 
the American Republics of the Department of State; 
Harry D. White, Director of Monetary Research of 
the Treasury Department; Grosvenor M. Jones, As- 
sistant Director of the Bureau of Foreign and Do- 
mestic Commerce; and Leslie A. Wheeler, Director, 
Office of Foreign Agricultural Relations, Depart- 
ment of Agriculture. Of these seven members, five 
are economic experts. 


PROBLEMS AT HAVANA. The Meeting of For- 
eign Ministers of the American Republics at Havana 
will take place in an atmosphere far more ominous 
than that of any previous Inter-American confer- 
ence. The American nations have been acutely con- 
scious of Nazi “fifth column” activities for some 
time, and increased German pressure on the Central 
American countries to refrain from any action inimi- 
cal to future trade relations with Germany brought 
a direct “hands off’ warning by Secretary Hull on 
July 11. This warning was softened only by the 
simultaneous notification to Great Britain that the 
conference was purely American in character, issued 
in answer to a British proposal of July 10 for the 
pooling of Anglo-Western Hemisphere resources. 

Many observers feel that next week inter-Ameri- 
can relations will undergo their most severe test at 
Havana. The United States has stated clearly its 
position regarding the transfer of European posses- 
sions from one non-American power to another,* 
and the Cuban proposal to place such possessions 
under a joint Pan-American protectorate has been 


*Cf. ‘‘Washington News Letter,’’ 


Foreign Policy Bulletin, June 28, 1940. 


widely approved. The steps necessary to carry oy 
such a plan, however, have yet to be devised. The 
United States is also committed to defend the Amer. 
icas, both against military aggression and political 
penetration through economic means. Unless these 
assurances can be implemented by effective actiog 
within a reasonably short time, Latin America will 
find it increasingly difficult to ignore Germany's al. 
ternate threats of reprisal and promises of a lucra. 
tive post-war trade. The surpluses of raw materials 
and foodstuffs, which are rapidly accumulating in 
Latin America while the European market dwindles, 
have placed many of these countries in a vulnerable 
economic position. 


ELECTIONS IN CUBA AND MEXICO. The 
Mexican presidential elections, held on July 7, passed 
as quietly as might be expected in view of the bit 
terness of the campaign and the tension prevailing 
throughout the country. There is little to indicate 
that the results were influenced either by pressure on 
the part of the United States, which had been feared 
by the Mexican Left, or by Nazi activities. Accord: 
ing to the count of the PRM (Mexican Revolu- 
tionary Party) General Avila Camacho was elected 
by a seventeen-to-one majority over General Al. 
mazan, the Opposition candidate. The latter, how- 
ever, has by no means conceded the result, and there 
is a disturbing possibility that General Almazan will 
establish a rival Congress when the legal Congress, 
dominated by the Avila Camacho group, is installed 
on September 1. Unless a compromise can be formu: 
lated before that time, serious complications may 
develop. One compromise proposal, which is hardly 
likely to find much support in the Avila Camacho 
camp, involves the selection of a Provisional Presi 
dent to take office for a year or two at the expiration 
of President Cardenas’ term on December 1. 


Early returns on the Cuban election, held July 14, 
indicate a victory for Colonel Fulgencio Batista by 
a margin of perhaps 50 per cent over Dr. Ramon 


Grau San Martin, the Opposition candidate. Aside | 


from the inevitable charges of terrorism and interfer 
ence at the polls by the Opposition, the contest was 
relatively calm and the outcome appears clear-cut 
Despite Communist support, which may have been 
purely a political expedient, little ideological signif 
cance is attached to Batista’s defeat of Dr. Grau. Both 


have pledged cooperation with the United States and | 


foreign capital, and business interests do not appeaf 
apprehensive of Batista’s alleged Leftist tendencies. 
Howarp J. TRUEBLOOD 


| FORE 


An inter pr 


Cataclysr 
thresholc 
reaching 
political 

States in 


Jul 


RITA 
a p' 
within \ 
peace se 
significa: 
Tokyo 4 
and mo: 
axis, ha 
authorit 
them 11 
though 
while, * 
new de\ 
lowed t 
The 
result « 
siderabl 
that Cl 
or in tk 
military 
manufa 
munitic 
now in 
obstacle 
ment i 
certain 
sult of 
be firm 
anese | 
Japane 
ent Ja 
Japan’ 
fective 
embrax 
is mor 
the W 
friend 
Soviet 
histori 


