J il 





heir 
Still 
eve 


ply 


efi. 


also 
e of 


ichy P 


in 4 
nity 


‘oad 
‘ent: 
ents 
ited 
nev 
Vi0- 


Lin 


> the 


nse 
al 
nore 
Ness 


Entered as 2nd class matter 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 14 


—_—_ 


JANUARY 238, 1942 





FTER an initial public meeting on January 15, at 

which the position of the United States was em- 
hatically expressed by Under Secretary of State Sum- 
ner Welles, the Conference of Foreign Ministers at 
Rio de Janeiro has begun private discussions to nego- 
tiate definitive resolutions for adoption at the final 
session, about Januerv 26. The war atmosphere in 
which the Conference is proceeding was evident in 
the addresses delivered on the opening day. The wel- 
coming speech of President Getulio Vargas of Brazil 
contained a strong pledge of cooperation in hem- 
isphere defense; and the remarks of the Chilean, 


Uruguayan and Mexican foreign ministers all reflected 


in varying degree the theme of continental solidarity 
against outside agression. 


The first phases of the conference were accom- 
panied by an obbligato of military arrangements il- 
lustrating the United States’ progress in gaining stra- 
tegic security in the south. The formation of a joint 
Mexican-American defense commission was an- 





for 


nounced on January 12. A day later, Uruguay was 
granted lend-iease war materials unofficially valued 
_ at $17,000,000 to $20,000,000; and $550,000 more 
} was later allocated to Costa Rica, one of the first 


Mis | American nations to join the United States in the war. 


On January 16, moreover, Washington approved a 
$20,000,000-loan to the five Central American Re- 


4 publics to enable them to complete the Pan American 
call Highway as far south as the Panama Canal. 


iter: 
Susi: 
few 
for 
zine. 


— 


Ations 
Editor 


POSITION OF THE U:S.A. In view of the record 
of Axis aggression, Mr. Welles stated at Rio, “the 
only assured safety which this continent possesses lies 
in full cooperation between us all in the common de- 
fense” as “equal and sovereign partners.” Alluding 
to the extensive operations of Axis diplomatic and 
consular representatives in the Americas, he asserted: 
‘The pre-eminent issue presented is solely that those 
tepublics engaged in war shall not be dealt a deadly 





ARGENTINA QUESTIONS HEMISPHERE SOLIDARITY PROGRAM 


thrust by the agents of the Axis ensconced upon the 
soil and enjoying the hospitality of the American re- 
publics.” The Under Secretary of State stressed the 
uselessness of classic neutrality in the present circum- 
stances and set forth the broad program advocated 
by the United States at the Conference: severance of 
diplomatic, financial and economic relations between 
the American states and the Axis; cooperation in de- 
fense measures; suppression of subversive activities; 
increased production of strategic materials; mainte- 
nance of adequate shipping facilities; and alleviation 
of disturbances to the domestic economy of the Latin 
American nations. As a concrete step in this direction, 
Mr. Welles announced specific allocations of twenty- 
six important export commodities for delivery to 
Latin America in the first three months of 1942. 


Despite the lack of official information, prelim- 
inary reports from Rio de Janeiro suggest that, when 
the more than 100 resolutions presented by the twen- 
ty-one republics have been pared down, the bulk of 
the North American suggestions will have been 
adopted. In their entirety they represent an emerging 
system of collective security in this hemisphere. In 
essence, the United States is demanding that the 
Latin American nations collaborate in preventing any 
threat to the hemisphere’s strategic security and in 
producing a maximum quantity of materials vital to 
the war effort. In return, it is offering not only a mil- 
itary guarantee of the territorial integrity of the 
Americas, but economic assistance during both the 
war and post-war periods. 


The focal point for inauguration of the broad inter- 
American plan is the draft resolution for breaking 
relations with the Axis, sponsored by Mexico, Co- 
lombia and Venezuela (which have already taken this 
step). The resolution, presented on January 16 by the 
Colombian delegation, not only provides for complete 
rupture, but calls for consultation among the repub- 
lics before relations are resumed. Thus, the American 














————OO— — 
— 





nations would in effect apply collective sanctions 
against the Axis. There have been intimations that, 
should any American republic refuse to collaborate 
in this stand, the United States might use its tre- 
mendous power over inter-American commerce and 
transportation to exclude the noncooperative member 
from the benefits of the new American system. 


THE ARGENTINE STAND. Since, normally, 
the political, economic, cultural and racial ties of 
many South American countries are predominantly 
with Europe, it is not expected that the United 
States’ proposition will receive unanimous and unre- 
served approval. Foremost among the opposition 
forces stands the Argentine government. In public 
statements, both Acting President Ramon S. Castillo 
and Foreign Minister Enrique Ruiz Guifiazi had in- 
sisted that Argentina would preserve its neutrality 
and reject any proffered military alliance or any pro- 
posed status of “pre-belligerency.”” Under pressure 
from other delegations, however, the Argentine posi- 
tion appears to be shifting. On January 16 Castillo 
remarked that there were no insoluble issues between 
Argentina and the other American nations, and hint- 
ed that internal considerations such as the large popu- 
lation of Italian stock in the country made extreme 
action difficult. The next day he stated that Argentina 
was prepared to impose restrictions on Axis nationals 
who might sabotage the Allied war effort; and eigh- 
teen Germans accused of fraudulently using German 
welfare society funds for Nazi propaganda subsidies 
—detained last August but subsequently released— 
were arrested for the second time. The evidence in- 
dicates that the Argentines are prepared to agree to 
some modified formula on the question of a break in 
relations, in return for sizeable economic concessions. 


In seeking an explanation for Argentina’s role at 
Rio, it is always necessary to remember that the state 
of internal politics is often a determining factor in 
national policy. In Argentina, for example, the Cas- 


LIBYAN CAMPAIGN STIFFENS ALLIES’ MEDITERRANEAN FRONT 


Stalled after two months of heavy fighting, the 
British and Axis forces in North Africa are racing to 
bring supplies into the battle front before major ac- 
tion is resumed. In recent weeks the Imperial troops, 
harassed by sand storms and by German planes ap- 
parently withdrawn from the Russian front, have 


Page Two 





3 FPA DISCUSSION PACKETS 


for 
teachers, study groups and 
club meetings 


on 
1. The Pacific War: 2. Our Defense Effort: 
3. The Future Peace 


25c each 

















—$——— 


tillo régime—made up of a small, conservative, by 
by no means fascist clique—has adopted severe tp, 
pressive measures to preserve its grip on power. The 
Opposition in Argentina consists of two groups: th, 
numerically slight but militant army-nationalist forges 
of the Right, with ideas akin to those of the Europea, 
totalitarians; and a mass of pro-Allied, pro-demo. 
cratic Argentines, whose principal outlets for poli 
tical expression are the great Buenos Aires press and 
the opposition Radical party spokesmen. 
The second group, it is believed, comprises a clea 
majority of all politically conscious Argentines, by 
has hitherto lacked honest and forceful leaders 
Nevertheless, in recent months Vice Presiden 
Castillo has been compelled to take increasingly 
harsh steps to prevent an upsurge of hostile activity 
from this quarter. Among these have been a pol 
icy of electoral fraud, under which the conserva 
tive party carried the Buenos Aires provincial elec 
tions on December 7 last; the rumored intervention 
of the federal government in several of the remaining 
Radical provinces, to prevent them from returning; 
majority of Radical deputies in the Congressiona 
election of March 1942; and—-most severely felt— 
proclamation of a state of siege giving broad police 
powers to Castillo’s government. As a consequence, 
the press and radio have been severely muzzled in 
Argentina, while the right of public assembly is dras 
tically restricted. To some extent these prohibitions 
may be motivated by pro-fascist sentiment among 
government officials. Certainly the forced neutrality 
of opinion which the Argentine administration is at 
tempting to impose tends to play into the hands of 
the Axis, which would like nothing better than to see 
Latin America remain impartial. But by all indica 
tions Castillo’s policy is determined not so much by; 
desire to aid the aggressors as to keep his government 
in power by suppressing pro-Allied manifestations— 
which in almost every case are also manifestations 
against him and his associates. PDavip H. PopPER 





/ 


made little headway against the rear guard Axi) 


units in Agedabia, on the Gulf of Sidra. Meanwhile’ : 


General Erwin Rommel, in need of immediate rein-| 
forcements, had to withdraw to El Agheila—47‘ 
miles from the Axis base of Tripoli. 


Both British and Axis troops have attempted to 
straighten the kinks in their supply lines. On January, 
17 the Imperial army wiped out a possible threat] 
to its rear and considerably shortened its 450-mile| 
supply line by forcing the surrender of Halfaya Pass, 
the last Axis-held position in Egypt. The fall of this 
rocky stronghold makes it possible for the British t0 
use the coastal Libyan highway to rush fresh South 
African and Free French troops to advanced units 
near El Agheila. The British supply route by sea—538 











ngly 
IVvity 
pol. 
>rVa- 
elec. 
ition 
ning 
ng i 
Ona! 
“lt— 
lice 
nice, 
d in 
dras. 
tions 
noNng 
ality 
iS at 
Is of 
D see 
dica- 


nent 
ns— 
tions 
ER 








a 
—_ 





miles from Alexandria to Benghazi—is more vulner- 


| able to aerial attack by Axis planes based in Crete. 


ATTACKS ON MALTA. In a determined effort 
to speed supplies to General Rommel by shortening 
the “Libya Ferry,” the German and Italian air forces 
have launched an intensive attack against Malta, the 
British island fortress midway between Gibraltar and 
the Suez Canal. Only 60 miles from Sicily and 198 
miles from Tripoli, Malta has long been a thorn in 
the side of the Axis. The chief Axis shipping lane, 
extending 550 miles from Naples to Tripoli, carefully 
detours to the west of Sicily. The two more direct 
lanes, through the Straits of Messina (to the east of 
Sicily) and past the heel of the Italian boot, have 
been exposed to effective British naval action guided 
by R.A.F. planes based at Malta. The British claim 
that in December 75 per cent of the Italian ships 
taking the direct route to Libya were damaged or 
sunk, but this proportion has probably been reduced 
by the activity of new Luftwaffe units in the Med- 
iterranean. 

When Italy entered the war, Britain’s chances of 
holding Malta were considered slim. Only 17 miles 
long and hardly bigger than Staten Island, Malta 
seemed unable to withstand a heavy naval and air 
assault from near-by Axis bases. Yet the island fort- 
ress, the most frequently bombed point in the world, 
has undergone more than 1,200 air-raid alarms. Its 
240,000 inhabitants may sleep in comfortable under- 
ground shelters deep in the natural rock. The island’s 
three airfields, accommodating several hundred 
planes, are equipped with underground hangars. 

In Valletta harbor on the northeast coast of Malta 
are drydocks, repair shops, munition and fuel stores. 
The rock-sheltered harbor bristles with long-range 
coastal artillery and anti-aircraft guns. Although 
exposed to air attack, warships can still slip into the 
harbor for fuel and supplies. Air defense of the island 
has been strikingly effective. 

The final issue of the battle for Libya may depend 


| more and more on Malta’s ability to withstand con- 


/ 
Axis | 
vhile 
rein- 


475) 


d to 
uaty 
hreat 
-mile 
Pass, 
- this 
sh to 
south 
units 
—538 





tinual air bombardment. It is clear that the Germans 
aim to knock out the R.A.F., perhaps in preparation 
for an air and sea invasion, similar to that of Crete. 
Evidence that such a plan had been temporarily 
scotched was revealed in December when the R.A.F. 
destroyed 30 Junker troop transports (of the type used 
in Crete) in an 8-hour raid on Castelvetrano airfield 
in Sicily. Set in the center of crisscrossing ‘‘life lines,” 
Malta if it fell would give the Axis a strategic base 
from which to operate against the British Navy. An 
uncontested route to Tripoli would make it far sim- 


Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: WHAT IS OUR MAIN WAR FRONT? 
Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 

Date: Sunday, January 25 

Time: 12:00-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over Blue Network 


For station, please consult your local newspaper 











pler to send heavy reinforcements to General Rommel. 
Held by the British, Malta would prove a valuable 
advance base for an invasion of Italy. 


TURKEY’S POSITION. While Malta remains 
the Mediterranean danger spot and the Germans con- 
tinue to retreat in Russia, Turkey, an uneasy non- 
belligerent, may breathe more freely. Russian suc- 
cesses in the Crimea have made a German attack on 
Turkey less likely, since the Soviet Navy can again 
operate freely in the Black Sea. Meanwhile, the Turk- 
ish attitude toward Germany has recently stiffened. 
Although a trade agreement between the two coun- 
tries was signed on October 10, it is reported that 
Ankara refused to send Germany any chrome before 
1943 (and then only on condition that German war 
materials were first delivered to Turkey). The gov- 
ernment has admitted receiving lend-lease material 
from the United States and has turned a deaf ear to 
Nazi charges that this was unneutral. In contrast to 
other Balkan countries, Turkey has not been overrun 
by German technicians and “‘tourists.’’ An illustration 
of the government’s independent spirit was its cool 
reception to the German Press Mission which ar- 
rived in November. Finding it impossible to gain any 
control of the press and radio, the mission left the 
country abruptly after two days. 

In an effort to alienate Turkey from the Allies, 
Berlin recently charged that Anthony Eden had 
“ceded” the Dardanelles to Russia and arranged for 
British-Russian partition of Iran. To counter these 
reports Sir Hughe Knatchbull-Hugessen, British Am- 
bassador to Turkey, had attended the discussions in 
Moscow and reported them fully to Foreign Minister 
Shukru Saracoglu. He denied the German charges, 
and emphasized that leaders of the U.S.S.R. were 
confident that Turkey would resist aggression. 

For the present, Turkey appears not to be threat- 
ened with attack, due to the German reverses in Rus- 
sia and Libya. The importance of this respite cannot 
be overestimated. A successful German drive against 
the well-trained but not heavily mechanized Turkish 
army of about 750,000 would nullify the British vic- 
tories in Libya, threaten the Suez Canal, and open the 


way to the oil of Iran andIraqg. Marcaret La Foy 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 14, JANUARY 23, 1942. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotruy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. 


Incorporated. National 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


LR 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





ee 
: 


una 
— 


sh i A a eR 


<< 
tess 


inom 


ca 


ee 


Washington News Letter 














JAN. 19.—In the second month of global war, 
Washington is still under the effects of the shock in 
duced by the country’s sudden readjustment from 
preparations for defense to full-dress war conditions. 
People are but slowly beginning to grasp the manifold 
implications of a struggle which has thrust on the 
United States not only the task of defending its bas- 
tions in the Pacific, but also that of serving as the 
principal source of supplies for the United Nations. 
Even those who for years had been anticipating the 
present emergency find their powers of imagination 
strained by the magnitude of the effort on which the 
United States is engaged, and by the seismic changes 
that the war is daily effecting in the international, as 
well as the domestic, landscape. 


WHICH FRONT COMES FIRST? Next to the 
question of actual war production, which after much 
controversy has been placed under the single direc- 
tion of Donald M. Nelson, chairman of the new War 
Production Board, the question that stands out in pub- 
lic discussions is that of the allotment of material al- 
ready produced among widely scattered fronts. This 
question was sharply raised during the past week by 
the protests of spokesmen in Chungking as well as of 
Chinese organizations in the United States against 
recent statements of Secretary of the Navy Knox and 
First Lord of the Admiralty A. V. Alexander, both 
of whom indicated that Hitler is the principal enemy, 
and that priority should be accorded to the war 
against Germany. This view has disturbed not only 
China, but also the Dutch East Indies and Australia, 
which fear that the Allies, by concentrating on Eu- 
rope and Africa, may permit Tokyo to seize strategic 
positions from which it would later be extremely 
difficult, if not impossible, to dislodge the Japanese. 
In their opinion Japan’s expansionist program, while 
linked for reasons of convenience to Hitler’s struggle 
for a “new order,” is an independent venture, which 
would be continued even after the downfall of the 
Nazis. 


Yet discouraging as the present prospect may seem 
in the Far East, it must be borne in mind that what 
happened at Pearl Harbor and may happen at Sing- 
apore has been due not so much to failure of human 
courage as to the initial difficulty of arousing the 
Western powers from complacency about their own 
potential strength as compared with that of Japan. 
Similar complacency regarding Germany in the early 
stages of the Second World War has been pretty 
well dispelled—although even now there are people 





in Britain and the United States who cherish ho 
of a German collapse from within. If today the West 
ern powers tend to consider Germany as enemy No. |, 
it is not because they are indifferent to the fate of the 
Far East, but because they believe that concentration 
of their available resources of man power and ma- 
terial—which are still admittedly inadequate—on the 
Russian and Mediterranean fronts may hasten Hit. 
ler’s downfall, and thus release them for a large-scale 
offensive against Japan. 


RUSSIA’S WAR NEEDS. The Anglo-American 
view about priorities of fronts is shared by the Rus- 
sians, who have so far carefully avoided every pos. 
sibility of a clash with Japan. The Russians believe 
that the war in the Far East will be a long war, and 
that the struggle against Hitler, which they hope may 
prove of shorter duration, should therefore take pre. 
cedence. At the same time, they have no illusions 
about the future. They doubt that the Nazis, in spite 
of many rumors to that effect, will stage an offensive 
either through Spain or Turkey. What they do antici- 
pate is a fresh offensive against Russia in the spring, 
and to meet this offensive—or, under the most favor- 
able circumstances, to drive the Germans out of Rus- 
sia—the Kremlin needs additional war material, 
which it hopes to obtain from Britain and the United 
States. 


In the allocation of war materials to many fronts, 
Washington has been anxious to fulfill Russia’s needs 
as adequately and promptly as possible. The chief 
difficulty is lack of shipping. And the renewed Ger- 
man submarine campaign in the Atlantic may serious- 








—__ 
VoL. 
—_— 


ican 
menc 
with 
unity 
slow 
of th 
agres 
prov 
ence 
face 
no d 
state 
the 
that 
Pres 


this 
repr 





ly interfere with such shipments as the United States 


can send to Russia via Murmansk and Archangel, the | 


two ports closest to the eastern front. Britain, which 
has shorter and more direct communications with 
these ports than the United States, has apparently 
been better able than this country to ship war ma- 
terial and foodstuffs to Russia. But British exports, 
in turn, are made possible largely because Britain can 


replace the goods it sends to Russia by imports from \ 
the United States. This makes it more essential than | 


ever for the Western powers to keep the Atlantic 
sea lanes open to their ships. So while Washington} 
would agree with Chungking and Canberra regard-| 
ing the vital importance of holding Singapore, it is 
felt here that, as the United States tunes up for all 
out war production, we must send material where it 


seems most urgently needed and can be most effec 


tively used. VERA MICHELES DEAN 








natu 
deci 
) into 


| sam 


to t 
| ing. 
gua 
lics 
Axi 
sibl 


flat 
bre 
ern 
lar 


par 


has 








