












FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL. XV, No. 47 


SEPTEMBER 18, 1936 





MR. BUELL GOES ABROAD 


On September 16 Mr. Buell sailed for Europe, 
at the invitation of the Geneva Research Center, 
to develop the plan of cooperation which was in- 
augurated last year. He will spend some time in 
Geneva, and will also visit several of the Euro- 
pean capitals. 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











emp 24 1936 


Periodical Division, 
Library of Congress, 


Washington, D. C. 











NAZIS RALLY AGAINST BOLSHEVISM 





ITH a great and impressive military display, 

the annual National Socialist Congress at 
Nuremberg came to a close on September 14 after 
a six-day session devoted to the glorification of 
Nazi achievements. One million devoted follow- 
ers of the Fiihrer trekked homeward again: their 
enthusiasm for Nazi principles rekindled and 
their future dedicated by Hitler to two tasks— 
the extirpation of bolshevism and the accomplish- 
ment of a four-year program directed toward 
greater economic self-sufficiency. 


In his opening proclamation to the Congress 
on September 9, Hitler proudly summed up the 
achievements of his régime. Under his leader- 
ship Germany had cast off the “chains of Ver- 
sailles” and had been restored to a position of 
equality and honor among the nations of the 
world. The strife between parties and classes 
had been eliminated and domestic peace estab- 
lished. Even German cultural life, he claimed, 
had experienced a renaissance. His proudest 
boast, however, was that he had brought to Ger- 
many economic recovery and not, he stressed, “at 
the cost of a single other nation or people.” He 
cited the reduction of unemployment from six to 
little more than one million, conveniently ignor- 
ing the fact that this decrease had been achieved 
at the expense of individual living standards and 
that many unemployed had been absorbed into 
the army and labor service. In pointing to the 
great increase in production and national income 
he failed, of course, to mention that both were pre- 
cariously dependent on huge and unproductive 
expenditures for rearmament and on a state 
credit already extended almost to the breaking 
point. In his proclamation Hitler did admit that 
Germany still faces a serious stringency of certain 
foodstuffs and raw materials, which he attributed 
to the unsympathetic attitude of foreign countries. 
Although frankly conceding that the Reich can 
never be entirely self-sufficient, he declared that 





“in four years Germany must be wholly inde- 
pendent of foreign countries in respect to all those 
materials which can in any way be produced 
through German skill, through our chemistry, 
machine and mining industries.” At the same 
time Germany would never “relinquish her de- 
mand for a solution of her colonial claims.” 


The keynote of the Congress was undoubtedly 
its hostility to bolshevism which speaker after 
speaker castigated as an instrument used by the 
Jews to obtain domination of the world. Re- 
peatedly Nazi accomplishments were lauded and 
those of the Soviet Union belittled. Contrasting 
the resources of Germany and Russia, Hitler ex- 
claimed: “If I had the Ural Mountains with their 
incalculable store of treasures in raw materials, 
Siberia with its vast forests and the Ukraine with 
its tremendous wheat fields, Germany under Na- 
tional Socialist leadership would swim in plenty.” 
Holding up the Spanish civil war as a horrible 
example, the Fiihrer declared that the bolshevist 
danger had become a “terrible reality.” Goebbels 
and Rosenberg far outdid Hitler in their virulent 
attacks on communism and Soviet leadership. Ap- 
pealing to other nations to eradicate this “in- 
fernal world pestilence,’’ Goebbels announced that 
“Germany as the outpost of European civilization 
is ready and determined to ward off this danger 
from her frontier with all the means at her dis- 
posal.” Bolshevism he characterized as a “patho- 
logical and criminal type of madness devised by 
Jews ...and led by Jews who aim at destroying 
civilized nations and founding a world Jewish 
régime that would subject all nations to its 
power.” 


The Congress did not fail to hear the customary 
protestations of love for peace. Hitler expressed 
his conviction, “that the European peoples and 
states can approach a happier future only through 
the preservation of peace.” The display of Ger- 
man military strength, the demonstrations of 

















oe - 





| 
| 















blind loyalty to Nazi leadership at Nuremberg, 
and the vicious attacks on the Soviet Union com- 
bine to make the rest of the world more than 
skeptical of Hitler’s sincerity. The Fiihrer’s ap- 
peal for a struggle against bolshevism may have 
been intended largely for domestic consumption, 
but it has accentuated the danger of a conflict 
between fascism and communism which can only 
be suicidal for Europe. Fortunately a number 
of European powers have recently demonstrated 
that they regard Germany rather than the Soviet 
Union as the threat to world peace. Britain has 
been alienated by these violent diatribes against 
communism. The French government decided on 
September 7 to meet Germany’s increase in the 
term of military service by spending an additional 
sum of 14 billion francs on its armaments over 
the next four years. With a political-military 
agreement initialed in Paris on September 6, 
France and Poland have revived an alliance which 
had been regarded moribund in the last few years. 
French credits totaling several biilion francs are 
to be made available for the modernization of the 
Polish army and for Polish industrial develop- 
ment. While not sacrificing friendly relations 
with Germany, the Polish government has indi- 
cated in this way that it will not be used as a tool 
of German policy. Even the Little Entente at its 
conference in Bratislava on September 12-14 re- 
vealed a surprising degree of unity in the face of 
German attempts to disrupt it. 
JOHN C. DEWILDE 


SYRIA AND PALESTINE 


With the future of Egypt definitely settled by 
the recent Anglo-Egyptian treaty, the attention 
of the Arab world turned last week to two other 
centers of nationalist agitation, Syria and Pal- 
estine. In Syria the Arabs celebrated the 
definitive signature of a treaty of alliance and 
friendship with France by which the mandated 
territories of Syria and Lebanon will become in- 
dependent nations at the end of a three-year 
transition period. But in strife-ridden Palestine, 
where five months of continuous guerrilla warfare 
have exacted a toll of 340 lives, 1,060 wounded, 
and material losses of 14 million dollars, Great 
Britain has taken drastic action to meet the Arab’s 
decision calling for continuation of the general 
strike until they attain their objective—stoppage 
of Jewish immigration and of land sale to Jews. 
On September 7 the British government appointed 
Lieutenant-General J. G. Dill to supreme com- 
mand of the troops in Palestine, canceled army 
manoeuvres in Sussex and called up several hun- 
dred reservists in order to embark 12,000 soldiers 


Page Twe 








for the Near East. When the new military gov- 
ernor assumes command he will have about 20,000 
troops at his disposal to carry out the announced 
policy ot ruthless restoration of order. 

This action terminates a period during which 
conciliatory tactics have been tried and have 
failed. The appointment on July 29 of a royal 
commission—headed by Lord Robert Peel, a 
former Secretary of State for India, and empow- 
ered to begin its inquiries as soon as the disorders 
cease—was unable to dissuade the militant Arab 
youths from their campaign of terrorism. Like- 
wise the personal efforts of the High Commis- 
sioner to bring about peace and even the interven- 
tion of General Nuri Pasha as-Said, Iraq Foreign 
Minister, were of no avail. The British govern- 
ment has now served notice that it will make 
no further concessions. The next few weeks will 
be a crucial period for Palestine. 

For many years Syria has been torn by dis- 
turbances as grave as those in Palestine. Yet on 
September 9 Léon Blum’s government signed a 
treaty with representatives of those same na- 
tionalists who have been ruthlessly suppressed by 
the mandatory administration of former French 
governments. The treaty is similar to the Anglo- 
Egyptian agreement of August 26. France will 
maintain troops in Syria and the Syrian army 
will be French-trained and equipped. Vested 
economic interests will remain in French hands. 
In return, Syria and Lebanon (which is expected 
to sign a similar accord in the near future) will 
become independent states, and will be sponsored 
by France as new members of the League of 


Nations. HELEN FISHER 


How Britain is Governed, by Ramsay Muir. 
Houghton, Mifflin, 1935. $2.50 
A penetrating criticism of the British government, ac- 
companied by constructive proposals. 


New York, 


The League of Nations and the Rule of Law, 1918-1935, 
by Alfred Zimmern. New York, Macmillan, 1936. $4.00 
Helpful analysis of the League as a new method of 

conducting relations between states. 


The Measurement of Population Growth, by R. R. Kuczyn- 
ski. New York, Oxford University Press, 1936. $4.00 
Invaluable statistical material. 

The Crimea, by Harold Temperley. New York, Longmans 
Green, 1936. $10.00 
An outstanding contribution to diplomatic history. 


The Twilight of Treaties, by Y. M. Goblet. 
Bell & Sons, 1936. 7s. 6d. 
A French geographer argues that underneath present 
treaty violations a new order is coming into existence 
based on geographic and economic needs. 


The Rape of Africa, by Lamar Middleton. 
Smith and Haas, 1936. $3.00 
A severe attack on Europe’s acquisition of Africa. 


London, G. 


New York, 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 47, SepreEMBER 18, 1936. 


Published weekly by che 


Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasiig Bug, President; EstHER G. OcpEN, Secretary; Vera MicHELEs DEAN, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2 


2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 

















eee ea 














