LEWJ 


0d at the 


ugoslavig 
ning Sup 
whose te 
nterested 
recently 
ally cap. 
nnounced 
had bee, 


S were at 


vital rail 
serve for 


RY. The 
Z00d will 
continued 
-onviction 
s is being 
vernment, 
ination to 


American 
urned to| 
| tour of 
se Yugo 
ormed by 
come and 
ted States 
some of 
into the 
ieve that 
he casual 
. supplies 
vare that 
of skilled 
tary per 
all these 
; no Con 
approval 
nd at the 


e toward 
| 


JADSEL | 


—1946 


FAR Abt Reee 
CRNEP AL LIBRAR® 


OCT 1 7 1946 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


Seneral Library ke peek 
“Asversity of Nichigan 


Any Arhor, Mt chivas 


FOREIGN 


POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 50 


SEPTEMBER 27, 1946 


“WILL ‘RETENTION OF WAR-TIME BASES GUARANTEE U.S. SECURITY? 


HEATED debate in the Iceland Parliament on 

September 22 over a proposed agreement which 
would allow continued United States use of the air 
base at Keflavik calls new attention to our efforts to 
secure world-wide military bases. On September 19, 
shortly after returning from a six-week 38,000-mile 
inspection tour in the Pacific, a five-member delega- 
tion of the House Military Affairs Committee ex- 
pressed the conviction that the United States must 
without delay ring the Pacific with strong bases in 
striking distance of Russia. Less than three weeks 
previously the fifth annual report of the Special 
Senate Committee to Investigate the National De- 
fense Program sharply attacked the administration 
for “abandoning overseas bases acquired during the 
war at great cost in lives and dollars.’’ Since such 
charges are effective in winning votes, they will 
doubtless be often repeated by candidates of both 
parties until the November elections. Far more than 
an election is at stake, however, so these charges 
should be weighed with unusual care. 

U.S. BASES RING THE PACIFIC. Is it true, as 
the Senate Committee declared, that the War, Navy 
and State Departments have failed to use “the full 
weight of our bargaining power’ to retain bases 
acquired during the war? The record does not justify 
such an accusation. As yet we have not even placed 
under trusteeship the Pacific islands taken from the 
Japanese, although such a step would have proved 
a great help in inaugurating the United Nations 
trusteeship system. According to a report of Septem- 
ber 23 the Army and Navy still seek to retain all the 
former Japanese mandates under complete Ameri- 
can sovereignty. Senator Warren G. Magnuson, 
Democrat of Washington, did state on August 29 
that the decision had been made to offer the islands 
for United Nations supervision at the forthcoming 


meeting of the General Assembly, but Lincoln 
White, spokesman for the State Department, de- 
clared the same afternoon that the government did 
not intend to submit a trusteeship agreement to the 
Assembly. In any case it is probable that the trustee- 
ship agreement, whenever presented, will place all 
the islands under sole American administration, and 
will designate certain “strategic areas’ in which the 
United Nations will be denied the right of inspec- 
tion. 

Nor does the administration show signs of laxity 
elsewhere in the Pacific. For many months it has 
been negotiating to retain the wartime base at 
Manus, largest of the islands in the Admiralties 
which were mandated to Australia. When the Amer- 
ican base in the Galapagos islands was turned back 
to the Government of Ecuador on July 1, Lieutenant 
General Willis Crittenberger, commander of the 
Panama Canal Department, pointed out that it had 
been agreed that the United States could maintain 
Army technicians there to train Ecuadoreans in 
order that the base might “be conserved in service- 
able condition against any condition whatsoever.” 
In Panama our efforts to retain some of our 131 war- 
time bases more than a year after the end of the war, 
aroused the Panama Assembly to approve unani- 
mously on September 2 a resolution calling on the 
United States to relinquish all the bases immediately. 
Ten days later a joint statement of the United States 
and Panamanian Governments announced that the 
United States in recent weeks had already returned 
71 defense sites and was preparing to return 27 
more at once, and that the two Governments would 
consult “on the most effective means for assuring 
the defense of the Panama Canal.’’ On the other 
side of the Pacific the newly independent Philippine 
Government, according to a statement of Assistant 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


Sx 


ad RNS 
ee 


ERE 


ee ee 


Et 
ay an 


f 
iF 
; 
t 
a, 
; 
f 


pas - se <- . 
—_—. s c 


Kb FL LE eS 
— —- an ’ ‘thd 
ee a ; = “ awe 


ee ———————____ 


AS Ae 


Secretary of War Howard C. Petersen on Septem- 
ber 19, is about to conclude an agreement granting 
us naval and military bases, including bases for long- 
range bombers. A report of September 3 suggests 
that the United States may convert the Alaskan 
base at Adak into a stronghold to rival Pearl Harbor. 

BASES SOUGHT IN ATLANTIC. In the At- 
lantic, where we already have ninety-nine year leases 
on bases in eight British possessions, our efforts in 
Iceland and the Azores also refute the charge that 
we are failing to use the full weight of our bar- 
gaining power. On August 16, while two American 
negotiators in Lisbon were renewing our efforts to 
acquire a long-term lease on a military air base in 
the Azores, eight United States warships appeared 
at the Portuguese capitol on a “good-will” visit. 
Almost a year ago the United States opened nego- 
tiations to acquire long-term leases on certain of our 
war-time bases in Iceland, which is on the direct air 
route between New York and Moscow. Unofficial 
Russian protests, however, placed the small new 
republic in a difficult position. On September 20 the 
State Department announced an agreement, subject 
to approval by Iceland's parliament, to relinquish 
the bases and withdraw American military and naval 
personnel. The United States, however, would have 
the right to maintain the personnel necessary for 
use of the Keflavik airport “by aircraft operated by 
or on behalf of the Government of the United States 


U.S. PROPOSES INDUSTRIAL AND 


It would be unfortunate if Mr. Wallace’s state- 
ment shortly after his resignation on September 20 
that he considered it his “holy duty” to fight for 
peace, should leave either the American people or 
the people of other countries under the misappre- 
hension that all those who do not see eye to eye 
with Mr. Wallace on foreign affairs are necessarily 
war-mongers. The more one studies Mr. Wallace's 
Madison Square Garden speech, in ‘conjunction with 
his July 23 letter to the President, the more it be- 
comes clear that the fundamenal difference between 
Wallace and Byrnes is not in the objective each is 
seeking to achieve—which is an understanding with 
Russia—but in the methods by which each proposes 
to achieve this objective. It is in an effort to devise 
workable methods which would win the support of 
the majority of the American people that the far- 
reaching debate on foreign policy unleashed by the 
Wallace-Truman episode should be pitched, if it is 
to clarify rather than confuse public opinion. 

CONSERVATIVE TREND IN GERMANY. 
Meanwhile in Germany which, in spite of peripheral 
disturbances in the Mediterranean, remains the focal 
point of Allied controversies about the future of 
Europe, some of the major problems confronting 
American policy-makers are being faced with new 


Page Two 


~ arenes 
— 


———— 


in connection with the fulfillment of United Stat, 
obligations to maintain control agencies in Ge, 
many.” While Iceland Communists complained thy 
the agreement provides for an American base jg 
disguise, the Reykjavik Trade Union Council calle 
a 24-hour protest strike beginning at noon on Sep 
tember 23. 


Secretary Wallace in his letter of July 23 to Preg, 
dent Truman charged that certain United States a 
tions, notably our “effort to secure air bases spread 
over half the globe from which the other half of 
the globe can be bombed . . . must make it look ty 
the rest of the world as if we were only paying lip 
service to peace at the conference table.” If it 5 
true that national security in the atomic age is de 
pendent upon international political agreemey 
rather than unilateral military action, our policy @ 
bases does appear to lack realism. It certainly isy 
startling contrast to President Roosevelt's war-time 
dream of United Nations control over a world-wide 
system of international naval and air strongholds 
The deterioration of our relations with Russia sing 
the end of the war, however, poses for our policy. 
makers the grave dilemma of depending on the 
United Nations for security and running the risk of 
its failure, or of ringing the world with bases of our 
own and running the risk of thereby weakening the 
United Nations beyond repair. 

VERNON McKay 


LAND REFORMS IN GERMANY 


realism. Mr. Byrnes’ Stuttgart suggestion for recon. 
sideration of Germany's border with Poland brought | 
a strong reply on September 16 from Mr. Molotov, | 
who declared that this border had been fixed be 
yond the point of further discussion. If it had been 
the purpose of Mr. Byrnes, as some have assumed, 
to bring an unequivocal statement from Moscow 
concerning the retention of German territory by Po- 
land, then this purpose has been achieved. It was 
obviously difficult for the Soviet government to sat 
isfy both the national aspirations of the Poles and 
those of the Germans. For the time being, at least, 
the Soviet government appears to have concentrated 


nl 
—— 


ist grou 
torious 
Socialist 
sian ba 
prising 
SOC] 
new pr 
ber of / 
ton to 
conside 
democr 
adoptec 
the Ge 
might 
lines. 
crats, | 
socializ 
that tu 
the Ru: 
structu 
their € 
control 
Now, . 
far-rea 
to carr 
to obt 
Govert 
man Cz 
the ha 
most © 
pansio 
acres ¢ 
Under 
sians, 
owner 
1,324 
corpor 
tribute 
The 
part o 
the de 
indust 
alizati 
many, 
is not 


on the immediate task of cementing the Slav bloc 


calls 1 


along its borders, which would have been seriously 
weakened by concessions to Germany at Poland’ 
expense. This decision, however, marks a setback 
for the German Communists, whose strongest 
talking-point had been the promise that Russia 
would support the return of territory in the east to 
a Germany unified under Communist control. Al 
ready before Molotov had unequivocably seconded 
Warsaw's views concerning the German-Polish 
border, elections held in the four zones of Germany 
during September had revealed an unexpectedly 


strong trend toward conservative as opposed to left 


Germ 
show 
addre 
centre 
yet in 


Headqua 
Dean, £ 

Please a 
| 


=> 


—= 
‘ed State, 

in Ge. 
ined tha 
| base ig 
cil called 


1 On Sep 


to Presi. 
States ac 
CS Spread 
t half of 
it look ty 
aying lip 
IE it 
ge is de 
§reement 
policy on 
inly is¢ 
war-time 
orld-wide 
on gholds, 
Ssia sing 
ir policy. 
y on the 
1e risk of 
es of our 
ening the 


ACK AY 
Y 


Or recon. 


—— 


jst groups. Even in the Russian zone, where the vic- 
torious Socialist Unity party composed of left-wing 
Socialists and Communists had received strong Rus- 
sian backing, the conservatives had registered sur- 
prising strength at the polls. 


SOCIALISM IN U.S. ZONE. This trend poses a 
new problem for the United States. Hitherto a num- 
ber of American advisers had been urging Washing- 
ton to support the Social Democrats, whom they 
consider the most promising element for building 
democracy in Germany. Had the Western powers 
adopted this course at the outset, our relations with 
the Germans, as well as with Britain and Russia, 
might have developed along markedly different 
lines. Genuine cooperation with the Social Demo- 
qats, however, would have required measures of 
socialization which the United States was not at 
that time prepared to adopt—with the result that 
the Russians took the initiative in altering the social 
structure in their zone by depriving the Junkers of 
their estates and establishing strict administrative 
controls over the operations of large-scale industries. 
Now, however, the United States has announced a 
far-reaching twofold program which it is planning 
to carry out in the American zone after having failed 
to obtain British cooperation. First, the Military 
Government will have authority to break up Ger- 
man cartels, which had concentrated huge power in 
the hands of a few industrial and financial leaders, 
most of whom had favored a policy of militant ex- 
pansion for Germany. Second, all estates of 250 
acres or over will be broken up into small holdings. 


| brought | Under this program which, unlike that of the Rus- 


Molotov, | 
fixed be 
had been 
assumed, 
Moscow 
ty by Po- 
1. It was 
nt to sat 
oles and 
at least, 
centrated 
Slav bloc 
seriously 
Poland's 
1 setback 
strongest 
t Russia 
ie east to 
trol. Al- 
seconded 


an-Polish 
Germany 
xpectedly 


d to left. Bis 


| 


sans, provides for compensation of dispossessed 
owners, it is estimated that 725,000 acres owned by 
1,324 individuals as well as by municipalities, public 
corporations and church organizations, will be dis- 
tributed among small owners. 

These measures required a difficult decision on the 
part of the United States with its prevailing belief in 
the desirability for continuance of free enterprise in 
industry and agriculture. They indicate growing re- 
alization in Washington that the situation in Ger- 
many, and in other areas of the continent as well, 
is not comparable to that in the United States, and 
calls for a different approach if we are not to lose 
German support to Russia by default. They also 
show that the goal set by Mr. Byrnes in his Stuttgart 
iddress—the establishment in the near future of a 
central “‘democratic’” German government—is not 
jet in sight, at least not until the success of the new 
program of socialization has been assured. 


eee 


Page Three 


Moreover, it is entirely possible that the inaugura- 
tion of this program will arouse the resistance of 
conservatives, and will force the United States to 
undertake political as well as economic intervention 
in the American zone. These developments may 
make it more easy for us to understand why the 
Russians had been unwilling to see Germany unified 
until its social structure and philosophy of life have 
been altered in such a way as to remove the threat 
of military resurgence; and may encourage the Brit- 
ish Labor government, which has so far tended to 
govern its zone on the pattern of colonial adminis- 
tration, to follow our example. Should this prove 
to be the case, the discussions about the future of 
Germany which have frequently complicated the 
work of the Allied Control Council in Berlin may 
have served a useful purpose by helping to bridge 
the gap between the views of Russia and of the 
Western powers. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The second in a series of articles on Germany in postwar Europe.) 


ANNOUNCEMENT 


On September first all three FPA publications— 
Foreign Policy Bulletin, Foreign Policy Reports, and 
Headline Books—were placed under the direction of 
Mrs. Dean, who has been named Director of Pub- 
lications. Thomas K. Ford has been appointed editor 
of Headline Books. Mr. Ford received his A.B. at 
the University of Minnesota in 1933, and his M.A. 
in international law and relations at Columbia Uni- 
versity in 1935. For seven years he served as editorial 
writer on the St. Paul Pioneer and Dispatch special- 
izing on international affairs and problems of Amer- 
ican foreign policy. From 1943 to 1946 he was 
assistant director of the Historical Service Board of 
the American Historical Association which prepared 
and, in cooperation with the War Department, pub- 
lished a series of pamphlets for use in discussion of 
current problems by the armed forces. 

Miss Augusta Shemin has been appointed Assistant 
Editor of research publications, succeeding Miss 
Helen Terry, who has left the FPA to become as- 
sistant editor of a new magazine published by the 
Social Service Division of the United Office and 
Professional Workers of America, CIO. 


A Short History of Eritrea, by Stephen H. Longrigg. Ox- 
ford, Clarendon Press, 1945. $3.50 
Britain’s Chief Administrator in Eritrea from 1942 to 
1944, the author analyzes present prospects and future 
needs of the territory mainly in the light of its historical 
background. He proposes a tripartite dismemberment of 
the former Italian colony. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 50, SEPTEMBER 27, 1946. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; HELEN M. Daccett, Executive Secretary; VERA MICHELES 
Dean, Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office arc New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Four Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Six Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


U.S. POLICY NEEDS RESHAPING TO AVERT CIVIL WAR IN GREECE 


The decision of the Security Council on Septem- 
ber 20 to drop the Ukrainian charges that the Greek 
government, with the support of British troops, is 
guilty of aggressive actions toward Albania repre- 
sents a diplomatic victory for Britain in its struggle 
against Russia for influence in Greece. The bitter 
rivalry between Moscow and London which gave 
rise to the protracted and acrimonious debate at Lake 
Success, however, continues unabated, and Wash- 
ington is aware that it cannot remain aloof from 
this conflict in the eastern Mediterranean. 

During the past week Herschel V. Johnson, act- 
ing American representative on the Security Council, 
called for a special investigation of the Greek case. 
This inquiry, Mr. Johnson suggested, should con- 
sider not only frontier incidents between Greece 
and Albania—as desired by the pro-Soviet members 
of the Council—but should study the reported 
clashes between Greece and the pro-Russian régimes 
of Yugoslavia and Bulgaria. Although Mr. John- 
son’s advisers in the State Department were not very 
hopeful that this proposed investigation would se- 
cure Russia’s approval, they nevertheless decided 
to suggest such a survey, in the belief that an effort 
to establish the facts might dispel at least some of 
the British and Russian charges and counter-charges 
which have beclouded discussion of the Greek issue. 
When this proposal was rejected on September 20, 
as a result of the veto by the Russian delegate, the 
United States was obliged to recognize that it had 
failed to find a new approach to the Greek problem. 

DIRECT INTERVENTION REJECTED. The 
principal concern of the United States is to help the 
Greeks avoid civil war between extremists on the 
Right and Left, since such a conflict could not fail 
to bring Anglo-Russian rivalry to a climax, precipi- 
tating a serious international crisis. The urgency 
of this problem is underlined by current reports of 
extensive military operations on the part of the pro- 
royalist troops of the Greek government against 
“rebel bands’ under Communist leadership in the 
mountainous areas of northern Greece. 

Yet in spite of the seriousness of this situation 
Washington has not felt in a position to take any 
step which might curb the independence of the 
_ present Greek government, particularly since this 
government was formed on the basis of national 
elections, held on March 31 under the supervision 
of a body of inter-Allied observers which included 
692 Americans. This official view prevented the 
United States from assuming a major rdle in con- 


nection with the plebiscite, held on September 1, 
which indicated that 65 to 70 per cent of the voters 
favored the return of King George II. On this o¢ 
casion, at the invitation of the Greek government, 
the State Department merely designated 51 civilians 
and 25 army personnel to help in revising electoral 
lists and to check polling practices, and took the 
position that all questions arising in connection with 
the return of the king, who is expected to arrive i 
Athens this week, would be settled by the Greeks 
themselves. The United States is now awaiting the 
formation of the new cabinet before reviewing its 
policy toward Greece. 

PRECARIOUS INTERNATIONAL BALANCE 
The high degree of tension between Russia and 
Britain in the Balkans is undoubtedly the major fac 
tor explaining the reluctance of the United State 
to call for rapid and far-reaching political changes 
within Greece. This does not mean that Washing 
ton is merely following London’s decision to “hold 
the line’’ against Russia in this area, but rather that 
the United States is convinced that strategic and 
economic interests of its own require support of 
Britain’s policy. 

Nevertheless, the State Department realizes that 
it cannot halt Soviet expansion merely by joining 
Britain in supporting an extreme Rightist gover 
ment in Athens, assuming such a régime is formed 
by King George. On the basis of reports received 
from Greece the State Department is convinced that 
many of the voters who approved the monarchy did 
so not because they were pro-royalist but because 
they considered the King the only possible bulwark 
against Communism. Neither can the United States 
help to check the growth of pro-Russian forces in 
Greece merely by staging impressive displays of 
naval power in Aegean waters. Instead, Washing 
ton believes it must use its economic power to im 
prove conditions in Greece if it is to lessen the po 
litical cleavage between Left and Right. As yet, 
however, few steps taken in the direction of aiding 
reconstruction have proved effective. In addition to 
lending an adviser on financial affairs to the Greek 
government, the United States has granted Greece 4 
25 million dollar loan through the Export-Import 
Bank. Thus far this loan has hardly been tapped, 
partly because Greece sorely lacks technical person 
nel for administering the loan, and partly because 
Athens has had eight different governments sinc 
liberation in the autumn of 1944. 

WINIFRED N. HaDsEL 


1918 


TA] 
qu 
corresp 
resente 
that th 
a peru 
of fore 
sary, Si 
noise’ 
war \ 
Even 1 
of atoi 
views 
intend 
not de 
the ins 
ern cc 
destru 
as ma 
ports 
at Hir 
RU 
allevi: 
when 
the U 
ern pt 
of le 
other 
termi: 
whict 
is tha 
war, 
sities 
the ¢ 


War, 
War \ 
wear 


