Te 
ral 








MAY 2 91945. 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


veneral Library 
Unt. FEROMCAL Oem 
Alvers CY of pr. PSRBRAL 
“eC = » 
Ann a, “oan ON, OO Migs. 
rhe. Mi oht on 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vor. XXIV, No. 31 


May 18, 1945 





PACIFIC WAR NOT JUST “AN AMERICAN SHOW” 


? the brief period since Germany's unconditional 
surrender Washington has been making every 
effort to drive home the facts about the war with 
Japan. It is now clear that, despite the loss of all its 
allies, Tokyo has the power to resist for a consider- 
able period and to exact a great toll of the United 
Nations before going down in defeat. Unquestion- 
ably the strategy of concentrating first of all on the 
defeat of the Nazis has been proved correct, for we 
have achieved victory in Europe, while successfully 
carrying forward the struggle in Asia. In the process 
the Japanese have lost a large part of their fleet, 
millions of tons of merchant shipping, and control 
over a large portion of the Pacific. Serious blows also 
have been inflicted on their air force, and many di- 
visions of their troops have been destroyed or by- 
passed. But the United Nations have not been able to 
undertake a land offensive against hundreds of 
thousands or millions of enemy soldiers at one time. 

A COALITION WAR. Nowhere in the Far East 
do the armies fighting Japan possess bases as power- 
ful or as favorably located as were the British Isles 
and Russia in the war with Germany. In driving 
toward Tokyo the brunt of the offensive plainly will 
have to be borne by the United States. Yet on this 
toad, too, we are marching together with allies 
whose aid will continue to be essential. The Chinese, 
both in the Central armies and in the Communist-led 
Eighth Route and New Fourth armies, have tied 
down hundreds of thousands of Japanese troops. The 
Americans fighting on Okinawa also have Australian 
friends on the blood and oil-soaked ground of Tara- 
kan, and British and Indian allies in Burma. These 
facts should be remembered when next we hear that 
the Pacific war is ‘‘an American show” and that we 
are able to lick the Japanese single-handed. 

Apart from the development of America’s own ef- 
forts in the Far East, nothing is more important than 


to transform the war against Japan into a fully de- 
veloped coalition enterprise. One great stride in this 
direction was made at the Quebec Conference last 
September when, despite the opposition of some 
American circles, it was agreed that the British Navy 
should participate in the Pacific on a large scale. The 
results are already evident at Okinawa, for several 
of Britain’s finest carriers have carried out support- 
ing operations near-by. In general, every British ship 
or division transferred to the Far East, every Chinese 
division added to the ranks of those fighting effec- 
tively, every guerrilla unit enabled to carry on more 
widespread anti-Japanese warfare— whether in 
China, Indo-China or the Philippines—will repre- 
sent a contribution toward shortening the struggle 
ahead. To some it may seem easier to wage a single- 
handed, isolationist war than to work with old allies 
and seek out new ones, but the ultimate cost in blood 
and international friction is likely to be far greater 
than under a policy of cooperation. 

POLITICS AND STRATEGY. The military stra- 
tegy of utilizing every opportunity for coalition war- 
fare against Japan has profound political implica- 
tions. It means that we must leave no stone unturned 
in the effort to develop fruitful contacts with the 
Chinese guerrilla forces under Yenan, as well as 
with the armies under the leadership of Chiang 
Kai-shek, and that the establishment of genuine Chi- 
nese unity is now more essential than ever. It means, 
also, that sound policies must be developed toward 
the peoples of colonial Asia, who in the past have 
seemed politically inert, but have been stirred up in 
unprecedented fashion by the events of recent years. 
The fact that guerrilla resistance movements have ap- 
peared not only in the Philippines but also in Indo- 
China and Burma is a token of wartime changes. If 
maximum military aid is to be drawn from the colo- 
nial peoples now under Japan's heel, it will be neces- 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 





ae he 














Saty to appeal to the nationalist aspirations that are 
growing among them. And it will not be enough for 
the United States to confine its interest in dependent 
areas to the acquisition of strategic bases. 

A crucial factor in speeding Japan’s defeat will be 
the maintenance and development of close relations 
with Russia. As a result of its role in the defeat of 
Germany and the diversionary effect of Soviet divi- 
sions stationed in the Far East, the U.S.S.R. has al- 
ready made a significant contribution to the defeat 
of Japan. It now lies in the power of the Russians to 
extend further aid in the form of bases, supplies or 
possibly troops. But one inescapable prerequisite for 
such aid is that, in the occupation of Germany and 
the restoration of liberated Europe, the Big Three 
remain united. It is hardly necessary to emphasize 
that, in their present difficulties, the Japanese are 
pinning their hopes on a break-up of the Big Three. 
The amicable settlement of leading European issues 
can have a great deal to do with the winning of the 
earliest possible victory over Japan. 


Page Two 








—— 


DEFINING UNCONDITIONAL SURRENDER 
It is impossible to say whether Japan will yield short 
of utter defeat. But an effective Allied policy to 
prevent the resurgence of Germany might encourage 
this result. If Tokyo sees that Germany's prolonged 
struggle has produced no loophole through which 
the Germans can escape the consequences of ageres. 
sion, the Japanese may consider it advantageous to 
avoid the thoroughgoing destruction that invasion of 
their homeland would bring. In any event, the Jap. 
anese would be strengthened in their hope for a 
negotiated peace if we were to commit the error of 
defining unconditional surrender by making detailed 
promises to them. To assure the Japanese, as Presj- 
dent Truman did in a special message on May 8, that 
“unconditional surrender does not mean the exter- 
mination or enslavement of the Japanese people,” 
is sound and truthful policy, but we cannot offer 
them an easy future after their years of aggression, 


LAWRENCE K. ROsINGER 


TRUSTEESHIP FORMULA SOUGHT AT SAN FRANCISCO 


SAN FRANCISCO. — The termination of hostilities 
in Europe, far from distracting the Conference from 
its tasks, has caused it to pursue them at a grueling 
pace, so that the representatives of Britain and the 
European countries can return home as soon as pos- 
sible. The post-war problems which the machinery 
here being evolved is designed to settle overshadow 
the conference table. While an earnest effort is being 
made to keep specific political and economic issues 
out of the discussions, it is impossible to talk of 
trusteeships without thinking about the disposition 
of Italy's colonies in Africa and its strategic islands 
in the Mediterranean (not to speak of the Japanese 
mandated islands) ; or to weigh the merits of bilat- 
eral and regional security pacts without wondering 
what measures the Allies plan to take to prevent 
Germany's military resurgence in the future. 

The two most noticeable undercurrents in the Con- 
ference are the determination of the Big Five to 
reach an agreement on amendments to the Dumbar- 
ton Oaks proposals which would meet the reserva- 
tions and criticisms expressed by the “middle” and 
small nations; and, at the same time, a strong trend 
to put a check on Russia’s aspirations in Europe and 
Asia—to demarcate the line beyond which a victori- 
ous Russia should not be allowed to go. Now that 
military victory has been achieved, both Britain and 
the United States show less disposition than during 
the war years to placate Moscow. Yet if there is one 
point on which there is a consensus it is that the 
Russians have proved very cooperative, in spite of 
the initial flare-up about Argentina and the shock 
caused by Molotov’s announcement of the arrest of 
the sixteen Poles. The Soviet delegation has been as 


earnestly absorbed in the work of the Conference as 
any other. 

RUSSIA ASSUMES LEADERSHIP. Mz. Molotov, 
on the eve of his departure for Moscow, skillfully 
placed Russia in the vanguard of nations that de. 
mand protection of human rights (among which he 
placed the right to work, with a broad hint at the 
prospect of post-war unemployment), and empha- 
sized the need for furthering the welfare and inde- 
pendence of colonial peoples. If these issues could 
be discussed in a public forum, instead of mass press 
conferences, the question might be raised whether 
Russia itself is not a colonial power, controlling de- 
pendent peoples in Europe and Asia, and thus sub- 
ject to the application of the high standards of 
human rights it is urging on the Western nations. 
The fact remains, however, that the leadership in 
urging colonial reforms that could have been taken 
by Britain and the United States has been asserted 
by Russia, which has thereby won the support of 
several countries in the forefront of social progress, 


notably New Zealand; while Canada has taken the | 


lead in presenting a well-thought-out project for the 
organization of the Economic and Social Council. 
The presence of Russia at this Conference has un 
questionably had an impact on the thinking of other 
delegations; at the same time there is no doubt that 
the Russians, for their part, have learned much from 
their contacts here. The discussion of mutual prob- 
lems between Russia and the Western nations is pet- 
haps one of the most important results of the Con- 
ference. 

EMPHASIS ON SECURITY. In this discussion, 
which goes on practically twenty-four hours a day 





jn CO! 
buses. 
the al 
ity W 
for s 
Russi 
dema 
thous 
Gern 
Whe: 
vehet 
Chap 
in th 
as a 


than 
prese 
first 

form 
right 
and 

ion) 
futul 
our ¢ 
to q 
Holl 
sessi 


mos 
ous 

ence 
of i 


now 
self 
non 


a br 





FORI 
Head 


one f 








aril 


eSS, 

the 

the 
ncil. 

un- 
ther 
that 
rom 
rob- 
pet 
Con- 


3i0n, 


day 











— 
—_— 





in committee rooms, at meals, in elevators and on 
buses, the chief problem raised is how to reconcile 
the almost primitive desire of every nation for secur- 
ity with the need, so brutally revealed by the war, 
for some form of collective security system. When 
Russia, France, and the countries of Eastern Europe 
demand the retention of bilateral security pacts, their 
thoughts are dominated by their tragic experience of 
German (and in some cases also Italian) aggression. 
When the Latin American countries, with equal 
vehemence, insist on a priority rating for the Act of 
Chapultepec, they are stirred by fear of intervention 
in this hemisphere by a non-American power—and 
as a result, paradoxical as it may seem, have become 
even more fervent advocates of the Monroe Doctrine 
than the United States. When this country, in turn, 
presents a trusteeship proposal which is intended 
first of all to assure our security in the Pacific by a 
formula that represents a compromise between out- 
right annexation (advocated by the Army and Navy) 
and the Atlantic Charter (favored by public opin- 
ion), it is endeavoring to build a rampart against 
future Japanese aggression. But our efforts to insure 
our Own security make it increasingly difficult for us 
to question the determination of Britain, France, 
Holland and Belgium to retain their colonial pos- 
sessions, which for them represent factors of power 
in the post-war world. 


NEED FOR TRANSITIONAL SYSTEM. The 
most that can be hoped for in this period of tumultu- 
ous transition from war to peace is that the Confer- 
ence will succeed in establishing a transitional system 
of international organization, whose charter can be 
amended with relative ease to conform to conditions 
now unforeseen and unforeseeable. This will in it- 
self be a major achievement—even if the charter is 
no more than our Articles of Confederation. For then 
a breathing-space will have been won in which to 
forge a more perfect union. 


Page Three 





For a clear, brief survey of the achievements of 
the Mexico City Conference, and the texts of the 
Act of Chapultepec and the Economic Charter of 
the Americas, read— 


THE MEXICO CITY CONFERENCE AND 
REGIONAL SECURITY __ by Olive Holmes 


25¢ 


May 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPorTS are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5 ; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















Such union, however, will not prove lasting unless 
it is built to meet the needs and spirit of our times. 
Here one can see clearly the gap that has developed 
between the new forces that are stirring in Europe— 
most strikingly represented in the French delegation, 
which contains many members of the resistance 
movement, beginning with Foreign Minister Bidault 
—and the countries physically untouched by war, 
like those of Latin America. The New World seems 
old, and potentially or actually reactionary as com- 
pared with the Old World of Europe. It is among 
those who have gone through the hell of war and 
Nazi terrorism that one feels a promise for the fu- 
ture. This promise must be reflected in the charter 
if the UNCIO is to grip the imagination of war- 
tired peoples. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 





THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Pope Pius XII, by Kees Van Hoek. New York, Philosophical 
Library, 1945. $2.00 


Interesting, brief biography by a Catholic journalist. 


In the Margins of Chaos: Recollections of Relief Work In 
and Between Three Wars, by Francesca M. Wilson. New 
York, Macmillan, 1945. $3.00 


Written with warmth and understanding by one who did 


relief work, largely for the Friends, in different parts of 
Europe and Africa. 


Timeless Mexico, by Hudson Strode. New York, Harcourt, 
Brace, 1944. $3.50 


Vivid, dramatically written history of Mexico. 


Russia Is No Riddle, by Edmund Stevens. New York, 
Greenberg, 1945. $3.00 


A friendly but candid appraisal of the temper and poli- 
cies of Russia in wartime, by the Moscow correspondent of 
the Christian Science Monitor who is well acquainted with 
the country and the people. 


Hope for Peace at San Francisco? What Catholics Should 
Think of the World Organization, by Robert A. Graham, 
S.J., with the collaboration of William L. Lucey, S.J., 
and James L. Burke, S.J. New York, America Press, 
1945. 25 cents 


This useful, readable booklet contains the text of the 
Bishops’ Statement on International Order, and a study 


analysis of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals with interesting 
comment. 


Report on the Russians, by William L. White. New York, 
Harcourt Brace, 1945. $2.50 


A gifted American writer who knows little of Russia’s 


past history or present problems vividly presents his 
gloomy impressions on a first visit to that country. 


A Miniature History of the War Down to the Liberation of 
Paris, by R.C.K. Ensor. New York, Oxford University 
Press, 1945. $1.50 


Multum in parvo aptly describes this concisely but com- 
prehensively written little book. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 31, May 18, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lget, Secretary; Vera Micuetes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
scond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a i’ear. Please allow at least 


on¢ month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





i init alan " . 5 
5 eet aye ae SN 
=» — pedo = ER POR ET de 


ET Tm be 24.0 ae en 


ee, eee 


Washington News Letter 














PROTECTIONISTS FIGHT EXTENSION OF TRADE AGREEMENTS ACT 


The first test of President Truman’s strength with 
Congress on an issue of foreign affairs will come 
over the current bill extending the Trade Agreements 
Act and authorizing the executive branch of the 
government to reduce tariffs 75 per cent below their 
1934 levels instead of the 50 per cent which present 
legislation permits. Opposition to the further reduc- 
tion is powerful, and most observers will not be sur- 
prised if the bill is defeated. 


PROTECTION PHILOSOPHY STRONG. The 
chief opposition comes from those industries which 
lost half their tariff protection in the trade agree- 
ments negotiated after the bill first passed in 1934 
and who now fear the loss of another 25 per cent. In 
this group fall textiles, nonferrous metals (lead and 
zinc), watches, pottery and hand-made glass. Wool- 
growers, protectionists for many years, also oppose 
extension. Some of the industries are concerned not 
simply with the prospective tariff loss but with the 
entrance into the American market of foreign prod- 
ucts—especially watches—during the war, when the 
output of most ordinary manufactured materials was 
severely restricted in the United States. 

An argument frequently used by opponents of ex- 


. tension concerns the disparity in world labor stand- 


ards, which has recently been raised by Emil Rieve, 
general president of the Textile Workers Union of 
America, CIO, in his pamphlet International Labor 
Standards, A Key to World Security. “In the United 
States,’” Mr. Rieve says, ‘the right of the industry of 
one state to trade outside its own borders is depen- 
dent upon the observance of a Fair Labor Standards 
Act. The principles underlying this act .must be- 
come the cornerstone of international relations.” It 
is a new concept that, to move freely in commerce, 
goods from abroad should be made under the same 
minimum labor standards as similar goods in the 
country of consumption. Representative Knutson, Re- 
publican of Minnesota, on April 18 elicited the 
views of Assistant Secretary of State Clayton on 
“cheap foreign labor,” and received this reply: “It is 
my firm conviction that in practically every field this 
country’s manufacturers and workers are so far ahead 
in efficiency of those in any other part of the world 
that even a 50 per cent higher wage cost here can 
have no effect on our over-all production costs.” 

The chances for protectionists to “hold their line” 
are so much brighter in 1945 than they were in 1934, 
or in the other years when Congress extended the 


FOR VICTORY ° 


BUY UNITED 


Act—1937, 1940, 1943—that the American Tarif 
League has taken on new vitality to stir up opposi- 
tion to extension of the Trade Agreements Act. The 
prospects of passage would be bright if the Admin. 
istration were to withdraw the 25 per cent reduction 
feature, but that would defeat the goal set on 
April 18 by former Secretary of State Cordell Hull, 
first sponsor of the Act. “As President Roosevelt 
pointed out in his message to Congress on March 26, 
1945, we cannot in the difficult period immediately 
ahead have an effective trade agreements program 
unless the Act is strengthened and brought up to 
date,” Mr. Hull wrote to Chairman Robert L, 
Doughton of the House Ways and Means Commit- 
tee. The trade agreements program has served to 
reduce not only American tariffs but commerce bar- 
riers of foreign countries, because it makes possible 
a bargaining process in which barrier is reduced for 
barrier. The Administration fears that it has ex 
hausted most of its bargaining power by reductions 
already made. 

UNITED STATES EXPORT PROGRAM. The 
struggle between the forces favoring the Tariff 
League and the Hull points of view will probably be 
decided in the Senate. The Administration is con- 
fident that the House will pass the bill, despite the 
slow progress of the hearings before the Ways and 
Means Committee which opened on April 16. The 
present Act expires on June 12, but failure to enact 
extension by that date would not jeopardize the pro- 
gram, for the Administration has no intention of 
negotiating trade agreements while the Pacific war 
is still in progress and the rehabilitation of European 
countries has yet to begin. 

Administration spokesmen relate the tariff issue to 
the problem of full employment in the United States 
and abroad after the war. Fred M. Vinson, Director 
of War Mobilization and Reconversion, told the 
House Ways and Means Committee on April 25 that 
the United States will need to import at least $6,000, 
000,000 to $8,000,000,000 worth of goods every 
year after the war to balance the increased export 
trade which he considers wiil be necessary to provide 
adequate employment. Secretary of State Stettinius 
on April 18 termed the trade agreements extension 
program an integral part of the government’s peace 
planning. Another aspect is the Bretton Woods pro 
gram, which may shortly be debated by the House 
of Representatives. BLamr BOLLES 


STATES WAR BONDS 








191 


< 
So 
r 


nece 
peac 
futu 
by vu 
the 

tain! 


Eur 
sia ; 
clea 


into 
part 
suck 
Crit 
Roo 





