Entered as 2nd class matter 


e , 
, of 
“40.05 


. ;7 ~ ?; 
“/ " pen 


ich?! fan Te 
san Library 














Was An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 

ting FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 

de. 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 

uilar 

day Vou. XX, No. 37 Juty 4, 1941 
COn- 


ler. WORLD ALIGNMENTS RESHUFFLED BY WAR IN EAST 


ie ee UNG reports from Berlin and Moscow 
regarding the course of Soviet-German military 
operations at the end of the first week made it difh- 
rger alt to appraise the possible outcome of the struggle 
ob {00 the eastern front, although it is significant that the 
ltalian press, on June 29, warned that war with 
Russia might prove long. The German military com- 
con. |muniqués, departing from the strictly factual tone 
ob. {adopted in the case of previous Blitzkriegs, claimed 
ican | Spectacular successes’” over the Russians and over- 
Jer.{whelming destruction of Russian material, playing 
ager [up the propaganda angle of the world “crusade” 
and | against Communism. As the Soviet-German war en- 
test jtered its second week, however, it appeared that, 
able {While German mechanized units had driven beyond 
are |the pre-1939 Russian frontier, they had not suc- 
egic |ceeded in breaking Soviet resistance, or in disorgan- 
ates | zing the main Russian armies which, in turn, were 
im- | engaging the Nazi Panzer divisions in a war of move- 
ment such as the French had failed to develop on 
the [he Western front. Even more important in their 
ling-range implications than the general staff com- 
of |muniqués were the profound shifts in the ideologi- 
his |@l struggle precipitated by the Nazi invasion of 
ial | Russia. 
iss | 1. EFFECT ON EUROPEAN COUNTRIES. It 
eral | becomes increasingly clear that, aside from the mili- 
the | tury and economic advantages Hitler might hope to 
ents |ttap from invasion of Russia, he also hoped to di- 
vide anti-Nazi forces in countries actively or poten- 
one | tially opposed to Germany. There is nothing sur- 
uld | ptising in the fact that countries which had been 
ast- | directly invaded by Russia (no matter how justified 
the | Moscow’s claims that it was doing so in self-defense) 
au-}Would welcome an attack on the Soviet Union 
ua {Which promised them, if not independence, at least 
ites fliberation from Soviet rule. This is the case of Po- 
us |land, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia and Ru- 
¢ |Mania. Other countries, which for historic or re- 


an- 








ligious reasons had feared either Russia of 
Communism, or both, could also be expected to sym- 
pathize with Hitler's renewed “crusade” against 
Communism—notably Hungary, Slovakia and Spain. 
Moreover, elements in every country which have re- 
garded Communism as far more dangerous than 
Nazism would overtly or covertly support Hitler's 
return to the anti-Communist and anti-Russian theses 
of Mein Kampf. This is true, for example, of the 
Vichy government. 

Paradoxical as it may seem, the most powerful 
effect of Hitler’s “crusade” has been felt not in the 
occupied countries of Europe, which have experi- 
enced Nazi rule, or in Britain, whose people believe 
they are fighting for their existence against Nazi 
Germany, but in countries as yet untouched directly 
by the war—notably the United States and Latin 
America. In the United States, whose increasing aid 
to Britain the Nazis hope to check before it turns 
the scales against them, the Soviet-German war has 
aroused the most contradictory emotions. While 
Pope Pius XII, contrary to expectations, made no 
anti-Communist pronouncement in his address of 
June 29, many Catholics—as well as non-Catholics— 
have been disturbed by the thought that United 
States opposition to Germany might assume the form 
of collaboration with Communism. On the whole, 
however, the American public has been unwilling to 
limit the program of aid to Britain in order to give 
extensive aid to the U.S.S.R. 

2. EFFECT ON THE SOVIET UNION. If the 
Soviet-German war is bound to reshuffle alignments 
throughout the world, deepening the international 
civil war by which both Nazis and Communists have 
benefited, it will also not fail to affect the political 
situation in the Soviet Union. Whatever may be the 
outcome of military operations, the Soviet system 
has now been subjected to those strains and stresses 
which the Moscow leaders had feared might jeopar- 


De 











— 
— 





dize it. It was this fear, above all, which dictated 
the Kremlin’s advocacy of peace and collective se- 
curity, in the hope that, given a respite from foreign 
struggle, Russia might build ‘‘socialism’’ within its 
boundaries, and then promote it abroad. 

While civilian morale in the Soviet Union has un- 
doubtedly been shaken by continued purges and ma- 
terial deprivations, it must be borne in mind that 
war against Germany is far more understandable— 
and popular—for the average Soviet citizen than 
was the Soviet-German rapprochement of 1939. The 
emphasis on national patriotism, the exaltation of 
the Russian “fatherland” and the praise of historical 
figures like Peter the Great which have character- 
ized Moscow’s appeals in recent years, may now bear 
fruit, as the Russians are invited not to attack other 
people (which they did without enthusiasm in Fin- 
land), but to defend their own territory. At the 
same time, it is not impossible that a series of mili- 
tary defeats would either force transfer of power 
to military commanders, or even provoke a sort of 
palace revolution on the part of such dissident ele- 
ments as may have survived successive purges. Con- 
versely, Soviet military successes would redound, in 
popular opinion both within and without the 
U.S.S.R., to the credit not only of Russia, but of 
Communism. Meanwhile, the necessity of cooperat- 
ing with Britain and ultimately perhaps of obtaining 
aid from the United States will necessarily bring 
Russia closer to the Western powers than it has 
been since 1917; and these contacts, in turn, might 
Operate to alter the character of Moscow’s policy. 
In this connection, the Kremlin could do nothing 
more effective to win the sympathy of the Western 
world than to proclaim its intention, at the end of 
the war, to restore the territories it seized in 1939- 
40, subject to the final settlement of their status at a 
peace conference. 


3. EFFECT ON GERMANY. But neither will 
the Soviet-German war leave the Reich unaffected. 
Perhaps the most striking feature of the Hitler and 
von Ribbentrop statements of June 22 was that they 





What progress are we making in our attempt to 
achieve economic unity and political cooperation 
in the Western Hemisphere? Read: 
EXPORT-IMPORT BANK LOANS 
TO LATIN AMERICA 


25¢ 


June 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 





Page Two 














——$———— 
dispelled the legend—fostered by Nazi military yj 
tories—that Germany itself is invulnerable and fr 
from anxiety. On the contrary, these statements » 
veal profound preoccupation on the part of Ny 
leaders with the manifold problems created by 4 
conclusion of friendship and non-aggression pag 
with the Soviet Union; the necessity, in spite of thes 
pacts, of maintaining large German land and ,j 
forces on the eastern front; and the consequent dif, 
culty of reaching a ‘‘radical’”’ solution of the war o 
the western front. On the basis of available dog 
ments, it would appear that Hitler, who throughoy 
his career has been unalterably opposed to Com 
munism, allowed himself to be persuaded sometiny 
in May 1939 by von Ribbentrop and the Germs 
High Command that a Soviet-German non-ageres 
sion pact would relieve Germany of the threat oj 
war in the east in case Britain should fight the Reid 
over Poland—an eventuality until then dismissed ly 
von Ribbentrop, who had thought Britain would nl 
fight under any circumstances. 

The failure of the Soviet-German rapprochemen 
to free Germany for an attack on Britain representei 
a setback for the von Ribbentrop policy and clearei 
the ground for return to Hitler’s original anti 
Russian and anti-Communist course. This shift wa 
apparently effected only after a struggle within th 
party and, judging by Hitler’s statement of June 22 
on the direct advice of the German High Command 
Equally interesting is the fact that, if the Hitler an 
von Ribbentrop statements are to be taken at fac 
value, they reveal considerable, and apparently suc| 
cessful propaganda on the part of Communists with 
in Germany. Even if the Nazis should achieve mili 
tary successes in the Soviet Union, they may not fini 
it possible to stamp out all opposition elements both 
within Germany and occupied countries. Above all 
military successes would only mark the opening 
chapter in the difficult and time-consuming task o! 
winning active Russian collaboration in the devel| 
opment of the economic resources of the USSR, 
without which in case of a long war German-cor 
trolled Europe would suffer serious shortages of foo! 


: 
and lubricants. VERA MICHELES DEAN 











The Soong Sisters, by Emily Hahn. New York, Doubledal 
Doran, 1941. $3.00 
4 well-written biography of the three famous sisters @ 
the Soong family, better known as Madame H. H. Kung 
Madame Sun Yat-sen, and Madame Chiang Kai-shek. A} 
though sufficiently reserved to be placed in the authorize 
class, it outlines in broad strokes a half-century of Chiné 
modern development in which the “Soong dynasty” ha 
played an increasingly dominant rdle. 
— 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 37, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Jury 4, 


ee 


1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


Frank Ross McCoy,: President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MicHELES DEAN, Eéiif 

Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 

Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Nations 


, under the Act of March 3. 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 





Th 
the S 
prise 
in th 
foun: 
lic pe 
they 
pecul 
fact | 
this 1 
the it 
Euro 
prop: 
tives 

Or 
situa 
to th 


ing | 
Russ 
thro 
pape 
matt 
Urus 
forty 
listrr 
sista 
polic 
Latii 
and 

ful | 


O 
ICY 
inte: 
poli 
spec 
the 
La] 
hav 
spec 
rept 
to ( 
dre: 
offs 
Roc 
Rar 
for 
ope 
aff 














|| TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA 
Ete, 
les By JOHN I. B. McCULLOCH ' 
b. The outbreak of war between Nazi Germany and Within the past fortnight, however, the Uru- 
7 the Soviet Union has occasioned much the same sur- guayan government has come forward with a sug- 
ai prise and confusion of thought in Latin America as gestion which, if accepted by all, would funda- 
jig} in the United States, and may have even more pro- mentally modify the “neutrality” position of the 
t OR found repercussions. For the predominantly Catho- American republics. In 1917, several months after 
Oc} lic population of Latin America the Nazi claim that the United States declared war on Germany, Uru- 
how} they are waging a crusade on Communism has a guay announced that it would not regard as a bel- 
om peculiarly strong superficial attraction. Moreover, the ligerent any American power which took up arms 
tim| fact that Spain has indicated an unusual interest in against a non-American state. In other words, Uru- 
mar} this new phase of the war, and has even expressed guay’s port facilities would be available to such an 
gres| the intention of sending a token army to the Eastern American power on full peacetime terms. In late 
t off European battlefields, foreshadows a redoubling of June, Uruguayan Foreign Minister Alberto Guani 
eich} propaganda activities by Latin American representa- officially proposed to the other American nations that 
dy! tives of the Spanish Falange. such an attitude be generally adopted by republics 
1nd} On the other hand, the new turn in the Europea: of this hemisphere. At present, replies to this “— 
situation has brought Latin American Communists gestion are being received and studied in Montevideo. 
ment} to the tardy support of the anti-Axis cause. Follow- NEW MEETING OF FOREIGN MINISTERS? 


‘ntel| ing the German invasion of territory held by the 
are} Russians, Chilean Communists staged a parade 
ant} through the streets of Santiago, while the news- 
Wa) paper Sig/o urged immediate establishment of diplo- 
n th! matic relations with Moscow. In both Mexico and 


Opinion throughout the Western Hemisphere ap- 
pears divided on the question whether a new Con- 
ference of the Foreign Ministers of the American 
Republics should be held at this time. Two such 
meetings have taken place since the outbreak of the 


hem “a ' 

€21} Uruguay similar demands were made, and in the present war—one at Panama City in September- 
hand} former country Communist writers proposed the en- October 1939 and a second at Havana, Cuba, in 
r and 


listment of a volunteer corps to be sent to the as- 


| : July 1940. Before adjourning at Havana last sum- 
fact} sistance of the Red armies. The shift in Communist 


mer, delegates decided that the next conference 

















al ned te be most sigamtent, of cones, i ines should be held in Rio de Janeiro, but specified no 
a Ls erican countries — notably Chile, Mexico exact date for this gathering. 
mil'! and Cuba — where the party has been most success- si “aoe 
t fin) ¢,) politically. At a joint press conference in Rio on June 5, the 
- both ; Brazilian Chancellor, Oswaldo Aranha, and the new 
e all OPINION DIVIDED ON NEUTRALITY POL- Argentine Foreign Minister, Enrique Ruiz Guifiazi, 
enin' ICY. Latin Americans have followed with intense were reported to have urged the convocation of such 
sk of| interest the rapid evolution of United States foreign a conference at an early date. On the following day, 
devel | policy in recent weeks. The “unlimited emergency” however, Secretary Hull stated that the United States 
3SR, speech of President Roosevelt was well received on was not prepared to endorse such a suggestion out- 
n-cor| the whole, although the influential Argentine paper, right, and hinted that the opportune moment for a 
font} La Prensa, expressed regret that the President should further conference had not yet arrived. Apparently 
san, have chosen to convey the impression that he was Washington is reluctant to commit itself to a new 
speaking in the name of all twenty-one American meeting of the Foreign Ministers while the general 
ibledai|_ republics. The titular President of Argentina, Rober- international situation remains highly uncertain and 
_| to Ortiz, was quoted as giving the Roosevelt ad- changeable. 
al dress high praise. The effect of this was more than 
ek. Aj offset, however, when, on the day following the F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
a Roosevelt talk, the Vice President of Argentina, Subject: JAPAN AND THE SOVIET- 
yh Ramén Castillo, who has been in control of affairs 4 GERMAN WAR 
: for the past year during the serious illness of Ortiz, = ag ted aa 
—j opened the Argentine Congress with a blunt re- Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 
“= affirmation of Argentine neutrality. Station: NBC, blue network 
For more extensive coverage on Latin American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS, a bi-weekly newsletter edited by Mr. McCulloch. For sample 
copy of this publication, write to the Washington Bureau, Foreign Policy Association, 1200 National Press Building, Washington, D.C. 














| Washin 


gton News L ettec 





cities, 








WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

JUNE 30.—As the German-Soviet war entered its 
second week, Washington turned to the task of im- 
plementing its announced policy of extending all-out 
aid to the “opponents of Nazi aggression.” On June 
24 President Roosevelt ordered the Treasury to re- 
lease $40,000,000 of Soviet credits which had been 
frozen earlier this month in the general ruling affect- 
ing Germany, Italy and other European countries 
held to be subject to Axis influence. On June 25 the 
White House authorized a further announcement 
that the Neutrality Act would not be invoked in the 
latest conflict; thus opening the way for shipment of 
supplies to the U.S.S.R. 

BRITAIN GETS PRIORITY OVER RUSSIA. 
Despite this prospect of material support to Russia, it 
is apparent to Washington observers that Britain 
will continue to have first lien on virtually all ex- 
portable American war supplies. Many factors, rang- 
ing from military and economic strategy to domestic 
political considerations, combine to emphasize the 
priority of Britain and the secondary position of the 
Soviet Union in the Administration’s plans for meet- 
ing the new international situation. 

Chief among the military considerations which dic- 
tate a speed-up of aid to Britain is the strategic 
importance of British operations against Germany 
in the west and the remoteness of the vast theater 
of war in the east. Russia and the United States have 
a common frontier in the Bering Sea but, in terms 
of American strategy, our most vital area remains 
the Atlantic and the sea and air approaches to the 
Western Hemisphere. The Nazi campaign in Russia 
has not materially affected the war at sea, nor re- 
moved the danger of a future assault on the British 
Isles, although it has offered Britain an immediate 
breathing spell. Far from relaxing American efforts, 
therefore, military strategists are urging the Admin- 
istration to intensify its assistance to Britain now, 
when naval and air support will enable the British 
to take full advantage of their opportunity to strike 
effective blows in the west. Even though it may not 
be possible for the British to launch a decisive 
counter-offensive at once, American support in the 
form of bombers and an extended naval patrol 
would strengthen Britain’s position and our own 
outposts in the Atlantic. 

Other practical considerations tend to limit the 
immediate aid which the United States could give the 
Soviet Union. The bulk of our airplane and muni- 





tions production is already assigned to Great Britaj 
and the U.S. armed forces, while serious bottlen 
are retarding deliveries. The shipping shortage j 


still acute, despite the efforts of the Maritime Com. 


mission to mobilize 2,000,000 tons of merchant ves. 
sels and tankers to offset the heavy losses in the 
Atlantic, and new tonnage from the emergen 
building program will not be available before the 
end of this year. Almost the only route by which 
American shipments can be transported is by way 
of the Pacific to the Russian port of Vladivostok. 

Nevertheless, it is possible that the Soviet govern. 
ment has sufficient shipping to transport supplies 
from the United States, if they can be made avail- 
able. At present, about 11 Soviet freighters are in 
various American ports and others might be trans. 
ferred from other routes. While Constantine Ouman. 
sky, Soviec Ambassador in Washington, has not yet 
presented a full list of Russia’s requirements, the 
most important items requested in the past have been 
machine tools, industrial equipment, oil-well ma- 
chinery, and marine pumps and equipment for naval 
vessels. Approximately $1,700,000 worth of ma- 
chinery for the U.S.S.R. is said to be in American 
warehouses, where it has been held up awaiting ex- 
port licenses. 

More difficult than these military and economic 
factors, however, are the political complications 
which face the Administration in implementing its 
positive policy. The outcry in Congress against mak- 
ing common cause with Russia has not been as loud 
as might have been expected, but the mixed emotions 
of the American people have found a reflection in 
Congressional opinion. Most of the President's sup- 
porters accept his contention that Hitler is the chief 
threat to the security of the United states, and con 
sequently endorse the Administration program of 
full aid to all opponents of the Nazi war machine. 
Nevertheless, even among the followers of the Presi- 
dent there are some who are deeply disturbed by the 
alignment of Communist Russia with the democra- 
cies, and confused by Hitler's ‘crusade’ against 
bolshevism. With these middle-of-the-road elements, 
including many Republicans, statements like that of 
former President Herbert Hoover on June 29, com 
demning Stalinist Russia and urging the United States 
to stand idly by, can only have the effect of encour 
aging opposition to any decisive action by the goveri 
ment. This is the great danger. For the perils of 
inaction have now become more ominous than the 
risks of action. W. T. STONE 















— 
Vou. X 
——— 


A’ 
create 
yasior 
Japan 
it was 
no lo 
ready 
cope 
diffict 
Eve 
and $ 
espec 
condi 
viet [ 
grow 
flecte 
viet 
consi 


| tinue 


| king. 





subm 
Arm’ 
powe 
front 
armi 
T( 
polit 
a di 
has 
An 
Tok 
The 
bety 
sepa 
offic 
Em; 
mee 
Con 


