|. ROOP 


SGRERAL LIBRE 
wuty. oF 98 7,74. 


—_ 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
ve 


- ep -_e. 


Aa ry 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


You. XXII, No. 37 


a 


JuLy 2, 1943 


HE current controversy in the United States over 
government subsidies has drawn attention to the 
experience of Britain and Canada in preventing in- 
fation. While conditions in the three countries are 
got exactly comparable, the basic problem has been 
the same in each, namely, to prevent an inflationary 
wage-price spiral without checking the necessary ex- 
pansion of production. 

PRICE CONTROL IN BRITAIN. During the 
first eighteen months of the war Britain went through 
a period of rising prices comparable with our own. 
In spite of price-fixing, rationing, high taxes and a 
limited use of subsidies, the general cost-of-living 


_}index—primarily under the stimulus of rising prices 


in non-subsidized foods—rose 28 per cent and the 
inevitable demand for higher wages accompanied 
his rise. But, at this point, the British govern- 
ment decided to hold the cost-of-living index by 
amuch greater use of subsidies. The following prod- 
acts, accounting for 97 per cent of the food index 
(whic h was 60 per cent of the general cost-of-living 
index) were now under the subsidy program: meat, 
bacon, fish, flour, bread, tea, sugar, milk, butter, 
theese, eggs and potatoes. The level of prices paid 
0 British farmers was set high enough to stimulate 
output. They were assured against any financial loss 
fesulting from increases in cost of production, par- 
ticularly the higher farm wages designed to keep 
hbor on the farms. In the case of imports, subsidies 
ttok the form of absorption of trading losses by the 


{Ministry of Food. In addition, subsidies were paid to 


shippers to prevent higher transportation costs being 
added to food prices. Since these measures were 


‘}ttken, the cost-of-living index has risen only 1 per 


tnt, while subsidy payments increased from $78,- 
000,000 in 1940 to an estimated $600,000,000 in 
1)43—roughly 3 per cent of total British budgetary 
expenditures. 

Subsidies, however, could hardly have checked the 


HOW SUBSIDIES HAVE OPERATED IN BRITAIN AND CANADA 


inflationary tendencies in Britain without increasing- 
ly rigid rationing and extremely high taxes. While 
the major objectives of rationing were to provide an 
even flow of supplies over a period of time and to 
assure equitable distribution, rationing was also in- 
tended to reduce consumption—by restricting effec- 
tive demand—and implement price control. Both in- 
come taxes and sales taxes on non-essential goods 
have also done much to reduce the pressure on prices. 
Surtaxes on high incomes involve a maximum rate 
of 9744 per cent, while lowered deductions and al- 
lowances mean that the maximum tax-free income 
for a single person in Britain is $440. At the same 
time the sales tax rates run from 16% per cent to 
100 per cent. With the large-scale diversion of cur- 
rent savings to war bonds and certificates—by March 
1943, $456 per capita compared with $133 in the 
United States—British fiscal policy has thus been 
able to ease the task of price control by supplement- 
ing rationing and subsidy arrangements. 


CANADA’S EXPERIENCE. From August 1939 
to December 1941, when the price ceiling was estab- 
lished in Canada, prices rose by about 15 per cent. 
Up to April 1943 they had increased only 1.8 per 
cent above that point. As in Britain, high taxes and 
rationing have played their part in holding this 
level, but subsidies have also been an important 
factor. While they have been used to alleviate the 
“squeeze” due to prices being out of balance in the 
period on which the price ceiling was based, and 
to stimulate output, as in the case of cheese, milk 
and butter, probably their most important function 
has been in helping to prevent a wage-price spiral. 
With wage increases tied to the cost-of-living index, 
consumer prices had to be held in line or a cost-of- 
living bonus to wage earners would have been neces- 
sary. This could only have increased business costs, 
and the vicious inflationary spiral would have been 
in full swing. Subsidies were used therefore to 


hy 
> 
Ait 
‘oe 
, 
iy 
i 
on 
yy 
Wy 
th 
i 
" 
We 
if 
i 


vi 


a ee ee ee 
- Se ae 
ee ee Se 


On ______ _ ___ Page Two 


stabilize or reduce retail prices on tea, coffee, butter 
and milk. Domestic subsidies were used also to main- 
tain prices on such items as fresh fruits, canned 
goods, beef, footwear, and fuel, while subsidies on 
imports were paid when the goods were regarded as 
essential, and the increase in cost was a result of a 
rise in price in the country of origin. Holding prices 
in line by use of subsidies protected the entire popu- 
lation against a rise in living costs, not simply the 
wage earner. In achieving this result, Canada spent 
$65,161,500 on domestic and import subsidies be- 
tween September 3, 1939 and March 31, 1943. 
While the situation in the United States differs in 
some respects from that in Canada and Britain— 
particularly the latter, where substantial lend-lease 


BASIS FOR FRENCH UNITY SLOWLY EMERGES IN ALGERIA 


A point of equilibrium was reached in the French 
political situation on June 26 when the French 
Committee of National Liberation agreed to retain 
General Giraud in command of the forces in North 
and West Africa and General de Gaulle as the com- 
mander of all other forces in the Empire. Thanks to 
this compromise settlement, the immediate break- 
down of French unity, so painfully achieved and 
precariously maintained, has been averted, at least 
for the moment. However, the crucial issue of army 
reform has by no means been settled, and meanwhile 
the serious possibility exists that the spirit of the 
French forces may be undermined by uncertainty as 
to their allegiance. De Gaulle, in line with his con- 
sistent opposition to all those who have actively co- 
operated with Vichy or were directly responsible for 
the defeat in 1940, continues to insist that many of 
the officers in the present French army in North Africa 
should be ousted at once. Giraud, on the other hand, 
defends most of these men who now command his 
troops, on the basis of the records they have more 
recently established, and opposes any immediate 
dismissals. Furthermore, Giraud feels under personal 
obligations to these officers, for many of them are old 
friends who were his comrades in arms in World 
War I and served under him in Tunisia, where the 
French army made its remarkable comeback. 


ANGLO-AMERICAN INTERVENTION. Under 
normal conditions, disagreement between French- 


The economic life of Mexico has undergone far- 
reaching changes during World War II. For an 
analysis of their effect on relations between Mexico 
and the United States, READ: 


IMPACT OF WAR ON MEXICO’S ECONOMY 
by Ernest S. Hediger 


25c 


June 15 issue of ForEIGN Poticy Reports 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5; to FPA members, $3. 


a a en enema me, 
food imports make it easier to finance subsidies. 
it is none the less true that the basic problem yy 
face is the same. With our cost-of-living index 
28 per cent we have reached the same stage, afte 
roughly the same period of participation in the war 
as Britain had in April 1941, and it seems quit 
possible that subsidies, especially for food, woul 
now be useful both in checking any further price rig) 
and in stimulating production. If effectively admiy. 
istered, and accompanied by stricter rationing an{ 
taxes high enough to siphon off more of the surply 
spending power of the nation, they might conceiy. 
ably work as successfully as they have in Britain and 
Canada. 

Howarp P. WHIDDEN, Jr. 


men over the question of army reform would be, 


strictly French affair. Now, however, that North| 


Africa has been an active base for combined Allied 
operations, the British and Americans feel that the 
are justified in insisting that the French army be kepi 
as it is, rather than risk a possible decline in efficieng 
by a change in officers, especially since the new ap 
pointees might be unfamiliar with local condition 
and with the men they would be called upon to lead 
Moreover, since American and British troops foughi 
under Giraud with success in Tunisia, General Eisen 
hower apparently believes that the future safety of 
his forces depends upon maintaining the French mili 
tary command intact. Accordingly, the United Ne 
tions High Command has thrown its support t 
Giraud by informing the French Committee tha 
sweeping military reforms could not be allowed at the 
present time, and by inviting Giraud to come to the 
United States within the next fortnight for militay 
conversations. 


Since the new settlement was brought about partly 
by strong Allied pressure, it deepened the line of 
cleavage not only between the two French generals 
but between Britain and the United States, on the one 
hand, and the de Gaullists on the other. Some of 
de Gaulle’s followers reject the Allied plea of milt 
tary security as justification for intervention, and it 
sist that the issue of who is to lead the French fore 
into battle is a purely national question. In line wit 
this emphasis on French sovereignty, the June 
issue of Combat, the organ of the de Gaullists in 
giers, sought to carry an editorial which was prompt 


censored, criticizing the French Committee for fail 
ing to assett French interests in the face of Alli 
wishes. In fact, it seems that de Gaulle’s pollitia 
strength in North Africa, which has been growil 
rapidly since his arrival in Algiers on May 30, ! 
increasing as a result of this latest rebuke by Allie 
diplomacy. In other words, resurgent nationaliss 
among the French, who are beginning to recover frog 


——— 
———— 


their nat: 
ularity ai 
to the su 
it is no 
what th 
Gaulle h 
ing betw 
Britain, 
role the} 
Hope 
present 
looked i 
ports no 


Blood ay 
Fromn 
operat: 
The k 

author st 

papers p 

the cruel 


The Con 
New \ 
A bro: 

states ar 

by a wo! 


Theodore 
by Go. 
versity 
This f 

on nava 

Bernard 

of sound 

derstand 


Battle fi 
ton, MW 
Vivid 

during ( 

correspo 


War an 
Pacific 
A pre 

ence on 

Nations 

Decembe 

to curre 


Cordell . 
City, |! 
The re 

been ste 


reasonec 


Mitchell 
New 
The f 

prophet 

struggle 
in the | 


orn 


FOREIGN 
Headquart 
second-cla: 
one month 


—_—_ 


es} their nation’s collapse, has increased de Gaulle’s pop- 
1 we) ularity and, at the same time, has aroused opposition 
kK up| to the support given Giraud by the Allies. Although 
afte} it is no secret that many de Gaullists deeply wee 
wat} what they regard as Anglo-American meddling, d 
quite Gaulle himself attempted on June 27 to allay ill- Feel: 
ould} ing between his followers and the Allies by praising 
= fig) Britain, the United States and the U.S.S.R. for the 
min} ole they are playing in the liberation of France. 
and Hope that French unity will be preserved in this 
rplus} present crisis rests on several facts which are over- 
iceiv.} +Jlooked in many of the sensational and conflicting re- 
1 and} ports now coming out of Algiers. First, de Gaulle and 
jr. THE E-P.A. 
Blood and Banquets: A Berlin Social Diary, by Bella 
Fromm. New York, Harper, in collaboration with Co- 
be a operation Publishing Company, 1942. $3.50 
North The keen observation and sharp pen which made the 
; author such a good politico-social reporter for the Ullstein 
Allied papers prick inflated Nazi egos, giving a vivid picture of 
they the cruel, mad life in Berlin before the war. 
+ kept The Coming Age of World Control, by Nicholas Doman. 
“ieng New York, Harper, 1942. $3.00 
W ap A broad historical discussion of the failure of nation 
itis states and the logical likelihood of their being supplanted 
lead by a world society regardless of the war’s outcome. 
| 10a) 

Theodore Roosevelt and the Rise of the Modern Navy, 
ought by Gordon Carpenter O’Gara. Princeton, Princeton Uni- 
Eisen- versity Press, 1943. $1.50 
ty of This follows the more comprehensive Princeton books 
.mil.} on naval power by Harold and Margaret Sprout and 
iN Bernard Brodie. It is in the nature of a period piece, full 

# 6of sound and interesting information pertinent to an un- 
rt 1} derstanding of present-day naval and foreign affairs. 
> thit) Battle for the Solomons, by Ira Wolfert. Boston, Hough- 
at the ton, Mifflin, 1943. $2.00 
to the Vivid descriptions of the fighting about Guadalcanal 
ilitay during October-November 1942, written by a very capable 
correspondent. 

War and Peace in the Pacific. New York, Institute of 
partly Pacific Relations, 1943. $1.25 
ne of A preliminary report of the Institute’s Eighth Confer- 

erals ence on Wartime and Post-War Cooperation of the United 
ny Nations in the Pacific and the Far East, held in Canada, 
1€ 00} December 4-14, 1942. Will serve as a useful introduction 
me of} to current and future problems in east Asia. 
mil Cordell Hull: A Biography, by Harold B. Hinton. Garden 
nd it- City, Doubleday, 1942. $3.00 

forces The record of an American Secretary of State who has 
> with been steadfast rather than showy, living according to his 
5 x reasoned belief in democratic decencies. 
ne 

; Mitchell: Pioneer of Air Power, by Isaac Don Levine. 
in Al 

New York, Duell, Sloan & Pearce, 1943. $3.50 

mpl The first biography of the outstanding United States 
r fait prophet of victory through air power. His unsuccessful 


struggle for a new concept of war is an important chapter 
in the history of our disarmament years. 


Page Three 


—————==== 


Giraud are in fundamental agreement that the lib- 
eration of France takes priority over all other con- 
siderations. Second, both French leaders are basically 
in accord with the United States not only because of . 
traditional Franco-American friendship, but also be- 
cause the United States supplies almost all the 

ment of the restored French army in North Africa. 
Finally, General Eisenhower enjoys the confidence of 
both de Gaulle and Giraud, and is trusted to safe- 
guard the best interests of all the Allies in an im- 
portant theatre of military operations. 


WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


BOOKSHELF 


Australian Frontier, by Ernestine Hill. New York, Double- 
day, Doran, 1942. $3.50 


Vivid description of the less well-known fringes of the 
island continent. 


From Bird Cage to Battle Plane—The History of the RAF, 
by Ralph Michaelis. New York, Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 
1943. 


A thorough anecdotal account of the history and current 
activities of the RAF, both amusing and informing; some 
prior knowledge and interest in the field of military avia- 
tion are desirable however for full enjoyment. 


America at War: A Geographical Analysis, edited by 
Samuel Van Valkenburg. New York, Prentice-Hall, 
1943. $2.50 


Specialists show the importance of geographical influ- 
ences on the United States during the conflict and the 
approach to peace. 


Hitler’s Speeches, 1922-1939, edited by Norman H. Baynes. 
New York, Oxford University Press, under the auspices 
of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, 1942. 
$15.00 


This vast, interpretative compilation is so arranged as 
to give a definite picture of the mind and methods the 
Allies are fighting. Its use is facilitated by extensive 
bibliographic notes and an exhaustive index. 


Far Eastern War, 1987-1941, by Harold S. Quigley. Bos- 
ton, World Peace Foundation, 1942. $2.50 
A very valuable, scholarly, yet simple, account of the 
first four and a half years of the Far Eastern conflict. The 
author covers events in China and Japan as well as devel- 
opments in international relations. 


Easy Malay Words and Phrases, by Marius A. Mendlesen. 
New York, John Day, 1943. $1.00 


A simple introduction to every-day Malay, spoken from 
Malaya to New Guinea. 


My Appeal to the British, by Mahatma Gandhi, edited by 
Anand T. Hingorani. New York, John Day, 1942. $1.00 
The full text of various articles and statements by 

Gandhi during the months preceding his arrest. Indispen- 

sable to the understanding of Indian conditions and of the 

efforts of a pacifist to lead a non-pacifist political move- 
ment. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 37, Juty 2, 1943. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


ee is! 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lugr, Secretary; VERA MicHEes Dean, Eéiter. 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Entered as 
Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


Juty 2.—Eamon de Valera, who by virtue of 
having been Prime Minister of Eire since 1932 has 
been head of a parliamentary government for a 
longer period than any European statesman now in 
office, is likely to continue to enjoy that distinction 
for the remainder of the war in spite of losses suf- 
fered in the general election held on June 22. It is 
true that his party, Fianna Fail, lost the independent 
majority it possessed in the previous Dail Eireann. 
Under the system of proportional representation that 
prevails in Eire, Fianna Fail emerged with 66 seats 
against the 73 that it held in the out-going Parlia- 
ment; Fine Gael, the party of ex-Premier William 
T. Cosgrove, won 32 seats as compared with 40; 
Labor 17 as against 10; and the Farmers, who had 
no seats before, won 14. 

But although Mr. de Valera has lost seven seats 
and his majority, he will probably succeed in mak- 
ing a deal with one or more of the other parties that 
will enable him to hold office. He is still the fore- 
most statesman in Eire. Indeed, considering the 
length of time he has been in office, and the eco- 
nomic strain to which his country has been subjected 
during the war, the outcome of the election may be 
regarded as a personal triumph for the Prime Min- 
ister. This interpretation is confirmed by the fact that 
Mr. Cosgrove, his principal opponent, who made the 
need for setting up a coalition “national govern- 
ment’’ the chief issue in the campaign, lost eight 
seats. The chief surprise was the rise of the Farmer 
party which, starting from scratch, gained 14 seats. 
The success at the polls of the Labor and Farmer 
parties indicate growing concern on the part of 
the voters with the country’s labor and food problems. 

FOREIGN POLICY NO ISSUE. Certainly, there 
appears to have been no dissatisfaction with de 
Valera’s policy of rigid neutrality. All parties and 
nearly all candidates endorsed the course that the 
Dublin government has followed throughout the 
war. Barring an act of aggression by the Axis, Eire 
may be expected to remain aloof from the conflict. 

The fact that Eire can be neutral is proof of the 
reality of the independence that it obtained by the 
Anglo-Irish treaty of 1921. When World War II 
broke out in 1939, Eire was the only member of the 
British Commonwealth of Nations which refused to 
declare war on Germany. Today it is the only English- 
speaking community in the world that is not at war 
with the Axis. 

The Allies have scrupulously respected Eire’s 
neutrality despite the grave strategic disadvantages 


it has entailed for them. The consequences of Eire’s 
neutrality became especially serious for the British 


in the summer of 1940 when, following the fall of 


France, the Nazis obtained submarine and air bases 
on the Atlantic coast. At that time, the southerg 
Irish bases of Cobh (Queenstown), Bere Haven, 
and Lough Swilly, which had been handed over to 
Eire by the cabinet of Neville Chamberlain under 
the agreement of April 25, 1938, would have been 
of inestimable value to the British Navy in fighting 
the Nazi U-boat menace. Even President Roose. 
velt’s friendly overtures failed to persuade de Valera 
to grant the British the use of these important bases, 

Eire’s neutrality has also proved harmful to the 
cause of the United Nations in other ways. Since 
Dublin maintains diplomatic relations with the Axis, 
Nazi agents can and do collect information in the 
Irish capital on the movements of Allied shipping 
convoys and on American troop movements in North- 
ern Ireland, transmitting it to Berlin. Nor is Eire’s 
neutrality benevolent to the cause of the Allies as 
was Washington’s neutrality before Pearl Harbor. 
It is so rigid that even the heroic exploits of Irish- 
men fighting in the Allied armies are not permitted 
by the censorship to be mentioned in the press. 

POSITION OF NORTHERN IRELAND. But, 
while recognizing Eire’s right to remain neutral, 
Britain and the United States have consistently re- 
fused to accept Dublin’s objections to their use of 
Northern Ireland as a base for military operations. 
The United States completely ignored the sharp pro- 
test made by de Valera on January 27, 1942, on the 
occasion of the arrival of the first contingent of 
American troops in the “Six Counties,” when he con- 
tended that this action constituted tacit recognition 
by Washington of the “partition” of Ireland. 

From the long range point of view of achieving 
the unity of Ireland—a goal desirable in itself—it 
may be questioned whether Eire’s decision to remain 
outside a conflict that will determine the life or 
death of the English-speaking world was a wise de- 
cision. If the de Valera government had linked its 
fate with the rest of the British Empire in 1939, it 


. would, to a great extent, have cut the ground from 


under the feet of supporters of Britain in Northern 
Ireland. As it is, the cleavage between the two sec- 
tions of the Irish people has been deepened, a large 
part of the sympathy that de Valera and his party 
enjoyed in the United States has been forfeited, and 
“partition,” if not made permanent, may have been 
indefinitely extended. JoHN ELLIoTT 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


~ 


Solom 


a new A 
although 
the week 
announce 
front fro 
the enem 
air than 
Allied fo: 
of import 
on the fr 
The real t 
effort is 
Munda o 
of signif 
DIFFE 
rent oper 
the cond 
Guadalca 
fensive it 
defend o 
last year 
United } 
shortenin 


| the victo 


Americat 
become 
Secretary 
shortage: 
of a uni 
in conne 
dence: C 
drive thi 
the Solo 
supervisi 

The i 
operatio 
for the 4 


