








anger 
f the 
ig, the 


ready 


gives 


ed by 
Tokyo, 
erican 
ilitary 


e, and | 


Hitler 
Mme. 


OTT 


+ 
799 
4 


ted to 
? ‘TIME 
ice of 
ncheon 
nection 


ved by 


Iso im | 


tables. 


DS 














General Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


MAR 8 1943 


TY? Sep ment 4 
Vliversity of Michizan 


higan 


VO) EHC). ROHS, 1510) jc Bh 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL. XXII, No. 20 


Marcu 5, 1943 





TERRITORIAL CONTROVERSIES PLAY INTO HANDS OF NAZIS 


ae strong German resistance encountered by the 

Russians in the Donetz area gives more reality 
than could volumes of interpretation to Stalin’s order 
of the day of February 22 to the Red Army, which 
has provoked so much discussion on the question 
whether or not the Russians would stop at the Russo- 
German border of 1941 or march on into German 
territory. The blunt fact is that the Soviet Union is 
straining every ounce of manpower and economic 
resources to accomplish the primary task set by Stalin 
—and that is to eject the German invader from Rus- 
sian soil. Important as is the aid sent to Russia by 
Britain and the United States in the form of tanks, 
airplanes, guns, and other armaments, as well as 
some foodstuffs, it cannot begin to replace the losses 
of industrial production, food and raw materials suf- 
fered by the U.S.S.R. as a result of German invasion. 
Nor can these losses be rapidly made good even in 
territories re-occupied by the Russians, where the Ger- 
mans have systematically destroyed human and ma- 
terial resources. 

SECOND FRONT DEMAND REVIVED. The 
difficulties that confront the Russians also give added 
emphasis to Stalin’s continued pressure for the open- 
ing of another front on the continent. While the Afri- 
can campaign has caused the Germans to divert a 
part of their airforce from the Russian front, it has 
not appreciably relieved the pressure of German land 
forces, since Marshal Rommel appears to be operat- 
ing in Tunisia with a relatively small number of men 
and tanks. And, as in the past, the necessity for an- 
other front is dictated not merely by Russia’s de- 
mands, but by the needs, common to all the United 
Nations, of delivering a decisive blow at Germany 
at the earliest possible moment. 

It seems doubly unfortunate that, at this critical 
juncture, some of the United Nations statesmen 
shou!d find themselves preoccupied with questions of 
territorial settlement in Europe, which have received 


wide publicity and already threaten to create rifts 
between the US.S.R. and its neighbors. Russia's claims 
to the allegiance of the inhabitants of eastern Poland, 
and reports from sources not officially indentified that 
Poland has designs on Soviet Ukraine after the war, 
brought a categorical protest on both counts from the 
Polish government-in-exile on February 25. In a 
statement issued on that date the Polish government 
declared that it maintains “unchangeable the attitude 
that so far as the questions of frontiers between Po- 
land and Soviet Russia is concerned the status quo 
previous to September 1 1939 [that is, before the 
occupation of Poland by Germany and Russia] is in 
force,” and considers that any attempt to undermine 
this attitude, which conforms with the Atlantic Char- 
ter, ‘is detrimental to the unity of the Allied nations.” 
In reply, the Soviet official news agency, Tass, charged 
on March 2 that Poland had imperialist aims, and 
was misusing the Atlantic Charter to prevent the re- 
union of White Russians and Ukrainians inhabiting 
Poland with their “blood brothers” in the U.S.S.R. 

DR. BENES’ PROGRAM. Friction between Po- 
land and Russia has had the result of making Czecho- 
slovakia reluctant to proceed with consideration of its 
previous plans for federation with Poland. The 
Czechoslovak Premier, Dr. Benes, regards Soviet col- 
laboration with the Allies as the cornerstone of post- 
war Europe, and does not want Russia to be alienated 
by controversies over territorial questions. The Soviet 
government, for its part, has stated that it recognizes 
Czechoslovakia’s pre-Munich frontiers, thus putting 
an end to reports that, once the war is over, it might 
claim Ruthenia, a section of pre-1939 Czechoslovakia 
whose population is predominantly Ukrainian in 
origin. 

Dr. Benes himself apparently believes that the 
post-war settlement should be concerned primarily 
neither with the readjustment of territorial boun- 
daries nor with the immediate formation of a Euro- 








—_—_—_—_—_——— ge Ty) —— — — 


pean federation. His program, as expressed in a state- 
ment to the press on February 18, includes re-estab- 
lishment of the independent nations of Central and 
Eastern Europe; an agreement on their provisional 
frontiers, to be reached by the United Nations in ad- 
vance of an armistice; recognition of the need for a 
two- or three-year armistice period during which “the 
final form of things’ can be arranged by ultimate 
settlement at the peace conference; and wholesale ex- 
* changes of minority populations to end permanently 
the problem which proved so powerful a weapon in 
Hitler's propaganda armory. Only after these ar- 
rangements have been agreed upon and carried out 
does Dr. Benes favor the establishment of Central 
and Eastern European federations or ‘‘common- 
wealths of homogeneous states.” 

The exchange of minority populations advocated 
by Dr. Benes has, as a matter of fact, been already 
tried out—in the most brutal possible form—by the 
Nazis. While it is conceivable that wholesale trans- 
fers of populations could be carried out after the war 
in a relatively humane way, with safeguards for the 
protection of individual rights and property, such ex- 
changes threaten to perpetuate the chaos and misery 
that today overshadow the continent. Nor do they 
offer any clue as to how the transplanted minorities 
are expected to make a living in the country to which 
they are sent back, perhaps after centuries of absence. 





areca 


ee ——— LS 


RESURGENCE OF NATIONALISM. The argu- 
ments presented by Poland and Czechoslovakia indj- 
cate that nationalist sentiment, far from having been 
diminished by the need for international unity against 
Hitler, has been exacerbated—at least so far as the 
governments-in-exile are concerned. This is not sur. 
prising, since the very survival of the nations con. 
quered by Hitler depends, in large measure, on the 
preservation of their national identity under Nazi 
rule. There is no disguising the fact, however, that 
it plays directly into the hands of Nazi propagan. 
dists who are trying to create a split between Rus- 
sia and its Western allies, in the hope of effecting 
a separate peace with one or other group of anti- 
Nazi powers. This makes it all the more neces- 
sary that the United Nations should without fur- 
ther loss of time, study and formulate their post- 
war aims, as suggested by Under Secretary of State 
Sumner Welles in his Toronto address on Febru- 
ary 26. Otherwise, as Mr. Welles pointed out, 
“there is danger that divergent views and policies 
may become crystallized, to the detriment of the com- 
mon war effort, and to the detriment of efforts to 
bring about a peace that will be more than a brief 
and uneasy interlude before another even more hor- 
rible and more destructive war devastates and de- 
populates the world.” 





VERA MICHELES DEAN 


LEND-LEASE RENEWAL CLEARS FIRST HURDLE IN CONGRESS 


With a glowing tribute to the lend-lease program 
as “a vital factor in the inevitable victory of the 
United States and the United Nations,” the House 
Committee on Foreign Affairs unanimously recom- 
mended on February 27 that Congress give a one- 
year extension to the present Act, which expires on 
June 30. Lend-lease has, therefore, cleared the first 
hurdle in the way of its renewal, and although it is 
expected that some opposition will arise when the 
bill comes up for discussion in Congress this week, its 
passage is almost certain. 

RECORD OF “BRILLIANT EFFECTIVENESS.” 
In investigating the achievements of lend-lease, the 
House Committee found that “brilliant effectiveness” 
had characterized its efforts to provide supplies to the 
Allies, although aid to China lagged seriously behind 





What kind of peace with non-Nazi Germany? 
Should Allies establish military administration? 
Will Russia share in administration? Should 
Germany be dismembered? READ: 


What Future For Germany? 


by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


FEBRUARY 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3.00 











that to Britain and the U.S.S.R. During the last three 
months of 1942 alone the goods and services sent by 
lend-lease to the 43 nations whose defense the Pres- 
ident has found vital to the United States had a mon- 
etary value of $2,482,000,000, twice the total for all 
of 1941. And in the 22 months to December 31, 1942, 
more than $8,253,000,000 worth of transfers have 
been arranged—approximately one-eighth of the 
total United States war expenditures during that 
period. Lend-lease has, therefore, become a recog- 
nized part of our mechanism for waging war. 


Another reason the Congressional Committee en- 
dorsed lend-lease with enthusiasm is that it is a re- 
ciprocal arrangement whereby our Allies have sup- 
plied United States armed forces with great quan- 
tities of food, medical supplies, equipment and ser- 
vices on a lend-lease basis, and without payment of 
cash. Already this aid on the world’s various battle- 
fronts has saved the United States millions of dollars 
in administration costs and, even more important, it 
has lessened the strain on precious shipping space. 

Closely related to new United Nations offensives 
is the possible role of lend-lease in carrying on relief 
work. It is essential that the armies of the Allies be 
ready to bring in their wake food and other basic 
supplies to the territories they occupy, for the value 
of a “quiet countryside” to effective military action 














— 
irgu- 
indj- 
been 
ainst 
; the 
Sur- 
con- 
1 the 
Nazi 
that 
\gan- 
Rus- 
cting 
anti- 
eces- 
fur- 
post. 
State 
ebru- 
out, 
licies 
com- 
‘ts to 
brief 
» hor- 


d de- 


AN 


three 
nt by 
Pres- 
mon- 
or all 
1942, 
have 
f the 
- that 
recog: 


ee ef- 
a fe 
> sup- 
quan- 
d set- 
ent of 
battle- 
lollars 
ant, it 
pace. 

nsives 
relief 
lies be 
- basic 
- value 
action 











—— 


has been demonstrated in North Africa. In the period 
after hostilities cease, too, lend-lease could be used 
jn arranging for the financing of relief supplies, in 
this way avoiding the unfortunate experience of inter- 
Allied debts in World War I. Moreover, as Axis 
satellites drop out of the war, it may prove necessary 
tocome to their aid. If Finland, for example, should 
seek a separate peace with the U.S.S.R., its people 
will need grain from the United States and other 
United Nations to replace supplies that Germany is 
now furnishing. 


THREATS TO LEND-LEASE. Although the con- 
tinuance of lend-lease is virtually assured until mid- 
1944, the program may be seriously crippled before 
then and, after that date, its very existence may be 
threatened. How precarious it may become has, in 
fact, been indicated by three trends that have ap- 
peared during the past several weeks. 

(1) The revolt in Congress against Administration 
measures threatens to hamper lend-lease although, 
as long as the war is in a critical stage, opponents 
will probably confine themselves to introducing 
amendments that will curb rather than halt the pro- 
gram. One such anticipated amendment provides that 
Congress should be given a voice in the settlement of 
lend-lease accounts, presumably in order to prevent 
the British, for example, from gaining advantage 
over us after the war in the field of commercial avia- 
tion by means of our lend-lease planes. That such a 
restriction has as its object not the protection of fun- 
damental American interests but a weakening of the 
Act is indicated by the fact that the Master Lend- 
Lease Agreements already provide for the return to 
the United States after the war of any cargo planes, 
tanks, ships, and other equipment the President 
deems to be “‘of use to the United States of America.” 


(2) As rationing in the United States becomes 
more severe in the months ahead, public opposition 
may develop to the shipment of food under lend- 
lease. Actually, however, most of our shortages are 
due to the needs of our armed forces and to the 
greatly increased purchasing power of the millions of 
workers in war industries. By comparison, lend-lease 
has been responsible for but a small part of the drain 
om our foodstuffs. Only one per cent of canned vege- 
tibles, less than two per cent of canned fruits, less 
than one per cent of butter, and only a tenth of one 
per cent of coffee have been sent as lend-lease sup- 
plies. Foods shipped have been those which bulk small 
terms of shipping space and large in terms of pro- 
tins and vitamins—cheese, lard, dried milk and 





Page Three 








iain ae 
—— ¥ 


eggs, and concentrated canned goods. Opposition to 
lend-lease for relief may also arise if too much em- 
phasis is placed on the necessity for the United States 
to feed the world after the war. Since such an under- 
taking will require joint efforts on the part of the 
United Nations and pooling of supplies from all over 
the world, it is misleading to stress the food sacri- 
fices that will be expected from the United States. 
Such statements threaten to endanger the life of an 
essential program. 








(3) Although government officials have repeatedly 
pointed out that the efforts of other United Nations 
to bring about the defeat of the Axis cannot be 
measured in dollars and cents, many of our people 
still hope and believe that money will ultimately be 
paid for lend-lease supplies. As the amount of these 
transfers rises and it becomes increasingly apparent 
that cash returns will not be forthcoming, it is pos- 
sible that a disillusioned public may demand reduc- 
tion of lend-lease, particularly when lend-lease is 
assigned not to the task of destroying the Axis but 
to the more prosaic task of affording relief to Europe 
and Asia. To counteract these threats to the continu- 
ance of lend-lease, it is essential that the real nature 
of its program as a weapon of war and peacetime re- 
construction be given wider publicity. 


WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


FPA TO BROADCAST ON MARCH 13 


On Saturday, March 13, the Foreign Policy Asso- 
ciation will broadcast its third round-table discussion 
over the Blue Network from 1:15 to 1:45 p.m. The 
subject will be: LATIN AMERICA’S ROLE IN 
POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION;; and the speak- 
ers will include Vera Micheles Dean, with James G. 
McDonald as chairman. 





All We Are and All We Have, by Generalissimo Chi 
Kai-shek. New York, Chinese News Service, 1942. 
cents. 

Speeches and messages of China’s leader from Pearl 

Harbor until mid-November 1942. 


The Riddle of the State Department, by Robert Bendiner. 
New York, Farrar & Rinehart, 1942. $2.00 
Valuable and reasonably objective on organization and 
personnel of the department. The early chapters on policy 
are rather thin and add little that is new. 


Brazil Under Vargas, by Karl Loewenstein. New York, 
Macmillan, 1942. $2.75 


A comprehensive and outspoken account of government 
and politics in present-day Brazil. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 20, MarcH 5, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lgsr, Secretary; Vera MicHeces Dean, Editor. Entered as 


scond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


me month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Bis 











Washington News Letter 





| 











Mar. 1.—In World War I it was the capitulation 
of a small country, Bulgaria, on September 29, 1918, 
that first heralded the collapse of the mighty German 
Reich six weeks later. It would ‘be too much, of 
course, to expect that the defection of Finland from 
its alliance with the Axis would be followed by any 
comparable result now. Nevertheless, the repercus- 
sions of Finland’s withdrawal from the war would 
certainly be considerable. It might well lead to sim- 
ilar action on the part of Hungary and Rumania, and 
would greatly add to the discouragement of the Ger- 
man and Italian peoples by giving them a clear real- 
ization of their own impending and inevitable defeat. 

The United States government has never aban- 
doned the hope of eventually detaching the Finns 
from their alignment with Berlin through the lever 
of the traditional friendship between this country and 
Finland. Consequently, Washington has never fol- 
lowed London's example in breaking diplomatic re- 
lations with Helsinki. In maintaining this attitude, 
the Administration has had the support of a large 
part of the American people who consider it one of 
the most poignant tragedies of the war that a liberty- 
loving nation like Finland should be ranged on the 
side of the Axis. Hopes entertained here of detaching 
Finland from the Axis were considerably dampened 
by the declaration of President Risto Ryti of Finland 
on his inauguration of a second term on March 1 that 
“we cannot see any signs of an end to the war.”” He 
repeated the official Finnish thesis that “the goal of 
Finland does not go beyond security,” emphasizing 
that “the Finns do not want to take part in the conflict 
between the great powers any further than the 
achievement of this security makes necessary.” 


FINNS SEEK WAY OUT. In the first pronounce- 
ment by a United States official since the Finnish pres- 
idential election, Under Secretary of State Sumner 
Welles voiced the hope on February 23 that the Hel- 
sinki government would cease giving effective mili- 
tary aid to the mortal enemies of the United States 
and to the mortal enemies of exactly the kind of de- 
mocracy and human liberty that the people of Fin- 
land have believed in and stood for. This statement 
was made in answer to a question by a reporter, ask- 
ing whether this was an appropriate time for Fin- 
land to take some definite action to dissociate itself 
from the Axis. Mr. Welles’ reply suggests a belief 
that the Finnish people have been more anxious for 
peace than their government, and that it is up to the 
new Finnish cabinet to act more in harmony with 


FOR VICTORY ° 





their aspirations. 

There is plenty of evidence to show that the Fings 
are already war-weary and have become convinced 
by the recent series of Russian victories that they haye 
backed the wrong horse in linking their fortunes with 
Germany. Thus the Finnish Social Democrats, the 
largest political party in the country, issued a mapi- 
festo immediately after the election, urging that Fin. 
land should maintain friendly relations with the 
United States and meanwhile be ready to withdraw 
from the war whenever its independence was assured, 

Although there is a substantial amount of truth 
in the Finns’ contention that they have been fighting 
a separate war, the task that confronts Finland in ex: 
tricating itself from the conflict is fraught with diff. 
culties. The two outstanding obstacles to Finland's 
withdrawal from the war are the presence in northem 
Finland of an estimated total of 100,000 German 
soldiers and the fact that Finland is now dependent 
upon Germany for its grain and other food supplies. 


RUSSIAN HOSTILITY UNABATED. Recent 
Russian declarations do not encourage much ho 
of an early peace settlement. In his order of the day 
of February 22 to the Red Army, Premier Josef Stalin 
listed Karelia as one of the territories which Russia 
must recover by force of arms. The Russians, more- 
over, do not share the prevailing American view of 
President Ryti’s “liberalism.” In a broadcast on 
February 19, the Moscow radio denounced the Fin- 


nish President as a “staunch champion of the chau-| _ 
vinistic plans of a so-called greater Finland and an} 


advocate of close alliance with the Germans.”’ 


The Atlantic Charter, to which the Soviet govern-| 


ment subscribed on January 1, 1942, expressly en- 


joins its signatories from seeking territorial aggran- | 


dizement or from effecting “territorial changes that 


do not accord with the freely expressed wishes of | 


the peoples concerned.” The downfall of Nazi pow- 


er would remove Moscow's need for strategic st | 


curity in the Gulf of Finland by which the Krem- 


lin justified its demands for Viipuri and Hango in| 
1939—provided, and that is an important consider 


tion, that Britain and the United States are willing to 
collaborate with Russia in a reconstruction of Europt 
that would prevent the resurgence of Germany. The 
case of Finland is thus a striking example of the 
urgent necessity for the United Nations to find “com 
mon denominators” now, as Mr. Welles said in his 
Toronto speech of February 26. 


JouN Exiott | 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





swt @ 


