





. ee 


lb 2 | 

rary Entered as 2nd class matter 
y of Michigan ia. 
Arbor, Mich. 


General L 
Univer 


Ann 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





JUNE 2, 1944 











- meg Revs 
ENRRAL 

: Sav. op MiGs. 
a“ 

LW 

er | 

m 

ly 

of 

er 

e- | 

cts 

t- | Vou. XXIII, No. 33 

he 

iet 

ed 

nt a” making critical choices between a great-power 
est directorate and a world organization, and be- 
vat | tween the formation of a world organization now, 
wn | while the war is still on, or at some indefinite post- 

as | war date, the United States must also make daily de- 
ed. | cisions concerning current developments abroad, most 
.js ) immediately in Europe. Much as some people might 
Ye- | want to postpone settlement of political problems 
ion { until after the war, the war itself forces considera- 
yn- | tion of many controversial issues. 

on It may be said, without unfairness, that before 
the | 1939 this country’s policy toward Europe was essen- 
ide | tially negative in character. Many Americans had im- 
nal | portant economic or intellectual ties with the conti- 
in- | nent, but politically Europe was an area where the 

to | United States occasionally intervened to prevent cer- 
of | tain things from happening, rather than an area 
on. | where it had positive interests and pursued clearly 
ler- | defined aims. This negativism had the curious result 
op- | that while much sympathy was expressed by the 
fhe | American people for the Spanish Loyalists and 
are Czechoslovakia, for example, the American govern- 
tch | ment seemed indifferent to the fate of democratic 

institutions in Europe. 

vief SPHERES OF INFLUENCE IN EUROPE? To- 
the ~ day the United States is forced, in its own self-inter- 
n, est, to act in Europe—and it must act, not alone, but 
sec- | in collaboration with Britain and Russia, both of 
th- | which have long-term policies with respect to their 
hip _ neighbors on the continent. It is obviously necessary, 
ter- | to win the war, that this country should establish 
yw- ‘ the closest possible collaboration with its two great 
ip? / Allies. This necessity is bound to influence Wash- 
ing | ington’s decisions on specific issues. But since our 
ind | decisions, in turn, are bound to have some influence 
ion | on those of Britain and Russia, it is of the first im- 
S portance that we should define for ourselves the 


course of development we would like to see Europe 
follow during and after the war. 





WHAT U.S. POLICY WILL BEST ASSURE STABILITY IN EUROPE? 


The course which would seem least desirable from 
the point of view of the United States is the crea- 
tion in Europe of two spheres of influence—with the 
countries of Eastern Europe and the Balkans having 
no choice but to cluster around Russia, and those 
of Western Europe having no choice but to lean on 
Britain. Such a trend would perpetuate the state of 
anarchy that facilitated two world wars. Of course, 
if the United States should once more, at the end of 
this war, withdraw into isolation, then a division of 
Europe into British and Russian spheres of influence, 
with each of the two great powers undertaking re- 
sponsibility for the protection of its satellites, might 
prove the only answer to the problem of security. 
But assuming that the United States intends to par- 
ticipate in world affairs, a security system for Europe 
based primarily on the 20-year Anglo-Russian alli- 
ance of May 26, 1942 would not offer a construc- 
tive program from the American point of view. The 
Anglo-Russian alliance, the Russo-Czech pact of 
mutual assistance, and other bilateral or regional ar- 
rangements can be useful as bricks in the structure 
of a world organization. But if no world organiza- 
tion is created, they could all too easily degenerate 
into the old-fashioned types of arrangements which 
provoke the suspicions of nations not included ia 
their framework, resulting in counterarrangements 
and eventual clashes. 


A POLICY OF PARTNERSHIP. It is because 
great-power alliances offer little hope of post-war 
stability that it seems in the interest of the United 
States to support a wider combination of nations. 
Even the most extreme isolationists would be shocked 
if this country were more or less excluded from 
Europe. But even the most extreme interventionists 
would not want the United States to assume the 
major share of responsibility for stabilization of the 
continent. The policy toward Europe that would 
seem to suit both American interests and American 


“oa 
+ =e 





owas Ne 


noe Sater s MAP omy oS ee 


— 
- 


ipa mate 


5 





Ce ee 


SS 


vipa 





ee ee - 
Ae ety = gyememerranet nen aon 
ws ani 


gee’ ae 
ise ww as. 


™ + - 
SN a deionnaslin 


= —" : 
eee CIS m= 
x - 


ao 2 


Sat pe eee 
IE Daas Sh aber eee a ee - 





————_£_£_£_====== 


temper is neither isolationism nor imperialism—but 
rather a policy of partnership with other nations in 
the common task of reconstruction: a partnership in 
which the United States would obviously be one of 
the senior partners—not, as now apparently con- 
templated, a member of a great-power directorate 
whose fiat would shape the destinies of smaller, 
weaker nations. 

To achieve such a partnership, two things seem 
essential. First, the United States must help to 
strengthen the countries of Europe that can prove 
a bulwark to the resurgence of Germany. This means 
that we must neglect no opportunity to render poli- 
tical, as well as economic, aid to the peoples who 
have resisted Nazi rule, and whose resistance makes 
Allied victory possible. The more all the nations of 
Europe participate in post-war reconstruction and 
security measures, the lighter will be the burden 
borne by the great powers. It is all the more un- 
fortunate, under the circumstances, that Washing- 
ton continues to give the impression—intentionally 
or unintentionally—that it is not enthusiastic about 
the recovery of France. Our official coolness toward 
the French Committee of National Liberation is in 
sharp contrast to the more friendly attitude of the 
Bi:.ish, who see that they will need a strong France 
if they are to rebuild the continent—most of all if 
they should have to rebuild it without our active co- 
operation. Mr. Churchill has seemed to bow to Pres- 
ident Roosevelt's wishes on France—but his policy 
actually gives the French Committee the feeling that 
Britain, not the United States, is its friend in the 
hour of direst need. 

SUPPORT OF POPULAR MOVEMENTS. Sec- 
ond, the United States must make it as clear as pos- 
sible, not only by words but by deeds, that we are 
genuinely sympathetic to popular movements in 
Europe which are seeking to advance the welfare of 
their peoples. There are, of course, many different 





Page Two 








traditions, many shades of political opinion to take 
into consideration. No hard and fast rule can apply 
to all contingencies. But we must get over the idea 
that non-action on our part constitutes non-interven- 
tion. The very fact that we abstain from action in a 
given situation is, in itself, a form of intervention— 
as our policy during the civil war in Spain should 
have made abundantly clear. Russia has already in- 
dicated that it will encourage the formation in the 
countries of Eastern Europe and the Balkans of 
“friendly,” although not necessarily Communist, 
governments. Mr. Churchill, in his address of May 


24 to the House of Commons, revealed that in coun- | 


tries where Britain has strategic or economic interests 
it will support the continuance of existing régimes— 
General Franco in Spain, King George in Greece— 
although it might defer to the United States on 
France or to Russia on Yugoslavia. The British Prime 
Minister, who has frankly declared that ideology is 
no longer at stake in the war, is following a policy 
dictated by considerations of expediency. 

Does, or must, the United States share Mr. 
Churchill’s views? Or do we have other principles 
and objectives in mind in Europe? The impression is 
gaining ground among Europeans that, once the Al- 
lies have liberated the conquered countries from Hit- 
ler, this country will support restoration of pre-war 
régimes no matter how undemocratic they might have 
been. Mr. Hull, in his broadcast of April 9, sought 
to dispel this impression by outright championship 
of democratic forces. But it will persist, and gain 
ascendancy, unless this country blazes the trail be- 
yond the creation of a three-power directorate, where 
it seems to oscillate between Britain and Russia, 
toward a world organization where it could more 
freely exercise the vast powers and influence with 
which it will emerge from this war. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The second of three articles on United States policy in Europe.) 


JAPANESE DRIVES IN CHINA SPUR CHUNGKING-COMMUNIST TALKS 


Vice President Wallace's trip to the Far East has 
come at a moment when military and political con- 
ditions in China are in an unusual state of flux, 
with great possibilities for good and evil. At the 
same time that Chungking’s forces, aided by Ameri- 
can training and equipment, are moving toward 
Burma in the first genuine offensive they have 
launched in seven years of war, other Chinese troops 
a thousand miles to the northeast are suffering bitter 
setbacks, the most serious of which is the loss of 
Loyang, capital of Honan province. On the one 
hand the Chinese are seeking to effect a junction 
with General Stilwell’s men in north Burma, so that 
a land route may be established to supplement the 
present air route from India to China. On the other, 
they are faced by a grave threat to a highly strategic 
region—the great “elbow” of the Yellow River, 


west of Loyang—as well as to their communications 
lines over a wide area. It is still too early to foresee 


how the results of the Chinese and Japanese offen- | 


sives will ultimately stack up against each other, but 
at present the enemy seems to be doing much more 
damage to our side than we are inflicting on him. — 

DISCUSSING CHINESE UNITY. On the politi- 
cal front, the possibilities of greater unity between 


Chungking and the Chinese Communists appear | 








brighter than at any time since large-scale friction | 


developed four years ago. On May 17 Lin Tsu-han, 
61-year-old chairman of the Communist-led Border 
Region Administration in the Northwest, arrived in 
Chungking for political talks. Previously two Cen- 
tral government representatives had held discus- 
sions with Lin in Sian, laying a basis for his visit 
to the capital. On May 19, one day before the Central 











ake 


ply 
dea 


na 
1— 
uld 
in- 


the 


ist, 
fay 


un- 


11& 


on 
me 
r 1S 


icy 


Mr. 
sles 
1 is 
Al- 
Lit- 
wat 
ave 
ght 
hip 
ain 
be- 
ere 
51a, 
ore 
ith 





— 
—_ 


fxecutive Committee of the Kuomintang, the official 
political party, opened a six-day session, he was re- 
weived by the Generalissimo. And on May 24 it was 
ynnounced that Chiang had instructed the Central 
epresentatives to continue their conversations with 
Lin. 

This is not the first time in recent years that the 
Communists and Chungking have held discussions 
for a settlement of differences, but today there are 
gertain favorable omens that were absent in the past. 
for example, on the day of Lin’s arrival, a group of 
Chinese and foreign newspapermen was permitted 





‘to leave Chungking for a trip to Communist terri- 


tory. It appears unlikely that the Central government 
would breach the walls of its stringent blockade on 
frst-hand information about the Communists if a 
breakdown of political negotiations was anticipated. 
Moreover, the correspondents were permitted to 
take with them a consignment of medical supplies 
for the guerrilla fighters of the North. This is the 
frst consignment to be allowed through since the 
summer of 1943. 


RESURGENT LIBERALS. Still more encourag- 
ing are indications that liberal sentiment is reassert- 


have been hard-pressed by inflation and reactionary 
measures of suppression, appear more and more to 
be offering constructive criticism of internal condi- 
tions. On May 21, to cite one instance, five uni- 
versity professors declared that China’s desperate 
financial position is due basically to the fact that 














, wealthy citizens are not bearing their share of the 
| costs of the war. The suggestion was made, among 


others, that the government levy a forced loan of at 
least five billion Chinese dollars monthly (perhaps 
U.S.$20,000,000) from specified wealthy persons. 


UNITY MEANS FIGHTING POWER. In one 
sense the Kuomintang-Communist parleys are mili- 
tary negotiations which can have a profound effect 
on China’s ability to resist, for there is no doubt that 
the division between the two parties has weakened 
the struggle against Japan. In the Sian area, toward 
which the enemy may drive from his Yellow River 
front, hundreds of thousands of the country’s best 
trained and equipped troops are still employed in 
watching the Communists and maintaining a_block- 
ade against them. This is why, in an editorial of 








May 13, written before Lin Tsu-han came to Chung- 


| king, the Ta Kung Pao, China’s leading newspaper, 


stated: ““We earnestly hope that the Sian negotia- 
tions will end the strife between brothers and that 
the eventual agreement will allow the sending of the 


Page Three 


ing itself in Free China. Progressive elements, who. 








Government's troops in Shensi to the front to strike 
against the enemy.” 

Nor is this the only military benefit to be gained 
from political understanding, for the regular forces 
of the Central government and the mobile and guer- 
rilla troops of the Communists could then coordinate 
their activities against the enemy, as they did so well 
in the early years of the war. And the United States 
air forces in China, as yet unable to reach into the 
zones that mean most to Japan economically, might 
be able to establish air bases in Communist territory 
and lash out at North China and Manchuria. The 
construction of such fields has been urged by Amer- 
ican military men for some time, but for internal 
political reasons the necessary permission has not 
been forthcoming from Chungking. 

Unquestionably, then, Mr. Wallace's trip occurs 
under conditions that are both critical and propitious. 
It is to be hoped that he will not only give China 
assurances concerning future aid, but also express 
this country’s strong desire for a fully united China, 
which will come to grips with its economic, military 
and political problems more effectively than in the 
recent past. One thing is certain: if China takes the 
democratic road toward a peaceful adjustment of dif- 
ferences that have caused much uneasiness in the 
United States, the American people will feel an even 
greater responsibility than heretofore for relieving 
their Far Eastern ally at the earliest possible moment. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 





The Pacific Is My Beat, by Keith Wheeler. New York, 
Dutton, 1943. $3.00 


An intensely interesting account of a reporter’s war- 
time assignments in the Pacific, ranging from the Aleu- 
tians to the Solomons. 


This Is India, by Peter Muir. New York, Doubleday, 
Doran, 1948. $2.50 


A superficial account of India by an American journalist 
who had little preparation for what he was to see there. 


As We Go Marching, by John T. Flynn. Garden City, 
Doubleday, Doran, 1944. $2.00 


After sketching rather interestingly the development 
of Fascism in Germany and Italy, the author turns with 
asperity to bitter criticism of the present Administration 
which he sees marching toward Fascism. 


The Church and the Liberal Society, by Emmet John 
Hughes. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1944. 
$3.00 


Brilliant analysis of the Catholic stand on “Liberalism.” 


The Netherlands, Bartholomew Landheer, editor. Berkeley, 
University of California Press, 1943. $5.00 


A group of Dutch authorities present clearly and inter- 
estingly a picture of their country in one of the United 
Nations series, devoted to mutual understanding among 
the Allies. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 33, Junz 2, 


1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President ; DonotHy F. Lust, Secretary; Vena Micue tes Daan, Editor. Batered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Be i81 


Produced under wnion conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 









A perth gee 
ee ee af * 





Washington News Letter 














CHURCHILL SEEKS POST-WAR FRIEND IN SPAIN 


Official quarters here are reported to believe that 
Francisco Franco will not long survive the war's end 
as caudillo of Spain. Dissatisfaction with his author- 
itatian régime extends far and deep among his fel- 
low countrymen. The United States and Britain, 
however, proceed on the understanding that military 
exigency requires political quiet in Spain—which 
means Franco’s continuation in office—during the 
war, and that, as long as Franco remains the fore- 
most Spanish official, he is a man for the Allies to 
reckon with. The diplomatic victory the two govern- 
ments won in Madrid on May 2, for instance, with 
the conclusion of the neutrality agreement limiting 
Spanish wolfram shipments to Germany, could be 
lost if the Spanish government failed to take decisive 
steps to prevent wolfram from being smuggled out 
of the country. The importance of the wolfram ques- 
tion and the possibility that Spain might wreak harm 
on the Allies explain, in short-term perspective, the 
kind words Winston Churchill devoted to Spain in 
his address to the House of Commons on May 24. 
But his words also have a long-term meaning, both 
for the United States and for Britain. 

ALLIED POLICY ON SPAIN. From the United 
Nations point of view, the Spanish sections of 
Churchill's speech aid the current Allied campaign 
to reduce the value of neutral aid to the enemy. In 
the main, this campaign is proving a success. While 
Churchill abandoned hope for Turkish entrance into 
the war, he pointed out Turkey’s helpful action in 
cutting off chrome shipments to Germany. The State 
Department is confident that Portugal will soon re- 
duce its shipments of wolfram to Germany, and 
agreement is looked for with Sweden on the irksome 
ball-bearing question. Eire alone holds out against 
concessions to the United Nations. 

In emphasizing that war necessity causes the Allies 
to deal gently with the present Spanish government, 





For a survey of the development of trade and the 
striking advances in aviation in Africa, as well as 
the problems they suggest for the future, READ— 
COLONIAL PROGRESS IN CENTRALAFRICA 
—Belgian Congo and French Equatorial Africa 
by Grant S. McClellan 


2 and 
IC 
May 15 issue of ForgiGN Poticy REPORTS 


REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











FOR VICTORY * 


Churchill bespoke the attitude of the Washington 
Administration, which finds it expedient, in deal. 
ing with neutrals, to apologize for Spain but to blast 
at Sweden, Eire and Turkey. This strategy is due to 
the division between friends and enemies of the 
Allied cause within the Spanish government. Accord. 
ing to the British, blunt words about Spain would - 
only discourage our friends and strengthen our 
enemies in that government, which as a whole op. 
poses democratic institutions and tends to sympathize 
with the German cause rather than our own. The 
friends in the Spanish government whom the Allies 
consider it worthwhile to encourage include Foreign 
Minister Jordana, who argued the Allied cause in 
the Spanish cabinet during the wolfram negotiations; 
Air Minister Vigon; and members of the secretariat, 
who have permitted thousands of refugees to pass 
through Spain on their way to havens of safety from 
Nazi tyranny. 

Mr. Churchill’s references to Spain have created | 
the impression here that further friendly British ac- 
tions respecting both Spain and Portugal may be ex- | 
pected. The British Foreign Office has detected signs 
in Madrid and Lisbon that the position of high re- 
gard and influence which Britain has enjoyed in 
those capitals for a century and more is declining, 
while the stock of the United States is apparently 








rising. Although the British Prime Minister is not , 


engaging in a race against the United States for 
favor here and there, he considers it advantageous 
to build Britain’s political strength where he can, 
especially in Western and Mediterranean Europe. 


But whatever encouragement Franco found in | 


Churchill’s speech, this is not expected to help him 
remain in office. Although Churchill’s remarks may 
bring Franco supporters closer to Britain, time will 
tell whether it carried the rest of the world away 


from Britain. For whether he meant to or not, } 
Churchill left the impression that he spoke kindly | 


not only of Spain but of Spanish fascism. And two 
days later Sir Samuel Hoare, British Ambassador to 
Madrid, strengthened that impression by publicly 
advocating a foreign policy of “live and let live.” 


Particularly disturbing on the eve of the great mil- \ 


itary drive for liberation of Europe from the Na- 
tional Socialist form of fascism, this sounded like 
an echo from the 1930’s, when Germany and Italy 
waxed strong and menacing because Hoare and 
others were saying then: “‘live and let live.” 


BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 








a. 
o 
i 


Qa. 
@ 
- 








