RISIS 


ic meas. 
1e Right 
st week, 
on No. 
govern. 
yn. The 
| powers 
ine had 
they af. 
limited 
inet was 
allegedly 
rliamen- 
itary re. 
ne Right 
id Com. 
ice July 
Radical 
»sely or- 
bat fas- 
| fascist 
; de la 
» recruit 
1 against 
ts. The 
re bitter 
a Croiz 
counter- 
r Front. 


compro- 
dical So- 
dence in 
sts, how- 
‘then the 
3 to curb 
saring of 
r of im- 
ddenly a 
de Feu 
oups and 
yns. Af- 
sed their 
troduced 
- dissolu- 
racter of 
rbidding 
g incite- 
hese bills 

Before 
eft made 
y not ac- 
doubtful! 
yrganiza- 


WILDE 


d. Nationa! 
DEAN, Editor. 
. Year. 


FOREIGN POLICY 
: BULLETIN 


Aw interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


VoL. XV, No. 8 


DECEMBER 20, 1935 


THE CUBAN REVOLUTION: FALL OF MACHADO 


by Charles A. Thomson 


The first of two reports dealing with the revolution- 
ary disorder and social unrest which have dominated 
Cuba for more than two years. 

This issue describes the United States mediation, the 
general strike, the army’s revolt, Machado’s fall, and 
the brief Céspedes régime. 


December 18 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 38, 1879. 


Library of Congress 


Divtsion of-Accésgions 


Washincton, D. C. 


‘ 
>» 
‘ 


oY <3 
‘ 


A PEACE WITHOUT HONOR 


FFICIAL publication of the Hoare-Laval 

peace plan on December 13 only served to 
increase world indignation at the manner in which 
Britain and France, claiming to act as the League’s 
representatives, had intended to dismember a 
League state to satisfy the territorial ambitions 
of a declared aggressor. The plan provided for an 
“exchange of territories” under which Ethiopia 
was to cede outright 60,000 square miles in re- 
turn for a corridor of 3,000 square miles through 
Italian Eritrea, including the port of Assab. In 
addition, Britain and France were “to use their 
influence at Addis Ababa and Geneva’”’ to secure 
the formation in Southern Ethiopia of an Italian 
zone of economic expansion and settlement total- 
ing 160,000 square miles, for which Ethiopia was 
to receive no territorial quid pro quo. In this zone 
Italy was to enjoy “exclusive economic rights,” 
to be exercised by a “privileged company” which 
would acquire all unoccupied lands and a monopoly 
of exploiting mines, forests and other natural re- 
sources. This company would be “obliged” to con- 
tribute to the economic “equipment” of the coun- 
try and to expend a portion of its revenue for the 
benefit of the natives. The Italian zone was to 
remain an “integral part of Ethiopia” but to be 
controlled by League “services” in which Italy 
was to play “a preponderant but not exclusive 
role.” Questions regarding administration of the 
zone were to be handled by one of the principal 
League advisers, “who might be of Italian nation- 
ality,” and who would act as assistant to the chief 
League adviser at Addis Ababa. The League ser- 
vices throughout Ethiopia “would regard it as 
one of their essential duties to insure the safety 
of Italian subjects and the free development of 
their enterprises.” 

The immediate outcry raised against the Hoare- 
Laval proposals by Ethiopia, the British press and 
Parliament, the French Radical Socialists, and 
the small League powers in Europe and Latin 
America has already more or less doomed them 


to failure. Captain Anthony Eden, British Min- 
ister for League Affairs, figuratively washed 


VKENYA “i , s 


GB Italy to Ethiopia @ Ethiopia to Italy 
HOARE-LAVAL PLAN 


Britain’s hands of the whole scheme on Decem- 
ber 12, when he told the League sanctions com- 
mittee that the peace proposals were “neither 
definitive nor sacrosanct,” and that Britain would 
“cordially welcome any suggestions for their im- 
provement.” At his request the sanctions com- 
mittee, convoked for the specific purpose of con- 
sidering an oil embargo against Italy, postponed 
action until after the League Council—summoned 
for December 18—had passed on the peace plan. 

While the Hoare-Laval scheme will probably 
either be abandoned or materially modified, the 
question remains whether Britain acted consis- 
tently in sponsoring such a deal. Various consid- 
erations have been mentioned in justification or 
extenuation of British action: Japan’s renewed 
drive into China; unrest in Egypt; Italy’s threat 
to Lake Tana; the confusion of France’s internal 
situation; the reluctance of British financial and 
industrial interests to support an oil embargo; 
Tory sympathies for Mussolini; fear that the 
British fleet, immobilized in the Mediterranean 


~~ 


ee ee eee Se 


aR OB 


a ee 


since September, would not prove a match for that 
of Italy. All these considerations, however, were 
present in actual or potential form at the out- 
break of the Italo-Ethiopian war and must have 
entered into the calculations of a government with 
the least pretensions to foresight. The key to 
Britain’s action must be sought elsewhere—in the 
attitude of France. The Baldwin government had 
repeatedly declared that it would support the 
collective system only on condition that all League 
powers, great and small, pulled their full weight; 
should the collective system prove ineffective, it 
intimated that Britain might have to loosen its 
ties with the continent and look to its own de- 
fenses by unilateral action. Again and again dur- 
ing the Ethiopian crisis Britain had sought to 
obtain a definite pledge of French naval assistance 
in case of Italian attack on the British fleet, only 
to receive somewhat ambiguous assurances from 
M. Laval, who has never concealed his reluctance 
to alienate Italy. The imminence of a League 
embargo on oil — which Mussolini had warned 
would mean war — made it imperative for Britain 
to remove all doubts regarding French intentions. 
M. Laval’s last-minute reply, as delivered to Sir 
Samuel Hoare during the ill-fated week-end of 
December 7, was apparently that France — not 
an oil-producing country — firmly opposed an em- 
bargo and would require at least a fortnight be- 
fore it could come to Britain’s assistance in the 
Mediterranean. Had Britain gone ahead with an 
oil embargo under these circumstances, it might 
have been left holding the bag in a League war 
with Italy. 

Here was the eventuality always envisaged — 
if not necessarily desired — by the Baldwin gov- 
ernment. France’s unwillingness to apply ulti- 
mate sanctions left Britain free to pursue its al- 
ternative course of isolation, qualified only by the 
necessity of avoiding war in Western Europe. 
This would explain not only Britain’s desire to 
settle the Ethiopian dispute as promptly as pos- 
sible, but also its eagerness to re-open negotia- 
tions with Germany regarding arms limitation 
and a Western air pact. The League, having 
proved ineffective in the relatively simple case of 
Italian aggression, could no longer be relied on 
as a bulwark against German expansion. In 
such a case, was it not the better part of valor to 
insure Britain against naval and air attack by 
Germany, leaving the collective system to shift for 
itself in Eastern Europe? 

Such a move by Britain would not be altogether 
unwelcome to M. Laval. Many French observers 
have already pointed out that League sanctions, 
as tested in the Italo-Ethiopian crisis, would prove 
wholly inadequate in the case of far swifter and 


Page Two — 


— 


more efficient aggression by Nazi Germany. 
France’s post-war search for security, once di. 
rected at strengthening the League, has conse. 
quently turned to other objectives. M. Lava! is 
apparently not averse to revival of a four-power 
pact — first proposed by Mussolini in 1933 — un. 
der which France, Britain, Germany and Italy 
would safeguard the status quo in Western Eu. 
rope and possibly Austria. A prime necessity of 
this scheme is that Italy should be recalled as soon 
as possible from its colonial adventure and re. 
stored to the European concert of nations. True, 
a four-power arrangement might jeopardize 
France’s post-war alliances in Eastern Europe 
and its more recent pact of mutual assistance with 
the Soviet Union. But the question is being in- 
creasingly asked in France whether Meme! is 
worth the bones of a single poilu; and the Franco- 
Soviet pact, now coming up for ratification in the 
French parliament, has never been popular with 
M. Laval, who seems to prefer a direct agreement 
with Germany. Should France and Britain, hav- 
ing for diverse reasons despaired of collective se- 
curity, seek to establish a great-power directorate, 
they would deliver a mortal blow at the League, 
which could be parried only by strong action on the 
part of the small powers and effective opposition by 
a fully aroused public opinion. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


AN INTERNATIONAL BOOKSHELF 


Space does not permit listing the unusually large 
number of excellent works on international af- 
fairs recently published in the United States. 
Among outstanding books are: ] Write as I Please, 
by Walter Duranty (Simon & Schuster, $3) —a 
distinguished journalist who combines political 
insight with the intuition of a novelist gives the 
absorbing story of his experiences in the Baltic 
States and Soviet Russia. Like a Mighty Army, 
by George N. Shuster (Appleton-Century, $2) — 
an excellent, popularly written account of Nazi 
attempts to coordinate the Christian churches and 
establish blood, race, soil and Germanism as re- 
ligious principles in the Third Reich. Hurope’s 
Crisis, by André Siegfried (Wiley, $1.50) —a 
leading Frenchman traces the economic decline of 
Europe and concludes that Europeans must be 
reconciled to a permanently lower standard of 
living. Woodrow Wilson, Life and Letters: Neu- 
trality, 1914-1915, by Ray Stannard Baker 
(Doubleday, Doran, Vol. V, $4)—Woodrow Wil- 
son’s biographer gives a lucid analysis of the in- 
numerable and complex problems raised by the 
efforts of the United States to remain politically 
aloof while expanding its foreign trade. 

O.K.D.R. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 8, DecemMBgR 20, 1935. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nations 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lastrg Bugit, President; EstHer G. Ocpgn, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


