forts to 
f neces. 
1ic non- 
us to be 
ciple of 
» United 
—a Ppos- 

But it 
oin with 
onsulta- 


of mak- fF 


BUELL 
NDS 


1e aid of 


n fidence 4 


31, met 
political 
f French 
13, when 


attacked & 


er Léon 
‘tempted 
alist his- 
yn learn- 
immedi- 
if under 
ithorizes 
ican and 


» cabinet 
st partyh 


ibsidiary 


it group.f 


n against 
citement 
rancaise 
VM. Blum 
ces. Al- 


through- ; 


mentary 
iscist or- 
t on the 
monstra- 
ft, it was 
‘ticipated 
inder the 
t against 


of anti-f 
s as thely 


PARR RARDIN mt RRA INA Tm 


Pree 


shit ital 


it will bey 


- provoke 
»WILDE 


ta 


ed. Nariona 


<i 
AS 


qo° 


BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLI€CY..< 


VoL. XV, No. 18 


FEBRUARY 28, 1936 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at che Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


THE QUEST FOR ETHIOPIAN PEACE 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


The League “mandate” to France and Britain; Italian 
counter-sanctions; Effect of sanctions on Italy; Maneuvering 
for peace; The terms of the Hoare-Laval deal; The after- 
math; Hoare’s defense; Mediterranean consultations; Will 
the League apply an oil embargo? 


February 26 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


ANOTHER SWING OF THE SPANISH PENDULUM 


HE general elections of February 16 provided 

Spain with the most clear-cut test of strength 
yet possible between its Right and Left forces. 
They resulted in a victory of the Popular Front, 
a working alliance of Left Republicans, Socialists, 
Communists and certain Anarcho-Syndicalists, 
over a more loosely joined Right coalition which 
included the Catholic Popular Action party, big 
land-owners, industrialists, monarchists and other 
conservatives. Of the 473 seats in the new Cortes, 
the Left bloc will control approximately 250, the 
Right groups about 175 and the Center parties 
perhaps 50. These estimates include a number of 
seats whose fate remains to be determined in a 
run-off election on March 1. 


A general amnesty for the 30,000 persons im- 
prisoned after the Left-wing revolt of October 
1934 was the most urgent measure listed in the 
platform of the Popular Front. As soon as the 
Left victory became known, immediate fulfillment 
of this pledge was demanded in mass demonstra- 
tions and prison riots. Rumors that an army coup 
might cheat the Popular Front of its triumph at 
the polls increased general unrest. The Portela 
government, which had conducted the elections, 
decreed a “‘state of alarm’’—modified martial law 
—and reimposed a press censorship. When these 
steps proved insufficient to calm the growing agi- 
tation, the cabinet resigned on February 19 and 
President Alcal4 Zamora appointed Manuel 
Azafia, leader of the Popular Front, to head a 
new ministry. A general amnesty was promptly 
decreed and this move served to re-establish public 
order. 


The February elections ended a period of domi- 
nance by the Right and Center groups which be- 
gan in November 1933. These groups decisively 


} crushed the revolt from the left in October 1934, 


Dean, Editor.) 


a Year. 


* 


but their success failed to assure political tran- 
quillity. Since then six governments have fol- 
lowed each other in office at Madrid. Constitu- 


tional guarantees were almost constantly suspend- 
ed during 1935. In September Alejandro Lerroux, 
leader of the moderate radical party, who had 
headed a succession of ministries, was replaced as 
Premier by Joaquin Chapaprieta, an independent. 
Lerroux remained in the cabinet as Foreign Min- 
ister, but political scandals later forced his with- 
drawal—a development which seriously weakened 
the Right-Center coalition. 

Chapaprieta sought to remedy the Republic’s 
economic maladies, resulting from an unfavorable 
balance of trade, chronic budget deficits and con- 
tinuing unemployment. Some economy measures 
were effected, but the attempt to balance the budg- 
et failed when the Catholic Popular Action re- 
fused to support a program of heavy taxes on the 
rich. Loss of this group’s backing led to the fall 
of Chapaprieta in December. President Alcal& 
Zamora, while personally a devout Catholic, dis- 
trusted the loyalty to the Republic of Gil Robles, 
leader of Popular Action, and his allies. Although 
Gil Robles, as head of the largest party in the Cor- 
tes, was the logical person to form a cabinet, he 
was passed over in favor of Manuel Portela Valla- 
dares, a Center politician. It was this interim 
ministry which supervised the elections. 


The election result may prove more significant 
as a defeat for the Right than as a victory for the 
Left. Restoration of the monarchy was not an 
issue in the campaign. But any danger that the 
Spanish Republic might be undermined by a trend 
toward fascist dictatorship or a Catholic authori- 
tarian state appears to have ended for the time be- 
ing. Moreover, the Catholic Popular Action and 
its allies have been balked in their hopes to modify 
anti-clerical and other liberal provisions of the 
Constitution. It is not clear, however, to what 
extent the Left groups can maintain sufficient 
strength and cohesion to carry out their promises 
of banking reform, division of large estates, secu- 
larization of schools, protection of labor and an 


extensive program of public works. Their major- 
ity in the Cortes will not be large. Support from 
both the Socialists and the Catalan Esquerra may 
be uncertain. The former, who constitute the 
largest group in the Popular Front, have refused 
representation in the Azafia cabinet, which is 
made up entirely of Left Republicans. Outside 
the government, the Socialists will be in a position 
to exert continual pressure on the administration, 
while retaining freedom of action to stage a coup, 
should opportunity arise, in favor of a Socialist 
republic. It is also reported that the Socialist 
party needs time to adjust the rift between the 
followers of Francisco Largo Caballero, who, re- 
membering the fate of their comrades in Austria, 
advocate violent seizure of power by the prole- 
tariat, and the less numerous adherents of Pro- 
fessor Julian Besteiro, who urge a moderate 
and revolutionary course. In Catalonia the Left 
victory rescued from prison and returned to office 
Luis Companys and his associates, who in October 
1934 declared for a separate Catalan state. Al- 
though Premier Azajfia favors restoration of au- 
tonomy to Catalonia, he opposes independence for 


that region. CHARLES A. THOMSON 
REVOLUTION THREATENS CHACO PEACE 


Social and economic unrest following the Chaco 
war, and dissatisfaction of the military with the 
policies of professional politicians apparently mo- 
tivated the successful coup d’état which took place 
in Paraguay on February 17. After only a day of 
fighting, the revolutionists led by Colonels Fred- 
erico W. Smith and Camilo Recalde seized control 
of the government at Asuncién and forced the 
resignation of President Eusebio Ayala. They 
proclaimed as Provisional President Colonel Ra- 
fael Franco, the popular hero of the Chaco war, 
whom the government had exiled to Argentina on 
February 3, ostensibly because he had engaged 
in “Communist” activity. Colonel Franco re- 
turned on February 19 to assume the leadership of 
the new government. According to the mandate 
conferred on him by the revolutionists, he will 
convoke “when opportune” a national constituent 
assembly, which is to “reorganize” and “‘modern- 
ize” the republic. Presumably the quadrennial 
Presidential elections, scheduled for March 1936, 
will be indefinitely postponed. Meanwhile the 
country will be ruled by a military dictatorship 
enjoying some support from the Left. 


While both Colonel Franco and the newly ap- 
pointed Foreign Minister Dr. Juan Stefanici have 
pledged themselves to honor the peace agreements 
made by the previous régime, the revolution seems 


Page Two ~——— 


to have jeopardized the success of further negotia- 
tions regarding the Chaco. In accordance with 
the peace protocol signed at Buenos Aires on June 
12, 1935, hostilities between Bolivia and Paraguay 
have ceased, the armies have been demobilized, 
and exchange of prisoners is now taking place un- 
der the terms of an agreement only recently rati- 
fied by the two countries. The Buenos Aires peace 
conference, which made these arrangements, ad- 
journed on February 14 pending the outcome of 
Presidential elections in Paraguay and Bolivia. 
Like the League of Nations and other peace agen- 
cies, this conference has so far failed in its task 
of settling the dispute over the ownership of the 
Chaco either by direct negotiations or the formu- 
lation of an arbitration agreement. It is now ex- 
pected that the conference, when it resumes its 
sessions, will have even greater difficulty in per- 
suading Paraguay to take a conciliatory stand on 
this question. The army and the leaders of the 
revolution accuse the politicians of surrendering 
the fruits of a hard-won military campaign. Should 
the new government prove to be intransigeant, it 
will be in a good position to maintain its claims, 
for the peace settlement left Paraguay in de facto 
possession of almost the entire Chaco. Persistent 
refusal by Paraguay to accept a reasonable arbi- 
tration accord might well endanger once more the 
maintenance of that pax americana which Presi- 
dent Roosevelt only recently held up as a shining 
example to the rest of the world. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


Corporate Profits as shown by Audit Reports, by W. A. 
Paton. New York, National Bureau of Economic Re- 
search, 1935. $1.25 
An interesting attempt to determine corporate earnings 

from accounting records. 

Out of My Past: The Memoirs of Co-nt Kokovtsov, edited 
by H. H. Fisher. Stanford University, Stanford Uni- 
versity Press, 1935. $5.50 
An important treatment of the financial, political and 

diplomatic history of Russia from 1903 to 1918 by a 

Tsarist Minister of Finance. Valuable for scholars inter- 

ested in the period. 

Mechanization in Industry, by Harry Jerome. New York, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, 1934. $3.50 
The author catalogs mechanization in selected indus- 

tries since 1920 and suggests that unemployment thus 

created is likely to be temporary. 

The Economics of Inflation, by H. Parker Willis and John 
M. Chapman. New York, Columbia University Press, 
1935. $4.50 
A penetrating study of a subject which has created much 

popular misunderstanding. 

Costa Rica and Civilization in the Caribbean, by Chester 
Lloyd Jones. Madison, University of Wisconsin Press, 
1935. $1.50 
A brief survey of economic and social factors in Central 

America’s most progressive republic. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 18, FEBRUARY 28, 1936. Published weekly by che Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMOnp Lesiig BueLt, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class mater December 2, 1921, at che Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


TH 


