


the 
pre- 
J OY- 
CIS 
rsi- 
rugs 


act, 
nch 
the 
to 
ora- 
y 15 
cor- 
. by 
The 
y to 
nte, 
face 
last 
inst 
rans 
. de- 
tria 
Veu- 
r tO 
lor 
ADS- 
OTa- 
d ol 
oR 


lletin, 


imon 


[arx- 
.. by 


am’s, 


ational 
Editor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vout. XVI, No. 22 


MarcH 26, 1937 





THE GERMAN ECONOMIC DILEMMA 
by John C. deWilde 


Despite superficial indications of a prosperous boom, economic 
conditions in Germany are far from sound. While the German 
people are unlikely to starve and a financial collapse does not 
appear imminent, economic isolation has created severe stress 
and strain. There are probably only two ways out of the present 
dilemma—forcible territorial expansion or reintegration in the 
world economy. Which alternative will Germany adopt? 


25 cents 





March 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 














SL iggy 


Dr. William W. Bishop 
% University of Michigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 

















EUROPEAN POWERS AT ODDS ON LOCARNO 





Y rallying to the support of the Blum govern- 
ment the French people have once more 
demonstrated that they will not allow other coun- 
tries to profit from internal dissension. On 
March 10 the Senate and Chamber overwhelm- 
ingly approved the flotation of a national defense 
loan. Following a patriotic appeal by President 
Lebrun subscriptions poured in, enabling the 
government to issue bonds to the value of eight 
and a half billion francs. The maximum of ten 
and a half billion could undoubtedly have been 
raised had it not been decided to postpone flota- 
tion of the remaining portion until fall. Since 
the Treasury must still borrow substantial sums 
for other purposes, the success of the national 
defense loan does not remove all financial difficul- 
ties. The position of the Treasury, however, has 
been greatly eased for some months to come and 
the government considerably strengthened. For- 
tunately for M. Blum no serious repercussions have 
followed the rioting at Clichy on March 16, when 
a Communist attempt to break up a Croix de Feu 
meeting provoked a general mélée in which five 
persons were killed and several hundred wounded. 
The French government will now be free to 
participate more actively in the negotiations for 
a new Locarno agreement which Germany’s dil- 
atory tactics and civil war in Spain have already 
delayed for more than a year. On March 12 the 
Italian and German governments finally answered 
the British memorandum of November 18 which 
had sought to elicit proposals for a Locarno ac- 
cord. While these notes have not been published, 
enough of their content has become known to 
indicate that a wide gulf still separates the Fascist 
powers from Britain and France. 

Berlin and Rome apparently want to confine the 
projected treaty to non-aggression pacts between 
Germany, France and Belgium which would be 
guaranteed by Britain and Italy. The British, by 
contrast, wish to include in the treaty reciprocal 





undertakings of assistance protecting Britain as 
well as other powers against unprovoked aggres- 
sion. Since Anglo-Italian relations remain tense, 
Britain may be willing to drop Italy from a mu- 
tual defense system; yet the Reich apparently 
declines to sign any agreement which might com- 
mit it to support Britain against Italy. 


While the French and British envisage a West- 
ern Locarno within the framework of the League, 
which would pave the way for the Reich’s return 
to Geneva, Germany refuses to consider any con- 
nection between the pact and the League. With 
Italy’s backing, it declines to accept the com- 
petence of the League Council to determine the 
aggressor in specific cases and suggests instead 
that either Britain and Italy, or some neutral court, 
should decide when and by whom the proposed 
pact has been violated. 

Although Germany seems to have abandoned 
its demand for abrogation of the Franco-Soviet 
alliance as the price for a new Locarno, it pro- 
poses, in effect, that Britain and Italy rather than 
the League should determine when France would 
be justified in aiding its Eastern European allies. 
This suggested limitation of France’s freedom 
of action is significant because it has become in- 
creasingly evident that Germany does not intend 
to attack either France or Belgium, but plans to 
remain on the defensive in Western Europe if 
war breaks out in the East. The German Foreign 
Office now appears anxious to have the neutrality 
of Belgium—and even Switzerland — guaran- 
teed so that these countries can on no account be 
used as a basis for operations against the Reich. 
Germany prefers to narrow the frontier it must 
defend to the Franco-German boundary, which 
has now been fortified on the German as well as 
the French side. The British and French, sus- 
pecting Germany’s intentions, are trying to per- 

suade Belgium not to insist on absolute neutral- 
ity, but to permit at least the passage of troops 











and airplanes across its territory in accordance 
with obligations under Article XVI of the 
Covenant. 


The nature of the Italian and German replies 
indicates that a deadlock in the negotiations will 
soon be reached. While rearmament has strength- 
ened France and Britain, these two powers can- 
not impose a new Locarno treaty on Germany and 
Italy; and the Reich is unlikely to sign any pact 
except on its own terms. JoHN C. DEWILDE 


MUSSOLINI COURTS THE MOSLEMS 


The estrangement in Anglo-Italian relations 
produced by Italian activities in Spain was en- 
hanced last week by Mussolini’s ten-day tour of 
Libya. This tour, marked by an impressive naval 
display and the ceremonial proclamation of 
Il Duce as champion of Islam, reached a climax 
on March 16 when Mussolini made a triumphal 
entrance into Tripoli. At the opening of the 
Tripoli commercial fair on the following day Mus- 
solini received a symbolic sword of Islam, and was 
applauded for his praise of Moslem aid in the 
conquest of Ethiopia and his promise that Italy, 
as a great Moslem power, would continue to re- 
spect Moslem laws and religious traditions. In a 
pamphlet issued at the beginning of Mussolini’s 
visit, General Italo Balbo, Governor-General of 
Libya, pointed out that Italian rule has brought 
many benefits to Moslems in both Ethiopia and 
Libya, including the building of many new 
mosques and encouragement of the old Koranic 
teaching in the schools. He concluded with the 
statement that “it is sufficient to cast a rapid 
glance over the present situation in Moslem coun- 
tries subject to the influence of western powers 
to perceive that the only authentic oasis of peace 
and tranquillity among the Islamic populations in 
the whole Mediterranean is Libya.” 

Continued unrest in Palestine and Syria indi- 
cates that Mussolini’s bid for Moslem sympathy 
may find fertile ground in the British and French 
mandates. Arab terrorism in Palestine is daily 
increasing. More than a score of lives have been 
lost in the past few weeks, and Jewish organiza- 
tions are besieging the British government with 
demands for more adequate protection, including 
martial law if necessary. Syria has accepted the 
League settlement of the Alexandretta question 
with poor grace, although factional disputes are 
temporarily in abeyance, pending the outcome of 
the work of the League commission which is 
elaborating a definitive constitution for the Alex- 
andretta district. Many Syrians refuse to re- 
nounce the hope of wresting the Moslem town of 


Page Two 











ae 








Tripolis from Christian Lebanon, as compensa- 
tion for their virtual loss of Alexandretta. 


Other Arab countries present a more encourag- 
ing picture. Iraq, apparently none the worse for 
its October coup d’état, is proceeding peaceably 
with the new government’s plans for reorganiza- 
tion, and is apparently withdrawing from its 
former active interest in the Palestine conflict. 
Egypt is rapidly implementing the final clauses 
of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty. An extraordinary 
session of the League of Nations will be held in 
May to admit Egypt to membership, and on 
April 12 the nations which have capitulatory 
rights in Egyptian territory will meet at Mon- 
treux to consider the gradual abolition of their 
special privileges. HELEN FISHER 





The Ultimate Power, by Morris L. Ernst. Garden City, 
N. Y., Doubleday, Doran, 1937. $3.00 
A prominent attorney maintains that judicial supremacy 

is an outworn institution which supports our economic 

royalists, and urges that Congress be empowered to over- 
ride the Supreme Court veto. 

Hitler, by Konrad Heiden. New York, Knopf, 1936. $3.00 
The author of A History of National Socialism has 

written by far the best biography of der Fiihrer that has 

yet appeared. 

The United States and Europe 1815-1828, by Edward How- 
land Tatum, Jr. Berkeley, California, University of 
California Press, 1936. $3.00 
This able challenge to the conventional explanation for 

the Monroe Doctrine ascribes its origin primarily to fear, 

not of Russia and the Holy Alliance, but of England’s com- 
mercial and political dominance. 

Political and Diplomatie History of Russia, by George 
Vernadsky. Boston, Little, Brown, 1936. $4.00 
A very useful survey, in textbook style, of Russia’s de- 

velopment from earliest times to 1935. 

Viewed Without Alarm: Europe Today, by Walter Millis. 
Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1937. $1.25 
Nine interesting essays interpreting Europe’s mental 

climate, with the conclusion that war is less imminent 

than most Americans believe. 


The Theory and Practice of Socialism, by John Strachey. 
New York, Random House, 1936. $3.00 
Verbose, non-technical summary of the historical back- 
ground and politico-economic philosophy of Stalinist com- 
munism. 


Fascism and National Socialism, by Michael T. Florinsky. 
New York, Macmillan, 1936. $2.50 
The author attempts to give a more sympathetic inter- 
pretation of these two totalitarian régimes than is cus- 
tomary among foreign commentators. 
The Behavior of Money, by James W. Angell. New York, 
McGraw-Hill, 1936. $3.00 
Exploratory statistical studies of recent American mone- 
tary phenomena. 
Picking America’s Pockets: The Story of the Costs and 
Consequences of Our Tariff Policy, by David L. Cohn. 
New York, Harpers, 1936. $2.75 


A sprightly exposition of the case for free trade in the 
United States. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 22, Marcu 26, 1937. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars 2 Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Leste Bugit, President; EstHer G. OcpEn, Secretary; Verna Micue.es Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


National 








- 
o 


| > 


a © cf © a bk @ 


— ak AA —_ wae 2. COUP; 





