ngement 
aS estab- 
rtook to 
in Hun- 
s a firm 
ips from 
10Wever, 
ce about 
a has in- 
ompany, 
| Capital 
lian ves- 


1€ upper 


fforts to 
replaced 
yer inter- 
anube is 
ymmerce. 
the Dan- 
yn-Danu- 
ecome 4 
licy. But 
| general 
5s so far 
cept our 
stern Eu- 
o Wash- 
s of the 


ition not 
Elbe and 
summer, 
yn, at the 


vber, and | 


risters in 
s on Rus- 
Ye should 
, among 
» restora- 


,OLLES 


uy 1946 
“SRMHMEAL RGGe 
SGNBRAL LIBRAR’ 


UNIV. OF MiGM Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


‘rer Dr. William w. Bishop 
i se De 
ivorsi¢ yo ichiza Library 
* i aroor, Bich 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 84 


JUNE 7, 1946 


BIG-THREE COMPETITION REFLECTED IN EUROPEAN ELECTIONS 


_— the Big Three are as yet unable to agree 
on the peace treaties that would rearrange the 
balance of power in Europe, they are viewing with 
the keenest interest the results of the national elec- 
tions recently held in Czechoslovakia, France and 
Italy. Despite the important local problems at stake, 
the dominant question in each case was whether the 
voters would gravitate toward Russia or toward the 
United States and Britain. With the issue thus clearly 
joined, not only Moscow, but Washington, London 
and the Vatican attempted to exercise some degree 
of influence in the elections to secure the results they 
desired. 

CZECHOSLOVAKIA CONFIRMS PRO-SOVIET 
POLICY. In the Czechoslovak elections of May 26 
the emergence of the Communists as the strongest 
party marked a success for Russia’s efforts to consol- 
idate its position in Eastern Europe. The victorious 
Communists won the largest vote of any single party, 
and they have named as Premier Klement Gottwald, 
aformer leader of the Comintern who spent the war 
years in Russia. To many Americans the results of 
these Czechoslovak elections have come as a shock. 
Not only has the United States generally assumed 
that no nation would freely choose a Communist 
Premier, but it has, somewhat complacently, clung 
tothe memory of its role as godparent of the Czecho- 
slovak republic during World War I. Americans 
have also tended to overlook the less flattering his- 
torical fact that the Czechoslovaks were deeply dis- 
illusioned with the West at Munich and assumed, 
tightly or wrongly, that Russia would have aided 
them against Hitler. Moreover, while the United 
States has talked only in general terms about a forth- 
coming economic agreement with Czechoslovakia, 
Moscow signed a bilateral trade treaty with Prague 
on April 10. 


FRENCH COMMUNISTS LOSE FIRST PLACE. 
In France the political current appears to be running 
in the opposite direction from that in Czechoslo- 
vakia. In the national elections held on June 2 to 
choose a new Constituent Assembly that will write 
a constitution to replace the draft rejected by a ma- 
jority of voters on May 5 — chiefly because its pro- 
visions for an all-powerful unicameral Assembly 
seemed to make possible domination by a Commu- 
nist minority—the moderate Catholic Popular Re- 
publican Movement (MRP) replaced the Commu- 
nists as the largest party. With the MRP in first 
place—but lacking a majority—the Communists run- 
ning second, and the Socialists third, the French will 
probably be obliged to form another provisional 
tripartite régime, headed this time by Georges 
Bidault, leader of the MRP and the present Foreign 
Minister. Although the French elections have con- 
firmed the anti-Communist trend indicated by the 
earlier referendum on the constitution, they have by 
no means assured France of greater political unity 
and stability. It will, in fact, be more difficult than 
ever for the MRP and Socialists to work with the 
Communists in the months ahead, for the recent 
electoral campaign was characterized by such rancor 
that virtually nothing remains of the common re- 
sistance front formed by these groups during the war. 

Neither will it be possible for the great powers to 
forget the subtle maneuvering in which they engaged 
in order to influence the French elections. Britain 
and the United States clearly sought by indirect inter- 
vention to counterbalance communism in France by 
special pre-electoral moves, while Russia aided the 
Gusmaieniit party. By what must be regarded as more 
than mere coincidence Britain declared on May 30 
that it was going to arm a strong French air force 
with aircraft and equipment, and on May 28 the 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


~ tS eS 


4! 
i} 
i 


EEE Page Two —$—$_| ———— 
United States announced its loan to France. According wheat”’ which Russia has sent France during the pag} furope : 
to the terms of the comprehensive Franco-American two months has saved the nation’s bread ration. | the few 
trade and financial agreement, which goes into im- PAPAL INTERVENTION IN ITALY. In Italy} strength 
mediate effect, a credit of approximately $1,400,000,- the efforts of the Big Three to influence the outcome propaga 
000 will be extended to France to aid in national re- of the first free national elections in nearly twenty. gravely 
construction. In addition, the cost of about $1,800,- five years—the results of which had not been taby.| jg Huns 
000,000 worth of war-consumed lend-lease supplies lated as we went to press—were less direg} for mo 
will be cancelled, and the United States will sell than in France. At the same time, however, the fac} of the } 
. France war surpluses valued at $1,400,000,000 for _ that Britain and the United States opposed the col.) by adm 
$300,000,000. lection of heavy reparations from Italy at the recent} regarde 
In all fairness it should be pointed out that Wash- conference of Foreign Ministers and insisted tha} Commu 
ington did not impose, either explicitly or implicitly, Trieste remain an Italian city, while Foreign Com.) jn any | 
conditions of any kind on French domestic or for- missar Molotov supported the contrary point of view, jmity o! 
eign policy in return for the loan. Yet the financial was undoubtedly not overlooked by many Italian} boring 
agreement was unavoidably “political” in the broad voters. But the most important intervention in the} detrime 
sense of the word, since the prospect of immediate Italian elections was that of the Pope. In a broad.} sia. At | 
economic aid from the United States encouraged cast to the College of Cardinals on June 1, Pius XIJ} out int 
rank-and-file voters in France to support moderate made the last in a series of pre-electoral appeals to} ments v 
political groups. The French Communists, clearly the French and, more especially, to the Italians} conditic 
aware of the political implications of the loan, at- against “state absolutism” and ‘the wreckers of} or whic 
tempted to offset its influence in behalf of their Christian civilization.’” Although the Pope mentioned} ity ex« 
opponents by declaring that their efforts for indus- no parties by name and refrained from referring to} Czecho 
trial reconstruction had been responsible for the the monarchical issue in Italy, he delivered one of the} United 
American decision to grant credits to France. And in strongest attacks against extreme Left political} Witl 
a further attempt to minimize the importance of groups that the Papacy has made in recent decades} both tl 
American aid, they claimed that the “electoral WINIFRED N. Hapset | of mar 
REVIVING EUROPE SETS COURSE TOWARD SOCIAL DEMOCRACY | 2" 
The results of post-war elections in many Euro- far-reaching reforms that could assure not only po-} United 
pean countries confirm the conclusions reported last litical but also economic and social democracy. The} pomic : 
winter by the Foreign Policy Association* that the most significant aspect of the gains made by these} the Un 
prevailing trend on the continent is toward neither two parties is that their program appears revolution | pifican 
Right extremism nor communism. The middle-of- ary to a majority of Americans, but is welcome to} most p 
the-road social democracy which, with a very few British Dominions like Australia and New Zealand) ycts 
exceptions, is gaining the ascendancy on the conti- as well as the Labor government of Britain, whose) either 
nent in spite of the bitter heritage of civil hatreds, sweeping victory at the polls less than a year ago} goods 
hunger and material destruction left in the wake of in effect strengthened the trend toward social de | payme 
war, is composed of two major elements, both un- mocracy on the continent. necess: 
familiar to American politics: the Socialists (also It is of the utmost importance that this should be} js und 
known as Social Democrats) and the Catholic So- understood in the United States, for hitherto opinion | tributi 
cialists (variously known as Christian Democrats, here has tended to view the struggle for power if | the A: 
Christian Socialists or, as in France, Popular Re- Europe solely as a struggle between American demoe | Russia 
publicans). racy and Russian communism. This view has to) we ha 
SOCIAL DEMOCRACY IN ASCENDANCE. an increasingly dangerous extent obscured compre: | tries « 
The first of these major parties owes its inspiration  ension of developments on the continent, even | Polan 
to the principles of Marxism. The second draws its among officials in Washington. In reality the strug- regim« 
ideals from a series of Papal encyclicals advocating _-S!¢ in Europe since the defeat of Nazism and Fas | tize c 
social reforms from the time of Pope Leo XIII to the cism has been between social democracy and cote = 
present day. Both these groups which, with varia- munism—and the United States, by its fear of any sd 
tions in relative strength, have won strong major-  ‘™Ovement labeled “socialism” has again and again, E 
ities in Belgium, the Netherlands, France, Hungary, while vigorously denouncing Russia, imperiled the 
Austria, Norway and Denmark, as well as the United very elements on the continent that are most symp a 
States zone of Germany, advocate nationalization of thetic to Western democracy, and most opposed | | poy 
key enterprises affecting the public welfare, and both totalitarianism of either Right or Left. cep 
are fundamentally in agreement on the need for LEFTISM NOT ALL DUE TO RUSSIA. The 
*See V. M. Dean, “Daily Contacts in Europe Aid Russo-Western Under- apprehension aroused in London and Washington R 
Policy fs Bucopee” orion Policy Repos, Jamary 13. i9ae, ““™ US by Russia’s domination in the countries of Easter . 


ae 
' the pag 
ition. 
In Italy 
outcome 
y twenty. 
en tabp. 
S  direg 
the fact 
the cl. 
ne recent 
sted that 
gn Com 
of view, 
y Italian 
Mm in the 
a broad. 
Pius X]J 
>peals to 
Italians, 
ckers of 
entioned 
erring to 
ne of the 
political 
decades, 
LADSEL 


Y 


only po- 
‘acy. The 
by these 
volution- 
Icome to 
Zealand 
n, whose 
year ago 
ocial de. 


hould be 
> Opinion 
power if 
n democ 
v has to 

compre- 
nt, even 
he strug- 
and Fas- 
and com- 
ir of any 
nd again, 
riled the 
st sympa 
yposed to 


SIA. The 
ashington 
f Eastern 


———— 
——— 


Europe and the Balkans has led us to assume that in 
the few instances where Communists have shown 
strength this has been due entirely to Moscow’s 
propaganda or threat of force. This theory has been 
gravely undermined, on the one hand, by elections 
in Hungary and Austria, which rolled up majorities 
for moderate and even conservative parties in spite 
of the presence of Russian troops, and on the other 
by admittedly free elections in Czechoslovakia, long 
regarded as an outpost of the West, where the 
Communist party registered the highest gains won 
in any country of Europe. It is true that the prox- 
imity of Russia does exercise an influence on neigh- 
boring countries. But that influence may prove to be 
detrimental, and not necessarily favorable, to Rus- 
sia. At the same time it is entirely possible that, with- 
out interference by Russia, extreme Leftist move- 
ments will gain ground in countries where economic 
conditions are rapidly deteriorating, as in Austria, 
ot which have little hope of finding economic stabil- 
ity except in cooperation with Russia, notably 
Czechoslovakia. It is this development which the 
United States has not sufficiently heeded. 

With the disappearance of Germany, which was 
both the principal market and the principal source 
of manufactured goods for Eastern Europe and the 
Balkans, these countries are confronted with the al- 
ternative of either obtaining substantial aid from the 
United States and Britain, or of entering the eco- 
nomic sphere of Russia. What we must realize is that 
the United States, before 1939, played only an insig- 
nificant role in the trade of these countries, for the 
most part backward producers of agricultural prod- 
ucts for which we have little need. Unless we 
either decide to make them gifts of manufactured 
goods or to open our markets to their products in 
payment for credits, we shall have to recognize the 
necessity they experience of trading with Russia. It 
is understandable that, in view of our major con- 
ttibution to the common struggle for the defeat of 
the Axis powers, and of the undertakings made by 
Russia at Teheran and Yalta, we should feel that 
we have the right to demand free elections in coun- 
tries of Eastern Europe and the Balkans—notably 
Poland and Rumania—now governed by dictatorial 
fégimes that bar opposition activities, and to criti- 
tize conditions in Bulgaria and Yugoslavia, where 


For background on Siam’s protest to the United 
Nations, read— 
SIAM AND THE GREAT POWERS 
by Virginia Thompson 
A survey of the attempts of this small country—beset by 
powerful neighbors each imbued with imperialistic con- 
cepts—to live with the great powers on harmonious terms. 
25 cents 


March 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month 
Subscription $5.00; to F.P.A. members, $3.00 


Page Three 


elections already held have proved unsatisfactory to 
us. But if we intervene in these countries against Rus- 
sia, we must do so with the knowledge that their 
peoples have hitherto lacked the economic well-being 
and minimum education that would enable them to 
make what we could acknowledge as “free” choices. 

IS U.S. POLICY IN EUROPE REALISTIC? There 
are many obvious reasons why the United States 
fears and distrusts Russia. But if this country, as 
some propose, should now adopt the position of re- 
garding war with Russia as inevitable—a view de- 
scribed by General Eisenhower on June 2 as “‘vicious” 
—it should do so at least with fuller understanding 
of the issues at stake in Europe than is now usually 
displayed. Historians will argue for years concern- 
ing the moot question whether Russia created an 
“eastern” bloc which inevitably brought about a 
“western bloc’ or, as Mr. Churchill put it at Fulton, 
Mo., a “fraternal association” of the United States 
and Britain; or whether the Western powers, by se- 
crecy about the atomic bomb and attempts to acquire 
new strategic bases, fanned Moscow's fears of a 
Western coalition: What is clear is that, since the 
end of the war, the policy of the United States 
has been based, in rapidly increasing measure, on the 
assumption that Russia is the enemy of the Western 
world; and that setbacks for communism will bring 
about in Europe restoration or establishment of “free 
enterprise,” of capitalism, and of institutions pat- 
terned on American democracy. 

If that is, in fact, the basis of our policy in Europe, 
then we may soon discover that we are operating on 
assumptions that are not realistic. We cherish our 
way of life, find it peculiarly suited to our needs, 
and would understandably resent attempts by other 
countries to alter or destroy it. But it might be well 
for us to ask ourselves whether our way of life is 
equally suited for other countries whose experience 
differs from our own—for China, or India, or Russia, 
or even most of Europe? The choice today is not be- 
tween capitalism and communism. To an extent that 
will some day profoundly surprise us, the peoples of 
Europe, Asia and Latin America, while rejecting the 
totalitarianism of communism, find themselves out 
of sympathy with the materialism of American so- 
ciety, and are seeking a course that would combine 
political liberty and cultural and moral values with 
social and economic progress. In this respect—much 
as this, too, may surprise us—there is a closer “fra- 
ternal association’”’ between the British under a Labor 
government and the social democratic régimes of 
Europe than between Britain and the United States; 
and a greater area of common experience between 
all those who in Europe suffered terror and starva- 
tion in the fight against Nazism, including the Rus- 


sians. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The second of two articles on possible next steps in disputed areas.) 


— Page Four — 


—t 


UNSETTLED CONDITIONS CONFRONT CHINA-BOUND AMERICANS 191% 
SHANGHAI, May 14.—What is probably the first velopment of penicillin. These supplies will be 
American passenger ship to reach Shanghai since utilized partly by Mme. Sun Yat-sen, widow of the 
1941 has just discharged its Shanghai-bound trav- great Chinese nationalist leader, in her medical work 
elers. We landed today, about 170 strong, after a and partly by the deaconness, who will take her share 


15-day trip on the converted troop ship, Marine Fal- to Hankow which, she hopes, will become a cente| [== 

con. The passage has had special significance, for for penicillin production and distribution in Weg 

the arrival of this private vessel without commercial Central China. i 

cargo is a step toward resuming normal communica- The UNRRA group of some 20 men and women 

tions between China and the United States, severed reflected the variety of rehabilitation, as well as re} L— 

by the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. lief tasks undertaken by that organization. Ther| = 
UNCERTAINTY ABOUT CHINA. The pas- were specialists in child care, relief administration 

sengers on the Marine Falcon seemed about as ran- and social work, a public health nursing consultant, 

dom a group of persons with business in China as an oral surgeon, a radio engineer, a distribution 

one is likely to find. Not all were United States citi- supervisor, various administrators and others. 

zens, for there were Chinese, British subjects, Cana- The comparatively small business group consisted} You. X 

dians, Swedes, Swiss and others; but the 80-odd of individual traders, as well as technical and office 


Americans who debarked at Shanghai are symbolic staff people for firms like the National City Bank | Jl 
of America’s interest in China. They fall into four British-American Tobacco Co., Socony Oil, etc. This 


main categories: missionaries, government personnel slight business representation reflects principally the POR 
(chiefly UNRRA, but also some soldiers), business- caution with which American and other foreign M 
men, and a miscellaneous group consisting largely firms are viewing the chaotic political and eco} 15, an 
of the wives and children of men already working nomic conditions of postwar China. Although China} and th 
in China. offers a field of operations for some importers and} comp! 
It was encouraging to note that, while a patron- exporters and for certain of the larger companies, Axis : 
izing attitude toward China was shown by some pas- the dominant current note seems to be one of caution} since 
sengers, the “Old China Hand” spirit was not much in approaching this market. deput 
in evidence. Many of the passengers were new to the NEED TO UNDERSTAND CRUCIAL ISSUES.} pfoble 


field of Chinese affairs and had had no opportunity The effectiveness of individual Americans in Ching) ™*®*S 
to acquire prejudices that pre-war treaty-port experi- in the years ahead will depend largely on the political | *Y°" 
ence frequently imparted to their predecessors. There and economic conditions under which they will have} DE 
was also an unspoken awareness that China in the to operate, especially those affecting Russo-American | these 
long run will become a great power, despite current relations. Yet there was virtually no discussion of} are fc 
difficulties, and that foreigners who approach the crucial Far Eastern issues among the passengers—} dludin 
Chinese in a condescending manner are out of step _ partly because the news supplied to the ship by radio} forces 
with the trend of events. But perhaps the main point in two weeks of bulletins contained but one brief! on Bu 
is that the Western position in the Far East has been reference to China, and partly because of the new-| ties | 
thoroughly shaken up, and no one on board was ness of many of the people to the China field. shoul 
quite certain how his or her affairs would work out Nevertheless, the absence of vigorous concern } and tl 


after we reached Shanghai. about the issues confronting American policy-makers dispui 

HOPES FOR THE FUTURE. Although uncer- in China cannot but be disturbing. The role of the} ‘onne 
tainty was a major theme, it was mingled with strong United States in Far Eastern affairs is indicated by | by th 
overtones of optimism and a desire to come to grips the many cargo ships and naval vessels anchored in pered 
with the problems of operating in China. The mis- Shanghai waters, as well as by the smaller American | durin, 
sionaries in the main looked forward to building naval craft which swarm in the harbor. But mere selves 
anew, although many of their hospitals, schools and physical power will not be enough to make an in- seem 
church buildings were destroyed during the war. telligent, effective policy possible if Americans in naval 


Particularly interesting was the Episcopalian deacon- general show a lack of awareness and active interes have 
ness who, under a cooperative arrangement with the in current Chinese conditions. Unite 


China Aid Council, a relief organization in New Lawennce K. Rosca 

York, carried with her a quantity of penicillin cul- FE i at the 
A 2 . (Mr. Rosinger is spending four months in China and Japan 

tures as well as various materials useful in the de- gather first-hand material for FPA publications.) plan. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 34, Jung 7, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nation#l Amer 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHeies DEAN, havig 
Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Yeat. dimin 
Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year powe 
_'* Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


