





- pro- 
wage 
0 per 
e, the 
labor 
a Paz 
effect 
other 
ircles, 


ad off 


eport, 
livian 
nd fe- 
ssOcia- 
ed out 
condi- 
: to be 


rlivian 
signal 
or pol- 
Zone, 
hen he 

Pefia- 
iers 15 
rovern- 
esident 
x loans 
. finan: 
ure by 


‘inance 


IOTT 


DS 








PERIGDICAL ROOM 
GENERAL LISRARY 
UNIY. OF MIC. 


MAY 22 1943 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


veneral Library 


VAaversity of Michigan 
fan Arhor. 


hi chican 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 31 


May 21, 1943 





ALLIES PLAN OFFENSIVE IN EAST WITHOUT HALTING IN WEST 


a? invasion of rocky, fog-shrouded Attu island 
in the North Pacific on May 11 is the first new 
American land action launched against Japanese 
troops this year. Widely interpreted as a harbinger 
of offensives to come, this move has led to heightened 
speculation over the possibility that Far Eastern prob- 
lems may be an important theme in the current 
Roosevelt-Churchill discussions. The fact that the 
British leader has been accompanied by Field Mar- 
shal Wavell, commander-in-chief in India, as well as 
by other high military men from that theater, lends 
point to conjecture, especially since American Gen- 
erals Stilwell and Chennault had previously arrived 
home from the Far East. 


EUROPE STILL COMES FIRST. The meager in- 
formation as yet available does not warrant the con- 
dusion that Asia is the major topic of conversation. 
It is worth noting that the Churchill mission is com- 
posed of leaders in all spheres of war activity—not 
merely the Orient. Even less reason exists for think- 
ing that any change in the strategy of concentrating 
on the defeat of Germany is contemplated. With the 
Axis crushed in North Africa, the Russians driving 
on Novorossiisk, and the conquered peoples of Eu~ 
fope stirring as never before, this does not appear 
to be the time for a “breathing spell” in the West 
in order to undertake major operations in Asia. It is 
tme, however, that by opening up the Mediter- 
fanean and thereby greatly simplifying the problem 
of sending supplies to India, the African campaign 
has created new possibilities of action against Japan. 


As far as the Orient is concerned, the Washing- 
ton conversations should be regarded as a continua- 
tion—perhaps an acceleration—of plans already de- 
vised at Casablanca last January. The communiqué 
issued after that meeting referred to measures that 
would be undertaken to assist China. This was fol- 
lowed by the visit of two high British and American 
military leaders to India and China and their an- 


nouncement of “complete accord . . . in coordination 
of offensive plans” in Asia. On February 12 Presi- 
dent Roosevelt spoke of “great and decisive actions” 
that would be taken against Japan, especially in the 
air; in March representatives of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff and of top American commanders in the Pa- 
cific held important conferences on Pacific strategy 
in Washington. Most recently of all, it was an- 
nounced on May 13 that General MacArthur and 
Admiral William F. Halsey, Jr., had engaged in dis- 
cussions. All of these parleys— especially when 
viewed in the context of Australian and Chinese 
pressure for greater action in the Far East—add up to 
careful discussion of ways of meeting possible Jap- 
anese attacks and of launching drives of our own. 


PROBLEMS IN ASIA DIFFICULT. In the en- 
thusiasm generated by the Tunisian victory, it should 
not be forgotten that the Far Eastern military pic- 
ture remains overcast. It is not simply that the Jap- 
anese still have considerable offensive power, while 
we have hardly rounded first base in efforts to drive 
them from their new empire. These matters are im- 
portant, but perhaps to be expected in view of the 
necessity of concentrating on Europe. What is more 
serious is the steady deterioration of the economic, 
political and military situation in China, which even 
now holds down more Japanese troops than any 
other fighting front in Asia. At present Tokyo is 
continuing its quiet, inconclusive but very dangerous 
strategy of attrition by operations against guerrilla 
forces in North China and a campaign into a major 
rice-producing region south of the Yangtze. When 
these drives are taken in conjunction with the serious 
famine conditions existing in certain parts of the 
country, it is obvious that the maintenance of China’s 
resistance is an outstanding problem of Far Eastern 
strategy—one well worth the attention of the high- 
est leaders of Britain and the United States. 

It has been customary to speak of a campaign in 











Burma as a solution of many of China's problems 
and a means of making China a major offensive land 
front against Japan. Unfortunately, the troops which 
entered Burma from India last December in a lim- 
ited, tentative drive have been forced back almost 
to the Indian border, and there is no prospect of a 
further Allied offensive in the region until after the 
monsoon rains end next October. Moreover, the recon- 
quest of Burma and even the reopening of the Burma 
Road—both of which would inevitably take some 
time—might not of themselves be enough to alter 
decisively the fighting power of the Chinese army. 
Yet these developments would be of genuine value 
in guaranteeing the continuance of Chungking in 
the war and in opening up to Allied arms the path 
into Thailand, Malaya and Indo-China, which are all 
at present in Japanese hands. 

WHERE DOES ATTU FIT IN? The American 
landing on Attu has been welcomed in Chungking, 


Page Two 








ay 
—— 


and the American press has itself speculated tha 
this might be the first step toward some combined 
move with the Soviet Union against the northerp. 
most section of the Japanese islands, especially the 
naval base of Paramushiru, some 630 miles from 
Attu, but almost directly off Soviet Kamchatka, 
Whatever may occur in the future, it would seem 
wise at this moment, particularly in view of difficul. 
ties of weather and distance in the North Pacific, 
to view our move in the Aleutians in terms of im. 
mediate results. The invasion of Attu will pave the 
way for the re-seizure of Kiska island to the east, 
depriving Japan of air and submarine bases that 
might be used against Alaska and the west coast of 
North America. At the same time, both the lend-lease 
air route from the United States to the U.S.S.R. and 
the North Pacific lend-lease sea route will become 
safer. 
LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


EUROPE’S PEOPLES MUST BE FREE TO PLAN THEIR OWN FUTURE 


The quickening tempo of Allied activities on the 
periphery of Europe brings a greater sense of urgency 
concerning the political decisions that must precede 
and accompany military operations. It has long been 
apparent that it will not be enough for the United 
Nations to batter down the walls of Hitler's Euro- 
pean fortress. They will have to enter that fortress 
with some agreement as to the fate of the liberated 
peoples, if the end of war is not to be the prelude to 
widespread civil conflict. 


What agreement is emerging from negotiations so 
far carried on among the leaders of the United Na- 
tions? Britain, the United States and Russia have 
recognized the Allied governments in London— 
although Russia has “suspended” relations with the 
Polish government, and has frequently been at odds 
with the government of Yugoslavia. In the still- 
disputed case of France, Russia has recognized the 
French National Committee, headed by de Gaulle, 
the British support de Gaulle and cooperate with 
Giraud, while the United States, having declared that 
it did not want to prejudge the decision, has worked 
closely with General Giraud in North Africa. The 
fact that, at the Food Conference which opened at 





For a picture of present-day Sweden, and an 

analysis of the many problems confronting this 

nation in its attempt to maintain a policy of neu- 

trality, READ— 

SWEDEN: THE DILEMMA OF A NEUTRAL 
by Naboth Hedin 


25c 


May 15 issue of ForeiGN Po.icy Reports 


REPorTS ate published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5.00; to F.P.A. members, $3.00. 











Hot Springs, Virginia, on May 18, de Gaulle and 
Giraud are both represented by M. Alphand, former 
official in the Ministry of Commerce, may indicate 
the possibility of cooperation in international affairs 
between the two French leaders. 


COMMUNISTS NOT THE ONLY ELEMENT | 


FIGHTING NAZIS. Meanwhile, behind the facade 
of diplomatic transactions, Russia has made no se 
cret that it is hoping to find in neighboring states— 
Poland, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria—elements sympathetic 
to the Soviet Union and willing to risk much to un- 
dermine the Nazi ‘‘new order.” That some, although 
by no means all, of these elements are drawn from 
Communist ranks is not due solely to Russian in- 
fluence. It is due first of all to the fact that the coun- 
tries of Eastern Europe and the Balkans face today 
economic and social conditions similar to those of 
Russia in 1917, and experience, in lesser or greater 


degree, a ferment that might result in thoroughgoing / 


revolution once Nazi rule has been broken. 

In these conditions of violent flux two cardinal 
principles might serve as points of departure for the 
United Nations. First, it would be unwise, as tt 
would be unfair, for Russia to assume that the Com- 


munists alone have consistently and courageously 


opposed Nazi rule. It is true that, owing to theif 
efficient organization and political experience, the 
Communists have been particularly successful in 
Europe’s underground movements. But many people 
on the continent have not forgotten that between 
September 1939 and the invasion of Russia in June 
1941 the Communists, following the policy set by 
Moscow, opposed the Allied war effort, declaring 
there was no real distinction between Nazi Germany 
and its opponents. If the political complexion of the 
French National Committee is representative of the 


a re 





E il 


ern- 
| the 
rom 


itka, 


icul- 
cific, 
im- 
the 
east, 
that 
st of 
ease 
and 
ome 


ER 


and 
rmer 
icate 
tairs 


ENT 
cade 
D Se 
fes— 
hetic 
) un- 
ough 


from } 


n if- 
oun- 
‘oday 
se of 
eater 
roINng 


dinal 
r the 
as it 
Com- 
ously 
their 
, the 
ul in 
eople 
ween 
June 
et by 
laring 
many 
of the 
»f the 











state of mind in France, as well as in other occupied 
countries, it would be true to say that men and 
women of all shades of political opinion, economic 
background, and religious beliefs have found a com- 
mon basis of action in their opposition to Nazism. 
Should this condition prove to exist in Europe once 
the “fortress’’ has been breached, it will become the 
duty of the United Nations, instead of setting party 
against party, class against class, to build on this 
common foundation among all anti-Nazis in the 
hope that it may also offer a foundation for post- 
war reconstruction. 


DEMOCRACIES MUST NOT FEAR RADICAL- 
ISM. It is essential, however, that in dealing with 
what might be described as conservative groups in 
Europe, Britain and the United States should not for 
amoment give the impression that they are seeking 
to create some kind of a bloc hostile to the Soviet 
Union. Fear of such a bloc has long dominated Mos- 
cow, and has not yet been completely dispelled. To 
dispel it, Britain and the United States, and others 
among the United Nations, must adopt a second 
cardinal principle—and that is not to fear radical- 
ism, whatever its form, just because it seems to break 
with the known traditions of any given European 
country. Fundamental internal transformations may 
have to take place in a number of countries on the 
continent — among them, obviously, Germany — if 
Europe is to start on post-war reconstruction with a 
tolerably clean slate. These transformations may 
come, in some countries, through reform; in others, 
where reforms are not forthcoming, through revo- 
lution. Britain, the United States and Russia, which 
at the end of the war will together control the major 
share of military power in Europe, could conceiv- 
ably use this power to urge reforms or instigate 
tevolutions. But to be lasting, to be truly rooted in 
the native soil, these reforms and revolutions must 
spring from the actions of the peoples themselves. 
Where the great powers will face critical decisions 
is in not cutting such changes short through fear of 
consequences and, above all, in not coming to blows 
with each other as to the course these changes should 
take. 


No single yardstick is available to measure such 
problems. No litmus paper can be applied to human 
beings to reveal whether they are trustworthy or un- 
trustworthy. Common sense will necessarily have to 
play a large part in any policy that may be adopted. 
Obviously, the Nazis and Fascists, and their declared 


Page Three 





supporters in Axis-held countries, must be outside the 
pale. But what of the rest of the people of Europe, 
both conquerors and conquered? In theory, the 
method favored by Russia in the case of Poland— 
the “‘we or they” method—sounds simple and con- 
vincing. Many people feel that the crisis of our times 
is too acute to permit distinctions among several 
shades of gray, and that the world must be judged 
merely in terms of black and white. But is it, in 
practice, feasible to so divide human beings— 
especially when, as in Europe, they have been sub- 
jected to such agonizing dilemmas, such soul-shat- 
tering alternatives? And would not such an approach 
imply the necessity of eliminating—through execu- 
tion, or imprisonment, or exile—all those who hap- 
pened not to come up 100 per cent to whatever 
standards may be set by the United Nations? Are the 
United Nations, in effect, so thoroughly agreed -on 
common standards that they can, with any sense of 
integrity, demand the extermination or removal of 
all those who have deviated from them in the past? 
Is not one of the main objects of the United Nations, 
on the contrary, to create conditions in Europe which 
will permit a variety of human experience, a range 
of choice for the individual conscience—and not to 
set a single pattern, no matter how consonant that 
pattern might be with American, or British, or 


wear ; 
Russian ideas: VERA MICHELES DEAN 








America in the New Pacific, by George E. Taylor. New 
York, Macmillan, 1942. $1.75 
Penetrating discussion of the issues of the Far Eastern 
war. The author calls for American leadership in enlist- 
ing the fullest possible support of the peoples of Asia in 
the struggle against the Axis. 


Action in the East, O. D. Gallagher. New York, Double- 
day Doran, 1942. $3.00 


A South African journalist who was on the spot angrily 
describes the blunders and shortcomings that contributed 
to the loss of Malaya and Burma. 


The Anglo-American Trade Agreement, by Carl Kreider. 
Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1943. $3.50 
An able analysis of American and British commercial 

policy in the years 1934-1939, with special emphasis on the 

impact of the trade agreement which became effective 

January 1, 1989. ’ 


White Man’s Folly, by Vanya Oakes. Boston, Houghton 
Mifflin, 1943. $3.00 
Interesting story of the experiences of an American 
woman journalist during ten years in the Far East, 
especially China. The author stresses the failure of the 
West to develop policies based on “a true and sympathetic 
comprehension” of the peoples of Asia and their aspirations. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 31, May 21, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lzsgr, Secretary; Vera Micugies Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


One month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Be 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








Washington News Letter 





atthae, 








May 17.—Not even the presence of Winston 
Churchill could cause political observers in Wash- 
ington last week to overlook the significance of Dr. 
Edouard Benes’ arrival. The head of the Czech gov- 
ernment-in-exile came here to discuss with President 
Roosevelt the heretofore unsolved problem of the 
organization of Central Europe. The fact that Dr. 
Benes intends to visit Moscow this summer lends 
added importance to his trip to the United States. 


Dr. Benes is firmly convinced that the future peace 
of Europe depends on the success or failure of efforts 
put forth during the war to achieve friendly coopera- 
tion between the Western powers and the Soviet 
Union. This is, for him, no new or belated discovery. 
He has always been a foremost champion both of the 
League of Nations and the principle of collective 
security. It was he who presided over the League 
Assembly that in the autumn of 1935 proclaimed 
economic sanctions against Italy for its invasion of 
Ethiopia. 

BENES REMEMBERS MUNICH. Dr. Benes wel- 
comed the advent of the U.S.S.R. into the League in 
1934 as a powerful reinforcement of the Geneva 
organization and, under his leadership, Czechoslo- 
vakia entered into military alliances with both France 
and the Soviet Union. The tragic experience of 
Munich, when his own country was sacrificed to 
give Europe a momentary respite from the inevitable 
war, strengthened his belief in the imperative need 
for collaboration with Moscow. During that “ap- 

sement’” interlude, both Britain and France 
barred Russia from the councils of Europe, and 
made a compromise with Hitler which at least some 
of their leaders hoped would divert Nazi expansion 
to the East. When, instead, the British and French 
became involved in war with the Third Reich the 
following year, Stalin reciprocated by leaving the 
Western democracies to fight it out alone with the 
Fuehrer. 


Nothing could be further from the truth than the 
Nazi propaganda claim, used by Hitler so effectively 
in 1938, that Benes is “Stalin's stooge.” The Czech 
President, however, is realistic enough to appreci- 
ate the fact that, without the good will of Russia, 
Czechoslovakia cannot hope to survive as an inde- 
pendent state. Dr. Benes’ policy toward Russia offers 
an interesting and instructive contrast to that of the 
Poles, both before and during the present conflict. 
The Warsaw government, under the leadership of 
Pilsudski and his successors, failed to agree on a 


FOR VICTORY ° 


territorial settlement with either the Germans or 
Russians, and thereby alienated both of their po 
erful neighbors. Even on the brink of war, w 
Hitler was demanding Danzig and the Corrid 
the Poles could not make up their mind to em 
brace a Russian alliance. The direct result of this 
vacillation was the Fourth Partition of their country, 
in September 1939. 


Dr. Benes, on the contrary, has never had any 
hesitation in choosing Russia rather than Germany, 
As a result, he believes he could have counted on 
Soviet support if a European war had broken out 
over the Sudetenland in 1938. Today, while Moscow 
claims the eastern part of Poland, the Soviet list of 
territorial claims presented by Pravda on February 8 
does not include Carpathian Ruthenia, a province of 
Czchoslovakia inhabited mostly by Ukrainians. It has 
also announced that it does not recognize the frontiers 
imposed on Czechoslovakia at Munich. 


NO BLOC AGAINST THE U.S.S.R. This past 
winter Dr. Benes gave striking evidence of the im 
portance he attaches to Soviet friendship when he 
extricated Czechoslovakia from the Czech-Polish 
agreement of 1941, which provided for a federation 
of the two countries after the war. Moscow saw in 
this pact the nucleus of a bloc which might one day 
be used by the Western powers to establish another 
cordon sanitaire against the Soviet Union—and Dr. 
Benes had no desire to alienate the Soviet govern- 
ment. It is axiomatic that as long as Benes remains 
head of the Czech government, his country will join 
no bloc that may be regarded as anti-Soviet. The 
sine qua non of any entente between Czechoslovakia 
and Poland, therefore, must be composition by the 
latter of its conflict with the U.S.S.R. 


Like General Sikorski, the Polish Premier, Dr. 
Benes is considered by some of his compatriots in 
exile as too pro-Russian. Stefan Osusky, the Chicago- 
educated former Czech Minister in Paris, heads a 
movement in London in opposition to Dr. Benes, and 
another of his political foes is former Premier Milan 
Hodza, now in this country. But Dr. Benes’ prestige 
is so great, and his relations with Washington, Lom 
don, and Moscow so excellent, that he is likely to 
continue to be recognized as head of the Czech gov- 
ernment until the Czech people themselves are in 4 
position to confirm or reject his leadership. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


for 
for 


¢ 


RBPe Sa fs 5 Ss 


co &. 


=a 





