—=_ 


=SSOrs that 


reiterated 
eek. Afte 
eMeNt Op 


d that the 


ds of those 
1g up the 


nst the ip. 


> undoubr. 
1E Feaction 
ited again 
- Executive 
scessary to 
tates or js 
first action 
e, after its 
s to delay 
rator Pitt. 
aterials to 
repeal of 
considera- 
to request 
srohibition 
y of amity 
n 1911, 
er of the 
impartial 
>reach be. 
lat it may 
volvement 
argo, Con- 
President 
-partment, 
Executive 
continue, 
ut if war 
ould then 
irged with 
als which 
S. 


action on 
are many 
e effective 
ative and 
ch a basis 
joint Con- 
) the next 


STONE 


ed. National 


DEAN, Editor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XVIII, No. 40 


JULY 28, 19389 


EUROPE’S DIPLOMATIC TUG OF WAR 


by Vera Micheles Dean 
How would Europe line up in case of war? 
This report summarizes the new European align- 


ments, and analyzes the official commitments on 
which they rest. 


July 15 issue of FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS .. . 25 cents 


MOTT — 


class mateer December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
BRion; N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Wich. 


BRITAIN BEATS STRATEGIC RETREAT IN FAR EAST 


ONFRONTED by a direct Japanese attack on 
its interests in China, the British government 
has waged a diplomatic rear-guard action to mod- 
erate or delay its retreat from an exposed position 
which, for the moment at least, has become unten- 
able. The immediate crisis arose from a British-Jap- 
anese dispute at Tientsin, where the Japanese have 
been blockading the British and French Concessions 
since June 14. Not until July 15 did Japanese Foreign 
Minister Hachiro Arita and Sir Robert Leslie Craigie, 
British Ambassador at Tokyo, commence discussions 
to determine the scope of negotiations on the points 
at issue; and the conference dealing with the Tientsin 
problem proper began only on July 24. 


BRITISH-JAPANESE AGREEMENT. On the 
same day, the text of the basic accord under which 
future negotiations will be conducted was announced 
in London. Britain recognizes that in China “hostil- 
ities on a large scale are in progress,” during the 
course of which “the Japanese forces in China have 
special requirements for the purpose of safeguarding 
their own security and maintaining public order in 
the regions under their control and . . . have to sup- 
press or remove any such acts or causes as will ob- 
struct them or benefit their enemy.” The British gov- 
ernment has ‘‘no intention of countenancing any acts 
Or measures prejudicial to the attainment of the 
above-mentioned objects by the Japanese forces.” 
This broad and ambiguous phraseology appears to 
represent the thin edge of the wedge whereby Japan 
hopes to oust foreign interests from China. By grant- 
ing virtual belligerent rights to the Japanese forces 
in the “regions under their control,” the British ap- 
pear to have assented to all Japanese supervision over 
Western activities in China based on military neces- 
sity—a pretext already stretched to extreme lengths 
by Japanese apologists. 

During the past few weeks Tokyo has obviously 


been striving to force the British hand before the 
deadlock in Europe is resolved. Japan’s ultimate aim 
is open British recognition of the “‘new order in East 
Asia,” which is tantamount to acknowledgment of 
supreme Japanese control over China and cessation 
of financial and material assistance to the Chiang 
Kai-shek régime. To impress Britain with the advis- 
ability of submission, Japanese authorities have 
whipped up anti-British sentiment at home by attri- 
buting the long-drawn-out hostilities in China to 
British obstructionism. This maneuver culminated in 
a hostile demonstration before the British Embassy 
in Tokyo on July 14. In China, British “face” has 
been impaired by continued indignities against Brit- 
ish subjects; Chinese mobs have been incited to attack 
British property, and an anti-British boycott move- 
ment is encouraged. Japanese have hinted that failure 
to reach an agreement would lead Tokyo to join the 
other anti-Comintern powers in a military alliance. 


JAPAN EXPLOITS WEST’S DISUNITY. Under 
the circumstances the British tactics are to strive for 
localization of the Tientsin dispute and other issues 
at stake. As long as their attention is centered on 
Danzig neither Britain nor France, both of whose in- 
terests are in jeopardy, can counter the Japanese drive 
by threat of military or economic action. Weak as it 
is, moreover, the position of the Western Euro 
powers in the Orient has been still further under- 
mined by events in the United States. The defeat of 
the Roosevelt Administration’s neutrality legislation, 
interpreted abroad as an isolationist victory, was fol- 
lowed on July 21 by the polite refusal of Secretary 
Hull to testify before the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee on the Pittman resolution providing for 
an embargo on the export of essential war supplies 
to Japan. At the same time, Secretary Hull declined 
to commit the Administration on the desirability of 
giving Japan the requisite six months’ notice for de- 


nunciation of the commercial treaty of 1911—a less 
drastic procedure suggested in a resolution intro- 
duced by Senator Vandenberg on July 18. 

On the other hand, complications in another quar- 
ter may have served to prevent the Japanese ion 
posing too directly their essential demand for relin- 
quishment of all Western rights and privileges in 
China. Serious difficulties have once more arisen with 
the U.S.S.R., with whom the Japanese are involved 
in two separate localities. While desultory fighting 
continues in the Khalka river district on the Man- 
chukuo-Outer Mongolia frontier, the Soviets have 
conducted a series of air raids against railway centers 
far inside the Manchukuo border which appear to 
have sobered the Kwantung army officers for the mo- 
ment. Soviet-Japanese relations have concurrently 
been strained by a threat to confiscate Japanese- 
operated coal and oil concessions in the northern or 
Soviet half of Sakhalin, where the Soviet authorities 
have levied large fines against the concessionaires for 
alleged violation of labor union contracts. 


Davw H. Popper 


CHAMBERLAIN DENIES APPEASEMENT PLAN 


While announcing his new agreement with Japan, 
Prime Minister Chamberlain denied on July 24 that 
he intended to revive his appeasement policy by of- 
fering a large loan to Germany. Rumors of such an 
_ Offer had arisen during the past few days, as a result 
of conversations between Mr. Robert S. Hudson, Sec- 
retary of the Department of Overseas Trade, and Dr. 
Helmuth Wohlthat, economic adviser to the German 
government who was in London ostensibly to attend 
an international whaling conference. According to 
the reports of Mr. Hudson’s proposal, Germany 
would receive a large credit in return for restoring 
its national economy to a peace-time basis, withdraw- 
ing from Czechoslovakia, and negotiating an agree- 
ment with regard to limitation of armaments and di- 
vision of export markets. Mr. Hudson, who was re- 
ported to have offered his resignation, admitted that 
he had discussed the project with Dr. Wohlthat, but 
without any authorization from the Cabinet. 

The British government, meanwhile, continued its 
policy of furnishing financial assistance to its allies 
on the Continent. Considerable conflict arose over the 
precise terms of the £5,000,000-credit to Poland. The 
British insist—particularly as a precedent for im- 
pending loans to other countries—that all of the sum 
be spent in Great Britain. The Poles, desiring to se- 
cure military equipment as quickly as possible, pre- 
fer to spend part of the fund in the United States and 
other countries. Although Colonel Adam Koc, head 


Page Two 


———t 


of the Polish financial mission in London, has threg,. 
ened several times to return to Warsaw, it is probable 
that he will not secure complete freedom in spendin 
the credit. Meanwhile, the Regent of Yugoslavia 
Prince Paul, and the president of the Bulgarian Pay. 
liament, Stoitche Mochanoff, both visited London lay 
week, presumably seeking some share in Britain's 
large-scale loans and export credit guarantees. 

Both the Hudson-Wohlthat episode and the fric. 
tion over the Polish loan tend to underscore the cur. 
rent uncertainty regarding the European “peag 
front” and to encourage new distrust of Britain's de. 
termination to resist German expansion. As negotia. 
tions between London and Moscow continue to pro. } 
duce no alliance, new reports appear concerning the | 
possibility of a German-Soviet commercial agreement | 
In addition to improving the trade relations of these 
two countries, which in many ways have comple 
mentary economies, such a treaty might prove the 
first step toward a political rapprochement, providing 
for spheres of influence in Eastern Europe and giving 
Germany a freer hand in the West. 


STRIFE IN DANZIG. Failure to conclude a Brit. 
ish-Soviet alliance greatly increases the chance for 
Germany’s annexation of Danzig, through use of in- 
timidation similar to that employed during the Su-| 
detenland crisis last summer. The Danzig political | 
police, corresponding to the German Gestapo, have | 
arrested scores of citizens, including twenty Social- 
ists, who were charged on July 19 with conspiring 
with a foreign power, presumably Poland, and} 
preparing to bomb bridges and government build: 
ings. On the following day, a Polish soldier was 
killed by a Danzig customs guard at the frontier vil- 
lage of Postelau. A further encounter between Polish 
and Danzig customs officers occurred near Rebben- 
berg on July 24, while numerous minor skirmishes 
were reported in the Danzig harbor districts. Over | 
four thousand extra police were said to be patrolling 
the Free City, where terrorism, political arrests, and 
demonstrations in favor of German rule appeared to 
be increasing. German spokesmen continue to declare 
that no compromise is possible concerning Danzig, 
while intimating that British mediation would be pre | 
ferable to war. These developments provide an 
ominous parallel to the events of last summer, whet 
local friction, Nazi intransigence, and Anglo-French 
hesitation combined to destroy Czechoslovakia. The 
future of Poland, dependent upon its corridor to the 
Baltic, will likewise be determined by the decisions | 
of its enemies and its friends regarding a minor} 
border area. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 40, Jury 28, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; VERA MicHELtes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


<<a 


National 


Two Dollars a Year. 


— 
Vol 
— 


