




















=A Genera) a Entered as 2nd class matter 
— PERIODICAL KR “~- Wary 
: iBNERAL LIBRA Untya re 
: ce “sV Oras? at 
P Dogs or M Sity o- Nich: AV a 4195 
~~ Aan a . *5an 
(PAA 7 
a° 
— 
fol. 
nan- An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
Deen FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
this 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





ttets | Yor. XXV, No. 4 


NOVEMBER 9, 1945 





loan 


reas) WILL U.S. CIVIL CORPS REPLACE OCCUPATION ARMY IN GERMANY? 


com Nie 
riteq | | BERLIN—The successful application of the Pots- 


009 | dam Declaration will depend on the attitude of the 
| ac.} German people and the degree of cooperation 
achieved by the four Allied powers. For the time 
being, and certainly until the stringencies of this 
winter have been alleviated by gradual economic re- 
sea. | COVErY> the Germans will remain more concerned 
veil with obtaining bare subsistence than with political 
War} issues- Most of them have no clear idea of the suf- 
stead | fetings they have inflicted on other nations and feel 
1 af.| ™ personal responsibility for what was done in their 
fairs| Dame: Few appear to have given much thought to re- 
the | Construction of Germany on non-Nazi lines, and 
from | those who have courageously risked the possible 
Con.| “ispleasure of fellow-Germans by working with 
Allied military authorities must, for the moment, 
tely on Allied support to maintain their positions. 
What will happen to them when Allied support is 
ultimately withdrawn remains an open question. 
True, many Germans have shown eagerness to de- 
nounce Nazis in their communities and to obtain 
| their dismissal from government and other jobs. But 
this trend seems to represent satisfaction of personal 
gtudges against local Fahrers rather than any co- 
herent political revolt against Nazism. 
Food’ CAN WE CHANGE THE GERMANS? The 
uebe& United States, acting ahead of the other occupying 
ceo® ' powers, is planning to hold elections in its zone be- 
ed mM ginning at the local level in January and ending 
‘lenc& ptobably in May with elections in the three states 
cleat under its control—Bavaria, Wiirttemberg and Great- 
if the _et Hesse. The coordinating committee of the Min- 
t sel) ister Presidents of these three states, formed in 
»blem Stuttgart on October 17, represents one more step 
yyenes | in the American policy of placing increasing respon- 
inion | sibility on the Germans for internal administration, 
O sult subject to the supervision of the Military Govern- 
€ Se) ment. American officials consider it essential that the 


used 


juest 


rittee 
secret 


ced a 
. The | 
nited 
COop- 
d de- 
ecific 





LES 





Germans learn to govern themselves, beginning with 
the lower levels of administration, and develop a 
sense of civic responsibility, lack of which in the 
past proved one of the greatest weaknesses of Ger- 
man political life. The war criminals trials are also 
intended to focus the attention of the Germans on 
the record and responsibility of their leaders. 

If the Germans can be made conscious of the way 
in which the misdeeds and mistakes of these leaders 
brought about Germany’s present plight, there would 
be hope for a genuine effort on their part to cooper- 
ate in the restoration of the nation. But if no such 
consciousness appears among the Germans, their 
tendency will be to oppose any measures, hard or 
soft, taken by the Allies. The peacetime cooperation 
of the Germans with other peoples will depend less 
on the destruction or removal of German industry 
than on the spirit in which they are prepared to use 
their remaining economic resources and their indus- 
trial “know-how,” which far surpasses that of their 
neighbors. Little has as yet been done by the Allies 
to change the spirit of the Germans, and it is diffi- 
cult to see how it can be fundamentally modified 
except through a spiritual reconversion by harmon- 
izing and defining more clearly Allied policies to- 
ward Germany. 

NATIONAL INTERESTS GUIDE ALLIES. The 
work of the Allied Control Council has revealed 
divergences among the powers that reflect well- 
known national differences. The British, with their 
long experience in colonial administration, have used 
a relatively small number of well-trained adminis- 
trators to direct the activities of the Germans in their 
zone. Since Britain needs a market for its products, 
there is a tendency on the part of some British to 
deplore the lowering of the German standard of 
living. The Americans, who want quick results, have 
worked like beavers and occasionally, through over- 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 














a Page Two 


zealousness, have gotten in the way of efforts by 


Germans to speed their own political and economic 
recovery. 


The Russians, whose country had been methodi- 
cally devastated by the Germans, have removed from 
their zone all plants, equipment and consumers’ 
goods they need, considering them legitimate rep- 
arations for their losses. At the same time, they have 
urged the Germans to effect their own salvation by 
ridding themselves of Nazi elements, and have taken 
great pride in encouraging manifestations of Ger- 
man culture and in showing their respect for German 
intellectual achievements. The French have not 
lagged behind the Russians in helping themselves to 
foodstuffs and consumers’ goods in their zone, con- 
sidering these materials as legitimate reparations. 
They have displayed a sympathetic attitude toward 
separatist sentiment, especially in Baden, and have 
vigorously opposed the formation of the five central 
administrative departments—finance, industry, for- 
eign trade, communications, and transport — en- 
visaged in the Potsdam agreement, on the ground 
that France did not participate in the Potsdam de- 
cisions. It is obvious that France, which fears the re- 
constitution of a strong central government in 
Germany, is determined to obtain settlement of its 
demands for internationalization of the Ruhr, and 
establishment of French control (possibly shared 
with Belgium and Holland) over the Rhineland, 
before it will consider the formation of central de- 
partments, strongly favored by the other three 
powers. 


CIVILIAN ADMINISTRATORS NEEDED. 
None of the problems raised in the Allied Control 
Council, according to Allied officials in all four 
zones, is beyond the possibility of reasonable settle- 
ment, provided the Big Four can agree as to their 
concept of the post-war world into which Germany 
must sooner or later be integrated. But effective 
handling of Germany's problems requires, first of all, 
that the Allies clearly indicate their intention to re- 
main as long as this may prove necessary. Above 
all, it is important that the United States clarify its 
policy toward Germany. Most American observers 
agree that the military occupation in the United States 
zone could be effectively maintained by a relatively 
small number of troops, perhaps detached from the 
regular army, and by a corps of civilian administra- 
tors familiar with German affairs. 

To achieve this arrangement, three measures ap- 











— — 
pear to be particularly urgent: (1) President Ty. N 
man should issue a statement of policy indicating 
the determination of the United States to participate 
in Allied occupation of Germany for as long as this 
may prove to be necessary; (2) a special agency tp 
deal with occupation affairs should be created, sim). 
lar to the agency already created for this purpose by 
the British, to expedite decisions on policy now too 
often delayed in Washington due to pressure of 
other business; and (3) a campaign should be up. 
dertaken to recruit well-qualified civilians prepared 
to serve in Germany for a stated number of years— 
not sit on the edge of their chairs eagerly waiting to 
return home, as many of the military personnel long 
overseas are now doing. The work to be accom. 
plished in Germany represents a great and arduous 
service to assure the future security of the United 
States. The work of Americans who undertake this 
task should not only be subjected to careful scrutiny, 
but should also be accorded proper recognition and 
support at home. 

ALLIES MUST SUPPORT LEFTISTS. We must 
realize that we are in the process of effecting in| 4. 
Germany a political and social revolution which, if 
it has lasting results, will leave a political régime} p,. 
definitely Left of center and an economy subject to| pe, 
extensive government controls. This change in Ger- 
many is favorable to the interests of the United 
States and other United Nations because it is the 
Leftist elements which are positively anti-Nazi and 
genuinely anxious to work with the Allies. Failure 
on the part of the Western powers to support these 
elements after 1919 was directly responsible for the 
collapse of the Weimar Republic. We must approach 
the Germans neither in a spirit of blind revenge nor} wh 
blind sentimentality, but with the determination to} hel 
discover, in concert with them, the flaws in modem} De 
society that lead to the ruthless use of scientific in-| ele 
vention for destructive purposes and to remedy these | on 
flaws in such a way that industry, instead of having} the 
to be crippled for fear of its lethal effects, can | an 
eventually be used freely by all countries for the wh 
benefit of the community. | sit 

VERA MICHELES DEAN | 





(The second in a series of articles on Germany.) 





Middle East Diary, by Noel Coward. Garden City, Double M 
day, Doran, 1944. $2.00 i 
Using the war as a backdrop the actor-playwright does | 


a rather charming, slight tale of his performances in the Ja 
Middle East. ha 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 4, November 9, 1945. 


Tt in. 
‘ 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dornoruy F. Lunt, Secretary; Vara Micug.es Duan, Editor. Entered # f 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at leas fr 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year pt 
—_'s) Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. te 








ating 
‘ipate 
S this 
cy to 
Simi- 
Se by 
V too 
re of 
© un- 
ared 
ars— 
ng to 
long 


luous 
nited 
> this 
itiny, 
| and 


ig in 
ch, if 
‘gime 
ct to 
Ger. 
nited 
s the 
| and 
Lilure 
these 
r the 
roach 
e nor 
yn to 
dern 
iC in 
these 
ving 
can 
> the 


\N 


yuble- 


_ does 
n the 





ered a | 
at least 

















— Page Three — 





"NEW REVOLTS FOLLOW OLD PATTERNS IN BRAZIL AND VENEZUELA 


In Latin America a new cycle of revolutions has 
set in during the past two years. In Ecuador, Colom- 
bia, San Salvador, Guatemala and, most recently, 
in Argentina, Venezuela, and Brazil, uprisings have 
occurred which seem to have only one thing in 
common—the use of force rather than the ballot 
box to effect desired changes in government. Indeed 
the pessimistic observer is led to conclude that the 
only advance over the 19th century and its “gay 
dvil wars” has been in man’s mastery of the science 
of destruction. All the lethal instruments.and tech- 
niques of 20th century warfare—tanks and bazookas, 
dive-bombing and strafing of defenseless villages— 
have been put to use in these revolutions, which are 
miniatures of the great operations of World War II. 

While the war lasted, the attention of Latin 
Americans was riveted on the global struggle in 
which they were, whether or not the fact was im- 
mediately apparent, profoundly involved. At the 
same time, those in power resorted to the ancient 
device of postponing difficult political decisions on 
the pretext that pressing external problems should 
have priority. For President Getulio Vargas of 
Brazil this policy bore bitter fruit when, on Octo- 
ber 29, the eve of the long-overdue presidential 
elections, he was ousted by the army. During his fif- 
teen years in office, Vargas had retained his position 
against mounting opposition by judiciously favor- 
ing in turn the liberal and reactionary elements 
within the government whenever this appeared politi- 
cally advantageous. His delicately balanced power 
was seriously threatened in mid-February of this 
yeat by both groups. At that time, the President, 
who in 1943 had promised that elections would be 
held at the end of the war, finally set the date for 
December 2 and, after the fashion of Brazilian 
electoral politics, appointed General Eurico Dutra, 
one of those who were then planning revolution, as 
the government’s presidential candidate. This alli- 
ance of convenience was not fated to succeed. Vargas, 
who had named Dutra only to split the army oppo- 
sition, was flirting with the Communists in a project 
to postpone elections and convoke a representative 
assembly to write a more democratic constitution for 
Brazil. When he took the first step toward imple- 
menting this plan, his War Minister, General Goes 
Monteiro, forced him to hand the government over 
to the Supreme Court. As the people of Rio de 
Janeiro went wild with joy, Chief Justice José Lin- 
hares became interim head of the government pend- 
ing elections which will be held as scheduled. 

WHAT WILL REVOLTS BRING? To infer 
from the fall of Vargas that a great stride toward 
democracy has been taken would, however, be to 
put too much credence in the professedly liberal in- 
tentions of the opposition. The old guard of the pre- 


Vargas period, which was hardly more satisfactory 
from a democratic standpoint, is attempting a come- 
back through the candidacy of Air Brigadier Eduardo 
Gomes, who is now expected to win since Gen- 
eral Goes Monteiro has transferred his support— 
and the weight of the military machine—from Dutra 
to Gomes. Unless Brigadier Gomes, at best a re- 
luctant candidate, takes strong leadership of the ill- 
assorted elements constituting his following and ini- 
tiates certain clearly indicated reforms, such as 
elimination of the authoritarian features of the Con- 
stitution of 1937 and of the control of public opin- 
ion, the events of October 29 will have done no more 
than change the occupants of the Guanabara Palace. 
Moreover, with the ex-President’s intentions still a 
mystery in the incredibly complicated political jungle 
of Brazil, that country may even witness a repetition 
of the events that occurred in Argentina—for Var- 
gas, like Perén, may make a strong bid for a return 
to power. 

The Venezuelan revolution of October 18, which 
overthrew the government of General Isaias Medina, 
was also precipitated by the prospect of managed 
presidential elections. But while the Brazilian move 
was aimed at unseating a 15-year-old dictatorship, 
the week-long fighting in Caracas reflected the dis- 
satisfaction of some groups with the sluggishness 
of the Medina government in bringing Venezuela 
out of its long travail under the dictator Juan Vi- 
cente Gémez. It is charged that in the ten years since 
Gomez died, the administrations of General Eleazar 
Lépez Contreras, himself a candidate in the forth- 
coming elections, and Medina have done little to 
implement projected social and economic reforms, 
while keeping power in the hands of a small group 
of people representing the wealthy mountainous 
western region of the country. The revolt was en- 
gineered by disaffected elements in the army, who 
at the eleventh hour were joined by the moderately 
leftist Democratic Action Party. It is entirely pos- 
sible that the young West Point or German-trained 
officers in the provisional government have motives 
quite different from those of their civilian colleagues. 
The government, headed by Dr. Rémulo Betancourt, 
has limited itself to announcing its intention of in- 
augurating machinery for direct election of the presi- 
dent by universal suffrage and secret ballot, bringing 
to trial all officials of the previous government 
charged with corruption in office, and taking steps 
to reduce the cost of living and raise living standards. 
After receiving assurances that foreign oil holdings 
would be respected and that the new cabinet is com- 
posed of reputable and patriotic men, the United 
States on October 30 tecognized the revolutionary 
government. 

OLIvE HOLMEs 








Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON DIVIDED ON U.S. INTERVENTION IN CHINA 


The general public today has an opportunity to 
play a direct part in the shaping of United States 
policy toward China, where, under the cloak of tem- 
porary military responsibility, we currently are set- 
ting up a sphere of long-term political influence. 
The nation apparently accepts gladly the proposition, 
frequently stated by the Administration, that the 
existence of a strong and stable China is essential to 
the welfare of this country, but it could begin now 
to consider whether, to strengthen China, we should 
strengthen the régime of Generalissimo Chiang Kai- 
shek at the possible cost of deep American involve- 
ment. The Administration itself is divided over this 
issue, which has become acute as the result of three 
developments: (1) The outbreak of civil war be- 
tween enemy Chinese armies commanded by Chiang 
and by the government of the northern provinces; 
(2) the continued stationing of two United States 
Marine divisions in northern China, to regain for 
Chiang territories which his own forces could not 
recapture; and (3) the announcement on Novem- 
ber 2 in Chungking that the United States will estab- 
lish a five-year military mission in China to assist the 
Generalissimo in reorganizing his armies, standardiz- 
ing equipment and setting up training centers. 

UNITED STATES INTERVENES ALONE. 
China’s troubled affairs confront the United States 
with a difficult decision as to which of three possible 
courses to follow. First, we could rely on the assur- 
ances given by Chiang that internal dissension will 
be settled by peaceful political means and accord 
him the usual moral assistance a recognized govern- 
ment can legitimately claim from other governments 
with which it maintains diplomatic relations. Second, 
we could put upon all Chinese the responsibility for 
settling their differences in whatever manner they 
wish and hold aloof until some sort of settlement 
is reached. Third, we could assume that the northern 
Communists are “bandits” and that we ought to assist 
the recognized government to defend itself. 

The Administration disagrees about which course 
to follow. Even the elements in the Administration 
which support the policy of intervention see in the 
very outbreak of civil war an end to hopes that 
Chiang can calm the dissension by peaceful political 
means. A general reluctance to see warfare flame 
anew in China stays the Administration from adopt- 
ing a policy of complete aloofness. The well-devel- 
oped military organization of the Communists causes 
some authoritative observers to doubt that they can be 
considered “‘bandits’’; those troops today are armed 


with heavy field guns and tanks, and even when they 
were lightly equipped they were able to harry the 
forces of the Generalissimo. The development of 
intensive warfare beyond the present skirmishin 
could cost the United States new military casualties, 
Yet the masters of policy are basing their course op 
the supposition that the Communists are ‘‘bandits’ 
and that it is our duty to maintain order in Asia by 
giving military aid to a particular Chinese régime. 
The decision that the United States should inter. 
vene in Chinese affairs during the period of peace 
is new, although throughout the war we gave mili. 
tary assistance to Chiang as a fighting ally. Only six 
weeks ago the Administration was veering in the di. 
rection of aloofness and had decided to nominate 
John Milton Helmick, Judge of the United States 
Court in China from 1934 to 1942, as Ambassador 
to succeed General Patrick J. Hurley, who was on 
his way to Washington from Chungking. General 
Hurley and Lt. Gen. Albert C. Wedemeyer, Chief 
of Staff to Generalissimo Chiang and commander | 
of the United States forces in China, are the chief 
architects of the intervention policy. After General 
Hurley visited the White House, President Truman 
decided to retain him as Ambassador and also to 
return General Wedemeyer to China. As the State 
Department is not in full agreement with the inter- 
vention policy, the problem remains open. 
WORLD-WIDE IMPLICATIONS. The issue 
transcends the question of China. The friends of 
intervention suspect that the Soviet Union is secretly 
supporting the Communist forces with arms and 
counsel. Accordingly, they conceive of our policy as 
a move simply to protect our normal interest in 4 
portion of Asia which also interests the USSR 
The intervention resulting from this practical con- 
sideration of the world relationship of the two 
mightiest powers nevertheless collides with a uni | 
versal principle recently enunciated by President 
Truman, who said on October 27 that “all peoples | 
who are prepared for self-government should be pet- | 
mitted to choose their own government by their own | 
freely expressed choice, without interference from | 
any foreign source.” As long as we consider that aid | 
to Chiang is the same thing as aid to China, freedom | 
of choice within China, whether by ballot or by vio- | 
lence, can exist only with difficulty. By recognizing 
the new governments of Venezuela and Brazil, the 
United States last week admitted the right of peoples 
to change their governments by other instruments 
than the ballot. Bair BOLLES 











