——— 


mili- 
gypt, 
| the 
their 
rotia- 
ful. 
draft 
igypt 
LgyP- 
The 
LZyp- 
llows 
lmin- 
ollow 
Canal 
sh to 
| the 
ks to 
Fur- 
> use 
nd to 
se of 
to be 
ptian 
ritish 
3 and 
draw 
sence 
onal- 
ing a 
ll en- 
ith a 
igypt 
right 
laws 
ssur- 
lence 
, the 
High 
nises 
rship 


National 
Editor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpreta the Research St 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


a 


VoL. XV, No. 46 SEPTEMBER 11> 


4986 


POST-WAR POLITICS IN GREECE 
by Nicholas S. Kaltchas 


This report deals with the events leading up to and 
immediately following the restoration of the monarchy 
in Greece, and touches briefly on the Metaxas dictator- 
ship after the General’s coup of August 5, 1936. 


September 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


second- 


December 


Entered as 
class matter 


1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 


Periodical Divisien, 
Library of Congress, 


Yashineton, D. €. 


DELAY ENDANGERS SPANISH ARMS EMBARGO 


HE advance of rebel forces, which in north- 

ern Spain brought about the capture of Irtiin on 
September 4, led to the fall at Madrid of the Giral 
cabinet and the organization of a much stronger 
and more representative government under Fran- 
cisco Largo Caballero, dynamic left-wing Social- 
ist. Following this consolidation of political pow- 
er, the loyalists claimed an important victory at 
Talavera de la Reina, where General Franco’s 
troops were reported to have been driven back 
four miles, thus checking for a time the danger of 
an attack on Madrid from the southwest. At the 
same time, the fall of Iran promised to relieve the 
loyalist threat to the rear of General Mola’s army, 
and thus facilitate his advance on the capital from 
the north. 

With the new cabinet the Madrid government 
now has, for the first time since the victory of the 
Popular Front in the February 16 elections, the 
active collaboration of all its supporting groups— 
with the sole exception of the Anarcho-Syndical- 
ists. The cabinet is made up of six Socialists— 
including the powerful right-wing leader, Inda- 
lecio Prieto—two Communists, three leftist Re- 
publicans, and one representative each from the 
Catalan Esquerra (Left) and the Basque Nation- 
alists. The government gains particularly from 
the cooperation of the Socialists, who possess the 
best organization and the most numerous repre- 
sentation in the Cortes of all the Popular Front 
parties. 

Meanwhile, international efforts to establish an 
arms embargo against both Spanish factions are 
still beset with difficulties. Following general ac- 
ceptance of the French non-intervention proposal, 
endeavors have been directed toward the organi- 
zation in London of a committee to supervise the 
efficacy of the bans declared by the various gov- 
ernments. Unwillingness on the part of Ger- 
many and Portugal to accept membership in 
the committee delayed initiation of its activ- 


ities. Germany finally acted on September 5, 
after receiving assurance that the committee 
would not attempt the réle of mediation in the 
civil struggle. But on September 7 Portugal, 
whose sympathies incline toward the rebels, was 
still holding out. This delay in establishing inter- 
national control of the arms embargo, it was 
feared, might encourage continued shipment of 
munitions, which the rebels can easily receive 
through Portugal. The fall of Irtin, important 
gateway city to France, closed a possible avenue 
of supply to the loyalists. Fearing that the “‘neu- 
trality” policy toward Spain was injuring the 
Madrid government more than the rebels, 200,000 
French metal workers staged a one-hour strike 
in the Paris region on September 7 to support 
their demand that the arms embargo be lifted 
in favor of Madrid. Premier Blum resolutely 
refused to sanction this step, declaring it would 
bring on a general European war. 
CHARLES A. THOMSON 


THE SOVIET PURGE 
To a long series of political assassinations, 
purges and other atrocities which have marred 
the recent history of Europe are added the Soviet 
executions. On August 25 it was announced that 
16 men, convicted of a plot to overthrow Stalin, 
had been shot. A number of these men were “old 
Bolsheviks” who had been Communist leaders be- 
fore the 1917 revolution, while two of them— 
Zinovieff and Kameneff—had held high positions 
in the Soviet régime. Following the death of 
Lenin in 1924, the government rested in the hands 
of a triumvirate composed of these two men and 
Stalin. Gradually the latter succeeded in estab- 
lishing his exclusive control, finally exiling Zino- 
vieff, Kameneff and Trotsky because they objected 
to Stalin’s Rightist tendencies. Although Trotsky 
has continued in exile, the other two subsequently 

recanted and were allowed to return. 


Last year both Zinovieff and Kameneff were 
convicted of being “morally” responsible for the 
assassination of Kiroff in December 1934—for 
which 107 persons were executed—and were given 
prison sentences. This August, the government 
charged that they had directly instigated the as- 
sassination and, with 14 others over a period 
from 1932 to November 1935, had plotted the 
death of Stalin and other Soviet leaders. Accord- 
ing to the indictment, the plot was engineered by 
Trotsky, now an exile in Norway, and was as- 
sisted by the German secret police (Gestapo). 

At the trial, which opened on August 19, 14 of 
the 16 defendants fully confessed their guilt. One 
astonishing feature of the plot was the charge 
that the chief conspirators planned to put to death 
the actual assassin of Stalin in order to conceal 
the plot’s origin. Fritz David, a member of the 
German Communist party and a Trotskyite, testi- 
fied that he attended meetings of the Third Inter- 
national last summer with a Browning machine 
gun under his arm, but could not get close enough 
to Stalin to shoot. 


The defendants gave their confessions amidst 
sobbing, oratory and mutual recrimination and 
without, apparently, expecting mercy. Although 
the stories corroborated each other, no witnesses 
were called by the state or the defense; and, weak- 
ened by long imprisonment, the chief prisoners 
had no opportunity to confer among themselves 
on their defense. From Norway, Trotsky de- 
nounced the whole proceeding, declaring the trial 
“one of the most horrible crimes in world history.” 
He announced that to prove his innocence he 
would sue for libel the Norwegian Nazi party 
which had repeated the Moscow charges. Mean- 
while the Soviet purge continues. Such prom- 
inent figures as Bukharin, Radek, Rykoff and 
Gregory Sokolnikoff are under official suspicion. 
Scores of Communists are being removed from 
their positions in the party or in industry if at 
any time they have been adherents of the Trotsky 
faction. 


Apparently these executions have failed to 
achieve their purpose. Even if there were some 
basis for the charge of counter-revolution, it is dif- 
ficult to see why the charges should have been made 
at this time, particularly when the chief defend- 
ants were already in prison for similar offenses. 
The most plausible explanation is that Stalin 
wished to use the trials as a pretext for discredit- 
ing Trotsky’s influence, which seems to be increas- 
ing among the Communists outside Russia, and 
also to hold in check revolutionary desires within 
the Soviet Union. Trotsky holds that workers in 


Page Two 


every country must incessantly struggle for the 
revolution—a belief based on the teachings of 
Marx and Lenin. Stalin has come to realize that 
the policy of instigating Communist revolution 
abroad has led to Fascist reaction and, if carried 
further, may even endanger the existence of the 
Soviet Union. The Russian masses, however, in- 
doctrinated with the principles of communism, 
which is fundamentally international and revolu- 
tionary, have been eager to aid their struggling 
brothers in Spain. The simplest way to hold them 
in check and discredit the revolutionary elements 
abroad was to show the world that Trotsky and 
his followers are men without scruple and 
“Fascist dogs.” Nevertheless, the result of Stalin’s 
repressive methods may be merely to widen the 
breach within the international Communist move- 
ment. 

It is a curious paradox that, in his endeavor to 
curb revolutionary forces, Stalin has injured the 
position of the Soviet Union among civilized na- 
tions. Since it joined the League of Nations in 
1934, Soviet Russia has endeavored to demonstrate 
that it is a champion of social justice and world 
peace. It has protested against the terrorism of 
the Fascist dictatorships, and urged Communist 
parties in every country to join with bourgeois 
liberals in a united front against fascism. Appar- 
ently to meet the charge that the Soviet was a ter- 
roristic régime, Stalin authorized publication of 
the draft of a new constitution several weeks ago. 
But the political executions of August reveal the 
repressive tendency of the Soviet government, 
which continues to rest on the firing squad and 
mass propaganda, rather than on the procedures 
of liberal democracy. These executions constitute 
one more example that Soviet Russia exacts an 
even greater toll of human life than Nazi Ger- 
many or Fascist Italy. So long as these conditions 
persist, the Soviet Union will fail to win the sym- 
pathy of democratic powers, which it has courted 
for years. Surrounded by menacing enemies, the 
Soviet is in need of both sympathy and aid, but it 
has chosen to forfeit these by practices which 
seem inherent in the régime. The most unfor- 
tunate result of this episode is that it will lead 
reactionaries to say—unjustly—that government 
planning inevitably leads to wholesale tyranny. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


The Nazi Dictatorship, by Frederick L. Schuman. New 
York, Knopf, 1936. $3.50 
A second edition, bringing up to date this comprehensive 
history and critique of National Socialism. 
Platform for America, by Ralph E. Flanders. New York, 
Whittlesey House, McGraw Hill, 1936. $1.00 
An appeal for more goods at cheaper prices. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 46, SgpTBMBER 11, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lgsiig Bugit, President; EstHerR G. Ocpen, Secretary; VERA MicHELes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


—- op ot ee Ae et © ® DD 3" 6 


