


SRRFREBGEEERRSR EAE I 


a 


‘BBESE: 


RRARRAaBERERS 


ives 


of 
Pp a 
ates 
; no 
ith’s 


ates 
ete 
ical, 
e in 
with 
ated 
uch 


tional 


Year. 


the TEAL oe 


SENBRAL LIBRARY Entered as 2nd class matter 





only. oF Mica. JUN 5 1986 


General Library 


University of Michigan 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


fon Arbor, nic 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 33 


May 31, 1946 





NE of the darkest weeks in the history of the 
United States temporarily overshadowed, both 
in its immediate impact and in its ultimate implica- 
tions, the international crises that continue to mark 
the world’s painful recovery from the agonies of 
wat. The profound shock caused by the railway 
strike should lead the American people, who had 
been spared the horrors of war, to view with a 
greater measure of sympathetic understanding the 
anxieties, sufferings, and inner conflicts of less for- 
tunate nations while they strive to reconvert the ma- 
chinery of industrial democracy. Yet so inextricably 
have the domestic affairs of every nation become 
bound up with the affairs of the international com- 
munity as a whole that every country, no matter how 
great its own internal problems, cannot for a mo- 
ment take its mind off the deep-seated convulsions 
that plague the Middle East, Europe and Asia. 
IRAN: WHAT KIND OF INTERVENTION ? 
When the United Nations Security Council met on 
May 8 to resume consideration of the Iranian situ- 
ation, Mr. Gromyko, the U.S.S.R. delegate, in ac- 
cordance with his warning of April 23, was again 
absent, and the Council received inconclusive reports 
from Iranian sources concerning the evacuation of 
Russian troops which had remained in Iran after 
March 2, in violation of the Anglo-Russian-Iranian 
treaty of 1942. On May 23 the Moscow radio an- 
nounced that all Russian troops had been withdrawn 
ftom Iran by May 9. Reports of American correspon- 
dents who have visited the province of Azerbaijan, 
which had earlier proclaimed its autonomy and had 
been the subject of prolonged Russo-Iranian nego- 
tations, indicate that it had in effect been cleared of 
Russian troops, but that the Soviet authorities had 
left in their wake a well-established pro-Russian 
group equipped with modern armaments who, ac- 





BIG THREE CONTEST FOR POWER NEARS CLIMAX IN DISPUTED AREAS 


cording to some accounts, have been engaged in civil 
war with the central government at Teheran. Thus, 
presumably, one of Russia’s main objecttves—to fos- 
ter establishment in the province of Azerbaijan, ad- 
joining the U.S.S.R., of a “friendly” government— 
has been achieved, in spite of intervention by the 
Security Council. 

If the ten members of the Council (with Russia 
absent) should now undertake an investigation of 
the situation in Iran, as had been previously pro- 
posed by the Australian delegate, a further step 
would be taken toward United Nations intervention 
in the affairs of that country. Such a step would be 
fully justified by the provisions of the UN Charter, 
which charges the Security Council with the func- 
tion of preventing war by inquiring into any and all 
situations susceptible of leading to armed conflict, 
and taking appropriate action. The Council, how- 
ever, made the initial mistake of concentrating its 
attention primarily on the question of Russia's viola- 
tion of the 1942 treaty—a violation which, it indi- 
cated, would be corrected by the withdrawal of Rus- 
sian troops. If, in effect, this withdrawal has taken 
place, investigation by the Council of attendant cir- 
cumstances, in particular the charge several times 
made but never actively pressed by the Iranian gov- 
ernment that Russia was interfering in the country’s 
internal affairs, would merit study. This, however, 
would require the opening of a new stage in the dis- 
cussion of Iran. At that point Russia, if it participates 
in the discussion, would be in a position to veto a 
UN investigation. 

There is no doubt that political, economic and so- 
cial conditions in that country, as pointed out by 
experts like Dr. Millspaugh, call for some form of 
outside action if Iran is not to be rent by civil strife. 
Intervention there will either be continued by each 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 











—E 








of the Big Three piecemeal, or have to be under- 
taken by a body representing the United Nations. 
Nor can Iran be considered in a vacuum, apart, for 
example, from equally controversial neighboring 
areas like Palestine and Transjordan. Had the issue 
been presented in this larger form by the United 
States at the initial meetings of the Security Council, 
the Western powers might have been able to avoid 
the stalemate now reached on Iran. And had Russia 
then publicly refused to cooperate on a program of 
seeking jointly with other powers to alleviate causes 
of unrest in Iran, it would have become far more 
clearly a target for world criticism than it is today. 


GERMANY: DIVISION OR UNITY? In Ev- 
rope, too, it is impossible to proceed with piecemeal 
decisions, as the events of recent weeks have made 
amply clear. The Potsdam settlement, reached before 
the heat of battle in Europe had cooled off, and be- 
fore the outcome of war in Asia had become known, 
was based primarily on military considerations. The 
United States and Britain have become aware, 
through bitter experience, that certain aspects of the 
Potsdam settlement are unworkable. But their pro- 
posed remedies still show confusion of purpose. The 
Western powers, harassed by the lack of foodstuffs 
in their zones of occupation, and the consequent 
necessity of importing food into Germany which as 
yet has no exports to pay for its imports, have become 
doubtful about the wisdom of reducing Germany's 
industrial productivity, have decided to suspend 
further reparations in kind, and insist on the need 
for the creation of a central economic administration 
which would permit the removal of zonal barriers. 
The French, however, believe that it is impossible to 
separate politics and economics, and that the estab- 
lishment of a central economic administration will 
inevitably result in the establishment of a central 
political administration. Actually, the United States 
has appeared to agree with the French desire for po- 
litical decentralization by fostering, in accordance 
with the Potsdam settlement, the creation of local 


DOMESTIC CONFLICTS WEAKEN U.S. ECONOMIC LEADERSHIP 


In the early days of the war, when this country un- 
dertook to supply armaments and other essentials to 
those who were resisting the onslaught of the Axis, 
President Roosevelt epitomized our commitments by 
saying we were to be “the arsenal of democracy.” 
The economic program required at that time was 
clear-cut. It called for production and more produc- 
tion of those things which were necessary to over- 
come our enemies. The already enormous productive 
capacity of this country was further expanded, in- 
creasing according to one estimate by 40 per cent from 
1940 through 1944. This expansion proved possible 
because the American people had unity of purpose. 
The productive power thus built up remains largely 


Page Two 
















administrative units in the American zone. Yet thi 
country has not proceeded: to the logical sequel ¢ 
urging a federation of local administrations in Ge 
many. 

The British, plagued by their own difficulties jy 
keeping up coal production at home, and therefog 
determined to maintain control of the Ruhr cq 
mines, have been no more enthusiastic than th 
United States about the French proposal for placiny 
the Ruhr under international control. But they hay 
not succeeded as yet in raising coal output in th 
Ruhr to the level where it could meet the needs of 
France, Holland, Belgium and other European coup, 
tries, let alone Germany. Meanwhile the Russian 
who assumed that, sooner or later, the United Statg 
and Britain would become sympathetic to the Ge. 
mans and would weaken their hold on the defeated 
enemy, have lost no time in consolidating their ow 
position. This is true not only in the areas assigned 
to them at Potsdam (which, presumably, are lost ty 
Germany), but also in their zone of occupation. Aj 
a result, the problems of the Western powers con 
cerning both the feeding of Germans in their zone 
and the future political structure of Germany hay 
been greatly increased. Nothing will be gained noy 
by crying over spilt milk. The wisest course would kk 
for the Western powers to admit that certain mis 
takes were made at Potsdam, and to seek to corred 
them through revision of that settlement. Unfortu 
nately the breach between the Western powers an( 
Russia has deepened to such an extent that a move 
in this direction might well be regarded by Russia a 
an attempt to rob it of the fruits of victory. Yet Mr 
Molotov’s statement of May 27, in which he e& 
deavors to answer point by point criticisms of Rus 
sian policy made by the United States and Britain 
indicates that the moment may have arrived when the 
Big Three will come to grips with the fundamentd 
issues of peacemaking. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The first of two articles on possible next steps in disputed areas.) 


intact and places in our hands an instrument that can 
contribute immeasurably to world peace, if only we 
are wise enough to sense its importance and to us 
it constructively. 

WORLD LOOKS TO US. FOR HELP. Out 


allies, who lacked our geographic advantages, were | 


directly exposed to the impact of total war. Thei 
economies were severely damaged. In countries over 
run by the Nazis, human and physical resources wert 
seized and ruthlessly converted to the purpose of the 
German war machine. The result was unparalleled 
enslavement of workers and spoilage of private prop 
erty. Similar tactics were pursued by the Japanese 
Now that the war is won, the victims of aggression 











= 
are i 
doth: 
ages 

a sta 
Euro} 


help, 
— 

ua 
« fc 
since 
they 
sista 


plan 
turn 


plan 

Lic 
lead 
step: 
free 
stab 
tion 
Mor 
resu 
capi 


larg 
To 

plet 
lion 
In ; 
of 
dol 
Cre 


of « 


neg 
the 


it V 








AN 


areas.) 


at Can 
ly we 
oO use 


were 
Theit 
over: 
wert 
of the 
lleled 
prop 
anese. 
°ssion 














ee 
—— 





are in dire need of bare essentials of life—food, 
dothing and shelter. Although we complain of short- 
ages here, we are comparatively well off, and enjoy 
a standard of living which will not be matched in 
Europe for many years to come. The peoples of Eu- 
rope and other continents therefore look to us for 
help, knowing that our capacity to produce is larger 
today than before the war, when it was already not 
equalled by that of any other nation. They want from 
us food, coal, equipment, tools, raw materials, and 
since they do not have the dollars now to pay for all 
they need, they seek, in addition, our financial as- 
sistance. 


U.S. ECONOMIC FOREIGN POLICY. USS. 
plans for the postwar world economy envisage a re- 
turn to multilateral trade and stable exchange rates. 
On the trade front we have taken the initiative in 
planning for an international conference on trade 
policies, to be convened shortly with some fifteen 
leading trading nations represented. It is hoped that 
steps can be taken at that time to reduce barriers to 
freer world trade. To achieve a system of free and 
stable exchange rates, we have joined with other na- 
tions in setting up the International Monetary Fund. 
Moreover, since the flow of capital abroad must be 
resumed, we are making a large contribution to the 
capital of the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development. But this Bank will not begin 
large-scale operations before the early part of 1947. 
To bridge this interval, the United States has com- 
pleted an agreement to grant Britain a $3,750 mil- 
lion credit, which awaits the approval of Congress. 
In addition the Export-Import Bank, since the end 
of the war, has extended several hundred million 
dollars in credits to aid in reconstruction abroad. 
Credits are also being provided to permit purchase 
of our surplus war goods overseas. 

A loan to France of over $600 million, recently 
negotiated but not yet officially announced, reduces 
the lending power of the Bank to the point where 
it will be unable to make further large commitments. 





Just Published— 


INTERNATIONAL TRUSTEESHIP—Role 
of United Nations in the Colonial World 


by Vernon McKay 


25 cents 
May 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month 


Subscription $5.00; to F.P.A. members, $3.00 





= Page Three 




















We have, however, promised China a large loan, 
and have indicated our willingness to give Russia 
similar assistance, provided Russia meets certain con- 
ditions. Accordingly, the President has stated that he 
will request Congress to increase the Bank’s lending 
power by $1,250 million. 

NEED FOR PROMPT RECONVERSION. If 
peace is to mean something more than mere cessation 
of hostilities, it is imperative that we implement 
our foreign economic program by promptly settling 
our domestic differences and restoring production to 
full capacity. For several months our economy has 
been subjected to crippling strikes, reaching the point 
last week of complete paralysis with the breakdown 
of railroad negotiations. This crisis comes at a time 
when democratic peoples look to us for leadership 
and material aid, knowing that ours is the only econ- 
omy with a ready and vast production potential. 

Living on short rations as they are, their sense of 
despair is accentuated by our seeming inability to 
find the key to full production before inflationary 
tendencies become unmanageable. They know the 
economics of inflation from first-hand experience, 
and are themselves even now battling it with far less 
resources at their command than we have. If the 
United States does not lead the way to a sounder 
world economy, they rightly reason that their pros- 
pects are dismal; that the spiral of inflation will 
bring catastrophic deflation, with misery for all. The 
balance in the political and social structure of Europe 
is already dangerously precarious; only by prompt 
restoration of full production here can we hope to 
save the day for those who aspire to democratic ideals. 

While the need for the necessities of life is acute 
in many countries, avoidance of economic collapse 
requires that the local means of production be re- 
stored forthwith. Thus, for example, Europe today 
is experiencing a coal famine which, until it is solved, 
will continue to paralyze production. Dollar credits 
to Europe are of little avail in meeting quickly this 
critical shortage; the only remedy is for us to pro- 
duce and export more coal. The more prolonged 
our failure to solve these domestic economic prob- 
lems, the greater is our delay in facing squarely 
fundamental issues that are inseparable from eco- 
nomic foreign policy. Not least of these issues is the 
crucial problem of imports. Unless we import on a 
scale larger than any hitherto achieved by this coun- 

try in peacetime, the outlook for a stable world econ- 
omy founded on multilateral trade will become well- 
nigh hopeless. 

HAROLD H. HUTCHESON 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 33, May 31, 


1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; Dororuy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera Micueias Dagan, 
Editor, Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ed 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 














Washington News Letter 

















U.S. AND RUSSIA CONTEND FOR INFLUENCE IN DANUBIAN BASIN 


The controversy over control of the Danube river, 
which drains 1,750 miles of fertile land from the 
Black Forest to the Black Sea, is a striking example 
both of how the interests of the United States have 
expanded far beyond American shores and of the 
issues on which the United States and the U.S.S.R. 
disagree. Below the Grein whirlpool, east of Vienna, 
the river winds among countries whose governments 
lean toward Russia, and is closed to traffic from the 
United States zone west of Vienna. Our political 
philosophy has had relatively little influence on the 
development of these countries and our peacetime 
trade barely exceeds the value of the UNRRA sup- 
plies we ship them. 


U.S. HOLDS DANUBIAN SHIPS. The Danubian 
shipping held by U.S. authorities provides Washing- 
ton with one of the few tangible diplomatic weapons 
it can use to wrest from Russia a measure of eco- 
nomic and political influence in the countries of the 
Danubian basin — Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Yugo- 
Slavia, Bulgaria and Rumania. When the occupation 
began, the United States found in its zone about 800 
Danube ships whose masters, aided by Axis satel- 
lite governments, had rushed them upstream from 
the eastern countries in the fall of 1944 and early 
1945 to prevent them from falling into the hands of 
the swiftly advancing Russians. The seizure of 372 
vessels on May 21 by the U.S. Army underlined this 
country’s intention to use them in bargaining with 
Russia and the governments of Danubian countries. 

While many of the ships are Austrian or German, 
several hundred of them came from Czechoslovakia, 
Hungary and Yugoslavia, and the governments of 
those states have asked for their return by the United 
States. This country, however, has refused to send 
them back. Russia last February sought to gain title 
to the Austrian ships, which at the time of Germany’s 
surrender belonged to the Danube Shipping Corpora- 
tion. The Creditanstalt in Vienna, which held the 
common stock of that concern, was requested by Rus- 
sian officials in Austria to turn over to them the 
shares and funds of the corporation. The Soviet gov- 
ernment claims the ships under the terms of the 
Potsdam agreement, which authorized Russia to take 
as reparations the assets of Germany in eastern Eu- 
rope. Although it is possible to argue that the ships 
had been acquired by German owners during the war, 
the United States did not permit the Creditanstalt 
to make the transfer. 


The Danubian ships, some of which are designed 
to ply not only the river but the Black Sea and the 
Mediterranean, have become important counters ip 
the economic policy Russia pursues in eastern By. 
rope. On March 29, for example, Russia and Hup- 
gary signed an agreement to establish a joint stock 
company for navigation, Maszohart, an arrangement 
similar to other “50-50” companies Russia has estab- 
lished in the Danubian region. Russia undertook to 
contribute to Maszohart the Pecs coal mine in Hun. 
gary, which it had taken for reparation as a firm 
previously owned by the Germans, and 20 ships from 
Austria. Hungary will not have the ships, however, 
until the United States releases them. Since about 
1,500 ships remain in the zone where Russia has in- 
fluence, the Rumanian ‘'50-50” navigation company, 
Sovramtransport, has been able to obtain capital 
equipment for its operations. Many Rumanian ves- 


sels, however, are unfit for navigation on the upper 
Danube. 


RUSSIAN-AMERICAN ISSUE. In its efforts to 
pry open eastern Europe, this country has replaced 
Britain and France as the chief Western power inter- 
ested in the affairs of a region where the Danube is 
the main artery of communications and commerce. 
The century-old issue—free navigation of the Dan- 
ube under international control, in which non-Danu- 
bian countries would participate —has become a 
cardinal point of United States foreign policy. But 
while Britain and France in 1856 obtained general 
assent to free navigation, the United States so far 
has been unable to persuade Russia to accept our 
arguments. Free navigation would open eastern Ev 
rope to Western influence and, according to Wash 
ington, would add to the national incomes of the 
Danubian countries. 


The United States proposed free navigation not 
only of the Danube but also the Rhine, Elbe and 
Weser rivers at the Potsdam Conference last summer, 
at the meeting of Foreign Ministers in London, at the 
Big Three conference in Moscow last December, and 
at the recent gathering of the Foreign Ministers in 
Paris. Our disagreement with Moscow centers on Rus- 
sia’s contention that control over the Danube should 
be limited to countries bordering the river, among 
which Russia has been numbered since the restora 
tion of Bessarabia to Russia in 1940. 


BLAIR BOLLES 





191 


S 


balar 
the | 
tions 
Italy 
the « 
vote! 
Unit 
joine 
and 

of in 
desi: 
POL 
the 

part 


| idate 


Com 
and 
a fo 
year 
thes 
Not 
that 
Pret 
to tl 
slov 
hav 
tori 
illu: 
rig! 
ther 
Stat 
con 
Mo 
on 


