


' APR =? We 
_| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN oor ee 
Bie An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff ~~ ss peng 
Sa- Subscription, One Dollar a Year Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3, 1879. 
Ag 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
for 
bly 
a Vou. XVI, No. 23 ApriL 2, 1937 
i — 
ict. CAN WAR PROFITS BE ELIMINATED? : oe ld 
Ses by Harold Tobin and R. L. Buell Dr. William W. “ore 
ary si i i i Tawa 1 $< ~f : . 
POT gh Pg By ey eg Fm * University of Michigan Library 
on wartime and to finance the conduct of a war out of current 
revenue, this report points out the dangers as well as the Ann Arbor, Mich. 
ory almost insuperable difficulties of taking “the profit out of : 
on- war” under our present economic system. 
clr April 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 
4 ———— 
a ITALY IMPERILS MEDITERRANEAN PEACE 
1acy HE diplomatic and military incidents provoked Yvon Delbos informed the British Ambassador in 
— by Italian fascism during the past month Paris on March 24 that France’s patience was 
have severely strained Italy’s relations with Brit- wearing thin, and that it would insist on strong 
3.00% ain, already disturbed by the British program of measures to prevent further landing of Italian 
has} naval rearmament, and have created serious fric- forces in Spain. M. Delbos apparently also urged 
has# tion between France and Italy. The shooting of Germany to counsel moderation in Rome, and con- 
teal hundreds of Ethiopians following the attempted sulted France’s Little Entente allies regarding the 
, of | assassination of General Graziani in Addis Ababa course to be pursued in case Italy extended its 
on February 19 brought condemnation of Italian military activities on Spanish territory. 
for} “atrocities” from the Archbishop of Canterbury Confronted by the possibility of a new clash 
io and members of the British House of Commons. with Britain in the Mediterranean, Mussolini took 
™? The sudden advance of Spanish Loyalists, who the precaution of shielding Italy from attack from 
orge} Youted Italian “volunteers” at Brihuega on March the rear by concluding a comprehensive five-year 
16-20, was compared to Italy’s World War defeat treaty with Yugoslavia on March 26. By the terms 
3 de-§ at Caporetto, and raised serious doubts regarding of this treaty Italy and Yugoslavia, which have 
3 Fascist military valor. Reports that Italian troops lived in a state of latent hostility since the war, un- 
‘illis:§ had landed at Cadiz on March 5, in violation of dertake to respect each other’s boundaries and to 
ntal | @n international agreement to prevent the depar- remain neutral in case one of them is attacked by 
nent) ture of volunteers for Spain after February 20, a third power. They pledge themselves not to tol- 
increased French and British apprehensions re- erate on their respective territories any subversive 
chey.§ garding Italy’s designs in the western Mediter- activities directed against each other’s territorial 
sack.) ranean. Nor did Mussolini’s tour of Libya, de- integrity or political régime. In case of internation- 
com-| ‘igned to place Rome in the réle of protector of al complications the two countries agrée to confer 
the Moslems, serve to strengthen British sympa- regarding measures to protect threatened com- 
nsky.| thies for Italy. mon interests. This provision apparently envi- 
| Angered by foreign comment on this series of sages the possibility that Austria may seek a so- 
—_ setbacks Mussolini delivered a fighting speech on lution of its problems either by union with Ger- 
March 23 in which he described anti-Fascist news many—a course unpalatable to Italy—or by res- 
York,) Writers as “illiterate,” denounced “the hysterical toration of the Hapsburgs, a move opposed by 
oratory of certain Anglican pulpits,” and declared Belgrade. The treaty also provides for improved 
none-} that Italy would avenge League sanctions sooner commercial relations between the two countries, 
or later, as it had avenged Adowa by its conquest as set forth in a provisional trade agreement 
and} of Ethiopia. signed on the same day, which will facilitate ex- 
‘ Il Duce’s belligerent words were echoed by ports of Yugoslav cattle, timber and agricultural 
nthe} Count Grandi, Italian Ambassador in London, products to Italy. In three additional protocols 
who told the international non-intervention com- Italy and Yugoslavia recognize and guarantee the 
——j} mittee on March 23 that not one Italian “volun- independence of Albania, which has served as an 
— teer” would be withdrawn from Spain until the Italian sphere of influence since the war; grant 
“+ end of civil war. Aroused by Italy’s defiant atti- cultural rights to the 250,000 Serbs, Croats and 
tude, which threatened recent efforts to tighten Slovenes in Italy, and the Italian minority in 
non-intervention, the French Foreign Minister Yugoslavia; and provide for termination of Italian 



































=-— 











aid to the Croat terrorist organization, Ustasha, 
whose members are held responsible in Belgrade 
for the assassination of King Alexander in 1934. 

The significance of the Italo-Yugoslav treaty 
has been variously interpreted. Some observers 
regard it as an attempt by Italy to detach Yugo- 
slavia from its Little Entente associates, Czecho- 
slovakia and Rumania, and its post-war ally, 
France, and bring it within range of the “Berlin- 
Rome axis”; others, see in it a move by Mussolini 
to effect a rapprochement between the Little En- 
tente and the Rome bloc, composed of Italy, Aus- 
tria and Hungary, which might counterbalance 
German influence in the Danubian region. What- 
ever the ultimate effects of the treaty, it indicates 
that Yugoslavia is determined to follow a foreign 
policy free of dependence on any one power or set 
of powers, in the hope of obtaining the maximum 
economic advantages in time of peace and of 
maintaining its neutrality in time of war. 

The tendency of the small powers to seek secur- 
ity irrespective of traditional diplomatic align- 
ments, already strikingly displayed by Belgium, 
is not of a nature to reassure Britain and France. 
By their successive failures to check aggression 
in Manchuria, Ethiopia and Spain, the Western 
democracies have not only shaken the foundations 
of collective security, but have lost the support 
they once enjoyed among the small powers—a 
support they may need the day they are involved 
in a direct clash with Germany or Italy. Yet 
even at this late hour a clear indication that Brit- 
ain and France are prepared to use their greatly 
increased armaments in defense not only of their 
own territories, but of all victims of aggression 
in Europe, might rally to their side those coun- 
tries which, despairing of mutual assistance, seek 
uncertain refuge from war in a policy of neu- 


trality. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


KUOMINTANG REBUFFS COMMUNISTS 


The complete failure of an important Japanese 
trade mission to China, announced in Tokyo on 
March 27, affords a further illustration of the 
deep-seated antagonism to Japan which has in- 
creasingly gripped the Chinese populace. The 
mission’s negative results are the more remark- 
able because the prevailing faction in Nanking at 
the moment, headed by Wang Ching-wei, chair- 
man of the Central Political Council, is known to 
be relatively pro-Japanese and anti-Communist. 
Had public opinion permitted, Wang’s group 
might have been inclined to come to terms with 
the Japanese. 

Although the political situation at Nanking is 


Page Two 





————en 
—— 


far from stable, the dominance of the pro-Japan. 
ese element has been apparent since the plenary 
session of the Central Executive Committee of the 
Kuomintang, held at Nanking from February 15 
to 22. On that occasion the Chinese Communist 
authorities, apparently willing to subordinate 
their social and political program to consumma. 
tion of the united front against Japan, proposed 
that the Kuomintang stop the civil war, concen- 
trate all the national forces on the task of repell- 
ing Japanese invasion, declare a political amnesty, 
and restore freedom of speech and assembly. In 
return the Communists declared themselves will- 
ing to abandon opposition to the Nanking govern. 
ment, further the general program of an anti- 
Japanese united front, place their army under the 
immediate direction of Nanking, and institute a 
democratic system of government in the areas 
under their control, refraining from confiscation 
of the property of large landowners. 


Stressing their disruptive tactics in the past, 
the Kuomintang Committee on February 21 
sharply refused to effect a reconciliation unless 
the Communists abolished the Red Army and in- 
corporated its soldiery into the Nanking forces, 
dissolved the Chinese Soviet Government and 
ceased all communist propaganda. These terms, 
which were tantamount to voluntary destruction 
for the Chinese Soviets, were not accompanied by 
any assurance of a stronger anti-Japanese policy. 
On the contrary, the Central Executive Commit- 
tee issued a manifesto on February 22 stating 
that “if there is still hope for peace we shall still 
be willing to continue our efforts in working fora 
preliminary readjustment of Sino-Japanese rela- 
tions on the basis of equality, reciprocity and mu- 
tual respect of each other’s territorial integrity” 
—a sentiment recently echoed in Japan. 


The Central Executive Committee has thus 
cleared the ground for the resumption of punitive 
measures against the Communists in order to 
achieve unification, while offering to embark on a 
moderate policy toward Japan. A dispatch from 
Sianfu on March 22 stated that the Nanking gov- 
ernment is already undertaking a campaign to 
oust the Red Army from northern Shensi—the 
area assigned to it in the truce reported on Jan- 
uary 28. Meanwhile, it appears possible that 
Japan will restrain its activity in China as a 
means of aiding Chiang Kai-shek to wipe out the 
Red forces. It remains to be seen whether Chinese 
military leaders who preach a doctrine of extreme 
nationalism will peacefully accept these develop- 


ments. Davip H. PopPER 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 23, Apri 2 1937. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasimm Bugit, President; Estumr G. Ocpan, Secretary; Vera Micueies Dean, Eéitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 





at t 


b 


Ine 





National | = 








— The Annual Meeting of the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 


an. | will be held at the Hotel Astor, New York, on Thursday evening, April 22, 1937. After the dinner, which will be 
| served promptly at 7:30 P.M., there will be a short business meeting including a brief report on the work of the 
a Association by the Vice-President, William T. Stone, and an address on “Democracy in the Present-Day World” by 

he His Excellency M. Georges Bonnet, Ambassador of France to the United States. Professor J. P. Chamberlain, Chair- 
i 15 man of the Board of Directors, will preside. Covers for members and their guests will be $3. Out-of-town members 
nist | will be especially welcome. 





late 
ma- PROXY FOR BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
sed The candidates listed below have been nominated to serve on the Board of Directors of the Foreign Policy 
Association, Incorporated, as indicated, and have expressed their willingness to act if elected. The word “Re-election” 
cel appears after the names of the present members of the Board of Directors who have consented to run again. 
ell. Persons other than those nominated by the Nominating Committee are eligible to election, and space is 
sty. provided on the proxy for naming such other candidates. Attention is called to the fact that 
In ‘“‘All members of the Board of Directors shall be members of the Association who are 
4 n so circumstanced that they can attend the meetings of the Board regularly.” 
vill- Constitution, Article IV, Paragraph 3. 
ern In accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, the candidates receiving the largest number of votes cast 
inti- § at the annual meeting April 22, 1937, will be declared elected. 
the Please note that proxies cannot be used 
te a 1. unless received at National Headquarters not later than Wednesday, April 21, 1937. 
reas 2. unless the proxy returned is signed by the member. 
tion Only members of the Association who are citizens of the United States have voting privileges. 
Nominating Committee: FRANCES HAND, Chairman 
Mary FINDLAY ALLEN Sripngey D. GAMBLE 
ail HENRY PRATT FAIRCHILD Wit1aM C. RIVERS 
’ 


21 Please cut along this line and sign and return the proxy to the office of the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


ess ieee i ee SCOOSSSOSOOHSHHOOHSOOOSOEOEEOEOO e 





| in- 
“ces PROXY 

| d Put cross (x) beside names of candidates of your choice. 
an Vote for six in Class of 1939 and six in Class of 1940. 
rms, 


, I authorize Raymond Leslie Buell or William T. Stone to vote for directors of the Foreign Policy Association, 
tion § Incorporated, as indicated below: 
1 by CLASS OF 1939 


licy. }} PAUL U. KELLOGG H. HARVEY PIKE, Jr. 

—_ RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 
ting 
still ||] MRS. THOMAS W. LAMONT RALPH S. ROUNDS 

ool RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 


rela- 7] JAMES G. McDONALD EUSTACE SELIGMAN 
— RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 























thus 
itive 








ona 
‘rom CLASS OF 1940 


an BRUCE BLIVEN MRS. BAYARD JAMES 
‘an RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 


Jan-}} ROBERT M. FIELD FRANCIS T. P. PLIMPTON 
that Lawyer, New York RE-ELECTION 


an CARLTON J. H. HAYES DR. FLORENCE R. SABIN 


RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 
inese 


reme 
elop- 


ER 



































National 
Editer. 

















(Sign herve) ...cccocesserssscoccccccccscessenssnestoossocsavessesseessiahnanninnninnl 








