tely 
abs 
> in 
ver: 
ger 
hed 
cOn- 
lion 
ews 
ave 
Dro- 
nal. 


ere 
ime 


lent 
ons 
vs," 
late 


hus 
still 
f it 
will 
the 
its 
the 
‘ian 
ISeS 
v10- 
the 


nce 
1 as 

as 
ela- 
nad 
33. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














VoL. XVIII, No. 20 


Marcu 10, 1939 





Europe in Retreat 


By Vera Micheles Dean 


. - - Mrs. Dean 
. scrutinizes it as 


“There is no muddling through in this . 
arrays the best information available . . 
an expert.”—Brooklyn Citizen 


“A deeply thoughtful, understanding, and even hopeful 


conclusion makes inspiring reading.”—Harpers Magazine 


$2.00 


FPA members ordering through Headquarters receive a 10% discount 











POLITICAL 


IMPLICATIONS OF PAPAL ELECTION 





HEN the Sacred College of Cardinals, on 

March 2, elected Eugenio Cardinal Pacelli to 
the Papacy on the third ballot, it served notice that it 
could not remain aloof from the political and ide- 
ological struggle raging throughout the world. Pope 
Pius XII, who for many years worked in close col- 
laboration with his predecessor, is the most experi- 
enced and widely traveled diplomat in the Vatican. 
As Papal Nuncio to the Kaiser’s Imperial Govern- 
ment in 1917, and subsequently as Nuncio to the 
Weimar Republic, he became intimately acquainted 
with Germany's war and reconstruction problems. 
In 1937, when he consecrated the shrine of St. 
Theresa at Lisieux, he was welcomed to France by 
the government of Léon Blum, whose Socialist party 
on the whole favors anti-clericalism. He has twice 
visited the New World: in 1934 he attended the 
Eucharistic Congress at Buenos Aires, and in 1936 he 
spent a month in the United States and had an inter- 
view with President Roosevelt. Pius XII is expected 
to be as uncompromising as Piux XI on such ques- 
tions as the racial policy of Hitler and Mussolini— 
and his radio address of March 3 supports this view. 
But, as a realistic Italian diplomat, he is also expected 
to pursue his predecessor's objectives by methods less 
calculated to provoke an irreparable breach between 
the Vatican and the totalitarian states. 


The new Pontiff assumes his arduous duties at a 
time when the rule of the Church, in both spiritual 
and temporal matters, is being challenged by new 
dogmas based either on materialist or outspokenly 
pagan concepts. These dogmas have made particu- 
lar headway in countries which had either remained 
outside the main stream of the French and American 
revolutions, or had only recently experienced the 
impact of the Industrial Revolution. The dominant 
tendency in these countries—which duplicates the 


experience of Western powers in the nineteenth 
century—is to exclude the Church from the politi- 
cal sphere; to defy the influence it has hitherto 
exercised over such matters as education and family 
life; to expropriate its property, as was done in 
Russia in 1917 and is being done today by the Nazis 
in Austria; and in some cases to challenge its uni- 
versal ideas by emphasis on nationalism and racialism. 


For the development of these tendencies the 
Church — or at least some of its representatives — 
cannot be held entirely blameless. It is not a mere 
coincidence that in Spain and Mexico, for example, 
members of the Catholic hierarchy have used their 
great wealth and influence not to advance social re- 
form, but to perpetuate the rule of obscurantist and 
reactionary governments. True, the Vatican, in a 
number of pronouncements—notably the encyclical 
Quadragesimo Anno of Pius XI1—has recognized 
the need for social reform in an age of mass pro- 
duction which calls for economic, as well-as.politi- 
cal, democracy. Catholic statesmen, however, like 
Schuschnigg in Austria or Imredy in Hungary, did 
not squarely face the political implications of this 
problem; and tried to steer a difficult course between 
what they considered the Scylla of Nazism and the 
Charybdis of socialism (too often arbitrarily de- 
nounced as godless communism) — with the result 
that they were finally forced to yield to the pres- 
sure of less scrupulous groups. Their vacillations 
and political prejudices were not infrequently 
shared by Catholic churchmen, for example Cardinal 
Innitzer of Austria, who acquiesced in Anschluss 
only to discover (as Von Papen and other German 
Catholics had done in 1933) what Nazi totalitarian- 
ism means for the Church. In all fairness, it should 
be added that the Vatican feared Anschluss, hoped 




















that it might be averted by restoration of the Catho- 
lic Hapsburgs, and condemned the action of Cardinal 
Innitzer. 

An equally difficult problem is faced by the Vati- 
can in countries like Spain and Italy, whose present 
governments pay outward obeisance to Catholicism 
—the predominant religion of the population—but 
foster political and social concepts which cut athwart 
the doctrines of the Church. General Franco, primar- 
ily a military man, is, according to all reports, a de- 
vout Catholic. He is surrounded, however, by politi- 
cal elements, notably the Falangists, who are con- 
cerned first and foremost with reorganization of 
Spain along totalitarian lines. A totalitarian Spain 
may follow one of two courses: either it will chal- 
lenge the Church at every step, as has been done by 
Nazi Germany; or it will try to use the Church for 
its own secular ends as has been done by Fascist 
Italy, where Mussolini, until recently, avoided 
a head-on collision, and even succeeded in es- 
tablishing a modus vivendi with the Vatican by the 
Lateran Treaty of 1929. Sooner or later, however, 
the second course becomes indistinguishable from 
the first, as was proved in 1938 when Italy, now 
forced to follow in Germany's wake, inaugurated a 
racial policy patterned on that of the Nazis. The 
extent to which the Church can avoid in Italy the 
conflicts and persecutions it has encountered in Ger- 
many depends on the future course of fascism, which 
is increasingly dictated not by Mussolini, but by the 
so-called radical, pro-German elements headed by 
Il Duce’s son-in-law and Foreign Minister, Count 
Ciano, and Roberto Farinacci, former secretary- 
general of the Fascist party. 


Confronted by this mounting tide of revolt, the 
Vatican still has the opportunity of lending its sup- 
port to the forces'in Europe and the New World 
which oppose totalitarianism. If it makes this choice, 
it will be throwing its weight on the side of coun- 
tries like France, Britain and the United States which 
have already effected separation of Church and State 
and assign no special privileged position to the 
Church, but insure all their citizens freedom to prac- 
tice and propagate the religion of their choice. Many 
straws in the wind indicate that the Vatican may 
be moving in this direction. Mr. Chamberlain’s au- 
dience with Pius XI during his stay in Rome on Jan- 
uary 12 was followed by the appointment of a 
Papal Legate to Britain on February 10. The United 
States, which has had no diplomatic representative 
at the Vatican since 1867, may reverse this practice, 
and President Roosevelt requested that special hon- 
ors should be accorded Cardinal Mundelein on his 
visit to Rome in November 1938. In France, too, 
non-Catholics have shown renewed interest in 
Catholic policy. All this evidence points in the di- 





Page Two a 





rection of closer ties between.the Western democra- 
cies and the Vatican. 


This trend, in turn, has been strengthened by the 
anti-totalitarian views freely expressed by leading 
Cardinals—notably Mundelein of Chicago, Verdier 
of France, Roey of Belgium, Schuster of Italy, Faul- 
haber of Germany and Cerejeira of Portugal; and 
by the growth of Catholic liberal thought not only 
in Europe—where Catholic intellectuals have hith- 
erto played a more important réle than in this coun- 
try—but in the New World as well. It would be 
unrealistic to expect the Vatican to take the leader. 
ship in international affairs: too active participation 
might be criticized by both Catholics and non-Catho- 
lics as incompatible with the function of the Church. 
But it would be of paramount, and perhaps decisive, 
importance for the course of future history if the 
influence of 350,000,000 Catholics throughout the 
world should gradually incline in the direction of 
anti-totalitarianism, and in favor of political régimes 
which, whatever their other faults and inadequacies, 
recognize freedom of thought, freedom of speech, 
and freedom of conscience. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


WILL BRITAIN ACT IN THE FAR EAST? 


While the Western democracies have contented 
themselves with routine protests against Japan's 
military occupation of Hainan Island, they have co- 
operated with increasing firmness on several other 
items of Far Eastern policy during recent months. 
The American protest notes addressed to Japan on 
October 6 and December 31 were supported by 
British and French notes of similar tenor in January. 
In mid-December the American government again 
took the lead with its 25 million dollar credit to 
China. London also seems to be following this sec- 
ond initiative by the United States. Under the ex- 
port credits guarantee bill recently approved by Par- 
liament, a sum estimated at £500,000 is expected to 
be placed at China’s disposal for the purchase of 
trucks and other equipment from British firms. It 
is also reported that the British authorities are con- 
sidering the possibility of advancing a loan of from 


£3,000,000 to £5,000,000 to China which would be | 


used to fortify that country’s currency position. 
Eventual British action on these financial matters 
is of greater significance than the relatively small 
sums at issue would indicate. The larger question of 
Anglo-American cooperation in the Far East is in- 
volved. The United States is the only power with suf- 
ficient freedom of action to take the lead in bringing 
economic pressure to bear against Japan. Will 
Britain follow such an American initiative, or will 
it duplicate its rebuff to Stimson’s note of January 


(Continued on Page 4) 











i 


fa- 


the 


nes 
es, 
ch, 


ers 
all 
of 

in- 
uf- 
ing 
Jill 
vill 
ary 





Washington News Letter Flite ee 


— 





sobeo, 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


MarcH 6—On his return to Washington from the 
Caribbean fleet maneuvers, President Roosevelt finds 
Congress in the midst of its long-awaited debate on 
the Administration's foreign policy. 


During the past few weeks the House has pushed 
through three important defense measures by over- 
whelming majorities. The Army Air Corps Expan- 
sion Bill, authorizing a maximum of 5,500 army 
airplanes at a cost of $300,000,000, was approved 
February 15 by a vote of 367 to 15 after only six 
hours of debate. The Naval Air and Submarine Base 
Bill, authorizing an expenditure of $48,800,000, 
passed the House on February 23 by a vote of 368 
to 4. Finally, the regular War Department Appropri- 
ation Bill, carrying a record outlay of $499,857,939 
for the fiscal year 1940, was adopted unanimously 
on March 3, virtually without discussion. The only 
setback for the Administration was the unexpected 
defeat of the proposed $5,000,000 authorization for 
harbor improvements at Guam, rejected by a close 
vote of 205 to 168. 


In the Senate, introduction of the Air Corps Bill 
on February 27 touched off a stormy six-day debate 
in which Administration critics launched a vigorous 
flank attack on the President's foreign policy. A 
dozen Senators, headed by Vandenberg and Bennett 
Champ Clark and supported by Borah, Hiram 
Johnson, Nye, Lundeen and LaFollette, centered 
their fire on the “cloak of secrecy” surrounding Mr. 
Roosevelt's recent conduct of foreign policy. Sena- 
tor Clark and others declared that the country was 
being exposed to a “deliberate campaign of propa- 
ganda,’ more sinister than that which preceded our 
entry into the World War. On February 28 Senator 
LaFollette and eleven of his colleagues introduced 
a revised war referendum designed as a final check 
against “secret diplomacy that may decoy us into a 
foreign war against our will.” 


While these Administration critics deplored the 
methods by which the French airplane deal had been 
accomplished, they hesitated to oppose the actual 
sale of war planes to the European democracies. 
Moreover, despite charges that the Administration 
is aggravating European tension by alarmist state- 
ments and provocative name-calling, most of the 
President's critics announced their intention of sup- 
porting the Air Corps Bill and other measures in 
the defense program. 


- 


Results of Foreign Affairs Debate. Outwardly, 
at least, the results of this running debate are un- 
certain and inconclusive. In the absence of a formal 
vote on any specific issue of foreign policy, the atti- 
tude of Congress on such legislative measures as the 
War Referendum or revision of the Neutrality Act 
remains as much in the dark as ever. But beneath the 
surface, Washington observers find several revealing 
indications of an important change in Congressional 
opinion. 

One clue to this change is found in cloakroom dis- 
cussion of the Neutrality Act. There is still strong 
opposition to any proposal for applying embargoes 
against aggressor nations, and even the Thomas 
amendment, which permits the President to lift an 
embargo against a victim of aggression “with the 
consent of Congress,” is conceded to have little 
chance of passage at this session. At the same time, a 
number of isolationist Senators are beginning to 
question the wisdom of maintaining the present 
mandatory embargo on arms. Some of these Sena- 
tors admit privately that it would be difficult, if not 
impossible, to enforce the present arms embargo for 
more than a few months after the outbreak of a 
general war in Europe. American public opinion, 
they concede, would be profoundly shocked if the 
opening days of a European war should be marked 
by a destructive aerial bombardment of London and 
Paris, and would probably force the repeal of the 
Neutrality Act within a very few weeks. 


Since such a reversal of policy after the outbreak 
of war would almost certainly bring the United States 
into the conflict as a belligerent, these Senators rea- 
son that it would be wiser to amend the law now, 
while Europe is still at peace. Several compromise 
formulas have been privately discussed. The one 
most frequently mentioned would eliminate the arms 
embargo clause in Section 1 of the present Act and 
substitute a general “‘cash and carry’’ provision. This 
would permit the sale of arms and ammunition, as 
well as other war materials, provided that such ma- 
terials are paid for in cash and are not carried in 
American vessels. Such a formula, of course, is dis- 
ingenuous, for while it makes no distinction between 
belligerents, it would in practice favor those states 
which control the seas and possess large cash bal- 
ances in the United States. 


This compromise has already found considerable 
support in Administration circles and is looked upon 
with favor by the State Department. The greatest 





eee 








obstacle to its acceptance at this time is the con- 
tinued suspicion of Congressional critics that it will 
be used to give an unconditional guarantee of Ameri- 
can aid to Britain and France, without any assurance 
from these powers regarding their future intentions. 
If an American guarantee of war aid to the Euro- 
pean democracies merely led to a stubborn attempt 
to freeze the existing status quo in Europe and 
Africa, it would be more likely to invite an explosion 
than to prevent war. But if the Administration could 
convince Congress that its primary aim is to enable 
Britain and France to move toward a negotiated 
settlement with the totalitarian states on terms of 
equality, it might find it possible to reach an ac- 
ceptable compromise on neutrality, and even lay the 
basis for greater unity in American foreign policy. 


W. T. STONE 


WILL BRITAIN ACT IN THE FAR EAST? 
(Continued from Page 2) 

1932? Britain’s action on the current proposals for 
financial aid to China will supply a partial answer to 
this question. In several respects, the British govern- 
ment has recently exhibited a somewhat firmer at- 
titude toward Japan. It has facilitated railway, river 
and highway transport for Chinese supplies through 
Burma, arranged for a Chungking-Rangoon airline 
service, and demanded and secured an indemnity for 
the Japanese bombing incident of February 21 on 
the borders of the Hongkong territory. 

The Western powers have meanwhile been at- 
tempting to counteract increased Japanese pressure 
against the foreign-administered areas of Shanghai 
and Tientsin. On February 23 a delegation of Jap- 
anese army, navy and consular authorities, spurred 
by a series of assassinations of Chinese puppet of- 
ficials at Shanghai, presented a set of demands to the 
Municipal Council of the International Settlement. 
Two days later the Council rejected these demands 
on the ground that acceptance would virtually trans- 
fer the policing power of the Settlement to the 
Japanese. Negotiations continued, however, and on 
March 3 a compromise was announced. While this 
agreement provided for more stringent measures 
against terrorism and for additional Japanese mem- 
bers on the Settlement police force, it did not jeop- 
ardize the Municipal Council’s exclusive jurisdiction 
over policing matters within Settlement boundaries. 
At Tientsin, where terrorism has been much less 
pronounced, the Japanese authorities have recently 
sought to enclose the foreign concessions with an 
electrified fence—a move which has evoked joint 


Page Four 








a 
—— 


representations by the British, French and Americap 
consular authorities. 


Far more serious is the blow struck at forej 
traders in North China by two regulations of the 
Peiping “provisional government” announced 
March 2. One regulation outlaws the former Chines 
currency and attempts to force acceptance of 
Japanese-sponsored banknotes at par, while the sec. 
ond bans the export of North China commodities 
except through an exchange transaction at the of. 
ficial rate. If these regulations were enforced, they 
would soon eliminate Western trade; the foreign 
banks will undoubtedly resist, and their stand will 
probably be accorded official support at Washington 
and London. 


Except for a minor offensive up-river from Han. 
kow toward Ichang, the Japanese command has 
settled down to the stiff task of consolidating its 
control of “occupied” territory in China. Operations 
against guerrillas in the north and around Shanghai 
have thus far achieved small results. As indicated 
by Japan’s budget estimates, however, there will be 
no diminution of the strain on Japanese finances, 
Appropriations tor 1939-1940, recently approved by 
the Japanese Cabinet, total 8,964 million yen—an 
increase of 600 million yen over the record figure 
for the current year. Of this budget, aside from 
emergency expenditures on the China “incident,” a 
considerably larger sum will be devoted to accelera- 
tion of naval and military armaments. More than 
6 billion yen will have to be covered by domestic 
loans. Signs of strain on Japan’s home front have 
also appeared in another quarter. On March 1 an 
arsenal explosion near Osaka killed some 200 people, 
injured 550, rendered 10,000 homeless, and vit- 
tually destroyed the industrial town of Hirakata. 
Of three such disasters to Japanese military estab 
lishments since December 19, this was by far the 


most serious. 
T. A. Bisson 





Fascism for Whom?, by Max Ascoli and Arthur Feiler. 
New York, Norton, 1938. $3.00 


Here is a book which has not yet had the attention it 
deserves. Although written by two emigrés, its content is 
objective and scholarly. In analyzing particularly the eco 
nomic aspects of fascism, the authors demonstrate clearly 
that neither German National Socialism nor Italian Fas 
cism constitutes a class régime in the Marxist sense. The 
only privileged elements in both countries are the hier 
archy of party leaders; all classes are subjected to their 
political domination. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 20, Marcu 10, 1939. 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasiie Bueit, President; DoroTHy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Eéitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


> ° 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 





ee 
ey 


National 








\| 


pli 
Cz 
fro 
Pre 
m« 


- 





