a 





peea?® Lol 





ad 


On | 
Plo. | 
Side 
wal | 


Less | 
yal | 
eful | 
licy. | 
n in | 
Ope | 
na 
ent, 


‘rent 
1SS0- 
COW. | 
> on | 
that | 
O an | 
. the | 
Ven: 
d by 
react | 
an 4 


right 





1 the 
id in| 
lesire 
t the 
mn 0 
vhich | 
“new | 
ofess 
aS00 | 
apan 
> and 
d the 
- this 
peati 
com: 





NE 





| GRAF SPEE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XIX, No. 9 


—_- 


DECEMBER 22, 19389 





Control of the Balkans is as much at stake today as it 
was in 1914. Yet a constructive peace in this region 


may be possible. Read: 


THE STRUGGLE FOR THE BALKANS 
by John C. deWilde 


December 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports . . 25¢ 





PERIODICAL ROOR 
GENERAL LIBRARY 


UNTV, OR MICH. of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 
University of Nichigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 














INCIDENT DISTURBS THE AMERICAS 





HE dramatic conclusion to the career of the Ger- 

man pocket battleship Admiral Graf Spee— 
blown up on December 17 by its own crew in the 
estuary of the River Plate—constitutes a signal suc- 
cess for the British navy in its attempt to sweep the 
oceans clear of hostile German vessels. The Nazi 
raider had been damaged in a running naval battle 
with three British cruisers on December 13, after it 
had attacked one of them, the Ajax, which was con- 
voying the French passenger liner Formose. Although 
the weight of the broadsides of all three British ships 
combined was less than that of the Graf Spee, they 
skillfully utilized their greater speed and power of 
maneuver against the pocket battleship’s two 11-inch 
gun turrets. Were it not for difficulties still largely 
unexplained, the Graf Spee might nevertheless have 
fought its way out to sea, inflicting far heavier losses 
on its opponents. Instead, its commander chose to seek 
refuge in Montevideo harbor. The Uruguayan author- 
ities, after examining the vessel, granted it permission 
to remain in the port until the evening of December 
17 to make essential repairs. By the end of this period 
a formidable Allied force was approaching the River 
Plate in wait for the Graf Spee. Confronted with 
these heavy odds, the German authorities decided to 
scuttle the ship rather than risk a demoralizing defeat 
or the possibility that it might fall into Allied hands. 


LIMITATIONS OF COMMERCE RAIDING. 
The fate of the Graf Spee illustrates once again the 
potentialities and the limitations of commerce raiding 
on the high seas by the isolated cruisers of a weaker 
naval power. The material depredations of these ves- 
sels are important. In the early months of the World 
War the German cruisers Emden and Karlsruhe sank 
or captured 32 ships, while in 1939 the Graf Spee 
sank 9 merchantmen, and the Deutschland, still at 
large in the North Atlantic, is known to have ac- 
counted for one British freighter and the auxiliary 


cruiser Rawalpindi. Far more important, however, 
is the strain imposed on a blockading naval power, 
which must scatter its forces in pursuit of the raid- 
ers. At one time, 78 British ships were searching for, 
or patrolling against, the Emden alone; and it is evi- 
dent that a disproportionately large number of Allied 
craft have been assigned to deal with the German 
pocket battleships. As a result of this diversion, the 
efficacy of the German counter-blockade activities in 
the waters surrounding the British Isles is inevitably 
enhanced. 

Yet in the long run the operations of surface raid- 
ers are not decisive. Without naval bases where they 
may replenish supplies and make essential repairs, 
the cruisers suffer from an ever-increasing disadvan- 
tage. Food and fuel may sometimes be acquired from 
friendly or captured merchantmen, but the question 
of ammunition supply is more difficult to solve. Every 
stop at a neutral port affords a clue to the where- 
abouts of the raider. With the help of wireless com- 
munications and observation aircraft the task of locat- 
ing enemy vessels on the high seas is easier than ever 
before. And, last but not least, the naval superiority 
of Britain and France is today so overwhelming that 
individual commerce raiders are unlikely to remain 
long unmolested. 


THE LEGAL COMPLICATIONS. Aside from 
its strategic implications, the Admiral Graf Spee epi- 
sode has raised a number of legal and political issues. 
While the vessel was anchored at Montevideo, the 
British contended that it should be forced to depart 
after 24 hours, the usual period of sojourn for bel- 
ligerent warships in neutral ports, or else interned 
for the duration of the war. The German Minister 
to Uruguay, on the other hand, claimed that a much 
longer period than the 72-hour extension accorded 
the vessel for repairs was necessary if it was to be 
rendered seaworthy. Caught in this diplomatic cross- 








eR 





ee 





fire, the Uruguayan government based its actions on 
the Thirteenth Hague Convention on the Rights and 
Duties of Neutral Powers in Naval War, signed in 
1907 by 44 states, including Uruguay, Britain and 
Germany. Under articles 12, 14 and 17 of this con- 
vention, the 24-hour limit must be observed ‘‘except 
on account of damage or stress of weather.” In neu- 
tral ports belligerent warships “may only carry out 
such repairs as are absolutely necessary to render 
them seaworthy, and may not add in any manner 
whatsoever to their fighting force.” It is for the local 
authorities to determine what repairs are necessary 
and to see that these are carried out with the least 
possible delay. A Uruguayan naval commission conse- 
quently ruled on this point. Its decision was sup- 
ported against German opposition by a united diplo- 
matic front of eleven American nations, including 
the United States. 


The other questions concerning the naval battle re- 
late to the matter of neutral territorial waters within 
which belligerents may not perform hostile acts. Ac- 
cording to press reports, a portion of the encounter 
took place within the 200-mile-wide mouth of the 
River Plate and continued at a point less than three 
miles from the shore. Since both Uruguay and Argen- 
tina, whose territories border on the estuary, insist 
that the entire bay is included within their jurisdic- 
tional waters, the Uruguayan government protested 
the violation of its territorial sea on December 15. 
The British, however, are equally firm in their view 
that the seas outside the classical three-mile-limit are 
free to all nations for the legitimate activities of 


Page Two 








— 


peace or war. In this contention they are generally 
supported by authorities on international law; by 
they will find it difficult to justify their pursuit of the 
Graf Spee within the three-mile limit itself. 

The Uruguayan protest also noted that the battle 
occurred well within the neutral zone established jp 
the Declaration of Panama, on October 3, 1939, fo 
protection of American interests in the waters sy. 
rounding the United States and the nations to the| 
south.* On October 13 the British Admiralty had| 
stated that it did not recognize any extension of terri. | 
torial waters beyond the commonly accepted limit | 
By disregarding the existence of the zone, the bel. | 
ligerents have now forced the American republics | 
either to take steps to implement their novel doctrine 
or to admit its ineffectiveness. One possible step | 
would be to forbid the entry of belligerent naval 
vessels into any neutral American port for fuel or te.| 
pairs after a naval battle. This procedure would 
weigh more heavily on the Germans, who possess no | 
territory in the Western Hemisphere where thei 
ships might find refuge, than on the Allies. Before 
such a drastic measure is adopted, however, the 
American states will probably consult among them. 
selves and with the belligerents in an attempt to| 
secure limitation of the area of conflict by mutud| 
agreement. Meanwhile, if the seas are denuded of| 
German shipping, there should be no reason for te | 
currence of hostile acts within the neutral zone. The| 
United States may thus be spared an embarrassing| 
controversy with the Allies. | Davi H. PoppEr 





*Cf. Washington News Letter, Foreign Policy Bulletin, October 6, 1939. 


LEAGUE DROPS U.S.S.R. AS GESTURE TO FINLAND 


In condemning the Soviet invasion of Finland and 
expelling the U.S.S.R. from membership on Decem- 
ber 14, the League of Nations made a gesture of 
symbolic rather than practical importance. It proved 
once more that the League is perfectly capable of act- 
ing, but only within the limits set by the interests of 
its members. The expulsion of the Soviet Union not 
only expressed the universal abhorrence of the attack 
on Finland, but also provided many countries with 
a welcome opportunity to ‘quarantine’ a state whose 
political and economic system offers a standing chal- 
lenge to capitalist and democratic institutions. At the 
same time, effective assistance to Finland was left to 
the discretion of individual League members, whose 
action may be coordinated through the League secre- 
tariat. 

HELP FOR FINLAND? The extent of real help 
which can and will be given remains problematic. 
The League Secretariat has taken steps to inquire 
into Finland’s needs and coordinate accordingly 
whatever offers of assistance are received. Prime Min- 
ister Chamberlain told the House of Commons on 
December 14 that his government had already re- 


leased for export to Finland ‘‘a number of fighter 
aircraft” and would permit the shipment of “other 
material.’” Yet the Allies will be reluctant to spare 
much war equipment, particularly since such supplies 
may fall into Soviet hands. Shipping difficulties are| 
also serious. The Baltic Sea is controlled jointly by 
the Russians and Germans, and the Finnish coast s| 
blockaded by the Soviet navy. The only means of 
transport lies through Sweden, across the Gulf of 
Bothnia, or by rail. The Soviet army has bee 
concentrating its attack on the central part of Fis 
land in an effort to drive 130 miles to the Gulf of 
Bothnia and cut these connections with the outside 
world. Meeting determined resistance and hand: 
capped by cold and snow, the Soviet forces have 
made but slow progress. Nevertheless, they may su¢| 
ceed in attaining their objectives before extensivt| 
supplies can reach Finland from other countries. | 

FUTURE ROLE OF THE LEAGUE. Whatevet) 
the ultimate value of League action to Finland, tht 
temporary re-emergence of Geneva has revived spec’ 
ulation regarding the future rdle of the League. The| 
expulsion of the last great totalitarian power is wel 


t 


| 





— 


come 
Leag 
were 
prese 
comp 
total 
is the 
lines 
bersk 
vert 

desis 
tions 
estak 
mad 
Leag 
prim 
chiet 
cont 
solve 
tries 
tatin 
forn 


Fi 
able 
in W 
Hav 
they 
of i 
Sovi 
of d 
app 
indi 
com 


tant 
hel; 
luti 
the 


Ente 


ee 3 
< 








dics | 
rine | 
Step | 
aval 

t re 


hter 
ther 
Date 
lies | 
ate | 
y by) 
St is| 
$ of 
E of 
DeeN 
Fin- 
f of 
side 
ndi- 
lave 
SUC | 
sive 


evel | 
the 

The| 
wel: 


' 





= Page Three 





comed by many observers who believe that the 
League would be much stronger if its membership 
were confined exclusively to democratic states. At 
present, however, the Geneva organization is still 
composed of many countries which, although not 
totalitarian, are far from democratic in character. Nor 
is the reorganization of the League along ideological 
lines wholly desirable. It might not only restrict mem- 
bership to a comparatively few countries, but con- 
vert the League into a new type of Holy Alliance 
designed to intervene in any nation whose institu- 
tions could be considered “alien” or “dangerous” to 
established democracy. If fundamental changes are 
made, it may prove more useful to reorganize the 
League along regional lines. Certain problems are 
primarily European in character, just as others are 
chiefly of interest to the countries of the American 
continents. Still other questions, however, can be 
solved only by an organization comprising all coun- 
tries, whose value would be its universality, necessi- 
tating the inclusion of every state regardless of its 
form of government or economic system. 


For the moment the League resolutions have en- 
abled France and Britain to escape from the dilemma 
in which the Soviet invasion of Finland placed them. 
Having joined forces to combat German aggression, 
they could hardly ignore equally flagrant violations 
of international law and treaty obligations by the 
Soviet Union. Unwilling to be diverted from the task 
of defeating Germany, the Allies saw in the Finnish 
appeal to the League an opportunity to record their 
indignation at the conduct of the U.S.S.R. without 
committing themselves to take on another opponent. 
While many of the smaller League states ‘were hesi- 
tant about expelling the Soviet Union, the Allies 
helped the President of the Assembly to jam the reso- 
lution through without a record vote. By doing so 
they pleased a number of Latin American countries, 








especially Argentina, but necessarily antagonized 
Moscow, which was quick to condemn their attitude. 

SOVIET-GERMAN PARTNERSHIP. Mean- 
while, Germany watched this Geneva by-play 
with considerable satisfaction. Although disappoint- 
ed that the invasion of Finland has not induced the 
Allies to call off the war against the Third Reich, the 
Nazis are now convinced that Moscow will hence- 
forth have no alternative but to cooperate closely 
with Berlin against “Western and capitalist imperial- 
ism.” If the Soviet army succeeds in conquering Fin- 
land and ultimately continues toward the Atlantic 
through Sweden and Norway, Western Europe may 
still come to consider the Russian Bear a more for- 
midable threat than the German Eagle. On the other 
hand, if the performance of the Soviet forces proves 
disappointing, Germany will be able to take a 
stronger stand in its dealings with Moscow, particu- 
larly in the Balkans, where the interests of the two 
countries may clash. 

The Nazis professed to be reassured by the speech 
in which, on December 19, Italian Foreign Minister, 
Count Ciano, explained the course of Italy’s foreign 
policy. While revealing that the Italo-German alli- 
ance was concluded last May on the understanding 
that Italy would not be ready for war for three years, 
Count Ciano nevertheless gave a blanket endorse- 
ment to all the German steps which had led to war, 
including the pact with the U.S.S.R. By disavowing 
any intention to create a Balkan bloc, he afforded 
comfort to Germany, which opposes the organization 
of a strong, united southeastern Europe capable of re- 
sisting German commercial penetration. Ciano’s 
speech indicated once more that Italy's chief griev- 
ances are directed against France and Britain, which 
apparently have taken no steps to satisfy Italian 
aspirations in Tunis or elsewhere in the Mediter- 


ranean. JoHN C. DEWILDE 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Britain in Recovery. Prepared by a Research Committee of 
the Economic Science and Statistics Section of the 
British Association. London, Sir Isaac Pitman, 1938. 
$5.00 


A comprehensive, but somewhat uneven, survey of recent 
developments in all phases of British economic life. 


The Finance of British Government, 1920-1936, by Ursula 
Hicks. New York, Oxford, 1938. $4.50 
An excellent study of British public finance, discussing 
both technical problems and general trends. 


World Finance, 1938-1939, by Paul Einzig. New York, The 
Macmillan Co., 1939. $3.00 


A comprehensive survey of the interaction of political 
and financial events for the period ending March 1939. 


Revolutions and Dictatorships: Essays in Contemporary 
History, by Hans Kohn. Cambridge, Harvard University 
Press, 1939. $3.50 


A professor of history at Smith College provides a stim- 
ulating analysis of contemporary Europe in terms of 
forces let loose by the French Revolution. Some of the 
most valuable essays deal with the spread of nationalism 
in the Near East, the rise of Fascism, and the breakdown 
of the Versailles structure. 


Selected Speeches on the Constitution, edited by Cecil S. 
Emden. New York, Oxford University Press, 1939. 
2 vols. $1.60 


Statements made in Parliament during the last two cen- 
turies, marking developments in British constitutional law 
and conventions. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 9, DgcEMBER 22, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Laer, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Bdéitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


<B> 181 F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





a ee 


Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Dec. 18.—With the return of Congress less than 
two weeks off, political leaders at both ends of Penn- 
sylvania Avenue are gathering their forces for what 
promises to be a hard and bitterly contested fight 
over renewal of the Reciprocal Trade Agreements 
Act. The present law, under which Secretary Hull has 
negotiated trade agreements with 22 countries, ex- 
pires on June 12, unless extended during the coming 
session. 


ADMINISTRATION ON DEFENSIVE. For the 
first time since the passage of the original Act of 
1934 the Administration finds itself on the defensive, 
facing an opposition which includes not only the en- 
tire Republican leadership, but also a number of 
Democrats who have previously supported the trade 
program. Within the past few weeks sharp attacks 
have come from Senator Pittman, chairman of the 
Foreign Relations Committee, Senator Edwin John- 
son of Colorado, Senator O’Mahoney of Wyoming, 
Senator Wheeler of Montana, and Senator McCarran 
of Nevada, as well as from such Republican critics 
as Senators NcNary, Vandenberg, Capper and Borah. 
In the House, Minority Leader Joseph W. Martin, Jr. 
has announced the appointment of a special commit- 
tee to study and report on the effects of the trade pro- 
gtam on American agriculture, industry and com- 
merce: The committee will be headed by Representa- 
tive Treadway of Massachusetts, ranking Republican 
member of the Ways and Means Committee, and a 
bitter foe of the trade program. 


By concentrating its fire on the alleged injury to 
the farmers and domestic producers of raw materials, 
the opposition has managed to gain support from 
many organized groups in the southern and mid-west- 
ern farm belts. Further opposition has been stirred 
up by the current negotiations with Argentina, Uru- 
guay and Chile, whose agricultural and mineral prod- 
ucts compete in some cases with those of domestic 
origin. Thus on the proposed agreement with Chile 
there were violent protests from western mining 
states against any reduction in the 4-cent excise tax 
on copper. There were similar protests against reduc- 
tion of the import tax on crude petroleum in the 
agreement with Venezuela, and the proposed reduc- 
tion of duty on linseed from Argentina. When hun- 
dreds of these protests begin to pour in—even though 
they often come from small marginal producers—the 
political effect is formidable. 


The war has also limited the scope of the trade 





agreements program and undermined the support of 
export industries which profited materially from 
some of the recent agreements. Already, important 
benefits of the British agreement have been wiped 
out by the elimination of goods previously purchased 
in the American market, and the transfer of large 
British orders to Canada. While munitions order; | 
may increase, exports of fresh fruits, farm products, 
and peace-time manufactures have already declined 
sharply. Governmental trade controls have been ¢. 
tablished in every warring country, increasing the 
difficulty of administering Secretary Hull’s liberal 
trade program. 


HULL ACCEPTS THE CHALLENGE. President 
Roosevelt and Secretary Hull, however, have accept. 
ed the challenge and are prepared to wage a deter. 
mined fight for extension of the program. Last week 
Mr. Roosevelt announced that he would ask Congress 
to renew the present Act, thus rejecting the advice 
of several Administration leaders who had privately 
urged him to allow the law to lapse until after the 
1940 elections. 


Mr. Hull has been even more emphatic. On at 
least half a dozen occasions during the past month 
the Secretary has hit back at his critics, either in | 
strongly worded statements at his press conferences | 
or in carefully documented letters to Senators and 
Congressmen. At Chicago on December 5 Mr. Hull 
made a detailed defense of his program before the 
American Farm Bureau Federation, the only major 
farm organization which has endorsed the Act. 


In his Chicago speech, Mr. Hull conceded that war 
conditions had rendered “more difficult” the work of 
rebuilding international trade. But he declined to 
agree that this is any reason for abandoning the en- 
tire program for the duration of the war. On the con- 
trary, his strongest argument for renewing the Trade | 
Agreements Act was based on the need for a liberal | 








trade policy to aid in restoration of sound economic} + 


conditions after the war. “If there is anything cet- 


tain in this world, it is that after present hostilities} ¢& 


have come to an end, there will be an even more | 
desperate need for vigorous action designed to re 
store and promote healthy and mutually beneficial 
trade among nations.” 


Whatever the merits of the trade agreements pro- 
gram, it will require a determined and intelligent 
campaign to assure continuation of the present Act 
in the coming session. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 








An it 





