






or al 
nter 
ucers 


s has 
priv. 


ming 
f the 
work 
each 
ional 
f the 
t the 





rated 
tably 
ries,” 
with 
leum 
icing 


nited 


com- 
dom- 

East 
irket- 
leum 
free- 
leum 
| de 
thor- 





PERIODIC 
pa RIOUICAL Kuve 





eaeral Library 


In te ya ? 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. ' 


s 





Vou. XXIII, No. 45 


Aucust 26, _— 





HULL SEEKS UNITED AMERICAN SUPPORT OF SECURITY CONFERENCE 


fps long-awaited preliminary conference of Amer- 

ican, British and Soviet representatives which 
began at Dumbarton Oaks on August 21 is a first step 
toward a new League of Nations—this time, it is 
hoped, one that will work. The current meetings, to 
be followed by similar conversations among the 
United States, Britain and China, are expected to 
qulminate in a general United Nations conference 


} which will consider the decisions reached by the Big 


Four and take final action. It is as yet not clear how 
soon the new world organization may be formed, but 
Chairman Connally of the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee declared on August 16 that the object is to 
create ‘‘a going concern before the end of the war.” 

There is every indication that the British, Soviet 
and American governments are in substantial agree- 
ment on the kind of international security organiza- 
tion they wish to form. Plans exchanged by the three 
powers before the current meetings began are said to 
provide for an executive council, assembly and world 
court. The assembly is to be an advisory body of all 
members, while the executive council is to contain 
the Big Four in a permanent capacity together with 
other rotating members. It is agreed that each of the 
Big Four is to have a veto on the use of armed force 
by the organization. Dileencfjat to the number 
of members to be included ine council, the size 
of the council vote required for military sanctions, 
and the method of applying sanctions. The last point 
is particularly important for the United States, in 
view of the constitutional requirement that a declara- 
tion of war must be made by Congress. Another item 
that may arouse considerable discussion is the Soviet 
proposal for an international air force to be placed at 
the disposal of the executive council. 


each} DEWEY ON FOREIGN POLICY. Not least sig- 


ES 


§ 








nificant is the problem of incorporating the smaller 
nations in the new world organization. In fact, it was 


through this issue that the conference was introduced 


Dm eI tate OO, 


into the American political arena on August 16 by 
Governor Dewey. While expressing approval of the 
discussions and appreciation of the need for world 
organization and great power unity, the Republican 
Presidential candidate declared that he had been 
“deeply disturbed by some of the recent reports con- 
cerning the forthcoming conference. These indicate,” 
he said, “that it is planned to subject the nations of 
the world, great and small, permanently to the coer- 
cive power of the four nations holding this confer- 
ence.” Mr. Dewey did not specify the reports he had 
in mind, nor did he explore possible methods of 
avoiding such a situation. But he was quickly 
answered by Secretary of State Hull, who asserted 
on August 17: “Governor Dewey can rest assured 
that the fears which he expressed . . . are utterly and 
completely unfounded.”” No four-power dictatorship, 
he said, “is contemplated or has ever been contem- 
plated by this government or, as far as we know, by 
any of the other governments.” 


Mr. Hull was no doubt alarmed, for he has worked 
long and hard to lift foreign policy above the-fire 
and smoke of partisan discussion. His constant objec- 
tive has been to undo the harm caused abroad by the 
view that the United States cannot be depended on 
in world organization because a change of admin- 
istration might produce a new American withdrawal 
into the shell of isolationism. In his handling of 
foreign affairs he has scrupulously avoided any word 
or act that might imply a narrow Democratic partisan- 
ship and has sought to shape an international pro- 
gram that the country as a whole could claim as its 
own, regardless of party. That he has succeeded in 
some measure is indicated by Mr. Dewey's swift 
acceptance of his assurarices and by the New York 
Governor's willingness to send his representative, 
John Foster Dulles, to confer with the Secretary of 
State on a nonpartisan basis. But perhaps even more 
important was the declaration by Republican Senator 
















tte iene Miata a ae a art ioe potatos dogs ae 









































—— 


i ee REE ne 


SS ee 


amy 


er 
<gippasey 4 


2 ae 


ls elon 


355 “ELT ae Bs? 
SE on Sh 


oat Som 








Taft on August 19 that he did not expect the pro- 
posed peace and security organization to lead to any 
serious conflict between the Democratic and Repub- 
lican parties. 

FUTURE OF SMALL NATIONS. Time after 
time the Secretary of State has made it clear that he 
stands for equal treatment of the small nations 
and their fullest possible participation in world af- 
fairs. Reference was made to this subject by Wen- 
dell Willkie on August 20 when, in replying to an 
invitation from Mr. Dewey to confer with himself 
and Mr. Dulles, the 1940 Republican Presidential 
candidate remarked: ‘For several years I have been 
deeply concerned about . . . the small nations. . . . 
I therefore made inquiry about ten days ago of the 
Washington authorities to determine if our govern- 
ment intended to insist upon the protection of the po- 
sition of small nations in the forthcoming Dumbar- 
ton Oaks conference. I was given strong affirmative 
assurances. Therefore I had determined to await re- 
sults before entering into any public discussions.” 
However, since the Hull-Dulles conversations were 
to be nonpartisan, Mr. Willkie agreed to exchange 
views with Mr. Dulles, and did so on August 21. 

Quite apart from the intentions of the United 
States and allied governments toward the small na- 
tions, it is necessary to realize that a proper status 
for these countries cannot be assured by international 
machinery alone. In the old League of Nations the 
small nations had greater voting power than they are 
likely to have in the new world organization, but in 
the prevailing international anarchy of the years be- 
tween the first and second world wars only the 
most powerful states actually possessed some mea- 
sure of initiative in world affairs. The fact must be 
faced that no genuine protection of the small nations 
is possible except on the basis of a great power 
agreement sufficiently strong to prevent the rise of a 
war situation. Consequently, to conceive of the rights 
of small countries as being in conflict with the Big 


ITALIANS HOPE FOR ALLIED AID IN 


With the date of German defeat in northern Italy 
advanced by the successful Allied invasion of south- 
ern France, which has outflanked the Gothic line and 
cut the Nazis’ main direct rail and road route along 
the Riviera coast into the region above the Arno, 
liberated Italians consider the problems of national 
rehabilitation increasingly urgent. For the present, 
of course, Allied control of liberated Italy's food, oil, 
and such means of communication and production as 
have survived the war will continue until the Ger- 
mans are actually driven out of their positions north 
of Florence. But questions concerning the nation’s 
economic future are now taking precedence in Italian 
politics over the traditional issues of anti-clericalism 
and the monarchy. 


Page Two 












Four is to pose a false conflict. Although many spec. “gsten 
fic problems between the Iarge -nd small powers} they ' 
remain to be ironed out, the future of such nations} jempc 
as Poland, Yugoslavia, Belgium, Ethiopia and the} nd c 
new Korea can be secure only if Britain, the United } witho 
States, China and the Soviet Union—France might } ackne 


well be added—are in essential agreement. 


Conti 


UNITY ON ECONOMIC ISSUES. It is apparent } porar 


that verbal harmony in American discussion of a new 
League is growing. This is a healthy sign of the in 
creasing unity of the American people on the need 
for cooperation to avert another war. But it would 
be an error to suppose at this stage of the political 
campaign or of American understanding of world 
affairs that the existence of common or similar form. 
ulas is synonymous with agreement on basic, long- 
range conceptions of the United States’ international 
role. The touchstone of foreign policy today is no 
longer mere willingness not to oppose a security 


organization. This issue, once such a serious obstacle, 


is now largely behind us. It has been replaced by 
barriers that are equally difficult to surmount. 
These new issues involve our attitude toward our 
allies and their security needs, our willingness to 
make mutual concessions in the field of tariffs and 
currency, and our desire to contribute our share of the 
force needed to make security more than a slogan. 
To support cooperation with other nations and favor 
high protective tariffs, to speak of unity and level 
unreasonable criticism at our allies, to talk of a peace 
ful world and yet oppose measures required to 
halt future aggressors in their tracks is to build 
the shadow of peace without the substance. On 
all these issues there is room for legitimate dis- 
agreement as to methods, but nothing would be more 
heartening than to see the verbal harmony on general 
principles that is so evident today extended to a fat 
deeper unity on the economic, as well as the poli- 
tical, methods of making this the last war. 
LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


FACING ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES 


UNEMPLOYMENT LOOMS LARGE. With 
Italian factories and&ities largely in ruins, the former 
Axis partner is faced by the prospect of an enormous 
surplus population for which there appears to be no 
outlet. Since the Bonomi government has been able 
to find no alternative to the public works and state- 
subsidized industries the Fascists set up in an effort 
to create employment during the twenties and thir- 
ties, the régime has proceeded somewhat slowly in 
combing out the inflated public works Mussolini es- 


porta 
fort t 
Al 
ans’ 

copin 
disun 
Italy’ 
tribu' 
the u 
as th 
the I 
Allie 
Italic 
becat 
full 

advo 
polit 
SF 
conf 
rang 
undc 
ly h 
25, | 
the 
ties 

of n 
Con 
with 
Bon 
peo} 
tant 
fror 
Jun 
iD | 
whe 
prot 
basi 
Ital 
stak 


7 
10 J 
the 
tlor 





tablished and destroying the remnants of the Fascist 
economy. But in view of the unemployment that 
would result from more drastic reforms, it seems 
doubtful that even Bonomi’s severest critics, who 


ery 
Ie 
dle 
0 


urge more ruthless destruction of the repudiated Jme 
















J} stem, would be able to carry out their program if 
S| they were in power. At present the Allies are giving 
ng f lemporary relief to the Italians in the form of food 
the om clothing, aid which Count Carlo Sforza, Minister 
without Portfolio in the Bonomi cabinet, gratefully 
tknowledged on August 20. But since the Allied 
| Control Commission is concerned solely with tem- 
ent | porary measures needed to maintain order in an im- 
ew 9 military theatre, the Allies have made no ef- 





































in- Vfort to help Italy solve its problems of reconstruction. 
eed} Although the grim economic outlook and the Ital- 
uld jjans’ inability to devise and agree on methods for 


ical }@oping with it are the chief reasons for the political 
rid | disunity in liberated Italy, other causes arising from 
rm- {Italy's temporary position as a battleground also con- 
ng- }iribute to the confusion. Foremost among these are 
nal }the unsettled status of Allied-Italian relations as long 
no jas the armistice terms remain secret and the role of 
tity {the Bonomi government as a shadow régime under 
cle, JAllied authority. But it should be reiterated that the 
by Pitalians are divided among themselves not merely 
because Allied control prevents them from assuming 
ouf full responsibility for the various programs they 
; to jadvocate but because of basic disagreements on the 
and political road Italy should take toward reconstruction. 
the} SPLINTER PARTIES EMERGE. Italian political 
yan, ¥confusion has taken the form of an almost endless 
vor lange of parties and groupings, many of which will 
evel Jundoubtedly be consolidated when elections are final- 
aces jly held. When Mussolini was overthrown on July 
to $25, 1943, six parties claimed to speak in the name of 
uild Pthe anti-Fascists. Now, however, even these six par- 
On Fiies cannot show a united front and nearly a score 
dis- Jot new parties, including such anomalies as Catholic 
ore FCOMmunists and a democratic union of persons 
eral Jwithout a party, have appeared and disputed the 
far {Bonomi government’s claims to represent the Italian 
oli- Fpeople. Among these new groups the most impor- 
lant appear to be the Rightists, who were eliminated 
R  $itom the government when Badoglio. resigned on 
june 6. The campaign to restore the conservatives 
3 |" power began approximately two months ago, 
Tith When Premier V. E. Orlando began laying the 
vi fgtoundwork for a new pro- -monarchist party. On the 
MEP Yasis of a platform that calls for a king to check 
1008 Htalian democracy in the interests of greater national 
; y e grea ) 
il stability, Orlando’s supporters have been able to 


rate. U.S. GOLD BAN MARKS STIFFER 


fort {| The United States’ suspension of gold shipments 
thit- fto Argentina on August 16 comes as the first item in 
y if The long-foreshadowed program of economic sanc- 
i €S tions against the Farrell régime. Employing machin- 
scist jery that was prepared six months ago, the Treasury 
that "Department took this action as Argentina was com- 
ems §pleting arrangements for the withdrawal of $2,000,- 
who $000 in gold, the latest in a series of monthly ship- 
ated Pments which over a period of fifteen months had 



















Page Three 








rally numerous liberals, including Benedetto Croce : 
and his followers, as well as conservatives. At : 
ent these rightists are attacking the Bonomi fo" 
on the ground that it is too far to the left to repre 
sent the majority of the Italian people, and are at 
tempting to replace it with a régime that would chart 
Italy's reconstruction along a more conservative 
course. In making a bid for power, the conservatives — 
have the support of both britain and the Vatican, 


which now appears tp be enjoying marked prestige - rel ‘ 


in Italy because of Pope Pius’ role in saving Rome. 
One result of the right’s efforts to gain control of 
Italian affairs has been the increased activity of the 
Italian Communists and their growth into a strong ~ 
national party. At present the Commiunists are con- 
ciliatory toward the church and the middle-class, but 
conservative quarters consider their position too 
moderate to be sincere and point to the party's auto- 
cratic organization as indicative of its real intentions, 
HELP FROM ABROAD NEEDED. In this way the 
stage is slowly being set for a clash between right and 
left. When, and if, the clash comes it will be far less 
violent if Italy's future appears more hopeful than it 
does at present. But the economic prospect can be im- 
proved only if the Allies are willing to extend some 
help to Italy in the painful process of rehabilitation, 
for the nation will require raw materials, machinery 
and foreign markets if it is to provide work for the 
unemployed. Proposals for extending aid to Italy can 
hardly expect a popular reception among the United” 
Nations, since too many of them have suffered greatly — 
from Italy's partnership with Germany. Moreover, 
there is justice in the arguments that the Italians are 
fundamentally responsible for the acts of their former 
government and that Italy’s plight is the result of the 
disastrous policies of its own Fascist leaders. Yet it 
is clearly in the interests of long-range European 
peace that the Allies take some steps toward helping 
the Italians help themselves in solving the desperate 
unemployment problem confronting them. If such 
signs were given that the Allies have plans for the 
future of Europe that include some provision for the 
rehabilitation of Italy, the Italians might be ex- 
pected to show greater confidence in the possibility 
of carrying on reconstruction by democratic rather 
than extreme methods from either the right or left. 
WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


POLICY TOWARD ARGENTINA 


reached between $20,000,000 and $30,000,000. No 
less than $429.5 million in gold stocks and foreign 
exchange credits are thus blocked for an indefinite 
period by the Washington order. Argentine credits — 
in the United States are placed in the same situation 
as its blocked sterling in Britain, with the exception 
that, as Buenos Aires is careful to point out, the 
latter arrangement was the result of a voluntary 
agreement. 























FINANCIAL SITUATION PRECARIOUS. Ar- 
gentina’s large reserves of sterling and dollar ex- 
change are the result of an increasingly “favorable” 
trade balance. In the past year, it has been sending 
its ships out laden with wheat, cheese, hides and oil 
for the United Nations and bringing them home 
practically in ballast, as the Allies have allocated 
their entire production effort to war needs. A com- 
parison of foreign trade figures for the first five 
months of this year with the corresponding period in 
1943 show that while the 41 per cent increase in 
total exports is largely attributable to their purchases, 
Britain and the United States are selling less to 
Argentina than ever before. With this curtailment 
of imports during the war period, and the problems 
of blocked sterling, gold and foreign exchange 
credits, Argentina faces the spectre of an unhealthily 
expanding economy. The Treasury Department order 
will accelerate the inflationary tendency, now barely 
held in check. 

If such financial steps do not suffice to change the 
policies of Buenos Aires, the United States and Brit- 
ain may take more drastic measures. The withholding 
of export permits for vital American farm machinery 
is probably contemplated. Even more serious would 
be the failure to renew the meat contract which ex- 
pires on September 30. Under this arrangement Brit- 
ain, on behalf of the United Nations, has purchased 
all of Argentina’s exportable beef surplus, or about 
700,000 tons, during the past two years at a price 
which is 80 per cent higher than that received for the 
greater Argentine meat export in 1939. Non-renewal 
of the contract would place meat sales on a day-to- 
day basis, with quantity and price no longer guaran- 
teed. Without even broaching the term “‘sanc- 
tions,” therefore, Washington and London may 
strike at the most important economic factor in Ar- 
gentine relations with the United Nations. 

In the face of these threats to the country’s eco- 
nomic existence, the Farrell government is playing 
for time. With the end of the war in sight, it looks 
forward to large-scale purchases of raw materials by 
Europe’s devastated countries, some of which, like 
Norway, may be in a position to negotiate trade con- 
tracts immediately. Buenos Aires believes, too, that 
it holds hostages for the good behavior of the Anglo- 
American governments, in the shape of their enor- 
mous Argentine investments. Proposals have already 
been made for the nationalization of British rail- 
way properties, with an investment value of over a 
million pounds, using blocked sterling as part pay- 
ment. In spite of the announcement last week that 


Page Four 





———— 
——— 





expropriation of foreign investments was not contem- 
plated, the fact remains that forced sales of sub. 
sidiaries of British and American utilities have taken 












191 





place. A recent decree revising the Expropriation } 
Law to give the executive more power is added eyj- } 


dence of the intentions of the Farrell-Per6én combina. 


tion. Above all, the shrewd men in the Pink House 7 
will undoubtedly try to capitalize on the mutual dis. F} 
trust of the two largest competitors for the Argentine 7 

market. This policy is borne out in the pointed tribute | 
to Britain paid by the Minister of Agriculture at the | 
opening of the National Live Stock Show on August } 


19—and the lack of reference to the United States as 
one of the partners to the meat agreement. 


ANGLO-AMERICAN ACCORD LACKING. It | 


is increasingly apparent that the United States and 
Britain are not in agreement on the policy to be fol- 
lowed in Argentina. Uncertainty as to the future of 
their respective commercial interests in that area is 
perhaps at the bottom of their failure to take com- 
mon decisive action. Desirous of expanding already 
existing export markets and encountering new ones, 
“each country,” says the August 6 issue of the London 
Economist, ‘finds it difficult to avoid suspecting 
each other’s motives.” United States businessmen 
view with concern the presence of high-powered” 
British trade missions in Latin America, whereas the 
British feel that the pressure exerted on them from 
America to undertake sanctions in the name of hem- 
ispheric solidarity may be a pretext to oust them 
from their long-established Argentine market, es 
pecially since the effect of such action on the outcome 
of the war is dubious. 


There are indications that the British are not so 
much concerned with the immediate. issue of fascist 
controls in Argentina as with the fundamental eco 
nomic problem which gave rise to the present mili- 
tary government. Some British observers, taking a 
long view, believe that helping Argentina to a bal- 
anced economy will encourage democratic middle 
class elements to rise to the top. The question then 
arises whether the two governments are willing to 
take steps that will lead them out of the impasse oc 
casioned by the unbalance of their trade with that 
country. Failure on the part of the two allies to col- 
laborate in helping Argentina solve its problem may 
mean that the military government will turn to its 
neighbors to ease its economic situation. This exten 
sion of Argentine hegemony over the southern bloc 
of states might portend disaster for the continent. 


O.tvE HoLMES 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 45, AuGust 25, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. Entered & 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Incorporated. National 


Set ap es OE Low 
Senmsinall 


tion ( 
Gene 
ing | 
Paris 
any ¢ 
ao un 
lovin 
the f 
Unite 
Fran: 


concé 
man} 


SPeECL 
cond 
devo 
cauti 
sente 
Pevide 
are f 
as r 

grou 
fiden 


will 


fears 
men 
belie 
been 
of si 
liber 


cruci 





Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


<> 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


llowii 
disc 
ports 
D th 


