nts. Bel. 
=d States 
his coun- 
naterials 
ler when 
1 surplus 
s already 
. Britain, 
off about 


ed States 
ne world 

stability 
1al Mon- 
; to sub 
3ank for 
ose sub 

$3,175; 
1 lending 

Interna 
, been es 
is under- 
to be re 
per cent; 
is; $45, 
‘rance, to 
they had 
arrange 
1 of $38, 
;, Chile a 
of steel 
O for the 
re United 
»slovakia, 
Norway 
BOLLES 


JAN 5 1946 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


> 
I ° eo . 
VeiVorsif 


. fs . 
¥Y Of Wich! 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


+2an 
_-_ 
eetiia ATO, hichizan 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 11 


—_ 


DECEMBER 28, 1945 


ALLIES SEEK FORMULA TO END INDONESIAN IMPASSE 


a in Java goes on week after week 
while the Indonesian uprising against the Dutch 

ars to have reached an impasse in which neither 
side will make concessions satisfactory to the other. 
Leaders of the Netherlands government were sched- 
uled to go to London on December 26 to talk 
with British officials, but it was reported unofh- 
dally that the Dutch planned to clarify details 
rather than to modify their present stand. Indi- 
tations of an eventual end to the fighting are 
not, however, entirely absent, despite the spread 
of violence to the neighboring island of Sumatra. 
By December 7 slogans on Batavia street cars, which 
used to proclaim that the Indonesians would rather 
“live in hell’ than be restored to Dutch rule, for the 
first time were calling for peace and denouncing the 
extremist youth movement for being too hot-blooded. 
Evidence of further division within Indonesian 
ranks came on December 15 when the British an- 
nounced that Arosdji, the chief of the Indonesian 
People’s Peace Army (TKR), had recommended 
military action against extremist Nationalist foices. 
Four days later the United States, in its first mild 
but definite statement of policy on the Indonesian 
affair, publicly expressed its earnest hopes for an 
early renewal of negotiations between Dutch and 
Indonesian leaders to end the fighting. Perhaps it 
was this conjunction of circumstances which led the 
British to postpone the application of the “strong” 
policy in Java which, according to some reports, was 
decided upon at the Singapore conference of De- 
cember 6. 

COMPLEXITY OF THE INDONESIAN PROB- 
LEM. Meanwhile, the rice crop that should be har- 
vested in the spring is not being fully planted and 
food is already short,a very dangerous situation in the 
island of Java which is not much larger than New 
York State, but has a population increasing by more 


than 700,000 every year and already approaching 
49,000,000. The island needs a careful program of 
industrial development designed to avoid the evils 
of overurbanization; more work must be done to 
improve the agricultural output; and education must 
persuade reluctant natives to emigrate to less popu- 
lated parts of the Indies. With its very low standard 
of living, its 25 languages and 250 dialects, its 
overwhelmingly illiterate peasantry and consequent 
unreadiness for democratic government, Indonesia 
has not only been exploited by Dutch capitalists but 
also by a large group of Chinese middlemen. The 
economic framework holding these elements to- 
gether is very complex, however, and it is possible 
that merely to remove Dutch rule would result in 
confusion that would harm native welfare and in- 
crease world insecurity by laying Indonesia open to 
potentially ambitious neighbors. 

The chief difference between the conduct of In- 
donesians and most colonial peoples today is due 
to the unexpectedly abrupt end of the war which 
found Indonesia with no Dutch or Allied troops 
present, while many thousands of surrendering Jap- 
anese whose modern weapons of war could be seized 
were at hand. Nearly 200,000 Dutch and Eurasians 
who had been held in Japanese concentration camps 
were also available as hostages for Indonesian na- 
tionalists to hold. Dr. Soekarno and his followers 
promptly proclaimed an Indonesian Republic and 
succeeded in establishing its authority over a fairly 
wide area. 

DUTCH BLUNDERS. The Dutch government in 
this crisis contented itself with little more than a 
reiteration of Queen Wilhelmina’s vague 1942 
promise of Dominion status for Indonesia. Dutch 
leaders evidently underestimated Soekarno’s strength. 
At least they confused the issue by stating that he 
was nothing but a Japanese puppet with whom 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


they were honor-bound not to deal. While it is 
true that Soekarno worked with the Japanese 
and even went so far as to burn President Roose- 
velt in effigy shortly before the war ended, he is 
no Laval—for the record shows that he was thrice 
imprisoned by the Dutch prior to the war because 
of his crusade for Indonesian freedom. In any case, 
the Indonesians seored a tactical success over the 
Dutch by replacing Soekarno with the reputedly 
more moderate Sutan Sjahrir. Dutch policy also re- 
vealed a number of contradictions. On one occasion 
acting Governor-General Van Mook was reported 
to have been authorized to negotiate with Soekarno, 
only to have his efforts repudiated shortly afterward 
by his own government. Had the Dutch made more 
precise and generous concessions at the beginning of 
the uprising, it is possible an agreement might have 
been reached, or at least the Indonesian position 
would have been weakened. The ensuing bloodshed, 
however, has only made the Indonesians more ob- 
durate. Even if the Dutch succeed in their present 
wish to bring in 28,000 troops within the coming 
months to maintain the order that the British hope 
meanwhile to restore, they may face a lasting heri- 
tage of Indonesian bitterness. 

BRITISH DILEMMA. It was General Marshall, 
on behalf of General MacArthur, who persuaded 
the Combined Chiefs of Staff to turn responsibility 
for Indonesia over to Admiral Mountbatten’s British 
forces, leaving General MacArthur free to concen- 
trate on the invasion of Japan. When the war ended 
it was therefore British rather than American sol- 
diers who had the twofold responsibility of carrying 
out the V-J surrender terms by disarming the 70,000 
(one estimate says 150,000) Japanese troops in the 
islands, and assuring the safety of many Dutch and 
Eurasian prisoners who had been interned by the 


Page Two —. 


Japanese. The Earl of Halifax, British Ambassado, 
to the United States, declaréd on December 14 tha 
there were still 30,000 armed Japanese in Java, while 
70,000 women and children in Batavia alone wer 
in grave danger from Indonesian extremists. “We 
have been given a job,” he said, “and it is surely oy 
duty to see it through.” This emphasis on British 
responsibility is, however, but one side of the story, 
The British face a serious dilemma. While they are 
definitely conscious of world criticism and would 
therefore like to end the Indonesian muddle, th 
at the same time feel the need for solidarity jg 
Dutch, French and British colonial policy. 

CAUTIOUS POLICY OF THE UNITED 
STATES. The State Department's statement of De 
cember 19, urging peace for Indonesia, was prompt. 
ed partly by attacks on the United States government 
for its failure to intervene on behalf of the Indo 
nesians. Yet it is understandable that this country 
should move with discretion in so complex a situa. 
tion. Not only native welfare, but Allied solidarity 
and world security are at stake. The Dutch colonial 
problem is so closely bound up with similar problems 
of the French and British that an attack on the Dutch 
is likely to endanger our friendly relations with 
Britain, which already fears that there are too many 
Americans who would '‘xe to break up the British 
Empire. 

On the other hand, the right of the Indonesians to 
a voice in their own affairs cannot be denied, and 
American idealism should lead the campaign for 
steady progress toward self-government for all de 
pendent peoples. American policy avoids antagoniz- 
ing the Dutch and British, but at the same time sug- 
gests our sympathy with native aspirations, thereby 
putting pressure on the Dutch to make liberal con- 


cessions. VERNON McKay 


SCANDINAVIAN COUNTRIES DISCUSS REMEDIES FOR COMMON PROBLEMS 


STOCKHOLM.—As soon as the collapse of Ger- 
many last May brought about the liberation of Den- 
mark and Norway, the Scandinavian countries re- 
sumed their pre-war discussions for closer coopera- 
tion in the political, economic and social fields. Dur- 
ing the past few months, meetings have taken place 
in Stockholm, Copenhagen and Oslo to strengthen 
the many ties which before the war linked these 
countries into the so-called Scandinavian bloc. 

POLITICAL TRUCE. With the possible exception 
of Finland—where the hard terms of the Finno- 
Russian armistice have created a difficult political 
situation—the countries of the Scandinavian group 
are among the most stable in Europe. The general 
elections held in Norway on October 8 and in Den- 
mark on October 30—the first since the war’s end— 
show that the Scandinavians wish to keep their time- 
tested systems of democratic government. Extreme 


leftist groups gained little, if any, ground. The pre 
portion of Communist votes, for instance, was rela 
tively small—and in direct relation to the general 
material condition of the people. In Norway, widely 
ransacked and impoverished during nearly five years 
of German occupation, the percentage is near 20; 
in Denmark, occupied but not extensively depleted— 
Hitler's idea having been to use it as a “model pro 
tectorate’” in order to persuade other countries not 
to resist German demands—it is 9; and in Sweden, 
untouched by the war and as prosperous as ever, it 
is about 6 per cent. 

Because of its neutrality in World War II, Swe 
den occupies with respect to the United Nations Or 
ganization a different position from that of Norway 
and Denmark, which are already members of UNO. 
It would seem probable that in the near future an 
invitation will be extended to Sweden and to other 


— 


“neace-Ic 
od sh 
the San F 
public O} 
present 
by some 
gives to 
ECO 
suffered 
of today 
plenty, 
can C1g. 
tained f 
those of 
4 whole 
reached 
ade in A 
export r 
product: 
ceeded t 
Althoug 
crowns 
due mos 
dal: situ 
mits the 
structior 
way of 
estimate 
Swedish 
Norw 
One of 
cantile ; 
sroyed, 
its capit 
German 
rach p 
have nc 
qumero 
for sev 


Can Rez 
K. Fi 
$2.00 
To str 

of our ge 

to the § 
reforms 
committ: 
mittee, 

nittee h 

ment pr 

gfess an 

are in d 


—,--. - 


FOREIGN 
Headquarte 
seeond-clas 
0 month 


B's 


——= | —_———_ Page Three 
bassador | « ace-loving’’ neutrals to join the United Nations craft. Denmark suffered least of all countries occu- 


(14 that} —and share the military and other obligations set by pied by Germany. Athough it has a claim of some 
‘a, While} jhe San Francisco Charter for member states. Swedish 11,000,000 Danish crowns (around $2,000,000) 


ne wer public opinion appears divided over this issue. The against Germany for unpaid deliveries and war dam- 
ts. “We present United Nations Organization is criticized ages, its financial situation is sound. The public debt 
rely our by some Swedes because of the preponderance it rose from 1.5 billion to 3 billion crowns during the 
\ British gives to the great powers. war, but Denmark had relatively few war expenses 


he story, ECONOMIC RECOVERY. Sweden's economy compared to other European countries. 


they are d little from the 

on ot ee SOCIAL COOPERATION. Conscious of the fact 
Ould} of today’s Europe, Sweden is a real paradise of ; 

lle. th ga Mitte re that social peace in the post-war period can be at- 
» they} plenty, where practically everything—from Amer- , 

larity Mite -ic- AE ROP tained only if sufficient employment is available to 
Y i} jan cigarettes to German knicknacks—can be ob- Dee ; 

z all, the countries of the Scandinavian bloc are trying 


INIT mee ‘reely and at prices only modemtely above to create a common reservoir of labor forces, trained 
i ° : . . Tez fOIUr O 
NITED f those of pre-war years. Its industrial production as — at 

or otherwise, on which they can draw in case of 


t of De |g whole has now risen to the highest level it had dl eed killed k 
prompt § seached since the beginning of the Skagerrak block- pty ee eee: or, = Seen, Se ; ben 
ernment § ade in April 1940, and Sweden even had to ration the Se while ha others they are relatively 
1€ Indo. export of certain domestic goods, such as forestry oe, See Me —— whose economy 
country § products, for which the demand abroad widely ex- “ ot gi pate te ¥ ous lieben 
a situa: | ceded the possibilities of production and shipping. , a ” bag -" S a "d ong 4 ae 
a Although its national debt increased from 2,700,000 — is ies Sncial ia a Pearse. - 
COLO ms eR . 5 . o al i - 
voblalll BE cst! * —— sf: ag a aes navian seiicl in Copenhagen, of a draft agreement 
»stly to rearmament expenses, Sweden's finan- be ag i ease 

7 Dutch dal situation is sound. This favorable outlook per- for a ove ye — an 8 ae 
ns with F mits the country to lend a helping hand in the recon- pre 5 aa ab ‘ ea aca re aay it eee 
90 many } struction of the war-stricken Northern countries by See, SONS ee” persis ‘fede — eg 
* British | way of credits and relief, the amount of which is et to the close economic and political Recieeaaansaiss 

stimated to total by now over 3,000,000,000 vocated by so many of their most prominent leaders. 


-sians to § §vedish crowns (about $600,000,000). ERNEST S. HEDIGER 
ed, and J 7; 
re Norway and Finland suffered most from the war. (Ernest S. Hediger, formerly a member of the FPA Research De- 
a a One of Norway S greatest economic assets, its mer- partment, has been spending several months in — ye 
a e . . among other assignments, he attended the Internation or 
: lf cantile and fishing fleets, was to a large extent de- Organization Conference in Paris.) 
agoniz- ¥ sroyed, and the country was extensively depleted of 
Me sug: | its capital goods and commodity stocks during the NOTICE TO MEMBERS 
thereby | German occupation. Many years will be needed to We are glad to announce that HEADLINE SERIES 
ral con- § reach pre-war levels. Substantial orders for ships No. 54, Europe’s Homeless Millions, will be sent to 
CKay have now been given to Swedish yards, while the members in late January. We regret the delay in 
EMS Oe ccves smaller Norwegian firms are booked up publication of this issue, due to production difficul- 
: fit several years for the construction of smaller ties. No. 55, Restless India, will follow in February. 
1e pre e ' 
as - THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 
enefa . 
8 idel Can Representative Government Do the Job? by Thomas Lower Deck, by Lieut. John Davies, R.N.V.R. New York, 
, widely - Finletter. New York, Reynal and Hitchcock, 1945. Macmillan, 1945. $2.00 
ve years $2.00 This simple, vividly told story of the hazardous work of 
ear 20; To strengthen cooperation between the various branches a British destroyer’s gun crew in convoying to Malta dur- 
letedill four government, Mr. Finletter, former Special Assistant ing its siege makes thrilling reading. 
lete t the Secretary of State, proposes three governmental 
Jel pro- reforms : a sharp reduction in the number of Congressional The Arab Island, by Freya Stark. New York, Knopf, 1945. 
ries not | Mmmittees; the creation of a legislative-executive com- - $3.50 
‘adil mittee, made up of Cabinet ‘members and the above com- A lively account of the successful attempt of the British 
1, mittee heads; and the adoption of a constitutional amend- to hold the Arab world on the side of the Allies during 
ever, it | Ment providing for the possibility of dissolution of Con- World War II. The author, who knows the Middle East 
sess and new elections in case the Executive and Congress well, sides with the Arabs on the controversial Zionist 
1. Swe. te in deadlock. issue and favors the creation of an Arab federation. 
ons OF moon saorg~ ied BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 11, Dacumpzr 28, 1945. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Norway eel 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Verna Micue.es Dean, Editor, Entered as 
Class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 1879. Three Dollars a Year lease : 
UNO. m@€ month for change of address on membership publications. ar e od . —— oe 
ture an 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


O other BS. 181 


Washington News Letter 


1918- 


U.S. COMMITMENTS CALL FOR FOREIGN POLICY COORDINATION 


The communiqué issued from Moscow by the Big 
Three on December 24, announcing that a peace 
conference of the 21 nations “which took an active 
part in the war against enemy states in Europe with 
substantial military contingents” will take place not 
later than May 1, 1946, and the progress made by 
the United Nations Organization, which is sched- 
uled to start functioning in London on January 10, 
place greater responsibility than ever on the United 
States for harmonizing its foreign policy with that 
of the other United Nations and for establishing ma- 
chinery at home to assure consistent and efficient 
cooperation abroad. 


STATE-WAR-NAVY COORDINATING COM- 
MITTEE. The foundation for a system coordinat- 
ing the executive agencies, however, already exists 
in the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee 
(known as Swink), which came into existence in 
December 1944. It worked out United States policy 
for the control of Japan and participated in the draft- 
ing of directives for the control of Germany and 
our policy toward Austria. This Committee has re- 
duced, but not eliminated, friction and rivalry over 
foreign affairs between the State Department and the 
military agencies. The existence of Swink was kept 
confidential as a military secret until the end of the 
war. It has its own secretariat, drawn from the per- 
sonnel of the three departments concerned. It does 
its basic work through six subcommittees: European 
Affairs, the Far East, Latin America, Near and Mid- 
dle East, Technical Information, Security Control 
and Rearmament. Its leadership is drawn from the 
level of assistant secretaries, with James Clement 
Dunn, Assistant Secretary of State in charge of Euro- 
pean, Near Eastern, African and Far Eastern Affairs, 
as chairman. The primacy of the State Department 
in the conduct of foreign affairs is acknowledged by 
the fact that, when Dunn is absent, a State Depart- 
ment official outranked by the War and Navy De- 
partment representatives acts as chairman. He is H. 
Freeman Matthews, director of the Office of Euro- 
pean Affairs. 


Suggestions for more elaborate cooperation be- 
tween those three departments are frequently ad- 
vanced in Washington. Last summer the Budget 
Bureau proposed to Secretary of State James F. 
Byrnes that he take steps to end conflicts between 
his department and the military. Secretary of the 
Navy James Forrestal on December 12, 1945 pro- 


posed creation of a National Security Council that FC 
would bring together the Secretaries of the three de. 
partments for decision on highest policy in interna. 

tional relations. World War II encouraged tenden. | | 

cies both toward independent action by different gov. | 
ernment agencies in foreign affairs and toward set. | 

ting up systems of coordination that would reconcile 
differences among agencies. The outstanding ar FD xx\ 
rangement for coordination was the establishment, ——— 
shortly after the attack on Pearl Harbor, of the Joint LO 
Chiefs of Staff Committee, where representatives of | 

the Army and Navy could arrive at common deci-| [N his : 
sions on policy relating to high strategy. That com-|4 the re 
mittee would cease to exist if Congress acted | ber 16 to 
favorably on the recommendation President Truman tense tha 
made on December 19 that the War and Navy De. by the U 


partments be merged. | or covert 
COOPERATION WITH CONGRESS. Coordina. | 7°" 
tion of the executive agencies in the making of for- ie ; 


eign policy will be of little value, however, unless a 
system is evolved for the close cooperation of Con- 
gress and the executive. The appointment by Pres- 
ident Truman on December 19 of Senators Tom Con- 
nally, Democrat of Texas, and Arthur Vandenberg, 
Republican of Michigan, among the United ee COM 
delegates to the UNO, contributed toward this | * Euro} 
cooperation, but neither President Truman nor | that the 
Secretary of State Byrnes has carried forward the | Pe@cem 
intimate system of congressional collaboration | # the c! 
worked out by Secretary of State Hull. In January isters by 
1943 the State Department opened a “seminar” for | A#airs. 

discussion with selected Senators from both par- champic 
ties about problems in foreign policy, and through- cedure 
out 1944 Mr. Hull conferred regularly with members | "8 ! 
of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the and Ru 
House Foreign Affairs Committee concerning the this ins 
Administration’s plans for the establishment of ma- and by 

chinery for international cooperation. Truman and States « 
Secretary of State Byrnes are both former members these d 
of the Senate, and they have frequently relied on onfere 
their innate sense of what Congress wants in devising well as 
their policies instead of soliciting directly the views invited 


London 

have cor 

resumed 
stand re: 


of key members of Congress. This tendency has * LR 
brought about the collapse of the Hull system, which | han 


deserves to be revived. By his regular conferences | 1 
with members of Congress, Hull bridged not only r -” 
the gap between executive and legislative branches |“ °° 
but also the gap between the Democratic and Repub: | 


lican parties. BLAIR BOLLES 


