


5 a Pe i ee i ed i i ee | 


a= > 


|FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as second- 


class matter December 

LipRar? 2, 1921, at the Pose 

AL Office at New York, 

is 1v- N. Y., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 











SECOND CLASS MAIL 





You. XIX, No. 47 


SEPTEMBER 13, 1940 








WILLIAM T. STONE TO BROADCAST SEPTEMBER 15 


The F.P.A. will start the second year of itt, AMERICA LOOKS 
ABROAD radio talks with an analysis of American foreign policy on 
Sunday afternoon, September 15, at 3:15 E.D.S.T. over the Blue Net- 
york of the National Broadcasting Company. We welcome comments 


on these programs from F.P.A. members and their friends. 


If you have not been able to hear the broadcasts, please urge your 


local station to carry them. 


iy 

5 1040 
General Uibrary 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 











GERMANY’S TOTAL WAR STRIKES BRITAIN 





ARRYING out Chancellor Hitler's threat of 

“retaliation” for British air-raids on Berlin, 
German planes on September 7 launched a series of 
destructive attacks on London, which took a mount- 
ing toll of life among civilians, particularly in the 
congested East End of the British capital. A British 
communiqué of September 8 stated that bombing 
at certain stages “appeared to be indiscriminate,” 
and that “damage was severe but, judged against 
the background of the war, is not serious.” The 
British air force, in turn, bombed many objectives in 
Germany, notably the port of Hamburg on Septem- 
ber 9. Marshal Goering, who had personally as- 
sumed command of the air Blitzkrieg from French 
territory, indicated that these mass raids constituted 
the second phase of the Battle of Britain, opening 
the way for German invasion of the British Isles, 
and the ‘‘decisive’’ victory of the Axis powers over 
the British Empire. 

Germany's preparations for its attack on Britain 
imposed an increasing strain on German-occupied 
territory, especially France. Not only were German 
bases in France bombed by the British air force, but 
it was reported on September 9 that Germany had 
made a formal demand on the French government in 
Vichy for a substantial part of the food and raw 
materials in unoccupied France and for any such 
products that France may be able to import in the 
future. This demand may confront the United States 
with a grave decision, since the new French Am- 
bassador to Washington, M. Henri-Haye, is expected 
to appeal for American assistance in relieving the 
‘French food situation. Refusal by the United States 
to furnish unoccupied France with food might 
bring that already sorely tried country to the break- 
ing-point. Yet it is clear that any assistance given to 
France will directly or indirectly aid Germany. 

A NEW DEAL IN RUMANIA. While the out- 
come of the life-and-death struggle between Britain 








and Germany remained in suspense, the Nazis pro- 
ceeded rapidly with their program of territorial re- 
vision in the Balkans. King Carol of Rumania, who 
on September 3 had summoned General Antonescu 
to form a new cabinet, bowed on September 5 to the 
General’s demand for his withdrawal; abdicated his 
already drastically reduced powers in favor of his 
son, Prince Michael; and departed once more into 
exile, accompanied by Mme. Lupescu, whose influ- 
ence on the King had long been denounced by the 
Iron Guard and other Rumanian politicians. General 
Antonescu is regarded as sympathetic to the Axis 
powers, and in any case has no choice but to accept 
the course dictated by Hitler. At the same time, he 
is apparently not ready to place Rumania under the 
rule of the Iron Guard. This group, whose principal 
leaders had been executed or imprisoned in Sep- 
tember 1939 following the assassination of Premier 
Calinescu by an Iron Guardist, had maintained 
close relations with Berlin, and had hoped to seize 
power on the dissolution of the monarchy. The Iron 
Guard, however, is not only anti-Semitic and anti- 
democratic, but also fanatically nationalist; and the 
Vienna award, under which Rumania was forced to 
cede Northern Transylvania to Hungary, split the 
group, some of whose members urged resistance 
against Hungarian occupation of this area, which 
began on September 5. General Antonescu is con- 
fronted by a staggering task. He must restore law 
and order in what remains of the country’s territory 
after the cession of Northern Transylvania to Hun- 
gary, of Southern Dobruja to Bulgaria, and of Bes- 
sarabia and Northern Bukovina to the U.S.S.R. He 
must purge the administration of corrupt elements 
which had been reputedly associated with court 
circles, and had aroused the indignation of many 
Rumanians. He must establish working relations 
with Germany, which now treats Rumania as a pro- 
tectorate whose principal function is to furnish the 





———— 





= = Page Two 





Reich with oil and foodstuffs, and will probably 
insist On a status of autonomy for the German 
minority remaining within the country’s shrunken 
frontiers. And he must avoid further clashes with 
Hungary, whose extremist nationalists claim addi- 
tional territory from Rumania, as well as with the 
Soviet Union, which appears to be encouraging com- 
munism and Pan-Slavism among Rumania’s neigh- 
bors, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. 

WAR IN THE NEAR EAST? Pacification of 
Rumania is of the utmost importance to Germany, 
which hopes to restore the normal flow of supplies 
from that country as soon as possible, and to de- 
velop there a market for German manufactured 
goods. Under the circumstances, the Nazis are ex- 
pected to back General Antonescu, who is regarded 
as a “strong man’ and enjoys the support of the 
army. The Vienna award and the abdication of King 
Carol, however, have not yet stabilized the situation 
in the Balkans and the eastern Mediterranean. On 
the contrary, Prime Minister Churchill, in his report 
of September 8 to the House of Commons, indicated 
that the Near East, whose resources of oil offer a 
great temptation to Germany and Italy, would soon 
become the theatre of action. Last week the Medi- 
terranean fleet, reinforced by new units, bombed the 
Italian-controlled Dodecanese Islands, and fresh con- 
tingents of British troops landed in Egypt, main ob- 


ALMAZAN DEFIES MEXICAN GOVERNMENT 


BY Davip H. PoPpPEeR 
Mr. Popper has just returned from Mexico. 


Heightening the political tension and uncertainty 
which have existed in Mexico since the disputed elec- 
tion of July 7, General Juan Andreu Almazan and 
his followers last week sharply defied the authority 
of the government of President Lazaro Cardenas 
and advanced their preparations to assume office on 
inauguration day, December 1. The Almazanistas— 
who, like the supporters of General Manuel Avila 
Camacho, the government candidate, claim to have 
received some 90 per cent of all votes cast in the 
election—summoned their Congress into secret ses- 
sion at an undisclosed meeting place on Septem- 
ber 1, the day the official legislature was convened. 
On September 3 the rump Congress proclaimed Gen- 
eral Almazan President-elect, and a day later issued 
a manifesto containing a slashing attack on the ad- 
ministration of President Cardenas. With unusual 
violence and disregard for accuracy, this pronounce- 
ment accused the government's Mexican Revolu- 
tionary Party of committing 12,000 political mur- 
ders in the last six years; of “blind subordination to 
Soviet totalitarianism”; and of corruption and error 
responsible for the “grave crisis’ in the country 
today. The manifesto concluded with a thinly veiled 
appeal for popular revolt. 








ee, 
——— 


jective of Italy's African war preparations. Italy 
meanwhile, sent a military mission to Syria, which 
had been coveted by the Italians in 1919, but wa 
assigned by the Paris Peace Conference to Frang 
in the form of a League mandate. The course tha 
war might take in the Near East, like all other de 
velopments, hinges on the outcome of the Battle of 
Britain. 

On the basis of censored news it is difficult, ané 
obviously fruitless, to venture any predictions. The 
outcome of the air Blitzkrieg depends not only op 
the relative quality and number of British and Ger. 
man airplanes and pilots, but also on the morale of 
the two peoples, now subjected for the first time t 
total war, which inflicts far greater hardships op 
civilians than on armed forces. The air war ove 
Britain is testing the endurance not merely of the 
trained fighter, but of the average human being, in 
a way in which it has not been tested in modem 
times except during the Spanish civil war and the 
war in China. In both these cases, the endurance 
of determined human beings proved equal to the 
strain imposed by brutal, and vastly superior, force 
—not because the Spanish Loyalists and the Chines 
had hope of victory over their enemy, but because 
they had reached the conclusion that death wa 
preferable to subjection. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


POLITICAL “WAR OF NERVES.” Despite its 
inflammatory statements, the Almazan faction has 
carefully refrained from challenging the government 
by force of arms. Rumors of sporadic strife in vari 
ous outlying Mexican states have filtered through to 
the capital, but the Ministry of National Defense 
asserts that federal troops have not had to intervene 
to maintain order. The Almazanista tactics—termed 
a political “war of nerves’—have apparently been 
designed to shake the confidence of the government 
by a show of strength, and provoke it to take the 
initiative in forcible action. Thus far, however, the 
authorities have only issued subpoenas requiring Al- 
mazan leaders to appear in court to answer charges 
of sedition and criminal provocation. Some of these 
leaders, fearing more strenuous government meas 
ures, were said to have sought asylum in various 
embassies and legations in Mexico City, while others 
were reported to be organizing a revolutionary junta 
in Texas. 


General Almazan himself, after an unexplained’ 
sojourn in Havana at the time of the Pan-American 
Conference, has traveled to Panama and is now if 
the United States, ostensibly as a tourist. On Sep 
tember 2 he issued a statement attacking the record 
of the “racketeer government’ of President Cat 
denas and promising to return to Mexico and claim 








=——— 


the pt 
tion Vv 
bellior 
gress 
Gener 
Until 


minut 
TH 


gues 4 
implic 
two ¢ 
policy 
Carde 
to po: 
is aln 
classe 
fessio 
Partic 
agree 
mass 
ters; 
or nc 
of tl 
trade 
tas, t 
coun 
decli 
ing | 
wide 
os. 
char; 
total 
embi 
the 

othe 


O 
clare 
in } 
of t 
take 
rect 


of f 





ver 


the 


rh 
the 


nce 


ord 
vat: 
aim 








—— 
—_ 





the presidency ‘‘at the proper time.” The declara- 
tion would appear to presage eventual armed re- 
bellion, were it not for the fact that the official Con- 
gress has unaccountably delayed its finding that 
General Avila Camacho has been elected President. 
Until this step is taken, the possibility of a last- 
minute compromise cannot be excluded. 


THE ALIGNMENT OF INTERESTS. The is- 
sues at stake in Mexico’s post-election conflict were 
implied rather than apparent in the speeches of the 
two candidates prior to July 7. Both advocated a 
policy somewhat more conservative than that of the 
Cardenas régime. General Almazan, who appears 
to possess more drive and energy than his opponent, 
is almost solidly supported by the middle and upper 
classes of the country, including a nucleus of pro- 
fessional men and Catholic leaders organized in the 
Partido Accion Nacional. Many foreign observers 
agree that he obtained a surprising predominance of 
mass support in Mexico City and other urban cen- 
ters; but it is impossible to state definitely whether 
or not this advantage was outweighed by the votes 
of the National Revolutionary Party’s rural and 
trade union adherents. According to the Almazanis- 
tas, the government must bear responsibility for the 
country’s difficult economic plight as reflected in 
declining ag-icultural and industrial production, ris- 
ing prices, deficits in publicly owned enterprises, and 
widespread hardship. President Cardenas and the 
C.T.M. (the Mexican labor federation), it is 
charged, are sympathetic to Communist and other 
totalitarian doctrines, and are responsible for the 
embitterment of Mexican-American relations due to 
the expropriation of American oil properties and 
other radical measures. 


On the other hand, government spokesmen de- 
clare that Almazan is an advance agent of fascism 
in Mexico and would destroy the hard-won gains 
of the Mexican Revolution if he were permitted to 
take office. The ideology of that revolution is di- 
rected with equal emphasis toward the abolition 
of foreign economic power in Mexico and the so- 


Page Three 








cialization of the country. In a lengthy address to the 
new Congress on September 1, President Cardenas 
reviewed the revolutionary achievements of his six- 
year term, stressing reduction of illiteracy, redistribu- 
tion of land to over 1,000,000 peasants, and com- 
pletion of the legal process of expropriation of for- 
eign oil properties. Government adherents admit that 
General Camacho is not disposed to carry this move- 
ment further, but contend that his tenure of office 
will be used to consolidate the gains already achieved. 

DIFFICULTIES OF REVOLUTION. A political 
“pause” of this kind is undoubtedly necessary to 
relieve the economic stress produced by official poli- 
cies and aggravated by the dislocation of Mexican 
foreign trade as a result of the European war. If 
Mexico's social experiments are to prove permanent- 
ly successful, a new productive discipline must be 
evolved to replace the orthodox incentives to efficient 
production. Mexican labor organizations, now 
placed in partial or complete control of the oil 
industry, railroads, public utilities and other enter- 
prises, are rapidly learning this hard truth. After 
strenuous opposition, the Petroleum Workers’ Union 
was recently forced by President Cardenas to agree 
to a reorganization of the oil industry including 
wage cuts, dismissals, and other measures designed 
to re-establish financial stability. Pressure is being 
placed on the railroad workers’ syndicate to effect 
similar reforms. All parties agree that much must 
be done to increase the production and income of the 
individual peasant on the government’s collective 
farms. The next few years will determine whether 
the revolutionary program will go forward along 
such lines, or will be circumscribed by a nation de- 
termined to discard economic innovation. What 1s 
certain is that the fortunes of war in Europe, and 
the rise or fall of totalitarian doctrines on that con- 
tinent, are bound to affect the course of Mexican 
affairs. It seems inconceivable that the United States 
will permit direct domination of Mexico by any 
European power; and the attitude of Washington in 
this respect will have a decisive influence on the 
future of the Mexican Republic. 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Neutrality for the United States, by Edwin Borchard and 
William P. Lage. Second Edition, New Haven, Yale Uni- 
versity Press, 1940. $3.50 


Retaining the valuable legal and historical material 
which distinguished their work on its first appearance three 
years ago, the authors of this book now carry their analysis 
through the early part of 1940 and repeat their plea for 
isolationist neutrality. 


A Federation for Western Europe, by W. Ivor Jennings. 
New York, Macmillan, 1940. $2.50 


A famous British constitutional lawyer plans a loose 
federation among the democratic states of northern and 
western Europe, and foresees its eventual extension to the 
entire world. Although based on arbitrary assumptions, the 
study is valuable for its consideration of difficult constitu- 
tional questions. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 47, SEPTEMBER 13, 1940. 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lager, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Eéitor. 


Entered as second-ciass matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


SF 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Pasa et 


SS 


ae SS =r 


——— re 





ti 
r 
by 


Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
Sept. 9.—It is perhaps premature to describe 
Washington’s apparent return to a stronger policy 
in the Far East as a direct extension to the Pacific 
of the new Anglo-American alignment achieved by 
President Roosevelt's momentous agreement with 
Great Britain. As long as the outcome of the Battle 
of Britain remains in doubt, the United States may 
be compelled to move cautiously in the Far East. 
And yet the warning to Japan issued by Secretary 
Hull on September 4 sounds a new note of firmness 
and indicates that the Anglo-American bargain may 
extend far beyond the transfer of 50 destroyers to 
Britain in return for the lease of naval and air bases 
by the United States. 


THE ANGLO-AMERICAN DEAL AND THE 
PACIFIC. Mr. Hull’s warning, issued in the form of 
a statement to the press, followed a series of un- 
confirmed reports that Japan had delivered an ulti- 
matum to the government of French Indo-China, 
demanding the right to transport Japanese troops 
over the French-owned Yunnan Railway to the 
Chinese border. Such a move, whether made by force 
or through agreement with the French authorities, 
would open up an important new avenue for Jap- 
anese attack against China, and bring Tokyo closer 
to its major objectives in Southeastern Asia Siam 
and the Netherlands East Indies. Mr. Hull's state- 
ment of September 4 was essentially similar to earlier 
statements of April 17 and May 11, expressing this 
country’s concern regarding maintenance of the 
Status quo in the area of the Pacific, particularly in 
Indo-China and the East Indies. But this latest re- 
minder, coming less than 48 hours after the naval 
base deal with Britain, carried far greater emphasis 
by virtue of Prime Minister Churchill’s pledge never 
to surrender the British fleet and the consequent de- 
cision in Washington to keep the American fleet in 
the Pacific. 


Other circumstances, moreover, helped to create 
the impression of parallel action by the two English- 
speaking nations. On September 4 Washington of- 
ficials allowed it to be known that the U.S. fleet was 
still based at Hawaii. Then, as though to underscore 
the broad community of interest between the British 
Commonwealth and the United States, Lord Hali- 
fax, British Foreign Secretary, followed Mr. Hull 
on September 5 with a statement of Britain’s interest 
in preserving the status quo in the Pacific. And on 
the same day a conference was held at the State De- 





partment between Secretary Hull, Lord Lothian, the 
British Ambassador, and Richard G. Casey, the 
Australian Minister to Washington, suggesting the 
possibility of cooperative measures by the three 
powers. 

It remains to be seen whether these diplomatic 
maneuvers actually foreshadow the extension of 
military conversations to the Far East. At the mo- 
ment, there is no evidence of military consultations 
similar to those being carried on by the Canadian- 
American Joint Board for Defense. But so far as 
the Pacific is concerned, the important point to keep 
in mind is that concerted action is always possible 
without any formal agreement as long as the Ameri- 
can fleet is free to remain in the Pacific. 


In other ways as well, the strategic consequences 
of the destroyer-naval base agreement extend beyond 
the limits of the Western Hemisphere. It is obvious, 
of course, that the new group of naval and air bases, 
once they are established, will enormously strengthen 
our continental defenses. The bases in the Bahamas, 
Antigua, Jamaica, St. Lucia and British Guiana will 
effectively cover the vital approaches to the Panama 
Canal and assure American naval and air supremacy 
in the entire area of the Caribbean and along the 
northern coast of South America. The proposed 
bases in Newfoundland provide additional security 
for Canada. But construction of these bases does not 
imply the adoption of a policy of passive defense, or 
even a limited Hemisphere defense resting on an 
Atlantic Maginot Line; on the contrary, it promises 
an aggressive policy founded on Mahan’s doctrine 
of the offensive as the best possible defense. This is 
the key to the strategy which is made possible by out- 
lying bases and parallel action by the world’s two 
principal sea powers. 


No one who has grasped the full meaning of this 
history-making agreement with Britain should be sur- 
prised, therefore, that the first effects have been 
felt as sharply in the Pacific and the Far East as in 
the Atlantic and the Western Hemisphere. The bar- 
gain holds, despite continued criticism of the meth- 
ods employed by Mr. Roosevelt to accomplish his 
ends and legal doubts which have not entirely been 
resolved by Attorney General Jackson's opinion. Nor 
can the bargain be undone, even though it involves 
commitments which many believe are tantamount to 
an unofficial alliance, binding the British Common- 
wealth and the United States and requiring both 
parties to take all measures which may prove neces- 
sary for their common defense. W. T. STONE 





FO 


An in 


i 


of 


A 
H 
B: 


demo 
light 
Chur 
the v 
conti 
dead 
milit 
a lar 
had 
been 
had | 
from 
tions 
vesse 
load 
orga: 
sour 
with 
best 
the ° 
PI 
| the | 
critic 
pose 
Mr. 
tion 
ing 
of E 
for 
opir 
Scot 
rath 
diffi 








