FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN —— 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated ef March 3, 1879. 
Nem-PeRICDICAL ROOF wes: 4oth Street, New York, N. Y. 
hage INERAL | IBRAR} 
par- UNLY, OE MiCcti 
eged Vou. XVI, No. 5 NOVEMBER 27, 1936 
a “HEADLINE BOOK” CHRISTMAS PACKAGE sila 
and An ideal gift! Genera p 
h an Three Headline Books in an attractive cellophane-wrapped tvergity of Michigan 
cer. package—WAR DRUMS AND PEACE PLANS, DICTATORSHIP and University 
ably} CLASH IN THE PACIFIC—together with a Christmas greeting from Wich 
ding} Dr. Harry Emerson Fosdick. Ann Arbor, Bich 
This package, with your name enclosed, will be mailed for $1.00. 
new Orders must reach the F. P. A. office by December 15. 
iture — 
ain’s 
ryr—| EUROPEAN CRISIS AND ROOSEVELT’S OPPORTUNITY 
head | 
vith- = by RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL strengthening of the French alliances will make a 
me” Mr. Buell has just returned from a trip through nine settlement with Germany more difficult. Mean- 
liate European countries. while, economic conditions within Germany and 
olse- Although Europeans today are not nearly so Italy grow worse; and Hitler and Mussolini have 
raft-| pessimistic about the future of their continent as revealed their own nervousness by a number of 
wil the readers of many American newspapers, there inflammatory speeches. Most observers believe 
‘tions is no doubt that the international situation has that there is relatively little danger of war during 
raw. deteriorated during the past year. the next 18 months; but if during that period this 
had} _— Recently, three events have aroused widespread deadlock is not resolved by a constructive eco- 
h is} misgivings: the failure of the League of Nations § nomic and political settlement, war may become a 
fac-} to prevent Italy’s annexation of Ethiopia; Hitler’s certainty. 
con-§ denunciation of the Locarno agreements and the Neither the French nor British government 
sup-} construction of new forts on the Rhine; and Gen- seems strong enough today to break the deadlock. 
de-} eral Franco’s military progress, which may result Premier Blum has made an impressive record; 
2 ob-§ in the establishment of a Spanish government but the fact that his government must rely on the 
ley’s } allied, at least in sympathy, with the Fascist gov- Communists for a part of its majority makes it 
‘inue} ernments of Germany and Italy. the target of bitter conservative attack, with re- 
Surprised at the success of Nazi efforts to ter- sulting weakness at home and abroad. In Britain 
eing | minate the unequal provisions in the peace treaties, the conservative Baldwin government has a much 
itish } certain elements in Germany are aspiring to stronger majority but weaker leadership. The 
erts,| supremacy in Europe. With this possibility in Labor opposition is little better, being divided and 
ence | view, Germany is building up what may soon be confused. No strong lead can be expected in the 
sted | the strongest army in Europe. Through its four- near future from France or Britain. 
n de- year plan for raw materials it is already carry- Nevertheless, economic recovery is taking place 
ud of ing out an industrial mobilization. Both Germany within the democracies; and they have a growing 
Brit- and Italy today are operating on the basis of a concern not only for liberty but for individual 
this} war economy. Abetted by Mussolini, Hitler has and social well-being. But unless the interna- 
sug-} been attempting to break down the League of Na- tional problem is solved, these gains may be lost 
ates | tions, strengthen the hold of fascism in Europe— = and democracy undermined. 
orceé |} beginning with Spain—and isolate the French President Roosevelt, fortified by an enormous 
iture | democracy. majority, is the only world statesman in a position 
ue Despite recent successes, Germany has so far decisively to break the deadlock between Germany 
The failed to overturn the fundamental alignment in and the other great powers. The Hull trade pro- 
ings} Europe. On the contrary, Britain, France and gram and the September monetary agreement 
rans- | Poland are all increasing their armaments to meet have already inspired confidence in American 
egin- | the German challenge. There are also some in- leadership. The time for further steps has now 
dications that France may conclude more precise come. No one in Europe expects the United States 
ER alliances with Yugoslavia and Rumania and make to undertake political commitments. At the same 
— a military convention with the Soviet Union. Ne- time no American intervention will succeed which 
National gotiations for a new Locarno agreement, how- is limited to moral preachments and hastily de- 
Mier} ever, seem to have broken down; and the very vised formulae. What is necessary is to strike 


at the roots of the economic and political malad- 
justments troubling the world. If President 
Roosevelt approaches the international problem 
with the same qualities of leadership he has dis- 
played in attacking the domestic depression, the 
possibility of success may be bright. 


CONSOLIDATING THE FASCIST FRONT 


Twice within the past fortnight the Fascist 
powers have sought to impress the outside world 
with their unity and determination to prevent the 
spread of communism. Tokyo and Berlin con- 
firmed the long-rumored conclusion of an anti- 
Communist accord which follows closely on the 
recent Italo-German rapprochement. In Spain 
the Fascist cause has been bolstered by the prema- 
ture recognition accorded the Rebel government 
by Germany and Italy on November 18. 


The German-Japanese agreement, according to 
Berlin, is confined to a pledge of “benevolent neu- 
trality” in the event of war, with, perhaps, as- 
sistance “in given situations.” In addition, it is 
reported to provide for common action against 
Communist “propaganda,” and close technical 
collaboration between German and Japanese mili- 
tary establishments and industries. A spokesman 
for the German government, however, denied on 
November 21 the existence of a “hard and fast 
alliance,” and reports indicate that this statement 
is probably correct. It seems unlikely that either 
power has irrevocably promised to support the 
other in every conflict with the U.S.S.R. 


Italo-German recognition of the ‘Rebel junta 
at Burgos as the legal Spanish government — not 
merely as belligerents—is obviously intended to 
strengthen the Rebels who have now been held up 
for more than two weeks at the gates of Madrid. 
Coming at a time when the legal government still 
holds the capital and over one-third of the coun- 
try, it clearly violates established precedents of 
international law. This gesture has already en- 
couraged General Franco to threaten the destruc- 
tion of Barcelona if that should prove necessary 
to end the “scandalous traffic in arms, ammuni- 
_ tion, tanks and airplanes, and even toxic acids” 
which is allegedly being carried on through this 
port. His warning that all foreign shipping and 
non-combatants should immediately leave Bar- 
celona is generally believed to herald bombard- 
ment and blockade. 
incapable of blockading the eastern coast of Spain 
with the few ships at their command unless they 
receive the assistance of German and Italian 
vessels. 


In the Soviet Union news of the German-Jap- 


Page Two — 


The Rebels, however, are 


—— 


anese accord provoked an outburst of indigna- 
tion. On November 21 the Soviet government 
indefinitely postponed signing an 8-year renew- 
al of its fisheries agreement with Japan, gener- 
ally hailed as a first step toward the settlement 
of other outstanding issues. The following day 
—over the sharp protests of the Hitler govern- 
ment—a Soviet court sentenced to death a Ger. © 
man engineer, one of 23 German citizens ar. — 
rested earlier in the month on charges ranging © 
from Fascist propaganda to espionage and sabo- © 
tage. Meanwhile, the Soviet government hag _ 
become increasingly bitter about the pusillani- 
mous policies which it accuses France and Bri- 
tain of pursuing in the Spanish conflict. Carry- 
ing out its announced determination not to be 
bound by the non-intervention agreement “‘to 
any greater extent than the remaining partici. — 
pants,” it has recently supplied the Loy alee 

' 


mr 


forces with tanks, airplanes and even personnel, | 


In France and Britain the recognition of! 
Franco and the German-Japanese rapproche- 
ment created a bad impression. The govern-/ 
ments of both countries, however, are still de-_ 
termined to prevent the division of Europe i 
two ideologically hostile blocs. They want to! 
keep alive at all costs the non-intervention com- | 
mittee on Spain. Speaking before his constitu- | 
ents at Leamington on November 20, the British 
Foreign Secretary declared: “Because some 
who should be firemen take a hand now and 
again at feeding the flames, that is no reason 
why the whole fire brigade should leave its 
posts and join in fanning Europe into a furnace.” 
The day before, in a heated rejoinder to a Com- 
munist member of Parliament, Mr. Eden had al- 
ready intimated that he considered the Soviet 


Union more to blame than Germany and Italy | 
for precipitating the crisis over Spain. The 
French and British governments have been in 
consultation about the threatened blocka of | 
the Spanish coasts. Mr. Eden told the House of | 
Commons on November 23 that Britaiy well | 
as France, will not for the time being accord bel 
ligerent status to the Rebels, which would enable 
them to search and seize ships on the high seas. | 
At the same time, however, the British govern- 
ment intends to secure the rapid enactment of | 
legislation making it illegal for any British ship | 
to transport war material to a Spanish port. 
Both Britain and France remain anxious to avoid 
all risk of international war, even at the expense | 
of a Fascist triumph in Spain. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 5, NovemMBER 27, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lesiie Bueit, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; VERA MIcHELES Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


An in 


EURC 


