es 
—$———— 


signs that eane 
itration of 


Ann Arbor. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Auc oo nay 


Genera) Library 


tr 
“Alversity Of Mich: 
= +8 an 


Mich. 


POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Aucust 28, 1942 


ast even at 

ype. If thi 

he starting | 

ving Rog 

ing great 

[his co 

E Italy, 

th Gener, 

Added to 

sia in the 

last week’s 

1 to relieve 

1 armies, {Vou. XXI, No. 45 

DEN, JR. 

NT AR reached the last untouched continent when 
ypointment Brazil entered the world conflict on August 22. 
1 of Assig{The only South American nation to take part in 
Villiam Phe first World War becomes the first to join the 
nt service |United Nations in the second. Its entrance compels 
ollege andja re-examination of South America’s position in 
>. in Intersfworld affairs. 

ia Univer] Brazil’s action, unexpected when it came, fol- 
nember offlowed a week or more of mounting tension. It had 


Oceania, by 
942. $3.75 
nalist’s trip 
40. The au- 
lism on the 
been bene 


eat Japan, 
1942, $2.75 
for Japan’s 
the road to 
the author. 
ith Russian 


irden City, 


d Japan as 
he power of 
against the 


ngton. New 
tion of life 
h prophetic 
nber 1941. 


ted. National 
tor. Entered as 


just become known that sinkings off our coast had 
declined during July, and that for a number of days 
no sinkings had been reported. Coincident with this 
slackening, however, came a wave of sinkings in 
the South Atlantic. Within a few days six Brazilian 
thips went down close to home waters, increasing 
by over fourteen thousand tons the sixty thousand 
already lost by that nominally neutral country. On 
August 18 President Vargas announced to a turbu- 
lent crowd that these acts of piracy would not go 
unpunished. Brazilian airmen, aided by United 
States flyers, soon reported attacks on seven sub- 
Marines, and the sinking of at least two. Amid a 
popular outcry for war, steps were taken to seize 
as compensation the ships and property of Axis 
nationals not already taken over. Brazilian shipping 
was ordered held in port, and Axis subjects prepar- 
ing to return home were detained as hostages. A 
formal note was sent to Germany, and the final dec- 
laration soon followed. 


No action could have been more clearly compelled 
by German aggression. Why did Hitler create this 
New enemy in the South? The risk of a flank at- 
tack from Brazilian soil may have seemed a minor 
one compared to the growing need of crippling the 
Cape route to India and the Near East, which clearly 
dictated the accelerated campaign in the South At- 
lantic. Or perhaps Germany may actually want to 
involve South America, which as a continent is mili- 
tarily weak, in order to force still further diversion 


BRAZIL'S WAR DECLARATION STIRS LATIN AMERICA 


of North American power, already dangerously scat- 
tered over the world. At least Germany's action 
indicates that Hitler is finding it hard to enlist our 
neighbors in the ‘new order.” 


AN END TO UNCERTAINTY. Brazil’s declara- 
tion of war gives final direction to a policy which 
for a long time looked like skillful fence riding. 
President Vargas, who came to power by coup d'etat, 
and in 1937 briefly startled the democracies by 
proclaiming Brazil a “corporate state,” was slow to 
antagonize the European dictators. This was natural. 
Brazil has little democratic tradition as we under- 
stand it. The country is huge, and hard to defend. 
A compact and ill-assimilated German population, 
numbering some hundreds of thousands, inhabits 
substantial districts in the South. German propa- 
ganda and espionage had made good headway, and 
German airways had spread a transport net through- 
out the country. 

On the other hand, ties with the United States, 
traditionally a friend of Brazil and economically 
vital to that country, had long been cultivated. Presi- 
dent Roosevelt was cordially welcomed on his visit 
to Rio in 1936, and tangible bonds were gradually 
forged. In January 1941 a military and air mission 
went to Brazil to cooperate in building up the na- 
tion’s forces. In October the United States lent 
Brazil a hundred million dollars, far the largest 
sum extended to a good neighbor. Lately Brazilian 
policy has inclined more and more clearly toward 
the United States. In the program laid down at 
Havana, Brazil has loyally cooperated at every point. 
It was in Rio de Janeiro that the ministers of all 
the American republics moved last January to break 
with the Axis, and Brazil’s supporting action came 
promptly. In the past few weeks, President Vargas 
has quietly taken steps to eliminate pro-Axis ele- 
ments within the government and to strengthen his 
own position: Hitler, victorious in the field, can gain 


no allies save by intimidation. The United Nations, 
despite a want of visible success, continue to attract 
the support of the world. 


EFFECT ON THE AMERICAN FRONT. The 
entrance of Brazil into the war undoubtedly in- 
creases our responsibilities. Brazil has a trained army 
in being of about 100,000, with reserves of perhaps 
300,000, a tiny air force, and a navy that counts 
two capital ships. It is obvious that its defense must 
fall heavily on its Allies, and especially on the 
United States. But there are compensating advan- 
tages: Brazil is only 1800 miles from Africa and 
commands the narrowest crossing of the Atlantic. 
American flyers are already using airports in Brazil, 
and the well-known “bulge” may easily become in 
time a takeoff point for an offensive by way of West 
Africa. Even now we should be in a far better posi- 
tion than the enemy to exploit this geographic fact. 

Formal entry of the largest Latin American re- 


RUSSIA’S DANGER CALLS FOR UTMOST EFFORT BY ALLIES 


As Russia’s peril grows with every German ad- 
vance in the Caucasus and in the direction of Stalin- 
grad, the United Nations, re-enforced by Brazil’s 
entrance into the war, face increasingly grim deci- 
sions on all fronts. The visit of Prime Minister 
Churchill to Moscow undoubtedly had a good 
psychological effect— both because it constituted 
tangible recognition of Russia’s rank among the 
Big Four of the anti-Axis powers, and because it 
brought to a head plans to link the Russian front 
in the Caucasus with the British front in Egypt and 
the Middle East. But the Russians, faced with mortal 
danger to their armies and resources, are understand- 
ably skeptical about all promises of aid until they 
see them realized. They would agree with Napoleon, 
who is said to have remarked that battles are won 
not by those who make the plans, but by those who 
take the responsibility for carrying them out and do 
carry them out. 


CAUCASUS LINKED WITH MIDDLE EAST. 
Even if the German threat to Russia were not. in 
stark reality, so great, it would still be wise policy 
for Stalin to drive home the point that the war can- 
not be won merely by letting the Germans push 


How are the Nazis using Europe’s resources to 
build an economic empire? For an analysis based 
on German and other European resources, READ: 


Nazi Economic Imperialism 
by Ernest S. Hediger 


25c 


August 15 issue of ForeiGN Pouicy Reports 
Reports are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


Page Two 


public may herald considerable changes in the politi 
cal attitude of the whole continent. Three days be 
fore the declaration Chile, which still retains nop 
mal relations with the Axis, expressed complete 
unity with Brazil against Germany's ‘‘barbarous ag. 
gression.” Six nations—Argentina, Bolivia, Chile 
Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay—have granted Brazil 
the right to use their facilities as though it were not 
at war. It is especially notable that Argentina, hith. 
erto so neutral as sometimes to resemble an an 
tagonist, seems to be reconsidering its position, 


——_ | 


The American front forged at Havana and Rig 
will be more active still and it is quite likely) 
that a number of Latin American countries, thus far 
guarded in their behavior, may become formal allies| 
in the struggle that is theirs as well as ours. The 
proposition that our responsibilities in the Western 
Hemisphere ought to stop at the Panama Canal al. 
ready seems singularly remote and out of date. 


SHERMAN S. HAYDEN 


further and further into Russian ‘‘space,” depriving 
Russian armies of essential resources. To quibble 
now, and argue that, when a second front in Europe 
might have helped France and Britain in 1939-40, 
Russia failed to open it, would not answer Russia's 
urgent demand today for help from the Western 
powers. Such help, although presumably limited in 
numbers of men and quantity of material, might be 
offered from the Middle East—and it is significant 
that General Wavell, together with British Middle 
East air force chiefs, participated in the Churchill 
Stalin conference. The appointment of Sir Henry 
Maitland Wilson, a veteran of earlier campaigns of 
World War II, as Commander in Chief of an inde 
pendent army in Iran and Iraq, announced on Au 
gust 24, followed closely on the replacement of 
General Auchinleck by Sir Harold R. L. G. Alexan- 
der as Commander in Chief of the Middle East 
There has been talk in the British press regarding 
the possibility of opening a “second” front in the 
Middle East, especially if the Germans succeed in 
breaking through Russian mountain defenses in the 
Caucasus, which in these days of parachutists and 
dive bombers can no longer be regarded as impreg: 
nable. Developments in that theatre of war are 4 
strange echo of 1812, when Napoleon, as he at 


int 


tio 
pr 


g u 


fi 
th 


tacked Russia, dreamt, among other things, of us 
ing Russian “auxiliaries” to strike at the British 
Empire in India—and the Russians preferred to 
fight to the‘bitter end on their own soil rather thai 
die in India in the service of the Corsican. 

THE LESSONS OF DIEPPE. But the Russians 
are looking not only east for help; they still hope 
that aid may come from the west, and come promptly. 
The obstacles to aid from that direction were fe 


r¢ 
h 
tl 
tl 


F 
| H 


se 


the politi 
e days be 
tains nop 

complete 
barous ag. 
via, Chile 
ited Brazil 
t were not 
itina, hith. 
le an an 
} position, 

and Rio 
uite likely 
s, thus far 
rmal allies 
ours. The 
e Western 
_ Canal al- 
date. 


HAYDEN 


depriving 
‘o quibble 
in Europe 
1 1939-40, 
er Russia's 
e Westem 
limited in 
, might be 
significant 
sh Middle 
Churchill- 
Sir Henry 
npaigns of 
yf an inde 
ed on Au 
cement of 
5. Alexat- 
ddle East 
regarding 
ont in the 
succeed in 
ises in the 
wutists and 
as impreg: 
war are 4 
as he at 
igs, of us 
he British 
eferred to 
ather than 


e Russians 

still hope 
: promptly. 
1 were f& 


, ee 


vealed by the Commando raid on Dieppe on Au- 
gust 19. Some of the lessons of that raid hold out 
hope—notably the mastery of the air established by 
British and American planes, and the coordination 
achieved between land, naval and air forces partici- 
pating in the attack. Others are less comforting. 
At Dieppe—although possibly not in equal degree 
at every point of Europe’s Atlantic coastline—the 
Germans were well-prepared for a surprise raid, 
except in the air, and may be expected to be even 
more on the alert from now on. German casualties 
were heavy—but so were those of the Allies. And 
the problem of how to carry the attack any distance 
into enemy-controlled territory once landings have 
been effected remains to be solved by subsequent 
expeditions. Yet it is only through experimental raids 
of this character that the forces of the United Na- 
tions can become acquainted with German defense 
preparations, and acquire the skill and toughness re- 
quired for any attempt at invasion. 

BRITISH CIVILIANS CARRY ON. As the Brit- 
ish Isles assume more and more the appearance of 
a series of airdromes and training camps garrisoned 
by soldiers and civilians, it seems increasingly im- 
portant for Americans to learn just how the British 
manage to carry on in the midst of privations that 
make our average standard of living appear the 
height of luxury. The British have shown a more 
than normal tendency to understatement with re- 
gard to difficulties they consider part of their com- 
mon lot, and American correspondents in Britain 
are more occupied with the sensational news of 
Commando raids and bomber operations than with 
the details of the daily life of the average British 
man, woman and child. 

Yet it is from these details that Americans, still 
so far removed from actual contact with war, might 
piece together a picture of what the British—who 
in turn are infinitely better off than the Russians, 
the Chinese, or the conquered peoples—are con- 
fronted with; and it is out of such seemingly harsh 
things as rationing and an increasing equalization 
of sacrifice that the British themselves are building 
a way of life that combines individual liberty with 
communal responsibility. Perhaps the first glimmer 
of the wide gap that separates the United States 
from other United Nations came with reports of 
the differences in pay, rations, and opportunities for 
recreation between American soldiers, on the one 
hand, and British soldiers on the other. Not that 
the Britishers grumble about these differences. On 
the contrary, they are reported to be pathetically 


_—— 


Page Three 


eager to entertain the American forces to the extent 
of their very meager food resources. But, in the long 
run, both for the winning of the war and the win- 
ning of the peace, would it not be advisable to strive . 
for greater equalization in the standard of living’ 
of the United States and the other United Nations? 
Is there not a danger that this country, a late- 
comer in the war, might emerge from it the least 
affected by war hardships, and consequently the least 
prepared to make post-war sacrifices and readjust- 
ments? Many American lives will be lost, many 
privations will have to be undergone by American 
forces, before victory is in sight. It might be better 
for the moral fibre of this country, in time of war 
as in the post-war period, if civilians here share, as 
much as possible, the hardships of American sol- 
diers—and American soldiers, in turn, share the life 
of the peoples who have been bearing the brunt of 


war for one or more yearts. YWeRA MICHELES DEAN 


FPA STAFF IN GOVERNMENT SERVICE 

David H. Popper, Associate Editor of research 
publications, has been granted leave of absence, and 
is now a volunteer officer candidate in the United 
States Army. With Mr. Popper's departure, the 
FPA has contributed seven members of its execu- 
tive and research staff to government service. Wil- 
liam T. Stone, Vice-President of the FPA, is on 
leave to serve as Assistant Director in charge of the 
Office of Economic Warfare Analysis in the Board 
of Economic Warfare. T. A. Bisson, John C. 
deWilde and Louis E. Frechtling are also working 
in the Board of Economic Warfare, in the Far East- 
ern, European, and Near Eastern fields, respectively. 
lames Frederick Green is on the staff of the State 
Department. William P. Maddox, former Assistant 
to General McCoy, is on a government mission in 
London. 


Our Latin American Neighbors, by P. L. Green. New York 
Iiastings House, 1941. $2.00 
A concise, general study of racial, geographic and eco- 
nomic factors influencing political, social and cultural 
activity in Latin America. 
The South American Handbook, 1941, edited by Howell 
Davies. New York, Wilson, 1941. $1.00 
One of the best sources of general information on all 
the Latin American republics, this new edition will be 
particularly welcome to commercial travelers. 


The Panama Canal in Peace and War, by Norman J. 
Padelford. New York, Macmillan, 1942. $3.00 


An authoritative study of the history of the Panama 
Canal, its economic and strategic importance, and the 
operations of the Canal administration. The author em- 
phasizes the role of the Canal in the American defense 
system. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, 
second-class matter December 2, 


No. 45, 
N. ¥. 


AuGUST 28, 
FRANK Ross 


1942. 


Published weekly by 
McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary 
1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Thr 


the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Vera MicHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 


ee Dollars a Year 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ee 18: Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


AuG. 28.—The significance of both the Solomon 
Islands operations and the Dieppe raid lies in the 
fact that they mark the transition of the United 
Nations after nearly three years of war from the de- 
fense to the offense. Hitherto, save for the British 
attacks in Libya and Abyssinia, and last winter's 
campaign in Russia, the initiative has been held by 
the Axis. 

Unlike the invasion of the Solomon Islands by 
the United States Marines, the Dieppe raid on Au- 
gust 19 contained no strategical element. It was no 
real effort to open up a second front in Europe, as 
the BBC expressly warned the French civilian popu- 
lation. 

But, on the other hand, the Dieppe landing. was 
by no means a mere hit-and-run Commande raid. It 
was a far more ambitious undertaking than any- 
thing of the kind previously attempted. 

A LABORATORY EXPERIMENT. For the first 
time, tanks were employed in such an operation. 
More than 1,000 airplanes covered the landing, and 
in the air battle that followed—the greatest since 
the Battle of Britain—nearly 200 German machines 
» are believed to have been destroyed against a loss 
of 98 Allied planes. According to a London esti- 
mate, about a third of Germany’s fighter air strength 
in Western Europe was wiped out. In addition, a 
German six-gun battery, an ammunition dump, a 
radio location station, and an anti-aircraft battery 
were smashed by the assailants. 

The chief value of the raid, however, must not be 
assessed in terms of the damage inflicted on German 
personnel or installations at Dieppe, but in terms of 
the practical experience it afforded the United Na- 
tions in the matter of opening up a second front in 
Western Europe. The Dieppe operation was primar- 
ily a laboratory experiment. 

Considered from this point of view, the result is 
generally regarded here as discouraging for the 
“second front’’ school and as confirming the opinion 
of aviation experts like Major Alexander P. de 
Seversky who hold that only by an intensive aerial 
offensive can the United Nations hope to crush Ger- 
many. For even if the German claim to have cap- 
tured 2,095 prisoners is exaggerated, the losses of 
the invaders were very heavy, as the casualty lists 
now being published in Canada prove. The Ger- 
mans were not taken by surprise. They made skillful 
use of the terrain, and their strong fortifications 
and enfilading fire mowed down the Allies as they 
dashed ashore, and deprived the offense of much 
of its impetus at the very start. 


FLYING FORTRESSES MAKE GOOD. While 
the outcome of the Dieppe raid apparently empha- 
sized the dangers of attempting sea-borne invasions 
along conventional military tactics of past wars, the 
fine performance of the American Flying Fortresses 
over Europe in the past week has opened up new 
perspectives of successful offensives against the 
Reich in the air in days to come. The splendid show- 
ing of the American bombers is cheering news in 
Washington in view of the comparative failure of 
our fighters. Despite the lengthy defense of Ameri- 
can military airplanes made by Lieutenant-General 
H. H. Arnold, Chief of the United States Army Air 
Force, in a prepared statement issued on August 15, 
it appears that American fighters are not good 


e@fiaugh to be used to any appreciable extent over 


Western Europe. Great hopes are entertained for 


the Republic P-47, a pursuit ship which performs 


best at altitudes between 25,000 and 30,000 feet and 
which is just beginning to come into large-scale pro- 
duction, but the Curtiss P-40, hitherto our main 
fighter, has been clearly inferior to the British Spit- 
fire, the German Messerschmitt, and the Japanese 
“Zero” plane, in its ability to attain height and in 
maneuverability. 

But the heavy American bomber seems to be mak- 
ing good with a vengeance. In the past, British 
critics have looked down on the Flying Fortresses 
as inferior to their own Lancasters, Halifaxes, and 
Stirlings, on the ground that the American machines 
could not carry such heavy bomb loads and, besides, 
were more vulnerable to attacks by German fighters. 

These fears have been disproved by the magnifi- 
cent achievements during the past week of the newer 
Flying Fortresses, led by Brig.-General Ira C. 
Eaker, Chief of the American Bomber Command in 
Europe. First, they made three successful daylight 
raids over German-occupied French cities, bombing 
Rouen on Monday, Abbeville on Wednesday, and 
Amiens on Thursday, and dropping their bombs 
squarely on their targets with the aid of the secret 
Norden bomb-sight. They showed that they could 
achieve a greater degree of accuracy from altitudes 
above 20,000 feet than any other bomber, British or 
German. They capped these performances on Fri- 
day by making their first unescorted operational 
flight over the continent, in the course of which they 
encountered 25 Focke-Wulf 190’s, Germany's latest 
and best fighters, in an air battle over the North Sea 
Six of the Nazi planes were destroyed or damaged, 
while not a single one of the Fortresses was lost. 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


la 


tion 
the 
hov 
on | 
Eur 
} 
cal 
crea 
his 
on 
of 1 
ence 
fate 
the 
of | 
the 
Asi: 
Kar 
to s 
Stat 
civi 
tilit 
ep 
to v 
trie: 


