ne its 
mod- 
Com- 
rven- 
tisfy- 
1 who 
in its 
1 both 
c ob 
ration 


it re-? 


Ss and 
ber 4 
Paris 
‘s and 
order. 
action 
yr at- 
Croiz 
dered 
stings 
1e the 


sneral 
nism. 
ion at 
g for 
serve 
rance. 
ly as- 
s that 
prob- 
ec and 
valua- 
Prices 
2d po- 
-scale 
emier 
7 will 
deter- 
These 
ces of 
lrance 
tment 


[LDE 


National 
1, Editor. 
e 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XVI, No. 2 


NOVEMBER 6, 1936 


MR. BUELL TO BROADCAST 
Raymond Leslie Buell will make his second 
broadcast on general conditions in Europe on 
Sunday, November 8, from 1:30 to 1:45 p.m. 
He will speak from Paris over WABC and the 
facilities of the Columbia Broadcasting System. 


NOV 13 19k 


e 6 Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Dr. William ¥. Bishop 


Mwiat 


dichigan Library 
Ann 


——— ee 


wu: ~ 


a 


GERMANY EMBARKS ON 


NEW FOUR-YEAR PLAN 


a 


ITH the approaching termination of the 

re-employment campaign launched by Hitler 
almost four years ago, the German government 
has taken decisive steps to put another “four-year 
plan” into operation. This plan, announced by the 
Fiihrer at the National Socialist party congress in 
September, seeks to make Germany as nearly 
self-sufficient as possible with respect to raw ma- 
terials, and is designed to furnish new opportuni- 
ties for employment as rearmament nears com- 
pletion. 


Adoption of the new plan was partly motivated 
by Dr. Schacht’s failure to secure an adequate 
supply of raw materials by foreign trade controls. 
At first glance it seemed that his policy of restrict- 
ing imports to essentials and subsidizing exports 
had met with considerable success. An import 
surplus of 284 million marks in 1934 was con- 
verted into an export excess of 111 million in 
1935. The first nine months of the current year 
yielded a favorable balance of 320 million, which 
for the first time was achieved without further 
limitation of imports. These developments, how- 
ever, have only slightly relieved Germany’s 
chronic shortage of foreign exchange. Part of the 
exports have been on long-term credit, and the 
proceeds of another considerable portion have be- 
come immobilized in clearing accounts or ear- 
marked for debt payments. Since the govern- 
ment, moreover, declines for a number of reasons 
to devalue the mark, German exports are likely 
to be unfavorably affected by the recent disap- 
pearance of the gold bloc. About 28 per cent of 
Germany’s exports go to the five countries which 
devalued their currencies within the last six 
weeks. France, Switzerland, Italy and Czecho- 
slovakia will also offer keener competition to 
German goods in other markets, particularly in 
southeastern Europe where Germany has made 
substantial gains during the past few years. 


That the four-year plan will necessitate the com- 


plete mobilization of Germany’s economic re- 
sources is indicated by the comprehensive organ- 
ization set up to carry it out. The whole program 
will be directed by General Goering who has for 
some time been Reich Commissar for Raw Ma- 
terials and Foreign Exchange. He will be assisted 
by a cabinet committee including the Ministers of 
Finance for the Reich and Prussia, and the Min- 
isters for Economics, National Defense and Ag- 
riculture. Dr. Schacht will continue to play an 
important réle, although in theory he will be sub- 
ordinated to Goering. Administration of the pro- 
gram will be carried out through six divisions 
dealing with production, distribution, labor ques- 
tions, agriculture, price control and foreign ex- 
change. All classes will be called upon to make 
sacrifices. Labor will have to remain content, as 
in the past, with stable wages—despite the rising 
cost of living. Business men and investors will 
have to forego a considerable portion of their 
profits and furnish the capital needed to increase 
the domestic production of raw materials. Mid- 
dlemen will be compelled to see their profit margin 
narrowed by drastic price controls. And the 
German people at large will once more have to 
draw their belts a little tighter. As Rudolf Hess, 
deputy leader of the National Socialist party, de- 
clared in a speech on October 12, the slogan is still 
“Cannon in place of butter.” 


Although the raw materials program will un- 
doubtedly be prosecuted with great energy, it 
cannot hope for the measure of success attained 
by the re-employment campaign. Hitler admitted 
at the start in Nuremberg that there will always 
remain a considerable deficiency in foodstuffs and 
raw materials. Pure autarchy, he confessed, 
would be impossible. It would be unrealistic to 


deny, however, that Germany can make substan- 
tial progress in producing its own raw materials. 
Strides have already been made in the production 
of synthetic motor fuels, and the output of arti- 


ficial fibre, known as “cell wool,” has risen rap- 
idly. Advances have also been made with arti- 
ficial rubber. At present all synthetic products 
are very expensive, and years of experimentation 
will be necessary before they can be developed 
into adequate substitutes. Meanwhile, Germany’s 
economy will be greatly burdened by excessive 
costs of production and its financial resources 
further strained by investment of the five billion 
marks needed for the new plan. 


The development of German raw materials 
marks a further step toward the creation of a 
planned economy. It requires the ruthless sub- 
ordination of individuals and enterprises to the 
state. Germany, however, is planning not for 
greater abundance and higher standards of liv- 
ing in time of peace, but for the development of an 
economy that would offer the greatest possible 
resistance in time of war. JOHN C. DEWILDE 


LONDON COMMITTEE WHITEWASHES 
ITS MEMBERS 

The London non-intervention committee lived 
up to its name during the past week by brushing 
aside all charges of intervention hurled at each 
other by the Soviet Union and the Fascist powers. 
On October 28—after Portugal had threatened to 
withdraw “at any moment”—the committee ex- 
onerated Italy and Portugal, on the ground that 
Soviet accusations against these two countries had 
either not been proved or had referred to inci- 
dents which preceded adoption of the non-inter- 
vention accord. M. Maisky, Soviet Ambassador 
in London, who alone dissented from the com- 
mittee’s whitewashing communiqué, explained 
that the Soviet note of October 23*—regarded by 
the committee as obscure—meant that, as long as 
no effective control had been established over the 
supply of arms to the Rebels, “those governments 
who consider supplying the legitimate Spanish 
government as conforming to international law, 
international order and international justice, are 
morally entitled not to consider themselves more 
bound by the agreement than those governments 
who supply the Rebels in contravention of the 
agreement.” On the same day the Spanish em- 
bassy in Paris charged that Italian troops and 
armaments, including 112 bombers, had been 
landed in Majorca, one of the Balearic Islands, to 
aid a Rebel attack on Barcelona; and on October 
29 the Loyalists, heartened by the arrival in 
Madrid of foreign tanks and airplanes, launched 
a vigorous counter-offensive against the Rebels. 


The British Labour party and Trades Union 


***Fascist Powers Unite Against Madrid,’ 


" Foreign Policy Bulletin, Octo- 
ber 30, 1936. 


Page Two 


—e 
——— 


Council, which have hitherto acquiesced in the 
government’s non-intervention policy as the lesser 
of two evils, demanded on October 28 that Britain 
take the lead in restoring to the Loyalists the 
right to purchase arms abroad. Prime Minister 
Baldwin, however, told Parliament the following 
day that, while breaches of the non-intervention’ 
agreement had occurred on both sides, they were” 
not of sufficient importance to cause a change in™ 
Britain’s policy. Foreign Minister Eden denied’ 
that non-intervention had benefited the Rebels, 
and asserted that neither the government nor) 
the non-intervention committee had any informa- 
tion to support Soviet charges against Portugal— 
although neutral observers in Lisbon have offered’ 
detailed evidence of Portuguese aid to the Rebels.’ 
He defended the non-intervention accord as an 
“improvised safety curtain,” which had prevented 
Spain’s civil war from flaring up into an interna-" 
tional conflict. 

That the Spanish crisis may prove an episode’ 
in the struggle between Italy and Britain for con-| 
trol of the Mediterranean was indicated by Mus- 
solini’s fighting speech at Milan on November 1, 
when he belligerently offered Europe an “armed 
peace.” Jl Duce pronounced himself in favor of’ 
discarding all illusions — such as disarmament, ' 
collective security and indivisible peace — which! 
he described as “relics of the great shipwreck of 
Wilsonian ideology.” He denounced communism 
in general terms as “supercapitalism of a state 
carried to its most ferocious extreme,” but unlike’ 
Hitler at Nuremberg made no specific reference 
to the Soviet Union. The kernel of his speech was 
an appeal to Britain for a “direct, rapid and com- 
plete understanding” in the Mediterranean “on 
the basis of recognition of reciprocal interests.” 
This appeal was accompanied by the warning that | 
if “one is really thinking of suffocating the life of | 
the Italian people in that sea which was the sea of 
Rome,” Italy is ready for combat. ’ 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


a 


France Faces the Future, by Ralph Fox. New York, In- 
ternational Publishers, 1936. $1.25 
A British Communist gives a rather biased and over- 
optimistic account of the formation and success of the | 
Popular Front in France. ' 
Gladstone’s Foreign Policy, by Paul Knaplund. New York, | 
Harper, 1935. $2.50 
i 


A useful study of a great anti-imperialist. 


Foreign Bondholders Protective Council, Inc., Annual Re- 
port, 1935. New York, The Council, 1936. $3.50 
Indispensable for data on foreign securities. 


The Development of Modern World Trade, by Isaac Lippin- 
cott. New York, Appleton-Century, 1936. $4.00 
An encyclopedic text in the field of commercial geography | | 
and foreign trade. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 2 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


2, NoveMBER 6, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
New York, N. Y. Raymonp Leste Busi, President; EstHer G. OGpen, Secretary; Vera MicHELES DEAN 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


' 
Incorporated. National | 


One Dollar a Year. 


. Editor. | 


An in 


