


the 
ican 
t in 
the 
1 as 
uch 
ugh 
ront 
viet 


rest 
d it 
osal 
hing 
| in- 
ent, 
it 1s 
nelp 
self- 
‘ited 
orts 
y be 
tion 
e to 
the 
ptly 
rime 
aid: 
any 
mes, 
rial 
lism 
that 
and 
cify- 
hill, 
ved 
cond 


[T 


S 





Entered as 2nd class matter 


Ur. William WwW. Bishop 
‘Ha. pel 
sity of Michigan Libr 


Wich. $ 


Ann ‘rhbor 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y 





VoL. XXI, No. 51 


Ocroser 9, 1942 





STALIN CALLS FOR FULFILLMENT OF ALLIES’ OBLIGATIONS 


S TALIN’S statement of October 4 has given new 
urgency to the issue of a second front in Europe. 
In a letter to an American correspondent in Moscow, 
Stalin, usually noted for his non-communicativeness 
to foreigners, said that the possibility of a second 
front occupies “a very important place, one might 
say a place of first-rate importance” in Soviet esti- 
mates of the current situation. Allied aid to the So- 
viet Union, he added, “has so far been little effec- 
tive’ as compared with “the aid which the Soviet 
Union is giving to the Allies by drawing upon itself 
the main force’ of the Germans. The only way in 
which the Allies can “amplify and improve” their 
aid, he said, is ‘‘to fulfill their obligations fully and 

on time.” 

RUSSIAN PEOPLE URGE AID. Stalin’s state- 
ment, coming at a moment when the Russians are 
rallying their forces for a supreme effort to link re- 
sistance at Stalingrad with operations in other sectors 
of their far-flung front, reflects public sentiment in 
the Soviet Union, of which Wendell Willkie became 
keenly aware during his visit to Kuibyshev and 
Moscow. While the Soviet government exercises 
strict control over public expression on political and 
military questions, it has shown itself, again and 
again since 1917, highly, if sometimes belatedly, 
sensitive to currents of feeling among the people; 
and sharp changes in policy—for example on collec- 
tivization of agriculture—have often been directly 
due to the necessity of meeting popular resistance or 
hostility to administrative decisions. 

When the Germans first invaded the Soviet Union 
on June 22, 1941, some of Russia’s political and 
military leaders hoped the U.S.S.R. might resist the 
German assault more or less single-handed, and little 
emphasis was placed at that time on Allied military 
aid. Since then the growing need for relief from the 
incessant pounding of German armies, who have 
occupied some of Russia’s most important industrial 


and agricultural areas, has profoundly altered Mos- 
cow’s relationship with the two United Nations best 
equipped to render military aid—Britain and the 
United States. It is difficult for Russian soldiers and 
civilians to feel that the amount of war material 


‘received from the Allies—no matter how hazardous 


its transportation by sea—is in any way commen- 
surate with the heavy losses in terms of lives and 
resources already suffered by the Soviet Union. To 
argue, as some do in Britain and the United States, 
that these sacrifices have been made by Russia for its 
own sake, and not for the sake of the United Na- 
tions, is irrelevant, since it is obvious to the merest 
layman that Russia’s success in holding the bulk of 
the German land forces on the eastern front has, at 
the same time, been of invaluable aid to the West- 
ern powers. 


WHAT THE “COMMON MAN” WANTS. 
When Wendell Willkie made his much-disputed 
appeal in Moscow for the opening of a second front, 
he may have been voicing the views of President 
Roosevelt as contrasted with those of British and 
American military leaders—or he may merely have 
expressed what he believes to be the overwhelming 
desire of the “common man” in all continents for 
“action now,” as he put it in his statement at Chung- 
king on October 3. To feel the need for “action” is 
not the same thing, of course, as knowing whether 
this or that kind of action is feasible, or what kind 
of action is best calculated at any given time to as- 
sure ultimate victory for the United Nations. This 
is a technical problem on which experts must pass 
judgment. The “common man,” however, especially 
in countries that seek to practice democracy, has 
both the right and. the duty to make his views known 
as to the general policy that experts, then, can at- 
tempt to translate into terms of practical action. 
When President Roosevelt, on October 1, expressed 
satisfaction with the high morale of the American 





‘ “S%. r 
ea ree 


ee ee 
— ae oe 5 
ms i ~ 


jl 


*y 


See 


‘Se 


Rae CET NE oe 
a saat 


VE Sy es 

















people, and described them as ‘‘very alive” to the 
war spirit, he must have had in mind the same mood 
of “action now’ to which Mr. Willkie referred. 
Without such a mood any offensive plans that mili- 
tary experts may work out, no matter how skillful, 
might prove a fiasco. 

LIMELIGHT ON AFRICA. The opening of an- 
other front that might relieve German pressure on 
the Russians need not be limited geographically to 
the European continent. In an effort to forestall and 
discredit, in advance, any action the Allies may take 
elsewhere the Vichy government, inspired by the 
Nazis, has sought to create the impression that an 
Anglo-American attack on Dakar is imminent, and 
has echoed the Nazi argument that the French must 
defend their empire against encroachments by Britain 
and the United States. The extent to which M. Laval 
is already cooperating with Nazi strategy in Africa 
brought a protest early in September from MM. 
Herriot and Jeanneney, presidents respectively of the 
French Chamber of Deputies and the French Senate. 
The subsequent detention of M. Herriot indicates 
the importance that Laval attaches to this protest 
and to the influence that France’s two “elder states- 
men’’ exercise over public opinion. Under the cir- 
cumstances the justification for continuance of Wash- 


ARGENTINES CLASH OVER BREAK WITH AXIS 


Lines of battle were sharply drawn in Argentina 
as September came to a stormy close. The Chamber 
of Deputies, by a vote of 67 to 64, adopted on 
September 29 a motion calling for an immediate 
break in relations with Germany, Italy and Japan. 
At the same session the Rio Conference resolution, 
recommending a break in relations with the Axis 
powers, was approved by a vote of 71 to 59. Un- 
fortunately for Argentina's democrats, these meas- 
ures must come before the Senate, where an over- 
whelming majority of members support the “prudent 
neutrality” policy of President Ramén S. Castillo. 
The government has made it clear that it considers 
itself in no way bound by the Chamber votes. 


Argentine Congressmen have also locked horns 
on a closely related issue—continuance of the ‘‘state 


Page Twe 





WHAT AMERICANS THINK ABOUT 
POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION 


In New England, by Walter K. Schwinn 

In the South, by Virginius Dabney 

In the Middle West, by William H. Hessler 
In the Northwest, by Herbert Lewis 


25c 


October 1 issue of ForEIGN Poticy REPORTS 
REporTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















LL, 
— 


ington’s diplomatic relations with Vichy—which had 
grown more and more tenuous after the return to 
power of Laval, who has openly expressed his desire 
for a German victory—appears to be nearing the 
vanishing-point. 

The balance of conflicting hopes, fears and de. 
sires on the European continent is so delicately poised 
that any act by Britain and the United States, wheth- 
er of commission or omission, will have unpre. 
dictably far-reaching consequences. Should the Rus- 
sians, with no increase in Allied aid, succeed in 
blocking further advance by the Germans — even 
without actually defeating them—their influence on 
the conquered peoples of Europe may assume grow- 
ing importance. This will be due not to Communist 
propaganda which, even in the midst of general 
poverty and despair, has as yet made little headway 
in Western Europe, but to the courage, determina- 
tion and effectiveness of the Russians. Any move 
that Britain and the United States now make against 
Germany must be judged not only as an opportunity 
to participate in the defeat of the Nazis, but as an 
opportunity to win the right of participating, along 
with Russia and the conquered countries, in the post- 
war reconstruction of Europe. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


of siege.” Instituted on December 16, 1941, this 
measure was designed to prevent newspaper discus- 
sion of foreign policy, a practice which—the gov- 
ernment contended—would dangerously inflame 
public opinion. It has since been pointed out that 
maintenance of the state of siege permits Castillo 
to silence opponents in his campaign for re-election 
to the Presidency in 1943. The state of siege, long 
a target of liberals, was challenged afresh in late 
September by the Buenos Aires Press Club, whose 
president, ex-Deputy Adolfo Lanius, is author of 
Campo Minado, or Minefield, an attack on the gov- 
ernment’s indulgent attitude toward totalitarian 
propaganda. The Press Club manifesto pointed out 
that Castillo’s muzzling of the press had been ap- 
plied to many matters not directly related to foreign 
policy, such as strikes and provincial politics. On 
September 29 the Chamber voted 77 to 56 for im- 
mediate suspension of the state of siege. Here again, 
the efforts of the Lower House are hampered by 
the known opposition of the President and the Sen- 
ate. Moreover, Congress is now winding up its 
session, and will not meet again until May 1943. 
REACTIONS TO BRAZIL’S ENTRY IN WAR. 
Brazil's entrance into the war on August 22 caused 
conflicting emotions among the Argentine people. 
Since Uruguay immediately moved to coordinate 
its defense set-up with that of Brazil, the conflict 
was in effect brought to within a hundred miles of 





—_ 
—_—_ 


the 

seer 
in t 
iscit 
sink 
was 
sign 
on § 
to b 
of a 
and 
of y 
T 
witl 
bor 
P| 
had 
Arr 
den 
flev 
cei’ 
wh 
Ind 
obs 
to | 
for 
car 
ob" 
the 
ass 


ele 


De 
go 
cle 
in 

gr 
ca 
ha 
on 








— 
— 


ad 
to 
ire 


he 


Je- 
ed 
th- 
re- 
us- 
in 
ven 
on 
yw- 
nist 
ral 
vay 
na- 
ove 
inst 
nity 
an 
ong 
Ost- 


this 
cus- 
gOv- 
ame 
that 
tillo 
tion 
long 
late 
hose 
r of 
gOv- 
irian 
| out 
| ap- 
reign 
On 
r im- 
gain, 
d by 
Sen- 
p its 
43. 
7 AR. 
1used 
ople. 
linate 
yn flict 
es of 





—_—_ 











——— Page Three = 


the Argentine capital. For the more timorous, this 
seemed an inducement to retreat more deeply with- 
in their ostrich holes; the so-called “Peace Pleb- 
iscite,” which had disappeared after a submarine 
sinking of the Argentine vessel Rio Tercero in June, 
was revived, and fourteen volumes of pro-neutrality 
signatures were ceremoniously presented to Castillo 
on September 5. On the other side of the ledger are 
to be noted the vociferously pro-Brazilian reactions 
of a great majority of students, labor organizations, 
and citizens at large, including an imposing roster 
of Argentina’s leading statesmen, past and present. 

The most conspicuous single gesture of solidarity 
with Argentina’s great Portuguese-speaking neigh- 
bor came from former President (1932-38) Agustin 
P. Justo. During his Presidency of Argentina, Justo 
had been made an honorary general in the Brazilian 
Army. He now offered his sword to Brazilian Presi- 
dent Getulio Vargas, and on September 6 he actually 
flew to Rio de Janeiro, where he was warmly re- 
ceived by Foreign Minister Oswaldo Aranha, and 
where—the following day—he reviewed Brazil’s 
Independence Day parade at Vargas’ side. Impartial 
observers, while not doubting Justo’s genuine loyalty 
to the United Nations cause, felt that this astute and 
forceful executive had played a trump card in his 
campaign to recapture the Presidency in 1943. In an 
obvious counter-move, Castillo on October 5 deposed 
the provincial government and appointed a political 
associate as Federal Interventor in Corrientes, Justo’s 
electoral stronghold. 

CASTILLO TRIES TO MEND HIS FENCES. 
Despite the stubbornness with which the Castillo 
government has clung to its foreign policy, it is 
clearly alarmed by Argentina’s increasing isolation 
in a warring world where neutrals are being pro- 
gressively squeezed out. At present, twelve Ameri- 
can republics are at war with the Axis, seven others 
have broken relations. In the Western Hemisphere, 
only Chile shares Argentina's neutral status, and the 
Chilean position—which officials of that country 





prefer to describe as ‘‘non-belligerency’”—may con- 
ceivably be altered in drastic degree after President 
Rios’ trip to Washington and other American capi- 
tals the latter part of October. If the United States 
has not imposed sanctions on Argentina for its un- 
cooperative attitude in the Pan-American program, 
at least Buenos Aires is receiving no special favors, 
and its leaders see Brazil and other countries being 
armed as fast as Washington can arm them. 


Indicative of this uneasiness in Argentina are ef- 
forts of the government to improve relations with 
neighboring republics. In mid-September Castillo 
conferred with President Enrique Pefiaranda of Bo- 
livia, in the little Bolivian frontier town of Yacuiba. 
The announced purpose of the visit was to drive the 
first spike into a railway line (for which Argentina 
will foot the bill) linking northern Argentina with 
the Bolivian oil fields. Foreign Ministers and Chiefs 
of Staff were included, however, in the official en- 
tourages. This meeting followed a visit of Argentine 
War Minister Juan N. Tonazzi to Paraguay; it pre- 
ceded by a few days the visit of an Argentine mili- 
tary mission to Peru. 


A further sign of government insecurity is the 
occasional sop thrown to zealous pro-democrats. On 
September 14, for example, the German Federation 
of Cultural and Welfare Societies—regarded as suc- 
cessor to the proscribed Nazi party—was dissolved 
by decree of the Ministry of Interior. Vigilance 
against Nazi propaganda continues to fall mainly 
on the Chamber’s special investigating committee, 
formerly headed by the dashing young Radical, Raul 
Damonte Taborda, and now presided over by the 
highly respected Socialist, Juan Solari. Recently, this 
committee dispatched one of its members to the 
northern territory of Misiones to study Nazi propa- 
ganda among the German settlements there, and to 
check on infiltration of Nazi elements from Brazil 
since the latter’s declaration of war. 


JouN I. B. McCuLLocH 


BOMBING OF GERMANY FACILITATES SECOND FRONT 


In a speech on October 4, Reich Marshal Hermann 
Goering revealed the close relationship between the 
Strength of the Russian resistance on the Eastern 
front and the success of the Allied air offensive in 
the West. He explained that the Luftwaffe is so busy 
in the East that it ‘‘cannot get around immediately to 
meeting the British challenge in the air.’ His report 
would have been more complete if, to his admission 
that the German food shortage is a result of the 
strain on communications before Stalingrad, he had 
added that British bombing had increased this strain 
and thus hampered the offensive against the U.S.S.R. 

Without secret information, it is impossible to 
estimate the damage already done by Allied air 


attacks on Germany and occupied Europe. But Major 
General Ira Eaker, Chief of the United States 
Bomber Command in Britain, was not speaking with- 
out knowledge of what had already been accom- 
plished when he declared on September 21: “I be- 
lieve that it is possible to destroy the enemy [ Ger- 
many] from the air.” Nor was he describing simply 
what he envisioned for the future when he said that, 
by destroying the enemy's communications and mu- 
nitions plants, its army could be brought to a halt; 
by destroying aircraft factories, its air force could 
be wiped out; and by destroying shipyards, its sub- 
marine production could be disrupted. For these 
particular objectives have been for many months 





ET as LOL I LE RY et PY OS SE RT ES RE 


et ee ee ee 





— IIOP a sar — 
CS ee : 


Se, Y «tem 
SE Reg Ere 








a 











precisely the goals of the Lancaster, Sterling and 
Halifax bombers of the R.A.F. in area bombing by 
night and, recently, of the American Flying Fortresses 
and Liberators in target bombing by day. 

From the beginning of the war to August 1942, 
approximately 30 per cent of British air attacks 
have been concentrated on German railways and 
communications. These have included the demoli- 
tion of locomotive works in the thousand-plane raids 
on Cologne and Essen, and the lighter but still 
devastating raid on Karlsruhe; the attacks on river 
communications of the Ruhr region at Duisburg and 
the Dortmund-Ems Canal; and the blasting of the 
railway yards at Hamm, key to rail communications 
in the Ruhr-Rhine area. More recently, American 
bombers have attacked the rail center at Rouen in 
northern France. In view of the German shortage 
of rolling stock, especially locomotives, and of the 
fact that the Nazis, after a year of war in Russia, 
had fewer locomotives than when they started their 
Russian venture—although thousands had been 
plundered from the occupied countries—these may 
well be considered the most important raids, and 
of the most immediate aid to the Russian armies. 
Closely related has been the bombing of German 
oil refineries and synthetic oil plants, the production 
of which is needed for transportation, as well as for 
the Luftwaffe and the German armies. These raids 
on oil plants, nearly 15 per cent of the total, have 
included targets in Hanover, Frankfort and Stettin. 

Most destructive of the attacks on German war 
production in general have been the powerful raids 
on Cologne and Essen, and the lesser raids on Diis- 
seldorf, Mainz and Saarbriicken; while aircraft pro- 
duction, in particular, has been affected by the raids 
on Kassel and Rostock. To these should be added 
the American attack of September 6 on a German 


Page Four 





ae 





aircraft factory in Meaulte in northern France. The 
four concentrated attacks on Rostock last April, 
however, probably afforded the most direct aid to 
the Russian ally, for here the Heinkel factories pro- 
ducing planes for the Eastern front were destroyed, 
All British raids on aircraft and munitions plants 
up to August 1942 amounted to roughly another 
30 per cent of the total. 

The bombing of the docks at Rostock and Liibeck 
was also of aid to Russia, since these Baltic ports 
have been used as bases supplying German armies 
on the northern sector of the Russian front. But 
more important in the over-all picture of attacks on 
German ports and shipyards have been the continued 
raids on Bremen, Hamburg and Wilhelmshaven. 
Symbolic too of the determination to destroy the 
submarine menace at its source was the 1,000-mile 
raid on Augsburg in April 1942, designed to wipe 
out factories which are said to have supplied 50 per 
cent of the Diesel engines used in German U-boats. 
Of all raids, those intended primarily to weaken 
German strength at sea have been about 25 per cent. 

Since most of these bombing attacks can have little 
effect on the military fronts for several months— 
and the really heavy concentration of bombers over 
Germany began only late in May 1942—it is not 
surprising that the Soviet government has considered 
the bombing of Germany no substitute for a ‘second 
front.” Its long-run effect, however, should not be 
minimized, and it is possible to see in the British- 
American air offensive not only a means of relieving 
the pressure on Russia but also a necessary prepara- 
tion for a land front in the West. There is no reason 
to believe that an air offensive is intended to take 
the place of a military invasion. But there is reason 
to believe that it will greatly facilitate such an op- 
eration. HowarD P. WHIDDEN, Jr. 





Statement of the Ownership, Management, Circulation, Etc., 
Required by the Acts of Congress of August 24, 1912 and 
March 3, 1933, of 


Foreign Policy Bulletin 
Published weekly at New York, N. Y. for October 1, 1942. 
State of New York, County of New York, ss. 


Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State and county aforesaid, 
personally appeared Vera Micheles Dean, who, havi duly sworn ac- 
cena aw, d and says that she is the tor of the FOREIGN 
POLICY BULLETIN, and that the following is, to the best of her knowledge 
and belief, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the afore- 
said publication for the date shown in the above caption, required by the 
Act of a 24, 1912, as amended by the Act of March 3, 1933, em- 
bodied in ion 537, Postal Laws and Regulations, printed on the re- 
verse of this form, to wit: 

1. That the names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing edi- 
tor, and business managers are: 

Publishers—Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 22 East 38th Street, 
New York, N. Y. 

Editor—Vera Micheles Dean, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 

Managing Editor—None. 

Business Managers—None. 

2. That che owner is: 


Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, the principal officers of which 


are: Frank Ross McCoy, President; Doroth 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y.; and 
70 Broadway, New York, N. y. 

3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holders 
owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, 
or other securities, are: 

None. 

4. That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners, 
stockholders and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stock 
holders and security holders as they appear upon the books of the company 
but also, in cases where the stockholder or security holder pone upon the 
books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, the name 
of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting, is given; also 
that the said two paragraphs contain statements embracing afhant’s ful! 
knowledge and belief as to the circumstances and conditions under which 
stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of the 
company as trustees hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of 
a bona fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any other 
person, association, or corporation has any interest, direct or indirect, in the 
said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by her. 

FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated. 
By VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 23rd day of September, 1942. 


{Seal} CAROLYN MARTIN, Notary Public. 
New York County, New York, County Clerk’s No. 339, New York County 
Reg. No. 3M284. (My commission expires March 30, 1943.) 


F. Leet, Secretary; both of 
illiam A. Eldridge, Treasurer, 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 51, Ocroser 9, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


8 














