




































ans 


for 


EE- 
mic 
will 
ter- 
efs. 


ros- 
ugh 
nis- 
pro 
cial 
ling 
con- 
with 


on 
arly 
hich 
eans 

16. 
pril 


eats 
> £e- 


e to 
view 
yrity. 


ES 


—1945 





APR 19 1948 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


Genera) Library 
Untyers:s 


ie t ef 
wsealyY O Nich: 





Ann Ah aw 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 








Yo. XXIV, No. 26 


Apri. 18, 1945 








HE blows now raining on Japan from many di- 
rections are portents of ultimate disintegration, 
imilar to that facing the Nazis in the West. In re- 
wnt weeks American forces have made significant 
ivances on Okinawa, the British Navy has stepped 
w its Far Eastern operations, Moscow has deprived 
pan of the consolation of the Soviet-Japanese neu- 
tality pact, the Koiso régime has fallen and given 
wy to the Suzuki cabinet, American planes have 
wok the 45,000-ton battleship Yamato, and General 
MacArthur and Admiral Nimitz have been placed 
acommand, respectively, of all American Army and 
Navy forces in the Pacific. This chain of unbroken 
jpanese misfortunes is a symbol of Japan’s decline 
sa military power and of greater defeats ahead. 
END OF A TREATY. Of all these events, Soviet 
dnunciation of the neutrality pact with Japan means 
most to the American public, for this country has 
ng looked toward the time when our Russian allies 
wuld be able to show their solidarity with us in 
he East. Now Moscow has served notice on Tokyo 
hat the pact “‘has lost its sense’’ and its prolongation 
s‘impossible.”” The grounds given by the Russians— 
hat Japan has aided Germany against the U.S.S.R. 
ind has waged war with the latter’s allies, the United 
Mates and Britain—clearly could be used to justify 
bviet entrance into the Far Eastern conflict without 
waiting for the expiration of the treaty in April 1946. 
Yet the American public should not expect the 
viet Union to fight Japan at an early date, unless 
Tokyo undertakes the desperate, fatal gamble of 
itiking first. It is true that the end of the European 
var is in sight, but it is not yet here. Moreover, after 
karting the main brunt of Nazi might and losing 
nillions of men in the process, the Russians may be 
mpected, at least, to wait until the main body of 
Tokyo’s armies has been tied down by the forces of 
he other United Nations. It is also possible that 





IS OUR CHINA POLICY CONSISTENT WITH NEEDS OF PACIFIC WAR? 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


Moscow will concentrate on various important meas- 
ures short of war, for example, making bases avail- 
able to the United States. 

The likelihood that the U.S.S.R. will aid us against 
Japan in no way lessens our own military responsibil- 
ities. In fact, it has now become more urgent for us 
to help create the conditions under which the Rus- 
sians can participate at the earliest moment. It must 
at the same time be recognized that denunciation of 
the neutrality pact has valuable immediate effects. It 
establishes a more favorable atmosphere for the San 
Francisco Conference, obliges Japan to maintain or 
even increase its forces in Manchuria and Korea, 
and undoubtedly has greatly heightened the tension 
and gloom already existing in Tokyo. 

FUTURE OF MANCHURIA. Yet questions have 
been raised about Moscow’s intentions in Manchuria, 
whose return to China was pledged by the United 
States and Britain at the Cairo Conference in No- 
vember 1943. There is no evidence that the U.S.S.R. 
desires to annex Manchuria or that it does not wish 
to see that territory become part of a friendly, stable 
China. But that the Russians will exert an important 
influence on the future of Manchuria, in which they 
have a deep security interest, is no more open to 
question than that America will help to shape the 
future of neighboring countries or of areas in which 
we have troops. 

A glance at the situation in China will show Man- 
churia’s explosive potentialities. At the present mo- 
ment the only Chinese resistance forces in or near 
the area are those of the Communist-led Eighteenth 
Group Army. If the Russians should later fight on 
Manchurian soil or in north China, they would come 
in contact with these troops and cooperate with them 
against Japan. The effect would be to strengthen the 

Eighteenth Group Army militarily and politically. 
If, before this happened, Chungking and the Com- 





—-_-—_—— 
——— 


munists had reached an agreement on unity, the 
Russians would simply be in the position of render- 
ing aid to the local forces of a united China. But if 
an adjustment of Chinese internal differences had not 
been achieved, grave issues could be raised both for 
Chungking and Washington. 

OUR POLICY TOWARD CHINA. The Amer- 
ican public does not know whether the U.S.S.R. will 
use troops against Japan, but such aid would un- 
doubtedly be welcomed both on Main Street and in 
Washington. Clearly, to expect the Russians to fight 
ge without influencing the areas they enter is to 

of Moscow something that we do not ask of our- 
selves—something that is in any event a political im- 
eas For, even if the Russians do not enter 
anchuria, their voice will still be heard in that 
region. Consequently, the only practical approach 
for the United States is to accept the influence of the 
U.S.S.R. in northeast Asia as a fact and to seek to 
anticipate concrete problems, so that they may be 
prevented from arising or may be adjusted satisfac- 
torily when they appear. 

Under General Stilwell and our former Ambassa- 
dor to China, Clarence E. Gauss, it was American 
policy to exert strong pressure on Chungking for 
internal Chinese unity, and to establish direct contact 
with the Chinese guerrilla armies while cooperating 





to the full with the government and armed forces of 


Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek. This approach rest- 
ed on the conviction that it would be of great mili- 


NEED FOR UNDERSTANDING OF RUSSIA’S SECURITY PROGRAM 


Russia's denunciation of its neutrality pact with 
Japan has caused renewed discussion of Moscow's 
foreign policy among those who, since Yalta, had 
expressed growing doubts about the willingness of 
the U.S.S.R. to cooperate with the Western powers. 
For many Americans Russia’s eventual participation 
in the Pacific war has become a primary test of its 
good faith. Yet no sooner does Moscow take a 
step in that direction than voices are heard de- 
claring that the U.S.S.R. has designs on areas of Asia 
adjacent to its borders. ; 

RUSSIA’S COURSE CLOSELY WATCHED. 
Whatever Russia does or fails to do, its actions or 
lack of them are suspect to other countries. When 
the Red Army was racing toward Berlin, many 
Americans were worried that the Russians would get 
dangerously ahead of their Western allies. Now that 
the Russian forces are concentrating on the occupa- 
tion of Vienna, the same people wonder why the 
Red Army has slowed down its drive toward Berlin. 
Suspicions are always voiced about the motives of 
great powers. The French, for example, have shown 
unmistakable anxiety concerning the ultimate objec- 
tives of the United States in Africa and Asia, where 
France has colonial interests. 


Page Two 








i 


tary value to help the Chinese guerrillas step up thei: 
war effort, especially since we would be workin 
with them if we landed at certain points on the Chin, 
coast. It was also felt that amicable American-Sovie 
and American-Chinese relations required that greate; 
Chinese unity be achieved before the final phases of 
the Far Eastern war. 

Recently a different tendency has found expression 
in some sectors of American policy toward China 
For example, in an interview of April 2 in Washing. 
ton, Ambassador Patrick J. Hurley declared that the 
United States would confine its assistance entirely to 
Chungking and give no supplies to the Chinese Com. 
munists. If such a policy were actually carried out, 
it would mean that we had decided, for political 
reasons, to forego the important military aid the 
guerrilla armies can furnish. It would also be incon. 
sistent with our interest in having the Russians fight 
the Japanese, since we would be in the position of 
encouraging the Russians to come in contact with the 
guerrillas whom we refused to aid. 

That such a tendency can long survive is open to 
doubt. The Gauss-Stilwell policy, despite the ob 
stacles it came up against, was a more realistic ap. 
proach to China’s problems. It was a policy that prom 
ised—in so far as control of events lay in our power 
—to make maximum use of all Chinese armed forces 
in the war against Japan, and to lay a sound basis for 
cooperation with both China and Russia in war and 


peace. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


But there are special reasons for the recurring 
anxiety about Russia's objectives in Europe. The fact 
that the U.S.S.R. is ruled by a political dictatorship 
dominated by the Communist party, which has not 
hesitated to repress by force opposition elements both 
within its borders and within those of countries it 
has helped to liberate from German rule; the exis 
tence in Russia of a social and economic system that 





challenges the system of private enterprise familiar 
to advanced Western countries; the absence of civil 
liberties associated with Western democracy; the 
hostile attitude of the Soviet government, until re- 











cently, toward organized religion, and its continuing | 


strictures on the policy of the Vatican 
tors have influenced the judgment of other countries 
about Russia’s foreign policy. None of these factors 
can be disregarded. The primary question since Rus- 
sia’s invasion by Germany in 1941, however, has 
been not whether Russia would adopt the political 
and economic institutions of Britain and the United 





States, but whether it would continue to fight the | 


all these fac: | 


Germans and, once a common victory had been | 


achieved, would participate in the establishment of 
an effective international organization that could pre- 
vent another global war in the future. This question 








has | 
any < 
cisco 


be sa 
achie 
coun 
pow 
Unit 
It in 
and 

disp 


stror 


thes: 
with 
cont 
tical 
on t 
to s 
Rus 
part 








. of 


wer 
ces 
; for 
and 


ring 
fact 
ship 

not 
both 
es it 
eXxis- 
that 
liar 
civil 

the 
l re- 
uing 
- fac: 
tries 
ctors 
Rus- 

has 
itical 
nited 
t the 
been 
at of 
| pre- 
stion 











———————— 











has lost none of its urgency. Can it be answered with 
any degree of assurance on the eve of the San Fran- 
cisco Conference? 

SECURITY MOSCOW’S CHIEF AIM. What can 
be said is that the U.S.S.R. is just as determined to 
achieve security as the United States or any other 
country. It has suffered enormous losses in man- 
power and material resources, far in excess of the 
United States and, relatively speaking, of Britain. 
It intends to repair these losses as swiftly as possible, 
and to prevent their recurrence by all means at its 
disposal. Among these means is participation in a 
strong international organization. 

The Soviet government, when it accepted the 
Dumbarton Oaks proposals, apparently assumed that 
these proposals would be accepted by other nations 
without fundamental changes. Public discussion of 
controversial political questions is not as yet prac- 
tical in the U.S.S.R. It requires a major adjustment 
on the part of the Soviet government to lend itself 
to such discussion on the life-and-death matter of 
Russia's post-war security. Yet the more the Russians 
participate in international conferences, the more 
they become aware of the views of peoples outside 
their borders, the better is the prospect for ultimately 
finding a common ground for cooperation between 
the U.S.S.R. and the other United Nations. 

An international security organization, however, 


Page Three 





TT 
TT 





will not of itself answer many questions which Rus- 
sia, like other nations, is asking about the future. 
Russia wants access to seaways and world markets; 
it wants stability in countries along its western bor- 
der; above all, it wants to make Germany incapable 
of embarking on another war of aggression, by de- 
priving the Germans of military power, and diverting 
their resources of labor and technical skill to the 
reconstruction of its devastated areas. This is what 
might be called Russia’s minimum program. At the 
same time, its military leaders, fresh from spectacular 
victories on the battlefield, want as much strategic 
protection for Russia on the west as it will be po- 
litically feasible to achieve; and nationalists in the 
Soviet government are in sympathy with this aim. 
Geographic proximity, military power, and similar- 
ities of economic and social problems, have already 
given Russia great influence in countries of Eastern 
Europe and the Balkans. This influence will spread 
westward only if the United States and Britain fail 
to assume their share of political responsibility in 
Europe, falter in their announced determination to 
establish an effective international organization, and 
find it impossible to agree with Russia about the 
treatment of Germany. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The third in a series of articles on political trends in Europe 
on the eve of San Francisco.) 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Many a Watchful Night, by John Mason Brown. New 
York, Whittlesey House, 1944. $2.75 
Despite some critics’ tendency to disparage the use of 
beautiful words in describing war experiences as if de- 
tracting from understanding, the author again demon- 
strates that a person with real feeling for language can 


interpret battle drama sympathetically to men below decks 
and the the reading public. 


Rendezvous with Destiny, edited by J. B. S. Hardman. 
New York, Dryden Press, 1944. $3.00 


A selective arrangement of addresses and opinions of 
President Franklin D. Roosevelt. 





What will United Nations delegates discuss at the 
historic April 25 meeting? Read 

AFTER VICTORY... 

by Vera Micheles Dean 


25¢ 


January issue of HEADLINE SERIES 


A clear, brief survey of world organization in question 
and answer form. Cuts through the mass of technical 
information now being published. Includes text of Dum- 
barton Oaks agreement. 

Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 E. 38th St., New York 16 











Education in Transition, by H. C. Dent. New York, Oxford 
University Press, 1944. $3.00 


This analysis of English education as affected by the 
war should be of value to those interested in post-war edu- 
cation in any country. 


Atlas of Global Geography, by Erwin Raisz. New York, 
Global Press, distributed by Harper and Brothers, 1944. 
$3.50 


Developed on the interesting idea of “the plane’s-eye 
view” and the theory that a global map would fit a globe if 
wrapped around it. The Global Press distributes directly a 
wall map, the Trans-Orbal Map at $1.00. 


The Land of Prester John, by Elaine Sanceau. New York, 
Knopf, 1944. $2.75 


As fabulous and fascinating as Marco Polo’s journey, 
this vividly written tale tells of the courage of Portuguese 
Jesuits and men of arms, whose work in Ethiopia con- 
tinued for almost two hundred years. 


Nationality in History and Politics, by Frederick Hertz. 
New York, Oxford University Press, 1944. $6.50 
The author considers national consciousness as the sum 
of many aspirations toward national personality. He treats 
these aspirations in their relation to the various factors 
in the background of modern nationalism and carefully 


brings out the effect of the doctrines of great thinkers on 
national ideology. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 26, Aprit 13, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lggt, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES DEAN, Editor. Eotered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., umder the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Beis) 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





4 


Washington News Letter 











COLONIAL ISSUE RAISED ON EVE OF SAN FRANCISCO CONFERENCE 


The dependent peoples of the world have a direct 
stake in the United Nations conference which opens 
on April 25 at San Francisco. The meeting is ex- 
pected to create machinery for the transfer of World 
War I mandates from the League of Nations to the 
new world organization, and the United States may 
propose, or at least support, an amendment to the 
Dumbarton Oaks proposals that would directly au- 
thorize the General Assembly to consider problems 
relating to colonial areas other than mandates. Dis- 
cussion about any particular region, like Palestine in 
reference to mandates or Indo-China in reference to 
colonies, would violate the purpose of the Confer- 
ence which has been convoked to establish the ma- 
chinery to deal with problems affecting world affairs. 
Disposition of Italian and Japanese colonies will 
await conclusion of the war, although the San Fran- 
cisco Conference may assign to the United States ad- 
ministrative control over the Pacific islands for which 
Japan was granted the mandate after World War I. 
Admiral Ernest J. King, Commander-in-Chief of the 
United States Fleet, on April 5 urged that this coun- 
try retain the Pacific Islands liberated by our forces. 

MANDATE QUESTIONS POSTPONED AT 
DUMBARTON OAKS. Had representatives of the 
United States, Britain, the Soviet Union and China 
completed the task they originally set for themselves 
in the Dumbarton Oaks conversations which ended 
October 7, 1944, they would have included in their 
proposals not 12 but 13 chapters. The 13th chapter 
was to have dealt with arrangements for transferring 
mandates, but the many weeks devoted to reaching 
agreement on proposals in the first 12 chapters dis- 
couraged the negotiators from prolonging the talks 
by consideration of this matter. Subsequently, hope 
developed that a special meeting on mandates might 
be held before April 25, but that prospect has faded. 
As a result, the San Francisco Conference will be 
asked to deal with this question, which President 
Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill and Marshal 
Stalin considered during their talks at Yalta. 

The San Francisco resolution on mandates can be 
expected to substitute for “mandate” some word 
like “trusteeship,”” and to provide a more authorita- 
tive system of international supervision of trustee- 
ships than that provided in Article 29 of the League 
Covenant. The League Mandates Commission was 
unable to combat directly either the discriminatory 
tax imposed in Southwest Africa in 1922 by the 


FOR VICTORY ° 


Union of South Africa Administrator or the closed. 
door policy invoked by Japan for its mandates in the 
Pacific; also, it was forced to rely on reports from the 
mandatory governments for information respecting 
affairs in the mandates. 

The new international organization may assume a 
responsibility which the League of Nations never 
had, that of devising a formula by which all colonia! 
areas could, like the mandates, be led gradually 
toward independence. The general authority of the 
Assembly, as set forth in the Dumbarton Oaks pro- 
posals, which grants to it “the right . . . to discuss 
any questions relating to the maintenance of inter- 
national peace and security brought before it by any 
member or members of the Organization,” covers 
colonial matters, but this government is said to con- 
sider it desirable that the Assembly be given a specific 
directive to discuss the colonial question. 

LOT OF COLONIALS IMPROVED. In antici- 
pation of a move for liberation of colonial posses- 
sions, the great powers have in recent years acceler- 
ated their programs for improving the social and 
political status of the dependent peoples. The British 
government has recently extended its Colonial De- 
velopment and Welfare Act, first passed in 1940, and 
the Dutch announced in 1943 that overseas posses- 
sions would receive after the war a fuller autonomy 
than the Act of 1925 gave them. The French govern- 
ment on January 19, 1945 announced that after the 
war Indo-China, most important of the French col- 
onies, would be autonomous. 

The colonial powers, however, do not seem will- 
ing to go beyond granting dependent areas a larger 
measure of self-government. In all that concerns 
colonial policy, the struggle will be between the 
forces that favor true national freedom under inter- 
national supervision and the forces that advocate 
nurturing colonial peoples for the status which we in 
the United States might describe as statehood. ‘‘It is 
imperative that the constitution which will determine 
the laws of the Fourth Republic must integrate our 
colonies into France,” said René Pleven, then French 
Colonial Minister, on October 29, 1944. Colonel 
Oliver Stanley, British Colonial Secretary, stated 
in his address to the Foreign Policy Association on 
January 19, 1945 that the aim of Britain’s colonial 
policy was the “achievement of the fullest possible 
measure of self-government within the Empire.” 

BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 











in ma 
who 
grant 
conte 
rare, 
days 
spirit 
view! 
adap 
the 
durir 
come 
deep 
main 
Ul 
Pres: 
gene 
time 
izati 
nigh 
Som 
litics 
chan 
of r 
he n 
cies, 
men 
cruc 
for ( 
witl 
tive. 
pha: 
and 
vers 
mer 
asst 





