JFOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


y on 
Thich 
cions 


ntual 


bloc 
e So 


r has 
| will 
uence 
OR 


ring 
mn, at 
rch 3 
., and 

Paul 
York 


ington 
, 1987. 


Tough- 


1eralis- 
Shina’s 
cluding 
cessary 
hter in 
crucial 
ly com- 
r work 
he first 


ry E Rie 


impact 
usiness, 
sources 


cientific 


w York, 


oughout 
ng that 
, jncom- 
the ma 


National 
lass mactet 


‘An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
PERIODICAL RO@~Miption, Two Dollars a Year 


ov y Se A Po Licy ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


APR 6 


iJ og 





Entered as  second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post | 
Office at New York, | 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














Vou. XVII, No. 23 Apriz 1, 1938 





— 


Recent FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS 
on Issues in the News 


The Struggle Over Spain (out April 1st) 
Mexico’s Challenge to Foreign Capital 
Strife in Czechoslovakia 

Cross-Currents in Danubian Europe 

U.S. Neutrality in the Spanish Conflict 
Europe in Crisis (World Affairs Pamphlet) 


25 cents each 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michican 











CHAMBERLAIN EXPLAI 


NS BRITAIN’S ROLE 





EVILLE CHAMBERLAIN’'S statement of Brit- 
ish policy on March 24 has to some degree 
improved prospects for European peace. True, the 
Prime Minister declined to pledge his country to 
assist Czechoslovakia in case of attack or to support 
France should it carry out the terms of its alliance 
with Prague. Such a guarantee, removing the de- 
cision as to war or peace “from the discretion of His 
Majesty's Government,” could not be made “‘in rela- 
tion to an area” where Britain’s vital interests “are 
not concerned to the same degree as they are in the 
case of France and Belgium.” Yet at the same time 
Chamberlain went further in reassuring France and 
Gechoslovakia than any British statesman had ever 
done before. He left little doubt that Britain would 
soon become involved in any war precipitated in 
Central Europe. 


Not only did the Prime Minister refer to the pos- 
sibility that Britain might intervene as a League 
member “for the restoration of peace or the main- 
tenance of international order,” but he stressed that 
where peace and war are concerned legal obliga- 
tions are not alone involved.” On the contrary, he 


declared: 


“Inexorable fact might prove more powerful than formal 
pronouncements, and in that event it would be well within 
the bounds of probability that other countries besides those 
who were parties to the original disputes would be almost 
immediately involved. This is especially true in the case of 
two countries like Great Britain and France, with long 
associations of friendships, with interests chiefly inter- 
Woven, and devoted to the same ideals of democratic lib- 
tty and determined to uphold them.” 


Here, then, is a clear warning to Germany that it 


cannot rely on British neutrality, particularly in con- 
flicts to which France becomes a party. 


As the best guarantee against aggression, the 
British government prefers to “exert all their in- 
fluence on the side of bringing peaceful, orderly 





solutions of any issues liable to interrupt friendly 
relations between nations.” To this end Mr. Cham- 
berlain urged Czechoslovakia to adjust its relations 
with its German minority and expressed Britain's 
willingness to help in settling any difficulties between 
the Berlin and Prague governments. 


From these declarations it is evident that Britain 
will not stand in the way of any settlement obtained 
by pressure short of force. The Reich is in an excel- 
lent position to apply such pressure. Within Czecho- 
slovakia it has the support of a strong German 
minority which, under the impression of events in 
Austria, is rapidly attaining complete unity. The 
three small German parties collaborating in the coali- 
tion Cabinet of Premier Milan Hodza have with- 
drawn their representatives. On March 22 the Ger- 
man Agrarian League disbanded, and its five deputies 
joined the totalitarian Sudeten German party headed 
by Konrad Henlein. Two days later, the Christian 
Socialist group, including six deputies, took similar 
action. Only the Social Democrats remain outside 
the Henlein organization which, with its 55 repre- 
sentatives, is now the strongest party in the Czecho- 
slovak Parliament. 


In addition, Chancellor Hitler possesses a pow- 
erful and persuasive instrument in the political 
and military strength of the Reich. If necessary, he 
can supplement it with economic pressure, for Ger- 
many and Austria together absorb almost a quarter 
of Czechoslovakia’s exports and, by virtue of their 
geographical position, can cut off a very large pro- 
portion of the foreign trade of this landlocked 
country. With these methods Hitler could obtain a 
better position for the Sudeten Germans and press 
Czechoslovakia into a German-controlled economic 
Mitteleuropa. Yet the Czechs—and probably the 
Slovaks as well—would resist to the last man any 
attempt to disrupt the territorial unity of their coun- 











2 shawn Ng mre 


i 
} 

















try or to assail their hard-won political independence. 
They have an excellently equipped and well-trained 
army, and possess some of the best armament fac- 
tories in the world. Their antagonists, moreover, will 
have to reckon with the likelihood of intervention by 
France and the Soviet Union, and the possible in- 
volvement of Britain. 

A rather precarious balance of power now pre- 
serves peace in Europe. Despite recent advances, 
Germany and Italy cannot yet be said to have cap- 
tured a position of absolute supremacy on the con- 
tinent. Although possessed of formidable armament 
on land and sea, they are economically weak. Neither 
has a supply of raw materials sufficient to sustain it 
in a prolonged war. Nor can they rely entirely on 
each other. In the event of war Italy would probably 
join the side which had most to offer—just as it did 
in 1915. With the exception of Italy, Germany has 
no ally. It could hardly count, as in 1914, on the neu- 
trality of Britain, which is now more closely linked 
to France than ever before and, with the stimulus of 
its accelerated rearmament program, is rapidly over- 
coming its military shortcomings. In the Soviet 
Union the Reich would face an opponent whose eco- 
nomic and military preparedness is certainly superior 
to that of pre-war Russia. Financially and politically, 
France is weaker than in 1914. Moreover, now that 
a definitive Franco victory in Spain seems inevitable, 
the French government faces the unpleasant pros- 
= of having another fascist or semi-fascist neigh- 

r on the south. Yet even here the outlook is not 
entirely gloomy. The French have always revealed 
extraordinary recuperative powers in times of na- 
tional emergency; and although they may see Spain’s 
sympathies enlisted on the side of the fascist na- 
tions, it would hardly be in Franco's interests to par- 
ticipate actively in a European war. Thus the balance 
of power still inclines in favor of those powers in- 
terested in the preservation of peace. Unfortunately, 
this factor may not deter nations from prosecuting 
policies which involve the danger of war. Hitler and 
Mussolini have both demonstrated that they are 
willing to take such risks. JouN C. pEWILDE 

MEXICO NATIONALIZES OIL 

The Good Neighbor policy in Latin America was 
dealt a severe blow when Mexico expropriated for- 
eign oil properties and the United States, in apparent 
reprisal, suspended silver purchases from the republic. 
The expropriation decree, announced on March 18, 
affected seventeen foreign companies whose holdings 
are valued at $350,000,000. Of this amount, $125,- 
000,000 is estimated to be American capital, and 
$225,000,000 British-Dutch, a factor which brings 
European nations into the controversy. 

The government's resort to expropriation climaxed 
a long dispute between foreign companies, deter- 
mined to maintain themselves, and President Lazaro 


Page Two 





ee 
es 


Cardenas, committed to a nationalist program de. 
manding that Mexicans progressively displace for. 
eigners in control of the country’s resources. The con. 
troversy dates from the petroleum strike of May 
1937. Following investigation of the companies 
books, the Federal Board of Conciliation and Ap. 
bitration handed down on December 18 a decision 
favorable to the workers, approving a one-third ip. 
crease in wages and expansion of pension and wel. 
fare systems—at an estimated annual cost of $7, 
200,000—together with limited labor participatiog 
in management. The companies, asserting they could 
not pay more than $3,600,000, sought an injunction 
from the Mexican Supreme Court. While the case 
was pending, the companies threatened to cease op. 
erations if the ruling was adverse. Embittered goy. 
ernment supporters charged the petroleum interests 
with attempts to coerce the Court. They alleged that 
the oil companies had largely suspended business on 
credit, in order to throw the burden for such transac 
tions on the banks, and had put a strain on the peso 
by withdrawing their balances in Mexico. 


On March 1 the Supreme Court denied the com 
panies’ appeal, thus ne them to fulfill the ver 
dict of the labor board. A temporary injunction on 
the 8th, staying enforcement of this decision, pro- 
vided a short breathing spell, but an effort at com 
promise proved fruitless. President Cardenas 
sonally promised the corporations that the wage bill 
would not run to the $11,400,000 which their experts 
had estimated, but would be held to a maximum of 
$7,200,000, or 26,000,000 pesos. The companies 
raised their offer to 22,500,000 pesos and at the last 
moment to the full 26,000,000, on condition that 
workers’ participation in management be eliminated. 
But this proviso proved an insuperable obstacle; and 
on March 18 the President, acting under the ex 
propriation law of November 1936, announced ne 
tionalization of the oil properties. The decre 
ised indemnity to the companies within t« 
time, but skeptics were quick to recall Mexico s fail 
ure to date to provide satisfactory compensation fot 
land seizures. President Cardenas later announced 
plans for a domestic loan of 100,000,000 pesos, to be 
used in part to indemnify owners of oil properties. 
An Administrative Petroleum Council, jointly repre 
senting government and labor, was named to operate 
the industry. 


The Mexican move confronted Washington with 
a dilemma. It was under pressure to protect Ameti- 
can interests, especially since the Cardenas initiative 
might set a precedent for other Latin-American cout. 
tries. Moreover, British and Dutch properties wert 
involved. On the other hand, in the present world 
crisis friendly relations with the republics to the south 
are a foundation stone in United States foreign pol 


(Continued on Page 4) 





de 


tic 
re 








ell 


for. 


nies’ 
| Ar 
“ision 
d in. 

wel- 
‘o, 
ation 
could 
ction 
’ Case 
© Op. 
8ov- 
erests 
1 that 
SS ON 
ansac- 


> Peso 


| COM- 
\e ver- 
On Of 
» pide 
. COM- 
$ per. 
ze bill 
Xperts 
um of 
panies 
re last 
n that 
inated. 
e; and 
he ex 
ed na 
Dron 
s faik 
on fof 
ounced 
5, to be 
erties. 
 repte- 
»perate 


n with 
Ameti- 
itiative 
n coum 
5 were 
- world 
e south 


gn pol 


, 


Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


MaRCH 29— German and Austrian Refugee 
Problem. That humanitarian appeals alone will not 
be sufficient to meet the problem of political refu- 

from Austria and Germany became apparent 
last week as State Department officials took the first 
steps in carrying out the project submitted by Sec- 
retary Hull to 29 American and European govern- 
ments. Details of the plan, which is understood to 
have been initiated by the President — apparently 
without prior consultation—have yet to be worked 
out and specific proposals will not be formulated 
until the meeting of the special committee of govern- 
ment representatives proposed by this government. 


Washington officials who are familiar with the ef- 
forts of other agencies, such as the Nansen Office of 
the League of Nations and the Migration Bureau of 
the International Labor Office, are well aware of 
the magnitude and complexity of the task confront- 
ing any new committee. The High Commission for 
Refugees Coming from Germany, created in 1933, 
has not only encountered serious obstacles in facili- 
ting immigration to other countries, but has also 
met with difficulties in seeking to establish a legal 
satus for oppressed minorities. After two years of 
efort, the Commission has been able to secure the 
signature, with reservations, of only nine govern- 
ments to a convention dealing with the status of refu- 
gees. No government has yet ratified this treaty. 


In announcing its project for an inter-govern- 
mental committee, the State Department emphasized 
that no country would be required to change its ex- 
sting immigration laws. In the case of the United 
States it was pointed out that some 17,000 emergency 
immigrants could be admitted under existing quotas 
during the remainder of the current fiscal year if 
financial aid could be furnished by private agencies 
to prevent refugees from becoming public charges. 
The figures for the fiscal year 1937 were as follows: 














Annual Quota Unused Per Cent 
Quota, 1937 Visas Issued Visas Unused 
Germany 25,957 12,532 13,425 5i+ 
Austria 1,413 424 989 62+ 
27,370 12,956 14,414 52 


Despite these unused quotas, some experts here 
doubt whether the United States will be able to ad- 
Mit any substantial number of refugees without 
modifying the existing immigration laws or regula- 
tions. The funds required to guarantee that indigent 
tefugees would not become public charges would be 





enormous and almost beyond the reach of any private 
agency. The number of applicants for American 
visas, moreover, has far exceeded the total of the 
annual quotas for a number of years. On June 30, 
1937 applications at American consular offices in 
Germany and Austria alone totaled well over 100,- 
000, and this number may be doubled or trebled as 
a result of the Nazi coup in Austria. Consular offi- 
cers, while allowed some discretion in interpreting 
the law, are forced to exclude many applicants on 
technical grounds which cannot be modified without 
amending the Act itself. 

The immigration laws of most Latin-American 
countries have been even more stringent than those 
of the United States in recent years, and immigra- 
tion from Germany has been insignificant. In 1936 
Brazil admitted only 1,580 Germans, while Argen- 
tina received 1,461. Mexico, under its immigration 
law of 1934, prohibits admission of laboring immi- 
grants. 

Some confusion has been caused here by President 
Roosevelt’s press conference statement at Warm 
Springs on March 15 that the American proposal 
would also apply to oppressed minorities in Russia, 
Italy, Spain and other countries. State Department 
officials, while withholding comment, are proceed- 
ing on the assumption that the project is limited to 
Germany and Austria. 


No change in neutrality. Administration leaders 
in Congress have sidetracked the plan, mentioned in 
this Letter last week, to commence hearings on reso- 
lutions seeking revision or repeal of the existing neu- 
trality laws. The decision was made by Representa- 
tive McReynolds, chairman of the House Foreign 
Affairs Committee, following indications that any 
move to repeal the laws would precipitate an acri- 
monious debate in Congress. The hearings, originally 
scheduled for March 29, have been postponed in- 
definitely. Meanwhile, the State Department declined 
to alter its position with respect to the embargo on 
arms shipments to Spain. The attitude of the Depart- 
ment was disclosed in a letter from Secretary Hull to 
Raymond L. Buell, made public on March 22. 

Mr. Buell had written informally to the Secre- 
tary pointing out that the Spanish embargo rested 
on a proclamation issued under the Neutrality Act 
of May 1, and that the conditions which caused the 
President to issue this proclamation had ceased to 
exist. It was his contention that events have proved 
that the effect of the proclamation has been to deny 
the Loyalists access to the American market, al- 














gee emer 
A> ie a 











eannmneel 


ee 























though Franco is being freely supplied with war ma- 
terials by Germany and Italy. When the proclama- 
tion of May 1 was issued, it was assumed that such 
shipments would also stop. In reply, Secr Hull 
iad that there had en soy Sar situa- 
tion in Spain such as to warrant the President in re- 
voking his proclamation of May 1, 1937” and that, 
moreover, the joint resolution of January 8, under 
which the original embargo on Spain had been im- 
posed, was still in effect. 

According to a letter of March 23 from Mr. Buell, 
however, ‘‘it was the intention of Congress to super- 
sede the specific embargo imposed on January 8 by 
the more elastic provisions of the Neutrality Act of 
May 1. The fact that the President deemed it neces- 
Sary to issue a proclamation reimposing the embargo 
under the general act would support this point of 
view. In any case, the immediate ae of the existing 
Spanish embargo is a proclamation imposed by Presi- 
dential discretion, and the retention of this embargo 
therefore involves the responsibility of the Presi- 
dent.” It is pointed out that the State Department 
adopted a very liberal interpretation of the Neutrality 
Act when it decided not to apply it in the Orient, but 
it has adopted a strict interpretation in refusing to 
lift it in the case of Spain. WituaM T. STONE 


MEXICO NATIONALIZES OIL 
(Continued from Page 2) 
icy, and Washington has no desire to drive Mexico 
into the arms of Germany or Japan. The State De- 
partment at first announced that it would not act 
until the pans aay had exhausted all legal recourse. 
To this end, the oil companies announced on 
March 20 that they would fle injunction proceed- 
ings against the expropriation decree. Two days 
later the American corporations presented to the 
State Department a brief claiming ‘‘a manifest denial 


= Page Four 








of justice.” Meanwhile Britain, whose navy needs 
Mexican oil, has made diplomatic representations ig 
Mexico City. There followed the announcement of 
Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau on March 2) 
that purchases of Mexican silver, amounting a 
proximately to 5,000,000 ounces monthly, w 
not be continued after April 1. This step served fup 
ther to depress the Mexican peso, which had falle, 
sharply after the expropriation decree. 


Many observers doubt that Mexico can com 
mand either the capital or the technical ability 
necessary for successful administration of the oj 
industry, which normally exports from 70 to §% 
per cent of its production. Even if it should 
overcome the lack of tankers, it would still face 
the hostility of the dominant British and American 
companies in its search for markets. Despite the pro- 
nounced “‘anti-fascist” policy in international affairs 
of the Cardenas régime, negotiations for petroleum 
sales to Japan have been reported. The oil crisis 
threatening an estimated loss in taxes of approx 
mately one-seventh of the total government budget, 
occurred at a particularly inauspicious time for the 
Cardenas administration. As a result of expenditures 
for public works and agrarian reform, its coffers are 
almost empty; and curtailment of agricultural credit 
is already breeding discontent among the new peasant 
farmers. In this situation it is not generally expected 
that the government will create new difficulties by 
any immediate attempt to take over the mining in 
dustry. A further danger may arise should political 
opponents of the régime take advantage of its pres 
ent straits to organize a revolt. The next six months 
may prove critical for President Cardenas, unless he 
can induce his people to make the economic sacrifices 
which victory in the present conflict apparently 


demands. CHARLES A. THOMSON 





The F.D.A. Bookshelf 


The United States and the Disruption of the Spanish Em- 
pire 1810-1822, by Charles Carroll Griffin. New York, 
Columbia University Press, 1937. $3.75 


Despite a difficult style, this book throws new light on 
the early relations of the United States and Latin Amer- 
ica. This early period in certain respects was similar 
to the present, for it was marked by a conflict between 
those who wished to aid Latin American independence 
and those who insisted upon “neutrality.” The neutrality 
school won, partly because the administration wished to 
secure the cession of Florida by Spain. It is interesting 
to note that, at the Congress of Vienna, Spain endeavored 
to secure the return of Louisiana, ceded by Napoleon to 
the United States in 1803. 


Lords of the Inland Sea: a Study of the Mediterranem 
Powers, by Sir Charles Petrie, Bt. London, Lovat Dick 
son Limited, 1937. 10s. 6d. 


This remarkably illuminating view of the British Right 
wing conservative mentality will go far to enlighten thos 
who are puzzled or incensed by Neville Chamberlain’s pol 
icy today. A firm believer in monarchy and the corporate 
state, a worshipper at the shrine of the dictators, an op 
ponent of the doctrines of the French Revolution and 4 
horrified enemy of the Communist scourge, Sir Charles 
has written a series of thumbnail sketches of the Mediter 
ranean powers in the light of his preconceptions. He urges 
Britain to cut loose from the Russian-controlled League of 
Nations, to establish conscription and curb left-wing e 
cesses at home, and to come to a “realistic” understanding 
with Mussolini. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 23, Aprit 1, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasiuzs Bug, President; Vera Micueres Dgan, Editor. 


National 
Entered as second-class matt! 


December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


|F¢ 








