
































FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN ae ae 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff Cer 3) ; gree: a 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year Un» Sldb» Office at New York, 
‘ “2% 5,, "apy N. Y., under the act 
ious POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated "* ois. of March 3, 1879. 
AN BRARS East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Any 4 ie Mae 
L 4 rads, * Ch . : 
oo mics. Op My ‘eg, SECOND CLASS MAIL 
Wot. XIX, No. 48 SEPTEMBER 20, 1940 ch, 
: 
-| CANADA AT WAR Se 
: by JAMES FREDERICK GREEN Ps . 
, A survey of Canada’s first year of war, with an analysis e) O4n 
of the political, financial and economic effects of military ‘f 
and industrial mobilization. 
C 
25¢ 
‘ September 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 
$ 
\- 
s AXIS POWERS SEEK SHOWDOWN WITH BRITAIN 
p —_ 
e 
(- 


ewes first week of Germany’s total air war against 
Britain ended on September 15, with no clear 
demonstration that the Nazis had secured the “‘day- 
s | light mastery of the air’’ which, according to Mr. 
d | Churchill's address of September 11, is “the crux of 
s, | the whole war.’ By September 16 casualties from 
s; | continuous raids on London were estimated at 1,200 
n | dead and 5,000 wounded —a figure regarded by 
s, | military experts as far below that to be expected in 
ll | a large and thickly populated city. Many buildings 
a | had been razed or damaged; communications had 
y | been interrupted at various points; stores of food 
| had been damaged; a number of women and children 
d | from congested areas had been evacuated; and por- 
ty | tions of London’s docks, where 37 per cent of the 
Mt | vessels engaged in overseas trade are normally 
st | loaded and unloaded, had been destroyed or dis- 
n | organized. Information from official and private 
5 | sources, however, indicated that London civilians, 
ie | with few exceptions, were adjusting themselves as 
is | best they could to the most destructive air raids of 
t- | the war, and were carrying on essential services. 

0 PREPARATIONS FOR NAZI INVASION. But 
| the British authorities had no illusions regarding the 
is | ctitical dangers to which the country might be ex- 
r- | posed in the immediate future. On September 11 


don’s anti-aircraft resistance, but sought to disrupt 
German invasion preparations at their source. Over 
the week-end of September 14 the Royal Air Force 
bombed French, Belgian and Dutch harbors. In 
France, according to information released by the 
Vichy government, the British planes inflicted “heavy 
destruction,” while British long-range guns shelled 
the French coast, and German guns replied by shell- 
ing Dover. 

ITALY’S THRUST INTO EGYPT. As German 
planes battered London, Italy on September 12 
launched its long-awaited drive into Egypt from 
key-points in northern and southern Libya. Under 
the leadership of Marshal Graziani, Italian motor- 
ized troops, supported by the air force, pressed for- 
ward into the Egyptian desert, meeting stiff British 
resistance on land and from the air. It is generally 
conceded that the Italians, who no longer fear an 
attack from the rear by French colonies in North 
Africa, have concentrated a force on the Egyptian 
border which is superior to that of the British in 
number both of men and airplanes. The British navy, 
however, controls the Eastern Mediterranean, and 
may be in a position to harass the Italian advance 
along the coast; and four hundred miles of desert, 
regarded by some military experts as impassable even 


1 | Mr. Churchill warned his people that Nazi prepara- 


tions ‘for invasion on a great scale are steadily go- 
ing forward” along the entire German-occupied coast 


| of Europe, from Norway to the Bay of Biscay. Plans 


for the Nazi invasion which, in Mr. Churchill's 


for mechanized troops, separate the frontier of 
Libya from the fertile Nile valley. 

Much will depend on the attitude of Egypt which, 
although an ally of Britain, still maintains a policy 
of non-belligerency, and is not officially at war with 


| Opinion, might be launched at any time on England, Italy. On September 15 King Farouk appealed to 
or | Scotland or Ireland, or on all three, were aided Moslems in Egypt and throughout the world for a 
es | tather than hindered by fog, which made it more collective prayer for peace; and, should British re- 
to | dificult for British fliers and shore batteries to 


th 








pound at German ship concentrations. 

The British, however, apparently decided during 
the first week of total war that offense was the best 
form of defense, and not only strengthened Lon- 


sistance prove effective, this appeal might be trans- 
formed into a plea for Moslem aid against the 
Italians. The Fascist government, however, appar- 
ently hopes that the Egyptians will urge appease- 
ment, and perhaps create a situation which would 























force the British to withdraw from Egypt, thus open- 
ing the way for Italian seizure of the Suez Canal. 
At the same time, the British must face the possi- 
bility that, if they concentrate all their Near Eastern 
forces in Egypt, they may facilitate an Italian coup 
in Greece, which continues to be the target of Italian 
press attacks because of its ties with Britain. 


UNEASINESS IN THE BALKANS. Uneasiness 
in the Eastern Mediterranean has been increased by 
the spread of revisionist sentiment in the Balkans. 
Now that Bulgaria has recovered Southern Dobruja, 
to be occupied in four stages between September 15 
and 25, some of its spokesmen are demanding the 
return of four small regions in eastern Yugoslavia 
and of western Thrace which Bulgaria ceded to 
Yugoslavia and Greece respectively under the Treaty 
of Neuilly in 1919. Hungary, not satisfied with re- 
occupation of Northern Transylvania, may press for 
return of the Banat, two-thirds of which it ceded to 
Rumania and one-third to Yugoslavia under the 
Treaty of Trianon in 1920. Public sentiment in 
Yugoslavia, which remains favorable to the West- 
ern powers, is exacerbated by signs of increased 
German penetration, and is veering toward the So- 
viet Union, which is regarded as the only possible 
check on Axis expansion in this region. A similar 
trend is noticeable in Bulgaria, where the Commu- 
nist party has denounced the country’s pro-Axis 
orientation, and urges rapprochement with the 
U.S.S.R. The Soviet government, for its part, 
claimed the right on September 13 to be represented 
on the Danubian Commission, which is being reor- 





Page Two —_ 





a 


ganized under German control. In Rumania Gep. 
eral Antonescu on September 14 proclaimed the 
formation of a “legionary” state, with himself as 
chief, and Horia Sima, leader of the Iron Guard o 
Legion, as Vice-Premier. Under the new régime, 
which is to be closely patterned on that of Nazj 
Germany, the Iron Guard will function as the sole 
political party; and on September 15 General Ap. 
tonescu pleaded for cessation of ‘‘internecine strife,” 
including differences that had developed within the 
Iron Guard. 

The political readjustments already effected o, 
under discussion are accompanied by economic read. 
justments designed to fuse the European continent 
into a single economic bloc dominated by Germany, 
in which customs barriers will be abolished (as in 
the case of the Bohemian-Moravian Protectorate on 
September 15), and trade will be carried on through 
multilateral clearing arrangements controlled from 
Berlin. The extent to which the new system rapidly 
being organized by Germany will survive the pres 
ent war depends, in the first place, on the outcome 
of the Battle of Britain. Should Britain successfully 
resist the Nazi invasion, the problem will still re. 
main whether the British will be in a position to 
give the countries of Eastern Europe sufficient mili- 
tary protection and economic aid to liberate them 
both from their present dependence on the Reich, 
and from the fear, common to many of them, that 
the collapse of Germany would merely open the 
way for domination of the continent by the Soviet 


Union. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


NAZI DEMANDS HARASS PETAIN GOVERNMENT 


Hampered both by external and internal difficul- 
ties, the government of Marshal Henri Philippe 
Pétain has forged ahead with plans for consolidat- 
ing its authority in defeated and divided France. 
Although the new régime retains nominal adminis- 
trative control over the entire country, it cannot, in 
the three-fifths of France occupied by German troops, 
exercise even the limited competence granted to it 
in the south. German sources openly describe the 
Pétain government as transitory, and refuse to make 
definitive arrangements for the future until military 
operations are concluded. In accordance with the 
terms of the Compiégne armistice, they have saddled 
France with a charge of 20,000,000 marks a day 
($8,000,000 at official rates) for the maintenance of 
German troops in France. By setting an artificially 
high exchange ratio of 20 francs to the mark, the 
Nazis are draining the French Treasury of almost 
half the estimated daily cost of the war to France 
while it was still a belligerent—far more than the 
amount which should be needed for an army of oc- 
cupation. The sums remaining to the Germans after 


meeting immediate military needs will be available 
for further purchases of materials already scarce in 
the country. 

Should the imminent invasion of Great Britain 
be delayed until the spring of 1941, it is quite 
possible that the Nazis may extend their occupation 
to cover the whole of pre-war European France. 
Such a move would permit even closer supervision 
of political activities, and stores of foodstuffs and 
materials, than is now carried out at Nazi dictation. 
It would give the Reich direct access to the Medi- 
terranean, where an important campaign may be 
waged during the autumn and winter months. Ex- 
tension of German control would actually be wel- 
comed by some French leaders, who have been 
greatly concerned that the suspension of postal and 
other communications between the two parts of the 
country might impair its unity, and thus facilitate 
the permanent partition of France. 

PETAIN GOVERNMENT RESHUFFLED. With 
its fate thus dependent on the fortunes of war, the 
Pétain government—though reactionary rather than 








= 


fascis 
Frenc! 
ently 
betwe 
Amba 
been : 
Vichy 
is to 
thirte 
of th 
retain 
Un 
and § 
cabin: 
ing O 
actin§ 
instit 
ment. 
leade 
cil. / 
Adrie 
Franc 
catior 
Yout 
the | 
tailec 
Mini 
signe 
of th 
gate 
persc 
civil 
TI 
proce 
lican 
whic 
and 
Chat 
Paul 
Gust 
the I 
Min: 
been 
Tl 
ticle: 
for 
and 
Wh: 
repe 
mutt 
tem 
trial 


FORE 
Headq 
Entere 


S 





le 











— Page Three 





fascist in its composition—is striving to adapt the 
French nation to the new order in Europe. Appar- 
ently as an outgrowth of conversations in Paris 
between Vice-Premier Pierre Laval and the German 
Ambassador, Otto Abetz, M. Laval’s authority has 
been increased in a Cabinet reorganization effected at 
Vichy on September 6. Henceforth the Vice-Premier 
is to preside over meetings of a Cabinet council of 
thirteen department heads and coordinate the work 
of the various government departments. He also 
retains control of the press and radio. 

Under the new system the formulation of laws 
and general policies is to be entrusted to an inner 
cabinet, known as the Council of Ministers, consist- 
ing of eight secretaries of state, and Marshal Pétain 
acting as President. Disappearance of parliamentary 
institutions is emphasized, not only by this arrange- 
ment, but by the absence of all former parliamentary 
leaders save M. Laval in the new governing Coun- 
cil. Among those deprived of Cabinet posts are 
Adrien Marquet, former Minister of the Interior; 
Francois Piétri, who had been Minister of Communi- 
cations; and Jean Ybarnégaray, once Minister of 
Youth and Family—a department now merged with 
the Ministry of Education. General Weygand, de- 
tailed to duty in French Africa, was replaced as 
Minister of War by General Charles Huntziger, who 
signed the Compiégne truce which took France out 
of the war, and has since served as chief French dele- 
gate on the Wiesbaden Armistice Commission. The 
personnel of the Cabinet now consists principally of 
civil servants. 

THE RIOM TRIALS. The new government is 
proceeding with preparations for the trial of Repub- 
lican statesmen accused of responsibility for the war, 
which is to take place at Riom. Between September 7 
and 15, it interned in the Chateau de Chazeron, near 
Chatelguyon, former Premiers Edouard Daladier, 
Paul Reynaud, and Léon Blum; General Maurice 
Gustave Gamelin; and Georges Mandel, Minister of 
the Interior in the Reynaud Cabinet. Two former Air 
Ministers, Pierre Cot and Guy La Chambre, have 
been indicted for their acts while in office. 

The controlled French press has printed long ar- 
ticles designed to prove the guilt of all these leaders 
for French unpreparedness, the declaration of war, 
and the disastrous conduct of military operatic .us. 
While the record of mistakes and failures needs no 
fepetition, it does not appear that the accused com- 
mitted acts regarded as criminal under a liberal sys- 
tem of jurisprudence. It is more likely that the Riom 
trials will be used to provide scapegoats on whom 








the collapse of the country may be blamed. Accord- 
ing to Marcel Déat, writing in L’Oeuvre, the French 
hope to avoid the stigma of collective war guilt, and 
consequent reparations, in a Nazi-dictated peace 
treaty by demonstrating the individual responsibility 
of the accused. It would be naive, however, to imag- 
ine that such a maneuver would alter the policies of 
Hitler, who would doubtless argue that the French 
nation as a whole was to blame for the misdeeds of 
its duly appointed representatives. 

While French officials thus repudiate the activities 
of their predecessors, many basic legal concepts of 
the Third Republic are vanishing as a result of steps 
taken by the new régime. Frenchmen who left 
France without permission between May 10 and 
June 30—that is, during the military campaign and 
the surrender—have been deprived of their citizen- 
ship, and their property has been confiscated. Indi- 
viduals holding public office or engaged in profes- 
sions such as law and medicine must not only be 
French citizens themselves but must prove that their 
fathers also were French. A number of youth groups 
have sprung up for training of the young. At the 
same time, the government is attempting to improve 
relations with the Church, never especially cordial 
under the Republic. On September 3 it repealed a 
law passed in 1904 forbidding teaching by religious 
orders in French schools. Republican legislation ban- 
ning anti-Semitic activities has also been repealed, 
and a number of demonstrations against Jews have 
been reported. Leading the anti-Semitic agitation is 
Jacques Doriot, who left the Communist party in 1936 
and founded his own French Popular party, with 
a bitterly anti-Communist platform. M. Doriot is be- 
lieved to maintain excellent relations with M. Laval, 
and his star is said to be in the ascendant. Finally, 
an official decree of September 12 marks a further 
departure from liberal capitalism. It gives the gov- 
ernment sweeping powers over production and trade 
which might — theoretically, at least —be used to 
cripple the economic power of French capitalists. 


Davin H. Poprer 


NEW HEADQUARTERS FOR F.P.A. 

The Foreign Policy Association extends a cordial 
invitation to its members to visit their new head- 
quarters at Midston House, 22 East 38th Street, New 
York, where the officers and staff will be glad to 
welcome them. 

Members will be particularly interested in the 
library-lounge, with its excellent collection of ma- 
terial on foreign affairs. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 48, SEPTEMBER 20, 1940. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lrggt, Secretary; Vera MicHeres Dgan, Editor. 


National 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Yo 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Se 


Washington News Letter 




















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


SEPT. 16.—When Congress voted final action on 
the Burke-Wadsworth bill on September 14, provid- 
ing the first compulsory military service law in peace 
time, it sought to define the military policy of the 
nation by restricting service under the Act to the 
Western Hemisphere and the territories and posses- 
sions of the United States. But, as the Battle of 
Britain enters a decisive stage, it is apparent that 
the power to define military policy rests with the 
President as Commander-in-Chief and with those in 
the Executive branch of the government who are 
responsible for the conduct of American foreign 


policy. 


PEACE-TIME CONSCRIPTION. In the Act 
itself, Congress reserves the right to determine what 
troops are needed “for the national security” in ex- 
cess of the Regular Army and Navy, and lays down 
the broad provisions for a “fair and just system of 
selective, compulsory military training and service.” 
Within these provisions, wide powers are conferred 
on the President, including authority to prescribe the 
necessary rules and regulations for registration of 
all male residents of the United States between the 
ages of 21 and 35, inclusive; induction of men into 
the land and naval forces for a period of twelve 
months; and enforcement of industrial contracts. 
The compromise provisions finally agreed on for 
“conscription of industry” give the President power 
to take over any plant refusing to execute a govern- 
ment order, and permit the government to operate 
such plant directly or through a contractor, paying 
whatever rental is deemed “fair and just’’ "by the 
President. 


While Congress implies that the selective service 
law is limited to defense of the Western Hemi- 
sphere, the fact remains that the law provides a 
military system which is adapted to meet any con- 
tingency. For the immediate future the War Depart- 
ment contemplates a Protective Mobilization Plan 
Force of 1,200,000 men composed of the Regular 
Army, National Guard and two increments of 
400,000 men each to be drafted this winter and 
spring.* The law will continue in force until 
May 15, 1945, however, unless amended or repealed 
at future sessions of Congress, and within the next 
few years the annual increments of 800,000 men 
(drawn from an estimated 16,500,000 required to 


*Cf. Washington News Letter, Foreign Policy Bulletin, September 6, 1940. 


register) will provide a basis for a trained army of 
three or four million men. 


THE POLICY ISSUE. The critical question, re. 
duced to its simplest terms, is whether we can best 
defend the vital interests of the United States by 
attempting to make the Western Hemisphere im. 
pregnable or by joining Great Britain in an effort to 
defeat Germany in Europe. This is a question which 
the President and his executive advisers must con- 
sider but, in searching for an answer, those respon- 
sible for our defense program and our foreign policy 
are compelled to weigh both short-term and long- 
term factors. 


In the short run the consensus among military av- 
thorities in Washington today is that Britain has 
slightly better than a 50-50 chance of resisting the 
threatened German invasion. In the long run, how- 
ever, it is pointed out that Great Britain has no base 
anywhere on the continent from which to defeat the 
great land forces of Germany in Europe. Should 
Hitler fail in his attack on the British Isles and 
should Britain withstand prolonged bombardment 
from the air, the war may enter a period of stale. 


mate. It might then become a war of attrition, with | 


British sea power pitted against German land and 
air power. Many observers believe that such a stale- 
mate might last until one side or the other collapsed 
from sheer exhaustion, or until Europe was reduced 
to political and economic chaos. In that event the 
question of a negotiated peace might be raised again 
as the only means by which to avoid the complete 
destruction of Europe. 

In the present hour of crisis, there is little talk of 
mediation in Washington, although it is pertinent 
to note that the possibility of a stalemate has not 
been entirely dismissed. The immediate prospect is 
a growing demand for additional assistance to 
Great Britain in the form of larger shipments of 
airplanes — particularly heavy bombers and fighters 
—and perhaps the training of military pilots. Such 
aid may be supplied for a time without fixing the 
ultimate objectives of our national defense program, 
and it may prove a decisive factor in the Battle of 
Britain. But it is already apparent that the military 
requirements of more active participation in the waf 
are not identical with the requirements of hemisphere 


defense. W. T. STONE 
The Pacific Ocean, by Felix Riesenberg. New York, Whit- 
tlesey House, 1940. $3.00 


A history of the exploration, trade and warfare of the 
Pacific Ocean during four centuries. 








FOR 


An inter 


You. XI. 


[UST 


INL 
SOl 


—— 
——- 
——__— - 


VE} 
anc 
closer t 
cluded 
the Fre 
vent Ic 
Dong 
sisted 
mande 
Japane 
in Ind 
| render. 
on Sey 
status 
| achiev: 
States 
proval 
retary 
ments 
govert 
of Fre 
TH 
the ag 
| permi 
in Tc 
China 
Hano 
troop: 
media 
troop: 
maint 
Indo- 
annor 
“und 
| darec 
| exche 
titori 
ony.” 


said 











