ee | 
TAIN 
rits of a 
at a loan 
t by eco- 
stability, 
annot be 
aralyzed, 
| so long 
ies suffer 
-arcity of 
ng. 

s become 
sentative 
ey, wrote 
mending 
king into 
r nations, 
vould ac- 
e United 
ther pow. 
. whether 
n, would 
c of pow. 
3 not now 
ain suffer 
s will not 
/ in large 


NITION. 
and Cur 
> at least 
he life of 
since the 
an before 
inistration 
; mind on 


on to per 
h loan. A 
receive at- 
of news 
ision Con- 
hh govern 
he United 
‘ilmington 
‘ablish the 
ernational 
nt, in ac 
ods Agree 
an partic: 
s the loaf. 
BOLLES 


FEB 2 6 lv4e 


PRRIGOE AL KGOM 
G@BNBRAL LIBRARY 
Waly. OF Micu 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


T os wa ? , 
Valversity of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 19 


FEBRUARY 22, 1946 


eg STALIN’s speech of February 9 on the 
eve of the first elections held in the U.S.S.R. 
since 1938, has been the subject of far-ranging 
speculation by Western commentators, some of 
whom have interpreted it as a warlike challenge to 
the Western powers and a repudiation of the UNO. 
Most such speculation has failed to take into account 
the fact that this was a political campaign speech 
and, as such, bore marks of the boastful attitude that 
politicians in all ages and all lands reserve for such 
occasions. The burden of Stalin’s speech was justifica- 
tion not merely of the policies pursued by the Com- 
munist party to achieve military victory but, far more 
significantly, of the contributions made to victory 
by the party’s industrial and agricultural program 
as embodied in successive Five-Year Plans. It was 
hardly to be expected that Stalin would laud the 
capitalist system since he and his associates regard 
the Soviet system as superior. While Stalin’s explana- 
tion of the origins of World War II reverted to the 
usual schematic phrases about the warlike character 
of capitalist economy, he did point out to his listeners 
the special totalitarian teatures of the Axis powers, 
and the anti-Fascist sentiments that united Russia 
with other countries fighting a “liberating” war. His 
failure to mention the contribution made by the 
Western powers to Soviet victories in terms of food 
and war equipment was ungracious, but the tempta- 
tion to take full credit for the military prowess of a 
nation which as late as 1941 was held in contempt 
abroad is not easy to resist. 

STRESS ON DOMESTIC PROBLEMS. Stalin, 
however, was concerned in this speech primarily 
with domestic rather than foreign affairs. Russia 
Must now resume its huge task of construction 
where it left off when it was invaded by Germany 
in 1941—with the added handicaps of wholesale 


U.S. AND RUSSIA MUST OVERCOME MUTUAL SUSPICIONS 


devastation of German-occupied areas and losses of 
population estimated at some twenty million. The 
Soviet government cannot offer its war-weary people 
rosy dreams of a streamlined Utopia like those con- 
jured up by enthusiastic American advertisers. The 
generation brought up under the Soviet system has 
known great hardships and grave physical and spir- 
itual strain. It must be bluntly told to prepare for 
more of the same. It is natural, under the circum- 
stances, that Stalin should want to stress the value 
of the sacrifices made in the past. The results, he 
thinks, speak for themselves—first of all quantita- 
tively, in numbers of planes, guns, tanks, armored cars, 
and other war material, and in the amounts of food 
that, he contends, only collective farms could have 
produced in sufficient quantities. The fact that, like 
President Kalinin last fall, he makes a special effort 
to explain why heavy industry had to be given prece- 
dence over the production of consumers’ goods may 
be regarded as an answer to soldiers returning from 
occupied countries who are urging prompt improve- 
ments in living standards. 

It is in this connection, too, that Stalin strikes 
the most optimistic note. Rationing, he says, will be 
abolished “in the very near future” — although 
he neglected to say that the adoption of this measure, 
at a time when much of Europe is gravely under- 
nourished, is facilitated by the presence of nearly two 
and a half million Russian soldiers in Eastern Europe 
and the Balkans, where they live off the land, some 
of it the richest grain-growing land on the continent. 
Special attention, Stalin adds, “will be focused on 
expanding the production of goods for mass con- 
sumption, on raising the standard of life of the work- 
ing people by consistent and systematic reduction of 
the cost of all goods, and on wide-scale construction 
of all kinds of scientific research institutes to enable 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


a 


a 
: 
ays 
a) 
ou 
mi 
rt 
di 
i 
ft 


science to develop its forces.” 

Stalin, however, takes pride in other than material 
achievements. The Communists, he contends, no 
longer distrust non-party Russians. “Times have 
changed,” and “both Communists. and non-party 
people are fulfilling one common task.” He also be- 
lieves that the “multi-national” Soviet state has suc- 
cessfully stood the test of war and has effectively 
solved “the national problem and the problem of 
collaboration among nations.” Stalin’s emphasis on 
the “multi-national” character of the Soviet state is 
not a defiance of UNO, as it has been interpreted in 
some quarters. Rather it should be studied in con- 
nection with the emphasis placed by Pope Pius XII 
on the “supranational universality” of the Catholic 
Church in his December 24 allocution announcing 
the appointment of an unprecedentedly large num- 
ber of non-Italians to the Sacred College of Cardinals. 

IS RUSSIA A MENACE? Is Russia, in the light 
of this speech, to be considered a menace to the 
world? Is the only recourse of the United States, as 
some seemingly responsible Americans aver, to arm 
grimly for World War III, this time with Russia as 
the enemy? Much evidence can be adduced in sup- 
port of an alarmist attitude: the disclosure in Can- 
ada of a leakage of secret information, presumably 
about the atomic bomb or radar, to Russian agents; 
Russia’s reported demands in Manchuria and Iran; 
and sensational rumors about a projected seiz- 
ure of Trieste by Russian-backed Yugoslavs. What 
here is false, what true? To what extent are we and 
the Russians becoming the victims of our own imagi- 
nations ? 

The efforts of the Western powers to preserve the 
secret of the atomic bomb—regarded by all Allied 
scientists as futile—was bound to encourage spying, 
a pursuit which is not praiseworthy, but can hard- 
ly be regarded as a Russian peculiarity. The Rus- 
sians are clearly determined to get all the advantages 
they can during this period of transition when no 


Page Two 


— 
— 


nation, least of all the United States, has crystallize 
its policy. At the same time, Russia has given the 
Western powers a weapon of debate that it mug 
not be surprised to see turned against it. For if the 
presence of British troops in Greece and Indonesig 
constitutes a threat to peace, as Russian Foreign 
Vice-Commissar Vishinsky argued, so does the pres 
ence of Russian troops in Manchuria. But we mus 
not forget that we, too, have troops on Chinese soil, 
For our part, if we want to check the Russians, we 
must clarify our aims in contested areas. The Yugo. 
slavs are known to have designs on Trieste — there 
is nothing new in that—and Russia has lon 
wanted to achieve influence in the Mediterranean, 
But on the other hand, the Western Allies have 
not been completely free of contacts with anti 
Russian elements in Europe —and especially ig 
Italy, where Italian nationalist sentiment about 
Trieste finds common ground with the Vatican's de. 
nunciation of Russian totalitarianism and Britain's 
natural desire to maintain its Mediterranean life 
line? 

Mutual suspicions create an atmosphere favorable 
to war. The wisest thing we can all do today is to 
air our respective suspicions and make no bones 
about our respective grievances. A good start in that 
direction was made in the UNO Security Counail, 
where Russia, far from being lackadaisical, took an 
active part in all debates and helped to get the dis 
cussion on a realistic basis. Russia will continue to 
make a strong two-fold appeal because of its reiter 
ated sympathy for colonial peoples and the success 
of its multi-national system, emphasized by Stalin. 
But surely the United States can meet Russia's chal- 
lenge on these two points—provided we actively 
champion the cause of dependent nations, which we 
have recently failed to do, and strengthen at home 
the institutions that have made it possible for people 
from all lands to find here a common heritage of 
democracy. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


THREAT OF FAMINE SHARPENS POLITICAL ISSUES IN INDIA 


The danger of famine and the sharp political issues 
now shaping up in India threaten, before many 
months have passed, to produce a crisis more ex- 
plosive than any Britain has faced since the end of 
the war with Germany and Japan. India, with its 
400,000,000 people, is the heart of the British Em- 
pire, the most important overseas base of Britain’s 
position as a world power. Consequently, what hap- 
pens there overshadows the many conflicts, admit- 
tedly Significant in themselves, that have arisen in 
the Leyarit; Greece, Indonesia, Egypt and other areas 
of British imperial interest. 

FAMINE FACES 100,000,000. How important 
India is in human terms is clear from the fact 
that more than 100,000,000 people are facing the 
prospect of famine or, at best, a most stringent and 


dire shortage of food. As a result of a serious cyclone 
and drought in the south and failure of the rains in 


northwest India, the central plateau area and prov / 


inces of Bombay and Madgas are seriously affected, 
while the Punjab and Sind will not yield their usual 
surplus of wheat and rice. In announcing on February 
16 that the daily cereals ration would be cut to 12 


ounces per person in the urban areas in which f& | 


tioning is applied, Viscount Wavell, Viceroy of 
India, declared that India was some 3,000,000 tons 
short of its food requirements. 

The government of India is approaching the food 
problem on two fronts. Through internal measurés, 
such as the ration cut just mentioned, it is seeking 
to stretch existing supplies. At the same time it 
addressing a special appeal to the authorities in Lom 


—— 


don anc 
in Was 
abroad. 
delegat 
js weal 
foremc 
ticipate 
dence 
missior 
FOC 
tion W! 
all the 
towarc 
and pc 
held ir 
by 2 P 
cuts, a 
demor 
same 
the lez 
travel 
depen 
crisis. 
Ind 
on mz 
been | 
famin 
from 
prope 
be re 
betwe 
to a 
ure C¢ 
situat 
conte 
when 
ganiz 
a rou 
semb 
Beng 
ing t 
the | 
restr; 


whil 


PORE! 
Headq 
second 
one m 


SS 


———= 


rystallized 
given the 
t it must 
For if the 
Indonesig 
7 Foreign 
_ the pres. 
we must 
inese soil, 
Sians, we 
he Yugo. 
e — there 
has long 
‘erranean, 
lies have 
vith anti. 
cially in 
nt about 
ican’s de 

Britain's 
nean life 


favorable 
day is to 
no bones 
rt in that 
Council, 
, took an 
t the dis 
ntinue to 
its reiter: 
1e SUCCESS 
>y Stalin. 
sia’s chal- 
: actively 
which we 
at home 
or people 
ritage of 
DEAN 


s cyclone 
> rains in 
ind prov- 
affected, 
eir usual 
February 
cut to 12 
vhich fa 
ceroy of 
000 tons 


the food 
neasures, 
; seeking 
ime it is 
s in Lom 


| 


———, 
~~ — 


don and to the members of the Combined Food Board 
in Washington for a larger allotment of grain from 
abroad. It is worth noting, however, that the Indian 
delegation which will come before the Food Board 
js weak politically, since the Congress party, India’s 
foremost nationalist organization, declined to par- 
ticipate on the ground that it could place no confi- 
dence in the government-selected personnel of the 
mission. 

FOOD AND POLITICS. The economic situa- 
tion will inevitably fan the fires of political unrest— 
all the more so since India has long been heading 
toward a new political crisis. The interplay of food 
and politics is indicated by the general strike recently 
held in the textile center of Allahabad, accompanied 
by a parade of 50,000 persons protesting food-ration 
cuts, and by the protest meeting of 100,000 persons 
demonstrating on the food issue in Cawnpore. At the 
same time Jawaharlal Nehru, second to Gandhi in 
the leadership of the nationalist movement, has been 
traveling about India urging the necessity of full in- 
dependence and of strong popular action in the food 
crisis. 

India, of course, has seethed with political unrest 
on many occasions, and the ravages of famine have 
been felt before, most recently in the terrible Bengal 
famine of 1943. But the current situation differs 
from previous ones because desperate economic 
propects coincide with a political crisis. It will 
be recalled, for example, that when differences 
between Britain and the Indian nationalists came 
to a head in the summer of 1942 after the fail- 
ure of the Cripps mission, an unusual economic 
situation was not present to reinforce political dis- 
content. Similarly, at the time of the Bengal famine, 
when economic issues became unusually serious, or- 
ganized political discontent was at low ebb. To draw 
a rough analogy, then, the impending situation re- 
sembles what India might have experienced if the 
Bengal famine had coincided with the crisis follow- 
ing the failure of the Cripps proposals. Moreover, 
the fact that the war is over tends to lessen the 
restraints on Indian activity against British rule, 
while for the first time in many years not only the 
members of the Congress party, but non-Congress 
Moslems, are in motion, as recent anti-British riots 
by Moslems in Calcutta indicate. 


CONGRESS AND MOSLEM LEAGUE. On the 
other hand, sharp differences of view between the 
Congress party and the Moslem League, leading po- 
litical organization of the Indian Moslems, may 
strengthen the British position. The main objective 


Page Three 


of the League and its President, Mohammed Ali 
Jinnah, is to create two independent Moslem states 
(to which the name Pakistan would be given) in the 
predominantly Moslem areas of northwestern and 
northeastern India. To the Congress, which advo- 
cates a united India, Pakistan is unacceptable. This 
clash of views, of course, is not new, but a change 
has occurred in the bargaining position of the 
League. Whereas five years ago the League was an 
organization claiming to represent all Moslems but 
actually possessing only a small body of supporters, 
today it unquestionably has a mass following. Exact- 
ly how large this following is remains to be demon- 
strated in the elections now going on in India. 

The first phase of the Indian voting was com- 
pleted in the latter part of last year with the elec- 
tion of a new Central Legislative Assembly. This 
body has very limited powers, and is selected by an 
extremely small number of voters, but it is signifi- 
cant that both the Congress party and the Moslem 
League won important victories. Of 102 elected 
members of the Assembly, 56 belong to the Con- 
gress and 30 to the Moslem League, and the new 
President of the body is a Congress representative. 
Of much more moment, however, are the provincial 
elections which start this month and end in April. 
It is on the basis of the provincial elections that the 
British will seek to establish an all-party Viceroy’s 
Executive Council and to convoke a “constitution- 
making body” to draw up an Indian constitution. 
Whether the British proposals on these matters will 
be acceptable to the Congress party remains to be 
seen, and Jinnah has declared that the League will 
not agree to a single constitutional body or a single 
transitional government preceding independence, 
since either of these would militate against the 
achievement of Pakistan. 

At the moment, of course, the political and eco- 
nomic crisis in India is still a potential one. Much 
will depend on the actual evolution of food policy, 
the quantity of grain imports assigned to India, and 
the policies of Britain, the Congress party and the 
Moslem League. But it is already clear that the stage 
is being set for one of the major struggles of the post- 


war years. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


The Peoples of Malaysia, by Fay-Cooper Cole. New York, 

Van Nostrand, 1945. $4.00 

Written by an anthropologist who lived for five and a 
half years among the peoples he describes, this book is a 
valuable and entertaining portrayal of the physical char- 
acteristics, living habits and social customs of the natives 
of British Malaya, the Dutch East Indies and the Philip- 
pines. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 19, Fesruary 22, 1946. 


Published weekly by the 


Fereign Policy Asseciation, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New Yerk 16, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lugt, Secretary; Vera Mice es Dean, Eaitor. Enrered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Pest Office at New York, N. Y., umder the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change ef address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dellars a Year 


Bio) 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


U.S. PRESTIGE IN CHINA IMPAIRED BY SECRET PACT ON MANCHURIA | 


The disclosure on February 11 that in a secret 
agreement concluded at Yalta exactly a year before 
the United States and Britain had recognized special 
privileges for the Soviet Union in Manchuria has 
placed on this country new responsibility to har- 
monize the conflicting interests of China and Russia 
and assure porn stability in an area which was 
the scene of Japan’s initial attack on China. Stabil- 
ity in Manchuria is threatened anew, first because 
Russia has maintained troops there beyond Febru- 
aty 1, the date on which, after Chungking’s request 
for delay, it had agreed to withdraw; and, second, 
because ome persist that the Soviet government 
is NOW ing to obtain from China economic ad- 
vantages exceeding those it had claimed under the 
Yalta agreement. The main provisions of this agree- 
ment, it will be recalled, had been embodied in the 
treaty of friendship and alliance concluded by Russia 
and China on August 14, 1945.* 

RUSSIA’S OLD PRIVILEGES RESTORED. The 
secret agreement affecting Manchuria, which Secre- 
tary of State James F. Byrnes announced, promised 
the restoration of privileges Russia had lost to Japan 
—partly as a result of its defeat in the Russo-Japanese 
war of 1904-05, and partly through Japan’s conquest 
of Manchuria in 1931-32. The agreement provided 
for powerful Russian participation in the administra- 
tion of the port of Dairen, the leasing to Russia of 
Port Arthur as a naval base, and the establishment 
of a joint Chinese-Russian company to operate the 
Chinese Eastern and South Manchuria railroads. 

To see this agreement in perspective, it must be 
borne in mind that in 1898 Russia had obtained from 
China a 25-year lease of the Liaotung Peninsula, 
on which Dairen and Port Arthur are located, but 
was forced to surrender the lease to Japan under 
the terms of the 1905 Treaty of Portsmouth. More- 
over, Russia had built the Chinese Eastern Railroad 
in the nineteenth century, and had constructed the 
South Manchuria Railroad from Changchun to 
Dairen when it became involved in war with Ja 
in 1904-05. Russia thus enjoyed, before World War 
I, most of the privileges whose restoration was as- 
sured by the Yalta agreement. At the time of the 
Bolshevik revolution of November 1917, however, 
the Soviet leaders, who then vigorously opposed ter- 
ritorial annexations and imperialist pete re- 
pudiated the Tsarist treaties which had given Russia 
special rights in China. 

SECRET DIPLOMACY. The main question is not 


*See L. K. Rosi *“Chinese-Sovier Pact Fosvers Big-Pour Unity in Far 
East,'’ Foreign Polity Bulletin, August 31, 1945. 


whether Russia is entitled to claim certain special| 
privileges on Chinese territory, or even whether these KE 
privileges violate Chinese sovereignty over Man. 
churia. The United States maintains a naval base at 
Guantanamo Bay without apparently feeling that it) === 
violates the sovereignty of Cuba, and expects to 
maintain a naval base in the Philippines even when 
the islands have achieved independence. Where the 
Yalta agreement is open to criticism is that it was =x 
concluded without the consent or knowledge of| —— 
China, whose territorial interests it directly affects, 

The agreement thus marks a return to the kind of 
secret diplomacy President Wilson denounced dur. --44; 
ing World War I—diplomacy which at that time : 
produced the secret Treaty of London between the 
Western powers and Italy. As in the case of that 
treaty, the fact that military commitments were in|...) 
volved was regarded as a justification of secrecy. But ...4 
while the treaty of London promised Italy a share of) ;. ¢}, 
enemy (Turkish and Austrian) territory in return for 


ment 
month 


Italy’s entrance into the war on the side of the Allies, ~~ 
the Yalta agreement promised Russia, in return for) 4. , 
its entrance into the war against Japan, certain porte 
rights on territory belonging to one of our allies. | | ...;, 
It is true that China accepted in the treaty of last| y,,., 


August the same terms as those embodied in the) ,,1, 

Yalta agreement. But while T. V. Soong, president of | ¢},;,,, 
the Executive Yuan who signed that treaty on Chinas, _ 
behalf, may have learned of the existence of the| ¢},;,, 
Yalta terms during his negotiations, the Chinese gov- | 1, ..+ 
ernment was apparently not informed of these terms 45 
in advance, and the world in general was kept in ig- 


norance until the secret agreement was simultane- oe 
ously announced last week in Washington and Lon-| ¢,, 
don. Chin 

The question, then, is not whether China will | ,,.., 
accept the Yalta terms—it did so in August—but | ..), 
what effect Mr. Byrnes’ revelation will have on fu)... 


ture relations between the United States, Russia, p; ol 
and China. The agreement “makes us, the Chinese ;,( 
people, feel that the meaning of friendship between | 
us, as allies, no longer exists,” the Chungking radio ¢,,. 
said in a broadcast to the United States on Febru- 
ary 13. When the United States and Britain offered } disy 
Russia concessions at China’s expense, they were d0 | 4, 
ing so for a purpose they considered of paramount 
immediate importance—Russia’s participation in waf | jj). 
against Japan. Now the Western powers are fac of 

with the question whether the price paid at that time 
may not cost them heavily in terms of China's cot: 


fidence and good will. BLAIR BOLLES 


