


slo- 


uld 
| 
hat 


> i 


ears 
70€S 
nate 
that 
blic 
ater 
ast: 
of 
yeat, 


lows 


nent 
» for 











AL ROOE 
@@NBRAL LIBRAR 


ctv, or ms 


Led 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


University of Michigan 


Wtnh_ 














FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vout. XXIV, No. 21 


Maron 9, 1945 





NATIONS STRIVE TO RECONCILE POWER WITH RESPONSIBILITY 


wo and more, as discussion of post-war plans 
focuses on the Dumbarton Oaks proposals 
which are to be considered at the San Francisco 
conference, the problems of the peace narrow down 
toone fundamental question: How can the military, 
industrial and financial resources of the great pow- 
ets be harnessed to the task of assuring secuzity to 
all without, at the same time, imposing restrictions 
intolerable to the small nations? In what way can 
the overwhelming might of the United States, 
Britain and Russia be so precisely balanced by a sense 


> of responsibility for the welfare of the international 


community as to offer hope of stability and not a 
threat of further wars? 

DILEMMA OF SMALL NATIONS. This ques- 
tion, however varied its aspects, is the same wherever 
we turn in Europe, Asia, Africa, Latin America, 
the Near and Middle East. Everywhere the small 
countries want the great powers to assume respon- 
sibility for their safety and welfare. They want 
guarantees of the integrity of their territories, arma- 
ments to defend themselves, expanded markets at 
stable or rising prices for their products, loans and 
taw materials to revive industries shattered by war, 
or to start new industries in undeveloped areas. 

Yet at the same time they are jealously on guard 
to see that the advantages they seek to obtain from 
the great powers will not result in exploitation of 
their resources or encroachments on their independ- 
ence. The very weakness of the small nations makes 
them apprehensive, and quick to detect real or 
imagined slights. Their understandable oversuscepti- 
bility easily develops into a form of intransigence 
that can be just as much of an obstacle to peaceful 
international relations as the aggressive designs of 
some of the great powers. But instead of making 
allowances for the overstrained nerves of small na- 
tions, especially those that have been subjected to 
Axis terrorism, the great powers often seem im- 


patient of delays and apprehensions on the part of 
weaker neighbors, and by pressing them for prompt 
decisions give the impression of trying to dictate 
their fate. That was the outspoken reaction of the 
Polish government-in-exile to the Yalta decisions— 
and others, less vocal, have felt equally disturbed. 
France, although classed as a great power, has ex- 
pressed through General de Gaulle the fear that it 
may be used as a rubber stamp for the decisions of 
the Big Three. 

Whatever form the United Nations organization 
may take, whatever mechanism may be devised to 
give all nations, a feeling of equality, there is bound 
to be a residue of uneasiness, envy, and distrust 
in relations between the strong and the weak. This 
should not come as a surprise to us in this coun 
where, even under unusually favorable social con- 
ditions, the ugly problems that arise in the treat- 
ment of racial and religious minorities can be wit- 
nessed daily. Only the slow—sometimes exasperat- 
ingly slow—process of education, of experience 
shared in common, of a life that offers the individual 
Opportunities to enrich himself and the community 
through work and creative leisure, can gradually 
alleviate the strains and stresses of our own society. 

RESTORATION OF HUMAN DIGNITY. And 
here we may perhaps find a useful parallel for recon- 
ciling potential conflicts between the great powers 
and the small nations. For after their experience with 
Axis totalitarianism, the small nations will not ac- 
cept any attempt to regulate their lives, however 
benevolent. All peoples who have lived under Axis 
rule are at one in feeling that what caused them 
most distress was not material deprivation, or even 
physical suffering, but the indignities heaped upon 
them as human beings by the Germans and Japanese. 
History is full of cruel episodes. But it would be 
dificult to find many examples of the determined, 
unrelenting, utterly cynical effort of the Axis con- 














_ querors to destroy the essence of human existence. 
“They spat upon our souls” is the way Russians in 
German-occupied areas have repeatedly described 
their experience. Only by restoring and respecting 
the dignity of the individual, no matter how weak 
and defenseless he may be—not by imposing new 
restrictions can the United Nations hope to 
liquidate the fearful heritage of Axis oppression. 
It may then prove less difficult than it sometimes 
seems today to respect the dignity and rights of 
weak nations. But just as the individual, however 
weak, has some responsibility to the community in 
which he lives, so even the smallest nations cannot 
expect protection and economic help from the great 
powers unless they are ready to carry their share of 
the common burden. This consideration undoubtedly 
influenced the decision of the Big Three at Yalta to 
exclude from the San Francisco conference all coun- 
tries which had not decided, by a given date, to par- 
ticipate in the war effort. 


Speaking for small nations in the Western Hemi- 
sphere, Mexican Foreign Minister Ezequiel Padilla 
urged a plenary session of the Inter-American Con- 
ference on February 23 to dedicate itself “to the 
defense of the cause of human dignity.” The “frus- 
trated lives” of millions in this hemisphere, he said, 
offer little hope of social security and economic 
expansion without which “peace is merely a dark 
and gloomy armistice.” These objectives, he de- 
clared, “will only be attained, by uniting the ener- 
gies, the resources, and the confidence of all the 
Americas.” In fact, in the history-making Act of 
Chapultepec the small nations of Latin America go 
so far as to welcome the military assistance of the 
United States to prevent acts of aggression by any 
American state on other states in this hemisphere. 

President Roosevelt, in his speech of March 1 to 
Congress, and Prime Minister Churchill, in his ad- 
dress of February 27 to the House of Commons, 
speaking for two great powers, stressed both the 


Page Two 








es 
a 


heavy responsibilities borne by the United States 
Britain and Russia in the winning of the war, and 
the need for cooperation by all nations if mili 
victory is to bear fruit. The Yalta compromise og 
voting procedure in the security council of the pro. 
posed United Nations Organization, announced o9 
March 5, stresses the fact that the great powers wil] 
have to supply most of the military force needed ty 
assure security, and must therefore have the final say 
about decisions involving use of force. The small 
nations, however, will have equality with the great 
powers in bringing before the security council any 
situation likely to threaten peace, and request its 
consideration. 

World peace, however, said Mr. Roosevelt, “can. 
not be a peace of large nations—or of small na. 
tions. It must be a peace which rests on the coop. 
erative effort of the whole world.’ Cooperation 
requires compromise. The President did not pretend 
that he entirely agreed with the most criticized 
compromise of the Yalta Conference—that reached 
about Poland—nor did he claim it was an ideal solu- 
tion. Mr. Churchill seemed definitely more satisfied 
with the Polish territorial settlement — although 
Foreign Secretary Eden, on March 1, said forth. 
rightly that the British government was not satis. 
fied with the present composition of the Lublin 
régime. As so often happens, the very measure of 
agreement achieved by the Big Three at Yalta seems 
to have made Britain and the United States less 
cautious about discussing points of disagreement. 
This is a healthy sign, and perhaps the most 
promising portent of Yalta for the small nations. 
And if we want an encouraging example of how a 
great power can deal with a small nation, then the 
moving ceremony in which General MacArthur 
turned over the civil administration of the Philip 
pines to President Osmefia on February 28 marks a 
milestone in international relations. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FUTURE WORLD ORGANIZATION MUST DEAL WITH HEALTH PROBLEMS 


Disease, like war, respects no political boundaries; 
an outbreak of either in any part of the world may 
become an instant menace to all other parts. An in- 
ternational health organization, therefore, will be an 
essential element of the world political organization 
which emerges from the United Nations meeting 
at San Francisco next month. The importance of 
such an agency will be, perhaps, second only to the 
military precautions adopted to insure peace. Offi- 
cial agencies from which a ‘world health depart- 
ment’ may logically develop, or which may cooper- 
ate with it, include UNRRA, the Red Cross and 
the League of Nations’ Health Section, which is 
still functioning. Unofficial agencies which have 
contributed greatly to public health on an interna- 


tional scale will also play a prominent role in the 
international control of disease. The Rockefeller 
Foundation holds a unique position in this field as 
a result of its pioneering work since 1913. A brief 
review of its activities in the war years may illus 
trate some of the health problems to be solved by 
whatever international organization is finally estab 
lished. 

In cooperation with government health depatt- 
ments at home and abroad, as well as by laboratory 
research and field investigation, the International 
Health Division of the Rockefeller Foundation has 
carried on many of its basic projects without sett 
ous interruption by the war. Problems directly due 
to the world conflict have been dealt with by the 





L. Sop 
studies 
as wel 
covery 
sical t 
Britist 
Sierra 
of epi 
Egypt 
way f 
South 
MA 
has bi 
as th 
king, 
ducte 
contr 
earlie 
Foun 
Brazi 
quito 
by tl 
work 
1944 
with 


FORE! 
Headqu 
second - 
one me 


> 








u 


eoNw ee eS Oe ee FTF es oe 


ee ee ee eee eee eee 


__ we we FR 


> << 


oF lc MmhlC rOOCOlUlC lrOOllCO 


aS Uh «Cl we 


co eo -_— —"s yo 














— 
Health Commission, a special agency which early 
in the war carried out nutrition surveys in Spain 
snd France, and is still supporting nutrition projects 
in England. In 1944 the Health Commission began 
work on typhus and malaria in Italy, and Ameri- 
ans who recall the Spanish influenza epidemic of 
1918-19 will appreciate the importance of this fea- 
ture of the Commission’s work, in view of the threat 
of widespread disease on the heels of the war. Since 
its formation in 1940 the Health Commission has 
met urgent calls for service, from North Africa to 
the Burma Road. Among its activities and those of 
the Health Division may be mentioned: 

YELLOW FEVER. To meet the war demand for a 
vaccine which provided active immunity aguinst 

ow fever after a single injection—developed by 
the laboratories of the International Health Divi- 
son in 1936—the Foundation had to multiply its 
laboratory space and the number of its technicians. 
A long-term study of the immunity provided by the 
vaccine also was undertaken, and preliminary ob- 
grvations in Brazil and Colombia indicate that it 
ordinarily lasts for four years. Tests of stored serum 
show that it may be kept fully effective at ordinary 
icebox temperature for at least two years. 

Of special interest to the Army are studies in 
“jungle” yellow fever, a previously unknown vari- 
ey of the disease discovered in 1932 by Dr. Fred 
L. Soper of the International Health Division. These 


| studies are being conducted in Colombia and Africa 


as well as Brazil, where Dr. Soper’s important dis- 
covery was made. Control measures against the clas- 
sical type of yellow fever have continued in Panama, 
British Guiana, Peru, Bolivia, Uganda, Gambia, 
Sierra Leone, Nigeria and the Gold Coast. Study 
of epidemics in the Numba Mountains of the Anglo- 
Egyptian Sudan showed that the type differed in no 
way from that of Central and West Africa and of 
South America. 

MALARIA. Extensive work in research and control 
has been carried on in such widely separated areas 
as the Cochabamba Valley in Bolivia and Chung- 
king, China. In the latter city, surveys are being con- 
ducted to determine where incidence is highest, and 
control work is being applied to those areas. An 
earlier and outstanding accomplishment of the 
Foundation, carried out in cooperation with the 
Brazilian government, was eradication of the mos- 
quito from Brazil—at an expense of $2,000,000— 
by the employment of more than 2,000 trained 
workers over an area of 12,000 Square miles. In 
1944 the Health Commission, on the invitation and 
with the cooperation of United States military au- 


Page Three 





———— 


thorities developed methods for the use of DDT 
insecticide to control. malaria mosquitoes in Italy. At 
the request of the Egyptian government, the Health 
Commission has also undertaken a control program 
in Egypt, which had severe malaria epidemics in 
1942 and 1943. Efforts of the International Health 
Division Laboratories are now concentrated on test- 
ing new chemical compounds for their efficacy 
against malaria parasites. 

TypHus. As far back as 1915 the Foundation 
helped finance a Red Cross Sanitary Commission to 
control this disease in Serbia, where 9,000 new 
cases were occurring daily. Its present typhus pro- 
gram was set up in 1940, both for the purpose of 
adding to basic knowledge of the disease and of pre- 
venting similar epidemics in this war. Studies in infec- 
tion and control are being conducted in the New 
York laboratories of the Health Division and in 
Free China. Field work is sponsored by the Health 
Commission. 

RESPIRATORY DISEASES. Since the common cold, 
influenza and pneumonia form the largest and most 
serious group of infections in the armed forces, the 
Commission provided aid for full-time Army re- 
search on these subjects at Johns Hopkins, the Uni- 
versity of Michigan, and Boston City Hospital, and 
work was later centered at Fort Bragg. Field inves- 
tigations were also carried on at three Army camps, 
the government making funds available for the en- 
tire project after July 1943. Methods in the prep- 
aration of influenza vaccine, worked out previously 
in the International Health Division Laboratories 
and applied by commercial laboratories, were found 
of service to the Army Influenza Commission. An 
extensive outbreak of influenza in camps late in 
1943 affected groups vaccinated against the “A” 
type of the disease, but clinical studies showed a 
75 per cent reduction in incidence among men vac- 
cinated, as compared with those unvaccinated. 
These observations offered overwhelming evidence 
that the principle of prophylactic vaccination against 
influenza is sound and valid, although further im- 
provements in the vaccine are still being sought. 

The pioneer work of Florey of Oxford in the 
development of penicillin (discovered several years 
earlier by Dr. Alexander Fleming in London) dates 
from a grant of $1,200 made by the Foundation in 
1936. It may be remarked that not often have 
greater returns in public health been achieved from 
so modest an investment. This illustrates the type of 
“imaginative” research — returns from which are 
purely speculative — which a private agency is in a 
special position to promote. © WALTER WILGUS 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 21, Marcu 9, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association 


Incorporated National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vara MicHe.es Dean, Editor, Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Se is: 


Produced under nnion conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


oh 


aa 








Washington News Letter 











CHAPULTEPEC A STEP TOWARD WESTERN HEMISPHERE EQUALITY 


The Inter-American Conference on Problems of 
War and Peace at Mexico City raises the question 
whether there is a conflict between a regional sys- 
tem of security—in this instance, Western Hemi- 
sphere solidarity; and a universal system—the pro- 
jected union to be defined at San Francisco. From 
the regional point of view, the Mexico City meeting 
has achieved a high measure of success, as evidenced 
in the adoption on March 3 of the Act of Chapulte- 
pec, which “during the war’’ assigns to all the sig- 
natory American republics the joint right to inter- 
vene against a Western Hemisphere country 
carrying out or threatening an act of aggression 
against a neighbor. The steps of intervention would 
include: (1) recall of chiefs of diplomatic mis- 
sions; (2) breaking of diplomatic relations; (3) 
breaking of consular relations; (4) breaking of 
postal, telegraphic, telephonic and radio-telephonic 
relations; (5) interruption of economic, commercial 
and financial relations; and (6) use of armed force 
to prevent or repel aggression. Part II of the Act 
of Chapultepec recommends that the wartime dec- 
laration be adopted constitutionally by the republics 
as permanent policy through a treaty. Would this 
permanent American regionalism encourage the So- 
viet Union or Great Britain to renew their interest 
in spheres of influence of their own? 


NEW POLICY FOR USS. This Act is an historic 
departure in the policy of the United States as well 
as of the sister republics. It formally commits this 
country to intervention—specifically abandoned only 
12 years ago at the Seventh International Con- 
ference of American States at Montevideo. That 
meeting laid the foundation for the hemisphere 
solidarity system, which resulted from the “Good 
Neighbor Policy” enunciated by President Roosevelt 
in his First Inaugural. Article 8 of the Convention 
on Rights and Duties of States adopted at Monte- 
video provided: “No state has the right to inter- 
vene in the internal or external affairs of another.” 


The Act, in the second place, apparently super- 
sedes the Monroe Doctrine, our interpretation of 
which in the past aroused resentment against us in 
the southern republics. When President Monroe 
enunciated the Doctrine in 1823, it stirred the en- 
thusiastic approval of the other Americas, which 
then regarded it as an assurance of security from 
European pressure. But essentially it was a policy 


FOR VICTORY ° 





BUY UNITED STATES 


of the United States, not of the Americas, and this 
country at a later date used it as the authority for 
intervention in the disturbed affairs of our neigh. 
bors. The neighbors in time came to realize that the 
Doctrine which defended them from European pres. 
sures exposed them to United States pressures. Ip 
the Monroe Doctrine this country undertook to pro. 
tect the continents of the New World; in Chapulte. 
pec the American republics together undertake to 
safeguard them. 


PROBLEM OF SAN FRANCISCO. Yet for all 
the progress it represents in the development of this 
country’s Western Hemisphere policy, the Act of 
Chapultepec is a strangely contradictory instrument 
for a sponsor of the Dumbarton Oaks world se. 
curity program to support. It is possible that the 
American republics under Chapultepec might decide 
that a threat to hemisphere peace exists, while the 
security council of the United Nations, under the 
world organization charter to be drawn at San 
Francisco out of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals, 
would decide that it did not exist. Or, if the Ameri- 
can republics voted for action and the United Na- 
tions security council opposed action, would the 
Americas bow to the greater body’s decision? The 
problem could become acute with respect to Argen- 
tina, a country whose policies are given different in- 
terpretations in the United States and Great Britain. 
Chapter 8, Section C, of the Dumbarton Oaks pro- 
posals recognizes the desirability of regional arrange- 
ments, but paragraph 2 says “no enforcement ac 
tion should be taken under regional arrangements 
or by regional agencies without the authorization of 
the regional council.” 

The most enthusiastic advocates of the Chapulte- 
pec idea among the American republics may try at 
San Francisco to introduce into the United Nations 
Charter the philosophy of equalitarian approach to 
joint settlement of international disputes which 
Chapultepec represents. Under Chapultepec the 
small nation is equal with the large in decision- 
making, whereas Dumbarton Oaks puts decisions in 
the hands of a few. Perhaps the refusal of France 
to join in sponsorship of the San Francisco meeting 
will make it possible for small-nation objectors to 
the Dumbarton Oaks system to obtain a fruitful 
hearing for their position. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


WAR BONDS 





he. 
the 
Decou 
hold ( 
invasi 
Marck 
comm 
forces 
follow 
ous p. 

DE 
lation: 
from | 
story | 
two ¢ 
to use 
and t 
side i 
Decor 
anese 
intere 
sible 
The 
perioc 
called 
island 
Alliec 
Free | 

But 
world 
gy ch 
milita 
of th 
to bo 
eratio 
evolu 
the a 
Peace 








