FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVI, No. 17 FEBRUARY 19, 1937 





THE RISING TIDE OF ARMAMENT 
by William T. Stone and Helen Fisher 


Military expenditure today is more than three times 
as high as in 1913—and still increasing. Germany, 
Japan, Italy, and other countries are straining their fi- 
nancial resources to meet mounting armament budgets. 
How long can this trend continue without disastrous 
consequences? 


February 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 


ee 


paRjopHr At. > ' 
PENERAL Lisa 
Univ, OF # 





of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











red 


i0- 


AVE 


ter 
ion 
by 
and 
iry 
rce, 

of 
iple 
ves 


ave 
The 
ans 
hat 
eed 
ace- 
able 
ary 

the 
dis- 
)32- 
jon, 
unce 


ational 
Editor, 








MEXICAN CHURCHES 


| 


REOPENED 





: eve death on February 7 of Leonor Sanchez, 
14-year-old girl shot during a police raid on a 
clandestine mass celebrated in an Orizaba home, 
stirred Mexican Catholics to new efforts for modi- 
fication of the country’s anti-religious laws. 
Popular indignation led to mass demonstrations, 
and crowds forced open the doors of churches 
which had been closed for several years. Yield- 
ing to widespread demand and to evident pressure 





from President Cardenas, Governor Miguel 


in, | Aleman of the eastern seaboard state of Vera 


Cruz—in which Orizaba lies—agreed to revoke 
the most extreme anti-church legislation, but later 
reversed this decision. He finally declared on 
February 13 that he had advised “the Catholics of 
Orizaba to petition the Federal Government to 
turn back the churches to the care of local groups 
‘in accordance with Federal law.” Thus religious 
centers could remain open in charge of lay- 
men’s committees, although masses were still 
banned. Following events in Orizaba, Catholic 
demonstrations led to the opening of churches in 
Cérdova and other towns of the state. On Feb- 
ruary 14, in the northwestern state of Chihuahua, 
women protesting the killing of a priest paraded 
the streets of the capital and entered churches 
which had been closed for three years. 





In Mexico’s religious struggle, state legislation 
has often exceeded federal in severity and radi- 
calism. Vera Cruz has been outstanding in this 
respect. The laws of this region have prohibited 
religious ceremonies and limited the number of 
priests to one for every 100,000 persons in the 
population, although masses are regularly cele- 
brated in Mexico City and many of the states. The 
policy of the federal government under President 
Cardenas has been directed toward gradual mod- 
eration of hostility toward the church. The pres- 





' ent executive has not been as aggressive an anti- 
clerical as former President Calles. On March 5, 
1936 he stated that the primary duty of his ad- 














































ministration was to foster social and economic 
reform, and declared: “The government will not 
commit the error of previous administrations by 
considering the religious question as a problem 
preeminent to other issues involved in the na- 
tional program.” By the end of the month, 12 of 
the 27 Mexican states were reported to have per- 
mitted the reopening of churches. State laws, 
however, continued to restrict the number of 
priests allowed to officiate in the republic to 197 
— approximately one for each 80,000 nominal 
Catholics. While parochial schools were pro- 
hibited, the President announced continued sup- 
port of the program for “socialistic” education 
in government schools, whose anti-religious em- 
phasis provoked a crisis between church and state 
in 1934. The continuance of this program, to- 
gether with government control of church prop- 
erty and official limitation of the number of 
priests, led the Mexican hierarchy to declare in 
January 1936 that “a state of religious persecu- 
tion” existed in the country. 


The President's willingness to risk loss of some 
Left-wing backing by a moderation of policy on 
the church question has been interpreted as 
evidence of the increasing strength of his régime. 
In admitting Trotzky to Mexico, Cardenas also 
went counter to the wishes of his labor supporters. 
As additional proof of the security of his admin- 
istration, observers cite a sweeping amnesty de- 
cree signed on February 5 which included within 
its scope 10,000 persons charged with political 
offenses, some of which dated back as far as 1922. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


THE RIDDLE OF THE MOSCOW TRIAL 


The trial in January of seventeen Russians— 
including such well-known figures as Radek, for- 
mer editor of Izvestia; Sokolnikov, former Am- 
bassador to London; Piatakov, former Vice- 





ee a Se << 

















Commissar for Heavy Industry; and Serebrya- 
kov, former Vice-Commissar for Communications 
—has aroused widespread speculation abroad. 
This trial, which ended on February 1 with the 
execution of thirteen of the accused and the ten- 
year imprisonment of the others, was marked by 
confessions more elaborate and sensational than 
those made last August by the old-guard Bol- 
sheviks Zinoviev and Kamenev. 


Radek and Piatakov confessed that they had 
been in contact with the exiled Trotzky, whom 
Piatakov claimed to have visited in Norway in 
1935, when the revolutionary leader had allegedly 
instructed his followers in the Soviet Union to 
form an organization for overthrow of the Stalin 
government. Trotzky, they declared, had plotted 
with German and Japanese officials — notably 
Rudolf Hess, one of Hitler’s closest advisers — 
for a Fascist invasion of the Soviet Union in the 
hope that war, regarded as inevitable in 1937, 
would result in the downfall of Stalinism and the 
establishment of a Trotzky régime. For its ser- 
vices to the Trotzky cause Germany was to receive 
the Ukraine, while Japan was to acquire the 
Maritime and Amur provinces. The self-con- 
fessed plotters were to pave the way for foreign 
attack by acts of espionage, sabotage of industries 
essential for national defense, and terrorism, in- 
cluding assassination of Stalin and other govern- 
ment officials. From his asylum in Mexico Trotzky 
categorically denied all charges made in Moscow, 
and offered to produce evidence to the contrary 


at an impartial trial by a non-partisan interna- 
tional body. 


This latest in a series of Soviet political trials 
has raised innumerable questions abroad. Were 
the accused actually guilty of the treasonable 
deeds with which they were charged, and which 
they publicly confessed? If not, why did they 
present elaborate confessions which impressed 
some seasoned observers in Moscow as genuine 
and sincere? And what are the implications of 
the trial concerning the future of the Soviet gov- 
ernment? 


That the accused, many of whom belonged to 
the pre-revolutionary generation and had been 
identified with the Trotzky opposition in 1927, 
were dissatisfied with Stalin’s course in domestic 
and foreign affairs is entirely plausible. Such 
men as Radek, Piatakov and Sokolnikov—men of 
intelligence, proved ability and independent judg- 
ment—would be unable indefinitely to conceal 
their disagreement with the existing system, but 
neither could they, under a dictatorship, find an 
outlet in open criticism and legal opposition. It 


Page Two 





——— 
ee 





is not unnatural that, deprived of freedom of ex- 
pression, they should turn to underground activi- 
ties: as Radek candidly admitted, they had 
“nowhere else to go.” But did their expressions 
of dissatisfaction and their desire for a change 
in régime go beyond mere talk and wishful think- 
ing? Were they translated into action? The 
public confessions reveal that the accused ex- 
changed views, and occasional letters. Such ex- 
changes, harmless in a democracy, assume under 
a dictatorship the proportions of treasonable con- 
spiracy in the minds not only of the government, 
but of the would-be plotters. This may explain 
the elaborateness of confessions which, on close 
examination, fail to reveal important acts of ter- 
rorism or sabotage. 

Again, it is entirely credible that representa- 
tives of hostile foreign powers would utilize every 
opportunity to obtain the support of opposition 
elements in the hope of weakening the Soviet 
régime, and that malcontents, despairing of ef- 
fecting any change by legal means, might accept 
foreign assistance to achieve their ends. Where 
credibility is sadly strained is in the attempt to 
establish a connection between Trotzky, fervent 
advocate of world revolution, and Hitler’s anti- 
Semitic régime, which has taken the lead in a 
crusade against communism. Nor is it possible, 
in the absence from the Moscow trial of Trotzky, 
the chief person accused, to accept at face value 
the confessions of his alleged fellow-conspirators. 


The significance of the trial for the future of 
the Soviet government is equally difficult to de- 
termine. In presenting the new constitution to 
the Soviet Congress last December Stalin claimed 
that the country had reached a point of internal 
stabilization at which “socialist democracy” 
could be safely introduced. That this form of 
democracy spells no mercy for political opposition 
had already been clearly shown by Soviet com- 
mentators and by the Zinoviev-Kamenev trial. It 
is understandable that the Soviet government, 
which lives in daily fear of foreign attack, might 
seek to consolidate the country by expunging all 
opposition elements at a series of spectacular 
trials, hoping at the same time to enlist the sup- 
port of Western democracies for the Soviet Union 
by revealing the dangerous and far-flung charac- 





ter of Fascist intrigues. Trials such as these, 


however, are not calculated to win sympathies in | 
democratic countries, or to convince them that | 
the Soviet government, despite the socialist bill 


of rights in its new constitution, is headed away 
from dictatorship and terrorism in the direction 


of genuine democracy. VERA MICHELES DEAN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 17, Fasruary 19, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National | 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasirgs Busgit, President; EstHer G. OGpEn, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Febr: 


—= 
— 








