ll 


the 

its 
rni- 
has 
ons 
War 
ind 
10N 
inly 
We 
our 
en- 
and 


| be 
ber 
ant, 
eak 
will 
A. 
slie 
We 


ann, 


racy 
gov- 
acles 
d to 


Lip- 


satin 
bors. 
the 


ittle, 


five 
'y in 
rior 
hori- 
e by 
t ef- 
ctual 


ational 
Editor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as second 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














Vout. XVIII, No. 6 


DECEMBER 2, 1938 





PARTITION OF CZECHOSLOVAKIA 
by Paul B. Taylor 


A study of the process by which the Third Reich, after 
annexing Austria, utilized the grievances of the Sudeten 
German minority in Czechoslovakia to bring about that 
country’s dismemberment. This report deals mainly with 
events inside Czechoslovakia. 


November 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents each 

















EUROPE STRUGGLES TO CHECK GERMAN ADVANCE 





_ HE Anglo-French conversations of November 23- 

25, originally scheduled as a further step in the 
program of “appeasement,” were robbed of their sig- 
nificance by anti-Semitic measures in Germany, which 
made it difficult for Mr. Chamberlain and M. Dala- 
dier to discuss the return of German colonies. A few 
hours before the arrival of the British Ministers in 
Paris the French government, hard-pressed by a ris- 
ing wave of strikes against its economic decrees, an- 
nounced the completion of a Franco-German peace 
declaration assuring the inviolability of France's 
Western frontier. That M. Daladier was not plan- 
ning to place unreserved trust in this document was 
indicated by the fact that France and Britain agreed 
to coordinate and increase their armaments, whose 
deficiencies had been all too plainly revealed by the 
Czechoslovak crisis. The British Ministers urged ex- 
pansion of French airplane production, hampered by 
bureaucratic red-tape, reduced working hours, and 
the reluctance of industrialists to modernize their 
plants; while the French Ministers demanded crea- 
tion of an adequate British expeditionary force, with- 
out which France would face overwhelming odds in 
a war against Germany and Italy. 


At the suggestion of M. Daladier, who—unlike 
Mr. Chamberlain—has made no headway in negotia- 
tions with Italy, recognition of General Franco's bel- 
ligerent status was postponed until all foreign “‘vol- 
unteers” have been withdrawn from Spain. The 
colonial question was not even discussed, on the 
ground that the Germans—only two months before 
thought fit to govern a Czech minority of 800,000— 
had since proved unfit to govern African natives. 
This line of reasoning also affected the activities of 
Mr. Firow, Minister of Defense of the Union of 
South Africa. While rejecting any suggestion for re- 
turn of German Southwest Africa, mandated to his 
government, Mr. Pirow had seemed ready to discuss 


the possibility of offering Hitler a colonial pool con- 
sisting of parts of French and British mandates, Por- 
tuguese Angola and the Belgian Congo. Belgium— 
whose ruler, Leopold III, paid his first official visit to 
Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands on November 
21—promptly announced that it had no intention of 
ceding any part of the Congo. And Mr. Chamber- 
lain’s proposal to set aside Tanganyika, formerly a 
German colony, as a settlement for Jewish refugees, 
strengthened the impression that Britain was not 
planning to make colonial concessions. 


While Britain and France, which seem resigned to 
German hegemony east of the Rhine, were consolidat- 
ing their own defenses, the countries of Eastern Eu- 
rope made frantic efforts to reconstruct some kind of 
defense against German penetration. Following a 
series of conferences between King George of Greece, 
Prince Paul of Yugoslavia and King Carol of Ru- 
mania, whose countries are menaced by the revision- 
ist aspirations of Hungary and Bulgaria, the three 
rulers visited London in November in search of Brit- 
ish economic and diplomatic support. After what ap- 
pear to have been unsuccessful pleas for Anglo- 
French assistance, King Carol visited Hitler at 
Berchtesgaden on November 24; and on November 
28 a 10-day conference of the Balkan states opened 
at Athens under the presidency of Rumania. 


That German expansion is creating at least as 
many problems as it was thought to have solved at 
Munich is shown by the experience of Czechoslo- 
vakia, which on November 22 signed treaties with 
Germany under which the Reich obtained 106 addi- 
tional villages with a population of 60,000, returning 
27 villages to Czechoslovakia; secured the right— 
refused by Mr. Chamberlain at Munich—to build an 
extraterritorial highway through Czechoslovakia, to 
be controlled by German police and customs guards; 
and agreed, jointly with Prague, to dig an Oder- 




















Danube canal supplementing the Rhine-Main-Dan- 
ube canal now being constructed by the Reich. In re- 
turn for these concessions, Czechoslovakia received 
German support in its refusal to cede Carpatho- 
Ukraine (Ruthenia) to Hungary, which wants to es- 
tablish a common frontier with Poland. 


This refusal precipitated a Cabinet crisis in Hun- 
gary, where Premier Bela Imredy was overthrown on 
November 23 by a combination of dissidents in his 
party of National Unity, who demanded immediate 
annexation of Ruthenia; Nazis, who advocated dras- 
tic anti-Semitic and anti-capitalist measures; and con- 
servative landowners, who opposed the land reforms 
M. Imredy had introduced in September to check 
Nazi agitation among landless peasants. On Novem- 
ber 27 Regent Horthy reappointed M. Imredy as Pre- 
mier, and it was indicated that the government might 
demand a plebiscite in Ruthenia. Over-insistence on 
this point, however, might bring Hungary into con- 
flict with Germany. 


Nor is it yet clear where Hitler plans to move next 
in his drive to the east. Poland, which had tried to 
placate both Germany and the Soviet Union, has re- 
alized since Munich that its 10-year non-aggression 
pact with the Reich has not prevented the Nazis from 
agitating for the return of Danzig, expelling Polish 
Jews, or blocking the creation of a common Polish- 
Hungarian frontier. Fearing that Germany might use 
the Ukrainian minority in Poland as the entering 
wedge for the establishment of an “independent” 
state combining Polish Ukraine, Ruthenia and Soviet 
Ukraine, Warsaw made advances to the Soviet gov- 
ernment for economic collaboration, and on Novem- 
ber 26 the two countries reaffirmed their pact of non- 
aggression. The Nazis themselves appear to be di- 
vided regarding their future course, the extremists 
urging establishment of a totalitarian economy in 
collaboration with the Soviet Union, regarded as the 
logical market for German manufactured goods, 
while the Fiihrer continues to denounce communism. 
The most important fact emerging from the Munich 
aftermath is that the Nazi attack, previously directed 
against France, Russia and Czechoslovakia, de- 
nounced as obstacles to eastward expansion, is now 
being shifted toward Britain and the United States, 
which block German expansion outside of Europe. 
The German press barrage aimed at ‘British war- 
mongers” and “Yankee imperialists” indicates that 
Mr. Chamberlain’s hope of diverting the Nazi drive 
from West to East may yet be doomed to disappoint- 
ment, and that the Munich settlement may have 
merely set the stage for a conflict between Germany, 
Britain and the United States in terms not essentially 
different from those of 1914. 


VerA MICHELES DEAN 


Page Two 











F.P.A. Celebrating 20th Anniversary 


Nineteen thirty-eight marks the twentieth anni- 
versary of the Foreign Policy Association. The occasion 
will be observed by a special anniversary luncheon at 
the Hotel Astor, New York on December 10. 


At the end of twenty years of research and educa- 
tional activity devoted to informing the public of the 
significance of world events in their bearing on 
American foreign policy, the Association finds its 
membership at the highest point in its history—over 
17,000 members in forty-eight states and fifty-five 
foreign countries. 











NATIONS STUDY REFUGEE PROBLEM 


Public sentiment in the great democracies, aroused 
by continued Nazi ruthlessness toward potential refu- 
gees, has at last prodded governments and interna- 
tional relief organizations to consider concrete plans 
for assistance to émigrés. This pressure is largely re- 
sponsible for the more liberal attitude toward relief 
and resettlement of refugees revealed by Prime Min- 
ister Chamberlain in the House of Commons on No- 
vember 21. While he did not encourage hopes that 
Britain itself would appreciably let down the bars 
against immigration, the Prime Minister suggested 
that a tract of at least 10,000 square miles might be 
made available in British Guiana for resettlement 
purposes. He also intimated that about 50,000 acres 
might be turned over to refugees in Tanganyika, 
formerly German East Africa; that another small- 
scale scheme for 200 settlers was being considered 
in that area; and that projects of similarly limited 
scope were contemplated in Kenya, Northern Rho- 
desia and Nyasaland. 


On November 24 the British government went 
one step further by waiving all visa formalities for 
German refugee children between 5 and 17 years of 
age whose maintenance and training could be guar- 
anteed by private organizations. Unfortunately, how- 
ever, the British Dominions—which offer some of 
the most suitable territory available for colonization 
—have taken no significant steps toward opening 
their doors to involuntary emigrants. Like certain 
South American nations, they fear the possibility of 
additional unemployment in urban centers or the 
dilution of national homogeneity if large alien ele- 
ments are admitted. 

While the British initiative represents some pro- 
gress, it also indicates that the governments involved 
have yet to come to grips with the real difficulties in- 
herent in the existing situation. Before an unsettled 
area like the Guiana highlands can be colonized, 
communications facilities must be constructed, trop- 
ical diseases eradicated, experimental colonies estab- 
lished, agricultural possibilities determined, and im- 

(Continued on Page 4) 





or 





sed 
fu- 
na- 
ans 


lief 
[in- 
No- 
hat 
ars 
ted 
- be 
ent 
ores 
ika, 
all- 
red 
ited 
-ho- 


vent 
for 
s of 
uar- 
OW- 
> of 
tion 
ung 
tain 
y of 
the 
ele- 


pro- 
lved 
$ in- 
ttled 
ized, 
TOp- 
stab- 
| im- 





Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Nov. 29—In the current discussion of Pan-American 
solidarity, very little attention has been given to the opinions 
of Latin Americans. Yet Washington officials and members 
of the United States delegation which sailed for Lima on 
November 25 are well aware that the attitude of leading 
South American countries will play a decisive part in the 
forthcoming Pan-American Conference. The following per- 
sonal commentary, based on first-hand observations by 
Charles A. Thomson, F.P.A. research associate who is com- 
pleting a three-months’ trip through Argentina, Brazil and 
Chile on his way to Lima, affords an interesting sidelight 
on trends in these three countries. 

Argentina. What surprised me most in Argentina 
was the new attitude toward the United States. I had 
expected to find some modification in the former hos- 
tility, which made Buenos Aires a focal point for 
anti-Yankee criticism. But I was not prepared for 
the degree of cordiality which now finds expression, 
particularly among those groups where criticism was 
most vocal in the past. To those who remember the 
situation a few years ago, President Ortiz’ telegram 
to President Roosevelt, supporting the latter's appeal 
for European peace, was significant of a new state 
of mind. Even more so, in view of the traditional at- 
titude of Argentine students, was the public state- 
ment of the national University Federation, voicing 
“extraordinary sympathy” for their President's ex- 


pression of solidarity ‘“with the leader of the great de- 


mocracy to the North.” 

The Good Neighbor policy, with its shift away 
from armed intervention, has had a large part in 
shaping this new attitude. But possibly even more 
important has been the personal influence of Pres- 
ident Roosevelt. He has become as much a symbol of 
democracy for Americans of the South, as Hitler and 
Mussolini are symbols of fascism. 

It is well to note, however, that this shift toward 
the United States is still largely confined to ‘‘public 
opinion.” The new attitude is not anchored to his- 
torical tradition, to economic or political relation- 
ships. Argentina’s sentimental tie with Spain, its cul- 
tural tie with France, its economic tie with Britain, 
the bond of millions of immigrants with Italy, are 
still strong. One description of Buenos Aires puts 
it as “a city run by the English, and inhabited by 
Italians who speak Spanish.” The leaders of the pres- 
ent government are generally considered pro-Euro- 
peans, although one of its most hard-boiled members 
was reported to me as forecasting increasingly close 
relations with the United States. There is a feeling 
that, in the long run, for trade as well as for politics, 


it may be wise to give preference to New World ties 
rather than to those with a continent which seems 
headed for disaster. 

No Argentine with whom I talked, whether Right 
or Left in sympathies, believed there was any possi- 
bility that the country might go “fascist,” or that 
German and Italian penetration was a serious danger 
to Argentine unity or to its particular brand of de- 
mocracy. Nor does Argentina believe that its inde- 
pendence is threatened by fascist aggression from 
abroad. 

Brazil. While realists tend to view President Var- 
gas as a political opportunist par excellence, no 
Brazilians I talked with seriously believed that 
Vargas would—no matter what flirtations he may 
have considered in the past—attempt to carry Brazil 
away from its century-old alignment with the United 
States. In the field of trade Brazil has been willing 
to talk business with all customers. Under its new 
rearmament program, Germany won the right to pro- 
vide the bulk of supplies for the army. But geogra- 
phy, historical tradition and economics ate to be 
counted in the balance on the side of the United 
States. 

Brazilian conditions must necessarily be defined in 
Brazilian terms. The Vargas régime rests primarily 
on the support of the army and navy. It is a military 
dictatorship; but it is more than that, for it com- 
mands considerable popular support, due to Vargas’ 
virtuosity at political juggling and conciliation, and to 
his courting of the masses through social legislation 
and other means. The President's supreme political 
astuteness is accorded universal recognition. Vargas 
does not talk; no one apparently knows what is in his 
mind, or what he will do next. He does not hold 
grudges; if he needs a man, he will use him, no mat- 
ter if that man has fought against him in the past; 
but any man or party whose usefulness is ended is 
headed for the discard. 

Chile. The Popular Front victory in Chile’s Pres- 
idential elections on October 25 may lead to signi- 
ficant changes in that country’s foreign policy. With 
respect to the Spanish struggle, official sympathy may 
be expected to shift from General Franco to the Loy- 
alists. Nazi penetration is likely to meet with greater 
difficulties. President-elect Pedro Aguirre Cerda ex- 
pressed in an interview his desire to cooperate with 
President Roosevelt “in making this hemisphere a 
bulwark for democracy, setting up a barrier to the ad- 
vances of fascism.’ Thus the Chilean elections, fol- 
lowing recent back-fires against German influence in 








a ee SN A i eT 


oo SSSSSSsases—SSHSS— Page Four 


both Brazil and Argentina, may represent another 
check for the fascist powers in South America. They 
may also give impetus to anti-dictatorial tendencies in 
other countries of the continent, reinforcing particu- 
larly the trend in Argentina and Uruguay, where 
Presidents Ortiz and Baldomir respectively appear to 
be moving away gradually from the semi-dictatorial 
heritage toward re-establishment of democratic prac- 
tices and political liberty. Finally, there are some in- 
dications of a growing entente in the international 
field between Chile and Mexico. 

The Lima Conference, which opens on December 
10, may possibly witness the emergence of a bloc of 
progressive or Left-wing governments—Mexico, 
Chile, Bolivia, Ecuador and perhaps Colombia—as 
contrasted with the dictatorial and Right-wing 
régimes still strong in Peru, Brazil and most of the 
Central American and West Indian republics. 


NATIONS STUDY REFUGEE PROBLEM 

(Continued from Page 2) 
migrants trained for the work they will be required 
to perform on arrival. A League Commission investi- 
gating the practicability of settling Assyrian refugees 
in part of this territory reported in 1935 that condi- 
tions were unfavorable, that settlement would have 
to be gradual, and that not more than 1,000 families 
could be accommodated. The Tanganyika develop- 
ment will apparently be restricted to an area of only 
78 square miles—a mere token settlement—and the 
Nazis are not likely to permit Jews to leave the Reich 
to take up residence in a former German colony. 
Other African potentialities provide for colonists by 
the tens rather than the thousands. Since virtually 
all the German refugees have pursued urban occupa- 
tions, a considerable period will be required for oc- 
cupational re-training before colonization of this 
type is possible. 

Agricultural settlement schemes are thus more im- 
portant as nuclei to be utilized by future waves of 
refugees than as measures of immediate relief to in- 
voluntary emigrants. Only gradual infiltration into 
more thickly settled regions, on an individual basis, 
can meet the needs of most of those who must flee at 
once. In this field the United States—which now ad- 
mits the full legalized quota of 27,370 Germans an- 
nually—has shown the way. It remains for the thirty- 
one other members of the Intergovernmental Com- 
mittee for Political Refugees, which meets at London 
early in December, to make a similar contribution. 


The Committee must also consider how best to 
overcome the staggering financial problems raised by 

















resettlement schemes, particularly those calling for 
mass colonization. The Chamberlain government ap- 
parently believes that voluntary contributions can 
still meet the expenses involved in its development 
plans. But since the cost of land settlement may reach 
$1,000 per person, it is evident that private efforts 
cannot possibly prove adequate. Hopes that the Ger- 
man government—which proclaims its desire to be 
rid of its Jews and other dissident elements—would 
permit German Jewish property and funds to be used 
for this purpose have now virtually vanished. The 
one-billion-mark fine which must be met by the Ger- 
man Jewish community before August 15, 1939, to- 
gether with the virtual confiscation of Jewish bus- 
inesses and other sources of income, are rapidly de- 
stroying all assets of the 700,000 Jews who, accord- 
ing to German sources, still remain in the Reich. The 
German government, moreover, may choose to retain 
the Jews in ghettos as hostages for the good behavior 
of democratic governments. In any case, the only 
possibility of expediting refugee emigration may lie 
in the success of efforts to float an international loan 
under government guarantees. 


One haven does exist to which scores of thousands 
of Jews might doubtless be transferred in short order 
—Palestine. Unfortunately, however, Britain's at- 
tempt to arrange for a compromise settlement in that 
area would be prejudiced by alteration of Palestine 
immigration quotas, although it was announced on 
November 25 that “consideration” was being given 
to a Jewish Agency request that 20,000 children and 
youths up to 25 years of age be settled there imme- 
diately. Britain's efforts to end the virtual Arab re- 
bellion in Palestine advanced a step beyond mere 
forceful repression on November 9, when the gov- 
ernment published the report of the technical com- 
mission which had investigated—and found imprac- 
ticable—the partition scheme for the territory recom- 
mended by a royal commission sixteen months be- 
fore. Simultaneously, the government announced that 
it would hold discussions with representatives of the 
Palestine Arabs and the neighboring Arab states on 
the one hand, and with the Jewish Agency on the 
other, regarding future policy in Palestine. Many ob- 
servers felt that British vacillation and delay had per- 
mitted the situation to deteriorate so greatly that no 
agreement with the Arabs would be possible. The 
conversations, in any case, were not expected to start 
before the beginning of 1939, and there was no indi- 
cation of the policy Britain might follow in the event 


of their failure. Davip H. Popper 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 6, December 2, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Leste BuELL, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


a 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


— = 








FC 


— 
Vol 


20t 


- nor weimo-'"om 





