nas dealp 
Fran 
ugurated 
ichy gov. 
' govern. 
sham of 
1e brutal 
whether 
inder his 
istakably 
he Vichy 
tary rule 
zi ‘New 
‘ler must 
lation of 
he has a 
to guard | 
it. These 
German | 
ire being | 
he elimi | 
noted in | 
t reunion 
possible.” | 
| French- 
the Axis | 
Novem: 
il Charles 


- Admiral | 


——— 
——_ 


peaker in } 


he North | 
idcasts to 
firmed re- | 
Gaulle ts | 
urance of 


Admiral > 


nd is con: | 
a “‘strong 
» Darlan’s 
th Africa 
however, 
cord with 
re French 
ons at the 
the pros- 
ric Dakar. 


sLLIOTT 


NDS 


— 


Ann Arbor, 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Williag W. Bishop be 


Bich. 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vor. XXII, No. 8 


DECEMBER 11, 1942 


BEVERIDGE REPORT HEARTENS BRITISH, ALARMS NAZIS 


ig report on social security which Sir William 
Beveridge submitted to Parliament on Decem- 
ber 1, 1942 is not only a landmark in the history of 
social legislation in Britain but a significant step in 
the unfolding of British plans for the post-war 
world—a step which has already had political reper- 
cussions in Germany as well as in Britain. 

The purpose of the report is to establish a national 
minimum which will rid Britain of what Beveridge 
has called the five great evils of modern industrial 
society — poverty, squalor, ignorance, disease, and 
idleness. It can hardly be regarded as revolutionary, 
since it builds on the social reforms inaugurated by 
Lloyd George and Winston Churchill when they 
were colleagues in a Liberal Ministry before the last 
war. But, if carried into effect, it would go far to 
guarantee a life of decency and security to all people 
in Britain. It seeks to accomplish this objective by 
establishing certain basic principles: provision against 
unemployment; provision for a national health 
service for every man, woman and child; a unified 
systefa of workmen’s compensation; abolition of 
the means test for relief; provision for the expense 
of marriage, childbirth and death; and protection 
of the family by granting endowments for all chil- 
dren after the first. The scheme simplifies the whole 
administrative machinery, putting it under a Ministry 
of Social Security. It is based on the contributory 
principle—worker, employer and state each paying a 
part of the cost. The state’s share will be roughly 
half the total, or £350 million, compared with a pres- 
ent outlay of £265 million on social security. This 
appears to be within Britain’s taxable capacity. 

RESPONSE IN BRITAIN. The War Cabinet's 
decision on the report will not be known until the 
new year, but the popular reception accorded it has 
been more favorable than its supporters had antici- 
pated. It has been greeted with enthusiasm by the 
majority of British newspapers. It has already been 


approved by the Liberal party, and will undoubt- 
edly be supported with zeal by Lloyd George. Al- 
most certainly the Labor party and the Trades Union 
Congress will give it their full support, although 
they will scarcely withdraw their demands for more 
far-reaching changes. Many Conservatives, particu- 
larly the “young Tories,’ have also expressed their 
approval, in part at least because they believe the 
scheme will forestall efforts to make greater changes 
in the economic and social structure. Beyond this, it 
will answer the demand of the armed forces for safe- 
guards against mass unemployment after the war, 
and the demand of the people of Britain that some- 
thing tangible come out of the wartime aspirations 
for a better society. In a very real sense the wide- 
spread approval of this measure reflects the degree 
to which the British, after more than three years of 
war, have accepted the necessity for sweeping social 
and economic reforms. 

Opposition, however, promises to be strong—from 
the insurance companies which have hitherto handled 
industrial insarance, and from conservatives who 
fear both the additional tax burden which the scheme 
will involve and its social implications. It will be 
resisted, too, on the ground that until Britain’s post- 
war trade position is known it would be dangerous 
to assume such a heavy financial responsibility. But, 
in spite of opposition, it seems clear already that 
the Beveridge report charts broad lines of social 
change, and that the chief dispute will be about the 
speed and not the ultimate direction of that change. 

NAZI REACTION. The report has already had 
interesting repercussions outside of British circles. 
The Allied governments in London have been stirred 
to greater activity in their post-war planning. In 
Australia there has been genuine interest, but some 
criticism in official quarters that the report does not 
involve a fundamental reorganization of the eco- 
nomic system — a reorganization which the Labor 


government in Canberra apparently contemplates for 
Australia in the post-war period. 


Nazi reaction to the report is especially significant. 
More than any Allied threats, or announcements of 
Allied production, it seems to have frightened the 
Nazi propagandists who have long told the people 
of Germany and of the occupied countries that only 
Hitler's “new order” could give them economic se- 
curity, while all the democracies had to offer the 
common man was unemployment and poverty. The 
Nazis have done their best to discredit the Beveridge 
report lest it bring a renewal of faith in the demo- 
cratic way of life. 


This response on the part of the Axis should prove 
to the skeptical that plans for a brave new world 
are among the most effective weapons of political 
warfare. In this case it is the idealists, not the real- 
ists, who have alarmed the Nazis. The same reac- 
tion can be expected in Germany when the report on 
social security in the United States, which has just 
been placed on President Roosevelt's desk, is sub- 
mitted to the next session of Congress. And probably 


Page Two 


—— 


even more effective will be the announcement to the 
occupied countries of Europe of the plans now be 
ing devised by ex-Governor Lehman, Director of 
Foreign Relief and Rehabilitation. Once scheme 
such as these are actually put in operation, whethe 
in the domestic or the international field, they wilj 
prove of even greater value as bulwarks of peace jg 
the post-war period. Their realization would go far ty 
make possible the world order which Prime Ministe 
Mackenzie King of Canada described to the Pilgrim | 
Society in New York on December 2, 1942. “The | 
new order,” he said, “must be based on human | 
rights and not on the rights of property, privilege | 
and position. . . . In the state and industry, control 
should be broadly representative and not narrowly 
autocratic. In the new order, economic freedom will 
be as important as political freedom.” This is not 
call for a state-regimented collectivism but for 4 | 
self-regulated social democracy, in which individual | 
initiative could function within the bounds set by 
the common welfare. It is the best answer to Hitler's 
“new order,” and the best hope of free men. 


HowarbD P. WHIDDEN, Jr. 


CAN ALLIES RECONCILE WAR POLICIES WITH WAR AIMS? 


As the tide of battle sweeps back and forth in 
Tunisia and Russia, the peoples of the belligerent 
countries enter another of the periods in this revolu- 
tionary war when they feel impelled to rethink and 
redefine the issues at stake. Such periods are always 
welcomed by the Nazis, who continue to hope that 
in the absence of spectacular Allied victories the 
peoples of the United Nations, although fortified on 
the battlefront with new weapons, can meanwhile 
be weakened on the home front by doubts and fears 
about the future. 


REALISM VERSUS IDEALISM. Realization that 
this war is being fought in terms, so to speak, of 
double exposure—on the field of battle and in the 
realm of ideas—has permeated the consciousness of 
those who have urged that the strategy of post-war 
reconstruction should at no time be divorced from 
the strategy of winning the war. Today it becomes 
increasingly clear that the United Nations may suc- 
ceed in pooling the men, munitions and ships needed 


Is London more anxious than Washington to begin 
the work necessary to carry into effect the common 


principles of post-war reconstruction? READ— 


As Britain Sees the Post-War World 


by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


October 15 issue of ForEIGN Po.Licy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


for a military victory over the Axis powers, yet lose | 
the final round by succumbing to the very doctrines 
and practices we claim to be combating. 


Much has been said and written since the Ameti- | 
can invasion of North Africa about “realism” in | 


international affairs, and those who have questioned | 


certain policies and objectives of the United Nations 
have been dismissed as ‘‘idealists.”” Since realism and 
idealism cannot be weighed or measured like ma 
terial things, argument on this theme usually proves 
inconclusive. The issue might be clarified by glance 


ing briefly at the record of both schools of thought. } 


For example, the “realists” who refused to see, in 
the Spanish civil war, a crucial move in the Axis 
struggle for control of Europe and the world may 
be said to have idealized Hitler and Mussolini; while | 
the ‘‘idealists’” who recognized the true character of 


the Spanish conflict turned out, in that instance, to | 
have been realists—and the same would hold true of | 


those who were “realistic” and “idealistic,’’ respec- 
tively, about Japan’s expansion in China. Similarly, 
those who favored isolation for the United States 
before Pearl Harbor, believing that this county 


could live unto itself alone, regarded themselves a5 


hard-boiled realists—yet they might be described as 
idealists, since they assumed the existence of ai 
ideal world in which the United States could remaia 
a sort of permanent Shangri-La, impervious to the 
breath of time and the envy of less advanced or less 
fortunate countries. But the “idealists” who preached 
international peace, yet rejected as repugnant the 


a 
“nt to the 
now be 
rector of 

schemes 
, whether 
they will 
peace in 
go far ty 
Minister 
e Pilgrim 
42. “The 
1 humag 
privilege 
1, control 
narrowly 
dom will 


$ iS nota 
ut for 4 | 
ndividual | 
Is set by | 
> Hitler's | 
i. 
EN, JR. 


} 


} 
, yet lose | 
doctrines 


lism’” in 
iestioned | 
| Nations | 
lism and 
like ma | 
ly proves 
by glance 
thought. 
O see, if 
the Axis 
orld may 
ni; while 
acter of 
tance, to | 
d true of | 
” £espec- 
similarly, 
ed States 
countty 
selves as 
cribed as 
e of af 
d remain 
is to the 
od or less 
preached 
nant the 


e Ameti- | 


~ 


— 
—— 


possibility of ultimate resort to force in order to as- 
sure peace, were equally mistaken, since they as- 
sumed that goodwill—unsupported by good works— 
would suffice to reform an obviously imperfect world. 

TOWARD A NEW REALISM. In the perspec- 
tive of history it may appear that the failure of the 
Long Armistice was due to both realists and idealists 
—both making assumptions that disregarded the re- 
actions of human beings. It might not be amiss for 
the two schools of thought to learn a few lessons 
from a section of the world’s population which, in 
the past, has found it practically impossible to affect 
the course of world affairs, although forced to en- 
dure the ill-effects of their mismanagement—and 
that is women. 

The average woman, through force of circum- 
stances, finds it necessary to combiné realism and 
idealism. She does not assume that her loved ones 
are perfect, nor does she drive them out of the family 
circle when they reveal themselves subject to human 
frailties. She takes the good along with the bad, 
never abandoning hope of ultimate improvement 
and success for the least promising ugly duckling. 
She knows that certain practical needs must be met 
—not once a year, or once a century in spectacular 
fashion, but, most unspectacularly, every single day 
of her life—the needs for food, shelter, clothing, 
and a modicum of education and recreation. These, 
within the limits of her individual abilities, she 
strives to provide. Nor does she expect financial re- 
ward for her efforts at family tasks, such as are ex- 
pected in other occupations, accepting the sense of 
satisfaction which comes from serving those to whom 
one is attached as the only lasting value in life. 

This blend of realism and idealism, if translated 
into terms of international relations, might have 
more far-reaching and, at the same time, more 
lasting effects than the world-shattering dogmas 
which, much as they transform the conditions of 
human existence, do so at enormous cost in hu- 
man lives. If we were inspired by this spirit, we 
would realize that compromises must be made in 
international affairs, just as they are made in the 
home, the local community, the business enterprise, 
the labor union, or the nation—but that in making 
compromises we must never lose sight of the objec- 
tives for which we are striving. This spirit would 
lead us to see that no problem can be solved with- 
out raising a host of new ones—just as the opening 
of another front in Africa, so vigorously demanded 
by the people of the United Nations, has raised a 


Page Three 


host of political problems with respect to the future 
of the French nation. It would make us understand 
that final resort to authority and power is essential 
for the functioning of any group of human beings, 
whether family or international organization, and 
that what is evil is not power but the uses that are 
so often made of power. It would help us to recog- 
nize that, if the industrial and financial resources now 
being rallied by the United Nations for wartime 
needs had been applied to peacetime tasks instead 
of being misapplied, dissipated, or only partially 
utilized, the world would have witnessed an era of 
progress unrivaled in history. It would force us to 
see that no individual, and no nation, can live in 
complete isolation, much as that might be desired, 
and actually reaches the highest development and 
derives the greatest satisfaction through participation 
in community life. It would prevent us from shrink- 
ing at the first indication of self-interest or evil 
design among those individuals and nations with 
whom we are collaborating, and remind us that no 
human being and no national group can be seen in 
terms of unadulterated black or white. Above all, it 
would help us, while making adjustments necessi- 
tated by the trivial, often sordid, details of day-to- 
day living, to keep alive the ideals which have en- 
kindled men throughout history, and without which 
human existence would descend—as it has in Nazi- 
controlled Europe—below the level of animals. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


The Senate Foreign Relations Committee, by E. E. Denni- 
son. Stanford University, California, Stanford Univer- 
sity Press, 1942. $2.50 
Timely study of the history and functions of a particu- 

larly important committee. 


Strategic Materials in Hemisphere Defense, by M. S. 
Hessel, W. J. Murphy, and F. A. Hessel. New York, 
Hastings House, 1942. $2.50 
A book of facts about our war needs in raw materials, 

easier to read and more informative than most similar 

works published heretofore. 

How Many World Wars? by Maurice Léon. New York, 
Dodd Mead & Co., 1942. $2.00 
Personal reminiscences of a French American lawyer, 


dealing mostly with political questions concerning post- 
World War I. 


India and Freedom, by L. S. Amery. New York, Oxford 
University Press, 1942. $1.25 
Selected speeches on British policy in India by the Sec- 
retary of State for India during the period 1940-42. 
The War in Maps, by Francis Brown and Emil Herlin. 
New York, Oxford University Press, 1942. $1.50 


A useful and lucid collection of annotated maps covering 
every phase of the war to Autumn 1942. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 8, DecemBer 11, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Legr, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Fo 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


Dec. 7.—The debate in the United States Senate 
on legislation to aid Panama on December 3-4 had 
a significance that transcended by far the compara- 
tively unimportant contents of the measure itself, 
concerning a joint resolution authorizing the trans- 
fer of U.S.-owned lands and facilities in Panama 
to the government of that country under agreements 
negotiated by the State Department. The importance 
of the debate lies in the fact that it marked the first 
time that the “isolationists’” have lifted their heads 
since Pearl Harbor. It was the opening skirmish of 
a battle that seems inevitably fated to be fought at 
the conclusion of this war between the partisans of 
active cooperation by the United States in interna- 
tional affairs and those who would have this country 
avoid any sort of international “entanglements.” 
The fact that the joint resolution passed the Senate 
by a vote of 40 to 29 will not discourage the “iso- 
lationists.”” They count on a repetition of the war- 
weariness and the longing for ‘‘normalcy” that swept 
over the United States in 1919 to keep this country 
from assuming the international commitments the 
Administration already has in mind. 

The gist of the minority case against the Panama 
resolution was that the executive branch of the gov- 
ernment was attempting to “by-pass” the Senate’s 
function of ratifying treaties. A resolution requires 
only a simple majority to be adopted, whereas a treaty 
must have a two-thirds majority. If the Treaty of Ver- 
sailles had been presented to the Senate in the form 
of a joint resolution in 1919, the United States 
might have joined the League of Nations. What the 
“isolationist’’ Senators, in opposing the resolution, 
were really trying to block was not the turning over 
of the water and sewer systems of Panama City to 
the Panamanian government, but the entrance of the 
United States into some future League of Nations. 

FEARS OF THE ISOLATIONISTS. It is signifi- 
cant that opposition to the resolution was led by such 
arch-isolationists as Senators Hiram Johnson of 
California, himself a veteran of the historic Senate 
fight against the League in 1919, Robert Taft of 
Ohio, Gerald P. Nye of North Dakota, author of 
the neutrality legislation of 1935, and Bennett 
Champ Clark of Missouri. 

Mr. Taft in his argument warned that the Atlantic 
Charter was no more than a declaration of policy 
and was not binding on Congress, and the same was 
true, he said, of the United Nations agreement on 
the prosecution of the war. Although such instru- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


ments were not binding, the Ohioan contended that 
they were forming in the aggregate all the factors of 
a treaty and might leave the Senate, at the end ‘ 
the war, in the position of ratifying or rejecting 
peace treaty about which it had not been consulted 
The battle that is shaping up between the adyo. 
cates of international cooperation and the champions 
of ‘‘non-entanglement’” also threw its shadow this | 
week on the deliberations of the Republican National 
Committee in St. Louis. The man chosen to lead the | =~ 
Opposition party, Harrison E. Spangler of Iowa, will — 
have great influence in determining the future atti. 
tude of the G.O.P. on this vital issue of foreign pol. | 
icy. This consideration explains the opposition of } re 
Wendell Willkie to the candidacy of Werner W.} V | 
Schroeder, a Chicago lawyer, who is reputed to } 1,00 
belong to the Colonel McCormick school of iso- } shipy 
lationism. | pre-v 
POST-WAR PLANS. Meanwhile, the Adminis. pred 
tration is already laying plans for active United } Japa 
States cooperation in the post-war settlement. The | will 
signing of the Canadian-American accord on De | wea 
cember 1, pledging both countries to lower their | lack 
tariff barriers after the war; the announcement by | und 
President Roosevelt on November 24 that he had | redu 
discussed with President Carlos Arroyo del Rio of | Paci 
Ecuador, during the latter’s visit to Washington,a }  L 
plan for Pan-American economic collaboration aimed | only 
at lifting the living standards of the poorer nations | ing 
without damaging the economy of the larger repub , chu: 
lics; and the appointment of ex-Governor Lehman as | |anc 
Director of Foreign Relief—all indicate the Admin-  hov 
istration’s intention to embark on post-war interna- } tati 
tional cooperation on a big scale. tine 
President Roosevelt obviously anticipates opposi- Pac 
tion to his plans, for he told his press conference on | fro: 
November 24 that he might soon reply in a broad- | ser 
cast to the “short-sighted” critics of his rehabilita- sup 
tion schemes, pointing out that such measures were } giv 
worth doing not only from humanitarian motives | reo 
but from the point of view of our pocketbooks at. 
and for the purpose of obtaining immunity from, 
future wars. The President doubtless had in mind _ pr 
men like W. P. Witherow, retiring president of the | car 
National Association of Manufacturers, who told a | of 
War Congress sponsored by that organization in New as 
York City on December 2 that he was “‘not fighting Ch 
for a quart of milk for every Hottentot, or for a of 
TVA on the Danube, or for governmental handouts ba 
of free Utopia.” JOHN ELLIOTT we 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS ™ 


