uropean 
y. This 
ity Act, 
y reduc- 
citizens. 
natically 
rd liner 
0 Amer- 
on this 
warning 
floating 
vere be- 
recalled 


red 


ing its 
possible 
prepara- 
industry 
een the 
Depart- 
| for ab- 
ess. The 


with a 
made to 
4, when 
| to min- 
nm assets. 
1istrator, 


the | 


———————EEE——EEEE 


that the | 


ance the 
in muni- 
Neutral- 


JREEN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XVIII, No. 47 


SEPTEMBER 15, 1939 


——a 


DEFENDING AMERICA 
by Major George Fielding Eliot 


A concise, lucid and balanced account of our problem 
of national defense, written by a military expert in 
language the layman can understand. 


World Affairs Pamphlets, No. 4 
(F.P.A. membership covers this series) 


25 cents a copy 


mre! 
Entered as second- 
ODICAL Roem fo ee ee 
NERAL LIBRARY con «. ae 
UNIV. OF mic. N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, 


Mich. 


POWERS PREPARE FOR WAR OF ATTRITION 


ws tight lid of military censorship clamped 
down on the activities of the European belliger- 
ents has concealed the details of many of the mili- 
tary operations but not the broad lines of preparation 
for prolonged and arduous conflict. After ten days 
of warfare the German High Command had won 
substantial victories in Po- 


textile center. Three days later the Poles were 
making a determined stand in the suburbs of their 
capital against attacks from the northeast and the 
south. The success of the Nazis was due to the en- 
circling tactics permitted by their greater mobility, 
and to their command of the air, which was utilized 
to disorganize resistance, 


land. The German fortifi- 
cations in the West, how- 
ever, were being subjected 
to increasing pressure by 
the French. The focal 
point of hostilities had 
already begun to shift to 
the Franco-German fron- 
tier, where it was likely 
to remain as long as the 
Allies aggressively op- 


posed the invasion of Po- 


ated by the war. 


work in the past. 


‘THE Foreign Policy Association has a 
special responsibility to its members and 
to the American public in the situation cre- 


In the coming months, the Association will 
do its utmost to sift the facts. We shall avoid 
predictions and prophesies. We shall en- 
deavor to the best of our ability to weigh 
and analyze the evidence from all sides with 
the objectivity which has characterized our 


evacuation and _ retreat. 
Yet the main body of the 
Polish army appeared to 
have withdrawn to the 
east despite the severity of. 
the German attack. Its; 
capacity for future oppo-} 
sition depends on such} 
unfathomable factors as ' 
its morale, sufficient rain- 
fall to make roads and 
fields impassable for 


land. Evidence was ac- 
cumulating to support their insistence that they 
meant to continue fighting until the Hitler régime 
collapsed, although this might be a matter of years. 

“BLITZKRIEG” AGAINST THE POLES. The 
war in the east commenced early in the morning of 
September 1. Striking with the bulk of their armed 
forces at many points along the border, the Germans 
soon thrust deep into Poland with their highly 
motorized and mechanized columns. While Adolf 
Hitler personally watched its progress, his army 
pinched off and overran the Polish Corridor, with 
the exception of Gdynia. It pushed southward from 
East Prussia, and north and east from German Si- 
lesia and Bohemia into the heart of industrial 
Poland. 

By September 6, German troops had entered 
Cracow without resistance. On September 9 they 
captured Lodz, Poland’s second city and greatest 


heavy vehicles and to 
swell strategic rivers, and the willingness of Ru- 
mania and the U.S.S.R. to convey supplies to the 
troops. Until a decisive engagement is fought, large 
German forces will be tied to the eastern front. 


WAR IN THE WEST. Meanwhile, terse but 


vague French military communiqués disclosed the 
commencement of operations along the fortified 
French-German frontier. Although no attempt was 
made to launch a large-scale offensive against the 
German West Wall, French forces were said to 
have penetrated a few miles into German territory 
in the gap between the Rhine and Moselle, particu- 
larly in the Saar basin. The preliminary engagements 
impelled the Nazis to reinforce their frontier gar- 
risons and provoked a counter-attack near Luxem- 
burg. These movements, however, were mere har- 
bingers of much more extensive actions to come. 
Foreshadowing them, the arrival of the first British 


troops to take up positions in France was announced 
on September 6. While both sides refrained from 
general aerial warfare in the west, the British, on 
September 4, bombed German naval vessels near 
the North Sea entrance of the Kiel Canal and 
claimed, despite German denials, to have damaged 
a pocket battleship. Repeating the tactics of 1918, 
they also made flights over northwest Germany and 
dropped millions of propaganda leaflets addressed 
to the German people. The war on the high seas, 
too, fell into a familiar pattern, with German ship- 
ping driven to cover in neutral ports while German 
submarines sank fifteen British ships of 86,000 gross 
tons between September 3 and 12. Losses were ex- 
pected to decline as soon as a convoy system had 
been organized. 


Flushed by their successes in the east, German 
spokesmen hinted that they might consent to end 
hostilities, provided they received at least that ter- 
ritory which had belonged to Germany in 1914— 
Danzig, the Corridor, part of Posen and industrial 
Silesia. This point was stressed by Field Marshal 
Hermann Goering in a defiant speech delivered be- 
fore German munition workers in Berlin on Sep- 
tember 9, but obviously intended for the outside 
world as well. The Polish campaign, Goering de- 
clared, would be practically completed two weeks 
after its inception, while the “last cleansing” would 
be accomplished in less than four weeks. As Polish 
resistance flagged, 70 German divisions could be 
transferred to the west. Germany was far stronger 
industrially than in 1914, according to the Field 
Marshal, and could no longer be successfully block- 
aded by the British navy, thanks to the German 
four-year plan for industrial self-sufficiency, and the 
sources of supply in the U.S.S.R., Rumania and 
Yugoslavia. These optimistic claims, however, 
seemed somewhat inconsistent with the stringent 
rationing measures already adopted by the Reich. 


LONG CONFLICT IN PROSPECT. While 
Goering’s address revealed a desire to drive a wedge 
between France and Britain, the Western powers 
showed no outward sign of disunity. As if in answer 
to Nazi feelers regarding a victorious peace settle- 
ment at the expense of Poland, the British Cabinet, 
on September 9, announced that it had decided to 
base its policy on the assumption that the war would 
last three years or more. Previously, on September 3, 
Prime Minister Chamberlain had reconstructed his 
government, creating a War Cabinet of nine which 
included Winston Churchill as First Lord of the Ad- 
miralty—the post this outspoken opponent of the 
Nazis had occupied in 1914. Important new minis- 
tries were established to deal with public informa- 
tion, economic warfare and food supply, while An- 
thony Eden returned to the government as .Domin- 


Page Two 


——— 
——< 


ions Secretary. In rapid succession Britain proclaimed 
a series of measures regimenting the economic powe 
of the nation for war. The sum of £500,000,000 was | 
voted as a war credit. 

At the same time the Empire rallied to the defeng 
of the mother country. Australia and New Zealand 
declared that they were at war with Germany op 
September 3. They were joined by Canada on Sep. 
tember 10, as public pressure for formal participa. 
tion outweighed the consideration that, under the 
American neutrality act, the Dominion would no 
longer be able to strengthen its armaments by pur. 
chases from the United States. The Irish Free State 
remained neutral; and the Union of South Afric 
—where Boer nationalism and German propagand, | 
are important factors—experienced a cabinet crisis! 
before a new ministry headed by General Jan Chris. 
tiaan Smuts decided on September 5 to break of | 
diplomatic relations with Berlin. Because of stron 
minority elements in Canada and South Africa, the 
immediate assistance rendered by these Dominions | 
was expected to be strictly limited. 


France, too, has taken steps to increase its eco. 
nomic stamina in the face of hostilities. The 
Daladier government has instituted strict govern 
mental controls over most phases of financial and 
economic life. Exchange control was established on 
September 10 in order to preserve the French gold 
reserve—now twice as large as in 1914. A spec 
appropriation of 115,000,000,000 francs (about $2,-| 
565,000,000) is available for the prosecution of the| 
war. Decrees are to be promulgated to prevent 
profiteering, and income taxes will be increased to 
cut down production for purely civilian needs. 


By such measures rather than mere words, Britain | 
and France have exhibited their determination to, 
carry on the war, at least until German troops with-| 
draw from Poland. Neither ally expects a domestic | 
collapse within the Reich in the immediate future. 
Both appear to be relying heavily on their economic | 
superiority over a period of years, which is often | 
regarded as the decisive factor in the Allied victory 


of 1918. Today the belligerents have immediately | 


taken measures on the economic and propaganda 
fronts which were only adopted after several years 
of fighting in the first World War. Henceforth new 
methods must be evolved to meet new situations. 


Davip H. Popper 


NEUTRAL EUROPE AID TO REICH 


In contrast to the World War, many countries if 
Europe have so far maintained their neutrality. Dur 
ing the last conflict only the Scandinavian nations, 


Switzerland, The Netherlands and Spain refrained | . 


from participating in hostilities. Italy remained neu- 
tral until 1915, and then finally joined the Allies 


En 
“ 


———== 


roclaimed 


NiC power 
0,000 was 


1€ defense 
y Zealand 
rmany on 
a on Sep. 
participa. 
under the 
would no 
ts by pur. 
Free State 
ith Africa 
ropaganda 
inet crisis 
Jan Chris. 
break of 
of strong 
\frica, the 
Yominions 


e its eco. 
ties. The 
t govern 
incial and 
slished on 
ench gold 
A special 
about $2, 
ion of the 
D prevent 
creased to 


eds. 


1s, Britain | 
ination to 
ops with- 
| domestic 
ice future. 
economic 
1 is often 
ed victory 
mediately | 
‘opaganda | 
eral years | 
forth new 
situations. | 


POPPER 


CH 
yuntries in 


lity. Dur 
Nn nations, 
refrained 
lined neu- 
the Allies 


a 
— 


after having bargained with both sides. Today the 
circle of non-belligerents includes not only Russia, 
together with the Baltic countries, but also the en- 
tire Balkan area which in 1914 was the tinder- 
box of the continent. The Mediterranean, which was 
expected to be a major theatre of war, is still at peace. 


Undoubtedly most of the present neutrals will do 
their utmost to keep out of war. Among the Balkan 
countries attempts are being made to adjust, or at 
least adjourn, disputes for the duration of the 
struggle. Rumania and Yugoslavia have been nego- 
tiating for a non-aggression pact with Hungary 
which has always cherished revisionist ambitions at 
the expense of both these powers. Bulgaria, which 
covets the Rumanian Dobrudja as well as territorial 
access to the Aegean Sea, may be induced to sign 
a similar pledge. Yugoslavia, ruled since August 27 
by a cabinet including six Croatians, is now united 
in its determination not to take part in the war. All 
these efforts to form a bloc of Balkan neutrals have 
been strongly encouraged by Rome. 


As long as Italy remains neutral, Turkey will not 
be compelled to fulfill the terms of its alliance with 
Britain. In announcing the Anglo-Turkish agree- 
ment to Parliament on May 12 last, Prime Minister 
Chamberlain clearly stated that the two countries 
had undertaken to assist each other only “in the 
event of aggression leading to war in the Mediter- 
ranean area.” Although the Italian press applauds 
every German victory, the Fascist government has 
scrupulously refrained from any action or expression 
of opinion which would cast doubt on the perma- 
nence of its neutrality. There appears to be no rea- 
son why the most exposed member of the Rome- 
Berlin axis should open itself to attack by Britain 
and France. Mussolini's best strategy would be to 
await a favorable opportunity to offer mediation to 
the belligerents. Should Italy, however, try to serve 
Germany as a base of supplies, then the Franco- 
British navy might immediately interfere with Italian 
foreign trade. In such an event Rome might be forced 
into war. 


The neutrality of a large part of Europe is most 
encouraging to Germany, for both strategic and 
economic reasons. It is now impossible for France 
and Britain to attack the Reich in the rear through 
southeastern Europe. The neutrality of the Low 
Countries helps to protect a vulnerable spot in Ger- 
many’s defensive armor because its fortifications do 
not cover the Netherlands frontier. It would hardly 
be in the Reich’s interest to violate Dutch or Bel- 
gian neutrality and thus expose itself to counter- 


Page Three 


attack on the least protected part of its western 
boundaries. | 

The more neutrals there are on the continent, the 
more potential sources of supply remain open to 
the Reich. At present Germany can still draw on an 
area which in the first quarter of the current year 
furnished 44.7 per cent of its imports. True, the 
Reich cannot expect to maintain the peacetime vol- 
ume of trade with all these neutrals. During the 
last war Sweden was the only non-belligerent whose 
exports to Germany were consistently greater than 
in 1913. As in the World War, Britain is likely to 
take all the necessary measures to insure that neutrals 
divert no imports to Germany. Already neutral met- 
chant ships have been requested to call at British 
ports to facilitate search for contraband. Yet it will 
undoubtedly prove more difficult to control the trade 
of so many countries. The chances that supplies may 
sift through the British net are greater than in the 
last war. 

The neutrals themselves can furnish Germany 
with many products. The Reich is obviously count- 
ing on Sweden to provide much of its iron ore. Last 
year Germany covered 41 per cent of its import re- 
quirements in this country. From the five Balkan 
countries Germany obtained about 22 per cent. of 
its entire food imports in 1938, but only 12.1 per 
cent of its raw materials and semi-manufactures. 
This area is under such constant military and eco- 
nomic pressure from Germany, that it can probably 
be made to deliver even larger quantities of min- 
eral oil, bauxite, copper, timber, livestock and grain. 
It is still doubtful, however, to what extent the 
Soviet Union will supply the Reich with essential 
materials. While the surpluses available for export 
have diminished in recent years, Russia could still 
furnish Germany with considerable amounts of 
manganese, lumber, petroleum products, and grain. 


It could help to make a blockade of the Reich largely 
ineffective. 


Apparently France and Britain are not unduly 
disturbed by this prospect. They know that Germany 
will not be able to pay for any large volume of im- 
ports. They also know that the Reich’s holdings of 
gold and foreign exchange probably do not exceed 
two billion marks—an amount equal to only one- 
third of last year’s imports. While Germany 
could pay for foreign goods with machinery and 
other manufactures, its industrial plant and labor 
supply may be unequal to the task of turning out a 
vast amount of war material and a considerable 
volume of export products at one and the same time. 

JOHN C. DEWILDE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 47, SEPTEMBER 15, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DororHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MicHEe.es Dsan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Ss 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


i 
i} 
a 
Hy | 
it 
' 
{ 
i 
i 


| Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


SEPT. 11.—In appraising the steps taken by Presi- 
dent Roosevelt during the first ten days of hostilities 
in Europe, Washington observers are careful to 
distinguish between three separate but closely re- 
lated fields of action. These are: 

1. The series of proclamations and executive orders 
issued in accordance with international law and exist- 
ing domestic statutes for maintenance of American neu- 
trality and defense of American rights and interests. 

2. The consultations with Congressional leaders 
looking toward a special session of Congress. 

3. The formulation of plans in cooperation with 
other American republics for the proposed conference 
of neutrals at Panama. 

“TRADITIONAL” vs. “LEGISLATIVE” NEU- 
TRALITY. To most Washington observers a sig- 
nificant feature of the proclamations and executive 
orders issued since September 5 is the emphasis 
placed on “traditional” neutrality as something dis- 
tinct from what the President terms the “so-called” 
Neutrality Act of 1937. This distinction was heavily 
underlined by the Administration when it made 
public the first proclamation, based on international 
law and American precedent, three hours before the 
second proclamation invoking the 1937 law and 
applying the mandatory arms embargo to all bel- 
ligerents. By adhering to the rules of international 
law, Mr. Roosevelt is not only preserving full free- 


dom of action for the United States, but is also - 


holding the door open to a vigorous defense of our 
neutral rights at some future time. Moreover, by 
placing traditional neutrality before legislative 
formulas, he is building a case for Executive dis- 
cretion, and revision or repeal of the existing legis- 
lation. The state of “limited national emergency,” 
declared by the President on September 8, is inter- 
preted here as another instrument giving the Execu- 
tive large emergency powers. 

Nevertheless, in applying the Neutrality Act, the 
executive orders drafted by the State Department 
conform strictly to the letter of the law. The arms 
embargo was applied originally to Germany, Po- 
land, France, Britain, Australia, New Zealand and 
India. On September 10 the embargo was extended 
to Canada, following the Dominion’s formal dec- 
laration of a state of war with Germany. It should 
be noted, however, that the regulations issued under 
section 3, forbidding loans and credits to belliger- 
ents, takes full advantage of the discretion vested in 
the President, and exempts “ordinary commercial 


credits” and “‘short-time obligations” of a character 
customarily used in normal peace time transactions, 
In effect, this exemption makes the same distinction 
between “loans” and “credits” as the Bryan policy 
during the first years of the World War. 


SPECIAL SESSION. Before reaching his final 
decision on the call for a special session of Congress, | 
Mr. Roosevelt canvassed the legislative situation 
with both Republican and Democratic leaders and 
many rank and file members of both parties. Sev. | 
eral important factors were taken into consideration, | 
First, in the view of Administration advisers, it was | 
essential for the President to establish national unity 
and confidence in his foreign policy. Second, ni 
ministration leaders hesitated to sanction a pro | 
longed Congressional debate revealing a division in 
U.S. policy. It would have been fatal to the Presi. | 
dent’s future direction of policy to call Congres | 
into special session without the pledged support of 
Republican leaders and a definite assurance that | 
the Administration program for repeal of the arms | 
embargo could be put through without protracted 
debate. Finally, there was a desire to give the coun- | 
try a chance to react to the new situation and for | 


public opinion to crystallize. 


Not all of these doubts have been resolved. The 
consultations with Congressional leaders have ap- 
parently satisfied Mr. Roosevelt that his program 
can be accomplished, but whether it can be achieved 
without lengthy debate remains to be seen. 


NEUTRAL COOPERATION. The announce | 
ment that Sumner Welles, Undersecretary of State, 
will represent the United States at the conference of | 
21 American republics to be held in Panama late | 
this month is evidence of the great importance at- | 
tached by Washington to this meeting. The purpose | 
of the conference, suggested by Panama and five 
other republics, is to unify and harmonize cor 
tinental policy in relation to the European war. The 
program, which remains to be worked out, may not 
go so far as to propose a neutrality bloc or a com | 
mon neutrality declaration, but it will probably in- 
clude the adjustment of neutrality provisions in the 
several states to conform more nearly to a common 
standard. It is worth noting, moreover, that the re 
sponse of the State Department today is far mort 
cordial than it was to a similar suggestion for inter 
American cooperation made by several Latin Ameti-| 
can states early in the World War. 

W. T. STONE 


