York, 


ul for 


- York, 
based 
years. 

ch has 


rerman 
in the 


- York, 


of the 
in 1936 


y York, 


ition of 
er cor- 


c, Funk 


it every 


Nationa! 
N, Editor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


VoL. XVIII, No. 3 


NOVEMBER 11, 1938 


INTERNATIONAL AID TO GERMAN REFUGEES 
by David H. Popper 


What is being done to help the unfortunates who have fled 
from Germany? What can the League do to assist them? 
What are the prospects for and the cost of resettlement? 
What are the technical obstacles to emigration? Is the refu- 
gee problem a Jewish problem only? Mr. Popper answers 
these questions, surveying the problem of political refugees 
from Germany since 1933, as well as the work of the Evian 
Conference of last July. 


November 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents each 


BRITAIN PAYS MUSSOLINI’S MUNICH BILL 


| HE overwhelming vote cast by an apathetic 
House of Commons on November 2 in favor of 
the Anglo-Italian accord of April 16* marked one 
more step in Prime Minister Chamberlain’s policy of 
pacifying Europe at the expense of weak countries. 
This accord, as stated in the accompanying letter of 
Lord Perth, British Ambassador to Italy, was to go 
into effect only after settlement of the Spanish ques- 
tion, then momentarily expected to be reached as a 
result of Franco’s victory. In his November 2 speech 
to the House of Commons, Mr. Chamberlain de- 
clared that this condition had been met during the 
Munich four-power conference, when Mussolini 
“volunteered’”” the information that he intended to 
withdraw 10,000 men, “or about half of the Italian 
infantry force,” which was done in early October. 
This figure seems very low when compared with 
estimates both from Loyalist and Italian sources 
which place the number of Italian soldiers in Rebel 
Spain between 40,000 and 80,000. The British gov- 
ernment subsequently received “definite assurances” 
from I/ Duce that the remaining Italian forces of all 
categories will be withdrawn as soon as the Non- 
Intervention Committee recognizes Franco's bel- 
ligerent status; that no further Italian troops will 
be sent to Spain; and that the Italian government 
had “never for a moment entertained the idea of 
sending compensatory air forces to Spain in lieu of 
the infantry forces which have now been withdrawn’”’ 
—a promise contradicted by Loyalist reports of fresh 
troop landings on Rebel territory. In addition, Hitler 
and Mussolini informed Mr. Chamberlain “most 
definitely” at Munich that they had no territorial 
ambitions whatever in Spain. These assurances, ac- 
cording to the Prime Minister, “constitute a substan- 
tial earnest of the good intentions of the Italian 
government. 


*'*Britain Makes a Deal with Italy,"’ 
1938. 


Foreign Policy Bulletin, April 22, 


Ratification of the Anglo-Italian accord is to be 
followed by de jure British recognition of Italy's Ethi- 
opian conquest, already recognized by France on Octo- 
ber 12. Britain, it seems, will not extend unilateral 
recognition of Franco’s belligerent status, apparently 
leaving this decision to the London Non-Intervention 
Committee which, now that the Soviet Union has 
been excluded from European councils, serves as a 
mouthpiece for the Munich powers. Mr. Chamber- 
lain is thus paying, in part at least, Mussolini’s bill 
for services rendered at Munich where, according to 
the British Prime Minister, I/ Duce saved the peace 
of Europe. It may well be asked, however, whether 
Mussolini will consider ratification of the April 16 
accord sufficient compensation for his .eleventh-hour 
intervention, or demand territorial concessions in 
North Africa—for example in the French protec- 
torate of Tunis, where the doctrine of self-deter- 
mination might be made to play the same liberating 
role for 100,000 Italians that it did for 3,500,000 
Sudeten Germans. 


Meanwhile, Mr. Chamberlain considers it “per- 
fectly clear that the Spanish question is no longer a 
menace to the peace of Europe.” While this is prob- 
ably true—since, as Mr. Chamberlain said, the pow- 
ers which declined to defend Czechoslovakia would 
hardly fight on behalf of the Spanish Loyalists—war 
in Spain itself seems far from being terminated. 
Following the withdrawal of Italian infantry, whose 
presence, in any case, was more embarrassing than 
helpful for the Franco cause, the Rebels launched a 
counter-offensive on the Ebro River, gaining some 
ground, but meeting with stubborn resistance on the 
part of the Loyalists. The Barcelona government, 
increasingly isolated from the outside world, lacks 
war materials and foodstuffs. But it is better organ- 
ized, both from the military and industrial point of 
view, and less troubled by political dissension than 


at any time since the outbreak of civil war in 1936. 

Looking at the situation in the post-Munich per- 
spective, it becomes increasingly clear that Britain, 
by summoning the League of Nations in 1935 to 
apply sanctions against Italy during the Ethiopian 
war, threw Italy—which had just begun to col- 
laborate with France for the defense of Austria’s 
independence—into the arms of Germany. Benefiting 
by this split in the Stresa front, Hitler forged the 
Rome-Berlin axis, diverted Italy from Central Europe 
to the Mediterranean, and cleared the way for con- 
summation of Austro-German union, hitherto op- 
posed by Mussolini. Franco-British fear that really 
effective sanctions, such as an oil embargo, might 
provoke Italian reprisals or, conversely, destroy the 
Fascist régime, left Italy embittered against the 
Western democracies without preventing its conquest 
of Ethiopia. This conquest France and Britain are 
forced to recognize today, when they can no longer 
derive any real advantage from the policy of con- 
ciliation. The real victor in the struggle over Spain 
is neither Italy nor the Western democracies, but 
Germany. Profiting by the break-up of a coalition that 
might effectively have opposed its eastward expan- 
sion, the Third Reich has established its hegemony 
in Central Europe, and uses Italy as a decoy to keep 
France and Britain occupied in the western Medi- 


terranean. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


CZECH PARTITION COMPLETED AT VIENNA 


Hungary's occupation, between November 5 and 
10, of the Czechoslovak territory assigned to it by 
the German and Italian Foreign Ministers at Vienna 
on November 2 completes, temporarily at least, the 
partition of Czechoslovakia begun at Munich. Hun- 
gaty has gained—according to present estimates— 
nearly 4,800 square miles of territory, including 
Uzhorod, the Ruthenian capital, and practically all 
the other important cities of southern Slovakia and 
Ruthenia except Bratislava and Nitra. Estimates of 
the ceded population vary from 860,000 to 1,065,000, 
including from 140,000 to 400,000 Slovaks and 
Ruthenians. 


While the Vienna award did not fully satisfy the 
desires of Hungary and Poland, backed by Italy, for 
complete partition of Ruthenia, it struck a blow at 
the communications, economic resources, and politi- 
cal life of Slovakia and Ruthenia from which these 
regions, now autonomous parts of Czechoslovakia, 
can recover only with great difficulty. By severing the 
railway line east to Rumania, and cutting Bratislava’s 
rail connections with the rest of Slovakia, the Vienna 
award practically completes the ruin of Czechoslo- 
vakia’s national railway system. Loss of the fertile 
agricultural land in the south leaves chiefly poor 
mountainous districts, especially in Ruthenia, which 


Page Two 


may prove a drain on the Prague treasury. Loss of 
the Ruthenian capital and other important cities dis- 
rupts the political organization of the whole eastern 
part of the country. The danger is increased by Hun- 
gary’s dissatisfaction with its territorial gains, the 
continued activity of Hungarian and Polish irregu- 
lars in Ruthenian territory, and the situation revealed 
by Prague’s removal and arrest of Andrew Brody, 
first Premier of autonomous Ruthenia, on the charge 
of high treason. 


Poland’s territorial claims were settled on Novem- 
ber 1 by a Czech-Polish agreement providing for 
the cession—according to preliminary estimates—of 
a little over 400 square miles of territory. The ceded 
lands include the districts around Teschen, which 
had been occupied by Poland before October 10, and 
two small additional areas in Slovakia. The first of 
these new sections, a frontier strip adjoining Teschen, 
contains a railway running into Poland and connect- 
ing at Skalice with the main line east from Bohumin 
to Budapest, whose Bohumin terminus Poland had 
already obtained by its occupation of the Teschen 
area. The second is a district around Javorina where, 
after a dispute, the boundary was delimited by agree- 


ment in 1924. Poland recently re-opened the question | 


and has received at least part of its earlier demands. 
According to the Czechoslovak census figures of 1930, 
Czechs and Slovaks form a majority in all three of 
these ceded areas. 

Taken as a whole, the partition of Czechoslovakia 
—which has cost it a third of its population and 
nearly a third of its territory—is another one-sided 
application of the principle of “self-determination” 
in Central Europe. Czechoslovakia’s new frontiers 
with Hungary, Germany, and to a certain extent with 
Poland, were drawn according to the Austrian and 
Hungarian censuses of 1910. The countries which 
benefit by this scheme contend that Czechoslovakia, 
since 1918, had denationalized its minority popula- 
tions and conducted censuses unfairly. Much neutral 
opinion, however, supports the Czech answer that 
the use of the 1910 census tips the scales even more 
unequally in favor of Hungary and Germany. In 
Slovakia and Ruthenia, an intensive “Magyariza- 
tion” campaign had by 1910 left the inhabitants com- 
paratively little feeling of nationality, while in Bo- 
hemia and Moravia-Silesia the long dominance of 
the Germans discouraged Czechs from asserting their 
nationality. The methods used in the Hungarian 
census and, to a lesser extent, in the Austrian census, 
tended to minimize the minority population figures 
more seriously than post-war Czech methods. While 
reducing the total minority populations in what was 
Czechoslovak territory, the new frontiers transfer 
large Czechoslovak minorities to Hungary, Germany 

(Continued on Page 4) 


oss of 
es dis- 
astern 
’ Hun- 
s, the 
rregu- 
vealed 
Brody, 
charge 


lovem- 
ig for 
es—of 
ceded 
which 
0, and 
irst of 
‘schen, 
ynnect- 
humin 
id had 
eschen 
where, 
agree- 
lestion 
mands, 
F 1930, 
ree of 


ovakia 
mn and 
e-sided 
lation” 
ontiers 
nt with 
an and 
which 
ovakia, 
opula- 
neutral 
er that 
mn more 
iny. In 
yyariza- 
ts com- 
in Bo- 
ince of 
ig their 
ngarian 
census, 
figures 
While 
lat was 
transfer 
ermany 


W. ashington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 7—"“Rearmament’”’ is rapidly becoming a 
major preoccupation of the Administration. Al- 
though it will be at least eight weeks before the new 
national defense program is ready for submission to 
Congress, Washington is already buzzing with re- 
ports and rumors about a score of rearmament 
schemes now under active consideration. Many of 
the published rumors are doubtless exaggerated, and 
the more sensational schemes are certain to be modi- 
fied before they emerge from the Bureau of the 
Budget. Nevertheless, the defense survey has pro- 
gressed far enough to indicate that the final program 
will not only be a primary factor in shaping our 
foreign policy, but will have a profound effect on 
domestic policy and on our national economy as well. 

The most striking feature of the program, in its 
present tentative form, is the emphasis placed on 
long-term industrial projects. By contrast, the direct 
increases proposed for the Army and Navy seem 
small and almost insignificant. The only direct de- 
fense appropriation mentioned by Mr. Roosevelt him- 
self is an increase of $150,000,000 for the Navy, to 
be used for continuing the shipbuilding program. 
And as the Navy Department will shortly complete 
the contracts for building three new capital ships, in 
addition to three already under construction, it will 
not have the facilities for laying down any more 
heavy battleships. Airplane production will undoubt- 
edly be stepped up, and new authorizations asked of 
Congress. But far more ambitious than any of these 
military and naval plans are the projects which fall 
under the head of industrial preparations. These in- 
clude, among others, the following projects: 

1. The gearing of industry into the War Department's 
plan for industrial mobilization. This will involve imme- 
diate expansion of “‘educational orders” to several thousand 
factories for production of specialized war materials. The 
nominal appropriation made by the last Congress will be 
increased substantially. 

2. Development of privately owned public utility op- 
erating companies, with the aid of federal funds, to assure 
adequate power supply to some fifteen industrial centers. 


3. Federal aid to railroads for the purpose of increasing 
modern rolling stock and improving and extending road- 
beds. Settlement of the recent wage dispute, in which the 
companies agreed not to reduce wages, was presumably 
a condition of government assistance under the railroad 
“defense” project. 


4. Stimulating domestic production of “‘strategic and 
critical” raw materials, or purchase abroad, to provide re- 
serve stocks to meet the needs of a war emergency. The 


Bureau of Mines has been authorized to determine the 
possibilities of producing these “deficiency metals,” such as 
manganese, tungsten, chromite, bauxite and vanadium, 
from low-grade domestic ores, and wherever possible to 
promote their production for peace-time uses. In the case 
of certain key minerals available only abroad, Congress 
will be asked to appropriate funds to build up large reserve 


stocks in this country. 

The immediate effect of this phase of the defense 
program on our domestic economic situation is un- 
doubtedly one reason for the enthusiasm shown in 
certain political quarters, including some of the more 
ardent New Dealers. To the War Department, the 
expansion of educational orders is nothing more than 
the realization of a primary sector of the industrial 
mobilization plan on which the Army has been work- 
ing for more than fifteen years. But to some of the 
Administration economists, industrial defense ex- 
penditures promise to be a more effective—and far 
more attractive—method of pump priming than pub- 
lic works. This kind of armament spending, it is 
pointed out, will go largely into the capital goods 
industries which have been lagging for so many 
months. They will stimulate production of steel, 
machine tools, rolling mills and railroad equipment, 
and hence hasten recovery. Moreover, they will not 
meet with the opposition which has so hampered 
other forms of government spending. 


This argument is appealing, and is apparently 
making considerable headway. When it was used a 
year ago, just before the naval expansion program 
was sent to Congress, it was vetoed by several de- 
partment heads who looked with disfavor on using 
national defense as a means to recovery. But in the 
weeks since Munich there has been a note of slight 
hysteria in much of the rearmament talk, and in the 
present atmosphere many ill-considered projects are 
finding their way into the rearmament program. 

On the other hand, there is evidence that a few 
responsible officials are beginning to be concerned by 
the possible economic consequences of a ‘vast re- 
armament program. They are pointing out that while 
other countries, particularly the Fascist states, have 
managed to increase productivity by diverting capital 
and savings into unproductive state enterprises, they 
have been forced into a closed economy and have not 
avoided the pitfalls of continued deficit financing. 
If we intend to make the Western Hemisphere “safe 
from any threat of attack,” as Under-Secretary 
Welles suggested on November 6, we may be com- 
pelled to adopt the policy of limited, or regional, 


————————————————________ 978 


autarchy. But this does not necessarily mean that we 
must plunge into a war economy geared to the in- 
dustrial mobilization plan. In fact, as several mili- 
tary experts are pointing out, the industrial mobiliza- 
tion plan, with its regimented economy, is only nec- 
essary if we are preparing to raise a mass army for 
service overseas. 


One finds greater realism in the Navy Department 
than almost anywhere else in Washington. Continen- 
tal defense is primarily a naval problem. If the Navy 
is asked to defend the Western Hemisphere, it be- 
lieves that it is capable of performing this task even 
if British sea power should decline and Germany 
should secure a base in Western Africa. But if the 
Navy is asked to operate simultaneously in the Far 
East to uphold the Open Door, then it confronts a 
vastly different problem. Hence, before we launch 
the new rearmament program, the Navy would like 
to have a clear-cut definition of just what policies we 


desire to support. W. T. STONE 


CZECH PARTITION COMPLETED AT VIENNA 
(Continued from Page 2) 
and Poland—according to Prague’s claims, 400,000 
to Hungary, over 120,000 to Poland, and 750,000 to 
Germany. These countries, however, estimate their 
new minorities at a much lower figure. 


The Vienna award brings into sharp relief the 
extent of German control over Southeastern Eu- 
rope foreshadowed by the Munich accord. Al- 
though that accord envisaged a Four-Power settle- 
ment of the Polish and Hungarian demands, Poland 
enforced its claims alone and Hungary, after ap- 
pealing to the four powers, received judgment from 
Germany and Italy. While Mussolini obtained more 
territory for Hungary than had been expected, the 


main lines of the decision conformed to Germany's 
wishes. As Germans discussed ambitious canal and 
railway building projects in Czechoslovakia, Prime 
Minister Chamberlain on November 1 admitted Ger- 
many’s predominance in the Danubian area. In the 
post-war years, the Western powers and the Little 
Entente failed to modify the Central European settle- 
ment of 1919 either through territorial revision or 
through acceptance of any of the plans for interna- 
tional economic federation proposed by Danubian 
statesmen. Now the pendulum has swung to the op- 
posite extreme, and Germany is imposing its own 
national solution in Danubian Europe and beyond. 


PAUL B. TAYLOR 


BEQUEST TO THE F.P.A. 

The members of the Board of Directors of the 
Foreign Policy Association wish to express their sin- 
cere regret at the death of Mr. Henry G. Barbey, who 
was long a devoted member. This is a loss suffered 
not only by the Association, but by all persons of lib- 
eral thought. Mr. Barbey’s keen sense of justice and 
duty made him an understanding friend to many 
causes working to bring about better world condi- 
tions. 

Through this Minute the Board desires to record 
its deep appreciation of the generous bequest which 
Mr. Barbey so thoughtfully made to the Foreign 
Policy Association. 


ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION POSTPONED 

Since the speakers whom we had hoped to have 
for our Twentieth Anniversary Celebration have been 
unavoidably detained in Europe, this meeting has 
been postponed. The exact date of our Celebration, 
however, will be announced definitely within the next 
two weeks. 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Pius XI, Apostle of Peace, by Lillian Browne-Olf. New 
York, Macmillan, 1938. $2.50 


Pope Pius XI and World Peace, by Lord Clonmore. New 
York, E. P. Dutton and Company, 1938. $3.00 


Pope Pius XI and World Affairs, by William Teeling. New 
York, Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1937. $2.50 


All three of these biographies of the pontiff concentrate 
on his international policies. Mr. Teeling is critical of the 
Vatican’s attitude toward the Ethiopian and Spanish wars 
and toward the Fascist-Communist struggle in general. 
Lord Clonmore’s brisk and somewhat intemperate defense 
covers more territory and is better documented, while 
that of Mrs. Browne-Olf describes events more from the 
personal and religious side. 


Proletarian Journey, by Fred E. Beal. New York, Hill- 


man-Curl, 1937. $2.75 


Fred Beal, whose participation in the Gastonia strike 
once made the headlines, sought refuge in Russia while 
out of prison on bail. He returned embittered by his ex- 
perience with a “dogma more soulless than any peniten- 
tiary,” and now regards himself as “a fugitive from two 
worlds.” 


Colonial Population, by Robert R. Kuczynski. New York, 
Oxford, 1937. $1.75 


Statistical data on colonial populations throughout the 
world. Published under the auspices of the Royal Institute 
of International Affairs. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 3, NovemBer 11, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND Lestig BugELt, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Eéditor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


EB 181 


Two Dollars a Year. 


Nor 


