me 
ner 

to 
san 
the 
ion 
nce 
les’ 
ne] 

of 
ted 
ted 


edo 
igh 
the 
vho 


ork, 


the 
ner- 
var. 


Yale 


nese 
the 


New 


fers 
hods 


‘ork, 


con- 


tional 
itor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVI, No. 11 


JANUARY 8, 1937 





F. P. A. MEETINGS 


How Can China Achieve Unity? 
Russia Looks East and West 


January 9 New York 

9 Philadelphia 
9 Cincinnati 

12 Albany 

14 Worcester 

16 Hartford 

16 Springfield 

16 Providence 


What is Back of the Spanish Conflict? 
British Policy and the World Crisis 


Significance of the Anti-Communist Pact 


Britain and the U. 8S. A. Do? 


19 Utica War in Spain 


Death and Rebirth of the League of Nations 


Communism and Fascism—What Are They? 


Wanted—Monetary Stabilization: What Can 





2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879, 











Dr. William W. Bishop 
% University of Wichigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











NAVAL 


INCIDENTS AGGRAVATE SPANISH CRISIS 





HE Anglo-Italian Mediterranean accord, 
signed in Rome on January 2, has confused 
rather than clarified the European situation, dis- 
turbed during the holiday period by guerrilla 
warfare between German and Spanish Loyalist 
ships. In this accord Britain and Italy, which as 
late as last summer were at swords’ points about 
Ethiopia, recognize that “the freedom of entry to, 
exit from and transit through the Mediterranean 
is a vital interest both to the different parts of the 
British Empire and to Italy and that these inter- 
ests are in no way inconsistent with each other.” 
This declaration merely restores the situation 
as it existed before the Ethiopian crisis and in- 
troduces no new elements into Anglo-Italian rela- 
tions. More important in its direct bearing on 
the Spanish crisis is the statement in which the 
two countries “disclaim any desire to modify, or, 
so far as they are concerned, to see modified, the 
status quo as regards national sovereignty of ter- 
ritory in the Mediterranean area’—a statement 
amplified by notes annexed to the accord in which 
the Italian Foreign Minister, Count Ciano, con- 
firms the British government’s assumption that, 
so far as Italy is concerned, “the integrity of 
present territories of Spain shall in all circum- 
stances remain intact and unmodified.” This ex- 
change of pledges—interpreted as a warning to 
both Germany and the Soviet Union—presumably 
bars Italian occupation of the Balearic Islands, 
as well as a division of Spanish spoils between 
Italy and Germany. At the same time, it might 
obligate Britain to prevent the establishment in 
Spain of a separate Socialist or Communist state, 
such as appears to be emerging in Catalonia. 

It is generally believed that the published Medi- 
terranean accord is accompanied by an under- 
standing that Great Britain—which during Christ- 
mas week replaced its legation at Addis Ababa by 
a consulate — will eventually recognize Italy’s 
conquest of Ethiopia, press for ejection of Haile 


Selassie’s representatives from the League As- 
sembly, and sponsor the grant of loans and credits 
for the development of the new Italian colony. 
Mussolini, who has been particularly eager to 
secure British acknowledgment of his Ethiopian 
triumph, appears to have obtained tangible ad- 
vantages from the Mediterranean accord, merely 
surrendering potential claims to Spanish territory 
which, if pressed, might have brought Italy into 
direct conflict with Britain. Nor is it clear 
whether Britain has secured commensurate bene- 
fits from Italy, which has cleverly used its Octo- 
ber 25 accord with Hitler to extract successive 
concessions from France and Britain. The fact 
that Italy has subscribed to the Mediterranean 
agreement does not mean that it is ready to jetti- 
son its outwardly good relations with Germany, 
or to join a new Stresa front to block German 
aggression. On the contrary, Mussolini seems to 
be engaged in his favorite game of playing both 
ends against the middle: the landing of Italian 
troops at Cadiz, in Rebel territory, was reported 
on January 4, and Count Ciano has been in close 
consultation with the German Ambassador in Rome 
regarding the reply of the two Fascist powers to 
the Franco-British appeal to prevent “volunteer” 
departures for Spain. 


This appeal was delivered by the French and 
British Ambassadors in Berlin, Rome, Lisbon and 
Moscow on December 27, a Sunday, in the form 
of separate but similar notes. The Soviet govern- 
ment, on December 30, declared its readiness to 
comply with the Franco-British request, provided 
effective action was taken by other powers. Italy 
pointed out that it had urged prohibition of volun- 
teers as early as August, and that suspension of 
volunteer enlistments at this time would consti- 
tute intervention in favor of the Loyalists. The 
Hitler government, which like that of Mussolini 
had demanded a ban on volunteers last summer, 
is faced with the choice of withdrawing from 








DE Se Pe at 








Spain German soldiers said to number between 
15,000 and 20,000, or tripling this force, as recom- 
mended by General Wilhelm Faupel, German 
envoy accredited to General Franco. 

The uncertainty of Germany’s attitude toward 
Spain was not dispelled by the series of naval 
incidents which have occurred during the past ten 
days. On December 24 the German freighter Palos, 
allegedly carrying war material and Spanish Rebel 
agents from Hamburg to insurgent territory, was 
seized by Spanish Loyalists and taken to Bilbao, a 
port under the jurisdiction of the Basque autono- 
mous government. In announcing this incident 
which, according to the Nazis, occurred on 
the high seas, the German communiqué hinted 
at reprisals, expressing the hope that “the 
Red rulers will agree to release the steamship 
with its cargo untouched and its three passengers 
aboard, before these measures are carried out.” 
Three days later, following a visit of the German 
cruiser Koenigsberg to Bilbao, the Basque authori- 
ties released the Palos, but detained a portion of 
the cargo, said to consist of field telephones, and 
a Spanish citizen found on board. On Decem- 
ber 20 the Koenigsberg, re-enforced by the cruiser 
Karlsruhe, pressed for surrender of cargo and 
passenger, indicating that, in case of non-compli- 
ance with this demand, German ships would estab- 
lish a blockade of Bilbao against Spanish vessels. 
On New Year’s Day German vessels halted two 
Spanish Loyalist ships—the Aragon, off the north 
coast of Spain, which was seized, and the Soton, off 
the south coast, which was forced to run aground. 
Two days later the Koenigsberg seized the Span- 
ish freighter Marta Junquera. On January 5 Ger- 
many threatened to take further measures unless 
the Palos cargo and passenger were surrendered 
by January 8. The significance of these incidents 
depends on whether Hitler has decided to give 
Franco unreserved support, as one step in his 
crusade against communism or, like Mussolini, in- 
tends to use the threat of war to extract from 
Britain political and economic concessions he is 
not yet ready to demand at the point of a gun. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


THE END OF NAVAL LIMITATION 

The ceremonial hammers which drove the first 
rivets into the keelplates of Britain’s two new 
35,000-ton battleships, the King George V and 
the Prince of Wales, on New Year’s Day also drove 
the last nails into the coffin of the system of treaty 
limitation which has regulated the world’s navies 
for the past fifteen years. The Washington treaty 
of 1922 and the London treaty of 1930 both ex- 
pired at midnight December 31. The London 


Page Two 











_—, 
—— 


treaty of 1936, which limits the size of individual] 
ships but not the total number which may be built, 
has been ratified by only one power, the United 
States, and so is not yet in force. British nego. 
tiations for the adherence of other naval powers 
have thus far proved fruitless. If the treaty does 
become binding, its chief claim to effectiveness ag 
a preventive of naval competition will be the 
elimination of secrecy among its signatories, who 
will be bound to give each other full advance in- 
formation on all construction. Its provisions for 
qualitative limitation will operate only as long as 
non-signatory powers—among them Japan, Italy 
and Germany—are sufficiently awed by its numer- 
ous escape clauses to keep their own new ships 
within treaty limits. 

The last days of the naval treaties were marked 
by a rush to save warships due to be scrapped 
under their terms. Britain twice invoked the 
London treaty’s escalator clause, saving 40,000 
tons of destroyers and five light cruisers. Four 
heavy cruisers were also rescued by conversion to 
6-inch guns. The United States could thus retain 
59,000 tons of destroyers, and Japan has kept 
practically all its excess tonnage in all categories. 
What few ships remain to be scrapped by the 
three powers are hardly fit for active service. 

Britain’s two new battleships are symbolic of 
the naval race, now accentuated by the passing of 
the limitation treaties. Six 35,000-ton vessels are 
under construction, and at least six more will be 
laid down during 1937, including two in the 
United States. Hundreds of smaller vessels are! 
already on the ways or appropriated for, and 
several powers are carrying through extensive 
modernization of older ships as well. Plans for 
future building are even more ambitious. | 

Perhaps more important than the new arma- 
ments race is the fact that the expiring Washing-| 
ton treaty contained the famous Article 19, which: 
forbade new fortifications in the Pacific area. 
Britain’s informal suggestion that the Article be 
retained met with objections on the part of the 
United States, which contended that any new ar- 
rangement must, like the original Article, form 
part of a general Pacific settlement. Japan, too, 
has been cold-shouldered by the American State 
Department for suggesting a bilateral agreement. 
In the meantime the Pacific powers, mutually 
suspicious, are busily surveying possible new 
fortification sites. Japan has already been 
alarmed by the recent American plan to improve 
the harbors of Pan-American Airways bases in 
the Pacific—work which is of no more military 
significance than Japanese port construction in 
the mandated islands. HELEN FISHER 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 11, January 8, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasitz Busi, President; Estusrn G. Open, Secretary; Vera MicHEies Dean, Béitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


FC 


An | 


——— 
VOL. 
— 


Janu 


| 








