







for 
Sur- 


lity, 


» all 
any 
Was 


self 
War 


ner- 


ver 


ind 


es. 


onal 
itor. 














An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 














Tou. XVIII, No. 46 


SEPTEMBER 8, 1939 





For a better understanding of the background 
of the European war, read: 


GERMANY’S EXPANSION IN EASTERN EUROPE 
BCONOMIC MOBILIZATION OF GREAT BRITAIN 
FUROPE’S DIPLOMATIC TUG OF WAR 
AMERICAN DEFENSE POLICIES 

THE NEUTRALITY ACT OF 1937 


ECONOMIC PROBLEMS OF U.S. NEUTRALITY IN WARTIME 


SPECIAL OFFER—4 Foreign Policy Reports for $1.00 


BIC DICAL ROOM N. Y., under the act 
BRAL LIBRARY of March 3, 1879. 
Vv. OF MICH. 
General L 








—_ 





—_ 


EUROPE PLUNGES 


INTO WAR 





— 


ESPITE neutral offers of mediation and per- 
sistent Franco-British efforts to bring about 
direct negotiations between Berlin and Warsaw, war 


- | broke out in Europe at 11 o'clock on Sunday morn- 


ing, September 3. It came after Britain, France and 
Poland had refused to accept “another Munich” 
dictated by Hitler, and after the German Fuehrer 
had ordered the invasion of Polish territory early on 
September 1. That evening the French and British 


'had warned Berlin that they would immediately 


fulfill the obligations of their alliance with Warsaw 
unless Germany assured them that aggressive acts 
against Poland would be suspended and the Ger- 
man forces promptly withdrawn. Attempts in Berlin 
to delay a reply to this warning were finally coun- 
tered at 9 o'clock Sunday morning by the delivery 
of a British ultimatum declaring that a state of war 
would exist if the required assurances were not 
forthcoming within two hours. Germany refused to 
heed this threat, as well as a subsequent French 
ultimatum couched in similar terms. 

BRITISH STAND FIRM. In Britain and France 
this dénouement of another European crisis came 
almost as a relief to the war of nerves to which they 
had been periodically subjected during recent years. 
It followed prolonged negotiations in the course of 


_ which each side declined to retreat from the position 





ithad once taken. In sharp contrast to their policies 
during last year’s Czech crisis, the British and French 
steadfastly resisted all temptations to put pressure 
on Warsaw to accept Germany's demands. In every 
note sent to Berlin they insisted that a settlement 
could be achieved only if the Reich and Poland 
would negotiate directly with each other on a basis 
of complete equality. Such was the general tenor of 
the British communication flown back to Berlin on 
August 28 by the British Ambassador, Sir Nevile 
Henderson. It specified that the direct negotiations 


safeguard Poland’s “essential interests” and that the 
resulting solution be susceptible of an international 
guarantee. Poland had already indicated its willing- 
ness to negotiate on such a basis. Berlin was warned, 
however, that the British government could not 
“acquiesce in a settlement which put in jeopardy the 
independence of a state to whom they have given 
their guarantee.” In addition, the note promised 
Hitler that Britain would discuss his proposals to 
arrive at a lasting Anglo-German understanding 
once the Polish issue was peacefully composed. 

From this point of view Britain never deviated. 
Confronted on August 29 with a virtual German 
ultimatum that Poland send an emissary with full 
powers to Berlin by midnight the following day, the 
British government instructed its Ambassador, very 
early on August 30, to inform the Wilhelmstrasse 
that it could not produce a Polish plenipotentiary 
within that time. In a reply handed to Foreign Min- 
ister von Ribbentrop at midnight that same day, 
London again considered it “impracticable to estab- 
lish contact so early as today.” By that time, how- 
ever, Berlin had already resolved to act. British pleas 
that both sides agree to abstain from all aggressive 
action and arrange some temporary modus vivendi 
regarding Danzig fell on deaf ears. 


HITLER DECLINES TO ABATE DEMANDS. 
Germany’s failure to act sooner was wrongly inter- 
preted in many European capitals as a sign of el 
tancy and weakness. Although anxious enough # 
achieve his objective without war, Hitler proved 
unwilling to abate his demands by one jot. He tried 
hard to disinterest France and Britain in the Polish 
conflict, but was determined at all costs not to be 
thwarted by British or French interference. On Au- 
gust 25 the Fuehrer assured Sir Nevile Henderson 
that he was ready to make a fundamental, long-term 
settlement with Britain. He would guarantee the 














a 





= Page Two 





British Empire and even conclude an alliance with it 
provided his limited colonial demands were satis- 
fied. In addition, he would renounce all frontier 
modification in Western Europe. In vain the German 
Chancellor sought to beguile France with similar 
assurances. At the same time he kept reiterating that 
the Danzig and Corridor questions “must be solved” 
and that the Reich could no longer tolerate the 
“Macedonian conditions” on its eastern borders, as 
well as the “barbaric” maltreatment of the German 
minority in Poland. 


Meanwhile the exact nature and extent of Ger- 
many’s demands on Poland had remained unknown. 
It was not until 9 o’clock on the evening of Au- 
gust 31 that the Germans suddenly broadcast the 
terms which they had ostensibly been ready to offer 
the Poles. In brief, they provided for the immediate 
return of the Free City of Danzig to the Reich, and 
for the retention of the Polish port of Gdynia by 
Poland. The remainder of the Corridor was to be 
turned over to an international commission which, 
at the end of one year, would hold a plebiscite 
among all those who resided in this territory in 
January 1918, or who were born there before that 
date. If the Corridor went to the Reich, Poland was 
to have a narrow corridor leading to Gdynia. In 
case the Corridor were retained by Poland, Germany 
was to be granted similar extraterritorial communi- 
cations with its province of East Prussia. 


While these German proposals seemed compara- 
tively generous, they were obviously published at 
the last moment only to win sympathy for the Reich 
both at home and abroad. They appear never to 
have been submitted officially either to the British 
or to the Poles. Foreign Minister von Ribbentrop 
read them hurriedly in German to Sir Nevile Hen- 
derson in their midnight interview on August 30, 
but refused to hand him the text on the ground 
that it was already too late. The Warsaw govern- 
ment learned of the proposals only after they were 
broadcast. When the Polish Ambassador attempted 
to obtain an interview with von Ribbentrop on the 
following day, he was put off until evening. Even 
then the German Foreign Office refused to deal 
with him because he had no power either to reject 
or accept the German proposals. Clearly the Ger- 
mans had no intention to engage in any real nego- 
tiations. They insisted that the Poles accept their 
settlement without further question. When Warsaw 
resisted and ordered practically complete mobiliza- 
tion on August 31, the Hitler government decided 
to act without delay. 


MOSCOW ENCOURAGES HITLER. The Fzehr- 
er’s decision to flout Britain and France was moti- 


vated at least in part by his belief that Germany 
would not have to fight a war on two fronts. The 











non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union assure 
him that Germany could mobilize its entire arme 
strength in the West once Poland had been oyg, 
run. Any expectation that a last-minute hitch woyi 
mar the new friendship between Berlin and Mosc 
was dissipated on August 31 when the Suprepy 
Soviet or Parliament consented unanimously to taj. 
fication of the agreement with Germany. Premig 
Molotov utilized the occasion to deliver a scathiny 
attack on France and Britain. Both these powers, }y 
alleged, had supported Warsaw in its refusal “to 4 
low the Soviet Union to send troops through Polanj 
to defend her against aggression.” The Franco-Britis, 
offer to protect Russia against attack had been "y) 
hedged about with clauses and peradventures 4s jy| 
suggest that in case of need their aid would pro’ 
fictitious, leaving the Soviet Union without effectiy, 
assistance.” Yet the Soviet spokesman failed to shoy 
how these suspicions, even if well-founded, justified 
a sudden rapprochement with Germany which coul 
only encourage Hitler to attack Poland. 


The neutrality of the Soviet Union may have ma 
it easier for Hitler to dispense with Italian assistance 
At any rate, when the Fuehrer went before the Ger. 
man Reichstag on September 1, he declared I/ Dum 
had been informed that Italian military aid would 
be unnecessary. That same afternoon the Cound 
of Ministers in Rome announced that Italy woul 
“take no initiative whatever toward military opera 
tions.” It seems unlikely that Germany's acquiescence 
in this decision was at all forced. Both countries 
probably realized that under existing circumstance) 
Italy's participation in war might be a liability. As 
an armed, but uncertain neutral, Italy could diver 
at least part of the Franco-British forces from 
Germany, and might find it possible to furnish Ger 
many with some supplies from abroad. It may nov 
withhold its intervention until realization of its own 
demands appears most opportune. 


ISSUES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The outcome| 
of the present war in Europe cannot be foreseen | 
The initial strategic advantage seems to lie with 
Germany, which can remain on the defensive be 
hind its formidable West Wall and compel Britain 
and France to assume the burden of the offensive 
Both sides appear determined to battle to the bitter 
end. The British and French are in no mood to tol| 
erate a continuation of Hitlerism with its recurrent 
demands and crises. Under aggressive Nazi leader 
ship the Germans are renewing the struggle begu 
in 1914 to assert themselves at the expense of the 
British Empire. The issue far transcends that be} 
tween Poland and Germany. It involves an interna| 
tional revolution—a struggle for a redivision of] 
wealth and influence in the world. 


; i 
To assess responsibilities under such circumstances) 








So 








— 
is 
at f 
solu 
on | 
perl 
thre 
mes 
Th 
chit 
did 


ass! 


an) 

















oul 
SCOy 


[ati 
Mie 


S, he 
0 al. 
land 
ritish 
1 
a$ to 
rove 


show 
tified 
sould 


made 
ance, 

Ger. 
Duc 
vould 
uncil 
yould 
peta: 
cence 
ntries 





ances 
y. As} 
livert| 
from 
Ger: 
now 
own| 


come | 
seen. | 
with 
e be 
ritain 
1SIVE. 
bitter | 
> tol- 
rrent 
ader- 
e gui 
f the 
t be 
erna: 
n of 


ances 











EEE 
— 





is no easy task. It is clear that the Third Reich was 
at no time interested in bringing about a peaceful 
solution of its immediate conflict with Poland except 
on its own terms. Unfortunately, Germany's past ex- 
perience had largely confirmed its conviction that 
threats and sabre-rattling were the most effective 
means of securing satisfaction of its grievances. 
Those powers which failed to set up workable ma- 
chinery for peaceful change during the twenties and 
did not resist the use of force during the thirties must 
assume at least part of the blame for the fatal de- 


Page Three 














velopments of the last few weeks. In ruthlessly push- 
ing its claim to more extensive Lebensraum, Ger- 
many is undoubtedly reverting to the worst imperi-— 
alistic practices of the nineteenth century. At the 
same time, it must be remembered that, in the years 
when Britain and France were dominant, no system 
or method was devised whereby the 80 million Ger- 
mans could participate on a sound and equal basis 
in the wealth which the French and British had 
themselves accumulated during an era of great im- 


perialist expansion. JouHN C. DEWILDE 


JAPAN CHANGES FRONT 


Having barely recovered from the initial shock of 
the Soviet-German treaty of non-aggression, Japan 
must now readjust its policy to cope with the out- 
break of war in Europe. The Soviet-German treaty, 
by rudely dashing Japanese hopes of German mil- 
itary aid against the Soviet Union, nullified one of 
the prime gains which Japan had envisaged from 
closer ties with the Berlin-Rome axis. It has virtually 
assured Japan’s neutrality in the new European con- 
flict, thus freeing the Anglo-French coalition from 
the threat of a Japanese attack in the Far East. 

Within a few days after signature on August 24, 
the Soviet-German pact had forced a drastic re- 
orientation of Japan's foreign policy and a severe 
shake-up in domestic politics. The army extremists, 
fervent advocates of a military alliance with the 
Berlin-Rome axis during recent months, were badly 
discredited. In the new Cabinet under General 
Nobuyuki Abe, formed on August 29, a notable 
shift from the right toward the center took place. 
The fact that Mr. Shigemitsu, Japanese Ambassador 
at London, has been suggested for the post of For- 
eign Minister—at present held concurrently by the 
Premier—suggests the extent of the trend away 
from extremism. It is also evidence of a new policy 
toward the Western democracies, underlined by the 
sudden toning down of the campaign against British 
centers in China. Confronted by a Soviet Union with 
hands freed for action in the Far East, Japan may 
now seek to court—instead of assault—the Western 
powers, possibly in the guise of a defender against 
Bolshevism. The alternative pressed upon Japan by 
German diplomacy—conclusion of a non-aggression 
pact with the Soviet Union—is not likely to be fol- 
lowed, despite the ironical fact that the U.S.S.R. 
has invited Japan to sign such a pact on many 
previous occasions since 1931. In the heavy fighting 
on the Mongolian-Manchurian border, according to 
recent reports, the Soviet forces have inflicted seri- 


ous defeats on the Kwantung Army. Although these 
engagements have grown to large proportions, a 
gradual détente rather than a full-dress war may be 
expected to result from them. The U.S.S.R. is more 
likely to use its newly acquired freedom of action 
by increasing its aid to China, currently evidenced by 
the arrival of Soviet airplanes at Chungking under 
terms of the recent $140 million Soviet credit to the 
Chinese government. 


The gains which Japan might have derived from 
a European war in other circumstances are now 
affected by a number of stringent limitations., Jap- 
anese political circles had never envisaged a 
pean conflict in which the Soviet Union would faain- 
tain its neutrality. Under such conditions Japan [faces 
a stronger rather than a weaker Soviet Uniqga in 
the Far East. Furthermore, Japan’s inability to trad 
Chinese resistance after two years of exhaxsting 
warfare curtails the prospect of a profitable !war- 
time trade. Japanese economy has been gearéd to 
the supply of munitions for the war in China, and 
the existing shortages in capital resources, labor 
supply and raw materials place strict limits of: ex- 
pansion of production for export. Unless the ‘scale 
of war operations in China is drastically redlaced, 
the alluring profits from an export boom of 4917- 
1919 dimensions are not likely to be realized.: The 
new Cabinet, however, shows no intention of g{ving 
up the effort to subjugate China. In this connestion, 
the United States will henceforth occupy an [even 
more decisive position vis-a-vis Japan. With wgr in 
progress in Europe, Japan will become still tore 
dependent on American commodities in ordéx to 
continue its war against China. And Japan’s dplo- 
mats, it may be expected, will assiduously court the 
United States in the hope of avoiding the embirgo 
foreshadowed by denunciation of the Japariese- 
American trade treaty. , A wee 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 46, SEPTEMBER 8, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; 


National 
Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. 


Incorporated. 
Dorothy F. Leger, Secretary; 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Re 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


SEPT. 5.—As the European war began in earnest, 
the Administration proclaimed American neutrality 
on September 5 and continued its efforts to evacuate 
citizens abroad and to protect commerce and ship- 
ping. In the first of two proclamations, President 
Roosevelt announced the neutrality of the United 
States in accordance with international law and na- 
tional precedent. Under this proclamation, the Gov- 
ernment assumes responsibility for treating all bel- 
ligerents equally, closing its ports to belligerent 
warships, forbidding its territory to their troops, 
and denying—in many other ways—any official as- 
sistance to the countries at war. In return for these 
obligations, the United States can require respect 
for its citizens and their property on the high seas, 
and retain the right to trade—subject to the law of 
contraband — with both belligerents and neutrals. 
This type of neutrality proclamation, first issued by 
President Washington during the Anglo-French con- 
flict in 1793, is designed to define the position of 
the Government vis-a-vis foreign countries and is 
implemented by penalties under federal statutes. 


NEW NEUTRALITY REGULATIONS. The 
second proclamation issued by President Roosevelt 
derives from the Neutrality Act of 1937, further 
regulating American action in wartime. This legis- 
lation was enacted under the theory that President 
Wilson’s insistence upon traditional rights of neu- 
tral trade and travel and partiality for the Allies 
forced the United States into the World War. Un- 
der this Act, the United States waives some of its 
neutral rights under international law, and restricts 
many of the activities of its citizens that might even- 
tually compel the Government to intervene on their 
behalf. Although the President has not yet sum- 
moned Congress to consider revision of the Act, 
he is expected to do so in the near future. 


The first announcement of these two proclama- 
tions came on Sunday night, September 3, when 
President Roosevelt spoke briefly over the radio. 
Mr. Roosevelt, declaring that he would make every 
possible effort to keep the United States out of war, 
stressed the importance of national unity. The Presi- 
dent reiterated his belief that an outbreak of war 
anywhere endangered American peace, and empha- 
sized the necessity of keeping hostilities out of the 
Western Hemisphere and adjacent oceans. In de- 
nouncing wartime profiteering, Mr. Roosevelt im- 


plied that he would take steps to prevent abnormal 
financial and commercial transactions with the bel. 
ligerents. A rapid rise in security and commodity 
prices during the opening days of the war crisis sug- 
gested the possibility that the 1914-1917 boom might 
be repeated. 


TRADE AND TRAVEL PROBLEMS. After the 
outbreak of war had ended the Administration's 
efforts to secure a peaceful solution of the Polish- 
German dispute, the State Department accelerated 
its efforts to assist Americans in Europe. The Mazri- 
time Commission and the Navy are expected to 
speed up evacuation by additional ships which may 
have to be convoyed out of the war zones. Mean- 
while, Secretary Hull announced on September 5 
that passports would not be issued for European 
travel except in cases of ‘imperative necessity.” This 
action, while not required by the Neutrality Act, 
accords with the spirit of this legislation by reduc- 
ing the possibilities of danger to American citizens. 

The presence of such danger was dramatically 
emphasized on September 3, when the Cunard liner 
Athenia sank off the Scottish coast. Over 300 Amer- 
ican citizens were returning from Europe on this 
ship, which was either torpedoed without warning 
by a German submarine or destroyed by a floating 
mine. Although most of the passengers were be- 
lieved to have been rescued, the incident recalled 
the diplomatic difficulties which followed the 
Lusitania sinking in May 1915. 


THE HOME FRONT. While continuing its 
diplomatic efforts for peace until the last possible 
minute, the Administration extended its prepara- 
tions for protecting American finance and industry 
in event of war. Many conferences between the 
State, Navy, Army, Treasury, and Justice Depart- 
ments were held, and plans were completed for ab- 
sorbing the initial shock to American business. The 
SEC announced that through cooperation with 4 
Wall Street committee, efforts would be made to 





keep the stock exchanges open—unlike 1914, when | 


they were closed for over four months—and to min- 
imize the effects of the liquidation of foreign assets. 
Mr. Jesse H. Jones, Federal Lending Administrator, 
declared in an interview on August 31 that the 


Export-Import Bank was in a position to finance the | 


export of American commodities—other than muni- 
tions—regardless of the restrictions of the Neutral- 
ity and Johnson Acts. 

JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


Worl: 


\| 


