












FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVI, No. 1 OcrosBer 30, 1936 





NEW YORK LUNCHEON MEETING DATES 


November 7 January 30 

December 5 February 27 

January 9 March 13 
March 27 


Mark these dates on your calendar NOW for the stimulating 
and timely luncheon discussions at the Hotel Astor. 








Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











Dr. William W. Bishop 


*% University of Michigan Library 


~ + 
“* 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 

















FASCIST POWERS UNITE AGAINST MADRID 





ITH the steady advance of General Franco’s 

forces, European tension over Spain threat- 
ens to reach the breaking point. On October 22, 
when President Azafia transferred some govern- 
ment offices from Madrid to Barcelona, Moscow 
indicated that it would continue to recognize the 
Loyalists as Spain’s legitimate government even 
if the Rebels occupied Madrid. This decision was 
emphasized by the appointment of Vladimir An- 
tonov-Ovseenko—a military expert who had or- 
ganized the resistance of Petrograd workers 
against White forces in 1917—as Soviet Consul- 
General in Barcelona. The danger of an interna- 
tional conflict would be materially increased if 
two rival governments—one at Madrid and one at 
Barcelona—should openly call on foreign powers 
for recognition and armed assistance. 


Soviet policy in the Spanish crisis remains 
something of an enigma. On October 22 the So- 
viet Union—possibly yielding to diplomatic repre- 
sentations by London, Paris and Prague—receded 
from the threatening position it had assumed a 
few days earlier. Torn between the desire to 
collaborate with the Western democracies in a pos- 
sible conflict with Germany, and the urge to dis- 
play its solidarity with the Spanish Loyalists, the 
U.S.S.R. apparently decided, for the time being, 
to take no step which might irrevocably alienate 
the sympathies of France and Britain. Yet when 
the non-intervention committee reconvened in 
London on October 23 to consider the replies of 
Germany, Italy and Portugal to Soviet charges of 
intervention, the U.S.S.R. submitted a note de- 
claring that it could not consider itself bound by 
the non-intervention agreement “to any greater 
extent than the remaining participants”—a state- 
ment first interpreted as a threat of immediate 
withdrawal. Subsequent discussion—in the 
course of which Germany and Britain charged the 
Soviets with violation of the non-intervention ac- 
cord—revealed that the Soviet representative was 


not yet ready to withdraw from the committee. 

No such zigzagging has marked the actions of 
the Fascist powers which, while categorically de- 
nying intervention on behalf of the Rebels, have 
openly proclaimed their support of the Rebel 
cause. On October 23 Portugal broke off diplo- 
matic relations with the Madrid government, 
alleging in a 21-page memorandum that the 
Third International, with the support of the Span- 
ish Popular Front, had plotted to establish 
communism throughout the Iberian Peninsula. 
Equally forthright has been the attitude of Ger- 
many and Italy, which on October 25 reached an 
accord on the general European situation, one of 
whose principal features is the statement that 
General Franco’s régime commands the support 
of a majority of the Spanish people—a statement 
which opens the way for recognition of the Rebels. — 

The Italo-German accord provides for collabora- 
tion of the two countries in all matters affecting 
peace and their “parallel interests”; defense of 
European civilization against communism; eco- 
nomic cooperation in the Danubian region within 
the framework of the Rome protocols and the 
Austro-German accord of July 11; conclusion of a 
new Locarno pact strictly confined to Western 
Europe; German recognition of Italy’s Ethiopian 
empire, in return for which Germany is to receive 
economic concessions in Ethiopia; and the main- 
tenance of Spain’s territorial and colonial integrity 
—intended to dispel rumors that General Franco 
had promised to grant Germany and Italy bases in 
Spanish Morocco and the Balearic Islands. 

Italian spokesmen have been careful to point 
out that this all-embracing accord is in no sense 
a hard and fast alliance, and does not preclude 
agreements with other countries, notably Britain, 
where Italy still hopes to obtain financial assis- 
tance for the development of Ethiopia. Germany 
appears to obtain important advantages with re- 
spect to the Danubian region, a Western Locarno, 








—_—_—_— = 





and an opportunity to share in the exploitation of 
Ethiopia. But these advantages may prove to have 
little intrinsic value. Italy, whose resources of men 
and money are tied up in Ethiopia, is not in a po- 
sition at present to block the new German Drang 
nach Osten; a Western Locarno corresponds to 
Mussolini’s cherished scheme for a great-power 
accord and would safeguard Italy from exclusive 
dependence on Germany; and such benefits as the 
Reich may obtain by furnishing machinery and 
technical assistance for the exploitation of Ethi- 
opia can contribute little in the near future to the 
solution of its economic problems. As regards 
Italo-German collaboration against communism, 
Italy is doubtless ready to combat Communist de- 
signs on Spain, where it hopes to obtain the sup- 
port of a Fascist régime for its plans to weaken 
British control of the Mediterranean. It seems 
doubtful, however, that Italy—much as it abhors 
communism in general — will allow itself to be 
drawn into a Nazi crusade against Soviet Russia. 


The principal object of the Italo-German accord 
is to confront Britain and France with the possi- 
bility that, if they fail to make political and eco- 
nomic concessions to Germany and Italy, the two 
Fascist powers will jointly defy the Western de- 
mocracies. The accord thus again raises the ques- 
tion whether France and Britain are ready to 
assume the lead in European affairs, or will merely 
acquiesce in the program formulated by the two 
dictatorships, which are less concerned with peace 
than with the establishment of their own domina- 


tion in Europe. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BLUM CABINET STEERS MIDDLE COURSE 


The Radical Socialist party congress, which met 
at Biarritz October 22-25, has greatly strength- 
ened the position of the Blum government in 
France. The leaders of the party, which is the 
most conservative in the Popular Front, success- 
fully secured a vote pledging continued support 
to the present cabinet. The Communist wing of 
the Popular Front came in for severe criticism, 
stay-in strikes were roundly condemned, and the 
government was called upon to suppress extremist 
agitation and preserve public order. The congress 
accepted devaluation of the franc as a “painful” 
necessity, but demanded a “sound” budget. 
Despite these veiled warnings, it seems likely that 
the Radical Socialists will do nothing to precipi- 
tate the fall of the government during the forth- 
coming session of parliament. 


The position taken by the Congress was not 
unexpected. Its members were aware that with- 
drawal from the government at this time would 


Page Two 








—— 
—— 





probably bring about a major political crisis. The 
party composition of the present Chamber of 
Deputies is such that a governmental majority 
other than the one now represented by the Popu- 
lar Front would be difficult to find. Dissolution 
of the Chamber would plunge the country into a 
bitter electoral campaign just at a time when in. 
ternal peace is vitally necessary for economic re- 
covery and the conduct of foreign policy. 


Moreover, the Blum government has done its 
best during the past month to conciliate the mod- 
erates. In foreign affairs it has resisted Com- 
munist pressure and abided by its non-interven- 
tion policy in the Spanish civil war, thus satisfy- 
ing an overwhelming majority of Frenchmen who 
want to avoid war at almost any cost. In its 


domestic policy it has struck at extremists on both | 
Realizing that the public ob- 


Right and Left. 
jected to occupation of factories once arbitration 
machinery had been set up, the government re- 
cently evacuated a number of factories, cafés and 
restaurants occupied by strikers. On October 4 
the Minister of Interior prohibited—for the Paris 
district and until further notice—all meetings and 
demonstrations likely to disturb public order. 
Four days later the government brought action 
against Colonel Francois de La Rocque for at- 
tempting to reconstitute the illegal Fascist Croiz 
de Feu. To keep the balance even, it also ordered 
the Communists to reduce to 10 the 127 meetings 
which they had scheduled for Alsace-Lorraine the 
weekend of October 11-12. 


The last few months have witnessed a general 
revulsion against both fascism and communism. 
Events abroad and prolonged political agitation at 
home have produced a widespread longing for 
peace and renewed determination to preserve 
democratic processes of government in France. 
The trend toward moderation should greatly as- 
sist the government in meeting the problems that 
will arise in the immediate future. These prob- 
lems are admittedly difficult. The economic and 
financial situation has not responded to devalua- 
tion as favorably as had been expected. Prices 
have tended to rise too rapidly and disturbed po- 
litical conditions have prevented the large-scale 
repatriation of capital. Nevertheless, Premier 
Blum has promised that the budget for 1937 will 
not show too large a deficit. He is also deter- 
mined to push his second series of reforms. These 
include a press law to disclose income sources of 
newspapers and punish defamation; insurance 
against agricultural calamities ; and the enactment 
of unemployment and old-age insurance. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 1, Ocroper 30, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Screet, New York, N. Y. RayMOnpd Lesiig BugELt, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES Dgan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








— 


i 


} 





