———- 
———$__ 


Vv world 
itry se. 
d if the 
Franc 
ffort at 
be done 
n from 
prevent 
tatoria! 
1 States 
1in, the 
nocracy 
ffort at 
it prin- 
change, 
ve such 


UELL 


r 3, re © 
r Front & 
ists in- & 
) to 71; 
t single 
9; and 
- group 
S was 
kon on 


e most 
t sup- 
e vote 
an ex- 
Olicies. 
a gov- 
his ill 
certain 
i-bour- 
et may 
» quali- 
posing 
ily one 
ile the 
ind the 
ffice in 
of de- 
| main- 
ie Left 
Italian 
e been 
trophe 
1 raise 
1 must 
nment. 


3.W. 


National 
N, Editor. 
bar. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international evegp by the Research Staff 


Subscrjpes lar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


VoL. XV, No. 29 May 15, 1936 


U.S. INTERNATIONAL BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 
by Frank Whitson Fetter 
The history of the American balance of payments up 
to the world depression, the changes which have taken 


place since 1929, and their significance for the future 
international position of the United States. 


May 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


“erlodical Division, 


ibrary of Congress, 


a shineton, D. 6. 


EUROPE STRUGGLES 


WITH DICTATORS 


N May 9—two days before the League Coun- 

cil convened in Geneva—Premier Mussolini 
announced Italy’s annexation of Ethiopia and pro- 
claimed King Victor Emmanuel III Emperor of 
Ethiopia, thus resurrecting the Roman Empire 
after a lapse of fifteen centuries. Marshal Bado- 
glio was named Governor-General of the con- 
quered territory with the title of Viceroy. In 
northern Ethiopia, Badoglio’s army is reported to 
be restoring law and order and to have taken over 
the Jibuti railway; while in the south, General 
Graziani has occupied Harar and completed the 
Fascist conquest of that section of the country. 
Il Duce has won a great victory and strengthened 
his position at home; but the fruits of this victory 
will not ripen for many years. 


Meanwhile the League Council, faced with Mus- 
solini’s fait accompli, met in Geneva on May 11 
under the presidency of Anthony Eden. Ignoring 
Italy’s annexation of Ethiopia—and thus uphold- 
ing the Stimson doctrine of non-recognition of 
the results of aggression—the Council voted to 
retain the Italo-Ethiopian dispute on its agenda. 
Baron Aloisi, the Italian delegate, refused point- 
blank to sit at the table with the “so-called” Ethi- 
opian representative, and walked out of the ses- 
sion in a rage. 


On May 12 Mussolini ordered the entire Italian 
delegation to leave Geneva, although Italy has not 
yet resigned from the League. Opinion in Geneva 
seems to have hardened against Italy and sanc- 
tions apparently will not be lifted for the present. 
The small European powers and even France are 
now backing Britain in its determination not to 
submit to Italy, but relations between London 
and Rome are reported to be growing increasing- 
ly tense. The Council may formally condemn II 
Duce’s annexation of Ethiopia at this meeting 
but a settlement will probably be postponed until 
a special Council session called for June 15, when 


it is hoped that the new French government will 
have taken office. 

It seems unlikely that France’s belated sup- 
port of sanctions will save the situation. Britain 
has suffered an almost irreparable blow to its 
prestige; the League’s authority has sunk to a 
new low; and Mussolini has annexed a League 
member. As a result of the Ethiopian debacle, 
Hitler stands to be the chief potential winner in 


Europe. MiILpRED S. WERTHEIMER 


BRITAIN QUIZZES HITLER 


The questionnaire submitted to the German 
government on May 8 by Sir Eric Phipps, British 
Ambassador in Berlin, seeks to clarify various 
German notes and memoranda delivered since 
March 7, especially Hitler’s peace plan of March 
31.* The main points on which Britain seeks fur- 
ther information are as follows: 


1. Does Germany now regard itself in a position to 
conclude “genuine treaties”? The questionnaire empha- 
sizes that “it is, of course, clear that negotiations for 
a treaty would be useless if one of the parties hereafter 
felt free to deny its obligation on the ground [that it] 
was not at that time in condition to conclude a binding 
treaty.” 

2. Will Germany respect the remaining “operative” 
clauses of the Versailles Treaty and any agreements 
which may be said to originate in that treaty’s pro- 
visions? 

8. Has the point been reached at which Germany 
can declare that it “recognizes and intends to respect” 
the territorial and political status of Europe, except in 
so far as it may be altered “by free negotiations and 
agreement”? 

4. What form are the non-aggression pacts offered 
by Germany to its neighbors in “northeastern and 
southeastern Europe” to take? Does Germany agree 
that these pacts may be guaranteed by mutual assis- 
tance arrangements? Britain adds that a general set- 
tlement would be greatly facilitated if Germany in- 
terpreted the phrase “northeastern and southeastern 
Europe” as covering not only contiguous states, but 
also Latvia, Estonia and the Soviet Union. 


*"*Hicler’s Peace Plan: Menace or Promise?’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, 
April 10, 1936. 


5. What does Germany intend to do regarding non- 
interference in the internal affairs of other states, as 
distinguished from external non-aggression? This ques- 
tion concerns Nazi agitation in Austria, Czechoslovakia 
and other countries with German minorities, which 


Hitler hopes to absorb in the Third Reich without the 
firing of a shot. 


6. In view of Germany’s announced willingness to 
return to the League, the Hitler government is asked to 
indicate its future attitude toward the Permanent Court 
of International Justice, and to explain the functions 
and constitution of the new international court pro- 
posed by Hitler on March 31. 

In conclusion, Britain states that this question- 
naire is not to be regarded as “exhaustive.” Other 
matters—including presumably the colonial ques- 
tion, to which no reference is made—‘“will have 
to be raised at a later date.” For the present 
Britain wants to deal only with points whose elu- 
cidation is essential to the opening of general 
negotiations. 

The British questionnaire would seem more im- 
pressive if it were not for the fact—revealed by a 
recent British Blue Book—that the Foreign Office 
has been addressing substantially the same ques- 
tions to Hitler for a whole year, and has as yet 
received no satisfactory reply. On May 23, 1935, 
following Hitler’s Reichstag speech of May 21 
outlining a 13-point program of foreign policy, 
Sir Eric Phipps sought to discover the precise 
meaning of the phrase “equality of rights’; to 
ascertain whether Hitler’s reference to sections 
of the Versailles Treaty which “discriminate mor- 
ally and practically against the German nation” 
was intended to keep open the questions of the 
Rhineland demilitarized zone, international riv- 
ers, colonial mandates, and Austria; and to in- 
quire what action Hitler proposed to take to im- 
plement his offer of non-aggression pacts with 
neighboring states. The German government re- 
plied on May 31 that it did not see how it could 
further clarify Hitler’s speech “by means of defi- 
nitions.” All subsequent British inquiries, which 
grew more pressing as time went on, were waved 
aside in Berlin with references to the “holiday 
season,” the Nuremberg party congress of Sep- 
tember 1935, the Italo-Ethiopian crisis, and the 
effects of the Franco-Soviet pact on the European 
situation. It seems doubtful, under the circum- 
stances, that Mr. Eden will prove more successful 
than Sir John Simon or Sir Samuel Hoare in pin- 
ning Hitler down regarding his plans for the 
future of Europe. VERA MICHELES DEAN 

NEW PRESIDENT IN SPAIN 


On May 11 Manuel Azania, Premier of Spain’s 
Left Republican Cabinet since the February elec- 
tions, became President of the Republic, succeed- 


Page Two 


ing the more conservative Niceto Alcala Zamora, 
who was forced out of office on April 7.7 Azania 
was chosen by the Electoral College, a body made 
up of the deputies in the Cortes, and an approxi- 
mately equal number of electors named by popu- 
lar vote on April 26. The election of the new ex- 
ecutive, who enjoyed the support of the Popular 
Front, was uncontested—the Right groups ad- 
vanced no candidate. It is expected that the Cab- 
inet will be continued with few changes and with 
a premier drawn from the ranks of the Left Re- 
publicans. 

President Azafia, a bourgeois liberal, enters of- 
fice at a time when political tension is acute. Since 
the February elections the parties of the Popular 
Front—Left Republicans, Socialists, Communists 
and Syndicalists—have secured (1) an amnesty 
for 30,000 political prisoners; (2) re-employment 
of all workers discharged for revolutionary ac- 
tivities; (3) dissolution of the Falange Espanola— 
Spain’s Fascist organization—and imprisonment 
of its youthful chief, José Antonio Primo de 
Rivera; and (4) acceleration of agrarian reform. 
While only 8,400 tracts of land had been distribu- 
ted from 1932, when the land law was approved, 
until February 1936, 70,000 tracts are reported 
to have been allocated during March and April 
of this year. 

Despite these gains, it seems uncertain how 
long the Popular Front can hold together. The 
Socialists, who constitute its largest group, may 
soon withdraw. Their militant chief, Francisco 
Largo Caballero, is working to enlist Communist 
and Syndicalist support for the organization of 
one united workers’ party. Rank-and-file unrest 
continues active in both town and country. 

Meanwhile, alarm and apprehension are prev- 
alent among the forces of the Right. Many con- 
servatives have left Spain, taking their funds 
with them, and the flight of capital is estimated 
to exceed 500,000,000 pesetas. Calvo Sotelo, mon- 
archist deputy in the Cortes, has charged that 
disorders occurring between February 16 and 
April 2 cost 74 dead and 355 wounded; 106 
churches were damaged by fire. José Maria Gil 
Robles, leader of the Catholic Popular Action 
party, declared on May 5 that the government’s 
failure to defend conservative interests was lead- 
ing many of his partisans to embrace fascism. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


+''Spain Ousts Its President,’’ sbid., April 17, 1936. 


The Crisis of the Middle Class, by Lewis Corey. New 
York, Covici-Friede, 1935. $2.50 


Exhortation to the propertyless middle class to support 
communism for its own best interests. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 29, May 15, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lgsiig BUBLL, President; EstHEm G. OGpgEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dsan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


An 


| 


WoL 


| 


Wh 


