








>rna- 
New 
€ on 
| be- 
ctive 


1OWN 
nited 
and 
1 and 
rary, 
gests » 
and 
nge- 
it re- 
untry 
“i0Ns. 
untry 
ough 
- wat 
th to | 
» dis- 
mon 
kind 
stab- 
1 for- 
few | 
xthen | 
Con- 
states 


a 











ES 


S 








& 
rPerwere* o 


<> A 4 +2 rT. *, 
GHNERAL Lise 
Unty. oF mice 


may 5 1944 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


University of Nichigan 
Ann Arbor, Nich. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 29 


May 5, 1944 





AMERICANS SHOW CONCERN OVER CONDITIONS IN CHINA 


ee the objectives of Japan’s current 
drives in North and Central China are still 
unclear, these moves, breaking a military lull which 
has existed since last December, demonstrate anew 
that the initiative on the China land front remains 
in Japanese hands. The inactivity of the Chungking 
forces, which confine themselves to meeting enemy 
attacks, arises from many long-standing economic 
and political difficulties. Chief of these is the ex- 
treme shortage of supplies, a result of the stringent 
Japanese blockade, the higher priority of other Al- 
lied war areas, and China’s low level of industrial 
production. But additional items must be entered in 
the ledger, including the ever-soaring inflation (due 
to hoarding and speculation, as well as lack of com- 
modities), Kuomintang-Communist political differ- 
ences which keep valuable troops away from the 
front, and the effects on Chinese morale of fighting 
for almost seven years, with the end not in sight. 

AMERICAN CRITICISM. America’s interest un- 
der these conditions in strengthening its solidarity 
with China is suggested by the decision to send Vice- 
President Wallace to Chungking in the near future. 
This trip is of more than domestic significance, for 
Mr. Wallace, as an old friend of China and the 
second highest official in the United States, can 
serve a useful purpose in improving Chinese-Amer- 
ican relations. Certainly there is no obscuring the fact 
that American commentators have in the past year 
become increasingly critical of conditions in China, 
teflecting in some respects views held in official cir- 
cles in Washington. These complaints have dealt 
not only with specific questions of Chinese-American 
war cooperation, but also with the direction taken by 
China’s internal political development. 

The adjustment, for example, of the United States 
armed forces in China to conditions prevailing there 
has led in some cases to friction and disillusionment. 
Soldiers and officers have resented the high prices 


paid until recently by the United States Army as a 
result of the unsatisfactory exchange rate between 
Chinese and American dollars. In general our men 
have been unprepared for the contrast between the 
bare realities of a nation battered by protracted war 
and the romantic conceptions of Chinese life that are 
still widespread in this country. They have been af- 
fected also by what they have seen or heard of cor- 
ruption and other undesirable practices of Chinese 
civilian and army officials, and they have found it 
difficult to accept a level of efficiency far below 
that to which they are accustomed at home. 

TOWARD DEMOCRACY? American and other 
foreign newspapermen have been angered by the 
exceptionally severe Chungking censorship which 
seldom allows them to serve their readers more than 
the bare bones of the news and sometimes suppresses 
non-security information of considerable importance. 
But the bulk of unfavorable comment has been con- 
cerned with Chinese politics, especially the sharp 
Kuomintang-Communist differences, which expressed 
themselves in a decade of internal strife before anti- 
Japanese resistance began in 1937 and could, it is 
feared, result in renewed civil war at a later date. 
The feeling has developed in the United States— 
and also in Britain—that Chungking has contributed 
greatly to internal friction by establishing rigid con- 
trols over Chinese political opinion and activity. Par- 
ticularly disturbing was the announcement by the 
Chinese Ministry of Education that persons going 
abroad as students would first have to attend a school 
run by the Kuomintang, the official political party, 
and, after arriving in the United States and Britain, 
submit to supervision in thought and conduct by 
Chinese officials stationed there. 

Chungking has reacted to American criticism by 
expressing its official resentment, carrying through or 
hinting at certain modifications of policy, and mak- 
ing some criticisms of its own. On the positive side, 





om eetoenate semen 6 


a 


"| 
: 
| 
| 


yee mremtetin  t 


Zea 


3 so cea iin Ll hate ak balan 


BO eee nn 











the problem of American Army purchases has been 
adjusted, and there have been suggestions that cen- 
sorship on foreign dispatches may be eased. At the 
same time, the Allies have been reminded that 
Chinese resistance is essential to the defeat of Japan 
and that, in the words of a government spokesman, 
“except for China’s fighting in the initial stages of 
this great war, the world today would present a dif- 
ferent picture and history a different page.” 

On the other hand, at least one high Chinese of- 
ficial has urged that Chungking regard foreign 
criticism realistically and draw important lessons 
from it. Thus, in a recent speech, Sun Fo, son of Sun 
Yat-sen and president of the Legislative Yuan, spoke 
in extremely sharp terms of China’s slow political 
progress and pointed to the fact that, after sixteen 
years of rule by the Kuomintang, “there is not one 
member of a county council nor one county admin- 
istrator who has been elected to office by the people 
of the country.” He also noted with alarm that “if 
in the post-war era our Allies should be convinced 
that with the domination of the Kuomintang China 
would not become a fully democratic state but would 
become, in fact, a fascist and aggressive state, they 
might take steps to protect themselves from future 
possibilities and might refuse to cooperate with us. 
In such a case we would be isolated.” 


WHAT IS AMERICA’S INTEREST? The degree 


Page Two 








LL 
a 


to which the United States should interest itself jp 
the internal affairs of other states is a central prob. 
lem of foreign policy, affecting the whole range of ; 
our relations abroad. The question is in no sense 
peculiar to China, but Sun Fo has put his finger ong 
crucial point by indicating that the self-interest of ) 
China's allies is deeply affected by the way in which 
China's domestic politics influences its role abroad, 

The issue is not whether the United States has the 
right to dictate to China—for it has no such right~ 
but whether China, as well as other nations, wij 
follow internal policies that facilitate international 
cooperation. Fortunately, at the present moment 
strong sentiments of mutual friendship exist between 
the Chinese and American peoples, but it is to be 
hoped that this friendship will not be exposed to 
future strain. If China, after the defeat of Japan, 
should be split by civil war, the result would be to 
complicate China’s foreign relations, especially with 
Russia, to prevent China from playing the important | 
role in Far Eastern affairs that Americans would like | 
to see it assume, and to shatter for the time bein 
American hopes for the development of the China 
market. Inevitably, in view of the seriousness of all 
these developments, the United States is obliged to 
examine closely any tendencies in such a direction 
and to determine its policies accordingly. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 

















GREEK CRISIS FINDS RUSSIA AND BRITAIN AT ODDS 


From behind the veil of Allied censorship that 
obscures the recent mutiny in the First Greek Brigade 
in the Middle East and the somewhat smaller naval 
revolt in Alexandria, signs indicate that the Greek 
political crisis, which began virtually on the day 
King George’s régime went into exile three years 
ago, is reaching its climax. In this crisis the central 
issue is whether the large leftist resistance groups— 
EAM (the Greek National Liberation Front) and 
the left-wing of a more moderate organization, 
EKKA—should be represented in the government- 
in-exile. Since these underground organizations are 
outspokenly republican, King George's supporters, 
as well as the émigrés who believe the constitutional 
question should be postponed until Greece is free, 
oppose their inclusion in the cabinet. EAM has also 
incurred the displeasure of the government-in-exile 
because, although the majority of its members are 
liberals and leftists, some of its leaders are Com- 
munists. 

Last autumn it seemed that the differences between 
EAM and the government-in-exile might be fought 
out in enemy-occupied Greece, for an armed clash 
occurred between guerrillas of the Liberation Front 
and members of EDES, a more conservative under- 
ground organization that is inclined to cooperate 
with the royalists. This encounter, it now appears, 


and, instead of leading to civil war, was followed 
by agreement to cooperate. 

WHAT THE QUARREL IS ABOUT. But ef- 
forts of the leftist resistance movements in Greece | 
to win a place in the government-in-exile have been 
less successful. The main stumbling-block in the path 
of unity has been the question of the monarchy. | 
EAM insists it cannot trust the King in view of the 
dictatorship he established in pre-war Greece, and 
demands a promise that a plebiscite on the form of 
Greece’s government shall be held before, rather 
than after, the ruler’s return to the country. Although 
the government-in-exile has consistently refused this 
demand, the opposing underground groups have not 
slackened their efforts. In an effort to increase — 
their bargaining power with the government, repre- | 
sentatives of EAM and EKKA formed a Committee 
of Five early this spring, and proclaimed their right 
to a position in the exiled cabinet as spokesmen for 
a widespread resistance movement. Although this 


| 
resulted from a German-inspired misunderstanding 





claim did not find a sympathetic response in official , 


circles, it won the approval of some members of the 
Greek armed forces in exile who share EAM’s fe 
publicanism and feel dissatisfied with the govern 
ment. On March 31 a group of officers holding these 
views called on Prime Minister Tsouderos and ft 

















“ 





eof | 
€nse 
Ona 
t of 
hich 


oad, 


ht~ 
will 
Onal 
nent | 
Veen 
0 be 
d to 
pan, 
€ to 
with 
rtant 
like 
eing 
hina 
f all 








ction 


ER | 


ding 


ywed 


t ef- 
reece | 
been 
path 
rchy. 
f the 
and 
m of 
ather | 
ough 
| this 
e not 
rease 
epfe- | 
uttee | 
right | 
n for 
this 
ficial 
f the 
'$ fe 
vern- 
these 
d te 














—_—_ 
—_-_ 


vested his resignation and the creation of a new 
cabinet including representatives of the Committee 
of Five. In reply, the Premier arrested the delegation 
and this move—instead of curbing disaffection in the 
armed forces—precipitated army and navy mutinies 
that lasted nearly three weeks and had to be put 
down by force. 

Faced by this evidence of lack of confidence in the 
overnment-in-exile, Prime Minister —Tsouderos— 
who had held office since the eve of Greece's defeat 
in 1941—resigned on April 3. His successor, Sopho- 
cles Venizelos, son of the famous pro-Allied leader 
in World War I and a republican who temporarily 
accepts King George as a trustee of Greek national 
sovereignty in exile, spent a fortnight in fruitless 
attempts to form a new government. After his resig- 
nation the king named George Papandreou as 
Premier. Papandreou, who only recently escaped 
from a Nazi prison camp in Greece, was apparently 
appointed because he combines a record as a well- 
known liberal leader with disapproval of the Com- 
mittee of Five. 


BRITAIN’S POSITION. The Greek political crisis 
is important to the United Nations because con- 
tinued disorders among Greek army and naval forces 
might impair Allied military plans. Equally impor- 
tant are the long-range implications of Greek devel- 
opments for future relations between the U.S.S.R. 
and Britain. Until recently it seemed to many ob- 
servers of Balkan affairs that Moscow and London 
had made some kind of deal whereby Russia, in re- 
turn for British agreement to support the Yugoslav 
Partisans, was pursuing a hands-off policy in Greece. 

But there has been some doubt as to the line Brit- 
ish policy in Greece was following. The British army 
tended to support all guerrilla groups inside Greece 
because of their military value. The Foreign Office, 
however, attempted to discourage the Liberation 
Front—presumably because of Churchill’s promise 
to restore King George, and Britain's fear that 
EAM’s inclusion of Communists might predispose it 
to a pro-Russian policy. Churchill's displeasure with 








JUST PUBLISHED —a political and economic 
analysis of 
ARGENTINA IN CRISIS 
by Ysabel Fisk and Robert A. Rennie 


25c 


May 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
Reports are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 





Page Three 











SS 
——— 





the leftist guerrilla groups in Greece was expressed 
in his report to Parliament on February 22, when he 
described the Greek situation as “the saddest case of 
all” and painted a picture of confusion and interne- 
cine strife. Any remaining doubts concerning Brit- 
ain’s disapproval of EAM’S effort to change the 
Greek government now were dispelled on April 29 
when Churchill sent a message to Premier Papan- 
dreou insisting that Greece’s political differences 
must be set aside until after the war and promising 
the Greek people freedom in choosing their form 
of post-war government. 


MOSCOW’S NEW POLICY. Meanwhile, South 
Africa's Premier, Jan Christiaan Smuts, and other 
Empire statesmen are reported to fear that while 
Britain attempts to suspend Greek political prob- 
lems until after the nation is liberated, Moscow may 
draw up a more positive program for Greece. And, 
in fact, there are indications that Russia may be 
abandoning its neutrality and giving support to the 
leftist Greek groups that have failed to win London’s 
approval. The first step in this direction was taken at 
the end of January, when an article in War and the 
Working Class castigated the Greek government-in- 
exile for advocating passive resistance in Greece and 
praised EAM for its guerrilla warfare. On March 21 
a Soviet analyst in Red Star reiterated this approval 
of the Liberation Front and declared “all Greek 
patriots” had rallied to its leadership. Accordingly, 
the Soviet press and radio later launched an attack on 
Premier Tsouderos’ government, declaring it rested 
on the support of pro-Fascist elements among Greek 
army officers. 


Behind the apparent shift in Soviet policy may be 
both immediate and long-range considerations. One 
is undoubtedly Moscow’s eagerness to insure the 
Greeks’ maximum participation in the war during 
the decisive months ahead by making their govern- 
ment-in-exile inclusive of all political groups. An- 
other may be Russia's desire to bid for a friendly 
post-war Greek régime—resting on the assumption 
that the present leftist guerrilla groups will play an 
important role in the future of Greece. What appears 
on the surface to be merely a Greek political crisis, 
therefore, could become part of a dangerous contest 
between Britain and Russia for spheres of influence 
in the eastern Mediterranean. On the other hand, con- 
tinued close military cooperation between these great 
powers can do much to prevent friction between 
them in Greece and other areas of tension. 


WHINIFRED N. HADSEL 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 29, May 5, 


1944, 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lugt, Secretary; Vara MicHELES Dgan, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


SB 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





ne meer tery. shee 


_ _ 
Be et, 


nok neni, 





=e SE. 
~~ 


et ae 


' 
i 
i 
f 
ay 
a 
] 


ee ee “ 


Le TN A 
a. ae 7 


Be cela 


~/ 
4 i. on = "lie 
pote wee 


Washington News Letter 

















May 1.—On January 31, 1920, when memory of 
the Senate’s rejection of the Versailles Treaty was 
still fresh, Viscount Grey, former British Foreign 
Secretary, wrote to the London Times that the Con- 
stitution of the United States “renders inevitable con- 
flict between the Executive and the Legislature.” 
Having experienced that conflict for eleven years as 
Secretary of State, Cordell Hull has now set out to 
make a team of executive and legislature as far as 
foreign affairs are concerned, so that Congress will 
accept at this war’s end the treaty arrangements the 
President makes. On the success of this experiment 
may depend the course which the United States will 
follow in world affairs in the coming era of peace. 

STATE DEPARTMENT PLANS TO COOPER- 
ATE WITH CONGRESS. Division between Congress 
and the State Department is traditional. Secretary of 
State John Hay said that a treaty “entering the Senate 
is like a bull going into the arena; no one can say 
just how or when the final blow will fall, but one 
thing is certain—it will never leave the arena alive.” 
During his first year in the State Department, Mr. 
Hull proposed that Congress enact legislation au- 
thorizing the President to forbid American exports 
of arms to the aggressor state in a war. Instead, Con- 
gress passed a bill prohibiting exports of arms to any 
belligerent. President Roosevelt and Mr. Hull vainly 
urged the Congress in May and June of 1939 to re- 
vise the Neutrality Act, whose provisions were help- 
ful to a Germany planning war. Although in domes- 
tic affairs Congress held a subordinate position from 
1933 to 1940, it effectively controlled American for- 
eign policy during the Roosevelt Administration 
until events like the surrender of France revealed 
the emptiness of Congressional debate. 

Chairman Tom Connally of the Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee declared on March 24 that Sec- 
retary Hull had proposed the organization of a Sen- 
ate committee to discuss post-war international plans 
with him. On April 25 the committee held its first 
meeting with Mr. Hull, and the Secretary intends to 
meet with the Senators regularly. The commit- 
tee is composed of four Democrats — Senators 
Connally, Walter George of Georgia, Alben W. 
Barkley of Kentucky, and Guy M. Gillette of Iowa; 
three Republicans—Arthur H. Vandenberg of Mich- 
igan, Wallace H. White, Jr., of Maine, and Warren 
R. Austin of Vermont; and one Progressive, Robert 
M. LaFollette, Jr., of Wisconsin. 

Congress has also been invited to participate, 


FOR VICTORY °* 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


through selected members of the House and Senate 
in decisions affecting subsidiary foreign policy ques. 
tions. For instance, Secretary of the Treasury Henry 
Morgenthau, Jr., frequently consulted the House and 
Senate Banking Committee during the preliminary 
negotiations on world monetary stabilization; these 
talks will bear fruit in the coming monetary confer. 
ence announced on April 21. In the petroleum cop. 
versations with Britain, now in progress in Washing. 
ton, the Administration takes into consideration the 
views of the special oil committee, whose chairman 
is Senator Francis Maloney, Democrat, of Connecti. 
cut. The State Department also has established 
liaison with Congress on international aviation ques. 
tions. \ 
ENCOURAGING TO UNITED NATIONS. | 
The leaders of Allied governments, realizing that | 
Congress has the power to dictate the terms on 
which this country will accept a peace settlement, 
naturally hope that Mr. Hull will be able to guide 
the Senate conferees into advocacy of a policy of 
forceful international collaboration. For practical | 
purposes, it is important that Mr. Hull convince Re. 
publicans as well as Democrats. Indeed, the Secre. ' 
tary of State maintains that the major parties should 
agree on foreign policy and thereby bury it as an issue 
during the forthcoming Presidential campaign. The 
April 27 speech of Governor Dewey of New York 
and the address delivered two days before by Ohio's 
Governor Bricker suggest that, although there will | 
be criticism of the Administration’s conduct of 
foreign policy, there may be broad agreement on | 











principle. 

On April 12 Mr. Hull told Speaker Sam Rayburn 
of the House of Representatives that he also intend- 
ed to confer with House members on the develop- | 
ment of the Administration’s foreign policy. He 
began working with the Senate rather than the House 
because the Constitution provides that the Senate 
alone can ratify treaties by a two-thirds majority vote. 
Representative Chester E. Merrow of New Hamp- 
shire proposed on April 22 the submission of a con- 
stitutional amendment to the people calling for treaty 
ratification by simple majority of both houses. But 
the prospect of change is slight. The Senate is jealous 
of its authority, and Senator Connally on April 25 
said that the two-thirds rule was essential to stable | 
foreign policy and he would fight all attempts to | 
abolish it. 





BLAIR BOLLES 











191 


VoL. 


