1 FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN : 


PR 2 ‘Becember 
; ‘ ; ; ss second- 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff osc, a eee 

Subscription, One Dollar a Year Office at New York, 

N. Y., under the act 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3, 1879. 
mRIODIC A ~OOMB West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
NERAL LISRARY 
P Vou. XVI, No. 24 Aprit 9, 1937 
Announcing the latest HEADLINE BOOK 
COOPERATIVES 


The story of the Cooperative movement, its successes and 
limitations. What are its possible effects on our problems 
of unemployment, wage scales, use of stored-up wealth, 
international trade and government control? Told in the 
terse style, and with the graphic illustrations which charac- 
terize HEADLINE BOOKS. 


Single copies—25 cents in paper, 35 cents in boards 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


INTERNATIONAL PLANNING FOR SUGAR AND TEXTILES? 


HE United States is currently participating 

in two conferences, each of which represents 
a modest effort to achieve more orderly interna- 
tional relations within a limited field. These are 
the Tripartite Technical Conference on the Tex- 
tile Industry convened at Washington on April 2 
by the International Labor Organization, and a 
sugar conference convoked on April 5 at London 
under the auspices of the League of Nations. 

The Washington conference includes’ govern- 
ment, employer and employee delegates from the 
23 countries most interested in the textile indus- 
try. Unlike other I.L.0. meetings which are 
called to consider specific recommendations or 
draft conventions regulating conditions of labor, 
it will examine “all those aspects of the textile in- 
dustry which, directly or indirectly, may have a 
bearing on the improvement of social conditions 
in that industry.” The conference grew out of 
the realization that it was impossible to apply 
more uniform labor standards by international 
convention until an exhaustive study had been 
made of the complicated and perplexing problems 
confronting this industry. 

Textile manufacturing has the broadest inter- 
national ramifications of any industry in the 
world. Not only does it directly employ at least 
fourteen million workers scattered through many 
countries, but in 1935 textiles constituted 17 per 
cent of total world exports. The industry, more- 
over, has undergone profound structural changes 
which have seriously disturbed international mar- 
kets and greatly intensified competition. Aided 
by low wages and a variety of other factors, tex- 
tile manufacturing in Japan, India and China has 
forged rapidly ahead at the expense of the United 
States and Western Europe. The trend toward 
industrialization and economic self-sufficiency has 
also resulted in the establishment of textile plants 
in many countries of the Near East and Latin 
America. Competition for the remaining mar- 


kets has been accentuated by widely varying 
wages and labor standards, and has brought in its 
wake a whole crop of trade restrictions, frequent- 
ly of a discriminatory character. The Washing- 
ton conference must consider all these factors 
with a view to insuring more orderly development 
of the industry. While its discussions will cover 
a wide field—markets, quotas, tariffs, raw ma- 
terial supplies, as well as hours and wages—it is 
not expected to draw up agreements, but merely 
to pave the way for possible action in the future. 

The sugar conference, to which 23 countries 
have sent delegates, has the more concrete task 
of framing a plan to regulate the production and 
marketing of a single commodity on an interna- 
tional scale. The production of sugar, like the 
manufacture of textiles, has suffered intensely 
from nationalistic economic policies. The Chad- 
bourne agreement of 1931 sought to stabilize the 
industry by assigning marketing quotas to the 
chief exporting countries and providing for the 
gradual disposal of accumulated surplus stocks. 
The scheme proved largely ineffective, however, 
and was allowed to expire on September 1, 1935. 
Sugar consumption did not show the expected re- 
vival, and all efforts to broaden the scope of the 
agreement to include all major producing coun- 
tries failed. While the participants reduced their 
production from 121 million quintals in 1929-1930 
to 65 million in 1934-1935, countries outside the 
agreement raised their output from 136 to 168 
million. The British Empire and the United 
States and its dependencies were primarily re- 
sponsible for this rise in production and the re- 
sulting collapse of the control scheme. 

Owing to general economic revival, the sugar 
industry has recovered to some extent in the last 
few years. Consumption has risen sharply, so 
that stocks at the beginning of 1937 were 16 per 
cent lower than two years ago and again approx- 
imated pre-depression levels. Yet the future may 


——— 


once more witness the accumulation of excessively 
large stocks. The increase in consumption is 
likely to slow down in the next few years, while 
every sign points to a continued rise in output. 
Prospects for success at London are mixed. 
The United States is favorably disposed to par- 
ticipating in an agreement. Through the Jones- 
Costigan Act of 1934 this country has divided the 
American market among the producers of Cuba, 
our insular possessions and the continental United 
States. While this Act expires at the end of 1937, 
the Jones-O’Mahoney bill recently introduced into 
Congress on the recommendation of President 
Roosevelt would indefinitely extend the quota 
system with some minor changes. Barring a pos- 
sible decision by the Supreme Court declaring 
such a law invalid, it would seem that supplies to 
the American market have been stabilized. 
Among other producers, Java, Cuba and the Phil- 
ippines have everything to gain from an accord; 
European countries also appear favorable. The 
attitude of the British Empire appears to be most 
uncertain. Undoubtedly certain parts of the Em- 
pire, like Australia and the West Indies, would 
like to have Britain assure further preferences to 
Empire sugar. India, which has been rapidly ex- 
tending its sugar production, may prove reluctant 
to accept auy controls. The British government 
itself, however, appears anxious to explore fully 
the possibilities of international agreement before 
embarking on a program to make the Empire self- 


sufficient in sugar. JoHN C. DEWILDE 


THE IMPASSE IN INDIA 


The general strike and widespread protest dem- 
onstration of April 1 which greeted the introduc- 
tion of the new Indian Constitution has brought 
to fever pitch the All-India Congress Party’s dis- 
satisfaction with that document. The Congress 
party manifestations followed legislative elections 
held in the eleven provinces of British India in 
January and February, as a result of which an 
electorate of 35,000,000 gave the party an abso- 
lute majority in six provinces and a plurality in 
three others. Decisive as it appears, this result 
understates the measure of the Congress triumph, 
since the Indian system of communal voting gives 
certain minority groups more than proportionate 
representation. The victory thus endorses a reso- 
lution of the Congress adopted at Faizpur on De- 
cember 28, 1936, declaring that the Constitution 
“has been imposed on India against the declared 
will of the people of the country”; and that “any 
cooperation with this Constitution is a betrayal 
of India’s struggle for freedom.” 


—_ Page Two 


——s 
—e 


Despite this extreme stand the party decided 
not to boycott the provincial elections. 
the campaign it carefully kept in the background 
the marked internal cleavage between its socialist 
wing, led by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, and the 
conservative propertied interests. The election 
was regarded as a demonstration of Congress 
strength and the electoral mandate as an oppor. 
tunity to sabotage the new Constitution from its 
inception by creating difficulties for the British 
authorities. On March 18 the All-India Congress 
Committee resolved that Congress ministers 
should accept office only if each Governor would 
agree not to “use his special powers of interfer- 
ence or set aside the advice of Ministers in regard 
to their constitutional activities.” Citing the Con. 
stitution’s provisions, the Provincia! Governors 
declared it impossible to accept this formula. 

The present situation is the outcome of a long 
dispute over the new Constitution, which Con- 
gress claims is in some respects a backward step 
in the evolution toward a self-governing India. The 
ultimate aim of the Constitution—incorporation 
of the British provinces and the autonomous prin- 
cipalities in a single federal state—meets with 
general approval, but there is serious objection to 
the fact that the Provincial Governors and the 
Governor General will possess extensive and un- 
conditional veto powers over legislative acts. It 
is also contended that the disproportionate repre- 
sentation of the autocratic principalities and con- 
servative special interests in the new parliamen- 
tary bodies will prove an effective brake on prog- 
ress toward full self-government. While the pro- 
ject for federation still awaits agreement with 
the Princes, the Congress party is at present dis- 
satisfied both with the proposed federal arrange- 
ment and the important limitations on responsible 
government in the provinces. 


For the moment a crisis has been avoided by 
the formation of minority governme: which 
will work with the Governors in th rinces 
dominated by Congress. Since the new legisla 
tures need not be summoned for six months, a 


breathing spell is provided for the establishment 
of a modus vivendi. Possibly Congress, when the 
flush of its victory cools, will prove receptive to 
the suggestion made at Delhi that Gandhi and the 
Marquess of Linlithgow, Viceroy of India, dis- 
cuss the possibility of ending the deadlock. But 
the extreme militancy of the party makes it equal- 
ly likely that an impasse in the provincial legisla- 
tures next fall may serve as a signal for wide- 
spread civil disobedience and violence. 


DAVID H. POPPER 


During | 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 24, Aprit 9, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp LEsLIg BUELL, President; EstHeR G. OGDEN, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Béitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


One Dollar a Year. 


National 


