TEOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


— 


he 


and 


iili- 
The 
rOV- 

de- 
t in 
bol- 
cher 


imon 


nited 
sting 


Mac- 


, and 
force 
tions 


New 


y sta- 
onies 


> 
7° 


—_ 
jational 
Editor. 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVI, No. 15 FEBRUARY 5, 1937 


AMERICAN POLICY IN THE FAR EAST 
by T. A. Bisson 

This report describes United States participation in recent de- 
velopments affecting the Far East—the London Naval Confer- 
ence, agreement to purchase China’s silver, issues affecting Man- 
choukuo, inauguration of a trans-Pacific airline, and the Philip- 
pine Independence Act. The objectives and methods of American 
policy in the Far East are of more than ordinary importance, for 
there is always the danger that the United States will ultimately 
be involved in any conflict which may develop in the Pacific area. 


February 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 








Entered as second- 
FEB . i9 class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
‘ Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 

of March 3, 1879, 








Dr. William #. Bishop / 
% University of Michigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











HITLER DISAPPOINTS F 


TT 
A 


RANCE AND BRITAIN 





HILE nervous diplomats awaited another 

“Saturday surprise,” Adolf Hitler on Janu- 
ary 30 gave the German people an account of his 
stewardship through the four years of power for 
which he had asked in 1933. Completing the 
“equality of rights” which he had promised them, 
the Fuehrer solemnly repudiated Germany’s sig- 
nature to the “war-guilt clause” and abolished the 
corporate independence of the Reichsbank and the 
German railways imposed on the Reich by the 
Versailles Treaty for the purpose of reparation 
payments. Then he reassured the diplomats by 
stating that Germany, now that equality was 
achieved, was ready to end the “era of surprises” 
and cooperate with other nations in solving the 
problems of the world. 

As evidence of this desire for cooperation, Hitler 
cited his agreements with Poland, Austria, Italy 
and Japan, and German friendship with other 
nations such as Yugoslavia, Hungary, Bulgaria, 
Greece and Turkey. He indicated willingness to 
guarantee the neutrality of Holland and Belgium, 
and declared that there could be no conceivable 
cause for any quarrel with France. 


But the conciliatory tone of the speech could 
not mask the fact that it contained no answer to 
the questions which European diplomats have re- 
peatedly asked of Berlin. The Fuehrer, while dis- 
claiming any thought of aggression in Western 
Europe, gave no assurances in regard to the East, 
and in fact made the forthright assertion that 
there could never be agreement between Germany 
and Soviet Russia. He reiterated the German de- 
mand for colonies, although he specifically con- 
fined German claims to the colonial territories of 
which the Versailles Treaty had deprived the 
Reich. While he praised the ideal of international 
economic cooperation, he refused to abandon the 
four-year plan for greater self-sufficiency and rely 
_on assurances from foreign statesmen respect- 
ing international economic aid or accommoda- 


tion.” He failed to repudiate the pan-German 
propaganda which seeks to draw all Germanic 
peoples into the Nazi orbit, and indeed stated that 
the Nazi theories of blood and soil are destined to 
revolutionize future thinking just as the Coper- 
nican “realization that the earth moves around 
the sun led to revolutionizing the conception of 
the world.” Disarmament, one of the cardinal 
points of the French and British conciliation offers 
of last week, received cavalier treatment at Hit- 
ler’s hands. The German leader pointed to his 
previous offers of international arms limitation 
on the basis of equality, noted that they had been 
rejected by the very powers which were now dis- 
cussing disarmament, and declared that each na- 
tion was alone competent to decide what was neces- 
sary for its own defense. He cited the growing 
Soviet danger as ample justification for German 
arms increases. 

In the domestic sphere, Hitler requested and 
received from a docile Reichstag a four-year ex- 
tension of the Enabling Act which permits him 
to rule by decree. He claimed proudly that the 
Jews had been completely eliminated from the 
fields of literature and education without causing 
any structural weaknesses. Pointing to the re- 
duction of unemployment and the successful co- 
ordination of industry under Nazi rule, he indi- 
cated his intention to continue along the same 
lines by means of the four-year plan. He also 
promised that a new constitution would be framed 
in the near future. 


In general, the reaction to the speech outside 
Germany has not been favorable. Relief at the 
purely negative fact that Hitler has not closed 
the door to cooperation is tempered by the realiza- 
tion that he offered no solid basis for opening ne- 
gotiations leading toward a general European 
settlement. The speech likewise failed to advance 
the solution of the dangerous Spanish problem. 
Germany, Hitler declared, must continue to sup- 





ee 











port General Franco in order to check the spread 
of Bolshevist “poison.” HELEN FISHER 


POLITICAL FERMENT IN THE FAR EAST 


When on January 30 General Senjuro Hayashi 
was charged by the Emperor to form a cabinet, 
it relieved the tension which had gripped Japan 
for almost a fortnight but at the same time 
marked a defeat for the liberal groups of the 
Empire. These forces had united behind General 
Kazushige Ugaki, who from January 25 to 29 
vainly attempted to secure the army’s participa- 
tion in a government headed by himself. To ex- 
plain their implacable opposition to Ugaki, the 
army’s ruling triumvirate— Generals Terauchi 
and Umezu, retiring Minister and Vice-Minister 
of War, and General Sugiyama, Inspector General 
of Military Education—referred in veiled terms 
to hitherto undisclosed mutinous incidents in 1931 
and 1932, in which Ugaki was said to have been 
implicated. The army maintained that its course 
of action had been motivated not by desire for 
military dictatorship, but by the paramount ne- 
cessity for preserving unity and discipline in the 
service. 


It seems clear, however, that the army has suc- 
ceeded in imposing an effective veto on the Em- 
peror’s choice. General Ugaki, in a dramatic exit 
from the scene, announced his determination to 
resign his military rank and asserted that the 
situation placed Japan “at the crossroads between 
Fascism and parliamentary politics.” He charged 
that the army had become “a political organiza- 
tion” with “a few men in authoritative positions” 
claiming to represent the entire force, and inti- 
mated that by their defiance the military had 
failed in their duty to the Emperor. 


General Hayashi, the new Premier, is reported 
to be acceptable to the army and in agreement with 
its general policies. His cabinet, announced on 
February 2, contains a number of moderates. 
Nevertheless, with powerful representatives of 
the services holding the war and navy ministries 
and bureaucrats predominating in other posts, his 
administration is expected to continue large mili- 
tary expenditures and an aggressive policy in 
China. It will probably also seek more political 
power and greater state control over economic 
life, thus weakening still further the precarious 
position of the political parties and the Diet. 


While Japan was engrossed by domestic dis- 
sension, events in China aroused hope for greater 
national unity in resisting Japanese invasion. An 
agreement between the rebellious Shensi forces 


Page Two 








ee I 
—— 


and the Nanking government was reported at 
Tungkwan on January 28, after no less than five 
temporary truces had expired. Permitting oc. 
cupation of northern Shensi by the Communists, 
the compact provides that troops of the rebel gen- 
eral Yang Fu-cheng will play the réle of buffer in 
the central portion of the province, while govern- 
ment forces garrison the south including Sian, 
the provincial capital. The army of Chang 
Hsueh-liang, who received a full pardon on Janu- 
ary 4 for his part in the rebellion, is to take over 
the province of Kansu. Although later reports 
indicate that General Yang and the Communist 
leaders have not agreed to these terms, it is gen- 
erally believed that the Tungkwan agreement is 
merely a stop-gap until the plenary session of the 
Kuomintang opens at Nanking on February 15. 
At that time the Nanking cabal of violent anti- 
Communists will feel the full weight of that sec- 
tion of Chinese opinion which demands cessaticn 
of all civil war in order to achieve unity against 
Japan. The significance of Nanking’s negotia- 
tions for a truce with China’s Red army, appar- 
ently supported by Chiang Kai-shek, will not be 
overlooked in Tokyo. Progress by Right forces in 
Japan and by the Left in China may set the stage 
for open hostilities in the Far East. 


DAvip H. PoPpPER 





What Next in Europe? by Sir Arthur Willert. New York, 
Putnam’s, 1936. $3.00 
Interesting discussion of a troubled scene. 


News from Tartary, by Peter Fleming. 
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1936. $3.00 
Intriguing account of a journey through Chinghai and 

Sinkiang, with news of Soviet dominance in Sinkiang. 


Annuaire de la Société des Nations, 1936, edited by Georges 
Ottlik. Geneva, Switzerland, Editions de l’Annuaire, 
1936. $6.00 
Welcome reappearance of this invaluable annual pub- 

lication. 


The Turkish Tranformation, by Henry Elisha Allen. 
cago, University of Chicago Press, 1935. $2.50 


New York, 


Chi- 





An i 


—— 
VOL. 
— 


| 





A sympathetic, highly documented sociological study of 
post-war Turkey. 


Japanese Trade and Industry, by Mitsubishi Economic Re- 
search Bureau. New York, Macmillan, 1936. $7.50 
An invaluable handbook on Japan’s economy, with de- 

tailed analyses and statistical data. 


The Balkan Conferences and the Balkan Entente, by 
Robert J. Kerner and H. N. Howard. Berkeley, Cali- 
fornia, University of California Press, 1936. $3.00 
Excellent documentary material, rather poorly organ- 

ized, on the post-war efforts to achieve Balkan unity. 


France Today and the People’s Front, by Maurice Thorez. 
New York, International Publishers, 1936. $1.75 
The secretary-general of the French Communist party 
views the problems of his country and party. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 15, Fesruary 5, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasiig BuELL, President; EstHer G. OcpEN, Secretary; Vera MICHELES Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








