co 


Ling 


ake 
\try, 
mes 
ives 


llah 
nent 
Pal. 
jews 
icili- 
> al. 
ered 
in a 
ina 


rival 
here, 
1 the 
| un 
eace 


the 
‘fap. 
rgOv- 
emi- 
Aus: 
aly 6. 
ER 


or and 
stitute 


in the 
esting 
y both 


imann, 
2.50 
f these 
‘ise of 
ital to 
these 
rnized 


‘red A. 


. views 
crucial 

inade- 
f them. 


National 
1, Editor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





You. XVII, No. 33 JUNE 10, 1988 





— 


INDUSTRY AND AGRICULTURE IN THE U.S.S.R. 


By Vera Micheles Dean 25 cents 


A concise analysis of the economic development of 
the Soviet Union under the first two Five-Year Plans 
—-particularly timely in view of the controversy aroused 
by the far-reaching Soviet purge. 


June Ist issue of Foreign Policy Reports 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 




















_ BRITAIN REVIVES NON-INTERVENTION PROGRAM 





HE prospect that the Spanish war may drag on 

indefinitely, continuing to menace European 
peace, has renewed international efforts to eliminate 
foreign intervention, and has apparently sapped the 
unity of the forces supporting the Franco régime. 
Since the Anglo-Italian pact does not go into effect 
until Italian troops have been withdrawn from Spain, 
the unexpected prolongation of the conflict threatens 
to stall the Chamberlain program for general ap- 
peasement. 


Following Mussolini's declaration on May 14 that 
in the Spanish struggle the French and Italians were 
on “opposite sides of the barricades,” Italo-French 
negotiations came to a standstill. Concerned by these 
developments, London resumed its endeavors to 
effect withdrawal of ‘‘volunteers” and stoppage of 
war supplies to both sides. A British formula, pro- 
viding for recognition of belligerent rights for both 
factions as soon as a substantial beginning had been 
made at evacuation of foreign troops, had been ac- 
cepted by the Non-Intervention Committee on No- 
vember 4, 1937. On May 26, after months of 
wrangling over details, a subcommittee of nine na- 
tions—with the exception of the U.S.S.R.—achieved 
unanimity on a revised program. It was agreed that, 
within 15 days after the arrival in Spain of commis- 
sions to count and supervise the withdrawal of ‘‘vol- 
unteers,’’ the French and Portuguese frontiers should 
be closed for a 30-day period. Control at sea would be 
te-established, through observers rather than revival 
of the international patrol, and would be extended 
to ports and airdromes. Following “a substantial 
withdrawal’”’—10,000 men from the side with fewer 
“volunteers” and a proportionately greater number 
from the other—recognition of belligerency would 
be granted, and complete evacuation would follow. 


The U.S.S.R. condemned these proposals as un- 


duly favoring the Insurgents, arguing that Franco 
might seek to crush the Loyalists during the period 
they were cut off from supplies. Its attitude was 
modified on June 2, however, when the Soviet repre- 
sentative, M. Kagan, agreed to restoration of land 
control on condition (1) that sea control be effec- 
tively reimposed, with observation officers remain- 
ing permanently in all Spanish ports, and (2) that 
land control be lifted if actual withdrawal of troops 
had not been started before the end of the counting 
period. But before the non-intervention program can 
get under way, two additional obstacles must be sur- 
mounted: the control machinery, whose cost is esti- 
mated at a minimum of £1,000,000, must be financed 
and the approval of the belligerent forces in Spain 
must be secured. Rumors in London that a truce 
might be sought were interpreted as primarily a 
political maneuver to bolster the position of the 
Chamberlain government against its domestic critics. 


Meanwhile, the revival of ruthless air raids by the 
Insurgents served to discourage hopes of pacifica- 
tion. On May 25 Alicante suffered the most deadly 
bombing of the war, with a toll of more than 600 
lives. Twenty-eight foreign consular representatives 
deplored the fact that “the attack was in the center 
of the city, far from military objects, and that vic- 
tims principally were civilians.” Six days later a 
rain of bombs on the Catalan town of Granollers, 
16 miles north of Barcelona, killed 200 persons and 
wounded an estimated 500. These events, together 
with air attacks by the Japanese on Canton, drew 
from Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles on 
June 3 a statement declaring such civilian bombings 
“barbarous.” Great Britain accompanied a similar 
expression of protest by a suggestion for organiza- 
tion of a small international commission to investi- 


| 

} 

: 
a 
' 
y 
| 
{ 
i 
i 

: 


| 
| 
} 


























gate the damages and possible military objectives in 
bombed areas. 

In Spain itself the armed contest has again reached 
practically a stalemate. General Franco, abandoning 
for the time being the campaign against Catalonia, 
has concentrated his efforts on the attempt to drive 
southward toward Castell6n and Sagunto, thus 
widening the Insurgent wedge splitting Republican 
Spain and endangering Valencia. But stiffened Loy- 
alist resistance, together with unfavorable weather, 
has prevented his gains from assuming decisive im- 
portance. Meanwhile, certain events have suggested 
renewed dissension between the ‘‘fascist’’ Falangists 
and other elements supporting the Franco cause. In 
April General Juan Yagiie, prominent Nationalist 
commander who is regarded as a Falangist sympa- 
thizer, made a speech at Burgos urging reconcilia- 
tion with the so-called “Reds” of Republican Spain, 
and calling for release of political prisoners and the 
abandonment of hatred. For this s . he was re- 
ported to have been later rebuked by General 
Franco. Rumors of a rift were revived by a mass 
break on May 22 of some 800 captives from an 
Insurgent prison at Pamplona, in which a number 
of dissident Falangists were said to have been in- 
volved. At the same time, the conservative Carlist 
monarchists, leading rivals of the Falangists for 
dominance of Franco’s single official party, were 
pictured as restive over the alleged expansion of Nazi 
influence in Nationalist Spain. Their strongly Catho- 
lic sympathies had been stirred by the German an- 
nexation of Austria. The situation was further com- 
plicated by resentment among Spanish officers 
against the activities and pretensions of Italian and 
German officials. Fears were expressed that the 
fascist states would seek to maintain a military hold 
on, Spain following the end of the civil war. Thus 
political dissension, which has openly plagued the 
Loyalists throughout the conflict, now appears to 
constitute even greater danger for the Insurgents. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


BRITAIN SPEEDS AIR DEFENSES 


The efforts of Prime Minister Chamberlain to 
reinforce his policy of European appeasement by 
acceleration of Britain’s rearmament program have 
aroused increasing criticism in recent weeks, result- 
ing on May 16 in a reorganization of the Air Min- 
istry. During a bitter debate in the House of Com- 
mons on May 12 the government was accused of in- 
action and inefficiency by the Labor and Liberal op- 
position, as well as by many Conservatives, including 
Mr. Winston Churchill. Claiming that Britain has 
only 1,750 first-line planes in comparison with six 
to eight thousand in Germany, critics of the govern- 
ment charged that departmental red tape has pre- 


Page Two 








ey 
—, 


vented the wholesale production of modern planes, 
The Air Minister, Viscount Swinton (formerly Philip 
Cunliffe-Lister), and his Under-Secretary, Earl Win. 
terton, replied in vain that by March 1940 Britain 
would have at least 3,360 first-line planes and addj. 
tional thousands of reserve planes, that the personne 
of the air force would be increased by 40,000 officers 
and men, and that negotiations are under way for 
the purchase of planes in both Canada and the 
United States. 


During a second air debate on May 26, Mr. Cham. 
berlain secured defeat for two motions calling for 
an independent inquiry into the Air Ministry and 
the establishment of a separate Ministry of Supply. 
The Prime Minister argued that a new Supply Min. 
istry would be ineffective unless granted wartime 
powers of authority over industry and labor, a pro- 
posal particularly unwelcome in trade union circles, 
The readiness of the government to impose con 
scription was revealed, apparently by indiscretion, in 
a speech by Sir Thomas Inskip, Minister for the Co- 
ordination of Defense. The Prime Minister later 
denied that he has any plan for conscripting labor, 
but implied that a military draft is anticipated. 

Following the resignation of Viscount Swinton, 
Mr. Chamberlain reshuffled several of the major 
posts in his Cabinet, reducing the number of peers 
from eight to six. The Air Ministry was taken by Sir 
Kingsley Wood, formerly Health Minister, whose 
administration abilities are expected to speed up the 
air program. The Colonial office, vacated by Mr. 
William Ormsby-Gore because of his elevation to the 
peerage as Baron Harlech, was given to Mr. Mal- 
colm MacDonald, who as Dominions Secretary had 
successfully negotiated the treaty with Eire. Mr. 
MacDonald, often mentioned as a future Foreign 
Secretary, is expected to negotiate a settlement of 
the colonial problem with Germany, as well as to 
deal with the Arab-Jewish conflict in Palestine and 
the recurrent strikes and riots in the West Indies. 
Despite insistent demands in many quarters that both 
Mr. Churchill and Mr. Eden join the Cabinet, the 
Prime Minister will probably not include these out- 
spoken opponents of his foreign policy at the pres 
ent time. 

Plans are being developed for defense of London 
in case of air raids, including a spectacular project 
for encircling the city by a balloon barrage to en- 
snare hostile bombers. At least a thousand hydrogen- 
filled balloons, moored by steel cables, will float 
above London at a height of 10,000 feet, forcing 
enemy planes to higher altitudes. Sir Samuel Hoare, 
the Home Secretary, has announced that the govern- 
ment is prepared to evacuate millions of Lon 
doners to rural areas and to protect others by con- 


(Continued on Page 4) 


Ze 


~~ ~wTeotp So a 








LNes, 
nili 

Vie 
itain 
iddi. 
nnel 
icers 
r for 


the 


ham- 
r for 

and 
pply. 
Min- 
rtime 
pfo- 
rcles, 
con 
yn, in 
e Co- 
later 


abor, 


nton, 
major 
peers 
oy Sir 
whose 
p the 
> Me. 
to the 
Mal- 
y had 
. Mr. 
reign 
nt of 
as to 
e and 
ndies. 
t both 
t, the 
e out 
» pres- 


ondon 
>roject 
to ef 
rogen- 
| float 
orcing 
Hoare, 
overn- 

Lon- 
Ny con- 


E_ 


Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JUNE 7.—Public pronouncements by high govern- 
ment officials are not the most reliable barometers 
by which to forecast underlying Administration 
licies or long-term trends; too often they prove to 
be but fickle weathervanes of shifting political winds. 
Occasionally, however, a public statement affords a 
useful guide to policy by virtue of its timing, if not 
its content. Thus, during the past fortnight, many 
foreign diplomats and most Washington correspond- 
ents have particularly noted the timing and sequence 
of the series of diplomatic pronouncements emanat- 
ing from the State Department. 


While Secretary Hull’s speech at Nashville on 
June 3 would doubtless have been read with atten- 
tion under any circumstances, its significance was 
heightened in the eyes of Washington observers by 
its obvious relation to two preceding utterances. 
These were (1) Mr. Hull’s reminder on May 28 that 
the Kellogg Pact “is no less binding now than when 
it was entered into”; and (2) Under Secretary Sum- 
net Welles’ emphatic protest, made a few hours be- 
fore the Secretary's speech, against the ruthless 
bombing of civilian populations in Spain and China. 


“World Order Based on Law.” The underlying 
purpose of all three statements was suggested by an 
incident just before the Secretary left for Nashville. 
Meeting correspondents at his usual press conference, 
Mr. Hull not only gave out the full text of his 
address but also a two-page mimeographed release 
containing highlights of the speech, with the unusual 
notation—“‘as selected by Secretary Hull himself.” 
One sentence toward the end of the speech was un- 
derlined: “There is desperate need in our country, 
and in every country, of a strong and united public 
Opinion in support of such a renewal and demonstra- 
tion of faith in the possibility of a world order based 
on law and international cooperative effort.” 


This renewed appeal to public opinion—primarily 
American public opinion—was the motivating pur- 
pose behind the two earlier statements as well as the 
Nashville speech. The first pronouncement was timed 
with a period of relative quiet in Europe, following 
the crisis of May 20. During the first critical stage of 
the Czechoslovakian crisis, the State Department was 
discreetly silent. When tension relaxed, however, 
Mr. Hull took advantage of the lull to register the 
point that this country is not unconcerned by devel- 


’ 








opments abroad. His statement was not officially 
communicated to any foreign government, but it 
reminded both American and world opinion that “we 
cannot shut our eyes to the fact that any outbreak of 
hostilities anywhere in the world injects into world 
affairs a factor of general disturbance the ultimate 
consequences of which no man can foresee and is 
liable to inflict upon all nations incalculable and per- 
manent injuries.” 


The condemnation of aerial bombings in Spain 
and China was likewise made public at a State De- 
partment press conference and not transmitted di- 
rectly to any foreign government. Although Great 
Britain took similar action on the same day, Mr. 
Welles insisted that the United States had acted en- 
tirely independently, and he made no reference to a 
British invitation to cooperate in an international 
commission to investigate bombings in Spain. But 
the statement, approved by President Roosevelt, laid 
the basis for possible future cooperation. “This gov- 
ernment,” it declared, “while scrupulously adhering 
to the policy of non-intervention, reiterates this na- 
tion’s emphatic reprobation of such methods and of 
such acts, which are in violation of the most ele- 
mentary principles of those standards of humane 
conduct which have been developed as an essential 
part of modern civilization.” 


The nature of the new appeal to American public 
Opinion was made clear by Mr. Hull at Nashville. 
It will not repeat the President’s appeal at Chicago. 
It will not refer to “quarantine” or a united front of 
the democracies against the dictatorships. A great 
deal of water has flowed over the dam since Mr. 
Roosevelt issued his call for “‘concerted action,” and 
Mr. Hull is well aware that he must state his case in 
different terms. The present objective is more limited 
and is necessarily—perhaps purposely—defined in 
more general terms. ““The most important problem 
now confronting the human race is that of establish- 
ing throughout the world . . . an unshakable régime 
of order under law.”’ With this as the first excerpt 
in his own selected “highlights,” the Secretary went 
on to outline four “concrete steps which can and 
should be taken without delay .. .”” and in which this 
government is prepared to join with other nations. 
These steps are: (1) “the restoration and strength- 
ening of sound and constructive international rela- 
tionships”; (2) “an effective agreement on limita- 






































tion and progressive reduction of armaments’; 
(3) “humanizing by common agreement the rules 
and practices of warfare”; (4) “exploring all other 
methods of revitalizing the spirit of international 
cooperation and in ing use of every practicable 
means of giving it substance and reality.” 


The four points are scarcely an adequate working 
program for immediate action, and there is little 
evidence to indicate that they were designed for such 
action tomorrow. There is evidence, however, that 
they were selected as the basis for organizing that 
“strong and united public opinion” which was lack- 
ing last November at Brussels and for which Mr. 
Hull called so fervently at Nashville. 


It is something of a strain to reconcile the philos- 
ophy of Mr. Hull’s appeal with the advice of Under 
Secretary Sumner Welles in his Baltimore speech of 
May 24. But a full reading of what Mr. Welles said 
when he cautioned against our participation in “in- 
ternational polemics” over internal policies of other 
nations hardly justifies the attacks he received in the 
press. What he said was directed primarily to Secre- 
tary of War Woodring, whose provocative warning 
to certain dictatorships on May 5 was hardly con- 
ducive to international understanding. 


W. T. STONE 


Page Four 








BRITAIN SPEEDS AIR DEFENSES 
(Continued from Page 2) 


struction of trenches in the city parks. Progress jg 
being made in educating the public in “air raid 
precautions,” including gas mask drills and fire. 


fighting, although the government's radio appeals} — 


for 1,000,000 assistants have so far brought in only 
400,000 volunteers. 


While the British public as a whole has acquiesced 
in this gigantic program for rearmament and air de. 
fense, the Chamberlain foreign policy continues to 
provoke widespread resentment. After defeats in the 
first two by-elections fought after the resignation of 
Foreign Secretary Eden, the government won a third 
contest on May 21 at Aylesbury, but its previous 
plurality was cut in half. Two impending by-elec. 
tions are being fought with unusual vigor by govern. 
ment and opposition leaders, both of whom hope for 
decisive victories. Despite a considerable movement 
for creating a “popular front’’ of all liberal, labor 
and independent groups which oppose the Chamber. 
lain government, the national executive committee 
of the Labor party has refused its cooperation. The 
Labor executive argues that the compromises in. 
volved in such a project would “dilute” the Socialist 
program of the party and in the long run weaken 


its prestige. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





The F.D.A. Bookshelf 


Mussolini in the Making, by Gaudens Megaro. Boston, 

Houghton, Mifflin, 1938. $3.50 

An absorbing study of Jl Duce’s character and motives 
as revealed by his socialist writings and speeches before 
the outbreak of the World War. The author believes that 
the leitmotiv of Mussolini’s life has been not devotion to 
socialism or fascism, but an overwhelming desire for pow- 
er, which he is now seeking to achieve not only on the na- 
tional, but on the international scene. 


The Origin of Russian Communism, by Nicolas Berdayev. 
New York, Scribner, 1938. $3.00 


In this penetrating study the author, who has the un- 
usual advantage of understanding both Russia and Marx- 
ism, shows how deeply Lenin’s theory of communism was 
rooted in Russian political thought of the nineteenth cen- 
tury. His interpretation of the essentially Russian char- 
acteristics of the Soviet system dispels some of the start- 
ling misconceptions which Western observers still nurture 
regarding the U.S.S.R. 


Glass Houses: Ten Years of Free-Lancing, by Carleton 
Beals. Philadelphia, J. B. Lippincott Co., 1938. $3.50 


Autobiographical notes by a well-known journalist who 
has followed Mexico’s developing revolution for the past 
twenty years. In intervals of European residence, he wit- 
nessed the arrival of fascism in Italy and made himself at 
home among the writers and intellectual leaders of pre- 
Republican Spain. 


The Filibuster, by Laurence Greene. Indianapolis, Bobbs- 
Merrill Co., 1937. $3.50 


A popularized version of the strange career of William 
Walker, who, for a short period near the middle of the 
nineteenth century, made himself President of Nicaragua 
and provoked a Central American war. 


The Last Genro, by Bunji Omura. 
Lippincott, 1938. $3.50 


The life of Prince Saionji, last of Japan’s Elder States 
men, is told in the form of a romance based on authentic 
historical facts. Most of the biography is presented in 
the guise of fictional conversations between Prince Saionji 
and his intimates in personal and political life. Since the 
career of Saionji spans the whole epoch of Japan’s modern 
development, much valuable background is embedded in 
this interesting historical romance. 


Philadelphia, Pa., J. B. 


The New Poland and the Jews, by Simon Segal. 
York, Lee Furman, 1938. $2.00 


An unusually competent history of post-war Poland, 
with special reference to its desperate economic problems 
and the folly of trying to solve them by anti-Semitic 
measures. Despite the trend toward totalitarianism, the 
author believes that a united front of all Poland’s pro 
gressive forces might restore democratic government if it 
were aided by public opinion in the Western countries. 


New 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 33, Jung 10, 1938. 


In 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesisg Busgit, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


Two Dollars a Year. 


FC 


An 


Fore 


\| 


Fos 


tio 
vir 
fai 


pai 


lea 





