$5 2e a4 b-cl\ iJ 


S 


BAF 


ner- 
Cai 


Lips 
ubt, 


will 
ait 


por: | 


and 
heir 
e to 
the 
may 
ntic. 
e to 
rate 
“ican 
ean 
nain 
- are 
first 
lead- 
cond 
1,000 
esent 
add 
then- 


ainst 


ed to 
Act, 
n di- 
) and 
‘ively 
lieve 
how: 
usset- 


adom | 


fleet 
lying 
DE 











AL ROOM 
AL LIBRARY 


’ 
; 


SEP 19 194) = Gonsvar Brbrary 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


on twamned see 
Univeorstty of chican 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Yo. XX, No. 48 


SEPTEMBER 19, 1941 





: en rising tide of unrest in German-occupied Eu- 
rope has reached a new high point. During the 
past few months, the spirit of revolt in the conquered 
countries has been manifest in repeated acts of vio- 
‘lence against Nazi occupation authorities and fre- 
quent sabotage of war industries, communication 
lines and transportation facilities. With the intensi- 
feation of this defiant resistance to German ruie, 
especially in the last three weeks, Nazi measures of 
retaliation have become increasingly severe. Germany 
| apparently hopes to suppress the anti-Nazi movement 

in Scandinavia, the Low Countries, France and East- 
en Europe before Britain and the Allies can cap- 
italize on its recent growth. 

MARTIAL LAW IN NORWAY. Germany's im- 
position of martial law in the districts around Oslo, 
from September 10 to 16, climaxed a lengthy strug- 
gle between the Nazis and the Norwegian trade 
| unions. As long ago as May 15, 43 Norwegian asso- 
dations representing almost every activity in the coun- 
tty jointly sent Reichskommissar Josef Terboven a 
sathing indictment of German government in Nor- 
way. Several leaders of these associations, led by the 
| National Federation of Labor and a number of pro- 
| fessional groups, were imprisoned in June, and all 
were warned not to encourage further anti-Nazi ac- 
tivities. Individual acts of resistance to German dom- 
ination continued to increase, however, and strikes in 
Oslo’s iron and shipbuilding industries were ended 
nly when Nazi authorities declared a state of 
| Gvilian emergency” in the area around the Nor- 
| Wegian capital on September 10 In the next four days 
the Germans court-martialed 27 Norwegians, 5 of 
whom were given death sentences, and arrested about 
2000. The victims included not only labor leaders, 
i? many others who had openly opposed the Nazi 

égime. In order to avoid a general strike, the Ger- 
mans replaced all trade union leaders with ‘trusted 
men” of Major Vidkun Quisling’s pro-Nazi Nasjonal 














GROWING UNREST IN OCCUPIED EUROPE 


Samling. Quisling’s official party organ, Fritt Volk, 
announced that martial law might later be extended 
to all of Norway if opposition to German control 
continued. 

RESISTANCE IN OTHER COUNTRIES. An- 
tagonism to German rule has been similarly demon- 
strated in the Netherlands and Belgium, although 
the underground army in the Low Countries so far 
has revealed its existence in individual rather than 
mass action. Netherlanders, by failing to observe 
Nazi blackout regulations, have guided R.A.F. fliers 
in their nightly attacks on Germany; they have also 
sabotaged Dutch food supplies destined for the Reich. 
In mid-August Belgian labor conscripts, working on 
a Nazi airdrome near Brussels, staged a daring coup 
in which they seized several hundred German rifles, 
half a dozen machine guns, many rounds of ammuni- 
tion, and scores of hand grenades. 

Despite the Nazi wave of terror in occupied France, 
sabotage and acts of violence indicate the existence 
of a widespread spirit of revolt. In Yugoslavia un- 
conquered bands of native troops remain active in the 
mountain districts, where persistent guerrilla attacks 
have harassed German and Italian garrisons and lines 
of communication. On September 14 four bombs ex- 
ploded in the central telephone exchange of Zagreb, 
Croatia, disrupting the entire telephone system, and 
injuring a German army officer and at least 13 others. 
At approximately the same time, several Yugoslav 
patriots fired on six Croat sentries in another part of 
the city. In Czechoslovakia and Poland, where Nazi 
oppression has been most severe, recent sabotage has 
been reported to be a serious handicap to the German 
forces of occupation. Even in Rumania and Hungary, 
now allied with Germany, local officials on September 
13 issued stern warnings against further operations 
by saboteurs. 

POLITICAL WARFARE. While the conquered 
nations have always resented and to some extent re- 


Hi 
if 
fy 
i 
i 
i), 
; 
( 
i 





> 


=) ae Ses 


A 


OMG REI 


~ 


sh So 
Sete a. = 


i i he 


a 


1 Si ha ee 


seme XO 


BO are iat ents 2 ee 





ered 








sisted Nazi rule, many of the current acts of 
revolt are a logical aftermath of Germany's war 
on Soviet Russia. This is particularly true of 
anti-Nazi activities in the industrial outskirts of 
Paris, where Communism has enjoyed a wide 
following, and in Eastern Europe, where many 
people are traditionally friendly toward Russia.. Soviet 
policy, up to June 22, was based on the thesis that the 
War was an “imperialist’”’ conflict in which the U.S.S.R. 
had no interest, and from which Communists in all 
countries should remain aloof. Germany's attack on 
Russia, however, changed this attitude. Soviet propa- 
ganda broadcasts proclaimed the war a Nazi scheme 
for world domination, and urged Communists in the 
conquered countries to help frustrate German plans 
by active resistance and sabotage. 


This Russian appeal differed sharply from previous 
British methods. Between the capitulation of France 
in June 1940 and the outbreak of Soviet-German hos- 
tilities this summer, British policy encouraged the sub- 
ject peoples to maintain their national spirit through 
passive resistance, but to avoid a direct challenge to 
Nazi domination. The British, supported by refugee 
governments and councils from most of the van- 
quished nations, foresaw an advantage in building up 
Opposition to German rule on all fronts, and eventu- 
ally calling on these opposition forces to rise when 
their combined strength might be most effective. In 
this connection, British spokesmen have pointed out 
that the Reich must depend on foreigners for a large 
part of the labor required to maintain its emergency 
régime. Faced with the unpleasant choice of aiding 
their conquerors or being deprived of vital food, 
clothing and other necessities, hundreds of thousands 
of non-Germanic peoples have been plowing the 
fields and making munitions of war to keep German 
soldiers fighting. If these subject peoples should sud- 
denly lay down their tools, operation of the whole 
Nazi system would be seriously impaired. 


The current unrest in occupied Europe indicates a 
growing conviction that Germany may yet lose the 
war. The Soviet Union’s sustained defense against 
German invasion has forced the Nazis to withdraw 





READ— 
LABOR PROBLEMS 
by John C. deWilde 


The fifth in a series on the Defense Economy of the 
United States, which examines at length the strike situa- 
tion and the record of the Mediation Board. 


September 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports . . . 25¢ 





Page Two 











—<——— 


troops from their garrisons in the occupied regions 
and has provided tangible evidence that the Reid 
is not invincible. Each indication of German weaknes 





may be expected to increase the spirit of revolt, Jus 
as the Nazis have gained new adherents to their cays. 
in foreign countries with their successive military vic 
tories, Soviet resistance in the East and British i, 
raids on Germany in the West are now winning activ. 
support for the Allies among the conquered peoples 
who find their only hope for restored independence in 
an eventual Allied victory. Any relaxation of th 
Allied war effort, however, would lead them towarj 
despair and hopeless submission to German rule. |f 
the anti-Nazi movement is not to suffer a collapse up. 
der the force of German repression, the Allies mug 
correlate their political warfare with a steady an{ 
determined military offensive. 
A. RANDLE ELLiotr 


NEW STAFF MEMBERS 

The Association announces with pleasure the a 
pointment of Mrs. Anne Hartwell Johnstone as Edy. 
cation Secretary in the Department of Popular Edy. 
cation, to replace Mrs. Stewart. Mrs. Johnstone has 
served for the last seven years as Program Secretay 
for the National League of Women Voters in the 
field of foreign policy, and has traveled extensively 
in Europe and the Orient. 


We are glad to announce also that Miss Priscila | 


Duxbury has taken over the work of Student Secte 
tary. Miss Duxbury has had special experience with 
student groups interested in international affairs. 





The Diplomatic Relations of the United States with Haiti 
1776-1891, by Rayford W. Logan. Chapel Hill, Univer 
sity of North Carolina, 1941. $5.00 


An intensive monograph on Haitian-American diploma 
during the first 115 years of United States independene 
This work should be read in connection with L. L. Monte 
gue’s recent and more general study on Haiti and th 
United States, 1714-1988. 


In China Now, by Winifred Galbraith. New York, Willian 
Morrow, 1941. $2.50 


Life in China, especially since the war, seen throug 
the individual triumphs and tragedies of a score of persoli 
of all types and classes. Fresh and original, with literary 
grace and emotional sincerity. 





| 





Subject: SOUTH AMERICA CHECKS NAZIS 

Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 

Date: Sunday, September 21 

Time: 2:15 p.m. E.D.S.T. | 

Station: NBC, blue network 
* Beginning September 28, FPA broadcasts will be heard | 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule* | 


from 12 to 12:15 p.m., E.S.T. 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 48, SEPTEMBER 19, 1941. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Natio 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Screet, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dornotuy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Béie 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Co Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Th 
by af 
es 
mitte 
near 
ough 
the V 
by th 
playe 
New: 
ican. 

A 
prov 
by a 
Gern 
grou: 
activ 


| attac 


sado 
ilege 
The 
bloc 
yond 
the § 
non 
reso! 
it 1s 
man 
men 
final 








— 


3} TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA | 























ie By JOHN I. B. McCULLOCH 
| The investigation of Nazi propaganda activities urged a stronger and more effective anti-Nazi stand 
™ by an Argentine Congressional Committee has en- by the executive branch of the government. 
: at | tered a decisive stage. The committee has thus far sub- 
chive mitted two reports, and a third is understood to be GERMAN AIRLINE SUSPENDS SERVICES. A 
ples near completion. Its findings throw light on the thor- further landmark in the campaign to rid Latin Amet- 
oe it ough organization of German citizens in Argentina, xa of German airlines was reached the first week 
the| jhe volume of propaganda received and distributed i September when the Ecuadorean government 
ward by the German Embassy in Buenos Aires, and the role ordered the Nazi-dominated Sedta company to 
e. If played by such propaganda organs as the Transocean suspend operations. Slowly throttled by a gasoline 
Put: News Service and the stridently pro-Nazi, anti-Amer- embargo, and forced in its later stages to use auto- 
must) can E/ Pam pero. motive fuel (dangerous at high altitudes), Sedta had 
and ; ' been gradually curtailing its flights. For some months 
A resolution submitted by the committee and ap- past, all Sedta services had been duplicated by the 
tr } proved by the Chamber of Deputies on September 15 United States-owned Pan American-Grace line, so 
by a vote of 78 to l calls for the dissolution of that the elimination of this German concern will cause 
German social and charitable organizations, on the no hiatus in local operations. 
¢ 4} round that they serve as a front for illegal political ’ mut . 
Edu-| activities. This resolution is notable for its outspoken This latest development eliminates 590 miles from 
Edu-| attack on the German Ambassador. It indicts Ambas- the German routes flown on the West coast of South 
¢ has} sador von Thermann for abusing his diplomatic priv- America, leaving the Nazis in control of only 70 miles 
etary ileges, and overstepping the bounds of his position. of airlines in Chile. Pan American-Grace had previ- 
n th) The Radical party, which controls the largest single ously replaced 5,494 route miles of the Scadta system 
ivel)} bloc of votes in the Chamber, is eager to go even be- in Colombia, 1,210 miles of Lufthansa routes in Peru, 
__ | yond this declaration. Radical leaders hope to force 2d 4,109 miles controlled by Lloyd Aéreo Boliviano 
scilli| the government to declare the Nazi diplomat persona in Bolivia. 
Sect { non grata and expel him from the country. Since the The eclipse of Sedta leaves German planes still 
‘With! resolution has not yet been approved clause by clause, flying over Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina, and Chile. 
fs. | itisstill possible that a demand for Baron von Ther- Brazil is the crux of the problem for, if Axis-dom- 
| mann’s expulsion may be introduced as an amend- inated lines in that republic were eliminated, Nazi- 
“a ment when the Deputies vote on the measure in its controlled services in the other countries would be 
final form. isolated and relatively innocuous. Recently the Con- 
oma} The progress of the Argentine investigation is dor line, which has extensive ramifications throughout 
—_ being watched with keen interest in other Latin Amer- Brazil and maintains flights to Santiago being Buenos 
nd th) ican republics, many of which are faced with a prob- Aires, was placed on the United States “blacklist. 
lem roughly similar to Argentina's. Early in Septem- The same fate overtook Lati, the Italian transatlantic 
Villim} ber Radical Deputy Rail Damonte Taborda, who line which operates on irregular schedule and over a 
heads the investigating group, made a trip to Monte- variety of routes. Inclusion of these airlines on the 
arene | video together with the committee’s secretary, Juan blacklist makes it mandatory on U.S. companies to 
iteran} Antonio Solari. Subsequently the visit was returned shut off all gasoline and other supplies. 


by two Uruguayan judges who had taken part in 


It would be undesirable to interrupt all air ser- 
—| Uruguay's 1940 trial of alleged Nazi conspirators. 


vices in Brazil, since such an interruption would 





| In addition to giving a cue to other Latin American create serious obstacles for travel in South America. 
AS |/ countries, the results of the investigation will indicate It is worth noting, however, that the local Pan 
\ to what extent popular sentiment in Argentina is cap- American Airways subsidiary, Panair do Brasil 
|| able of carrying the day against the cold and bloodless (which recently extended its services to the Bolivian 
| policy of “strict neutrality” persistently maintained by frontier) now has nine-tenths the mileage that Con- 
ead) Acting President Ramon Castillo. Several weeks ago dor has. This estimate, to be sure, is based on miles 
“7d four of the leading dailies in Buenos Aires — La actually flown, not route miles; but it indicates that 
= Prensa, La Nacién, El Mundo, and Critica — joined American facilities are already capable of meeting 
. Hw} Man attack on Castillo’s concept of neutrality, and the need for extensive air services in this hemisphere. 


For more extensive coverage on Latin American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS, 4 bi-weekly newsletter edited by Mr. McCulloch. For sample 
copy of this publication, write to the Washington Bureau, Foreign Policy Association, 1200 National Press Building, Washington, D.C. 








ras erg es 


Se 


H 
oF 
i 3 
fe 


it Washington News Letter 


Fe sci imotti dnieens SS B SIS 


SE Re SRS 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Sept. 15.—As Congress reassembles this week after 
its brief recess, Washington is measuring the changed 
position of the United States in the light of the world 
reaction to President Roosevelt's decisive pronounce- 
ment of September 11. The first defiant replies from 
Berlin and Rome have been tempered by subsequent 
Statements which suggest that the European Axis 
powers may hesitate to carry out their verbal threats 
—at least for the moment—and will await further 
American moves before precipitating a “shooting 
war.” But whatever the course adopted by the Axis, 
all sections of opinion in Washington recognize that 
the United States has moved from the twilight zone 
of non-belligerent action to the threshold of armed 
intervention. 

THE END OF PASSIVE DEFENSE. The decision 
announced by the President not only sweeps away the 
last pretense of American neutrality but also marks 
the transition from passive to active defense. Hence- 
forth, under the orders given by the Commander-in- 
Chief, the Naval and Air forces of the United States 
will protect British and Allied ships, as well as Amer- 
ican merchant vessels, in ‘the waters which we deem 
vital to our defense’ and will resist German and 
Italian raiders in these “defensive waters.” These 
orders, according to Secretary of the Navy Knox, 
have already been invoked in the Atlantic area “‘be- 
tween the American continent and the waters adja- 
cent to Iceland.” To most Washington correspondents 
and returning Congressmen, however, the words of 
the President and the explanation offered by Secretary 
Hull at his press conference on September 12 suggest 
that if Germany and Italy continue to attack Amer- 
ican ships or other vessels carrying supplies to Britain 
and Russia, then the raiders may expect to meet the 
fire of the United States Navy in whatever part of the 
world they choose for those attacks. To this interpre- 
tation they would add a second conclusion, namely 
that defensive operations by the American Navy are 
not conceived in terms of passive defense but in terms 
of active cooperation with British sea power in oppos- 
ing the European Axis powers. If these conclusions 
are justified, the Roosevelt declaration clearly asserts 
a doctrine of ‘‘freedom of the seas’’ which extends far 
beyond the position asserted by the United States 
in the past. 

In measuring the present position of the United 
States, it is important to remember that the support of 
Congress is still essential to the full implementation 


of national policy, even though traditional checks and 
balances are being swept away by the overwhelmig 
pressure of events. While all vital decisions affectj 
the disposition of the armed forces rest with the Pres. 
ident as Commander-in-Chief, Congressional support 
will be needed for the new lease-lend appropriation 
and other measures which may be contemplated to 
give force to the present policy. The Neutrality Act— 
which still forbids American flag vessels to enter Brit 
ish ports—can be further modified by Executive de. 
cree, but this basic contradiction to the country’s pres. 
ent policy can be removed only by Congressional 
action. 


SHIFTING CONGRESSIONAL OPINION. 
While it would be foolish to deny the reluctance of 
Congress to face the prospect of a shooting war, it 
would be equally misleading to ignore the gradual 
change that is taking place in the thinking of the 
American people, and which is reflected in Congres; 
as well. The change has come in part from the recog- 
nition of what a Nazi victory would mean to the 
security of the United States and the entire Westem 
Hemisphere, but it has not come primarily from fear 


of Hitler. The significant change has come with the / 


growing realization that America is far stronger today 
than it was a year ago, and that the strength of Amer 
ica, if used in time, may turn the balance against 
Hitler and frustrate a Nazi victory. 








| 


} 





A year ago—even six months ago—there seemed 
little prospect of turning the tide of Nazi conquest. 
The lag in our own defense program and Hitler's ap- 
parently dominant position on the continent of Europe 
led many Americans to the gloomy conclusion that 
our intervention would merely prolong the war indeft 
nitely, without hope of any decisive outcome. But 
today the prospect is completely altered, not only by 
the increasing tempo of rearmament in the United 
States, but by the surprising resistance of the Russian 
armies on the Eastern front. By holding the Nazi 
forces in the East, Russia has completely upset Hit 
ler’s calculations of final victory in 1941, and shaken 
the legend of Nazi invincibility. With the realization 
that Hitler is rapidly losing the power to bring the 
war to an end, hard-headed American opinion is be 
ginning to see the magnitude of the opportunity that 
is open to the United States and Britain. The effect 
of this altered prospect is already reflected in growing 
support for aid to the Soviet Union. And to some ob 
servers it seems to mark a decisive turning point i 
the attitude of Congress. W. T. STONE 


) 


t 
; 


} 


| 


CI, ee 








— 
VoL. . 
— 


A : 
little 
abou 
tight 
fall | 
ber 
prog 
the 
Gert 
its i 
D 
Leni 
only 
for | 
inch 
It cc 
dust 
plan 
the 
onl} 
Rus 
prac 
pror 
war 
C 
pres 





