———_—---—__ 
——$_$_$_$___ 


of more 
‘ive dis. 
Vargas 
and eco. 
latform, 
934 con. 
a state. 
imunists 
rtial ob. 
id Com. 
yminated 
» from 
orl COM- 
erialism 
lerate in 
for men 
rest day, 
‘ing con- 
enforce- 
it insur- 


surgents 
ened its 
owed by 
Lt Vargas 
hostility 
with an 
n-shirted 
to 700,- 
‘my and 
Congress 
r the In- 
orn ene 
iment to 


lian gov- 
ently im- 
Congress 
3,000,000 
cember 2 
ciprocity 


‘“HOMSON 
erick Shel- 


00 
nan should 


ce Council, 


past year 
1oto. New 


ie struggle 
details of 


2 B. Noble 


w diploma 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 
Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


VoL. XV, No. 7 DECEMBER 18, 1935 


TESTING LEAGUE SANCTIONS 
by John C. deWilde 


How effective are the sanctions applied to Italy? 
Will they deter other countries from aggression? 


Can sanctions be reconciled with the need for international 
change? 


December 4 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


ape. 


Entered as 
class matter 


second- 
December 


2, 1921, at the Post 

A Office at New York, 
4? \ N. Y., under the act 
i a SN of March 3, 1879. 
‘bel 13) \ 
nr . | 1¥5 
XK y 

SG i oY 


lodical Division, 


Library of Congress, 


Washineton, D. C6. 


HAS BRITAIN BETRAYED THE LEAGUE? 


— 2 eee eee ee set eee eS Oe ee 


O* December 8 Sir Samuel Hoare and M. 
Laval made a final effort to secure a peace 
settlement in Ethiopia before proceeding to the 
application of an oil embargo. Although the terms 
have not yet been published, press dispatches 
agree that Britain and France would give Italy a 
vast area in southern Ethiopia—partly as an- 
nexed territory, partly as a zone for colonization 
—together with the Tigre province in the north- 
east except for the holy city of Aksum. In “ex- 
change” Ethiopia would receive a port on the Red 
Sea, probably at Assab in Italian Eritrea. Safe- 
guarding British and French interests in adjoin- 
ing territory, the plan does not give Mussolini a 
corridor connecting Italiaix. Somaliland with 
Eritrea. It is not clear whether what remains of 
Ethiopia will be placed under League supervision. 


These concessions, which would give Italy part 
of the old Amharic empire as well as outlying 
areas, go far beyond what had been previously of- 
fered to Mussolini. The French and British for- 
eign offices apparently believe that it is better to 
give Italy about half of Ethiopia than to run the 
risk that the dispute might lead to Mussvlini’s 
overthrow or imperil the peace of Europe. These 
considerations are reinforced by the critical situa- 
tion in the Far East, as well as the continued 
weakness of the French cabinet. 


These factors, however, were all present last 
September when British and French spokesmen 
categorically proclaimed their intention to defend 
the Covenant. It was largely as a result of their 
declarations that the League took the unprece- 
dented step of naminy Italy the aggressor and im- 
posing sanctions. To offer Mussolini at this date 
even more territory than his troops have been able 
to occupy, after his defiance of the League and 
the Anti-War Pact, will gravely disillusion mil- 
lions of people throughout the world who had re- 
cently believed that, despite its initial failures, 


the League might be made into an effective in- 
stitution of international law and justice. 

Last summer, in response to a remarkable out- 
burst of British public opinion, the Baldwin gov- 
ernment drastically changed its League policy. It 
fought and won the November elections largely 
on the League issue. In his address to Parliament 
on December 3 King George again declared that 
the government would continue to exert its influ- 
ence “in favor of peace acceptable to the three 
parties in the dispute: Italy, Ethiopia and the 
League.” Yet if press reports are correct, the 
3aldwin government on December 8 joined that 
of M. Laval in making a proposal wholly incom- 
patible with the spirit of the League, even before 
it had resorted to effective sanctions. In 1932 the 
League powers and the United States solemnly 
adopted the non-recognition doctrine under which 
they refused to recognize Japan’s seizure of Man- 
churia. Today France and Britain propose to 
bring diplomatic pressure on Haile Selassie for 
the purpose of inducing him to cede half of his 
territory to Italy, which has defied international 
law no less than Japan. Should such a program be 
adopted, Italy’s eventual absorption of Ethiopia 
would apparently be only a matter of time. Un- 
willing to surrender anything of value which they 
own, France and Britain seem ready to sacrifice 
Ethiopia, whose territorial integrity is guaranteed 
by the League. There is little wonder that the 
Negus is reported indignantly to have rejected 
the Hoare-Laval proposal. It will be interesting 
to see whether public opinion in Britain as well 
as in other League countries acquiesces in this 
unabashed desertion of the collective system. 

RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


NEW “AUTONOMY” PROJECT IN CHINA 


A powerful mass demonstration of thousands of 
students in Peiping on December 9—the first evi- 
dence of large-scale Chinese student unrest in 


four years—denounced the Japanese-sponsored 
“autonomy” movements and called for immediate 
military resistance to Japan. The demonstration 
converged on the headquarters of General Ho 
Ying-ching, War Minister in the Nanking gov- 
ernment, who has been arranging with Japanese 
military officials in north China for an “autono- 
mous” régime in Hopei and Chahar provinces. 

This reported settlement of north China issues 
was apparently facilitated by Chiang Kai-shek’s 
complete domination of the recent Kuomintang 
Congress at Nanking, from which he emerged 
with enlarged dictatorial powers. The area em- 
braced by the proposed Hopei-Chahar régime in- 
cludes Peiping and Tientsin, as well as the stra- 
tegic railway system of north China. It would ab- 
sorb the “autonomous” district recently set up by 
Yin Ju-keng in northern Hopei. Yin himself 
would be given a high post in the new régime, 
despite the fact that Nanking had ordered his dis- 
missal and arrest on November 27. The govern- 
ing body would also include Tsao Ju-lin, leader of 
the Anfu clique which pawned China’s resources 
for the “Nishihara” loans advanced by Japan in 
1918. Tsao Ju-lin’s name in China is synonymous 
with traitor. He was driven from office by the 
student uprising of 1919, which smashed the Anfu 
clique and forced rejection of the Versailles 
Treaty. 

On December 7 the Nanking government be- 
came virtually a one-man dictatorship. In addi- 
tion to his Kuomintang offices, Chiang Kai-shek 
took over the chairmanship of the Executive Yuan 
—corresponding to the post of Premier—from 
which Wang Ching-wei had resigned. Since 
Chiang continues as chairman of the Military Af- 
fairs Commission, he will nenceforth exert direct 
control over both the political and military poli- 
cies of Nanking. Chiang Kai-shek’s assumption 
of enlarged dictatorial powers deals a severe blow 
to the movement for a democratization of the 
Nanking régime, which has been led by such men 
as Hu Shih. Agreement with Canton, which might 
have broadened Chiang’s political base and 
strengthened resistance to Japan, has not been 
achieved. 

The warnings to respect treaty rights of other 
powers in north China which Sir Samuel Hoare 
and Secretary Hull directed at Japan on Decem- 
ber 5, although significant as a hint of Anglo- 
American cooperation in the Far East, have not 
affected Japan’s activities in that area. Genuine 
resistance to Japanese aggression must originate 
in China before international support of the 
Chinese liberation struggle can be mobilized on an 
effective scale. T. A. BISSON 


Page Two = 


a 


FRANCE SURVIVES A CABINET CRISIS 


Only the last-minute adoption of drastic meas. 
ures against the semi-fascist leagues of the Right 
saved the Laval cabinet from defeat last week. 
When the French parliament reconvened on No. 
vember 28 after a prolonged recess, the govern. 
ment faced a precarious political situation. The 
economy decrees enacted under the special powers 
conferred on the government last June had 
aroused bitter opposition, particularly as they af. 
fected war veterans and civil servants of limited 
means. Still more dangerous to the cabinet was 
the demand of the Left for a curb on the allegedly 
subversive agitation of various anti-parliamen. 
tary organizations. During the parliamentary re- 
cess the cleavage between the Left and the Right 
had been sharpened. The Socialists and Com- 
munists, united in a common front since July 
1934, had joined with the more moderate Radical 
Socialists and other Left groups in a loosely or. 
ganized Popular Front designed to combat fas- 
cism. At the same time the so-called fascist 
leagues, particularly Colonel Francois de la 
Rocque’s Croix de Feu, had continued to recruit 
adherents and conduct an active campaign against 
parliament and “revolutionary” elements. The 
strife thus aroused had become even more bitter 
after November 16, when participants in a Croiz 
de Feu meeting at Limoges fired on a counter- 
demonstration organized by the Popular Front. 


sr ARR AoNIRCw 96 60%) os 


Nh co A Ie #- 


-_- 


Premier Laval successfully negotiated a compro- 


mise on the economy decrees with the Radical So- 
cialists, thereby insuring a vote of confidence in 
his financial policy. The Radical Socialists, how- 
ever, insisted that the government strengthen the 
mild decrees it had enacted on October 23 to curb 
street demonstrations and regulate the bearing of 
firearms. The cabinet seemed in danger of im- 
minent defeat on December 6, when suddenly a 
parliamentary spokesman of the Croix de Feu 
proposed disarmament of all political groups and 
disbandment of semi-military organizations. Af- 
ter the Socialists and Communists expressed their 
approval, Premier Laval immediately introduced 
three bills setting up machinery for the dissolu- 
tion of “all associations having the character of 
grcups of combat or private militias,” forbidding 
the carrying of firearms, and punishing incite- 
ment to assassination in the press. On these bills 
the cabinet received a vote of confidence. Before 
they passed the Chamber, however, the Left made 
them even more drastic. The Senate may not ac- 
cept the amended bills, and it remains doubtful 
whether the Croix de Feu and similar organiza- 
tions will tamely submit to them. y ¢_ prwitpE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 7, DscemMper 13, 1935. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


Nationa! 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Screet, New York, N. Y. RaYMOND Lasimg Bugit, President; EstHmnm G. Ocpgn, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


1s yc NAL EE ERIS CREATE) alo 


es 
—_ 


, Pai 


i. pie nat aie te a | 2 ee oe 


