ail 
be built, 
> United 
sh nego. 
| Powers 
aty does 
eness ag 
_be the 
1€8, who 
‘ance in- 
sions for 
} long as 
an, Italy 
3 numer. 
‘wW ships 


- marked 
scrapped 
‘ked the 
r 40,000 
Four 
arsion to 
is retain 
as kept 
tegories, 
by the 
vice. 
bolic of 
ssing of 
ssels are 


> will be 


in the 
sels are | 
for, and| 
xtensive | 
lans for 
Vv arma- 
heer 
9, which 
ic area. 
rticle be 
t of the 
new ar- 
le, form 
nan, too, 
an State 
reement. 
nutually 
ble new 
ly been 
improve 
bases in 
military 
ction in 
'ISHER 


i. National 
BAN, Editor. 
Year. 


__| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


2, 1921, 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Vou. XVI, No. 12 


JANUARY 15, 1937 


SPAIN: ISSUES BEHIND THE CONFLICT 


by Charles A. Thomson 
This report analyzes the events of the past three 
years, leading up to the 1936 revolt, and the groups 
composing the Right and Left alignments. 


January 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Dr. William W. Bishop 


*% Unty 


iversity of Michigan Libra | 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


GERMANY AND ITALY 


TEMPORIZE ON SPAIN 


HE brief though dramatic flare-up over 

alleged German activities in Spanish Morocco 
once more illustrates how productive of dangerous 
incidents the Spanish conflict continues to be. For 
some time rumors of German penetration into this 
area had been rife. Although there was no evi- 
dence of large bodies of German troops in Morocco, 
reports reached Paris that barracks were being 
constructed to receive contingents in the near fu- 
ture and that German technicians were helping 
to fortify the territory. French anxiety was fur- 
ther increased by the knowledge that Germany 
was apparently using Melilla as a naval base. The 
French government saw in this evidence a direct 
threat to the security of its North African posses- 
sions and its naval communications in the Medi- 
terranean. Taking a strong stand, it announced 
on January 7 that a large number of warships 
would be concentrated in the Western Mediter- 
ranean. Official circles also made ostentatious 
references to the preparedness of 100,000 troops 
in French Morocco. On January 9 the Rebel au- 
thorities were sharply reminded that Spain had 
undertaken, in the Moroccan conventions of 1904 
and 1912, not to alienate or cede any part of 
Morocco, nor to call in foreign troops. Meanwhile, 
the French press carried rather exaggerated re- 
ports on German activities which Reich news- 
papers bitterly branded as entirely false. This 
tense situation was relieved on January 11, 
when Chancellor Hitler took advantage of his 
customary New Year’s reception for the diplo- 
matic corps to assure the French Ambassador that 
Germany had no designs on any Spanish territory. 
At the same time the French Foreign Office re- 
ported that the acting Spanish High Commissioner 
at Tetuan had declared that “no constituted unit 
and no contingent of the Foreign Legion is sta- 
tioned in Morocco or expected.” 


Another incident, precipitated by the action of 
the Loyalists in retaining a Spanish Rebel pas- 


senger and part of the cargo of the German 
steamer Palos, was peacefully closed on January 8. 
Three days before, a German cruiser had radioed 
an ultimatum demanding their release and threat- 
ening, in case of non-compliance, to dispose of 
the two ships seized in reprisal and credit the 
Spanish Rebels with the proceeds. Although the 
Valencia government ignored the demand, the 
Germans took no additional step to enforce it. 
The situation remains potentially dangerous, how- 
ever, since the Reich has served notice it will adopt 
“further measures” if “piratical acts” against 
German merchantmen are repeated. 

On January 7 the German and Italian govern- 
ments finally delivered similar replies to the 
Franco-British proposal for a ban on “volun- 
teers.” The German note took France and Britain 
severely to task for placing the Reich in the réle 
of aculprit. Both notes pointed out that Germany 
and Italy had suggested prohibiting enlistments 
as early as last August. They expressed willing- 
ness to reconsider the problem provided other 
powers participated and agreed to an effective 
scheme to check the influx of volunteers on the 
spot. As a further condition they demanded that 
immediate steps be taken to stop “indirect inter- 
vention.” The German note failed to define this 
form of intervention, while the Italian govern- 
ment cited “propaganda and financial assistance” 
as examples. Moreover, both countries intimated 
they would insist on the withdrawal from Spain 
of all non-Spanish soldiers, political agitators and 
propagandists. These conditions insure that pro- 
tracted negotiations will be necessary if the pro- 
hibition against volunteers is ever to be put into 
effect. It appears obvious that Germany and Italy 
are temporizing in order to give the Rebel forces 
another opportunity to conquer Madrid. 

Anxious to preserve peace at any cost, the Brit- 
ish government chose to ignore the negative ele- 
ments in the Italian and German replies. On 


January 10 it sent notes to Paris, Rome, Berlin, 
Lisbon and Moscow requesting that measures pro- 
hibiting the dispatch of volunteers be enacted im- 
mediately and put into force subsequently by 
concerted action. Britain suggested that the de- 
tailed scheme elaborated by the London Non-In- 
tervention Committee for supervision at Spanish 
ports and land frontiers could be extended to cover 
enforcement of the ban on foreign enlistments. 
At the same time the government announced that 
it had spontaneously invoked the Foreign Enlist- 
ment Act of 1870 to prevent recruitment of volun- 
teers in the United Kingdom. Although the 
British note also promised to discuss forms of 
indirect intervention, it appears unlikely that 
Germany and Italy will find the new proposal more 
acceptable than the last. 


While Britain and France sought in vain to 
strengthen the non-intervention accord, the 
United States Congress hurriedly adopted on Jan- 
uary 6 a concurrent resolution prohibiting the 
shipment of war material to Spain for the dura- 
tion of the conflict. Although existing neutrality 
legislation was not applicable to civil wars, the 
State Department had until recently prevented 
arms shipments to Spain by means of “moral sua- 
sion.” On December 28, however, and again on 
January 5, it had been compelled to issue export 
licenses for arms consigned to the Spanish Loy- 
alists. The President and State Department used 
these incidents to galvanize the new Congress into 
immediate action. At first they hoped to utilize 
this opportunity to obtain legislation conferring 
on the President discretionary authority to im- 
pose embargoes in any case of civil strife, but 
latent Congressional opposition caused the aban- 
donment of this plan. The new resolution, ap- 
plicable only to Spain, is one more indication of 
the hostility of Congress to sweeping discretion 
for the President in general neutrality legislation. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


RIVAL CLAIMS IN ALEXANDRETTA 


The question of the future status of the Syrian 
sanjak of Alexandretta, which threatened for one 
agitated week to cause serious conflict between 
France and Turkey, seems to be once more on the 
road to peaceful settlement. Direct Franco- 
Turkish negotiations, which ended in disagree- 
ment on December 22, have been resumed, and 
the two countries have arranged a three-day post- 
ponement of the League Council meeting sched- 
uled for January 18, in the hope of reaching an 
accord by the 21st. 


The sanjak was set up as an autonomous district 


Page Two 


—. 
—— 


under the Syrian government in 1925, in exeey. 
tion of a 1921 agreement by which France guaran. 
teed special treatment to the large Turkish 
minority in the region around Antioch and Alex. 
andretta. This arrangement was satisfactory to 
Turkey as long as France remained in Syria as 
the mandatory power. On September 9 and No. 
vember 13, however, France signed treaties with 
Syria and Lebanon which will bring independence 
to the mandated territories in three years. Tur- 
key, remembering the Assyrian massacres in 
Iraq, was alarmed at the prospect of Arab rule, 
despite the fact that the Syrian treaty contained 
express guarantees for the protection of compact 
minorities in autonomous districts. On Novem- 
ber 1, Kemal Ataturk told the opening session of 
the Turkish parliament that the only unsettled 
question in foreign affairs was the future of 
Alexandretta, and the speech was received with 
wild enthusiasm. Popular demonstrations and 
the ostentatious abstention of Turkish voters in 
November’s parliamentary elections in Syria em- 
phasized the demand for liberation of the sanjak. 
Finally, Turkey invoked Article XI of the League 
Covenant, and brought the whole question before 
the Council at its meeting of December 10. Both 
powers aired their respective positions — which 
hinge largely on legalistic detail — before the 
other delegates and then settled down to private 
discussion. Eventually a compromise was reached, 
The League appointed a three-man commission 
of inquiry to inspect the disputed area; France 
agreed to withdraw military reinforcements 
which had been sent to Syria in September, and 
to postpone ratification of the Franco-Syrian 
treaty; and Turkey abandoned its demand for a 
neutral force to police the frontiers. The League 
commission reached Alexandretta just before New 
Year’s, and was greeted with vociferous demon- 
strations as it toured the sanjak. It will present 
its report to the Council when that body meets on 
January 21. At the same time direct negotiation 
between France and Turkey is expected to result 
in a proposal for some sort of League guarantee 
of the minority population in the sanjak, perhaps 
combined with demilitarization of the port of 


Alexandretta. HELEN FISHER 


MR. BISSON SAILS FOR FAR EAST 


Mr. T. A. Bisson, F. P. A. research associate, 
sailed for the Orient on January 9 to spend a year 
studying economic and political conditions in 
China and Japan. The trip has been made pos- 
sible through a fellowship from the Rockefeller 
Foundation. 


‘TFC 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 12, January 15, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasits Buatt, President; EstHer G. Open, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Daan, Zéitor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., umder the Act of March 3, 1879. One Doliar a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


An i 


|| 


Januar 


