


Ov: 
06 
ced 


ich 
Ave 
ya) 


w- 
ers 
rab 
ke- 
lis- 
en- 
ign 
rn- 
ike 
vill 


lis- 


la 
na- 


ich 
‘lo- 
vill 
my 
ted 


25, 
+00 
of 


yn- 
0 


ans 


G. 


ent 
nee 


onal 


lior. 














FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


by the Research Staff 


An interpretation of current international events 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL.\XV, No. 48 SEPTEMBER 25, 1936 





WAR DRUMS AND PEACE PLANS 
by 


Raymond Leslie Buell and Ryllis Alexander Goslin 


The danger of another World War—brought ominously near by the 
civil conflict raging in Spain—and the need of plans capable of secur- 
ing peace is the theme of the September issue of Headline Books. 


Paper, 25 cents Boards, 35 cents 
Any six titles, in boards, $2.00 
Mailed to members and subscribers early this month. 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 











i 2, 1921, at the Post 
te Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
\G, PY, pf March 3, 1879. 
Ne ee a}. pivisio® ~~ 3 det 
congre?”* 
pibrary © 
C. 
qasning to: 











A NEW CHINA CONFRONTS JAPAN 





HE Japanese Navy’s decision of September 

21 to increase its marine forces at Shanghai 
climaxed a long series of events in China dur- 
ing the past two months which has slowly worked 
up to a new crisis in Sino-Japanese relations. 
Three developments stand out in this period: the 
Kwangsi peace settlement; the murders of four 
Japanese since August 24; and the extreme de- 
liberation manifested by Japan in presenting its 
demands at Nanking in connection with these in- 
cidents. Each of these developments underlines 
the continued growth of that determined spirit of 
resistance to Japanese aggression which has 
seized upon China since last December. 

At the end of July, following Nanking’s tri- 
umph in Kwangtung, it was generally expected 
that Chiang Kai-shek would speedily enforce his 
dictates on neighboring Kwangsi province. In the 
settlement reached between Chiang Kai-shek and 
the Kwangsi leaders, however, the latter have won 
out in virtually every respect. By government 
mandate on September 5, Li Tsung-jen, command- 
er of the Kwangsi forces, was appointed Pacifica- 
tion Commissioner for Kwangsi province; Gen- 
eral Pai Chung-hsi, General Li’s aide, was named 
a member of the standing committee of the Mil- 
itary Affairs Council at Nanking; and Huang 
Shao-hsiung, earlier appointed governor of 
Kwangsi province, was re-assigned as chairman 
of Chekiang province. Nanking’s troops are be- 
ing withdrawn from Kwangtung. The proscription 
against Li Chi-shen, Tsai Ting-kai, commander 
of the 19th Route Army, and other participants 
in the anti-Japanese Fukien government of 1933- 
1934, all of whom have been associated with the 
present Kwangsi movement, has been lifted and 
they have been given official positions. The 
Kwangsi forces have been enrolled as the Fifth 
National Army of China, but under terms which 
apparently barred the reconstituted 19th Route 
Army as an independent unit. At the insistence 


of the Kwangsi leaders, it is also reported that 
Chiang Kai-shek agreed to lift the restrictions he 
has continuously enforced on freedom of press, 
speech and assembly. If this item were carried 
into effect, the anti-Japanese movement would 
speedily assume united nation-wide proportions. 
It would signalize an outstanding reversal of 
Chiang Kai-shek’s steady policy of refusing to 
build a national movement of resistance on a pop- 
ular basis. There is no evidence, however, that this 
policy has been reversed in actual practice. On 
September 18, for example, an anti-Japanese 
demonstration in Shanghai was broken up by the 
rifle butts of the Chinese police, with more than 
30 persons injured and 50 arrested. Nevertheless, 
the terms of the peace settlement with Kwangsi 
indicate that Chiang Kai-shek no longer finds it 
possible to engage in a civil war which flouts the 
nationalist sentiment that has developed among 
the Chinese people. 

This sentiment has now reached such heights 
that it is doubtful whether Chiang Kai-shek can 
continue to guarantee the safety of Japanese na- 
tionals pursuing legitimate occupations in China, 
so long as their government adheres to a policy of 
aggressive political encroachment. During the 
past month two Japanese have been killed at 
Chengtu, one at Pakhoi, and one at Hankow. The 
Chengtu affair of August 24 was precipitated by 
Japan’s insistence on reopening its consulate in 
that city—a move which was opposed in China 
on the ground that Chengtu was not a treaty port. 
The Pakhoi incident of September 3, in which a 
Japanese druggist was killed by a Chinese mob, 
has been complicated by internal political consid- 
erations. The port of Pakhoi was occupied late in 
August by the 19th Route Army, as the result of 
a military drive into southwest Kwangtung pro- 
vince from Kwangsi. This army refused to allow 
investigation of the incident by Japanese officials, 
and made preparations to defend the city against 











| 


ee I ner 








a threatened Japanese naval attack. Latest re- 
ports indicate that the 19th Route Army has 
evacuated Pakhoi under pressure from Chiang 
Kai-shek. The third incident occurred on Septem- 
ber 19 at Hankow, where an unidentified Chinese 
shot and killed a Japanese consular policeman. 

Meanwhile, the Japanese Ambassador, Shigeru 
Kawagoe, has opened conversations with the Chi- 
nese Foreign Minister at Nanking relative to de- 
mands concerning the Chengtu killings, to which 
have now been added the Pakhoi and Hankow in- 
cidents. The Japanese demands have been care- 
fully formulated by the Tokyo Cabinet, and have 
received Imperial sanction. Presumably they will 
require an official apology, indemnities, and pun- 
ishment of those responsible. It is also reported 
that they may require drastic suppression of the 
anti-Japanese movement, abolition of the Kuomin- 
tang, and further political concessions in north 
China, where Japan has been making piecemeal 
advances. In recent weeks, the Hopei-Chahar 
Council has virtually legalized the smuggling of 
Japanese goods by according them official protec- 
tion after payment of a special tax of one-eighth 
of the national tariff dues; and Sung Cheh-yuan, 
head of the Hopei-Chahar Council, has agreed to 
the principle of joint Sino-Japanese economic de- 
velopment of north China. On September 20 the 
Japanese army secured complete control of Feng- 
tai, strategic railway junction just south of Pei- 
ping, by forcing Chinese troops to evacuate their 
barracks at that point. An attempted thrust into 
Suiyuan province by Japanese-Manchurian forces 
in late August, however, was repelled by the local 
Chinese troops under General Fu Tso-yi. 

It is clear that Japan’s insistence at this junc- 
ture on the broader demands noted above would 
place Chiang Kai-shek in an impossible position. 
In the face of the rising anti-Japanese tide in 
China, he can no longer enforce the general ac- 
ceptance of extensive political concessions to 
Japan. The relative moderation which has char- 
acterized recent Japanese statements and actions 
suggests that they are alive to the dangers of the 
present situation, for which five years of steady 
Japanese military-political aggression in China 
are primarily responsible. A retreat from this 
policy on the part of Japan’s responsible leaders 
is the best insurance against a possible explosion 
of long pent-up forces in China. TT, A, Bisson 


DISSENSION IN FRANCE 


The civil war in Spain has not only endangered 
the peace of Europe, but added greatly to unrest 
in France. The policy of neutrality pursued by 


Page Twe 








the French Cabinet has produced a profound rift 
among its followers. Representing essentially the 
same social elements as the loyalist government 
in Spain, the French ministry of Léon Blum was 
from the first sympathetic toward Madrid. It con- 
sidered, however, that the preservation of Euro- 
pean peace was paramount, and for that reason 
took the lead in negotiating a neutrality accord 
denying the legally constituted Spanish govern- 
ment, as well as the rebels, access to foreign arms 
and ammunition. This policy provoked the oppo- 
sition of French Communists and the powerful 
National Confederation of Labor. The Commu- 
nists engaged in a persistent press campaign de- 
manding that the “blockade” against Spain be 
lifted. Huge popular demonstrations were organ- 
ized to demand “airplanes for Spain,” and work- 
ingmen in the metallurgical plants in Paris struck 
for one hour to protest the government’s policy. 

For a time it seemed that Blum might be able 
to check the mounting opposition. In a persuasive 
and vigorous speech delivered on September 6 
the French Premier openly challenged the Com- 
munists to unseat him. On September 9 the ad- 
ministrative commission of the National Confed- 
eration of Labor refused to follow the militant 
Communists and adopted a mildly phrased reso- 
lution requesting a reconsideration of the neutral- 
ity policy and at the same time reaffirming its 
solidarity with the Blum ministry. Recent events, 
however, are again threatening this solidarity. 
With military fortunes definitely favoring the 
Spanish rebels and several Fascist powers appar- 
ently sabotaging the neutrality agreement, pres- 
sure on the Blum government to lift the arms em- 
bargo will be redoubled. Unless the government 
yields, its fall appears possible. 


A new wave of “stay-in” strikes, meanwhile, 
has further embarrassed the French Cabinet. Op- 
position to the government’s Spanish policy con- 
tributed to this renewed outburst of labor unrest. 
For the most part, however, alleged failure to 
carry out the strike agreement of last June and de- 
mands for new wage increases to meet the rapidly 
rising cost of living were the immediate causes of 
the strikes. The government has managed to 
settle the major strike, involving 30,000 textile 
workers at Lille, but a number of factories still 
remain occupied. The Radical Socialists, con- 
stituting the most conservative element in the 
Popular Front, are becoming increasingly alarmed 
at the failure to check these strikes. Thus from 
the Right, as well as the Left, the Popular Front 
is threatened with disintegration. 

JOHN C. DEWILDE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 48, SEPTEMBER 25, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RarMonp Lasire Bugit, President; EstHerR G. OGpen, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 














oi 





