stressed 
atically, 
funda- 
itrol of 
from a 
interest 
ind her 
1 ships, 
g bases 


ad com- 
ign Af- 
1 doubt 
n are in 
le Con- 
ywer to 
on that 
» disap- 
r future 


1 Janu- 
inds of 
= to ac 
ration’s 
tory, it 
e or the 
Wash- 
ise bill 
ance to 
erial is 
and by 
{anage- 


TONE 


, Janu 
>.” This 
, heard 
: of the 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Ain Arbor, Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XX, No. 15 


JANUARY $1, 1941 


Nz! Germany's failure to invade the British 
Isles after the collapse of France, which shook 
the British Empire out of its habitual complacency, 
has afforded the government of Winston Churchill 
a breathing spell of more than six months in which 
to bring its slowly developing war effort to fruition. 
Taking advantage of the stalemate in Western Eu- 
ope, Britain has been able to risk the diversion of 
important military supplies to its Middle Eastern 
Command, whose highly successful operations 
against the Italians resulted, on January 22, in the 
apture of Tobruk and, on January 25, of Bisha, 
the terminus of a railroad leading to Massawa in 
Italian Eritrea. While safeguarding the Empire's 
strategic foothold in the Eastern Mediterranean and 
harassing the Axis on its weakest flank, the African 
ampaigns have not prevented the reinforcement of 
the citadel of Britain itself. On January 22 Prime 
Minister Churchill revealed that the Empire’s armed 
forces for defense and overseas war now total 4,- 
000,000 men, including the British Home Guard. 
The bulk of the war factories constructed under 
1939 war plans, he declared, are “just coming into 
production,” but the number of workers in muni- 
tions and aircraft plants already far surpasses the 1918 
level. 


BRITAIN’S FORTRESS ECONOMY. So long as 
the American output remains low and the German 
counter-blockade of Britain takes its toll of shipping, 
it is obviously essential that all British man power, 
materials and foodstuffs be utilized with maximum 
eficiency. To attain this objective an increasing de- 
gree of regimentation has proved necessary. During 
January men 20 and 36 years of age were required 
to register for future conscription into the armed 
forces, and these age limits are soon to be broadened. 
The scope of “reserved occupations” exempt from 
military service is gradually being reduced. All males 
between 16 and 60 are now liable to 48 hours’ duty 


BRITAIN BUILDS WAR ECONOMY: RETAINS DEMOCRATIC CONTROLS 


each month to combat incendiary bombs, and 
women, too, may soon be called for similar com- 
pulsory service. Consumption of luxuries has long 
been curtailed by taxation as well as import and 
production control. The rationing of basic food- 
stuffs, including those consumed by the army, is be- 
coming more stringent; the individual meat ration, 
in particular, has been cut to the amount which may 
be purchased for 1s. 2d. (about 23 cents) each 
week. To distribute war losses equitably, the gov- 
ernment has worked out a comprehensive scheme 
for compulsory insurance of real property and busi- 
ness assets against damage suffered since Septem- 
ber 3, 1939 and is also initiating a voluntary plan 
for the insurance of personal chattels. In the sphere 
of public opinion, the British Home Office on Janu- 
ary 21 suppressed the London Daily Worker (a 
Communist organ) and the news letter The Week 
because of their opposition to the war. 


Perhaps most important of all the steps yet taken 
to organize the British war effort is the govern- 
ment’s decision, announced by Minister of Labor 
Ernest Bevin on January 21, to register men and 
women of all ranks for compulsory assignment to 
vital industries when necessary. This action, adopted 
under the emergency legislation which gave the 
Churchill government virtually unlimited power 
over persons and property last May, is intended to 
minimize the scarcity of labor now developing in 
Britain. In the future trained personnel will gradu- 
ally be shifted out of non-essential pursuits, and the 
right of dismissal or of leaving the job will be se- 
verely limited. A permanent, mobile labor force is 
to be set up to unload and repair ships, construct 
urgently needed buildings such as workers’ living 
quarters, and meet other pressing demands. Ineffi- 
cient management will be replaced by the authorities. 

By measures of this type Britain is gradually forg- 
ing an economic war machine designed to compete 


SEI 
San EERE 


with the ruthlessly efficient organization of the Nazi 
dictatorship. The Churchill government, however, has 
not adopted full totalitarian controls. Aside from those 
extreme conservatives who fear that it is already ir- 
retrievably socialist, the government's severest critics 
are those who assail it for not going far enough. 
Mr. Churchill has steadfastly refused to centralize 
authority in a small war Cabinet free of depart- 
mental duties, preferring merely to set up three 
special committees of Ministers, known as “Execu- 
tives,” to deal with imports, production, and post- 
war reconstruction problems. Nor have the govern- 
ment’s efforts in specific fields satisfied those who 
regard Britain as a beleaguered fortress, in which 
inequalities of income should be drastically scaled 
down while all able-bodied individuals contribute 
their energies solely to the national cause. To men- 
tion a few specific instances, the Cabinet has been 
bitterly attacked for permitting wealthy individuals 
to purchase food in expensive restaurants without 
loss of corresponding ration privileges. It has been 
assailed for permitting the coal and transport indus- 
tries to pass on higher costs to consumers. There has 
been an outburst of indignation over congested and 
insanitary shelter arrangements in cities. Particular 
concern has been caused by the failure to halt the up- 
ward spiral of prices and wages which may lead to 


RUMANIAN REVOLT ADDS TO GERMANY’S DIFFICULTIES 


The abortive, but bloody rebellion staged by a 
faction of the Iron Guard in Rumania has thrown a 
revealing light on the constant difficulties with 
which Germany must cope in its task of keeping vir- 
tually the entire European continent under control. 
The revolt, which broke out on January 21, was at 
least indirectly aimed at Germany. The rebels sought 
to unseat General Ion Antonescu, who had seized 
supreme power last September with the approval of 
the Reich and had since permitted German troops to 
enter Rumania in the guise of “protectors.” Al- 
though the Iron Guard was originally instrumental 
in installing Antonescu as the country’s dictator, the 
more radical faction within this fascist organization 
soon became increasingly hostile toward the new ré- 
gime, not only because it failed to carry out a “total” 
social and economic revolution against the capital- 
ists, Jews and old-time politicians, but above all be- 


JUST OUT! An analysis of the newest phase of 
the European conflict: 


WAR IN THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN 
by Louis E. Frechtling 


25¢ 


February 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


Page Two 


———— 


inflation, or to adopt comprehensive plans for indys 
trial mobilization. 

DEMOCRACY IN WARTIME. For some y 
these failings, a habit of resistance to social chap 
by some leaders may be responsible; for othe 
bureaucratic timidity and inertia must bear the blam 
In general, however, the development of politic, 
life in wartime Britain does not indicate, as som, 
Americans have intimated, that democracy is dea 
in that country—unless it is believed that democrag 
cannot survive if government assumes extraordinay 
powers to execute extraordinary tasks. Criticism jy 
Parliament and the press is vociferous and frequenth 
productive of results. While industry still retains ; 
certain degree of independence, labor organization; 
now have a consultative voice in production up. 
equalled in British history. Under the stress of wa 
needs, many social welfare measures have beep 
adopted which tend to maintain and in some cases 
improve the living standards of the lowest income 
strata. No one in Britain would deny that innume. 
able shortcomings in political, economic and socig| 
life still exist. Nevertheless, the government's jp 
creasing control over the activities and welfare of 
all the inhabitants of the country remains broadly 
based on public opinion. , 

Davip H. PoppEr 


cause it submitted supinely to the surrender of most 
of Transylvania to Hungary and allowed Rumania 
to fall completely under German domination. While 
the Iron Guard always looked to Berlin for inspira 
tion, its members were motivated not so much by 
love of Germany, as by the desire to imitate the ex 
tremely nationalistic system of the Third Reich 
Many of them became embittered when Hitler 
showed scant consideration for the territorial in- 
tegrity of Rumania or for the revolutionary ambi 
tions of the Iron Guard. 


For the time being the revolt seems to have been 
suppressed. Horia Sima, the Vice Premier who ap 
parently led the revolutionaries, is reported to have 
been arrested, and hundreds of rebels are being 
rounded up for summary punishment. German 
troops did not intervene, although the Premier was 
apparently assured of their support “in case of 
need.” In a manifesto issued on January 25 General 
Antonescu proudly claimed that he had behind him 
“the loyal shadow of the great Fuehrer and the 
honor of German might, which guarantees ou! 
borders.” It remains to be seen whether Germany 
will not exact an additional price for this type of 
“moral” assistance. 

In retrospect it now appears that the fear of civil 
war may have been the primary reason for the recent 


=—— 


heavy 
Ruma! 
may a 
Germ< 
gatia | 
Greec 
emphé 
army, 
ferenc 
ernme 
Nazi 
Turki: 
of the 
PA: 
Germ: 
drive 
Despi 
Laval. 
pellin, 
fo an 
in OCC 
gime 
the m 
Nazis 
with . 
tained 
repres 


| Germ 


difficu 
again: 

The 
sive 1 
every 
ample 
neces: 
unless 
Riotir 
in the 
nical 
cupat 
party 
Norw 
leade 
of th 
fines 
lage ; 

It» 
evide 
be us 
agitat 
from 


_—— 


FOREIC 
Headqu: 
Entered 


> 


—=—=: 


OF indys 


some of 
r oO 

¢ blame 
politi 
as some 
Is dead 
emMocracy 
Ordinary 
ticism jy 
‘equenth 
retains , 
nization; 
tion un. 
Ss of war 
ive been 
ME cases 
t income 
innumer- 
nd social 
ent’s in 
elfare of 
| broadly 


-OPPER 


- of most 
Rumania 
n. While 
t inspira- 
much by 
e the ex 
d Reich. 
n Hitler 
rorial in 


ry ambi- 


ave been 
who ap 
1 to have 
ire being 
German 
mier was 
case of 
) General 
hind him 
and the 
itees oul 
Germany 


s type of 


ir of civil 
‘he recent 


EEE 
—_—_—_ 


heavy reinforcements of the German garrison in 
Rumania. At any rate, the possibility that trouble 
may again flare up in this country may discourage 
Germany from launching a campaign through Bul- 
gatia or Yugoslavia for the purpose of conquering 
Greece. The hazards of such a venture were again 
emphasized on January 24 when Turkish and British 
army, navy and air officers ended a series of con- 
ferences on military cooperation. The Turkish gov- 
ernment has left little doubt that it will oppose a 
Nazi invasion of Bulgaria. A large part of the 
Turkish army has been concentrated in Thrace, west 
of the Straits, prepared for “‘any possible action.” 


PASSIVE RESISTANCE TO NAZIS. Meanwhile, 
Germany is still encountering serious obstacles in its 
drive to enlist the cooperation of conquered France. 
Despite the official reconciliation between Pétain and 
Laval, the Germans have not succeeded in com- 
pelling the Marshal to restore his former colleague 
to an influential place in the government. The press 
in occupied France continues to assail the Vichy ré- 
gime for its refusal to collaborate with Germany in 
the military as well as the economic field; and the 
Nazis apparently sought to express their displeasure 
with Marshal Pétain on January 25 when they de- 
tained Roger Langeron, his chief administrative 
fepresentative in Paris. As long as Pétain withstands 
German pressure for military cooperation, it will be 
dificult for Germany to launch a decisive campaign 
against the British forces in the Mediterranean. 


The Germans have been meeting troublesome pas- 
sive resistance not only in France, but in virtually 
every occupied country. In the Netherlands, for ex- 
ample, the German authorities recently found it 
necessary to threaten much more severe reprisals 
unless anti-German agitation and sabotage ceased. 
Rioting and unrest among the students have resulted 
in the closing of at least one university and a tech- 
nical school. In Norway the German police and oc- 
cupation authorities have had to take the pro-Nazi 
party of Major Vidkun Quisling under their protection. 
Norwegian Nazis are so unpopular that one of their 
leaders recently issued an appeal asking for respect 
of their “right to exist.’ Despite several collective 
fines levied on Norwegian communities, acts of sabo- 
lage are said to be increasing. 


It would be wrong, however, to deduce from this 
evidence that Germany, if victorious in war, would 
be unable to control its vast empire. The present 
agitation in the subjected countries stems primarily 
from the hope, however small, that Britain, aided 


a 


Page Three 


by the United States, may yet be successful in free- 
ing Europe from Nazi domination. If that hope 
should ever disappear, the rebellious mood prevail- 
ing at present would probably be succeeded by an 
attitude of resignation or passive submission. 

Nor is there any proof that these troubles have 
seriously impaired Germany's ability to prosecute the 
war. The lull in the air war, attributed in some quar- 
ters to bad weather, need not be interpreted as a 
sign of weakness, but may on the contrary merely 
presage a more vigorous offensive. At present it 
seems unlikely that the Germans will strike in the 
Mediterranean. Italian losses, particularly in Africa, 
have been so great that any effort to retrieve them 
and oust the British from the Eastern Mediterranean 
would require the diversion of large German forces. 
It is more probable that Italy will obtain just enough 
assistance in the air to retard Britain’s advance in 
Libya and harass its Mediterranean fleet, while Ger- 
many concentrates its big guns on the British Isles. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


“MOBILIZING AMERICAN INDUSTRY FOR 


DEFENSE” is the subject of the FPA’s broadcast on 
February 2; the speaker will be John C. deWilde. These 
programs are heard every Sunday, from 2:15 to 2:30 
E.S.T., over the blue network of the National Broad- 
casting Company. 


FPA SUNDAY BROADCASTS IN BRAILLE 
Dear General McCoy: 

It is splendid—the way the Foreign Policy Asso- 
ciation is cooperating with the American Red Cross 
Braille transcribers to put embossed copies of its 
Sunday afternoon radio talks under the fingers of the 
deaf-blind, and my gratitude knows no bounds. I 
have had several of those talks spelled to me, and 
they indeed afford enlightenment on the meaning of 
foreign policy news. The Association is to be con- 
gratulated on the fair-mindedness with which it 
searches out facts in a world mad with turmoil and 
contradicting animus. For the deaf-blind who have 
so few pleasures or outlets for action there is nothing 
more vital than a periodical to give them summaries 
of the events every one about them discusses. Not 
only are they kept interested, but they also are pre- 
pared to understand and endure if their own lives 
are caught in the maelstrom of mankind’s upheavals. 

Again thanking you for the Association’s unique 
gesture of goodwill towards my doubly handicapped 
fellows, I am, 


HELEN KELLER. 


The Economics of Transportation in America, by Kent T. 
Healy. New York, Ronald Press, 1940. $4.00 
An authoritative and stimulating work on a highly con- 
troversial subject which has become one of paramount im- 
portance to our defense economy. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 15, January 31, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicuHetes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 

> 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter rival 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


JAN. 27.—As Congress continues to discuss the 
Administration’s lend-lease bill, with final action 
still at least a month or six weeks away, the execu- 
tive branch of the government is considering several 
far-reaching economic proposals which may eventu- 
ally play an important part in the development of 
the national defense program and the policy of full 
aid to Britain. These proposals, which are still in 
the tentative stage, look toward the extension and 
coordination of economic controls as an essential part 
of the larger defense effort. 

ECONOMIC DEFENSE MEASURES. It would 
be misleading to suggest that plans are already laid 
for creation of an American Ministry of Economic 
Warfare, or a counterpart of the War Trade Board 
created by President Wilson in 1917. Sooner or later 
some such central government agency may be set up, 
but at this stage the primary emphasis is on coordinat- 
ing the activities of existing agencies now operating 
on the economic front. The extent of existing eco- 
nomic controls is not generally realized, as the pow- 
ers conferred by recent emergency legislation have 
been sparingly used. Actually, however, the Admin- 
istration has many potent economic weapons which 
can be utilized both to strengthen the defense effort 
and to support the program of active aid to Britain. 
The chief economic controls may be summarized 
briefly as follows: 


1. Export Controls. Since July 2, 1940 the office 
of Colonel R. L. Maxwell, Administrator of Export 
Control, has had full power under the President to 
restrict or prohibit the export of any article or ma- 
terial necessary to national defense. So far, outright 
embargoes have been proclaimed on only two basic 
products—iron and steel scrap and aviation gaso- 
line—shipments of which have been limited to the 
Western Hemisphere and Great Britain. Neverthe- 
less, more than 180 separate articles, in addition to 
arms and ammunition, have been subjected to licens- 
ing provisions, and the export of many of these 
articles has been restricted or curtailed. While the 
items to be controlled are determined by Colonel 
Maxwell, in collaboration with the Army-Navy Mu- 
nitions Board and the Materials and Production Of- 
fices of the National Defense Commission, the State 
Department retains an important voice in the deter- 
mination of policy and actually administers the ma- 
chinery for issuing licenses. 


2. Financial and Monetary Controls. Wide 
powers in this field are shated by the Treasury, the 
Federal Loan Administrator and the Export-Import 
Bank. For some time, the Treasury has been sup. 
porting the currencies of friendly governments— 
notably China and Argentina—pby utilizing its 
Stabilization Fund. In collaboration with the Treas. 
ury, the Federal Loan Administrator and the Export. 
Import Bank have extended credits to China ‘and 
certain Latin American governments. In addition, 
the Treasury has administered the licensing system 
under which the American funds of European na. 
tions occupied by the Axis have been frozen. This 
system, it is now revealed, may soon be extended to 
cover other countries in such a way as to restrict the 
flow of Axis funds in and out of the United States, 


3. Control of Strategic Materials. At least four 
separate agencies are directly concerned with the 
purchase of strategic materials for defense needs. In 
addition to the Procurement Division of the Treas 
ury, the Federal Loan Administrator has set up 


three government corporations under the R.F.C. to | 
handle the building of stock-piles. These include the | 


Metals Reserve Company, which is buying tin, man- 
ganese, antimony, tungsten, etc.; the Rubber Re. 
serve Company; and the Defense Supplies Corpora- 
tion, which is purchasing other basic materials such 
as nitrates. The reported intention to purchase quan- 
tities of strategic materials in Mexico indicates that 
the program may also be used as an instrument of pol- 
icy, with the object of buying up vital supplies which 
might otherwise fall into the hands of the Axis 
powers. 


4. Shipping Controls. While the government 
today lacks the wartime power to requisition foreign 
vessels in American ports or to establish bunker con- 
trol, the Treasury has authority under the Espionage 
Act of 1917 to require all foreign ships leaving 
American ports to obtain clearance. The Maritime 
Commission, moreover, exercises important controls 
over American shipping through its power to allo 
cate trade routes and approve the sale or transfer 
of American ships to foreign registry. 

It is apparent from this summary that the chief 
problem confronting the Administration is one of 
coordination. By coordinating the activities of the 
twenty or more agencies now administering economic 
controls, the Administration would be in a position to 
carry out a far-reaching program of economic defense. 


W. T. STONE 


VoL. 


FE 


8) 

TI 
to es 
area | 
cal ai 
Toky 
wedg 
Chin: 
stren; 
the at 

TE 
three. 
Toky 
positi 
stron; 
contr 
as We 


| aidin, 


Indo- 
equip 
and J 
oppor 
ment 
itself. 
tecko: 
to tak 

Th 
tende 
on th 
Vichy 
repre: 
terms 
the Ja 
bor. ( 
the s 
merel 
tilitie: 
is sche 

At 


