—— 


ATION 
e Mexi- 
S up the 
1creased 
gin pay. 
its. Ina 
138, the 
_ for the 
merican 
August 
to make 
xpropri- 
xPresses 
Mexico 
Foreign 
oth the 
ye deter 
‘e-asserts 
liged to 
ng with 


fore the 
sroposals 
) Under- 

govern- 
1ine the 
at points 
irbitrator 
W ashing- 
1923. In 
proposed 
il Treaty 
st 22 the 
one solu- 
no more 


-anscends 
For the 
it encoufr- 
property. 
e United 
-neighbor 
vernment 
it should 
for these 
ilar com- 
properties 
‘ompensa- 
honor its 
$  govern- 
nservative 
TAYLOR 


National 
Editor, 


ed. 
DEAN, 
r. 


| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vout. XVII, No. 46 


SEPTEMBER 9, 1938 


F.P.A. Returns to the Air 


Arrangements for broadcasting the Saturday luncheon 
discussions of the Foreign Policy Association have just 
been completed with Station WQXR. The program will 
be on the air from 1:45 to 3:00 p.m. on November 19, 
December 10, January 14, January 28, February 18, 
March 4, March 18, and April 1. Speakers will be an- 
nounced later. 


Entered as second: 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


HITLER HOLDS EUROPE 


IN SUSPENSE 


— Nazi party congress opened in Nuremberg 

on September 5 in the midst of the greatest 
tension experienced by Europe since 1918. On 
August 30 the British Cabinet, at a meeting attended 
by Sir Nevile Henderson, British Ambassador to 
Berlin, apparently decided to stiffen the warning to 
Germany delivered by Sir John Simon three days 
earlier. This warning was implemented on Septem- 
ber 6 by the departure of the British fleet for 
maneuvers north of Scotland, which coincided with 
those of the German navy in the eastern part of the 
North Sea. While the German press moderated its 
attacks on Czechoslovakia, Henlein’s conferences 
with Hitler at Berchtesgaden on September 1 and 2 
did little to ease the crisis. As far as can be deter- 
mined, Hitler, while instructing Henlein to continue 
negotiations, rejected the Prague government's pro- 
posal for a three months’ truce, during which the 
two countries might discuss a plan elaborated by the 
Runciman mission. This plan—which has not been 
published—was reported to provide for the territorial 
reorganization of Czechoslovakia into cantons; a 
large measure of administrative autonomy would be 
granted to the Sudeten Germans (as well as the 
Hungarians and Slovaks), but the federal govern- 
ment at Prague would retain control over defense 
and foreign policy. 

Discussion of the cantonal proposal appears to 
have produced a rift within the Henlein party. Dr. 
Kundt, who has conducted negotiations with the 
Prague government, has been counseling moderation, 
while Dr. Frank, leader of the radical wing, has 
demanded integral fulfilment of the party’s Karlsbad 
program of April 24.* This program contemplates 
surrender by Czechoslovakia of its alliances with 
France and the Soviet Union, and liberty for the 
Sudeten Germans to proclaim their adherence to Nazi 


*"The Road Back—to 1914,’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, May 6, 1938. 


ideology. The final decision rests not with Hen- 
lein but with Hitler, who, with a true sense of the 
dramatic, continues to hold Europe in ignorance of 
his intentions. 

Hitler’s unwillingness to accept the Runciman plan 
for cantonal autonomy has already caused the British 
to study the possibility of ceding the whole Sudeten 
area to the Third Reich. Such a solution would 
truncate Czechoslovakia and leave it at the mercy of 
German political and economic pressure. True, 
Hitler’s racial theories preclude the incorporation 
within the Third Reich of peoples other than those 
of the German race. The fate reserved by the 
Nazis for non-German-speaking peoples—especially 
the Slavs of Eastern Europe, regarded as historic 
enemies of the Teutons—is that of more or less 
willing vassals, who would supply the “master race” 
with foodstuffs and raw materials. For the Czechs 
to acquiesce in this program would be to commit 
national suicide. On September 5 the Prague govern- 
ment drafted a “‘last-word” offer, reserving “essen- 
tial principles,” which apparently represents the limit 
of Czech concessions. Should this offer prove un- 
acceptable to Germany, Prague may be subjected to 
further pressure from London, under threat that, if 
it does not yield, it will be deprived of British support 
against Germany. 

Confronted with this dangerous dilemma, all Euro- 
pean countries are hastily adjusting their diplomatic 
positions. The French, with the sang-froid they have 
demonstrated throughout the summer, have quietly 
reenforced the Maginot line, behind which they feel 
secure against German attack. While the Communists 
and the General Confederation of Labor oppose 
Premier Daladier’s proposal for modification of the 
40-hour week in industries other than those work- 
ing for national defense, they would undoubtedly 
rally to the government in case of emergency. 


Italy deferred to Germany on September 1 by ex- 
pelling all Jews who had entered the country since 
1919, but is reported to have urged moderation in 
Berlin, indicating that it would not support German 
intervention in Czechoslovakia. For Mussolini must 
realize that a Greater Germany spells the doom of 
Italian influence in Central Europe and the Balkans. 
Like Italy, Hungary has something to gain by Ger- 
many’s success—but only if it cashes in on these gains 
before it becomes, in turn, a victim of Nazi domina- 
tion. That Budapest is aware of this dilemma is 
indicated by the decision of the Imredy government 
on September 4 to repress Hungarian Nazis and 
divide up Hungarian estates, thus counteracting 
Nazi propaganda in favor of land reform. Mean- 
while, the Western powers are feverishly mending 
their fences in Eastern Europe. Britain, which in July 
granted an export credit of $80,000,000 to Turkey, 
is buying wheat in Rumania and strengthening its 
position in the Danubian river trade; while France 
has just advanced $10,000,000 to Bulgaria—Ger- 
many’s World War ally—for the purchase of French 
railroad equipment. 


In this universal race to win allies before the zero 
hour, all eyes are turned toward the United States. 
Ambassador Kennedy’s call on Viscount Halifax im- 
mediately after the Cabinet meeting of August 30 
gave rise to rumors that Britain was trying to ascer- 
tain this country’s attitude in case of war over 
Czechoslovakia. Some indication of this attitude was 
given on September 1, when it was announced that 
the Naval Scouting Force would be assigned to duty 
in the Atlantic on September 6, the day the British 
fleet steamed off to its stations north of Scotland. 
And in a speech near Bordeaux on September 4, 
when he dedicated a French monument to Ameri- 
can soldiers, Mr. Bullitt, Ambassador to Paris, de- 
clared that France and the United States are bound 
by “mutual devotion to the ideals of liberty, democ- 
racy and peace.” 


Whatever the ultimate outcome of this week's 
events, there can be no doubt that today the United 
States is far more aware of the issues underlying the 
European crisis than in 1914, and that its sympathies 
are more definitely aligned on the side of Britain 
and France. But, like Britain, this country is re- 
_luctant to write blank checks on the future. And so 

up to the eleventh hour Nazi Germany—like the 
Germany of the Hohenzollerns—will be able to hope 
that the Anglo-Saxon countries will remain neutral 
in a conflict over Central Europe. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


Page Two 


—s 
— 


U. S..MEXICAN NEGOTIATIONS DEADLOCKED 


The Mexican government's note of September 2 
brings to a deadlock the arguments over payment of 
compensation to Americans whose farm lands 
Mexico has seized under its agrarian program. This 
note, foreshadowed by President Cardenas’ sharp 
declaration of policy in the Mexican Congress on 
September 1, rejects both the legal arguments and 
the main proposals of Secretary Hull’s note of Au- 
gust 22. Foreign Secretary Eduardo Hay denies that 
international law obliges Mexico to provide com- 
pensation in such cases, and makes an open bid for 
support of this doctrine by other Latin American 
countries. He declares that, far from being unprece- 
dented in the Americas, as claimed by Secretary Hull, 
“this interpretation represents the unanimous con- 
viction of the Ibero-American republics’; and in- 
vokes the Calvo doctrine that the alien has no greater 
rights than the citizen. 


The Mexican note rejects in substance the Ameri- 
can proposals for settlement. President Cardenas re- 
fuses either to set aside monthly sums in escrow for 
the satisfaction of claims, or to refrain from further 
expropriations until prompt and adequate compen- 
sation can be made for them. He does accept Under- 
Secretary Welles’ proposal of June 29 that, for the 
purpose of determining the value of seized proper- 
ties and the means of payment, each government ap- 
point a commissioner, and that the three diplomatic 
representatives of American republics longest ac- 
credited at Washington select an arbitrator to decide 
disputed points. From the Washington point of 
view, however, this seems an empty gesture so long 
as Mexico neither recognizes any international obli- 
gation to give compensation nor begins definite pay- 
ments. Moreover, in its effort to find outlets for 
expropriated oil, the Mexican government has con- 
cluded a barter agreement with Germany providing 
for the exchange of its oil for German newsprint 
and other commodities. Since other barter deals with 
Germany and Italy seem to be contemplated, Ameri- 
can exports to Mexico may decline still further. 

While the differences between the two govern- 
ments are serious, the conciliatory tone on both sides 
makes a friendly settlement seem not impossible. 
Washington has displayed a sympathetic understand- 
ing of President Cardenas’ difficulties; and Mexico's 
refusal to assume commitments at the present time 
does not necessarily express unwillingness to com- 
pensate for expropriations whenever this becomes 
possible. 


PAUL B. TAYLOR 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 46, SepremBer 9, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lgsiig Bust, President; DorotHy F. Laer, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dgan, Edstor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


gy 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


An in 


March 


bilize 
expec 
irrevc 
of th 
out a! 
rema: 
The : 
mons 
serve 
such 
or th 
W 
whicl 
must 
Hitle 
a dis 
his « 
mobi 
tions 
by 27 
build 
forti 
begir 
line : 
the § 
press 
does 
Th 
speec 
that | 
assur 
teser 
two 


