ID 


— 
ational 


Editor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 





2, 1921, at the Post 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year ” Office at New York, 
 & a N. Y., under the act 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated sepioh a9 . of March 3, 1879. 
Test 40tt qr 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. gS er Se oN 
of sv 
Vor. XVIII, No. 38 JULY 14, 1939 





How do present preparations for war affect the 
British economy? For an analysis of Britain’s re- 
armament program and an examination of its con- 
sequences for industry, finance and foreign trade, 
read the July 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports: 


ECONOMIC MOBILIZATION OF GREAT BRITAIN 
by James Frederick Green 


25 cents 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 











General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











TENSION EASES 


OVER DANZIG 





om July 10 after Albert Foerster, Danzig Nazi 
leader, had taunted Poland and proclaimed 
that Hitler would “‘liberate the Free City,” Prime 
Minister Chamberlain, with Poland’s approval, 
warned Germany against changing Danzig’s status 
“by unilateral action organized by surreptitious 
methods.” This new British statement, intended to 
dispel any doubts which might still linger in Berlin 
and Warsaw regarding the scope of Britain’s pledge 
to Poland, measures the extent to which Mr. Cham- 
berlain has moved away from his appeasement pol- 
icy. The concessions he has successively made to the 
“peace front’ idea, however, fall short of including 
Winston Churchill in his Cabinet, allegedly because 
this appointment would be interpreted in Germany 
as a sign that Britain had abandoned all hope of 
negotiating a settlement with the Reich. The Anglo- 
Soviet deadlock remains unbroken, but Britain’s de- 
termination to bolster up its eastern European allies 
was reafirmed on July 6, when it was proposed to 
increase government guarantees of export credits for 
“non-commercial’” purposes from £10,000,000 to 
£60,000,000. These credits will be used to facilitate 
purchases of war material and supplies by Poland, 
Rumania, Greece and other countries. Simultane- 
ously it was announced that British airplanes would 
visit Brussels on July 9, and Paris on Bastille Day, 
July 14. The British Cabinet thus indicated its readi- 
ness to combat Germany not only with military 
means, but with the weapons of propaganda and 
economic assistance Hitler has found so valuable. 
A BALKAN AXIS? The Rome-Berlin axis, 
meanwhile, has lost no time in seeking to expand 
its scope in advance of a conflict. The Bulgarian 
Premier, George Kiosseivanoff, was acclaimed in 
Berlin on July 5, when the German press voiced its 
sympathy for Bulgaria’s revisionist claims against 
Rumania and Greece, both of which have received 


unilateral guarantees from Britain. The Nazis ap- 
parently hope to create a “little axis” in the Balkans, 

composed of Hungary, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia, to 
counterbalance the Balkan entente formed in 1934 
when Turkey, Greece, Rumania and Yugoslavia 
agreed to maintain the status quo. While Bulgaria 
declined to join the Balkan entente at that time, it 
markedly improved its relations with Yugoslavia 
and in 1938, by the pact of Salonika, agreed not to 
alter the Balkan status quo by force. As compensa- 

tion for support of Germany, Hungary would pre- 
sumably recover Transylvania and the Banat, ac- 
quired by Rumania in 1920; Bulgaria would receive 
the Dobruja from Rumania and some territory from 
Greece; and Yugoslavia would be offered the Greek 
port of Salonika. Now that Britain has given guar- 
antees to Rumania and Greece, Hungary and Bul- 
garia fear that they may not obtain revision of their 
frontiers unless they play Hitler's game. Both coun- 
tries, moreover, are increasingly dependent on the 
Reich which, now that it has absorbed Austria and 
Czechoslovakia, takes over half of their exports of 
foodstuffs and raw materials. Yet the revisionist 
claims of Hungary and Bulgaria might injure Yugo- 
slavia, which has Hungarian and Bulgarian minori- 
ties within its borders; and the chief concern of both 
Bulgaria and Yugoslavia, for the present at least, is 
to maintain their neutrality against encroachments 
by all great powers. 

SOUTH TYROL AGREEMENT. At the other 
end of the Mediterranean Count Ciano, Italian For- 
eign Minister, accompanied by an imposing diplo- 
matic and military mission, is paying a visit to Spain, 
where he may negotiate a military alliance with 
General Franco. Some observers, however, believe 
that the Rome-Berlin axis may prefer to leave Spain 
nominally neutral, so that, under cover of neutral- 
ity, it could assist them without fear of retaliation by 




















France and Britain—as it helped the Central Powers 
during the World War. Meanwhile, one possible 
source of friction between Italy and Germany was 
removed on July 8, when the two countries agreed 
on the gradual transfer to Germany of 200,000 
German-speaking Austrians and about 10,000 Ger- 
mans from the South Tyrol, surrendered to Italy by 
Austria in 1919. According to this agreement, the 
German-speaking population of the South Tyrol 
may choose either to return to Germany (including 
Austria), or to become loyal Italians, permitting 
Italianization of the frontier region along the 
Brenner. This transfer will not only provide Ger- 
many with the agricultural labor it lacks but, like 
the Greco-Turkish exchange of population in 1924, 
may point the way to solution of similar problems 
in eastern and southeastern Europe. The interesting 
thing is that, in this case, the Nazis have com- 
promised on their concept of “blood and soil” by 
removing their German “racial” brethren to the 
Reich, but leaving the soil to Italy; and have sacri- 
ficed the slogan of “living space” to the necessity of 
remaining on good terms with Italy. 

The Italian press, which had been very reserved 
during the Danzig crisis, has now defined the price 
at which peace might be bought by the western 
powers. The price includes cession of Danzig, the 
Polish Corridor and former German colonies to 
Germany; of Tunisia, Djibouti, the Suez Canal and 
Malta to Italy; and of Gibraltar to Spain. On these 
terms the Fascist powers would be ready to “guaran- 
tee peace.” This obvious build-up for another 
Munich is bound to continue as long as Hitler and 
Mussolini believe that the western powers are merely 
going through the motions of resistance. The out- 
come of the present test of nerves, which so far has 
worked to the advantage of Poland and its western 
allies, will depend on the determination of France 
and Britain to resist any attempt, “peaceful” or 
otherwise, to dismember small states, while leaving 
the door open to a negotiated settlement. The danger 
of the European situation is not so much that Hitler 
wants war—it still seems evident that he would pre- 
fer to obtain his objectives by “peaceful” means— 
but that he may not believe France and Britain mean 
business until he has brought them to military action. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


GENERAL McCOY SUCCEEDS MR. BUELL 

The Board of Directors of the Foreign Policy 
Association announces with pleasure the appoint- 
ment of Major General Frank Ross McCoy, U.S.A. 
(retired), as President of the Association. General 


Page Two 








—= 


McCoy, who will take over his new duties in 
tember, succeeds Raymond Leslie Buell who resigned 


on July 1. Mr. Buell will continue as a member of 
the Board. 


In General McCoy the Association has chosen , 
man of wide practical experience in international 
affairs, who is recognized as one of America’s mog 
distinguished soldier-diplomats. While serving cop. 
tinuously in the Army for forty years, Gener 
McCoy held many non-military offices and headed 
important diplomatic missions in which he demop. 
strated outstanding qualities of statesmanship. 


Few American officers have performed more dis 
tinguished services than General McCoy or had 
wider experience in civil or colonial administration 
and in foreign affairs. Following his graduation from 
West Point in 1897, he began his career when the 
United States was entering a new period in its his 
tory. His first service was in Cuba, where he had 
charge of fiscal and budgetary affairs of the new 
Republic before he was 25 years old. A few years 
later he went to the Philippines with General Wood 
to serve as engineer and as Secretary of the Mor 
Province. He was personal aide to President Theo- 
dore Roosevelt, and later to Secretary of War Taft. 


After the World War, General McCoy was as 
signed to many important missions in different parts 
of the world. In 1921 he returned to the Philippines 
with the Wood-Forbes Mission to make a study of 
the situation in the Islands. In 1923 he went to Japan 
to help in restoring normal life after the great earth- 
quake. In 1927 Secretary of State Stimson chose him 
to supervise the Nicaragua elections, a difficult task| 
which he performed with tact and understanding. 
In 1929 General McCoy served as Chairman of the 
Commission of Inquiry and Conciliation for settle 
ment of the Chaco dispute between Bolivia and 
Paraguay. In 1932 he was appointed a member of 
the Lytton Commission which was sent to Manchuria | 
by the League of Nations. 

A notable tribute to his peace services was paid 
by Princeton University, which conferred on him the 
honorary degree of Doctor of Laws on June 20 “for 
his contribution to the cause of international good 
will and the peaceful settlement of international 
disputes.” In commenting editorially on General 
McCoy’s appointment, the New York Times de 
clared: ‘Forty years in the army only broadened his 
experience as colonial and civil administrator and | 
developed those qualities of statesmanship and diplo 
matic perception which fit him admirably for his 
new post.” 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 38, Jury 14, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dornotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Qa" 


National 





