1¢e 


10 


od 


aid 
ny 
di- 


rd 
ch 
gn 


ive 
1aS 


on, 
ext 


rk, 
the 


pute 


ional 
litor. 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














Vout. XVIII, No. 4 


NOVEMBER 18, 1938 





INTERNATIONAL AID TO GERMAN REFUGEES 


by David H. Popper 
Germany’s ruthless persecution of racial minorities has 
focused world attention on the plight of the unfor- 
tunates who must flee from the Greater Reich. In this 
report, Mr. Popper analyzes the problem of political 
refugees from Germany since 1933, and considers the 
prospects for assisting them. 


November I issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents each 











THE NAZI 


| 


INQUISITION 





iq HOSE who had hoped that territorial concessions 

to Germany would bring relaxation of Nazi ter- 
rorism against racial and religious minorities had a 
rude awakening on November 10 when, in retalia- 
tion for the murder by a young Polish Jew of Ernst 
vom Rath, Third Secretary of the German Embassy 
in Paris, Jewish property was systematically destroyed 
in the course of country-wide demonstrations, and 
35,000 Jews were taken into ‘protective custody.” 
These demonstrations were followed, on Novem- 
ber 12, by the publication of decrees—significantly 
signed by Field Marshal Goering as commissioner 
for the Four-Year Plan of economic self-sufficiency 
—excluding Jews from ownership or operation of re- 
tail, mail-order, export or handicraft enterprises, and 
membership in cooperative societies; providing that 
insurance claims of German Jews resulting from 
anti-Semitic excesses will be confiscated in favor of 
the Reich; and imposing a “‘fine’” of $400,000,000 on 
German Jews for the murder of vom Rath. 


The terroristic acts of the past week had been care- 
fully planned in advance, and only awaited a pretext 
to be carried into execution. Great as is the horror 
aroused by these acts, this is no time for unthinking 
hysteria. But neither is it a time for silence—because 
silence would be interpreted as consent. The Nazi 
government, duplicating the technique which has 
proved so successful in muzzling opposition at home, 
has declared that foreign protests will merely in- 
crease the sufferings of Jews, now obviously held as 
hostages to insure the silence of Western democra- 
cies. Submission to this threat would spell the doom 
of democracy itself. The Jews in Germany have al- 
ready been condemned to a living death. Under the 
circumstances now confronting them, physical death 
can hold little added horror. For the sake of preserv- 
ing what is left of democratic integrity, the Nazi 
threat must be challenged by untrammeled discus- 


sion of an issue which cannot be disregarded by any 
honest man or woman, irrespective of creed, economic 
status, or political persuasion. 

Those who knew Germany in the early post-war 
years of foreign occupation and currency inflation 
understand something of the venomous hatred now 
relentlessly vented on Jews and other minorities. 
They can recall the bitter tide of frustrated humilia- 
tion which swept Germany at the disastrous end of 
a grueling war; the influx of Jews from Poland and 
Galicia, who brought to many German cities that 
ghetto element which served as an excuse for Nazi 
diatribes; the envy and revulsion with which masses 
of undernourished and often unemployed white- 
collar workers looked at inflation profiteers, among 
whom, unfortunately, there were Jews—as well as 
Gentiles. These and other factors serve to explain the 
extent to which some, at least, of the German people, 
especially in the provinces, have apparently been se- 
duced by anti-Semitic propaganda. 

But to understand is one thing; to condone, an- 
other. War and civil strife are comprehensible, if not 
justifiable. It is far more difficult to understand 
wanton brutality wreaked on helpless people reduced 
to the level of panic-stricken animals. 

What the world has not yet sufficiently realized is 
that Nazi terrorism is being visited not only on Jews, 
who have served as a convenient scapegoat, but on 
all groups and individuals not ready to conform to 
Nazi doctrine. Equally important is the fact that the 
Hitler government, obviously pressed for funds to 
fulfill its Four-Year Plan, is systematically extracting 
financial resources from the victims of its terror. 
Those who had believed that Nazism would safe- 
guard private capital against communism can no 
longer persist in their delusion. What the Nazis have 
introduced in Germany is a form of graduated bol- 
shevism, directing their first attack not against the 


: 
| 
l 
‘ 
\ 




















capitalist class as a whole, but against Jewish capi- 
talists, ostensibly expropriated on racial rather than 
economic grounds. Once Jewish bankers, industrial- 
ists and small shopkeepers—and with them their 
Jewish employees and workers—have been forced to 
surrender their property by methods no less drastic 
than those of Russian Communists in 1917, the Nazi 
government may be expected to claim the property of 
the Catholic and Protestant churches, again screen- 
ing its economic motives with denunciations of al- 
leged religious interference in politics. Nor is there 
reason to believe that it will stop at this point, and 
that the property of agnostic Aryans is permanently 
insured against expropriation for the benefit of that 
economic Frankenstein, the totalitarian state. 

The Munich accord was justified in the United 
States, as well as Britain, by the argument that any 
kind of peace was better than war. Observers who 
pointed out the dangers of such a peace were de- 
nounced as warmongers. Now it is being realized 
with a shock that there may be worse things than 
war. War destroys men’s lives. But what is going on 
today in Germany destroys men’s spirits—not only 
the spirit of Jews, driven to self-destruction, but the 
spirit of Germans, both those who wholeheartedly 
applaud such measures, and those coerced by fear of 
consequences to join in the applause. Many Western 
liberals had rejected as fantastic the stories of Ger- 
man brutality current during the World War. They 
are now shaken in their convictions by evidence that 
Germany, under the Nazis, has retrograded to the 
sixteenth century, with its religious wars, its Spanish 
Inquisition and its night of Saint Bartholomew. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 

ANOTHER FRENCH RECOVERY PROGRAM 


In a desperate attempt to sustain its mounting 
arms burden, the French government, on November 
12, announced a series of 32 decree laws issued under 
the full powers granted by Parliament to the Daladier 
government. These decrees, regarded as the opening 
gun in a three-year recovery program, are apparently 
the work of Paul Reynaud, who on November 1 
succeeded Paul Marchandeau as Finance Minister in 
a Cabinet reshuffle. Outstanding among the regula- 
tions is the revaluation of the gold stock of the Bank 
of France at the rate of 170 to the pound sterling, 
in partial compensation for the reduced value of the 
franc in the international exchange market. This 
bookkeeping operation is to produce a profit of 35,- 
000,000,000 francs, which will be used to repay most 
of the inflationary advances made by the Bank of 


Page Two 








France to the Treasury in recent months. Another 
decree practically abolishes the 40-hour week—which 
is retained “in principle’’-—and permits employers to 
prescribe as much as 10 additional hours of labor 
each week. Such supplementary work is to be paid 
at slightly higher hourly rates, and employers will be 
subjected to a 10 per cent tax on the profits earned by 
extra work. Other decrees raise postal and telephone 
rates as well as transit fares in Paris; increase taxes 
on coffee, gasoline, tobacco, sugar and wine from 
28 to 35 per cent; and make slight upward adjust- 
ments in income and factory production taxes. 

The government is also striving to effect econ- 
omies. A special committee will attempt to weed 
out superfluous civil servants. Increased working 
hours will permit the dismissal of 40,000 railroad 
employees, who will be transferred to national de- 
fense industries. Public works programs will be 
abandoned to permit more intense concentration on 
rearmament. But no action has yet been taken to 


reduce war pensions, and M. Reynaud has promised | 


that a system of old-age assistance would be instituted. 

These measures reflect M. Reynaud’s avowed de- 
termination to stimulate a 30 to 40 per cent increase 
in French production by the classical method of en- 
couraging the repatriation and investment of French 
capital on favorable terms. M. Reynaud’s measures 
“to restore confidence” —which jettison many of the 
social advances accomplished by the Popular Front— 
are viewed with bitter hostility by the Socialists and 
Communists. They believe that labor is being forced 
by law to sacrifice its newly won gains, while capi- 
talist interests are cajoled by promise of profit into 
productive activity which they should carry on as a 
matter of patriotic duty. Even Right-wing critics re- 
alize that the Reynaud decrees, which may halve the 
French budgetary deficit, will by no means end con- 
tinual deficit financing—for armament purposes—or 
the consequent fear of inflation. Relative financial 
stability in France cannot be secured without Dra- 
conian action. At the very least, amortization of the 
public debt must be halted, and the interest rate on 
it reduced; and exchange control must probably be 
imposed to prevent the drain of capital from the 
country at each recurring international crisis. For 
France has reached the point where the orthodox 
liberal economic remedies no longer meet the needs 
of an insatiable war machine. And until the parties 
of the Left are convinced that sacrifices, necessary if 
France is to be strong, are fairly apportioned among 
all classes of the population, the nation cannot regain 


its social harmony. Davin H. Poprer 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 4, Novemser 18, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lgsiig Buel, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Ero 181 


Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 














Tk 


pevece 





The Annual Meeting of the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 
ch will be held at the Hotel Astor, New York, on Saturday, December 10, 1938. 


oi After the regular luncheon discussion, which ends at 3:30 p.m., there will be a brief business meeting. 
‘id 
be 





PROXY FOR BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


ne i ; ; : : ‘ oe 
The candidates listed below have been nominated to serve on the Board of Directors of the Foreign Policy Association, 
ces Incorporated, as indicated, and have expressed their willingness to act if elected. The word “Re-election” appears after the names 
ym of the present members of the Board of Directors who have consented to run again. 
St- Persons other than those nominated by the Nominating Committee are eligible to election, and space is provided on ° 
the proxy for naming such other candidates. Attention is called to the fact that 
an- “All members of the Board of Directors shall be members of the Association who are so circumstanced 
ed that they can attend the meetings of the Board regularly.” 
! Constitution, Article 1V, Paragraph 3. 
ing 
vad In accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, the candidates receiving the largest number of votes cast at the 
q annual meeting December 10, 1938, will be declared elected. 
e- 
be Please note that proxies cannot be used 
on 1. unless received at National Headquarters not later than Friday, December 9, 1938 
to 2. unless the proxy returned is signed by the member. 


sed | 
ed. 


Nominating Committee: Ralph S. Rounds, Chairman 
de- Mrs. Mary C. Draper Carlton J. H. Hayes 
ase Stephen P. Duggan Walter H. Pollak 
en- Please cut along this line and sign and return the proxy to the office of the 


ach Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
ires 


the PPPS SSSSSSSSSSSSSESSSSSSESSSSSSESSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSOSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSHSSSSSSHSSSSSSSS SOSSSSOSOHSHSESSSSSSSSSS eeeee ee 


Only members of the Association who are citizens of the United States have voting privileges. 











‘PROXY 
ind 


ced Put cross (x) beside names of candidates of your choice. 
api- Vote for one in Class of 1940 and six in Class of 1941. 
nto 
iS a 
re- CLASS OF 1940 


the i 
; ; WINFIELD WILLIAM RIEFLER 

—_— Trustee, The Institute for 
Advanced Study, Princeton, N. J. 


I authorize Raymond Leslie Buell or William T. Stone to vote for directors of the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, as indicated below: 








cial 
dra- 
the CLASS OF 1941 


- on WILLIAM A. ELDRIDGE HERBERT L. MAY 
» be RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 
he | | MRS. LEARNED HAND MRS. HOWELL MOORHEAD 

of RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 




















\dox 
eeds WM. W. LANCASTER H. ALEXANDER SMITH 

rties RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 
ry if 
long 
gain 






































ational 
Editor. (Sign here) as 


Member 








