~ ) Se, ee 





Entered as 2nd class matter 


MARS . 1942 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





ave 


ger 
by 


vith 


ere | 


but 
ast, 
ful. 
Rio 
has 
“ific 

if 
1 if 
r t0 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





You. XXI, No. 18 


—_— 


FEBRUARY 20, 1942 





UNITED STATES MUST FACE STERN REALITIES 


§ each day’s headlines bring news of disasters 
for the United Nations in the Atlantic and the 


‘| Pacific, it becomes more necessary than ever for the 


American people to see events in the broadest pos- 
sible perspective. If one can judge the temper of the 
country by editorial opinion, by the speeches of po- 


| litical, industrial and labor leaders, and by exchange 


of ideas in schools, colleges, shops, factories and 
community forums, then it can be said that the 
American people are confused and profoundly wor- 


} ried, but by no means discouraged. It is obvious that, 


until the United Nations command adequate man 
power and war material, they will be unable to de- 
fend all points at which the Axis might strike. Each 
day soul-searching decisions have to be made re- 
garding the strategy best calculated to avoid further 
disasters. What we need most of all are not plati- 
tudes about ultimate victory, or recriminations re- 
gatding the Administration, but hard facts concern- 
ing the character of the war, the main objectives of 
the United Nations, and the military and industrial 
means that are or may soon become available to 
teach these objectives. 


STRUGGLE FOR THE HIGH SEAS. The fall of 


| Singapore and the escape of German warships from 


Brest, emphasize anew the profound changes in the 
character of the war that have occurred since De- 
cember 7. Up to that time the victories won by 
Germany in Europe and by Japan in Asia had been 
primarily won on land. Important as these victories 
had been, Germany and Japan were in danger of 
becoming prisoners on the continents they had con- 
quered unless they could break out onto the high 
seas. Only the countries that control the high seas 
can hope to exercise world power—and it has been 
evident for many years that the present struggle is 
hot a struggle for domination of this or that con- 
tinent, but for redistribution of world power. 

The significance of Pearl Harbor was that the 


Axis countries succeeded there in striking their first 
major blow against the naval power of Britain and 
the United States on the high seas. That is why all 
the narrow seas—the Suez Canal, the English Chan- 
nel, the Panama Canal, the Strait of Macassar, the 
Straits of Gibraltar, as well as key bases like Singa- 
pore, Surabaya, Dakaé, and many others—have as- 
sumed such crucial importance for the outcome of 
the war. Either the Axis powers will force the gate- 
ways to the high seas at all or some of these points, 
as they have already done at Singapore, or else the 
United Nations will succeed in defending the gate- 
ways that remain in their hands, in preparation for 
recapture of those they have surrendered. If the 
Axis powers succeed, they will be in a position to 
sweep Allied shipping from the sea lanes of the 
world. They could thus, in wartime, cut off sea-borne 
supplies to continental countries like Russia and 
China which are continuing the struggle on land 
and, when the war is over, could prevent Britain and 
the United States from reaching overseas markets 
and raw materials. 


NO TIME FOR RECRIMINATION. The British 
and American people had not been prepared either 
in a military or a psychological sense for a struggle 
of this magnitude, which will determine the survival 
of the United Nations. The responsibility for this 
unpreparedness, it must be repeated, cannot be 
placed exclusively on any single British or Ameri- 
can statesman now in power. It rests, in varying 
measure, on all of us, and is due to our comfortable 
certainty that the condition of things existing before 
1939 could be indefinitely perpetuated without un- 
due effort or sacrifice on our part. This dangerous 
illusion must now be shattered once and for all, if 
the strenuous efforts demanded by the realization of 
possible catastrophe are to be exerted. 

Much has been said in this country concerning the 
futility of sending to other nations war material that 

















may be needed by the United States. Many com- 
plaints can be heard regarding the sacrifices now 
required for continuance of the conflict—the impli- 
cation being that the United States should, perhaps, 
cut its losses in the Far East, and make the best deal 
it can with the Axis powers, in the hope of preserv- 
ing its economy more or less intact. Such arguments 
cannot be dismissed as the expression of a “Cliveden 
set." They deserve both scrutiny and answer. 


If one thing is clear today, it is that the United 
States gained what Mr. Nelson called “golden 
hours” for speeding up its own war production by 
selling or lease-lending such war material as it did 
to Britain, Russia, China and other peoples who, 
under stress of much greater hardships than any yet 
experienced by Americans, have been fighting in the 
front lines of the world struggle. That the United 
States did not utilize these “golden hours” for all- 
out effort before, and even after, Pearl Harbor, is 
not the fault of the British, Russians, Dutch, Chi- 
nese and others, but again of all of us who refused 
to recognize the urgency of the situation and tried 
to carry on “business as usual.’”” Nothing could be 
more futile now than to bemoan the past, or criticize 
our Allies, who up to now have borne the brunt of 
the struggle. What we need to do is to stop re- 
criminating, and concentrate this country’s vast 
resources of energy, courage, ingenuity and bold 
imagination on the tasks ahead. 


INDIA ASSUMES CRUCIAL IMPORTANCE IN ALLIED STRATEGY 


As the Japanese entrench themselves in Singapore, 
attack Sumatra, and drive nearer to Rangoon, India 
assumes a key position in the struggle for the 
Orient. While it stood as the only major naval and 
air base of the United Nations in the entire Far 
East, Singapore guarded the eastern entrance to 
the Indian Ocean. Its loss, the gravity of which can 
scarcely be exaggerated, will make it possible for 
the Japanese to prey upon vital Allied supply routes 
in the Indian Ocean and to attack Burma and India. 

Acutely aware of the Japanese threat to the 
Burma Road and to India, Generalissimo Chiang 
Kai-shek, with his staff officers, arrived in New 
Delhi about February 9 for consultation with Brit- 
ish and Indian officials. For the Generalissimo it was 
the first trip outside his country since the outbreak 


Page Two 





Allied Strategy in the Near East 
by Louis E. Frechtling 


25¢ 


A survey of Turkey, North Africa and the Middle East— 
where major Axis moves may be in preparation. February 1 
issue of FOREIGN Po.icy Reports [issued on the Ist and 15th 
of each month. Subscription, $5 a year; to FPA members $3]. 

















NO ESCAPE FROM SACRIFICE. If there is 
lesson above all we must learn from the bitter « 
perience of Europe, it is that money and exertig 
withheld from the war effort now will be of » 
avail if the Axis powers, meanwhile, win the wa 
We may save ships and planes today, in the hoy 
that we can then use them for protection of oy 
own coasts—and thus not only lose the Pacific 4 
Japan but, what is ultimately more dangerous, log 


the support that China, India, and other countrial 


opposed to Japanese domination can give the Allie 
cause. We may, from fear of communism or cop 
cern for our own safety, hold back from Russi; 
the weapons it needs for continuance of its i 
sistance against Germany—and thus not only log 
Europe to the Nazis, but also give Russia cause i 
become our enemy. The nations of Europe hope 
to preserve their historic monuments and their eco 
nomic resources by surrendering to the Nazis—onl) 
to discover that they could not eat stones, and tha 
no amount of gold or diamonds can buy freedom 
once it is lost, or save children from starvation 
Even if this country did abandon the struggle now 
it would not regain unrestricted use of tires an(| 
sugar, or whittle down taxes in the kind of world i 
would have to face. By clinging to our presen’ 
luxuries, we risk the loss not only of our materia 
resources, but also of all the non-material value 


that make life worth living. VERA MICHELES DEAN 





of the Sino-Japanese hostilities in 1931. He has hele 
long discussions with Jawaharlal Nehru, who suc 
ceeded Gandhi as leader of the Congress party ot 
January 15, and with the Marquess of Linlithgow 
British Viceroy. The Indian people have given hin 
an enthusiastic reception, for they have always ex 
pressed sympathy for the Chinese in their struggle 


NEW CHINESE LIFE-LINE. Without mud 
question the Generalissimo’s first object is to dis 





cuss details for a new “Burma Road.” The Chinese 


disillusioned by the showing of the United Nations 


in southeast Asia, are preparing for the worst. The 


fall of Singapore will release an estimated 200,00) 
experienced Japanese troops for operations not onl} 


in Sumatra and Java, but also in Burma. Reinforce 
ments will strengthen the Japanese troops alread) 
driving toward Rangoon along the coastal railroad 
Despite the outstanding aerial defense of the Burm! 
capital by the R.A.F. and American volunteer pilots 
it appears unlikely that the port will be held. Thi 
Chinese soldiers in the north are guarding the Burm 
Road proper in the hope that, if South Burma fal) 
(and along with it the railroad to Rangoon), a net 
connecting link west to the Bay of Bengal might & 
developed. Still another route might utilize the rai 








as an 
Natic 
bers | 
eleve 
a gua 
will | 
withc 
ment 
of do 
mean 
preli 
in Vi 
by th 
tion 
nortl 
As 
the j 
Gani 
non- 
of € 
man 
Brit 
depe 
drev 
In ¢ 
on | 
be r 
Cou 
tion 
imp 
A 
the 
larg 
FOR! 
Head 


Secre 
N. } 


<= 











— = Page Three 











road extending from Calcutta almost to the Chinese 

















border, on completion of a highway from Chung- F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
king to northern Assam. It is reported that work on Subject: HAS AMERICA AWAKENED? 
nq the road has begun, but construction will require at Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 
ay mem ® year. ens pee nae over Blue Network 
oP POLITICAL DEADLOCK IN INDIA. Chiang For station, please consult your local news paper 
7 Kai-shek’s visit brings to the fore the dilemma which 
- 1 ; 
| sty opposes Japanese aggression; on the other, of Asia. It is the seat of the Eastern Group Supply 
ne! it is pledged to a struggle against British rule. The pgp en yh ger ed ee Preto gon 
lit party's attitude is epitomized by its boycott of Jap- rs SE ee ee ee 
cOn ds, in force since 1938, but hardly adequate. 5 endent — Be = for military ews and 
—s ee ee lies. India itself is producing rifles, machine 
Sst A serious deadlock between the British government “ae ll _P - ita 
‘*) and the Congress party arose on September 3, 1939, ditt ys ery; parycodengy = q Pemsagrsg * <4 
lox) when the Viceroy announced that India was au- armored vehicles and planes. tn se ee 
tl tomatically a belligerent in this war. Refusing to y* Ste ° —_ India has sent a ae age 600,000 
pe cooperate in the war effort unless India was regarded oe aa ee esens nf; = se ai “the 
SCO) as an equal rather than as a British possession, the a 7 fe — a an eee , 
onl) Nationalists one month later withdrew their mem- ¥ ey wets naoned . a Pape 
thal bers from ministries which controlled eight of the = yiagoesoss v, ee abe vane i watts we 
doa eleven provinces of British India. Congress demands oe © ee ee ane od s os Bis 
we a guarantee that at the conclusion of the war, Indians — . two bottlenecks: shortages in machine 
"| will be free to set up their own form of government C00 86 Ce q § the aalk tae 
‘without British interference. The British govern- ; ~— 8 ape liste Py tage: 4 d i “— er 
dit ment, however, refuses to promise more than a grant ng we sie 5 aoe . . art » Os | x th 
Set! of dominion status at an indefinite date, insisting that = ees On od — 2 ee ™ ‘1 
“tit) meanwhile the Hindus and Moslems come to some United — P aia a vigil! ney Se. 
a preliminary agreement. This is almost impossible waile a n% — co ry - eer cme Sesame 
FAN! in view of the Moslem League’s threat to resist rule a 0 h ee 0 aan a pete ae 
by the Hindu majority and its demand for the crea- mie -—_ - rae ‘ b she fp ey “ye 
tion of an independent Moslem state, Pakistan, in ndian production has Deen Sipped Up Sa a 
Wietivwestern Indie. outbreak of war, but its real strength is largely po- 
uy As the Japanese reach out to the Indian Ocean wom phere Pers a vey an ets 
, , war for ir freedom as well as for others, pro- 
y | the political deadlock may yet be broken. Mohandas ptm of poten would exceed any por a 
ps Gandhi, an unflinching believer in the technique of envisaged, and the army of almost one million could 
| é non-violent resistance, resigned from the leadership gradually be expanded to many millions. Although 
role of Congress on December 30, 1941. Finding that Nehru on February 12 reiterated his position that 
>©"| many of his colleagues favored cooperation with Indians would fight only as free men, much dis- 
7 Britain in the war effort a ang 8g trust of the British government would probably van- 
| dependence at the close of the war, Gandhi with- ish if India were in effect treated as a dominion. 
nese, | —_ so that the party could make its own decision. 


Meanwhile, Japan may break the deadlock by forc- 
ing the Indians to fight what they regard as the 
greater of two evils. 


tion) In an unexpected gesture of compromise, Britain 
Tht! on February 12 extended an invitation to India to M LaF 
,000) be represented in the War Cabinet and the Pacific — ae 
onl) Council. Though hardly sufficient to meet the Na- as to lamas 


orce} tionalist demands it is a step in recognition of India’s India Today, by W. E. Duffett, A. R. Hicks, G. R. Parkin. 
ead j ance in this Wi Published under the auspices of the Canadian Institute 
} importance in this war. of International Affairs, Toronto, The Ryerson Press, 
road : be a oie 
my . ARSENAL OF ASIA. Despite its hesitancy on ee per 
“~ the political front India, a sub-continent half as A very useful handbook which briefly presents the es- 
tots . . : 


sential facts needed to understand the political problems 


The large as the United States, is becoming the arsenal of India. Includes a chapter on India in the war. 





rm. : "EF: 
1 FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 18, Fesruary 20, 1942. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
fall Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Writtt1am P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lest, 


nev Secretary; VERA MICHELES DgAN, Editor; Davip H. Poppsr, Associate Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 
, by N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
t 


Be 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
fall 


Fr. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








ie ro 


” a - 


eee VE 


Washington News Letter 

















Fes. 16.—In the public debate which has de- 
veloped over the efficiency of government wartime 
operations, the Department of State has had its 
share both of critics and defenders. The critics found 
voice again this past week when an incidental, but 
unfortunate, chapter was added to the story of St. 
Pierre and Miquelon. This issue, which officials in 
the Department would gladly consign to oblivion, 
has a way of bobbing up with annoying regularity. 
Ever since the sudden Free French occupation of 
these Vichy-held islands on Christmas Eve, State 
Department officials have made decisions and is- 
sued statements under a cloud of ill fortune. The 
latest episode was an apparent disagreement between 
Under Secretary Welles and Secretary Hull as to 
whether the newly proclaimed Act of Havana, cov- 
ering the transfer of a European-held colony in this 
hemisphere to another non-American state, applied 
to St. Pierre and Miquelon. It was finally cleared by 
the announcement on February 14 that there had 
been a press conference misunderstanding. 


IN DEFENSE OF HULL. In another connection, 
the Secretary of State has found a vigorous cham- 
pion in the person of Wendell L. Willkie who, in 
the course of a Lincoln’s Day speech indicting other 
Washington officials, declared that “the country, 
irrespective of party, . . . [has} confidence in Mr. 
Hull.” The Republican leader charged that the De- 
partment of State, “our most respected department 
of government,” was gradually being destroyed “‘by 
a process of nibbling at the authority of the admin- 
istrator.” He referred indirectly to recently estab- 
lished agencies such as the Board of Economic War- 
fare and the Office of the Coordinator of Informa- 
tion, each of which has been assigned certain func- 
tions relating to the conduct of foreign relations— 
hitherto regarded as the prerogative of the State 
Department. It may be said, in passing, that poten- 
tially serious clashes of jurisdiction and activity 
among these agencies are being reduced through 
periodic adjustments and interdepartmental liaison. 

The impression in Washington is that creation 
of these new agencies was due, in part, to the fact 
that the State Department had been slow in adapt- 
ing itself to the emergency. Operating under the 
cloak of an organizational conservatism, character- 
istic of Foreign Offices the world over, the Depart- 
ment had not been quick to open up new and ex- 
tensive areas of activity within its customary field. 
It may well be that a jolt was necessary to overcome 
traditional lethargy. 


CURRENT EXPANSION. Whatever the reasog, 
the State Department in its own fashion has gradu 
ally been reshaping its organization to meet the 
pressing requirements of a nation involved in 4 
global war. The Department's personnel numbered 
1,720 in mid-1941 and is being expanded so rap. 
idly that estimates call for a staff totaling 2,590 by 
June 30, 1942. Thus, in a year’s time, the size of the 
State Department will have increased by 50 per cent, 
and expectations are that this trend will continue 
through the next fiscal year. 

Burdened with an endless array of technical prob. 
lems which war conditions create or aggravate—in 
the regulation of foreign trade, financing, shipping, 
domiciled aliens, citizenship and the like—the lead. 
ing staff officers must still find time to fight the war 
on a world-wide diplomatic front. Information gath. 
ered from diplomatic and consular posts all over the 


world must be sifted and interpreted as a back-| 


ground for development of a strategy designed to 
block Axis efforts at domination of remaining new 
tral areas in Latin America, Europe and the Near 
East, and to maintain the United Nations’ solidarity. 
The substantial success of the recent conference at 
Rio de Janeiro testifies to the effectiveness of the 
work which the staff of Cordell Hull is doing in at 
least one area. 

IN THE FOREIGN FIELD. Despite the suspen- 
sion of diplomatic and consular activity in many 
countries as a result of the war, the Foreign Service 
—eyes and ears of the State Department abroad 
—has been assigned new and enlarged tasks con- 
nected with the war effort. Fully one hundred of- 
ficials are employing their specialized knowledge in 
Washington; additional assignments have been 








Vou. x 


—<———— 


T H 
as 
and tl 
pl 
Peed 
defea 
been 
23. 2 
again 
sprea 
of ho 
isolat 
tion | 
fensir 
create 
distas 
War | 
jectiv 
and f 
Or 
prem 
victo 





made to the key listening-posts of Berne and Stock- 
holm; and new consular offices have been opened 
since Pearl Harbor in such far-scattered places as 
Asmara, Eritrea; Darwin, Australia; Accra, on the 
African Gold Coast; Basra, Iraq; and St. Lucia and 
Aruba in the West Indies. Staff work is still handi- 
capped by the fact that a total of nearly 600 of 
ficials (including clerical staffs) and their depend: 
ents are immobilized in Europe and in the Far East 
awaiting the completion of arrangements for an ex- 
change with Axis diplomats in the United States. 
In contrast to the sometimes amateurish quality of 
foreign representation which the United States had 
available in World War I, the Foreign Service today 
can be depended on to carry its weight in its own 


field. WILLIAM P. Mappox 


to sé 
| dutie 

plan 
| dene 
| Chur 
Min: 








