essential 
stice Sam. { 
dying the 
loubt that 
mong de- 


: Recently 
€eN most 
een clear. 


bitions to 
self. 


The de 
aterials is 
th serious 
.R. across 
idditional 
anes may 
ritness the 
he U.S. to 
nn August 
by vessel, 
ced from 
nd a still 
still dan- 
1 386,684 
of 1941. 
shipbuild- 
> is being 
1s, which 
id twenty 
ough out 
~d to out 

along if 
7s and to 
sible Jap 


” 


r soonet 


2 WILDE 


GENERAL LIBRARY 
GV. OF MICH 


Sener 7 ‘tbherar 
PERIODICAL Roum artes ite y 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


AUG 30 194) 


University of Michigan 


Arbor. Mich. 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN rOLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Aucust 29, 1941 


Vou. XX, No. 45 


SOUTH AMERICA WEIGHS COURSE OF WAR 


By VERA MICHELES DEAN 


Mrs, Dean has just returned from a visit to Brazil, Argentina, 
Chile and Peru. 


yg spectacular struggle between Germany and 
Russia and the mounting tide of revolt against 
Hitler’s ‘new order’ among the conquered peoples of 
Europe, have had a profound effect on the countries 
of South America, where public opinion registers 
changes in the international temperature with the 
delicate precision of a thermometer. When Germany 
was Winning an uninterrupted series of victories in the 
west, many Latin Americans, with varying degrees of 
resignation, had come to accept Nazi victory as in- 
evitable. But a subtle change in the political atmos- 
phere made itself felt soon after the German invasion 
of Russia. It might have been expected—and this was 
the expectation of Nazi propaganda—that fear of 
Communism would range the predominantly Catho- 
lic countries of South America on the side of Ger- 
many. What impressed Latin Americans, however, 
was that, for the first time, the Nazis had encountered 
military resistance which had thwarted their B/itz- 
krieg methods. And they attributed Soviet resistance 
not merely to Russia’s military and induc‘rial pre- 
paredness, but to the effectiveness of a rival ideology 
which had proved a match for Nazism. 


PREOCCUPATION WITH EXPORTS. To ap- 
preciate the effect that this change in opinion regard- 
ing the course of the war may have on South America, 
it is essential to understand that the countries of that 
continent, far from seeking security within a closed 
Western Hemisphere system, are keenly aware of 
their links with Europe and Asia. Until now their 
ptincipal exports have consisted of foodstuffs and in- 
dustrial raw materials. Their chief concern is to find 
amarket for these exports at the best price they can 
obtain. They are consequently far more export- 
minded and, to that extent international-minded, than 
many sections of the United States. It is to their ad- 


vantage to have the great industrial powers—Britain, 
the United States and Germany—compete: for their 
products, rather than have one great power monopo- 
lize the purchase of their exports, as the United States 
is in many respects doing today, when war and the 
British blockade have closed South America’s Euro- 
pean markets. From a purely materialistic point of 
view, many South Americans do not want to see the 
complete victory of either group of belligerents, 
which might leave the victors in a position to dictate 
political and economic terms to raw material-produc- 
ing countries. Many of them would prefer to see the 
war end in a draw, which would make it possible for 
South America to prosper by renewed economic com- 
petition between the great powers. 

IS SOUTH AMERICA PRO-NAZI? Some North 
Americans—who may themselves have hesitated to 
aid Britain—contend that South Americans are luke- 
warm toward the democratic cause, and attribute this 
lukewarmness to pro-Nazi sympathies. This is a mis- 
interpretation of public sentiment in South America. 
True, many of the countries to the south of us have 
not yet reached the stage of political and economic 
development propitious to the full functioning of 
parliamentary institutions; but the vast majority of 
the people are pro-democratic and anti-totalitarian by 
temper and tradition, even more than by intellectual 
conviction. Nazi propaganda, which stresses the inef- 
fectiveness of parliamentary institutions in countries 
where they function—as in Argentina and Chile— 
and denounces Anglo-Saxon “imperialism,” has made 
relatively little headway except in military and upper 
class circles. Even there admiration for the Nazis is 
due primarily to the awe aroused by the efficiency of 
the German war machine, and to the preference of 
military and upper class groups for a “strong govern- 
ment”’ in their own countries. This does not mean that 
Nazi influence in South America should be under- 
estimated for a moment. On the contrary, it can-yet 


aaa 


= Page Two 


prove very dangerous, because it is concentrated 
among key people who in case of a crisis might con- 
trol strategic positions in each country affected. 

The real influence in South America is neither Ger- 
man, nor Italian, nor Spanish. In fact, many South 
Americans resent any attempt by Madrid to direct 
their course, somewhat in the way that North Ameri- 
cans often resent pressure from Britain. The real Eu- 
ropean influence among educated South Americans 
stems from France, which was relatively disinterested 
in that continent. Because France—far more than 
Britain or the United States—was regarded as the true 
prototype of democracy and culture, its defeat has 
proved a personal tragedy for many South Ameri- 
cans. The defeat of France has also been interpreted 
as a great blow to the prestige of Latin peoples in 
general. The reaction to this event has taken two 
forms: on the one hand, there is a tendency to ration- 
alize the defeat of France, and the subjection of other 
Latin peoples—Spain, Italy, Rumania—by contend- 
ing that the Germans are invincible; on the other 
hand, there is an effort to discover how the countries 
of South America, with their predominantly Latin 
settlers, can overcome the weaknesses revealed by the 
Latin countries of Europe. 


WHAT SOUTH AMERICA THINKS OF U.S. 
In this period of painful readjustment, South Ameti- 
cams are re-examining their concept of the United 
States, and of the réle the United States might play 
in the Western Hemisphere. For them President 
Roosevelt remains the protagonist of a New Deal in 
hemisphere affairs. But they still wonder whether 
the Good Neighbor policy is merely an emergency 
measure, or has become an intrinsic part of our atti- 
tude toward South America. At the moment, the 
South American countries realize that the United 
States is the only market for their exports, and the 
only source of essential manufactured goods — al- 
though it becomes increasingly difficult for them to 
obtain manufactured goods from the United States, 
owing partly to our own armament needs, and partly 
to lack of shipping facilities. Although the former 
agitation against “Yankee imperialism” has some- 
what abated, especially now that the Communists 
have adopted the party line of cooperation with Brit- 
ain and the United States, many South Americans 


What is the economic and strategic importance of 
Central America for the United States in the 
present emergency? Read: 


THE RESOURCES AND TRADE OF 
CENTRAL AMERICA 


by A. Randle Elliott 


25¢ 


September 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


—= | = 
still feel that the United States exploits their tp. 
sources without adequate. compensatin. Yet th 

realize that, in many cases, their countries have no 
reached the level of technical development whic) j 
would permit them to take over operation of ming |“ ‘| 
and public utilities now operated by American at | 
British interests, and that withdrawal of foreign cap; 

tal might precipitate an economic collapse. As a rem, 

edy, they urge that the United States, instead of gy. Gaur 
ing loans which might be difficult to liquidate, pay 
higher prices for their strategic raw materials, such | 
as copper; and advocate careful control of foreign | age 
capital in the future. ng S 


The South American countries are not, on the 
whole, afraid as yet of Nazi invasion. At the same rardin 
time, they have become increasingly aware of Nazi thoug! 
activities within their borders, and are beginning ty | nore, 
take various measures—as in Bolivia, Chile, Argen: } ck ta 
tina and Uruguay—to check these activities. While| op, 
the countries on the east coast are concerned with the So 
Germany's plans for the future, on the west coast of Rez 
Chile and Peru fear that, in case of war in the Fa 
East, Japan might seek to establish a foothold on the | oy¢i: 
Pacific coast or sabotage their mines. War in the Far |» en 
East would also deprive these countries of a market | i. gh, 
in Japan, which has been bidding against the United 
States for the minerals of Chile, and has purchased 
three-quarters of Peru’s 1941 cotton crop. 


Turke: 
tively. 


aumbe 


develo 
forma. 
minat 

If some concrete incident should convince the | Soviet 
countries of South America that the Axis constitutes | maint: 
a direct danger for that continent, they would un-} incon 
doubtedly support United States measures for defense | Soviet 
of the Western Hemisphere, because they are pas-| withd: 
sionately attached to their political independence} fused 
But until that danger has eventuated, many of them| Irar 
feel that defense of their territory by the United | «oid 
States might prove almost as disastrous for theif} unity 
independence as invasion by Germany—and perhaps | the p: 
more lasting. In the midst of these mixed hopes and | sided 
apprehensions, the most important and immediate} Mpor 
task for the United States is to demonstrate three | by ne 
things: first, that this country is rapidly becoming a | ®untt 
center of culture which could, to some extent at | is p 
least, replace France in the hearts and minds of South | the so 
Americans; second, that it is concerned with defense | ttal p 
of democracy not only for the sake of material ad-| the 1 
vantage, even on a lend-lease basis, but for the sake | Persia 
of high ideals; and third, that it is prepared, from | while 
the military and industrial point of view, to make | bntis! 
good its challenge to Nazism. For the South Amett | @ vitt 
cans, too, are preoccupied with the kind of “new | Shah 
order” that may emerge out of this conflict. They | —— 
find Nazi methods repugnant, but they want to make | Hc 
sure that the new order anticipated by Britain and | teered 
the United States will offer them political and ¢0? | 
nomic participation on a basis of true equality. 


——=:_ 
their fe. 
Yet they 

have not 

ent which 


| of Mines 
rerican oy | 
eign capi 
Asa Fe: 
ad of giv. 
idate, pay 
rials, such 
o£ foreign 


t, On the 
the same 
e of Nazi 
sinning to 
le, Argen. | 
es. While 
rned with 
vest Coast 


n the Far 
od on the 
in the Far 

a market 
he United 
purchased 


vince the 
onstitutes 
vould un 
or defense 
y are pas 
pendence. 
y of them 
1e United 
for their 
d perhaps 
ropes and 
mmediate 
rate three 
coming 4 
extent at 
s of South 
h defense 
terial ad- 
r the sake 
red, from | 
to make 
th Amer 
of “new 
lict. They 
it to make 
‘itain and | 
and eco 


ity. 


=o 


Page Three 


H 


BRITAIN AND U.S.S.R. ACT TO CHECK NAZI INFLUENCE IN IRAN 


The invasion of Iran on August 25 by British and 
soviet forces opened up a new theater of hostilities 
yd spread the European war many hundreds of 
miles farther from the Polish Corridor, where it be- 

almost two years ago. General Sir Archibald 
Wavell, who had been transferred on July 1 from 
(iro to India, was in charge of the British armies 
yhich, supported by naval units in the Persian Gulf, 
yere attacking eastward from the Iraqi border and 
yestward from Baluchistan. Soviet troops were mov- 
ing southward into Iran from Trans-Caucasia and 
Turkestan, west and east of the Caspian Sea respec- 
tively. While little information is yet available re- 
garding the size of the opposing forces, Iran is 
thought to have a well-trained army of 100,000 or 
more, as well as a larger number of reserves, but to 
lick tanks, heavy guns and airplanes. 

ORIGIN OF THE CONFLICT. Great Britain and 
the Soviet Union justified their action by the refusal 
of Reza Shah Pahlevi, ruler of Iran, to eject the large 
gmber of German technicians, businessmen and 
‘ourists’” reported to be in the country. After 
an emphatic warning by the British government 
in the early spring that it was concerned over 
developments in Iran, the British made numerous 
formal and informal representations at Teheran, cul- 
minating in a virtual ultimatum by Britain and the 
Soviet Union on August 16. The Iranian government, 
maintaining that only 640 Germans were in Iran— 
incontrast to the two or three thousand cited in Anglo- 
Soviet accusations—apparently agreed to request the 
withdrawal of small numbers each month, but re- 
fused to order a general expulsion. 

Iran has sought ever since the outbreak of war to 
woid such a showdown, in order to safeguard the 


| unity and independence that it has achieved only in 


the past two decades. In 1907 Britain and Russia 
ded their long struggle for control of Persia—an 
important gateway to India and the Indian Ocean— 
by negotiating a treaty which divided the unstable 


country into spheres of influence. Russia was to exer- 


ise predominant influence in the north, Britain in 
he south, while the Shah was relegated to the cen- 
tal portion. The Soviet government, shortly after 
the revolution, renounced its rights in northern 
Persia, but Britain retained much of its influence, 
while the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company—in which the 
British government has a majority holding—enjoyed 
‘virtual monopoly in the rich Persian fields. Reza 
Sah Pahlevi, who came to power in 1925, labored 


a 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: TWO YEARS OF WAR 
Speaker: John C. deWilde 
Date: Sunday, August 31 
Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 

Station: NBC, blue network 


incessantly to modernize the economic, social and 
political life of the country, to revive a nationalistic 
spirit, and to end British and Russian control. The 
Trans-Iranian railway, a notable engineering achieve- 
ment, was completed in 1938 without resort to for- 
eign capital and with American rather than British 
technical assistance. In 1940 the Shah secured a re- 
vision of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company’s conces- 
sion, and won a guaranteed minimum annual pay- 
ment of £4,000,000. At the present*time Iran, like 
some other countries that have experienced British 
imperialism, appears willing to risk eventual Nazi 
domination in order to thwart a traditional opponent. 
ANGLO-SOVIET AIMS. By taking preventive ac- 
tion, the British and Russians hope to head off a 
German coup as effectively as Britain acted in Iraq 
and Syria. In fact, they probably welcomed Iran’s 
rejection of their ultimatum and the resulting oppor- 
tunity to occupy the country. Iran, ranking fourth in 
world oil production, has held its output at approxti- 
mately 78,000,000 barrels for the past four years. 
The principal producing areas are at Masjid-i-Sulai- 
man and Haft Khel in the southwest part of the 
country, less than 100 miles from the Iraqi border, 
and are connected by pipeline to Persian Gulf ports. 
Their importance to the belligerents is equaled only 
by the strategic position of Iran as a whole. The ad- 
vance of the Nazi forces to the Black Sea and re- 
treat of Marshal Budenny’s army eastward across the 
Dnieper places Germany within eventual striking 
distance of the Caucasus and Iran. Britain therefore 
finds it necessary to extend its long line of defense, 
now running from Egypt through Iraq, even farther 
to the north and east. With the Ukraine seriously 
menaced, Britain also needs the Trans-Iranian rail- 
way as a relatively convenient route for supplies to 
the U.S.S.R. This railway runs from Bandar Shahpur 
on the Persian Gulf to Bandar Shah on the Caspian, 
where supplies would have to be transshipped by 
water. Another railway extends westward from 
Teheran, but does not yet connect with a short line 
in northern Iran that reaches the Soviet border. 
JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULIETIN. Vol. XX, No. 45, AuGust 29, 


: 1941. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Entered as second-class matter December a 


Bois! 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leger, Secretary; VERA MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office atc New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. National 


Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


AuG. 25.—Prime Minister Churchill’s radio broad- 
cast of last Sunday, as viewed by Washington circles, 
reveals important decisions which the Roosevelt- 
Churchill conference reached concerning the Japanese 
threat in the Pacific. The immediate program appar- 
ently envisages an effort on the part of the United 
States, firmly supported by Britain, to convince Tokyo 
that any further aggression will meet with determined 
resistance, possibly involving the use of force. 

Two aspects of the Churchill broadcast offer clear 
evidence that this country is taking the lead in cur- 
rent dealings with Japan. The British Prime Min- 
ister explicitly declared that the United States was 
“laboring with infinite patience to arrive at a fair 
and amicable settlement which will give Japan the 
utmost reassurance for her legitimate interests.’’ The 
warning which followed—that, in case these nego- 
tiations failed, Britain would range itself ‘‘unhesi- 
tatingly at the side of the United States”—also indi- 
cated that the diplomatic initiative at Tokyo was 
being left in American hands. The strong wording 
of this pledge, nevertheless, suggested that Britain 
and the United States had agreed on specific defense 
measures in the Pacific, should Japan fail to heed the 
danger signal. 


NEGOTIATIONS AT TOKYO. Several days 
earlier, Washington correspondents had elicited an 
admission from Secretary Hull that important nego- 
tiations were being held in Tokyo. Referring to a 
two-hour conversation between Ambassador Grew 
and the Japanese Foreign Minister, Mr. Hull stated 
on August 19 that the talk had covered “many sub- 
jects” in addition to the issue of repatriating Ameri- 
cans from Japan. On the following day, moreover, 
he had declined to discuss the Ambassador's com- 
prehensive report to the State Department, said to 
include “Japanese proposals for settlement of trade 
difficulties.” Diplomatic conversations have mean- 
while continued, both in Washington and Tokyo. On 
August 25 Secretary Hull described these talks as 
purely informal and emphasized that any agreement 
with Japan would have to accord with the basic prin- 
ciples of American policy enunciated on July 16, 1937. 

Washington quarters, although not unduly optimis- 
tic, are satisfied that the United States holds the 
strongest cards in the diplomatic game now being 
played with Tokyo. During the past week or ten days, 
with the exception of belligerent press statements, 
Japan has made no additional forward move. Instead, 


there has been a noticeable effort by the Japaney | 
authorities to lessen the prevailing tension in th 
Pacific, except for refusal to permit about 100 Ameq. 
cans to depart on the President Coolidge. In this lap 
ter case, it now seems likely that Americans wil] he 
permitted to leave Japan for Shanghai, where they | 
can obtain passage to this country. 

The United States and Britain, together with the 
Dutch East Indies, are now in a position to offer You. X 
strong inducements to Japan in exchange for definite |} —— 
commitments. Despite the bold front maintained by 
Tokyo, it is clear that the freezing regulations, whic | 
have largely halted trans-Pacific trade, have proved } TH! 
a body blow to Japan’s economy—especially if that | 4 fo: 
economy is expected to sustain the burden of a new | Marce 
war. Before trade is resumed, Japan will undoubtedly | Germ: 
have to meet conditions laid down by Washington } under; 
and London. No inkling of these conditions has yet | almos 
been given. They would undoubtedly require pledges | armist 
of Japan’s good behavior both as regards Thailand } Repub 
and Siberia, guaranteed perhaps by a limitation on | had p 
Japanese forces in Indo-China and by non-interfer- | the ea 
ence with shipments of American materials to Vladi- | of the 
vostok. As the test case on the latter issue approaches, | narroy 
Japan has still refrained from more than unofficial | durati 
protests through its press and diplomatic spokesmen} pp) 


FURTHER U.S. MOVES. New measures, more: } progr: 
over, threaten Japan’s economic prospects. Export} shal F 
control orders issued on August 1 make it extremely | on Fr 
unlikely that Japan will again be able to buy Ameti- | exact 
can aviation gasoline during the emergency, even | gard 
should a basis for resumption of trade be found. On | clear | 
August 22 came a Presidential proclamation raising | and n 
the duty on crab meat, paste and sauce from 15 to | conces 
224 per cent— an action taken to equalize pro | fs ar 
duction costs in accordance with a Tariff Commission | daily 
recommendation. In 1940 Japan supplied about 90 } Pierre 
per cent ($3,269,000) of the American market in | Reich 
this product. Pétair 

There is as yet slight indication of the extent to | order 
which the Soviet Union may be cooperating in a joint | ind ir 
Far Eastern program. The projected tripartite com | Mjure 
ference at Moscow will presumably consider specific ; afte: 
measures through which the three powers can deal | Sttugs 
concertedly with the situation in the Pacific. Many | ®ab 
Washington observers feel that the Japanese threat | Hon w 
will not be finally removed until a unified British | mpl 
American-Soviet policy, linked to that of China and | mad 
the Dutch East Indies, is firmly applied in the Fat | Sono 


East. _ | Politic 
T. A. BIsSON | notice 


