>rce 


and 
orld 
me, 


iser, 
n to 
was 
the 


Llies 


viet 


tion. 


dard, 
Vorld 
after 


Liver- 


1 the 
s, the 


jational 
ered a 
at least 








General Library 


Uaiversity of Uichizan 
Ann A rhaw. 


JUN 1 939% 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


Stan 


wer 


wr chican 








FOREIGN POLICY =< 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vor. XXIV, No. 35 


JUNE 15, 1945 





FEAR OF CHANGE MUST NOT BE ALLOWED TO JEOPARDIZE PEACE 


ion alarmist reports from Europe and San Fran- 
cisco which, during the past few weeks threat- 
ened to create a “stop Russia’’ movement abroad and 
a new Red scare at home, have been temporarily 
checked by the almost simultaneous announcement 
of accord among the victors on a number of contro- 
versial questions: the scope of the veto power of the 
Big Five in the Security Council of the United Na- 
tions Organization; the zones and conditions of Al- 
lied occupation of Germany, settled at a meeting of 
the Allied Control Council in Berlin on June 5, and 
further discussed at Frankfort on June 10; agree- 
ment on the administration of Venezia Giulia and 
Trieste by the Allies, without prejudice to future dis- 
position of that area, where a token force of 2,000 
Yugoslavs is to remain; and reports from French 
sources that progress has been made toward estab- 
lishment of a Polish régime that would be accep- 
table to the United States and Britain as well as 
Russia. In spite of these reassuring developments, 


| the momentum gained by the press and radio cam- 


paign agewast Russia, both here and in Britain, indi- 
cates the existence of deep-seated maladjustments 
between the Big Three which, if not frankly faced 
now, could all too easily produce dangerous clashes 
in the future. 

END OF WAR UNLEASHES ANTI-RUSSIA 
CAMPAIGN. The cessation of fighting in Europe, 
less than two weeks after the opening of the San 
Francisco Conference, proved the go-ahead signal 
for groups in all the United Nations who had reluc- 
tantly accepted coalition with Russia for the sake of 
Winning the war, but had no desire or intention 
to continue this coalition into the post-war period. 
Not only among Britishers and Americans, but even 
among peoples like the Czechs who had looked to 
Russia for their liberation from the Nazis, could im- 
mediately be heard sentiments such as: “Now let's 


show the Russians where they get off”; or “When 
will the Western powers stiffen their stand on Rus- 
sia?”’; or, after announcement of the arrest of the 
sixteen Poles: ‘This is the last straw. Now it is clear 
that war between the United States and Russia is 
inevitable.’ The irresponsibility of such statements 
at a time when this country is engaged in a life and 
death struggle with Japan is matched only by the 
irresponsibility of those who, after insisting that Rus- 
sia’s entrance into the Pacific war would be a test of 
its good faith, now demand that Russia keep out, so 
that it cannot claim a share in the peace settlement 
in Asia—as if it were possible to isolate Russia either 
from Asia or Europe when it forms an integral part 
of both continents. 

The fundamental fallacy of these statements is 
the assumption that now, when the Western powers 
no longer need Russia (or hope they don’t), Russia 
will meekly and obediently resume the position of 
isolation and weakness to which it was reduced by 
its defeat in 1917. In this atmosphere of fear and 
mistrust, much of it artificially trumped up, the other 
United Nations regard every move of Russia’s, 
whether intrinsically constructive or not, as sinister 
in its implications. Russia, for its part, having 
reached a high-water mark in national power and 
influence, asserts its power to the full, and demands 
complete equality with Britain and the United States, 
whether it be in the control of occupied Germany 
or in the administration of dependent areas to be 
placed under the projected trusteeship council. 

RUSSIANS NOT ALWAYS EASY. It is only 
fair to say that the Russians themselves do not 
always help matters. They are hard bargainers, who 
sometimes succeed in fraying the nerves of fellow- 
negotiators before a compromise is finally reached. 
Public relations has so far not proved their forte, 
and their manner of treating the press and public 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 











hae leapt ae) ony 


———— 








of Allied countries often lacks that readiness to un- 
derstand the motives of other peoples which they 
feel should be shown toward them. The fact, more- 
over, that foreign correspondents have not been per- 
mitted, in many instances, to enter Russian-occupied 
territories—a situation easily explainable by consid- 
erations of security—has caused understandable irri- 
tation on the part of those charged with the presenta- 
tion of news to the British and American public, al- 
though American military commanders in Europe, 
too, have not favored full freedom of the press. 
Lack of direct news from Eastern Europe and the 
Balkans has made it possible for critics ready to be- 
lieve the worst of the Russians to proclaim their 
suspicions unchallenged, and has not eased the task 
of those who, sincerely convinced of the need, as 
well as practicability, of collaboration between the 
United States and Russia receive little or no assis- 
tance from the Russians in trying to give an accurate 
picture of Moscow’s actions east of the Elbe. 


Nor is the cause of Russo-American collaboration 
advanced by the activities of the American Commu- 
nist party, which is once more in the process of shift- 
ing its attitude on domestic politics, this time osten- 
sibly at the adjuration of the French Communist lead- 
er Jacques Duclos. Russia's policy, while not always 
palatable to other countries, is understandable in 
terms of its national interests, and must be appraised 
or criticized in that frame of reference. But when 
American Communists unquestioningly apply slogans 
or judgments arrived at in other countries to affairs 
here, without reference to the interests of the United 
States, they give direct aid to those who, fearing 
Moscow’s intervention in our internal affairs, op- 
pose all collaboration with Russia. There is a vast 
difference between trying to understand why the 
Russians act as they do, so that we may develop our 
own policy toward Russia on the basis of knowledge, 
not of blind fear or prejudice; and invariably assum- 
ing, as American Communists do, that everything the 
Russians do must be right, and everything any one 
else does must be wrong. 


Page Two 








ey 


FEAR OF COMMUNISM NOT A GOop 
WEAPON. At the same time, it would be dange;. 
ous to let annoyance with this or that move of the 
American Communists affect our judgment about the 
situation in Europe. For by denouncing Communists 
wholesale we merely carry on the work of Dr. Gogh. 
bels. In many of the liberated countries the Commpy. 
nists played an honorable, and in fact heroic, role ig 
resisting the Nazis, and have shown genuine concerg 
about the problems of reconstruction. If they are 
gaining influence in some countries, it is not solely 
because they are better organized and more cohesive 
than other political parties, which is true, but also 
because a vacuum in political and economic thinking 
has developed in the wake of Nazi defeat which 
other parties have been slow, or unable, to fill. Toler. 
ance of opposing points of view is too often regarded 
in democratic nations as identical with political 
agnosticism. The war was fought not only against 
Germany, but also against those elements of reaction 
in all countries which saw in Nazism a bulwark 
against social change, which they uniformly de. 
nounced as Communism. We still have to fight re. 
action on many fronts, but can hardly do so by taking 


up its favorite weapon—fear of Communism. We | 


can hope to fight reaction successfully only by help- 
ing to strengthen the forces favorable to orderly re. 
form which might eventually hold off extremist 
movements of both Right and Left. But if these 
forces do not win the support of the United States 
and Britain, they will either wither away, or else 
turn to Russia. 

Again and again throughout history revolutions 
have been fostered by the very people who, fearing 
any kind of change, prevented timely reforms. Our 
military leaders have shown us that successful stra- 
tegy consists of taking calculated risks at the right 
moment. A victory won by soldiers who did not hes 
itate to dare must not be allowed to be frittered 
away by statesmen who sometimes seem to fear po 
litical, social and economic changes more than wat. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


SOUND POLICY IN ASIA REQUIRES U.S.-SOVIET COOPERATION 


The difficulties faced by the United States in 
formulating sound policies toward Europe and Latin 
America should stimulate discussion of the course 
we are following in the Fast East. Are we headed 
for sharp differences with the Russians in Asia? 
What is our attitude toward nationalist and other 
popular movements in the East? Is it our purpose 
after victory to root out the aggressive forces in 
Japan, or will we compromise with dubious elements 
among Japan’s defeated ruling circles? And what 
kind of China do our current actions tend to encour- 
age: a progressive, modern state founded on far- 
reaching reforms, or a narrow oligarchy balanced 


uncomfortably on lend-lease bayonets? On the an- 
swers to these questions a good many things will 
depend, including the number of American lives te- 
quired to defeat Japan, the size of the post-war Far 
Eastern market for American goods, and the prospect 
of lasting peace. 

RESTLESS ASIA. The problems of the Far East 
are no whit less explosive than those of Europe. In 
fact, since most of the peoples of the Orient stil! have 
not achieved a self-governing status, and are barely 
on the threshold of industrialization and agrarian 
change, it seems probable that Asia faces an even 
more turbulent period than Europe. The possibilities 











' ane 
will 
S re- 
Far 
spect 


East 
>. In 
have 
arely 
irian 
even 
lities 











ee 
—_ 





of international conflict, civil wars and nationalist 
revolutions against foreign control are very real in 
the vast crescent stretching eastward from India. It 
is true that no policy the United States alone may 
adopt can guarantee a satisfactory evolution for the 
billion-odd people of Asia, but our course and that 
of the Soviet Union will be two leading determinants 
of the future. : 

The crucial issue now before us in the Far East 
js whether to concentrate on building positions 
against the Russians in preparation for another war, 
or to work on the assumption that Russians and 
Americans can iron out their differences and live 
together peacefully. The consequences involved in 
adopting the former policy should be faced now. In 
Japan, after that country’s defeat, an anti-Russian 
outlook might impel the United States toward coop- 
etation with elements interested in reviving Tokyo's 
military power—elements that would offer them- 
selves as a “bulwark” against the U.S.S.R. in an 
effort to make us forget that the last time Japan was 
strong it attacked Pearl Harbor, not Vladivostok. In 
China we might tend to become mortally afraid both 
of forward-looking guerrilla administrations and of 
democratic leaders and groups in the territory of the 
Central government, and might find ourselves drawn 
toward unconditional support of circles hostile to 
the Russians and to progressive internal changes. In 
colonial Asia we would be inclined to see in every 
nationalist movement the seeds of Russian influence, 
and might be induced to use our weight to buttress 
the weakened structure of colonialism. 

RUSSIA’S ROLE IN FAR EAST. Many of the 
Asiatic leaders who wish to develop their countries 
along independent, modern, industrialized lines are 
men of wealth and conservative outlook; but, like 
the European forces of resistance, the great popular 
movements which alone could make this goal attain- 
able will probably be left of center. It can be 
taken for granted that, however varied their points 
of view may be, these Asiatic movements will not be 
actuated by hostility toward Russia. This is particu- 
larly true because the achievements of the U.S.S.R. 
in modernizing its industry and agriculture during 
the past generation, the progressive nationalities pol- 
icy of the Russians toward the Asiatic peoples within 
their borders, and the absence of any Soviet stake 
in the existing colonial system, all tend to give the 
US.S.R. prestige among millions of men and women 
in the Far East. There are also many important fac- 
tors making for American prestige in Asia, but these 


Page Three 





— 
—_ 





would be dissipated if, through fear of the Russians, 
we were to allow ourselves to be alienated from 
the popular forces in the Far East. The late 
Wendell Willkie understood this well, and it was 
one of his main concerns to demonstrate that our 
lasting self-interest lies in cooperating both with the 
Russians and with forward-looking Asiatic leaders 
and groups. 

It would be dangerous to assume that our Far East- 
ern relations with Russia are largely a question for 
the post-war period, since much fighting remains to 
be done in Asia. General Joseph W. Stilwell, Chief 
of Army Ground Forces, who recently conferred 
with General MacArthur, declared on bloody Oki- 
nawa last week that the war with Japan “will take a 
long time—easily two years.” Whether or not this 
prediction proves correct, we clearly would be im- 
peded on thé road to Tokyo if an anti-Russian orien- 
tation in foreign policy were allowed to interfere 
with our securing as much aid as possible from the 
Russians, the Chinese guerrilla forces, and other 
popular movements in Asia. Significantly, the record 
shows that during his service in China General Stil- 
well worked unceasingly to promote Chinese unity and 
to lay a firm basis for American-Soviet cooperation. 

Any satisfactory Far Eastern policy must recognize 
that it is at least as reasonable for the Russians as 
for ourselves to be interested in Manchuria, Korea 
and other territories which lie directly across the 
borders of the U.S.S.R., but are a considerable dis- 
tance from the United States. Nor should it be as- 
sumed that any expression of interest automatically 
indicates Moscow’s desire to annex or gain unwar- 
ranted influence in lands not belonging to it. 

Our policy should also be based on the premise 
that it is essential to seek common solutions with the 
Russians instead of jumping to the conclusion that 
their position is inevitably unreasonable. It is true 
that satisfactory American-Soviet relations depend 
on Moscow as well as on Washington and that the 
Russians, like ourselves, may make mistakes in the 
Far East. But the Soviet record in that region is in 
certain respects better than our own, for the U.S.S.R. 
supported Chinese resistance and opposed Japanese 
aggression at a time when the United States was still 
sending oil and scrap iron to Tokyo. Under the cir- 
cumstances we should be at least as aware of our 
responsibility for peace in the Far East as we are 
of the responsibility borne by the Russians. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(The first in a series of articles on American Far Eastern policy.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 35, JUNE 15, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; VERA MicHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered as. 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Bo. 18) 





Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








me 


TFS, —Semamegegiopaite lier » 





Seana cee S 


i eat ana 


~ 


Washington News Letter \~::: 











WILL U.S. TARIFF CUTS LEAD TO FREER WORLD TRADE? 


The Administration must soon make up its mind 
what obligations it will ask the allies of the United 
States to assume in satisfaction of Article VII of the 
Master Lend-Lease Agreement which, in vague 
terms, calls for a reduction of national trade barriers. 
The scope of the Administration proposal will de- 
pend on whether the Senate approves the pending 
Trade Agreements bill, already passed by the House, 
which authorizes the President to cut down existing 
American tariffs by 50 per cent. The Senate Finance 
Committee struck this clause from the bill on June 8. 

SEARCH FOR ECONOMIC POLICY. Senate 
approval of the bill would encourage the Adminis- 
tration to arrange for a world trade conference, 
which it has been considering for some time, and 
which might give concrete form to the promise in 
Article VII. Government officials still hope that by 
means of such a conference, and implementation of 
Article VII, they can induce other countries to weaken 
the trade-restraining power of private cartels, re- 
duce quota, exchange and tariff restrictions on com- 
merce, and perhaps agree to a gradual elimination 
of regional trade preference systems. 

Recent expressions of American opinion indicate 
that the Administration would have domestic sup- 
port for a policy of international cooperation in the 
fields of trade and finance. The House of Represen- 
tatives on June 7, by a vote of 345 to 18, approved 
the Bretton Woods agreement for establishment of 
an international monetary fund and a bank for re- 
construction, in both of which the United States 
would participate. Republicans voted with Demo- 
crats to pass Bretton Woods, and on the same day 
Thomas E. Dewey, Governor of New York and 1944 
Republican candidate for President, proposed that 
the United States call a conference for lowering 
trade barriers. Alfred M. Landon, 1936 Republican 
candidate for the Presidency, had previously advo- 
cated a low tariff policy for the United States. These 
statements by leaders of the party which in Amer- 
ican political life has been traditionally protectionist 
show a marked change in opinion as compared with 
1919. World War I, in Dewey's words, was suc- 
ceeded by a “battle royal in economic warfare. . . 
Here was a grim game which weakened and divided 
the nations which carried high the banner of freedom 
while the totalitarian aggressors grew bold and 
strong.” 

The vote on Bretton Woods and the Dewey state- 
ment, however, are not conclusive signs that the 


American attitude has fundamentally changed. 4 
strong opposition to the encouragement of foreign 
commerce in competition with our own still exists 
on the part of industry and labor. The weakness 
of the economic charter agreed upon at the Mexig 
City conference in March reflected this opposition, 
The United States delegation believed that it would 
get insufficient backing at home—especially from 
small manufacturers—for positive commitments to 
help Latin American industry. The Senate has yet to 
pass on the international fund and bank, and it ma 
decide not to grant the President tariff-cutting 
powers. 

PROBLEM OF FOREIGN OPINION. The 
formulation of a program aimed at reducing com. 
mercial restrictions will depend on opinion abroad 
as well as at home. Some overseas observers consider 
the current American campaign against trade restric 
tion as the 1945 version of commercial nationalism, 
since this country is in a better position than any 
other to gain from free competition: It remains to be 
seen whether Britain and the Soviet Union will read- 
ily accept the Administration proposition that an 
agreement for cooperation in commercial policy isa 
corollary of the charter for cooperation on security 
matters being drafted at San Francsico. The confer. 
ence committee working there on the Economic and 
Social Council chapter agreed that the United Ne 
tions organization should have only powers of tec 
ommendation respecting the social and economic 
policy of nations. The fact that the United States 
strongly supported this limitation might lessen this 
country’s effectiveness in pressing for mandatory 
commercial commitments by other nations. 

“The urge toward empire preference is stronget 
than ever and an influential section of British opit- 
ion has urged the creation of a tightly knit sterling 
bloc within which trade would be encouraged to the 
exclusion of non-sterling nations,’ Governor Dewey 
said. Should the United States advocate a policy that 
might depress the British economy? Will Russias 
trading policy, which has totalitarian aspects reflect 
ing the nature of its political system, prove incom 
patible with a program for comparatively free com 
petition? An international commercial conference at 
which these questions would be considered would test 
to the utmost the statesmanship and powers of pet 
suasion of the United States. Bar BOLLES 


(The first of two articles on America’s international 
commercial policy.) 


FOR VICTORY * BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





191 


— 
VoL. 


—_ 


BIC 
pk 
Chur 
to si 
strate 
strate 
pere 
on W 
CISCO. 
tion 
Unit 
be n 
nom: 
the § 
Char 
whic 
Big | 
worl 

TI 
ercis 
clear 
sibil: 
objec 
Euro 
ight 
but < 
term 
that 
tions 
Gerr 
we 3 
liber 

Tl 
root: 
mor: 
insti 
trols 
force 





