ide of the 
uarters in ) 
- disclaim 
in North 
nts which 
in North 


ig French, | 
_ has said, | 
r leader a | 
ficial of a| 
ullists. 
ears mote | 
e hitherto 
what little 
me of the | 
olla 
reign Min- 
uton, both | 
ed to have 
‘ashington 
1940 was \ 
ras cabled | 
dier under | 
escence if | 
- Tassigny, 
few days | 
d zone. } 
hand—the | 
ver. Sixty: | 
rn 26,000 | 
erque, ate 
responded | 
yut, on the 
the Axis. 
‘rance and 
| on board | 
»s the last 
ELLIOTT 


NDS 


, mM 
PRRIVUILA!. KUY 
@ENEKAL LIBRARY 

uMlyY. OF 


NOV 27 942 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
veneral Library 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, !ncorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vor. XXII, No. 6 


NOVEMBER 27, 1942 


ALLIED POSITION IN FAR EAST IMPROVED BY AFRICAN CAMPAIGN 


> that the progress of American forces in 
North Africa might be accompanied by defeat 
in the Solomons have proved unwarranted. Japan 
must be expected to return to battle—but weaker for 
the loss of one battleship, a heavy cruiser or second 
battleship, 8 cruisers, 6 destroyers, 8 troop transports, 
4 cargo vessels, and from 20 to 40 thousand men in 
the great naval struggle of November 13-15 with 
units of the American fleet. Following these blows 
to the enemy and early reports of effective land ac- 
tion by our troops on Guadalcanal, Secretary of Navy 
Knox declared on November 20: “I think it is fair 
to say that our hold on the island is very secure.” 
TABLES TURNED IN NEW GUINEA. At the 
same time, Australian and recently arrived American 
ground forces in New Guinea are pressing the foe 
close to his northern coastal base at Buna, which was 
the starting point of last summer’s Japanese drive 
through the Owen Stanley Mountains toward Port 
Moresby. With the battle approaching its climax, 
General MacArthur is leading the Allied troops in 
the field in an effort to drive the enemy into the sea. 
On the night of November 19, Allied bombers sank 
a light cruiser and destroyer near Gona, and three 
days later another destroyer. On November 24 the 
capture of Gona from the Japanese was announced. 
These developments lay the ground for consolida- 
tion in the southern Solomons and further offensive 
action. Among the important Japanese bases in the 
general region are: Salamaua and Lae up the New 
Guinea coast from Buna; Buin on Bougainville 
island in the northern Solomons; and, most signifi- 
cant, Rabaul on New Britain—but to move against 
any of them will not be easy. In addition, it has been 
apparent for some time from the regularity of Allied 
air raids that the Japanese have been building uy 
strong positions on the island of Timor, hundred Is 
of miles west of New Guinea and 300 miles from 
the nearest point on the northwest Australian coast 


This activity constitutes not only a threat to Australia 
and Port Moresby on southern New Guinea but also 
an effort to protect Japan’s military position in the 
conquered Indonesian archipelago. 

WHICH FRONT COMES FIRST? Our successes 
have for the moment reduced rumors and criticisms 
relating to the United Nations position in the Pacific, 
but when new difficulties arise—as they inevitably 
will—further protests against placing major empha- 
sis on war in the West may be expected. According 
to these objections — which often seem a wartime 
version of pre-war isolationism*—the Japanese are 
far more dangerous to the United States than the 
Nazis and must therefore be dealt with at once as 
the chief enemy, so that they will have no time to 
consolidate their gains. Otherwise Japan may take 
many years to defeat or, it is sometimes asserted, may 
win in Asia despite a United Nations victory in 
Europe. 

It is certainly dangerous to ignore the menace of 
Japan or to believe that destruction of the Nazis will 
automatically end the war in the Far East. In fact, 
it is necessary for the United Nations right now to 
redouble their efforts to mitigate China’s supply 
difficulties, to take steps toward the settlement of 
the political problems presented by India, and to 
prepare for the earliest possible counteroffensive in 
Burma, so that the Burma Road may be reopened. 
Yet it is also true that the heart of the Axis indus- 
trially and psychologically lies in Europe, and that 
three of the four major Allies can at present deliver 
their most powerful blows in the West. Japan, on 
the other hand, is separated from us by appallingly 
long supply lines, and any victory over it would be 
hollow indeed if a major concentration on our prob- 
lems in Asia should enable Hitler in the meantime 
to win, or at least effectively consolidate his posi- 


. 


V. M. Dear 


**New Isolat Hampers Global War Effort,’’ Foreign 
vember 6, 1 


te eee 
eee 


tion. Victories in Europe, however, can be of the 
greatest value in improving our position in the Far 
East. 

This is clearly indicated by possible Far Eastern 
repercussions of the campaign in North Africa. If 
the United Nations are able once more to send metr- 
chant ships through the Mediterranean—avoiding the 
long detour into the South Atlantic and around the 
Cape of Good Hope—increased quantities of sup- 
plies will flow to India and other eastern areas. At 
the same time, the threat of a German-Japanese pin- 
cers move against the Middle East and India—about 
which so many fears were expressed last summer— 
is vanishing into thin air. The danger to India re- 
mains, but if the attack comes it will be from only 
one direction. In addition, the disintegration of the 
Vichy régime appears to have had beneficial effects 
among the French in Japanese-controlled Indo-China. 
The Tokyo radio has remarked on “the general at- 
mosphere of tension caused by the American inva- 
sion of North Africa,” and Berlin has reported ar- 
rests of de Gaullists in the former French colony. 
At a later date, when our Far Eastern land offensive 
begins, the fact that Frenchmen are fighting on our 
side in the West may have important repercussions in 
this area. 

CHINA APPLAUDS AFRICAN MOVE. The 
psychological effects of the African campaign are by 


Page Two 


a 
— 


no means negligible. On November 6, when action 
was as yet confined to Egypt, General Ho Ying-chin, 
China’s War Minister, telegraphed his congratula. 
tions to the British Middle Eastern Commander-ip. 
Chief and declared that the victory in Egypt would 
prove the turning point in the strategy of the United 
Nations. On November 9, after news of the Ameri. 
can landings had been received, the Chinese press 
jubilantly hailed the move. The leading newspaper, 
Ta Kung Pao, expressed the opinion that, as a re 
sult, more favorable conditions were developing for 
the invasion of Burma. 
To appreciate these reactions fully, it must be te. 
membered that ever since Pearl Harbor the Chinese | 
have felt cruelly disappointed over setbacks suffered | 
by the United Nations. They have longed for some 
major Anglo-American move in conjunction with 


Russian resistance, which would indicate that, dur | | 


ing the many years of their single-handed struggle, | 


it was not a mistake to think the acquisition of allies } 


would foreshadow the defeat of Japan. Therefore, 
the fact that North Africa is thousands of miles 
from the Far Eastern front is less important to them 
than the knowledge that their partners are at last 


on the offensive. They realize that, although the path | 
is hard, successful drives against Tokyo’s European | 


accomplices will be followed by decisive blows 
at Japan. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


BITTER STRUGGLE AHEAD IN NORTH AFRICA 


As the Allied offensive in French North Africa 
moved into its third week, it became clear that the 
decisive fighting still lay ahead. Apparently one Al- 
lied force had already moved across Tunisia to 
Sousse, cutting off Bizerte and Tunis in the north, 
while another column had struck south in the direc- 
tion of Tripoli. But on November 23 there was no 
indication that these were decisive moves or that 
the British 1st Army with its American and French 
contingent had yet made a major attack on the 
Bizerte-Tunis area where, according to the Axis 
radio, Rommel had taken over command of strong 
Axis forces. With Allied commanders wisely refusing 
to divulge their plans by exact announcements of 
preliminary operations, the real military situation in 


o i 


F.PA. Christmas Gift Suggestions 


Gifts to be read, re-read and shared as a living record of 
the world in which we live. 


Regular Membership .....ccccccccccscrnsesenenne $5 

Associate Membership .....ccccccccucnscessenseesees $3 

Special Subscription to Headline Books 
(10 issues) ............ $2 


An attractive Christmas card will announce each gift. 


_ =>, => => > + =. 


Tunisia remained obscure. All signs pointed, how- 
ever, to a longer and harder fight than had been 
expected. 


The picture in Libya was somewhat clearer. At last 


reports the Afrika Korps had reached El Agheila 
after a three-day rear-guard battle with advance units 
of the British 8th Army at Agedabia. It seemed quite 
certain that the Nazis would take advantage of the 


natural defenses of El Agheila before falling back > 


to the even stronger defensive position of Tripoli. In 
any case, it can be expected that the Afrika Corps will 
put up a determined resistance before the battle for 
Tripoli is won by the Allies. Their supply lines 
have continued to grow shorter, while British lines 
have become so extended that the 8th Army is de- 


pending on transport planes for many of its supplies. | 


At the same time, the Fighting French forces, re- 
portedly on their way across the Sahara from Lake 
Chad, can hardly play a decisive role in view of the 
light equipment they must necessarily use. In the 


last analysis, a speedy decision in both Tripolitania | 


and Tunisia will depend more than anything else on 
the air strength each side can bring to bear, especially 
in the triangle between Sicily, Sardinia and Tunisia. 
By using his strategic reserves, Hitler may be able to 
concentrate as many as a thousand planes in this 
area, which means that Allied air forces, even with 


——= 


on action 
ing-chin, 
ngratula. 
ander-ip. 
>t would 
e United 
e Amer) 
SSE press 
wspaper, 
as a fe 
ping for 


st be re. 
Chinese 
suffered 
for some 
on with 
hat, dur. 
struggle, 
of allies 
herefore, 
of miles 
to them 
e at last 
the path 
juropean 
e blows 


INGER 


-d. how- | 
ad been 


r, At last 


Agheila | 


nce units 


ied quite | 


e of the 


ing back | 


‘ipoli. In 
orps will 
attle for 
aly lines 
ish lines 
ry is de 
supplies. 
rces, re- 
om Lake 
w of the 
. In the 
politania 
z else on 
specially 
Tunisia. 
e able to 
; in this 
ven with 


—_ 
—_ 


the use of Malta and the newly won bases in North 
Africa, may be pressed to the utmost to maintain the 
air supremacy necessary for quick victory. 

AXIS COUNTER-MOVE EXPECTED. If Hitler 
intends, however, to make an all-out effort to main- 
tain a position in North Africa and not to use Axis 
forces in Tunisia and Tripolitania merely for a hold- 
ing action, it seems clear that he will have to bring 
about a major diversion of Allied strength. A giant 
pincers through Turkey in the east and Spain in 
the west would, if successful, close around the Allied 
pincers now threatening the Axis in the middle Medi- 
terranean. It is extremely doubtful, however, if Hit- 
ler has the strength for such a move at present. In 
the east, a Russian counteroffensive, one wing of 
which by November 23 had swept westward far be- 
yond the Don River, has cut the two railways which 
were supplying the Nazi Army in Stalingrad and now 
threatens the Axis position not only in that city but 
also in the Caucasus. A blow through Turkey to the 
Middle East at such a time, is probably out of the 
question. Much more likely is a Nazi advance 
through Spain, aimed at closing the western gate- 
way of the Mediterranean to the Allies. Even if 
Franco decides to oppose such a move—and he was 
reported on November 20 to have said he would 
accept aid from the other side if either Axis or Allies 
attacked—it could almost certainly be made at less 
cost and with the prospect of more rapid and decisive 
strategic results than any major action at the eastern 
end of the Mediterranean. 


| PROTESTS ABOUT DARLAN ANSWERED. 
| While precautions are undoubtedly being taken to 
| counter either or both of these moves, the present job 
of the Allies in North Africa is to clear Axis forces 
| from the whole southern coast of the Mediterranean. 
The decision of General Eisenhower and his Ameri- 
, can-British staff to use Darlan was undoubtedly made 
| in the belief that the rapid conquest of Tunisia was 
| essential for fruition of Allied plans, and that serious 
| French resistance from the rear was likely unless Ad- 

miral Darlan, as well as General Giraud, could be 
| persuaded to join forces with the Allies. Possibly it 
, was made also with the knowledge that Darlan 
| would bring all of French West Africa, with the in- 

valuable base at Dakar, over to the Allied side. Al- 
| though this decision involved political dangers which 
were the'cause of such loud protests in Britain that 
press censorship has prevented American correspond- 
ents from reporting their full strength, President 
Roosevelt's assurance on November 17 that arrange- 


~ 


————— eee 


— 


Page Three 


ments with Darlan are temporary should dispel any 
fears that the price paid for the French Admiral’s sup- 
port will prove too high. It should also be a guarantee 
that the presence in North Africa of Pierre-Etienne 
Flandin and Pierre Pucheu, French rightists and Nazi 
sympathizers, does not herald the setting up of a pro- 
fascist French government there. 

At the same time, the fear that Anglo-American 
intervention in Spain would bolster fascism in that 
country is probably unwarranted. This fear is based 
on the assumption that Franco is in a position, should 
he so wish, to resist the Nazis if they invade Spain. 
With most of the leaders of his army under Nazi 
influence and Serrano Sifier on the new national 
council of the Falange party, anything more than 
token resistance to an Axis attack seems improbable, 
even if Franco should now believe in ultimate Allied 
victory. It is possible, of course, that Franco might 
permit Allied resistance to the Nazis on Spanish soil. 
But whole-hearted support for the Allies in Spain, in 
the event that they are forced to counter an Axis 
move there, is much more likely to come from the 
Spanish people than the Franco government. 


HowaArbD P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


The United States and the Far East: Certain Funda- 
mentals of Policy, by Stanley K. Hornbeck. Boston, 
World Peace Foundation, 1942. $1.00 
A very brief, purely formal recapitulation of American 

Far Eastern policy up to Pearl Harbor, written by a State 

Department official. 


Price Control: The War Against Inflation, by Erik T. H. 
Kjellstrom, G. A. Gluck, Per Jacobsson, and Ivan Wright. 
New Brunswick, N. J., Rutgers University Press, 1942. 
$2.50 
A study of Sweden’s experience with price control since 

1939, with parallel survey f the British, Canadian, and 

Swiss systems. 


Geopolitics: The Struggle for Space and Power, by Robert 
Strausz-Hupé. New York, Putnam, 1942. $2.75 


A somewhat long-winded recapitulation of the conclu- 
sions of the pseudo-science used by the Nazis to justify 
their territorial exparsion. 


People Under Hitler, by Wallace Deuel. New York, Har- 

court Brace, 1942. $3.50 

This report on the German Home Front by a former 
Berlin correspondent of the Chicago Daily News combines 
careful observation of the facts and the people with a clear 
vision of the ruthless war aims of Nazi leaders. It should 
greatly help Americans to understand Nazi Germany and 
its leaders. 


What Does Gandhi Want? by T. A. Raman, New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1942. $1.25 
An Indian journalist discusses Gandhi’s pacifist views 
through extensive quotations from the nationalist leader’s 
writings and public statements. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 6, NoveMBER 27, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y 
second-class matter December 2, 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


1942. 


Published weekly 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHeLes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at leasr 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


| e181 


roduced under union conditions and composed and printed by union ! 
Produced und dit a a } 


Washington News Letter 


Nov. 24-—The Anglo-American invasion of 
French North Africa has focused world attention on 
Spain. German troops are reported to be massing 
along Spain’s northern frontier while to the south, 
across the Mediterranean, Spanish Morocco is sur- 
rounded by the forces of the United Nations. Spain 
is thus in a veritable nutcracker and, with Hitler ob- 
viously planning some counterstroke against the Al- 
lies, its jealously guarded neutrality is now more 
jeopardized than at any previous time in this war. 

General Francisco Franco answered the threat to 
Spain’s neutrality on November 18 by ordering par- 
tial mobilization. This action, it was stated, was a 
measure of prudence, intended to “insure our keep- 
ing away from the conflict and to strengthen our de- 
fense, our integrity, and sovereignty and at the same 
time to preserve peace in our territories.’’ At the 
same time Franco is reported to have informed both 
the Axis and the Allies that Spain would immedi- 
ately accept aid from the other side, if any of its sea 
and air bases were seized. This message came on the 
heels of a dispatch from Ankara, stating that the 
Spanish dictator had refused to grant such bases to 
Germany. Hitler in any case is apparently displeased 
with Franco, as indicated by the failure of the Nazi 
Foreign Minister, Joachim von Ribbentrop, to wel- 


come the new Spanish Ambassador on his arrival in 
Berlin. 


FRANCO PLEDGES NEUTRALITY. Renewed 
assurances of Spain’s intention to maintain absolute 
neutrality in the war were given by Juan Francisco 
de Cardenas, Spanish Ambassador in Washington, to 
Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles on Novem- 
ber 19. According to Secretary of State Hull, these 
assurances were proffered voluntarily by the Spanish 
government, and were not in response to an inquiry 
by the United States. They reinforced the pledge of 
neutrality that General Franco had given President 
Roosevelt on November 14. __- 

In informed quarters in Washington Franco’s 
protestations of neutrality are regarded as sincere. 
The Spanish leader's sympathies for the Axis are 
notorious, but it is pointed out here that if his pro- 
Axis leanings did not induce him to launch half- 
starved Spain into war in the autumn of 1940 when 
Hitler seemed a certain victor, Franco is hardly 
likely to do so now when the Fuehret’s prospects 
are relatively bleak. 


LAVAL RULES VICHY. Meanwhile, on the other 
vom. VeGartORY ° 


side of the Mediterranean, in metropolitan France 
Marshal Pétain virtually abdicated on November 1g 
by empowering Pierre Laval to promulgate laws ang 
decrees under his own name. At the same time the 
Marshal reinstated Laval as his constitutional sue. 
cessor in place of Darlan. Pétain’s transference of 
powers to Laval was interpreted here as meaning 
that this pro-Nazi politician was now planning to | 
take what was left of the Vichy régime, lock, stock, 
and barrel, into the Axis camp. It was considered 
likely that a declaration of war by Laval on the | 
Allies might be preceded by a peace treaty, by which | 
Germany would promise to leave France territorially | ; 
intact, save for the cessation of Alsace and Lorraine, | 
As a result of Laval’s advent to power, Vichy no | 
longer controls any part of the French empire. On 
November 23 Admiral Francois Darlan broadcast | 
over the Algiers radio that Governor-General Pierre 
Boisson had placed himself and the whole of French } 
West Africa, including the strategic port of Dakar, 
under Darlan’s orders. The same day Secretary . 
State Cordell Hull announced in Washington that a 
political and economic accord had been reached with 
Admiral George Robert, French High Commissioner, | 
concerning disposition of the French West Indies, | 
which include Martinique, Guadeloupe, and French | 
Guiana—an accord so satisfactory that no U ite | 
States occupation of these colonies was necessary. 
Mr. Hull made it clear that the agreement was | 
reached with Admiral Robert as the ultimate French 
authority in the Caribbean and entirely independent 
of Vichy. This accord marks the successful conclusion 
of tedious negotiations begun last May by Admiral | 
John Hoover and Samuel Reber of the State De | 
partment and, although full details of the agreement 
have not been published, it is understood to provide, 
among other things, for the immobilization of the 


French warships stationed there and for American } ; 


supervision of communications to and from the 
islands. The entrance of French West Africa into 
the Allied fold places the strategic base of Dakar | 
at the disposal of the United Nations; removes the 
threat that this base might have been used by the | 
Germans; and turns over to the Allies a number of | 
French submarines and other naval units in the 
harbor of Dakar. These developments mean that the 
French empire, except for Indo-China, is now con- 
trolled either by the United Nations or by Frenchmen 
cooperating with them. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


it 


