Nc lial 





BBFBBeeceeo F S$2e Lr) 


7 
2. 
= 


Be. 


call 
re. 
10W 


AY. 
Jeu: 


two 
tate 
nt’s 
pro 
ican 
1 to 


al- 


lent 
of 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Tou. XIX, No. 29 


— 


JUST OUT! a survey of the military and economic 
position of Italy. Read: 


ITALY’S ROLE IN THE EUROPEAN CONFLICT 


by Robert Gale Woolhstépic AL ROOM 


OENBRAL LIBRARY 
25 ¢ UNIV. OF MIGM. 


May 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


May 10, 1940 








Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











MAY <p 194 
General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Michigan 








———— 





WAR FEARS SHIFT TO MEDITERRANEAN 


—— 





AS the Allies completed their retreat from south- 
ern and central Norway, Europe's attention 
shifted to the possibility that another theatre of war 
might develop in the eastern Mediterranean. On 
April 30 the British government, still smarting from 
the effects of the Norwegian campaign, announced 
the precautionary measure of rerouting its merchant 
ships from the Mediterranean to the much longer 
route around the Cape of Good Hope; and on May 2 
the Allied fleets massed at Alexandria, principal 
port of Egypt, Britain’s ally. Germany was at great 
pains to assure the Balkans that its intentions to- 
ward them are entirely peaceful; and Italy de- 
nounced Allied moves in the Mediterranean as 
“provocative.” 

BALKANS ON THE ALERT. While the defeat 
of the British in Norway had a profoundly depress- 
ing effect on the Balkan countries, now alarmed by 
the prospect of German victory, the arrival of Allied 
ships at Alexandria appeared to bolster the spirits 
of Yugoslavia and Greece, which lie directly in the 
path of an Italian thrust in the eastern Mediter- 
tanean. On May 5 Greece opened a new strategic 
tailway connecting the port of Salonika — where 
Allied troops debarked in 1915 for a campaign 
against the Central Powers — with the Bulgarian 
frontier. And Yugoslavia continued both its mobili- 
zation which, when completed, is expected to bring 
500,000 men under arms, and its measures against 
Nazi “fifth column” activities. Meanwhile, Count 
Csaky, Foreign Minister of Hungary — through 
whose territory Germany would have to pass to 
teach Rumania—denounced alleged anti-Hungarian 
activities on the part of Slovakia, former section of 
the Czecho-Slovak state, now ruled by Germany. 





yun 


Some Hungarians apparently fear that Germany 
might use Slovak grievances as an entering-wedge 
for penetration into Hungary, and simultaneously 
urge the Budapest government to inaugurate the 


dismemberment of Rumania by pressing its own de- 
mands for the return of Transylvania. 

ITALY STILL WEIGHS DECISION. In this 
confused and complex situation, the two unknown 
factors remain Italy and the Soviet Union.* The 
outcome of the Norwegian campaign has strength- 
ened the position of those Fascist militants who have 
been contending that German victory is a foregone 
conclusion, that the British Empire is in process of 
dissolution, and that Italy, by a bold and timely 
move, should claim a share of the spoils. These 
political considerations have been re-enforced by the 
success of German air power in defending the Nor- 
wegian coast against naval attacks by the Allies. The 
Fascist government now has cause to believe that 
its air-fleet, too, could successfully repel Allied naval 
attacks on Italy’s long and exposed coast, while 
Italian naval and air forces wreak havoc on the 
Allies in the eastern Mediterranean. Such a belief 
may cause Italy to abandon its policy of non-bel- 
ligerency, and gamble on the possibility of deliver- 
ing a quick and mortal blow at France and Britain 
while they are still shaken by their Norwegian re- 
verses. From Germany's point of view, Italy's en- 
trance into the war would have the advantage of 
diverting the Allies, without involving any immedi- 
ate action on the part of the Reich. 

In appraising Italy’s position, it should be stressed 
once more that the possibility of Italian cooperation 
with the Allies was excluded since the outbreak of 
war. Italy's choice was between preserving its non- 
belligerent position, in the hope that at the next 
peace conference, which it would presumably enter 
with its man power and economic resources intact, 
it would be able to extract concessions from all bel- 
ligerents; and openly entering the war at the side 
of the Reich. It is not impossible that Allied conces- 
sions to Italy, together with concrete Allied successes 


*For pervions analysis of Italy's policy, cf. ‘Will War Spread to the 
Balkans? eign Policy Bulletin, April 19, 1940. 














against Germany, might have persuaded Mussolini 
to continue the policy of non-belligerency. Under 
existing circumstances, Italy stands to gain nothing 
by Allied victory, which it regards in any case as 
greatly in doubt; and stands to gain by Germany's 
victory only if it occupies, ahead of the Reich, ter- 
ritories it claims as its sphere of influence. Among 
these territories Yugoslavia and Greece are the most 


accessible, as well as strategically most desirable, 
rts might bar the’ 


since Italian control of Greek 
Allies from the Balkans as effectively as German 
control of Norway now bars the Allies from Scan- 
dinavia. 

While domination of the eastern Mediterranean 
may be regarded as Italy's immediate objective in a 
struggle with the Allies, ultimately Mussolini would 
doubtless hope to share in such division of the spoils 
in the Near East, with its rich oil resources, as might 
follow an Allied retreat from this region. Unlike 
Russia, which has achieved its immediate territorial 
objectives in eastern and northern Europe, and is 
ready, for the time being, to pursue a policy of neu- 
trality, Italy has not yet succeeded in capitalizing on 
its bargaining position. Mussolini’s strategy — like 
that of Hitler in Norway—is apparently to try and 
provoke the Allies into making the first move which 
could then be countered on grounds of self-defense. 
The Allies, as in Norway, are handicapped by their 
reluctance to invade neutral countries ahead of the 
enemy, which leaves the initiative in the hands of 
their actual or potential opponents. 

NO TIME FOR ILLUSION. As Germany, oper- 
ating on interior lines of communication, rapidly 
consolidates its military and diplomatic positions, 


While the Chamberlain government met the op- 
position of its critics in the British Parliament on 
May 7 and 8, military and political experts the 
world over sought to assess the consequences of the 
Allied withdrawal from southern Norway, which 
had produced the most serious crisis of the war in 
Britain. Some observers suggested that the impor- 
tance of sea power had been greatly reduced and the 
value of air superiority correspondingly enhanced; 
others, that without a better appreciation of the 
necessity for speed and perfect coordination of land, 
air and sea services, the Allies could not hope to 
wrest the initiative from their opponents; still 
others, that almost all of non-belligerent Europe 
would now gravitate into the German orbit. It is too 
early to express definitive judgment on some of these 
points, but certain factors are reasonably clear. 

GERMAN MILITARY SUPERIORITY. The Al- 
lies have yet to demonstrate that they can equal their 
enemy in the planning and resolute execution of the 
military offensive, which must precede an ultimate 


Page Two 








— 


and presses Italy for action in the Mediterran 

it would be dangerous to minimize the difficultic 
confronted by the Allies, forced to operate on the 
periphery of Europe, and to be on the alert for , 
German thrust at any point along this periphery 
American public opinion has been working on the 
comfortable assumption that, while the Allies mi 

be faced with initial difficulties, they could not fyi) 
to defeat Germany; and speculation regarding the 
future of Europe has been based on the theory thy 
the victorious Allies would merely have a choice 
between imposing a Draconian peace, involving the 
dismemberment of Germany, or establishing a fed. 
eration built on Anglo-Saxon patterns, in which , 
reformed Germany would be invited to participate 
on equal terms. Other alternatives, such as a smash. 
ing German victory, or a stalemate which would 
leave Germany in control of Europe east of the 
Rhine, while France and Britain, as envisaged ip 
Mein Kampf, merely survive as second-rate pov. 
ers on the fringes of the Atlantic, have received little 
or no consideration. Yet it is only realistic to face 
the possibility that Germany, while avoiding a ms 
jor engagement with France and Britain on the 
Western front, may succeed, for the time being a 
least, in excluding the Allies from the rest of the 
European continent; and, should Italy enter the 
war, from the Mediterranean as well. Such a devel. 
opment would not necessarily involve a military de 
feat for the Allies. But it might, unless the Allie 
take the initiative in the conflict, have the effect of 
immobilizing them in the West, while Hitler pro 
ceeds with the construction of Greater Germany. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN | 


GERMAN STRATEGY TRIUMPHS IN NORWAY 


victory. Speaking before the House of Commons on 
May 2, Prime Minister Chamberlain admitted that 
the expeditionary force prepared for assistance to 
Finland over three months ago had for the most part 
been dispersed, although it was known that German 
troops were practicing embarkation and landing op 
erations in the Baltic. Consequently only small, 
lightly equipped contingents were sent to Andalsnes 
and Namsos during the week of April 14. 

Because of the local German air supremacy, the 
inadequate port facilities at the Allied debarkation 
points were bombed disastrously by the German aif 
force. Despite their lack of suitable artillery, tanks 
or air support, the Allied contingents—including, 
apparently, a high proportion of raw British terti 
torials—were rushed 130 miles inland, reaching 
Lillehammer about April 22, to join with the Nor 
wegians and check the German advance. But by 
May 3 all Allied troops had retreated to the coast and 
sailed away. The Norwegian forces left behind, bit 
ter and discouraged, requested an armistice, and theif 








—— 


resista 
hold 1 
miles 

defen: 
aviatic 
ened 


ser 
for 
ser 


ady 
ac 


du: 


to 
Sec 


FO} 
Hea 
Ent 





FEE il 


- 
=~ 


SR. FSR RES HS 


> ON 


erti- 
ring 
Nor- 


and 
bit: 
heit 








ee 
e— 





resistance soon ceased. The Allies still retain a foot- 
hold near the iron ore port of Narvik, almost 400 
miles north of Trondheim. Even here, however, the 
defending German forces are being assisted by Nazi 
aviation, and it is probable that, if they are threat- 
ened with defeat, they will badly damage the rail- 
road connection with the Kiruna mines in Sweden. 

The strategic importance of the German triumph 
cannot be minimized. The Nazis may be expected to 
equip and supply formidable air and submarine 
bases on the western Norwegian coast with slight 
delay. These will be little more than 300 miles from 
Scapa Flow, the great British home fleet station, 
and not much farther from other important centers 
in northern Scotland. Since Nazi air attacks from 
more distant bases in the Reich forced the home 
fleet temporarily to abandon Scapa Flow last winter, 
it is questionable whether it can now be utilized, 
even though its anti-aircraft defenses have been 
strengthened. Starting from Norwegian ports, Ger- 
man submarines and light surface vessels will find 
it easier than ever before to elude the British block- 
ade in the North Atlantic. 

Even more serious is the revelation that the Allies 
have not yet grasped the crucial importance of 
speed, unified direction and coordinated action in 
meeting a foe who has mastered the technique of 
modern war. The British and French assistance to 
Norway was too small to achieve its purpose, and it 
came too late. The Germans risked much and suf- 
fered heavy losses but reached their objectives; the 
Allies, unwilling to hazard a strong naval and air 
attack on Trondheim before their opponent was 
firmly established, eventually abandoned what they 
had weakly begun. In this respect—though not in 
others—the Norwegian expedition recalls the Gal- 
lipoli adventure in 1915. What is disheartening 
about the entire enterprise is the impression of ir- 
tesolution, timidity, inertia and divided counsel 
among the Allied leadership. This is highly destruc- 
tive not only of Allied morale, but also of the con- 
fidence of European non-belligerents in the ability 
of Britain and France to fulfill their pledges and 
serve as a shield against Nazi incursions. Sweden, 
for example, must now become economically sub- 
servient to the Reich. 

DECLINE OF SEA POWER. Against these dis- 
advantages the Allies can set only the destruction of 
a considerable proportion of German naval strength, 
during the early stages of the operations around 
Norway. But to the Nazis this seems a small price 
to pay for their victory. They have never made any 
secret of their determination to win the war, not 


Page Three 








on the sea, but on land and in the air. Britain's re- 
luctance to expose its costly capital ships to Nazi 
air attack during the campaign apparently indicates 
that sea power is no longer paramount in narrow 
waters dominated by enemy aircraft. For obvious 
reasons—particularly for its effect on the Italians— 
the Nazis seemed determined to emphasize this con- 
clusion. In the face of an official British denial, they 
persist in claiming that they sank a British battle- 
ship of the Queen Elizabeth class and a heavy 
cruiser on May 3, and damaged other warships. 


The conquest of southern Norway has rudely shat- 
tered the complacent view, held especially in Britain 
and the United States, that a victory of the Allies 
is certain in the long run. It was erroneous to be- 
lieve that their superior economic war potential 
could of itself bring the conflict to a successful con- 
clusion. Hitler appears to have realized that he must 
either end the war this year or at least bring all of 
Eastern Europe under his economic control, and to 
have shaped his strategy accordingly. His objectives 
and his methods are in many respects similar to 
Napoleon’s. He may have determined to strike rap- 
idly at one Allied flank after another, from the 
Orkney Islands to the Near East, in an attempt to 
divide Allied strength and bewilder Anglo-French 
leadership. That his shock tactics are not without 
effect is indicated by Prime Minister Chamberlain's 
public reference to the possibility of a lightning 
German attack on England itself. It is only neces- 
sary to recall that there has been no foreign invasion 
of England since 1066 to appreciate how much the 
confidence of the British in their insular security has 
dwindled. 


Thus the situation of the Allies has deteriorated 
perceptibly, in terms of both strategy and morale. 
But it is by no means hopeless, given an imaginative 
and centralized leadership which can ultimately 
snatch the initiative from the hands of the Nazis. 
It is still highly doubtful that the war can be con- 
cluded without a final campaign on the Western 
front, somewhere between Holland and the Medi- 
terranean, where the bulk of the Allied forces sta- 
tioned in France can be brought into action. The 
French nation has been much more completely or- 
ganized for war than the British, and its army still 
represents a primary center of resistance. If the im- 
pact of events in Norway stimulates the British to 
equal efforts, as did the munitions crisis of 1915, 
the Allies may yet avoid the stalemate or defeat 
with which they are otherwise threatened. 


Davi H. Popper 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 29, May 10, 1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Sereet, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dornotny F. Lust, Secretary; Vera MicHeres Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Ae 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 












Washington News Letter 


















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


May 6.—The concern with which the Adminis- 
tration is following the attitude of Italy was sharply 
underscored last week by the series of diplomatic 
conversations held simultaneously in Rome and 
Washington. On May 1 Ambassador William Phil- 
lips conferred with Premier Mussolini, presumably 
on instructions from Washington, and was in con- 
stant touch with Count Ciano, Italy’s Foreign Min- 
ister. The following day President Roosevelt entered 
the conversations as a direct participant when he 
conferred at the White House with Prince Ascanio 
Colonna, the Italian Ambassador, in the presence of 
Acting Secretary of State Sumner Welles. 

U.S..ITALIAN RELATIONS. These exchanges 
were shrouded in secrecy and Washington corre- 
spondents were left to speculate on the nature of 
the talks. The only official comment was Mr. Roose- 
velt’s press conference statement on May 3 that the 
United States was “striving to prevent the extension 
of the European war to new areas and other na- 
tions.” Beneath the surface, however, it was appar- 
ent that the White House had not been entirely re- 
assured by Mr. Phillips’ reports from Rome, and that 
the President was seeking to impress upon Musso- 
lini the possible economic and political consequences 
of Italian entry into the war. There were hints— 
but without official confirmation—that the United 
States might be prepared to consider ways of im- 
proving economic relations between the two coun- 
tries, perhaps by resuming negotiations for a com- 
mercial treaty if Italy continued as a non-belligerent. 

One immediate economic effect of Italian inter- 
vention on the side of Germany would be to cut 
off the profitable Italian trade with the United 
States. Invocation of the Neutrality Act, which 
would almost certainly follow Italy’s entry, would 
prevent American ships from visiting Italian ports, 
and extension of the area of combat operations 
would close the Mediterranean to American shipping. 

The importance of American trade with Italy has 
increased greatly since the beginning of the war. 
During the first six months of the war, according to 
Department of Commerce figures, Italy’s purchases 
in the United States—some of which have undoubt- 
edly found their way to Germany—reached a total 
of $43,745,000, as compared with $28,042,000 dur- 
ing the same period last year. American imports 
from Italy rose less rapidly, amounting to $22,- 
560,000 for the six war months, as compared with 


$20,716,000 for the same months of 1938-1939. 

If the position of the Allies should become more 
critical as a result of Italian action in the Mediter. 
ranean, there is little doubt that the Administration 
would accelerate its economic aid to Britain and 
France. Last week, quite apart from the Italian 
crisis, Washington observers noted what seems to 
be the beginning of a campaign to pave the way for 
eventual credits to the Allies. No move in this di. 
rection has been made as yet, but there has been 
much off-the-record discussion of the possibility of 
repealing the Johnson Act forbidding loans to coun. 
tries in default on their war debt and amending the 
loan provisions of the Neutrality Act. Why the issue 
is being raised at this time is not clear, as the Allies 
should be able to finance their war purchases for 18 
months or two years without recourse to borrowing, 

THE MEXICAN REPLY. Despite its preoccupa- 
tion with European developments, the State Depart- 
ment continues to have its problems in the Westem 
Hemisphere. Last week the controversy over Mex: 
ico’s expropriation of American oil properties 
seemed to be entering a new phase with the receipt 
of the Mexican reply to Secretary Hull’s note of 
April 3. 

As anticipated, the Mexican government flatly 
rejected Mr. Hull’s suggestion that the claims for 
indemnity be submitted to arbitration. The note, 
which was made public here on May 4, dismisses 
the arbitration proposal on the ground that the 
issue was of purely “domestic” concern. It contends 
that there has been no denial of justice as long as 
the Mexican courts are still attempting to appraise 
the value of the expropriated properties. The new 
element was injected by the announcement that the 
Mexican government had reached an agreement 
with the Sinclair oil interests, under which the 
American concern will enter direct negotiations with 
the government for settlement of the amount of the 
indemnity and the conditions of payment. 

The size of the Sinclair investment is uncertain, 
the Mexican note asserting that it represents ‘‘about 
40 per cent” of the total investment of American 
nationals in the oil industry, and American oil com 
pany officials placing the figure between 10 and 20 


per cent. In any case, the agreement, if actually | 


concluded, will strengthen the position of the Car 
denas government. The State Department, meat 
while, is unlikely to press the issue further, at least 
until after the Mexican Presidential elections sched- 
uled for July 7. W. T. STONE 








— 


HIT 


H4 
montl 
with | 
on th 
his 01 
the f; 
but 01 
Euroy 
In 
Hitle: 
man | 
ning 
has v 
the / 
nomi 
Allie: 
gium 
large 
sentiz 
break 
ables 
famil 
third 
publi 
Hitle 
out ° 
acqu: 
unde 
quick 
G] 
Low 
princ 
Engl 
ing 
and 
last \ 
and 
day 


