a, 
—-_--—-—— 


cline of 
ade last 
id 1,119 


have re. 


s of raw 
the case 
ily com- 
1e small 
handise 
> actual 
in 1938, 
reas of 
nm coun- 
ply for- 
1 States, 
8. Asa 
balance 


ipments 
13 (625 
5S (845 
1 stocks, 
yurth of 
‘ves and 
irdy for 
ion, un- 
y would 
west. 

ISSON 


by John 
00 

y of the 
.in 1918, 
ection of 
plans of 


"-alestine, 
Hatzair, 


-icultural 
isible for 
i, despite 

Zionists’ 


inings C. 
k on the 
hich are 
t in part. 


M. Sears. 
on, 1938. 


of back- 


National 
AN, Editor. 


a e Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


. Ya 

Ww * Soeten POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
ae of 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
‘5 si 
“ 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretaggn of current international events by the Research Staff 


a4 XVIII, No. 19 


Marcu 3, 1939 


What lies behind the Arab-Jewish struggle in Palestine? 
The Puzzle of Palestine answers this question, and 
gives not only the essential facts of Palestine’s turbu- 
lent history, but also an account of the various plans 
which have been proposed to solve this problem. 


Headline Books, No. 14 


THE PUZZLE OF PALESTINE, by David H. Popper 


cloth edition, 95 cents 


paper edition, 25 cents 


if al ies 030 a. 


class matter December 


2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 


General Lidrary 
University of Michigaa 


Ann Arbor, Michizan 


RECOGNITION OF FRANCO 


HASTENS SHOWDOWN 


_ deciding to recognize the Franco régime on 

February 27, Britain and France have adopted a 
course which had become increasingly inevitable 
during the last few months. From the very begin- 
ning of the Spanish civil war their refusal to offer 
energetic opposition to Italo-German intervention 
had paved the way for defeat of the Popular Front 
government in Spain. A reversal of that policy at 
the last moment would have needlessly prolonged 
the conflict without affecting the final outcome. Un- 
able to pursue an alternative course, the British and 
French could not make recognition of General 
Franco conditional on specific pledges regarding 
treatment of the vanquished government forces or 
the future conduct of Spanish foreign policy. 


Nevertheless, recognition of the Nationalist ré- 
gime marks the first step in an Anglo-French cam- 
paign to wean Franco away from Italy and Germany. 
Admittedly it will prove difficult to dislodge the 
fascist nations from their present position of vantage. 
Rome and Berlin will not cease reminding Franco 
that he would hardly have won without their as- 
sistance. The Italians still have at least 30,000 troops 
in Spain, while the Germans have entrenched them- 
selves in the economic and commercial life of the 
country. Both hope to use Franco’s large and well- 
trained armed forces as a pawn in their program of 
power politics. Their expectation that Nationalist 
Spain will adhere to the anti-Comintern pact will 
probably be realized. They also derive support from 
Franco’s decision, announced early in January, to 
play an active rdle in the Mediterranean and Moroc- 
co. Further encouragement to their cause has been 
given by recent reports that General Franco would 
shortly appoint as his Prime Minister Ramén 
Serrano Sufier, a leader of the Falangist movement 
known as an admirer of Italian and German fascism. 


Yet the position of the British and French in 
Spain is not entirely hopeless. Preoccupation of the 
Spanish government with internal reconstruction, and 
possible dissension among the divergent elements 
which have helped Franco to victory, may preclude 
Spain’s active participation in the European struggle 
for power. Prolonged occupation of Spanish soil by 
Italian troops, or obvious attempts by Germany or 
Italy to dictaté the ‘country’s internal policy, might 
well arouse the hostility of the Spanish people, who 
have traditionally resented all foreign interference. 
In such an eventuality Franco could play London and 
Paris against the fascist powers. Trade with free- 
exchange countries like France and Britain is also 
essential for Spain, which needs to replenish its de- 
pleted supply of foreign exchange; and Britain alone 
can supply the long-term foreign loan which may 
be needed to heal the wounds of almost three years 
of civil war. 


Outside Spain the position of France and Britain 
appears strong. Their rearmament programs are at 
last proceeding at a more satisfactory pace; and their 
economic and financial reserves are far superior to 
those of the fascist powers. The British and French 
need only strong nerves to resist the pressure from 
Berlin and Rome. Actually, Hitler and Mussolini seem 
rather at a loss as to their next step. For Germany the 
way to the East appears at least temporarily barred. 
The anti-German student demonstrations which took 
place last week in Warsaw and other Polish cities 
testify to the fundamental antagonism between Po- 
land and Germany; and the dissolution of the lead- 
ing Hungarian fascist party on February 24 indicates 
that Hungary is not prepared to follow entirely in 
Germany's wake. A series of visits by Count Ciano, 
Italian Foreign Minister, in Belgrade, Budapest and 
Warsaw seems to prove also that Italy is anxious to 


aid eastern European states in resisting Nazi pene- 
tration. 

The realization of fascist objectives at the expense 
of Britain and France appears even more difficult. It 
would be suicidal for Germany and Italy to embark 
on war. They can only hope, by constant maneuvers 
and threats, to keep Europe in such a state of ferment 
and tension that the other powers will in the end 
meet their demands for the sake of “appeasement.” 
The dispatch of Italian reinforcements to Libya, re- 
ports of accelerated arming in Germany, and the 
menacing tone of the German and Italian press are 
all part and parcel of these tactics. 


A policy of watchful waiting and an attitude of 
calm confidence are the only effective counter- 
weapons to this campaign. More recently, British 
statesmen have coupled their appeasement policy 
» with assertions that they will resist any threat to the 
“vital interests” of France and Britain. Such was the 
tenor of a speech delivered by Foreign Minister 
Viscount Halifax on February 23. Yet the difficulty 
of joining appeasement with an expressed determina- 
tion not to yield to force is that any conciliatory 
gesture will inevitably be regarded by the fascist 
powers as an indication of weakness. Maintenance 
of “law and order” in the face of threats need not, 
and must not, preclude alteration of the status quo; 
yet orderly revision can proceed only after Germany 
and Italy have been convinced that their sword- 
rattling tactics do not intimidate other powers. Only 
then will it be possible to reach a constructive gen- 
eral settlement providing for adjustment of colonial 
and economic issues as well as termination of arms 
— JoHN C. DEWILDE 


BRITAIN PROPOSES INDEPENDENT PALESTINE 


Amidst Arab victory celebrations, charges of be- 
trayal from the Jews, and a sharp outburst of violence 
in Palestine, United States Ambassador Joseph P. 
Kennedy visited the British Foreign Office on Febru- 
aty 27 to discuss the implications for the United 
States of any steps to abrogate the British mandate 
over the Holy Land or to curtail Jewish immigration. 
This démarche, undertaken pursuant to the terms of 
the Anglo-American Palestine convention of 1924, 
followed closely upon publication of a summary of 
Britain’s plan’ to abolish the League of Nations 
mandate and establish an independent Palestinian 
state bound by alliance to the British Empire. Em- 
bodying vital concessions to the Arabs, the proposal 
is the fruit of a tripartite conference of Arabs, Jews 
and Britons convened at London on February 7. 


Under the British proposals, whose impact has 
scarcely been dulled by their tentative form, a transi- 
tional period which might be prolonged until 1942 


Page Two 


or 1944 would precede the consummation of inde. 
pendence. Constitutional details—among which ade. 
quate safeguards for all British interests would be 
prominent—would be settled by a round-table con- 
ference of British, Arab and Jewish representatives 
nominated by the British and meeting in London, 
possibly in the autumn of 1939. Procedures roughly 
analogous to those used in formulating the Egyptian 
and Indian constitutional structures would be em- 
ployed. But before these measures were taken, the 
British government would add Arabs and Jews to 
the existing executive and advisory councils for Pal- 
estine, now composed entirely of British officials. 
While these representatives would probably exercise 
only consultative functions, they are apparently to 
be selected on a basis of proportional communal 
representation, so that Arabs would enjoy a two-to- 
one predominance in the legislative organs. The path 
would then be cleared for Arab domination in an 
independent Palestinian state linked by alliance with 
Britain, although treaty provisions would doubtless 
guarantee Jewish minority rights—how effectively no 
one can say. Meanwhile, immigration and the acquisi- 
tion of land by Jews would be drastically circum- 
scribed. Once arrangements for independence were 
completed, the future of the Jewish National Home 
would rest to a considerable degree in the hands of 
the leaders of the Arab majority in Palestine. 


Although final judgment on the British proposal 
must be deferred until it is published in extenso, it 
seems apparent at the moment that by its terms the 
Arab Nationalists have won their greatest triumph 
in Palestine. Its provisions do not, to be sure, accord 
the Palestinian Arabs the complete and immediate 
independence for which they have steadfastly con- 
tended, but they do inaugurate a policy which would 
evolve inexorably toward that goal. Delegates from 
the five Arab states present at the conference are 
reported to be urging the Mufti of Jerusalem to ac- 
cept it, with excellent prospects for success. The 
Mufti, who dictates Palestine Arab moves from his 
refuge in the Lebanese Republic, would now have 
little to gain by continuing his policy of absolute 
intransigence. 


To the Zionists this sudden turn in the negotia- 
tions is a cruel blow, and they have not been slow to 
reveal their bitterness. With the refugee problem 
complicated by a Spartan German police order re- 
quiring the Berlin Jewish community to produce the 
names of 100 Jews daily for expulsion from the 
Reich, the one haven to which additional numbers 
of the persecuted might have turned now appears 
likely to be barred by British fiat. More than this, 
the status of the 450,000 Zionists already resident 
in the National Home maybe crystallized in a 

(Continued on Page 4) 


FE! 
imple 
resist 
Amet 
neigt 
Cong 
life < 
erm 
trade 
partt 
cial 
perts 
creat 
bala: 
poin 


40 p 


$$$. 
$$$ $a, 


of inde. 
ich ade. 
ould be 
ble con- 
Ntatives 
London, 
roughly 
‘gy ptian 
be em- 
cen, the 
Jews to 
for Pal. 
officials, 
exercise 
ently to 
mmunal 
two-to- 
‘he path 
nN in an 
ice with 
oubtless 
ively no 
acqulsi- 
circum- 
ce were 
1 Home 
ands of 


>roposal 
tenso, it 
‘ms the 
triumph 
, accord 
mediate 
tly con- 
2 would 
es from 
nce are 
nN to ac 
ss. The 
rom his 
yw have 
absolute 


negotia- 
slow to 
problem 
rder re- 
luce the 
‘om the 
1umbers 
appears 
an this, 
resident 
d in a 


Washington News Letter 


ee 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Fes. 27.—The first steps are now being taken to 
implement the Administration’s post-Lima policy of 
resisting German and Italian pressure in South 
America by something more concrete than good 
neighbor protestations. Last week both Houses of 
Congress approved a bill to extend until 1941 the 
life and scope of the Export-Import Bank, the gov- 
etmment agency best adapted to combat totalitarian 
trade practices in this hemisphere. The Treasury De- 
partment is concluding arrangements to give finan- 
cial aid to Brazil; and State Department trade ex- 
perts are searching for a solution to the dilemma 
created by Argentina's announcement that it must 
balance its trade with the United States, even to the 
point of cutting its imports of American goods by 
40 per cent. 


Threatened opposition to renewal of the Export- 
Import Bank’s charter failed to materialize in either 
the House or the Senate. Republican critics of the 
measure, attacking the bank as a dangerous instru- 
ment of foreign policy and a ‘‘war breeder,” had to 
be satisfied with an amendment to limit its borrow- 
ing and lending powers to $100,000,000. While the 
$25,000,000 credit granted on December 15 to the 
Universal Trading Company was condemned as “a 
political loan” to the Chinese government, the bank's 
previous commitments have merely aided the expor- 
tation of American goods to other countries. The 
intoads made in Latin America by European ex- 
porters, who in many cases enjoy government back- 
ing, are due in large part to the more liberal credit 
terms they can offer. In 1938 United States trade with 
eight Latin American countries was facilitated by 
credits extended by the Export-Import Bank. It is 
understood in Washington that a large portion of 
the bank’s increased capital will now be used in this 


direction, particularly to finance American exports to 
Brazil. 


For the last two weeks Washington officials have 
been assiduously courting the Brazilian Foreign 
Minister, Oswaldo Aranha. In the past, the United 
States has been inclined to take Brazil’s friendship 
for granted, and has unwittingly offended it by its 
persistent efforts to woo Argentina. Recently Brazil 
has become the spearhead of the ideologic and eco- 
nomic penetration of the European totalitarian states 
into Latin America. Its strategic location, and the 
Strength of its national defenses, make it of vital 


military importance for protection of the Monroe 
Doctrine. Mr. Aranha has been at pains to convince 
Washington officials that the pressure of the fascist 
countries will prevail in Brazil unless material aid 
is forthcoming from the United States. 

No announcement has yet been made as to just 
what form this aid will take. The passage of the 
Export-Import Bank bill, even with its limiting pro- 
vision, was encouraging to the Aranha mission. Aside 
from the more liberal credit facilities thus afforded, 
two suggestions have been under discussion for 
bolstering trade between the two countries. One is 
that Brazil might divert its wheat imports from 
Argentina to the United States; another that a tri- 
partite agreement to include Argentina might be 
negotiated. Treasury officials are considering a loan 
to the Brazilian government (the figure reported is 
$50,000,000) to furnish Brazil with ample foreign 
exchange and stabilize its currency. The rehabilita- 
tion of Brazil’s national defense is another pertinent 
item. Such financial and trade arrangements, although 
they sometimes clash with the spirit of the Hull 
trade program, are needed to combat German bar- 
ter practices. Since trade and political prestige go 
hand in hand, closer economic ties between the 
United States and Brazil would materially check 
Nazi influence. 


Congressional opposition, however, may be ex- 
pected to any direct loan to the Brazilian government. 
American investors have fared badly in recovering 
their South American loans. The new “credit im- 
perialism’”’ of the Treasury Department and its extra- 
curricular activities in the recent airplane sales are 
viewed with suspicion by several groups, including 
some State Department officials. The resignation of 
Wayne Taylor, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, 
was presumably a protest against such policies. 
Washington observers do not expect all of Aranha’s 
requests to be granted. 

The Argentine warning that future imports from 
the United States are to be curtailed by 40 per cent 
was evidently timed to coincide with Aranha’s visit. 
The chief dilemma in our trade and political rela- 
tions with Argentina is the inability of the United 
States to import sufficient agricultural products from 
Argentina to balance our large exports to that 
country. Trade with Argentina is no “natural,” and 
is hardly stimulated by our refusal to admit Argen- 
tine beef in any quantities or under any conditions 
on the ground that infection of beef in any portion 


of Argentina prohibits importation of all its meat 
products. Possibly the Argentines hope that their 
action will hasten Congressional reconsideration of 
the Sanitary Convention, already ratified by Argen- 
tina but pigeonholed by Congress at its last session. 
Germany's willingness to absorb Argentine raw ma- 
terials on a barter basis, and Britain’s insistence that 
Argentina buy British goods in exchange for its 
large importations of Argentine beef and wheat, 
however, are more important factors. Unless tripar- 
tite trade between Brazil, Argentina and the United 
States materializes, or large short-term commercial 
credits to these countries can be arranged, there seems 
to be little hope of drawing both Argentina and 
Brazil into the American economic and political orbit. 
FREDERICK T. MERRILL 


BRITAIN PROPOSES INDEPENDENT PALESTINE 
(Continued from Page 2) 


“permanent ghetto,” without possibility of further 
development. From the Zionist point of view, it 
appears that the Arabs are being rewarded for their 
unceasing terroristic campaigns and hostility to 
Britain, while the Zionists are penalized for follow- 
ing a policy of non-retaliation and loyalty to the 
Empire. They may therefore be expected to repeat 
the tactics adopted in 1930, when a British declara- 
tion favorable to the Arabs provoked such a storm 
of protest that it was “reinterpreted” in a manner 
restoring the balance between the two antagonists. 
As a last resort, passive resistance by the Jewish com- 
munity in Palestine has been envisaged; and hot- 
heads among the Zionists might utilize the occasion 
to engage in retaliatory violence against the Arabs, 
which the Jews have thus far generally eschewed. 
Should the Zionists feel constrained to espouse 
measures of this sort, the British would be confronted 
by a continuing state of disorder in the Holy Land 
for. which they may logically be saddled with a high 
degree of responsibility. It would not be equitable 
to condemn British policy unreservedly. Britain has 
had the thankless task of attempting to reconcile 
two uncompromising nationalist movements. In an 


Page Four 


— 
—— 


age of Realpolitik the British cannot be too severe} 
censured for extending the olive branch to the Arabs 
in order to retain their strategic predominance jg 
a region threatened by fascist maneuvers. Never. 
theless, the reluctance of the British to take stronge, 
steps to quell terrorism long before it had reached 
its present proportions, or to call an Arab-Jewish cop. 
ference before violence became organized rebellion 
will weigh heavily against them. Non-Zionist Jews 
and a large body of neutral observers would haye 
given considerable support to a compromise pro. 
posal recognizing the basic claims of Arab national. 
ism, but not throttling the future expansion of Jew. 
ish economic development in the Levant. They were 
particularly hopeful of such a scheme because Prime 
Minister Chamberlain, in opening the tripartite con- 
ference on February 7, declared that the government 
entered the discussions “bound by its obligations 
under the mandate . . . to both Arabs and Jews,” 
although arguments for changes in the mandate 
would be heard. 


The highly tentative nature of the suggestions thus 
far made by the British government permits it still 
to turn in this direction without loss of face. If it 
does not do so, an Arab-dominated Palestine will 
soon spring into existence. By appeasement of the 
Palestine Arabs Britain obviously hopes to retain its 
ascendancy among the ardent nationalists of the 
Middle East, despite the challenge of the totalitarian 
states. Yet here, as in the West, the question arises 
whether concessions which appear to be won by vio- 
lence will suffice to maintain Britain’s position in the 
region affected or in the world at large. 


Davip H. Popper 


MR. THOMSON’S RESIGNATION 


The Foreign Policy Association regrets to announce 
that, on February 15, 1939, Mr. Thomson resigned as 
Research Associate to take up his new duties as 
Assistant Director of the Division of Cultural Rela- 
tions in the Department of State. Mr. Thomson had 


been the F.P.A.’s Latin American expert since 1933. 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Betrayal in Central Europe, by G. E. R. Gedye. New York, 
Harper, 1939. $3.50 


An interesting and informative account of the fall of 
Austria and the partition of Czechoslovakia, written by a 
correspondent of the New York Times. Mr. Gedye, who 
was stationed first in Vienna and later in Prague, gives 
graphic, detailed pictures of both crises from the point of 
view of a staunch opponent of Nazism. 


Foundations of British Foreign Policy: From Pitt (1792) 
to Salisbury (1902), edited by Harold Temperley and 
Lillian M. Penson. New York, Macmillan, 1938. $7.50 


An excellent collection of two hundred documents, many 
published for the first time, illustrating the policy of 
successive Foreign Secretaries. The editors have added 
historical notes to explain each document in terms of in- 
ternational affairs and domestic politics. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 19, Marcu 3, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lusiig Bugtt, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dzan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matrer December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Co 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


| 


VoL 


| 


Eu 


Pee — alll 


