erent 
erior 
in if 
d in- 
ries, 
d. If 
, the 
rOries 


Naw 
o the 
states 
ships 
Is eft 
5 a 
situa: 
ig of 
is not 
Get- 
sritish 
aking 
This 
yy the 
to be 
might 
senta: 
of 4 
fense 
NE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
lew York, N. Y. 
AL Roéat “ 40th Street, New York, 


\ Entered as second- 
t class matter December’ 
' oi, 2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


2 17 FEBRUARY 16, 1940 


For a survey of Pan-Americanism since 1826, together 
with a study of recent developments in inter-American 


economic and political collaboration, read: 


PROGRESS OF PAN-AMERICAN COOPERATION 


by Howard J. Trueblood 
February 15th issue of Foreign Policy Reports... . 25 cents 


——— 


Dr. William W. Bishop 
% University 0: 


Ann Arbor, Wich. 


I$ EUROPE READY FOR ROOSEVELT PEACE MOVE? 


— canigaddal ROOSEVELT’S “exploratory” peace 


move comes at a moment when the European 


i | onflict threatens to become generalized. Germany 


wd the Allies are deadlocked on the Western front, 


.| where the war is confined largely to air skirmishes 


and naval action. The Soviet Union has launched a 
new and determined attack on the Mannerheim Line, 
where its superior man power threatens to crush the 
finns, who have appealed to the world for help. In 
the Near East the Allies, with the aid of Turkey, are 
preparing for a possible drive either against Germany 
ot Russia. It has long been expected in Washington 
that this spring, possibly as early as March, the bel- 
ligerents would attempt to end the present stalemate 
by undertaking large-scale operations. Europe might 
then experience the kind of totalitarian war which it 
has so far been spared in the West, and the prospects 
of a “negotiated” peace would be reduced to the 
nishing point. Under the circumstances, it has 
xemed to the President and to some of his advisers 
that the United States, as the most powerful neutral 
in the world, should take advantage of this breathing- 
pell to sound out the belligerents regarding the pos- 
bility of a negotiated peace. 


ALLIED DESIRE TO CRUSH HITLERISM. But 
on what basis could peace be negotiated in Europe 
today? Even more important, would peace negotia- 
tions at this time merely increase Germany's strik- 
ng power in the future? A majority of the French 
ind British remain determined to continue the war 
util Hitlerism— not merely Hitler—has been 
mushed. There still are elements in France and 
Britain—as in the United States—who support the 
policy of ‘appeasement’ and think that if only Hitler 
were removed by some magic, a peace settlement 
that would save “capitalism” could be arranged with 
other Nazis, for example Goering. Yet in spite of 
these “appeasement” activities, the French Chamber 


of Deputies, at the close of a secret session regard- 
ing the conduct of the war, gave a unanimous vote 
of confidence to M. Daladier on February 10. If this 
vote is an indication of French public opinion, then 
it would appear that France is not ready at this 
moment for another Munich. In fact, observers re- 
cently returned from the Allied countries believe 
that a “peace move” undertaken today by the Cham- 
berlain and Daladier governments would be the 
signal for popular revolts which, far from saving 
what is left of capitalism in Europe, might have ex- 
actly the opposite result. 


To understand this mood, one has to remember 
that the French and British people came to the con- 
clusion last September that the kind of peace Europe 
had known during the six years of Hitler’s rule was 
even more nerve-wracking than war. They emphati- 
cally do not want to go back to that kind of peace. 
And they contend that, even if Hitler should resign, 
the evils of Nazism would remain, and would con- 
tinue to plague Europe. They want to destroy these 
evils root and branch, even if they have to endure a 
terrible war to achieve their purpose. The question 
is: how can these evils be destroyed without also 
driving the German people to despair? And if the 
German people are driven to despair in the process, 
what hope is there of reconstructing Europe on a 
sane basis after the war? To this the French and the 
British reply that Europe will know an even worse 
fate if the Nazis remain in power, and worst of all 
if Germany should prove thé victor. So they demand 
war to the finish—and many of them feel that the 
United States, by intervening at this time, may be 
unconsciously playing into the hands of Hitler, who 
would be satisfied, until further notice, with a peace 
sanctioning his conquest of Austria, Czechoslovakia 
and Poland. 


GERMAN FEAR OF DISMEMBERMENT. It 


¢ Michigan Librar)) | 


| 


must also be realized, however, that millions of Ger- 
mans who oppose Hitler on every other ground are 
reluctant to accept a peace dictated by the Allies. 
They fear that if Germany accepts such a peace, it 
will again be dismembered, humiliated, and econom- 
ically weakened. They believe that Hitler alone can 
preserve German unity; and the desire to achieve 
unity has dominated the German people for at least 
a century. The problem of the Allies—and now the 
problem of the United States as well—is to discover, 
within Germany, a group who could succeed the 
Nazis if Hitler were overthrown, and negotiate a 
compromise with France and Britain. There is still 
a danger that the Allies and the United States might 
turn to the German monarchists and industrialists, 
who appear at this moment to offer the only alterna- 
tive to Hitler. But men like Rauschning and Thyssen, 
now in exile, helped Hitler to power in 1933 because 
they hoped he would crush communism and restore 
Germany's military prestige. They showed no con- 
cern, at that time, for either democracy or European 
peace. They turned against Hitler only when it be- 
came apparent that his movement was “‘socialist” as 
well as nationalist. Should the Allies and the United 
States lean on these elements in their efforts to 
achieve peace, they might find themselves support- 
ing the forces of reaction in the Reich, not the forces 
which might ultimately produce a unified but lib- 
eral Germany. The Western powers might even find 
themselves playing the rdle of a new Holy Alliance, 
whose endeavor would be to repress all revolutionary 
groups in Europe, whether they be labeled Nazi, 
Communist, or “‘anti-Christian.” 

LESSONS OF THE WORLD WAR. It is into this 
vortex of conflicting and confusing forces that Mr. 


Page Two 


— 
——, 


Welles will be plunging next week. One can only 
hope, for the sake of both Europe and the Unite 
States, that his exploratory trip is not being light) 
undertaken; that it will not be made a football of 
domestic politics; and that the Roosevelt Administra. 
tion, as well as the American people, is fully awar 
of the responsibilities it implies. For by exploring 
the possibilities of peace in Europe, the Unite) 
States is obviously departing from the path of strig 
isolation. It is starting on a course which, as in th 
World War, may ultimately necessitate some form 
of open intervention. 

One lesson drawn from our World War exper. 
ence should be borne in mind. The intervention of 
the United States, first as a peacemaker, then as ; 
belligerent, profoundly altered the balance of powe 
in Europe at that time, and enabled the Allies tp 
win a military victory. This victory might haye 
proved more fruitful if the United States, having 
shouldered the burdens of war, had remained ») 
shoulder the burdens of peace. By withdrawing from 
Europe after the Paris Peace Conference, the United 
States, for the second time in two years, again pro. 
foundly altered the European balance of power 
There is room for legitimate difference of opinion 


as to whether this country should or should not have 
entered the war in 1917. But one thing seems clear 
If this country does not intend to share the respons: 
bility for adjusting the far-reaching problems tha 
lie at the root of the present conflict, then it woul 
be far better, in the long run, for the United State) 
to keep its hands off European affairs. Otherwise, we! 
would again be creating vain illusions and arousing 
false hopes in Europe, only to destroy them as we di 
in 1919. Vera MICHELES Dean | 


WAR CLOUDS GATHER IN NEAR EAST | 


Extension of the war to the Near East appears to 
loom as a distinct possibility following several de- 
velopments during the past week. On February 8 
the Turkish government abruptly seized the German- 
owned Krupp shipyards on che Bosporus, thus lend- 
ing emphasis to its recent contention that Turkey 
should be considered “non-belligerent” rather than 
“neutral.” The following day it dismissed 100 Ger- 
man technicians hitherto employed by the War and 
Naval Ministries in various armament enterprises. 
On February 12 the arrival of 30,000 Australian and 
New Zealand troops at Suez called attention to the 
continued reinforcement of British and French gar- 
risons in the Near East. 

FRENCH AND BRITISH TROOP CONCEN- 
TRATIONS. According to reports emanating from 
Turkey, Allied forces in the Near East now total 
about 570,000 men. In its mandated territory, Syria, 
France is reported to have concentrated 300,000 
soldiers, consisting primarily of Senegalese, Algerian 


and Madagascar regiments, as well as one division| 
of the Foreign Legion and some highly mechanizel 
French troops. Britain is said to have about 40,00 
soldiers in its Palestine mandate, almost all of whom) 
were recruited in the United Kingdom. The bulk of| 
the British troops — approximately 200,000, com| 
posed largely of Moslems and Indians — are ste 
tioned in Egypt. Britain also has a strong air fort| 
and some auxiliary troops further to the east, in Iraq| 
Both Iraq and Egypt are allied to Britain by treats 
concluded on June 30, 1930 and August 26, 1936) 
respectively. Under the terms of these alliances, the) 
are compelled, in time of war, to give Britain all tht) 
assistance in their power, including the use of thet) 
ports, airdromes and means of communication. | 


The concentration of troops in the Near East mi 
well be a purely precautionary measure, designed t 
meet a possible German-Russian attack on the Ba 
kans and the Straits, or a Russian drive through Ira 
and Afghanistan. As early as last December Italia’ 


————— 
—— 


dispatches 
ments on 
these rep¢ 
ries in th 
alarm. Or 
Afghanist 
that the 1 
jointly wi 
converted 
doubtful, 
US.S.R. \ 
tate hosti! 
preoccupi 
stage a ¢ 
Germany 
sources O 


AN A 
UNION 
to launch 
as a base 
Rumania 
about th 
Union. BE 
lies only 
pipe-line 
the Casp 
operatior 
would re 
ment. T 
largely « 
problem 
troops C 
take of 


“Humane 
Haldor 
$2.50 
A run! 

an Asso 

at first 
from Pe’ 
with Jai 
guerrilla 

China’s « 

personal 

political 


The Por 
Campi 
A syn 

Salazar’ 

and pop’ 


Inside E 
“War 
Mr. G 

its persc 

a revea 

enacted. 


FOREIGN 
Headquarte 
Entered as 


Sz» 18 


—— Page Three = 
only dispatches reported considerable Soviet troop move- U.S.S.R. is said to be rapidly fortifying its ports on 
itej| ments on the Iranian and Afghan frontiers. While the Black Sea and its frontier in the Caucasus—with 
ghtly| these reports were generally discounted, the coun- _ the assistance of German military engineers accord- 
ill of| tries in the Middle East have remained in a state of ing to some reports. 
istr.| alarm. Only a few weeks ago the governments of In the last analysis, Turkey holds the key to the 
war} Afghanistan and Iran were said to have suggested situation in the Near East. Without its cooperation 
Oring that the non-aggression pact which they concluded and active assistance Allied operations in this area 
nite|| jointly with Turkey and Iraq on July 8, 1937 be —_ would be impossible. While Turkey is extremely sym- 
strig | converted into a pact of mutual assistance. It appears pathetic to the Franco-British cause, it still wants to 
n th| doubtful, however, that either Germany or the stay out of war. All its efforts in the Balkans have 
form} U.S.S.R. would risk any move which might precipi- had this purpose in view. Moreover, its alliance with 
tate hostilities in the Near East. The Soviet Union, France and Britain, concluded last October, specifi- 
xpe.| preoccupied in Finland, is hardly in a position to cally does not apply to war with the Soviet Union. 
on of| stage a diversion elsewhere for the moment; and — Turkish officials were also anxious that no exagger- 
as,| Germany is anxious not to dissipate its limited re- ated inferences should be drawn from the dismissal 
sower} sources Over a wide area. of German technicians. It was emphasized in Istan- 
iest)} AN ALLIED ATTACK ON THE SOVIET bul that the replacement of these Germans started 
have} UNION? It is far more in the interest of the Allies soon after the conclusion of the Anglo-French- 
aving} to launch an attack in the Near East. Using Turkey | Turkish alliance and was considered only a “logical 
ed | asa base, they might cut off German oil supplies in result of that trend in Turkish foreign policy.” 
from Rumania or strike at the Caucasus, which produces JouN C. pEWILDE 
Jnitel} about three-fourths of the oil output of the Soviet 
1 pt} Union. Batum, the Soviet oil port on the Black Sea, ANNOUNCEMENT 
ower} lies only fifteen miles from the Turkish frontier. The Recently the attention of the Foreign Policy Asso- 
inion} pipe-line connecting it with the Baku oil wells near ciation has been called to the unauthorized use of its 
t have} the Caspian Sea might be seized. Yet Allied military name in sponsoring the work of other groups in vari- 
clear.| operations, whether in this area or in the Balkans, ous fields. We wish to remind our members, as well 
pons:| would require a large amount of men and equip- as the public at large, that the Foreign Policy Asso- 
s tha} ment. The forces available at present, consisting ciation is a non-partisan, educational organization. 
would} largely of colonials, seem far from adequate. The It cannot and does not officially endorse the work of 
States} problem of transporting supplies for large bodies of any other organization, or individual. In some in- 
se, wt} troops operating far from home bases would also stances, it has cooperated with other groups, but only 
using} take on formidable dimensions. Moreover, the in a consultative capacity. 
ve did 
im THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 
“Humane Endeavour’: The Story of the China War, by Commonwealth or Anarchy? by Sir John A. R. Marriott. 
Haldore Hanson. New York, Farrar & Rinehart, 1939. New York, Columbia University Press, 1939. $2.00 
a $2.50 A capable survey of leading peace projects, from the 
{ViSi0N A running commentary on the Far Eastern conflict by sixteenth to the twentieth century, in their historical set- 
anizel| 2” Associated Press correspondent who covered the war tings. This should be a helpful handbook for those in quest 
‘0,000 at first hand, traveling through the interior provinces of a new world order. 

; from Peiping to Chungking. Drawing on his experiences on : ‘ 
whom; with Japanese officers and soldiery, the North China <_ —_ of po tag gg ogg by George Catlin. 
ulk of guerrilla forces, the Chinese Communist leaders, and gee rng 5 le a ij * hen ith hasi 

China’s central authorities, the author combines a gripping A. ayntins eg ve ace pen i Dipte Bee. ee 

COM; personal narrative with a thorough study of the military, = a modern period, and relevance to contemporary wer 
‘e sti| political and economic aspects of the war. eee 
| . : Manual of Government in the United States, by R. K. 

fore The Portugal of Salazar, by Michael Derrick. New York, Gooch. Fem York, Van Nostrand, 1939. $3.75 4 
n Iraj} Campion Books, 1939. $2.00 wget es 2" ‘he Mesut ak ee 
reatie A sympathetic and superficial argument that Professor Reorganization of > > a pero - owen 

,| Salazar’s corporate state is distinctly Portuguese, Catholic Meriam and Laurence F, Schmeckebier. ashington, 
1930, Brookings, 1939. $3.00 
and popular. , : 
s. ther These two books are useful companion pieces—the first 
*. | Inside Europe, by John Gunther. New York, Harper, 1940. as an able statement of how the United States is governed, 
all the “War Edition.” $3.50 the second as an investigation of technical problems which 
f thei Mr. Gunther’s intimate study of the European scene and have resulted from the increasing functions of govern- 
| its personalities, revised to include Europe’s two wars, is ment. Professor Gooch, fusing documentary sources with 
f a revealing backdrop against which the war drama is descriptive analysis, combines in his textbook the study of 
St maj} enacted. federal, state and local government. 
ned 
e Bal: FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XfX, No. 17, Fesruary 16, 1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DororHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicuHetes Dean, Editor. 
h Trat Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
Ttalias Sz 181 F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


FORE 
i An inter pre 
| i 6 . stbbee, FO 
Washington News Letter nie 
| You XIX, 
‘fl — 
: WASHINGTON BUREAU major factor in their calculations, Mr. Roosevelt and Secre. 
i National Press Building tary Hull—both ae candidates for the Presidency | For 4 ke 
Fes. 13.—News of the forthcoming journey of doubtless realize that a bold bid for peace will enhance their neutralit 
tine prestige among the electorate, whether or not it succeeds, 
Undersecretary of Scare Sumner Welles to Ro f Here and abroad the comment has been heard that . 
Berlin, Paris and London has set loose . flood o Mr. Welles should visit the U.S.S.R. and Finland 
= penn in 7 Semana ea Taken y- shies: yest as well as Western Europe if he wishes to make 4 
with Secrevary Hull's disclosure that informal conver- thorough survey of present conditions. Some sources 
sations are being held with neutral countries, it has regard the absence of the Soviet Union from his —_— 
theast sharply 10. the fore the question. whether any itinerary—and the blunt castigation of the Russiay | —_————— 
active, dttqmpe 't0 .nestore; peace in Europe can long dictatorship in President Roosevelt’s speech to the} +s Al 
nena. coematent wit strict Anerricnn neutrality. in American Youth Congress—as evidence that the Ad- 
the. cour of negotiations, the United States might ministration is contemplating a peace based princi- 
conceivably drift into a situation where it would pally on the status quo. Like the Munich agreement THE re 
underwrite some of the peace terms of one side or =o settlement might be built in part on the com. | 2 the G 
the other. Isolationist circles have been quick to ree antipathy of Britain, France and Germany to | sia fj 
call ‘the famous memocandam of Sit Edward Grey, communism. In view of the unpopularity of the February 
British Foreign Secretary, dated February 22, 1916, Nazis, however, it is unlikely that Washington would | Sthmus, — 
which was the caiminstion of Colonel House's Euro- support any scheme of this character. Omission of | plight of 
pean travels during the first World War. That docu- ne USSR may more plausibly be laid to the | described 
ment recorded President Wilson's willingness to extreme frigidity of Soviet-American relations since | % 4° #% 
eacemnrateg Ronee ference at a moment.considered the City of Flint incident and the invasion of Finland, | by the Int 
eee een See eect, 008 Seiqeed ther CONTACTS WITH NEUTRALS. The consulta. | !*s Com! 
ne Uae Seates would P tobebly” enter ee wet tions with the neutrals, still apparently in the most board the 
Re Sey sSaues Beth refused tw particle a, tentative stage, also have important implications, Graf Spe 
or to accept terms “not unfavourable to the Allies. They were pc discely constraed sbroad as a mann Gee 
MOTIVES FOR MEDIATION. There is no dis- designed to rally neutral support for a compromise Cossack, 
position in Washington to draw anything but the peace plan. Adverse foreign reaction prompted Sec. | Waters af 
most general parallel between the roving missions of retary Hull, on February 10, to stress the fact that destroyer, 
Colonel House and Undersecretary Welles. Circum- the purpose of the talks was to determine an equitable | 5y Norw 
stances have altered; the Administration can profit basis for peace after the war ends, rather than to | Meat ma 
by American experience in 1914-1917; and Mr. seek immediate cessation of hostilities. Norwegi: 
Welles is thoroughly schooled in the methods and The concept of a united group of neutral powers entered t 
implications of diplomacy. Moreover, political ob- which would throw their influence on the side of | Btitish), 
servers inside the Administration and out generally sanity when the time for a final settlement arrives Norwegi 
discount any prospect of an early settlement. They —_j, unobjectionable from the point of view of Ameri- | *¥4e th 
discern the following motives for last week’s moves: can policy. Secretary Hull was particularly careful to board. 
1. President Roosevelt may feel that, slight though they —Jimit his specific objectives to two subjects on which | THE 
are, the chances for a negotiated peace will dwindle rapidly = snore is little disagreement in this country: the estab | Norway 
yo pera ers gen gg mag lishment of a sound and liberal international eco- | Wegian a 
American ee en in the war will probably grow as nomic system, and the reduction of armaments. It i in failin 
the conflict spreads, every effort must be made to halt it now. interesting to note that President Roosevelt, in his Altmark 
2. Mr. Welles may really be seeking information only, peace appeal of April 14 last, urged Europe to settle | serts it 
particularly in Berlin, where the United States has not been —_its_ problems by conference, but restricted participa: | mers. It 
er eae easing Saye Meveamher 1958. kc tion of the United States to the same two fields. At | Norway 
would obviously be impolitic to sent a first-rank diplomat to wrt ; ; ‘toed wal me to th 
Germany alone; hence the visit to other belligerents. that time the President’s proposal was criticized on | 8 
3. The very disclosure of the Welles mission may oper- the ground that the United States could not expect tights al 
ate to postpone an offensive, for the belligerent which at- to secure freer international trade and disarmament }| ‘the neu 
tacks ee on © may wg would forfeit Amer- unless it a .. o to solve its ee oe be omayt 
er ens wl culties. On its face, the Hull project for collabora: } Ptzes be 
4. As the November elections draw closer, the Admin- : ‘ 
istration’s actions are increasingly affected by domestic po. 00 with neutrals seems to be open to the same ll 
litical considerations. Although this was probably not a objection. Davip H. Popper aa 


