Itilateral 
put ona 
f Europe 
pital for 
1d manuv- 
vely free 
x for the 
yw faced 
country 
certainty 
For ex 
Aarch 19 
eel prod- 
s. While 
countries 
ulties by 
problems 
es whose 
e. 
will not 
. decides 
political 
’ of this 
political 
partment 
- its obli- 
ing-stock 
=lections. 
s it diffi 
that the 
improve: 
onsidera- 
; govern 
t support 
. BOLLES 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


Ualversity of Michigan MAY 1 7 1946 


PURIDNGSAL Reem 
AL LIBRARY 
aes ae iy 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 


: Niy 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


You. XXV, No. 30 


May 10, 1946 


—_—- 


WHY EUROPE IS SKEPIICAL OF BYRNES’ ALLIANCE PROPOSAL™ 


ee visible progress has as yet been made in 

Paris toward agreement among the Big Four on 
the terms of peace treaties with Italy and the Axis 
satellites in Eastern Europe. This lack of progress 
appears all the more disappointing to Washington 
because the Truman Administration had hoped that 
the Byrnes proposal for a 25-year alliance against 
renewal of aggression by Germany and Japan would 
restore a feeling of confidence between the wartime 
allies, and open the way to a far-reaching settlement. 


U.S. PLAN FOR MILITARY ALLIANCE. The 
draft of a four-power treaty for the disarmament 
and demilitarization of Germany (a similar treaty 
is proposed for Japan) had not been on the official 
agenda of the Paris conference, but was publicly an- 
nounced by Secretary of State Byrnes on April 29. 
American sources have stated that the proposal for 
this treaty had been submitted to Britain and Rus- 
sia as early as the Big Three conference at Moscow 
lat December. eliciting little enthusiasm at_ that 
time on the part of either Mr. Bevin or Mr. Molo- 
tov. So far as can be determined, however, the pro- 
posal was then couched in the most general terms. 

From the point of view of the United States, 
which throughout its history has opposed “en- 
langling alliances” except for the temporary pur- 
pose of waging war, the Byrnes draft marks an im- 
portant milestone on the road away from isolation- 
sm, and for that reason deserves to be welcomed. 
The very fact that it represents a sharp break with 
ttaditional policy caused Mr. Byrnes to proceed with 
understandable caution and secrecy in suggesting 
this procedure to Britain and Russia, for fear that 
premature disclosure might provoke criticism in 
Congress and in the country which would jeopar- 
dize its chances. The Byrnes plan had been drafted 
in the hope of preventing a division of Europe (as 


well as other areas) into two hostile worlds—the 
Western world, dominated by the United States and 
Britain, and the regions bordering on the U.SS.R., 
dominated by Moscow. Actually, the proposed alli- 
ance stemmed from a suggestion made by Senator 
Vandenberg, Republican of Michigan, in 1945, and 
therefore carried all the more weight since it offered 
the hope that Mr. Vandenberg, who is a member of 
the American delegation in Paris, would rally the 
support of Republicans in Congress for the policy of 
the Administration. 

The cool, in fact caustic, reception accorded by 
the Soviet press to the Byrnes draft has caused a 
further revulsion of feeling against Russia in Wash- 
ington, where the belief is gaining ground that the 
Soviet government is concerned not with Russia's 
security against future aggression by Germany and 
Japan, but with an effort to undermine the “capital- 
ist” system. In support of this view it is pointed out 
that Russia supports Communist patties in Europe; 
indanains did Purces couinaied ac Over vwo-mal- 
lion in Eastern Europe and the Balkans; backs Yugo- 
slavia against Italy on Trieste; refuses to accept de- 
militarization of the Dodecanese Islands; continues 
to demand a trusteeship over the Italian colony of 
Tripolitania, although in modified form; fosters a 
network of barter trade agreements with neighbor- 
ing countries; and, most recently, displays sympathy 
for the Arabs in the crisis over Palestine. 

NOT ONLY RUSSIA OBJECTS. It is not Rus- 
sia alone, however, which expresses skepticism con- 
cerning the proposal presented by Mr. Byrnes. And 
it is important for us to understand why. This pro- 
posal, if made in 1919, would have proved a major 
contribution to the stabilization of Europe, which 
was then dangerously unbalanced by the rising 
power of Germany, the growing weakness of France, 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


and the withdrawal, for the time being, of Russia. 
Even had the United States suggested a Big Four 
alliance before or shortly after V-E Day, it would 
have given much-needed encouragement to those 
who looked to us for post-war leadership, and would 
have checked the re-emergence of groups all over 
Europe, notably in Germany, who still nourish 
hopes of reviving Nazism and Fascism. But, as 
cannot be repeated too often, much water has flowed 
under the bridge since May 1945. The world has 
undergone such profound changes as a result of 
six years of war and one year of treaty-less peace 
that, to put it bluntly, the Byrnes proposal, revolu- 
tionary as it may seem from the point of view of 
the United States, is bound to appear to weary and 
hungry Europeans as a quarter of a century too 
late. Just as our well-intentioned plans for freer 
world trade and an International Trade Organiza- 
tion have been formulated at a time when many 
other countries have had, not by choice but by sheer 
necessity, to adopt more or less controlled econ- 
omies, so our plans for a military alliance, inspired 
by a desire to reassure our wartime allies, notably 
Russia, concerning -our long-term intentions, come 
at a time when people from one end of Europe to 
the other have lost confidence in our determination 
to implement our indubitably good intentions. 


Judging by President Truman’s message to Con- 
gress on May 6 concerning military collaboration 
with other American republics the Administration 
has, as an alternative policy in case of failure of its 
25-year alliance draft, a program for the unification 
and standardization of military forces and equi 
ment throughout the Western Hemisphere, includ- 
ing Canada which, if adopted, would have far- 
reaching implications both for our relations with 
Britain and Russia and for the future of the United 
Nations organization. This program would seem to 


WILL U.S. ASSUME RESPONSIBILITIES IN PALESTINE? 


The fundamental common sense of the 44,000- 
word Palestine Report of the Anglo-American 
Committee of Inquiry is attested by the fact that 
it has provoked denunciations from both Arabs and 
Jews, most of whom continue to adhere to the un- 
compromising views they have steadfastly main- 
tained for the past generation. Violent verbal at- 
tacks by the Arabs culminated on May 3 in a 12- 
hour protest strike of an estimated 1,000,000 people, 
which halted commercial life in Palestine, Syria 
and Lebanon, and resulted in a riotous demonstra- 
tion in Jerusalem during which British soldiers were 
stoned. Threatening to resume the “national strug- 
gle” of 1936 to 1939 if the Palestine Report’s ten 
recommendations are adopted, the Arab Higher 
Committee, which was formed in November 1945 
to represent all Arab parties in Palestine, sent a note 


Page Two 


accept the breaking up of the world into spheres of 
influence of the great powers, with the United States 
taking the leadership in the Western Hemisphere 
Such a policy was once favored by some Washington 
officials, and was denounced by its opponents 4s 
“hemisphere isolation.” 


NATIONALISM STILL HAMPERS INTERNA. 
TIONALISM. The fundamental difficulty is that 
while we now genuinely believe in the need fo, 
international cooperation as we never have before 
our actions still follow the well-worn groove of na. 
tionalist thinking and practice. If the United States 
intended as far back as last December to cooperate 
with Britain, Russia and France in keeping Ger. 
many and Japan disarmed and demilitarized, why, 
other nations ask, have we been so anxious to with. 
draw our troops from Europe and Asia as rapidly 
as possible and to reduce our armed forces? If the 
United States intends to give financial aid to those 
groups in Europe who could aid the continent's re. 
construction, why, other nations ask, is Congress so 
loath to grant a line of credit to the British Labor 
government and the Administration seemingly re. 
luctant to accede to the pleas for aid of France's 
Socialist leader, Léon Blum? 

If Russia alone were pressing us for answers to 
these questions, we might be justified in yielding to 
the suspicion that a conspiracy against the ‘‘cap- 
italist” system is afoot. But these questions are being 
asked of us by many who have been our friends in 
Europe in the common fight against Nazism and 
Fascism, who above all want us to succeed, but who 
have suffered so much from our past indecisions and 
divided counsels on foreign policy that they are slow 
to trust our conversion to international cooperation. 
What can we do to convince them? 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The third in a series of articles on the peace negotiations in Paris.) 


of protest on May 2 to the British Cabinet. Mean- 
while, a second mass demonstration has been called 
for May 10, and several Arab groups are reported 
to be planning to ask for Russian aid. 

Nor is Arab agitation limited to Palestine alone. 
Representatives of seven other Arab states voted on 
May 5 to call an extraordinary session of the Arab 
League to take measures against the Anglo-Ameti- 
can Committee’s recommendations. Three days 
earlier, Abdul Rahman Azzam Pasha, the League's 
secretary general, had officially warned the British 
and United States governments against adopting 


— 
that hosti 
populatio 
propagan 
REPOE 
JEWISH 
the Jews 
of White 
and land 
rt Was 
Palestine 
the Com 
Zionist p 
that Jew: 
a few or 
Judaism, 
sate. Tl 
spokesm< 
fading } 
White P 
range pr 
In rec 
ferred te 
mit,” 
Pe the C 
tion mac 
The Pre 
lication 
self as 
‘the rep 
| ange Pp 
tional 1z 
I will ta 
aroused 
Capper, 
wiced t 
mitted | 
posing < 
ng to f 
it is pe 
Democr 
a Jewis! 
ANG 
Preside: 
was ind 


. 


The 
Roxas, 
McNut 
urgency 
post in 
testorir 
dbtaini 


the Report. Azzam Pasha told a press conference 
the Arab states would consider later whether to 
bring their case before the United Nations. The 
immediate and widespread character of Arab reac- 
tion justifies the Committee of Inquiry’s conclusion 


of whi 
pation. 
a acu 
estima 
nearly 


——— Page Three — 


heres of | that hostility is deeply rooted throughout the Arab read in the House of Commons a prepared  state- 
d States| population and is not, as Zionists claim, merely ment which has since given rise to an Anglo-Ameri- 
isphere, | propaganda by the rich effendi class. can controversy. Mr. Attlee said that Britain would 
hington REPORT FAVORS NEITHER ARAB NOR take no action until it could ascertain to what ex- 
ents a5 | JEWISH STATE. Since the Palestine Report favored tent the United States will be prepared to share the 
the Jews to the extent of recommending removal resulting additional military and financial responsi- 
ERNA. | of White Paper restrictions on Jewish immigration bilities.” Moreover, he declared that large numbers 
is tha | nd land purchases, their reaction against the Re- of Jews could not be admitted to Palestine until 
eed for | port was less extreme. However, in advocating that illegal Jewish armed organizations had been dis- 
before Palestine ‘‘be neither a Jewish nor an Arab State,” banded, and that Britain would deal not with indi- 
> of ng. | the Committee of Inquiry struck at the heart of vidual recommendations but with the Report as a 
d States | Zionist political aims. It is not surprising, therefore, whole. ek . 
operate | that Jewish approval of the Report was limited to Mr. Attlee’s views have raised protests not only 
1g Ger. |1 few organizations like the American Council for from the Jews but from two American members of 


d, why, | Judaism, which opposes all efforts to create a Jewish the Committee of Inquiry, Bartley C. Crum and 
we with tate. The American Zionist Emergency Council, Frank W. Buxton, who on May 2 stated publicly 
rapidly spokesman for 600,000 Zionists, was joined by other their strong opposition to postponing the immigra- 


? If the | leading Jewish groups in approving removal of the tion of 100,000 Jews until Jewish organizations in 
© those | White Paper restrictions but attacking the longer- Palestine had been disarmed. President Truman, in 
ont’s re. | ange proposals as an infringement of Jewish rights. his press conference on the same day, declined to 
gress sq | In recommending that 100,000 Jews be trans- comment on the British Prime Minister's suggestions. 
1 Labor | fered to Palestine “as rapidly as conditions will Although many Americans, including Frank 
igly re. | permit,” the six American and six British members Aydelotte of the Committee of Inquiry, express 
France’s | of the Committee unanimously endorsed a sugges- sympathy for the British view that the United States 

tion made by President Truman on August 31, 1945. ought to share responsibility as well as give advice 
wers to The President, in a statement accompanying pub- about Palestine, there is virtually no support on 


ding to | ication of the Report on April 30, expressed him- — Capitol Hill for the idea of American military aid. 
e “cap. elf as very happy at this step, but declared that Senators Ball and LaFollette agree that this coun- 


e being | ‘the report deals with many othet questions of long- try has some responsibility, but suggest that the 
‘ends in | age political policies and questions of interna- United Nations is the proper agency to handle the 
sm and | tional law which require careful study and which problem. United Nations trusteeship for Palestine 
yut who |! will take under advisement.” These remarks have is recommended by the Report, and growing rumors 
ons and | #oused speculation such as that of Senator Arthur indicate that the Arab-Jewish conflict may be 
ire slow | @pper, Republican of Kansas, who on May 4, brought before the Security Council as constituting - 
eration, | iced his pleasure that the President had not com- a threat to the peace of the Middle East. Mean- 
mitted himself to accept the recommendation op- while, the tragedy of hundreds of thousands of 
Ean | PeSing a Jewish state in Palestine. Without attempt- despairing Jewish refugees still awaits solution. The 
. 5...) | lig to read too much into Mr. Truman's comments, Report urges the United States and Britain, in asso- 
io Pare pertinent to recall that a plank in the 1944 ciation with other countries, to make immediate 


Democratic party platform favored establishment of attempts to find new homes for all displaced per- 


i Jewish commonwealth in Palestine. sons, but emphasizes that there is no place other 

Mean- | “ANGLO-AMERICAN DISAGREEMENT. That than Palestine where the great majority of Jews can 
a called | President Truman’s remarks aroused British concern go in the immediate future. 
eported | was indicated on May 1, when Prime Minister Attlee VERNON McKay 
> alone. SERIOUS ECONOMIC AND LABOR PROBLEMS CONFRONT ROXAS 
oted on | The trip to Washington on May 8 of Manuel higher on some essential items. Mr. Roxas has an- 
1e Arab | Roxas, President-Elect of the Philippines, and Paul nounced that he will seek a short-term loan of 
-Ameri- | McNutt, U.S. High Commissioner, emphasizes the $500,000,000, even though the Bell and Tydings 
e days | gency of the economic needs of this strategic out- bills—which provide, respectively, $625,000,000 in 
eagues | post in the Pacific. Little progress has been made in cash or supplies for war damage and an 8-year 
British | storing transportation, rebuilding ruined areas or period of free trade—have been passed by Congress 


dopting | tbtaining a supply of water buffaloes (40 per cent and signed by President Truman. 
ference | 0 which were destroyed during the Japanese occu- ROXAS WINS CONSERVATIVES. The victory 


ther to | pation) for work in the rice fields. Inflation is still of Mr. Roxas over President Sergio Osmefia in the 
is. The | acute problem. Total living costs were recently elections on April 23 was decisive. Both Mr. 
ib reac- | ‘timated by the U.S. Department of Commerce as Roxas and Mr. Osmefia have been outstanding 


rclusion |fearly four times the pre-war level, and are much figures in the Nacionalista (majority) party for 


many years, and there was little to choose between 
their platforms. Mr. Roxas, who is 54 years old, is 
a dynamic speaker, and campaigned vigorously 
against his 68-year-old rival, who made only one 
speech. He also had the support of many followers 
of the late President Quezén. Roxas’ reinstatement 
as Brigadier General in the Philippine Army, with 
the blessing of General MacArthur, seems to have 
answered satisfactorily previous charges that he was 
a collaborationist. He won support from conserva- 
tive business men, including Andres Soriano, former 
Franco consul in Manila, and was opposed by Com- 
munist tenant-farmers in Luzon. Roxas stoutly de- 
nied that he is a “Fascist.” 

Both sides were guilty of disorders in which 
several persons were killed. Mr. Roxas went into 
hiding just before the election, hinting that he ex- 
pected an attempt to kidnap him. But considering 
the abnormal condition of the last five years and 
the widespread distribution of fire arms, the elec- 
tion was quieter than many had prophesied. On 
April 27 Roxas had 958,294 votes to Osmeiia’s 
822,836. His Vice Presidential candidate, Elpidio 
Quirino, was elected by a smaller margin. Roxas 
also appeared to have substantial majorities in the 
Assembly and Senate. He will take office as Com- 
monwealth President on May 28, and as first Presi- 
dent of the Philippine Republic on July 4, when 
the islands achieve independence. President Truman, 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and General Mac- 
Arthur have been invited to attend the latter cere- 
mony. 

Although Filipinos have had nearly fifty years of 
American tutelage and steadily increasing self- 
government, a democracy along United States lines 
is hardly to be expected in the future, whatever the 
constitutional forms of the Republic may prove to 
be. Mr. Quezén, for example, exercised almost dic- 
tatorial power within the limitations of the Com- 
monwealth; Mr. Roxas will be, in practice, even 
less limited under the Republic. 

PROBLEMS FACING REPUBLIC. The immedi- 


Just published— 
FRANCE SINCE LIBERATION 
by Winifred N. Hadsel 
An analysis of France's struggle against internal divi- 


sion and economic impoverishment—whose outcome 
is bound to affect the European continent as a whole. 


25 cents 
April 15 issue of ForriGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. - 
Subscriptions $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


Page Four 


ee, 
 _— 


ate problem of reconstruction should be solve 
sooner or later with the funds which the Unity 
States is providing under the Bell Act. A section of 
this Act, which gives American citizens equal righis 
to property with Filipinos, has been criticized x 
“unilateral,” although it will encourage the inveg. 
ment of much-needed United States capital. The 
Tydings Act, which grants free admission of majoy 
Philippine products to the United States on a quot 
basis for eight years, thereafter imposes a duty of 
5 per cent, increasing annually for twenty years. The 
8-year free trade period is considered by some tog 
short to enable the Philippines to readjust them. 
selves to a rising tariff wall thereafter. 


Law and order have been partially restored, but 
many Moros and Christian Filipinos still bear arms 
Exploitation of tenant farmers by landlords ang 
usurers continues in Nueva Ecija, Pampanga and 
some other provinces. The Hukbalahaps, recruited 
by Communist organizers from these tenants, are 
estimated at 75,000, of whom 12,000 are armed 
Mr. Roxas promised, if elected, to stamp out dis. 
order within thirty days—a promise which need not 
be taken too literally. It is true that the Philippine 
government cannot tolerate armed bands that defy 
its authority, but permanent peace in these provinces 
will not be established until the historic grievances 
of the peasantry have been relieved. Whether Mr. 
Roxas, and a legislature composed chiefly of land. 


lords, lawyers and professional politicians, will | 


achieve anything tangible in this direction remains 
to be seen. It appears improbable, however, that 
disturbances will occur on a widespread scale 
throughout the islands, if only because of the 
stabilizing effect of American naval and military 


bases and their garrisons. WALTER WILGUS 


The Economic Development of the Middle East, by Alfred 
Bonné. New York, Oxford University Press, 1945. $4.00 
A survey of the economic problems and potentialities of 

the Arab lands. Mr. Bonné touches on population growth, 

land ownership and use, financial requirements and ab- 
sorptive capacity of a region which will play an increas 
ingly important part in world political and economic 
development. 


I Accuse de Gaulle, by Henri de Kerillis. New York, Har- 
court, 1946. $2.75 


A former member of the Chamber of Deputies who voted 
against Pétain in 1940 presents the strongest indictment 
of de Gaulle as a political leader that has yet appeared. 
Since the author believes the Free French movement 
should have remained a purely military organization, he 
shares the view held so tenaciously by the State Depart- 
ment during the war. . 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 30, May 10, 


<p> 181 


1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; 


Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Yeat. 
Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


National 
DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, 


1918- 


6, 
forces | 
the luk 
militar 
Paris < 
retreat 
posal | 
of stat 
whose 
the pc 
other 
suranc 
Milita 
with t 
inevitz 
tival 2 
ited o 
the w 
combi 


MIL 
the in 
regior 
ure. 7] 
quire! 
Foren 
gence 
are O 
the L 
make 
impo 
sourc 
bill, 
taker 
grou) 
to W 
subs¢ 


