| OT at a 








|FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


RAL LIBRARY 4 


wNlyY. OF MICH. 











You. XIX, No. 30 


May 17, 1940 





—_ 


Can Spain stay out of the European conflict? Read: 


SPAIN AFTER CIVIL WAR 
by A. Randle Elliott 


25¢ 


May 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


General Library 
Uaiversity of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Wich. 











HITLER AT GRIPS WITH ALLIES IN 


— 


LOW COUNTRIES 





AVING invaded Luxemburg, Holland and 
Belgium on May 10, Germany, after eight 
months of war, is engaged in a struggle to the death 
with France and Britain. The bloody conflict raging 
on the Western front may not, as Hitler declared in 
his order of the day to the German army, decide 
the fate of Germany for the next thousand years, 
but on its outcome hangs the immediate fate both of 
Europe and of the world. 

In his lightning attack on the Low Countries, 
Hitler has gambled Germany’s entire resources of 
man power and raw materials on the chance of win- 
ning the war this year, before the Allied blockade 
has undermined the German economy, and before 
the Allies have completed their military and eco- 
nomic preparations. It had been assumed by the 
Allies that Germany would attack Holland and Bel- 
gium only as a last resort: first, because it involves 
large-scale expenditure not only of lives, but of es- 
sential raw materials, notably oil; second, because it 
breaks the deadlock on the Western front, and en- 
ables the Allies to engage German forces in a 
familiar theatre of war close to their own bases; and 
third, because such an invasion was bound to shock 
public opinion in the United States. The fact that 
Hitler struck at the Low Countries last week, with- 
out waiting to consolidate the bases he had just 
acquired in Norway, would indicate that he feels 
under urgent economic pressure to end the war as 
quickly as possible, regardless of cost. 

GERMANY’S OBJECTIVES. By invading the 
Low Countries, Germany seeks to accomplish two 
ptincipal objectives: to obtain bases opposite the 
English coast, from which air raids and even land- 
ing expeditions could be launched against Britain; 
and to outflank France’s Maginot Line. During the 
last war, Germany occupied virtually all of Belgium, 
and used Belgian seaports as submarine bases. To- 
day it hopes to establish bases not only in Belgium, 


but also in Holland, some of whose ports, notably 
Rotterdam, are less than 200 miles by air from 
London. 

In their surprise invasion — undertaken without 
even an ultimatum, and justified by the familiar 
claim that the Reich was merely “proteging” the 
neutrality of the Low Countries against an allegedly 
impending Allied invasion—the Germans once more 
displayed striking ingenuity, excellent coordination, 
and amazing attention to detail. The use of unortho- 
dox methods like the landing of parachute —_ 
behind the enemy’s lines; attempts to utilize “ 
columns” of German residents and Nazi sympa- 
thizers to guide German troop movements; the use 
of enemy troops or civilians as shields; employment 
of a mysterious new weapon reported to render the 
occupants of fortifications completely helpless; mass 
air raids—these and other methods were intended 
to disrupt the morale of the Low Countries, confuse 
their general staffs and populations, cut their com- 
munications, circumvent their defenses, and break 
their resistance without delay. It was also hoped in 
Berlin that the confusion necessarily resulting from 
Cabinet shifts in France and Britain would facilitate 
Germany's long and minutely prepared invasion; 
while the hostile reaction of the United States was 
discounted in advance, on the assumption that this 
country will not have time to give the Allies effective 
assistance even if public opinion should openly sup- 
port the Franco-British cause. 

ALLIES’ PROSPECTS. This invasion, unlike that 
of Norway, did not catch Belgium and Holland un- 
prepared. The two Low Countries had been deter- 
mined to preserve their neutrality; but they had 
taken many precautions against the danger of a 
German thrust. Like France and Britain, however, 
they were apparently planning for a war conducted 
if not on the lines of 1914-1918, at least on rela- 
tively orthodox lines. They also failed to concert 


























their defense plans, leaving a gap between the two 
armies, and making Allied assistance to them more 
difficult. While Belgium and Holland withstood the 
initial shock of German invasion, both on land and 
from the air, the Germans, by May 14, had broken 
through the first line of Belgian fortifications near 
Liége, crossed the Maas and Yssel rivers in Holland, 
and forced the Dutch to abandon the northeastern 
Netherland provinces. The determined resistance of 
the Dutch and Belgians gave France and Britain 
time to bring men and material into positions ap- 
parently determined in advance by the Allied gen- 
eral staffs. To break the Allied defense of Channel 
ports, the Nazis may have to expose their forces to 
large-scale slaughter. This they are apparently ready 
to do, in the hope of achieving a decisive victory. 
Such a victory is by no means outside the realm of 
possibility, particularly if Mussolini takes this oppor- 
tunity to attack the Allies in the Mediterranean, on 
the Franco-Italian front, and in Spain. Conversely, if 
the Nazis fail to win a quick decision, and are forced 
into a long war of positions, the chances of a Nazi 
victory would be greatly minimized, because Ger- 
many pr@bably does not command sufficient eco- 
nomic resources, especially oil, for a long war; and 
once it has expended its stocks, would find it difficult 
to replenish them. 

ASSETS AND LIABILITIES. With the formation 
of cabinets of national union in France and Britain, 
the Allies may be expected to prosecute the war with 
greater energy. Their chief weakness lies not in 
their morale, which is high; nor in their prepara- 
tions for land warfare, where the French army is 
expected to display its traditional courage and strik- 
ing power; nor in any lack of economic resources. 
The chief weakness of the Allies lies in the fact, 
acknowledged by Winston Churchill on May 8, that 
they have not yet achieved equality with Germany 
either in the number of airplanes now at their dis- 
posal, nor in the rate of airplane production. While 
reliable figures are not available, it is believed that 
Germany has some 20,000 airplanes, as compared 
with 9,000 to 17,000 for the Allies, and that Ger- 
man airplane production is one and a half times the 
combined production of France and Britain. Unlike 
the Nazis, the Allies cannot afford to squander air- 
planes in mass attacks on widely dispersed key enemy 
positions. They may therefore be forced, at least for 
the time being, to concentrate on a few military 
points, giving Germany great freedom in the air. 
True, the question whether air power alone can prove 


CHURCHILL TO SPEED WAR EFFORT 


The resignation of Prime Minister Neville Cham- 
berlain marked not only the end of the first phase 
of the European war, but also a turning point in 
British party politics. In the vote which concluded a 


Page Two 








ey 
———, 


decisive has not yet been answered in the affirmative 
The German campaigns in Poland and Norway give 
no real clue to the vulnerability of Western countries 
which have far better anti-aircraft defenses. But, 
meanwhile, the fact remains that the Nazis enj 
superiority in the air and, whatever the outcome of 
the struggle, are in a position to wreak incalculable 
havoc on the Low Countries and on the Allies. There 
should be no illusion regarding the possibility tha 
Germany, under Hitler, may achieve this year the 
objectives it barely failed to achieve under the Kaiser 
in 1914-1918. Should this happen, the world mus 
be steeled for the shock of discovering that the peace 
Germany would then impose on the Allies may be 
as totalitarian in its destructiveness as the war now 
being waged in the West. 


POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES. The 
various problems already raised for the United States 
by Germany's onslaught on the West reveal the 
fallacy of thinking that this country, merely by 
proclaiming its neutrality, can insulate itself agains 
the effects of war in Europe. The fate of the neutrals 
of yesterday—Denmark, Norway, Holland and Bel. 
gium — demonstrates that neither neutrality nor 
pacifism is a safeguard against Nazi expansion. 
There is room for legitimate difference of opinion 
as to the course this country should pursue under 
the circumstances. But it would be a dangerous self- 
deception to believe that it makes no difference to the 
United States who wins the war in Europe. It does 
make a fundamental difference to this country 
whether the Allies, whatever their past mistakes with 
respect to Germany, remain in control of Europe's 
Atlantic seaboard, or succumb to the rule of the 
Nazis, who are openly bidding for domination not 
only of Europe, but of possessions held by European 
countries on other continents. Here, as in all con 
tingencies of life, there is a choice to be made, a 
decision to be reached. From the Allied point of 
view, the immediate danger is that in the next three 
to six months, which may prove decisive, the United 
States, yielding to panic, may commandeer all avail 
able resources for its own military preparedness pro- 
gram, and thus prevent the Allies from obtaining 
airplanes and other war material in this country. The 
irony of this situation would be that the United 
States, while withholding aid from the Allies, would 
be preparing to meet on its own territory the menace 
France and Britain are now combating in Europe. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


two-day debate on Britain’s retreat from central Nor 
way, the Chamberlain Cabinet on May 8 won by 
only 281 to 200, although it ordinarily had a me 
jority of 223 votes. More than one hundred Com 





= 


gervative 
the Prin 
of the | 
Mr. CI 
May 9 2 
had bee 
break 0! 
MR. 
British | 
many < 
and rep 
Churchi 
British 
Ministe 
ably co: 
of Def: 
ished ¢ 
the un 
bers, © 
mental 
Halifa: 
berlain 
ment / 
Seal; a 
Labor 
The 
govern 
John < 
labora 
offices 
the co 
Mr. ¢ 
three 
chairn 
ter of 
port \ 
bert \ 
gress, 
whict 
overv 
Labo: 
unior 
and 
cruiti 
Sir 
party 
Geos 
was 
as | 
port 
tive, 
Chu 


FORE 
Headc 
Entere 


<S 








um 


ZzeaeewrF Aa en 8 8 Fs OOM oP 


& 


yf- 
by 


1a- 








— 
OVC 


grvatives abstained from voting or openly opposed 
the Prime Minister. After failing to persuade leaders 
of the Labor party to join a coalition government, 
Mr. Chamberlain announced his resignation on 
May 9 and was replaced by Winston Churchill, who 
had been First Lord of the Admiralty since the out- 
break of the war. 


MR. CHURCHILL’S COALITION. The new 
British government, while still incomplete, contains 
many of the outstanding members of Parliament 
and representatives of all three leading parties. Mr. 
Churchill, the most brilliant and versatile figure in 
British public life, became both Prime Minister and 
Minister of Defense (the latter a new title, prob- 
ably corresponding to Minister for the Coordination 
of Defense, an office established in 1936 and abol- 
ished on March 11, 1940), and promptly reduced 
the unwieldy War Cabinet from eight to five mem- 
bers, of whom all but one are to have no depart- 
mental duties. The new War Cabinet includes Lord 
Halifax, who remains Foreign Secretary; Mr. Cham- 
berlain, Lord President of the Council; Major Cle- 
ment Attlee, leader of the Labor party, Lord Privy 
Seal; and Arthur Greenwood, deputy leader of the 
Labor party, Minister without Portfolio. 

The Labor party, which had refused to enter a 
government dominated by Neville Chamberlain, Sir 
John Simon and Sir Samuel Hoare, agreed to col- 
laborate with Mr. Churchill provided that it received 
offices commensurate with its popular strength in 
the country. In addition to placing Major Attlee and 
Mr. Greenwood in the War Cabinet, it secured 
three other important offices—Herbert Morrison, 
chairman of the London County Council, as Minis- 
ter of Supply; Ernest Bevin, president of the Trans- 
port Workers Union, as Minister of Labor; and Al- 
bert V. Alexander, a leader in the Cooperative Con- 
gtess, as First Lord of the Admiralty, the office 
which he held in 1929-31. These appointments, 
overwhelmingly approved on May 13 by the annual 
Labor party conference, were expected to win trade 
union support for the Government's war effort, 
and to expedite industrial production and the re- 
cruitment of labor. 

Sir Archibald Sinclair, leader of the Liberal 
party, became Secretary for Air, and David Lloyd 
George, independent Liberal and World War leader, 
was expected to receive some recognition, possibly 
as Minister of Agriculture. To retain the sup- 
port of the National Government forces (Conserva- 
tive, Liberal National, and National Labor), Mr. 
Churchill not only kept Mr. Chamberlain in the 





Page Three 














War Cabinet, but appointed Sir John Simon, for- 
merly Chancellor of the Exchequer, as Lord Chan- 
cellor (a post combining in some degree the func- 
tions of our Attorney General and Chief Justice, 
and requiring membership in the House of Lords); 
and Sir Kingsley Wood, holder of many offices un- 
der Mr. Chamberlain, as Chancellor of the Ex- 
chequer. Three of Mr. Chamberlain's more popular 
associates remained in the government: Anthony 
Eden, formerly Dominions Secretary, became Secre- 
tary for War; Sir John Anderson remained Minister 
for Home Security; and Sir Andrew Duncan te- 
mained President of the Board of Trade. One of 
Mr. Chamberlain’s chief critics, Alfred Duff Cooper, 
who recently lectured in the United States, was ap- 
pointed Minister of Information. The right-wing 
Conservatives were recognized by the appointment 
of Lord Lloyd as Secretary for Colonies, and Leonard 
Amery as Secretary for India. 


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE CABINET CHANGE. 
The resignation of Mr. Chamberlain, who seemed 
unable or unwilling to introduce new and younger 
talent into his administration, ends a nine-year 
period dominated by the Conservative members of 
the National Guvernment. Since its accession in the 
autumn of 1931, under Ramsay MacDonald and 
Stanley Baldwin, the National Government has 
seemed for the most part to lack imagination, de- 
cision, and drive in both domestic and foreign pol- 
icy. Yet in temporizing and dodging issues—as in 
the Ethiopian dispute, the Spanish war and the 
Czech crisis—it expressed the confusion and inde- 
cision of the British people regarding international 
affairs, and the inherent inefficiency of a democracy 
in comparison to dictatorship. After the outbreak 
of war, a political crisis—like that of December 
1916, when Lloyd George replaced Herbert As- 
quith—became inevitable, for the elder statesmen 
surrounding Mr. Chamberlain seemed unable to ap- 
preciate the strength and speed of the Nazi war 
machine. The new Churchill ministry, given a 381-0 
vote of confidence on May 13, promises to inject 
new life into Britain’s diplomatic, military and eco- 
nomic efforts. It presumably will continue the party 
truce over by-elections and, in accordance with 
World War practice, postpone the general election 
due next November. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





Handbook of the War, by J. C. deWilde, D. H. Popper and 
Eunice Clark. Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1989. $2.00 


Succinctly written guide, most valuable toward under- 
standing the facts underlying the European conflict. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 30, May 17, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotrHy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dagan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


ois 


Produced under union conditions and composed, printed and bound by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Washington News Letter 





sebbes, 








WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


May 13.—No one in Washington can have any 
doubt that Germany's invasion of Holland and Bel- 
gium has sharply accelerated the trend away from 
neutrality toward limited intervention in Europe and 
the Far East. Whatever the ultimate outcome of 
the great battle for supremacy now joined in the 
Low Countries, the immediate effect in Washington 
has been to stiffen the Administration policy of aid- 
ing the Allies by all measures short of actual war. 

For the present, the Administration has not ven- 
tured beyond the limits of this fixed policy, the 
moral objectives of which were defined by President 
Roosevelt in his address to the Eighth American 
Scientific Congress on May 10, and by Secretary 
Hull in his speech to the American Society of In- 
ternational Law on May 13. And for the immedi- 
ate future, the policy will be confined to economic, 
financial and diplomatic measures, within the frame- 
work of technical neutrality. But within these limits, 
both the Executive and Congress are being forced by 
events to reach important new decisions. 

THREE IMMEDIATE ISSUES. Three critical 
issues are already claiming immediate attention. 
These are: (1) the problem of aircraft production 
in the United States, involving the question whether 
this country is able to supply airplanes to the Allies 
in sufficient numbers to restore the balance of air 
power within the next six or eight months; (2) the 
status of the Netherlands East Indies, involving the 
disposition of the United States fleet, now holding 
maneuvers in the area southwest of Hawaii; and 
(3) the related problem of the Netherlands West 
Indies, involving the Monroe Doctrine and the Dec- 
laration of Lima. 

The speeding-up of airplane exports to the Allies 
is one of the few decisive steps which the Admin- 
istration can take at this time without legislative 
action. Any attempt to repeal the Johnson Act would 
encounter immediate opposition in Congress, and any 
move to open the way to credits would be blocked 
at this session. The release of planes now on order 
for the Army and Navy, however, is possible under 
new regulations which went into effect on March 25. 
This policy permits release of military airplanes for 
export at the discretion of the War and Navy De- 
partments upon recommendation of the Joint Aero- 
nautical Board. 

How many planes can be delivered in the next 
few months is problematical. The present rate of 





American production is far lower than is generally 
realized. Up to last March the maximum output of 
the aircraft industry was 351 planes a month, ip. 
cluding all commercial as well as military types. 
During the first six months of the war, actual de. 
liveries to the Allies totaled 770 planes, while de. 
liveries to the United States Army and Navy num. 
bered only 447. With more than 3,000 planes now 
on order for Britain and France, and 4,700 on order 
for the Army and Navy, production is expected to 
increase rapidly, but even under the most favorable 
conditions large-scale deliveries can scarcely be ex. 
pected for several months, unless all new American 
orders are transferred to the Allies. It is reported 
that this step, permissible under the release polig 
approved on March 25, is now under consideration, 

EAST AND WEST INDIES. The decision t 
keep the United States fleet at Hawaii, first an. 
nounced a few days before the invasion of Holland 
and Belgium, was reaffirmed last week. On the 
morning of May 11 small contingents of Allied 
troops were landed on the islands of Curacao and 
Aruba “to prevent possible German attempts at sabo- 
tage in the important oil refineries’ on these Dutch 
possessions off the coast of Venezuela. State Depart 
ment officials, who had been informed of the Allied 
move, took the position that the occupation did not 
constitute an infringement of the Monroe Doctrine, 
as no change in sovereignty was involved. They 
pointed out that the troops had been sent with the 
consent of the Netherlands authorities and that the 
occupation would be of a temporary nature. 

At almost the same time, however, the Depart- 
ment received intimations from Tokyo that similar 
action in the Netherlands East Indies might produce 
repercussions in Japan. Hachiro Arita, Japanese For- 
eign Minister, took the occasion to renew his state: 
ment of April 15 expressing concern over the main- 
tenance of the status quo in the East Indies, and 
Ambassador Grew promptly communicated with 
Washington. At his press conference on the same 
day Secretary Hull reiterated the desire of the 
United States that the position of the East Indies 
should not be altered, and within 24 hours assut- 
ances were forthcoming from Britain that it had no 
intention whatever of “intervening.” Tension was 
further reduced by statements from Dutch authott- 
ties that Allied military support similar to that ex 
tended in the West Indies was “not required or it 
tended” in the East Indies. 

W. T. STONE 





| FO! 


An int 


—_- 
—_ 


oL. x 


Whe 


<= 


dictot 
the C 
zero | 
defea 
war; 
every 
too | 
such 
eign 

nigh 
to ra 
victo 
rope 
tend 
cles 

dese 
shift 


this 
majo 
Pres: 
natic 
pare 
total 
for 
only 
were 
ity, 

and 
izat 
whi 
Eur 
of ( 
fou 
Way 
of t 
istic 
dar 


par 








