a 
Al 


. there 
omati¢ 
access 
ed out, 
O lease 
et ata 
serman 
to fall 
retween 
-atened, 
Support 
rain on 
rt trade 


in acute 
Johnson 
he New 
iction of 
rich may 
e, Great 
meet its 
r at least 
t year of 
Ja in the 
5 county 
Was met 
F British: 

Despite 
value of 
imated at 
940, with 
e gotiable 
he Unite 
lollar bal 
d amount 


> of trad 
vancial fe 
purchasé 
bled with 
heavy iff 


sf invisible 
orders am 
t facilities 
tish Tres 


ent, if i 


rime Mit 
our final 
factor 0 


'. STONE 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
“8 


7 | 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


NOVEMBER 22, 1940 


AXIS PLANS MEDITERRANEAN CAMPAIGNS 


ee OLINTS speech of defiance to Britain and 
4Y4 Greece on November 18, warning Italians that 
they must prepare for more severe sacrifices to 
annihilate the enemy, gave evidence that the tempo 
of the European struggle is being accelerated. This 
trend was apparent in the sphere of diplomacy, as 
the Axis powers engaged in a series of negotiations 
with their allies and neighbors which may prove mo- 
mentous. It was even more marked on the battle 
fronts, where both sides struck from the air with 
telling effect and indicated that they were planning 
still more important strategic moves for the future. 


EUROPE’S DIPLOMATIC ENIGMA. Lacking 
official information, observers resorted to conjecture 
in appraising the significance of recent diplomatic 
consultations. Only a noncommittal communiqué 
was issued at Berlin on November 14, when Soviet 
Premier and Foreign Minister Molotov entrained for 
Moscow after two days of conferences with Nazi 
leaders. Whether the upshot of the meeting was 
an allocation of spheres of influence, or merely 
closer economic ties between the two countries, it is 
still impossible to state. The only concrete signs of 
better relations thus far have been the implied recog- 
nition of Germany’s protectorate over Slovakia, as- 
sumed nearly two years ago, through publication 
of the German-Slovak treaty in the Russian press: 
the establishment of German consulates at the key 
cities of Leningrad, Vladivostok and Batum; and 
the reported withdrawal of German troops from 
northern Finland, where they were halted in their 
journey to Norway under a German-Finnish pact. 

The impression that the Hitler-Molotov conversa- 
tions were held to clear the way for a new Axis 
move was strengthened by subsequent pilgrimages 
of other European dignitaries to the Reich. On No- 
vember 15 Marshal Pietro Badoglio, Chief of Staff of 
the Italian Army, conferred at Innsbruck with General 
Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel, supreme commander 


of the German armed forces, on “joint prosecution 
of the war.” Two days later King Boris of Bulgaria 
visited Berlin, and on November 18, the German, 
Italian and Spanish Foreign Ministers conferred with 
Hitler at Berchtesgaden. These consultations may 
well presage simultaneous moves against Britain at 
both ends of the Mediterranean, which would com- 
pel the British to fight defensively on distant and 
scattered fronts difficult to supply. The Spanish an- 
nexation of the international zone at Tangier, oppo- 
site Gibraltar, on November 4, may have been a 
preliminary to future operations in this sector. Ru- 
mors that German troops had been stationed in Bul- 
garia foreshadowed action in the Near East. It is 
not impossible that formal acknowledgment of the 
“new order’’ by all the Axis satellites on the Euro- 
pean continent—perhaps accompanied by another 
peace offensive—will precede general military move- 
ments. 


Meanwhile, however, a potential obstacle to a 
Western Mediterranean campaign has arisen in the 
form of friction between the Vichy government and 
the Nazis. This was widely publicized by a com- 
muniqué issued at Vichy on November 14 protest- 
ing the mass expulsion of French-speaking inhabi- 
tants of Lorraine. Faced with a choice between de- 
portation to Poland or unoccupied France, train- 
loads of these unfortunates have been streaming into 
Lyon. The open disagreement on this matter under- 
scored the failure of Vice-Premier Laval to negotiate 
successfully with the Nazis for amelioration of the 
French position. At the same time, there was in- 
creasing evidence that the French were resisting 
Axis attempts to secure strategic footholds in the 
French colonial empire. Dispatches from Berne in- 
dicate that General Weygand may be preparing to 
safeguard the French grip on North Africa at any 
cost—perhaps against the openly expressed designs 
of the Italians as well as against General de Gaulle. 


THE WAR FRONT. For the time being, Italy 
was in no position for additional military operations. 
Three weeks after the beginning of the Greek offen- 
sive, the Fascist forces had lost most of their early 
gains and had retreated into Albania, while Greek 
troops were threatening the important Italian base 
of Koritza, 10 miles inside the Albanian frontier. 
It seemed likely that the Italians would temporarily 
assume the defensive in this area, until their forces 
could be augmented and reorganized by General 
Ubaldo Soddu, the Fascist Undersecretary for War, 
who has recently arrived in the battle zone. Such a 
task would necessarily precede resumption of the 
campaign, which will probably be accompanied in 
future by much more active aerial support and will 
be planned as a slow advance through difficult ter- 
rain rather than a lightning conquest. 

British sea and air power struck heavily for Greece 
as well as Britain on November 12, when—accord- 
ing to British reports—bombers and torpedo planes 
from two British aircraft carriers raided the Italian 
fleet at Taranto and badly damaged three capital 
ships and other vessels. The Italians insist that only 
one warship was seriously hit. If the British claim 
is correct, the balance of naval power has been 
heavily shifted in favor of Britain in the Mediter- 
ranean. Under these circumstances, the British base 
hastily established at Crete may serve as a point of 
departure for destructive raids against Italian sea 
communications, and Britain may find it possible to 
shift some vessels from the Eastern Mediterranean 
to Gibraltar or the Far East. In any case, the demon- 
stration of the effectiveness of air power, brilliantly 
employed, against even well-protected capital ships 
is fraught with significance for the future of fleets 


A NEW CRISIS 


Growing Japanese military and naval concentra- 
tions off China’s southern coasts during recent weeks 
have again created serious concern over the outlook 
in southeast Asia. Unsettled issues between Thailand 
(Siam) and Indo-China, and the uncertain attitudes 
of these countries toward Japan's aims, add further 
complications to the situation in this critical theatre 
of Far Eastern developments. 


JAPAN’S RECENT MOVES. In mid-November 
Japanese troops and transports were being concen- 
trated at Haiphong, main seaport of Indo-China; 
Kwangchou, site of a French leasehold on China’s 
southern coast; and Hainan Island. This movement 
had begun at the end of October, when Japanese 
military forces withdrew from Nanning, capital of 
the southern province of Kwangsi. Further with- 
 drawals have since occurred throughout the Yangtze 
Valley, with Japanese troops reported moving south- 
ward from Nanking, Hankow and other cities in 


Page Two 


——— 
ee 


in the narrow waters around the European continent, 
On the British front, a ‘series of developments 
brought home the rigor of the conflict with unaccus. 
tomed severity. On November 5 a German sea raider 
had attacked a convoy of 38 British vessels in the 
Atlantic, and German sources had claimed that all _ 
were sunk. British information subsequently dis. 
closed that the heroic stand of the auxiliary cruiser | 
Jervis Bay had permitted all but four of the ships to | 
scatter and reach safety, but the incident served as q [ 
striking warning of the peril to British shipping | 
from Nazi vessels based on French and Norwegian 
ports. 
Even more serious was the mass air raid of the | 
German air force on Coventry during the night of | 
November 14-15, which devastated the city of 250, | 
000 and cost about 1,000 casualties. This attack was | 
followed by unusually heavy raids against London, 
and by retaliatory action against Hamburg by the 
R.A.F. With air warfare reaching its full destructive 
power, it was an open question how long the com. } 
pact industrial areas of Britain could survive intense 
bombing without serious reduction of output. The 
British, however, appear determined to continue te. | 
sistance, no matter what the difficulties, until they | 
can take the field in a final offensive against the 
Reich. To prepare for this eventuality, an ‘Army | 
Cooperation Command” is to be formed December | | 
by the R.A.F. to prepare for attack and dive-bomb | 
ing operations in close conjunction with operations | 
by ground troops. Thus the British are paying their 
opponents the compliment of imitation and, it may 
be assumed, will employ the new command for pur | 


poses similar to those of the comparable German | 
squadrons. Davip H. Popper | 


IN INDO-CHINA? 


central China. The size of this concentration indi | 
cates that an important move may be in prepara | 
tion—directed possibly against Saigon, the larges| 
city on Indo-China’s southeastern coast. In this area 
lies the naval base at Cam Ranh Bay, which would 
be of great strategic value for an advance agains 
the Dutch East Indies or British Malaya. The excel | 
lent motor highway from Saigon to Bangkok, more 
over, offers the most direct route into Thailand 


| 


CHANGE IN FPA RADIO TIME 


Beginning Sunday, November 24, the FPA's radio pro- | 
gram will be broadcast 15 minutes earlier—from 2:15 to 2:30 
E.S.T. On that date Mrs. Vera Micheles Dean will discuss: 


RUSSIA’S ROLE IN THE WORLD CONFLICT 


We are eager to have your comments and those of your 
friends. If you have not been able to hear the broadcasts, 
please urge your local station to carry the FPA radio program. 


anese 
Brita: 
milite 
nied 

land’ 


sanct 
dispa 
provi 
for 1 
the 
conf 
in th 
the t 
Su 
possi 
on } 
how 
nied 
agre 
of ir 
satio 
Chu 
not 
extet 
US: 
speci 
matt 
for | 
in vw 
A 
the 


a. 


FORE] 
Headq 
Entere 


S 


—— 


itinent, 
pments 
naccus- 
1 raider 

in the 
that all 
tly dis. 
Cruiser 
ships to 
ed asa 
hipping 
‘wegian 


of the 
ight of 
of 250, 
ack was 
London, 

by the | 
structive | 
he com- } 
- intense 
ut. The | 
inue fe 
itil they 
inst the 

“Army 
ember 1 
e-bomb- 
erations | 
ng theit 
, it may 
for pur 
Germaa | 
OPPER 


ion ind: 
prepare: 
e largest 
this area 
‘h would | 
> agains 
he excel 
yk, more 
Thailand 


[E 


dio pro- 
to 2:30 
discuss: 


te 
of your 


oadcasts, 
program, 


iain, an««! 


—_—_—— 
————— 


from the Indo-China coast. Possession of Saigon 
would thus enable Japan to strengthen its ties with 
Thailand or exert pressure on the Thai authorities. 

Thailand's strategic position intimately affects the 
security of both Malaya and Burma, and the king- 
dom has increasingly become a focal point in the 
military and diplomatic maneuvers concerning south- 
east Asia. Thus far it has carefully refrained from 
committing itself, in its foreign policy, either to 
apan or the Western powers. Its continued pressure 
on the Indo-China authorities for a territorial read- 
justment, however, has led to troop concentrations on 
both sides of the border, alleged air incursions, and 
a possible outbreak of full-dress hostilities. Thai- 
land’s demands on Indo-China seem to align it with 
Tokyo, and may presage a simultaneous attack on 
the French colony if Japan moves on Saigon. Jap- 
anese press reports of November 18, claiming that 
Britain and the United States were about to sign a 
military agreement with Thailand, have been de- 
nied by officials at Washington and Bangkok. Thai- 
land’s real attitude thus still remains uncertain. 

The possibility of an important Japanese move in 
the near future was further indicated by an Imperial 
Conference which met on November 12 in Tokyo. 
The last such conference, held on September 19, 
sanctioned Japan’s pact with the Axis powers. Tokyo 
dispatches suggest that the latest conference ap- 
proved a treaty which has been under negotiation 
for many months with Wang Ching-wei, head of 
the Japanese-sponsored régime at Nanking. The 
conference may also have approved plans for action 
in the South China Sea, or it may have considered 
the terms of a Soviet-Japanese pact. 

Such an agreement was widely believed to be a 
possible outcome of the Molotov-Hitler conferences 
on November 12-13 at Berlin. On November 15, 
however, the official Soviet news agency, Tass, de- 
nied published reports that Japan had reached an 
agreement with the Soviet Union outlining spheres 
of influence in the Far East and providing for ces- 
sation of Soviet aid to the Chinese government at 
Chungking. This denial, it should be noted, does 
not altogether exclude the possibility of some less 
extensive arrangement between Japan and the 
US.S.R. A pact may yet be signed which covers 
specifically Soviet-Japanese issues, such as trade 
matters or the fisheries question, or which provides 
for Soviet neutrality in case Japan becomes involved 
in war in southeast Asia. 

ANGLO-AMERICAN POLICY. Preparations by 
the Western powers to meet a possible Japanese 


Page Three 


thrust into southeast Asia are evident on a number 
of fronts. On November 14 it was announced in 
London that “further reinforcements” had reached 
the Far East, although the numbers and character of 
these reinforcements were not specified. At the same 
time a new post—Commander-in-Chief in the Far 
East—was created, and Air Chief Marshal Sir Rob- 
ert Brooke-Popham assigned to this command, which 
covers Malaya, Burma and Hongkong with head- 
quarters at Singapore. During the past few weeks 
additional American air squadrons have been sent 
to the Philippines and Hawaii, while the fleet is 
being overhauled in successive contingents on the 
Pacific Coast. The third and last contingent reached 
San Pedro on November 14, and will probably re- 
turn to Hawaiian waters before the end of the 
month. Results of the Anglo-American-Australian 
conversations on defense matters in the Pacific may 
be revealed when Lord Lothian, the British Am- 
bassador, returns to Washington. Pan American Air- 
ways has requested permission of the Civil Aeronau- 
tics Board to fly its trans-Pacific clippers into Singa- 
pore, and a regular fortnightly schedule between 
Manila and Singapore will probably be inaugurated. 

Efforts at conciliation have also continued to mark 
British and American policy toward Japan. On No- 
vember 10 Joseph C. Grew, American Ambassador 
at Tokyo, held a lengthy conference with the Jap- 
anese Foreign Minister, Yosuke Matsuoka. This 
conference was said to have occurred in an “ex- 
tremely friendly atmosphere,” and the possibility of 
a new effort to improve Japanese-American rela- 
tions was seen as its result. On November 13, more- 
over, the details of an agreement affecting the oil 
supplies of the Netherlands Indies, which are con- 
trolled by British, Dutch and American interests, 
was announced at Batavia. Under the terms of the 
agreement, Japan’s supplies of petroleum and gaso- 
line obtained from the East Indies would rise from 
494,000 tons a year to 1,800,000 tons. Anglo-Ameri- 
can approval of the arrangement was seen in the 
provision that United States and British companies 
would act as agents in supplying the oil to the Jap- 
anese interests. 

It remains to be seen whether these conciliatory 
measures will induce Tokyo to stay its hand in 
southeast Asia. The immediate course of events 
depends largely on the use to which Japan puts the 
forces now concentrated off China’s southern coasts. 
If the decision is for another forward move, a se- 
vere crisis seems almost certain to result. 


T. A. Bisson 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 5, NOvEMBER 22, 1940. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera Micuergs Dran, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


> is1 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


etter, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 19.—As the United States continues its 
preparations to fortify the sites for the eight new 
naval and air bases acquired from Britain in Sep- 
tember, it becomes increasingly clear that Washing- 
ton is making headway in its larger program for use 
of other bases in Latin America and the Pacific. 
State Department spokesmen have repeatedly denied 
that any additional agreements have been concluded, 
but have consistently affirmed that negotiations for 
joint use of Latin American bases are in progress. 


WORK ADVANCES ON NEW ATLANTIC 
BASES. The Navy Department announced on No- 
vember 18 that the United States and Great Britain 
have agreed on the exact sites for American land- 
plane, seaplane and naval bases in seven of the eight 
British colonies where this country acquired rights 
under the September 3 transaction. Newfoundland 
will contain an air base and Army training ground, 
as well as a naval station of about 22 acres on the 
south side of St. John’s Harbor. Bermuda will pro- 
vide land-plane and seaplane bases, a naval station, 
and storage space for explosives. These two outposts, 
which will protect the vital industrial area along the 
eastern seaboard of the United States, are now be- 
ing surveyed in detail by groups of American Army 
and civilian engineers. 


In Jamaica, only 594 miles from the Panama 
Canal, military airfields and naval dockyards are to 
be used jointly by Great Britain and the United 
States. One of the first of the new Caribbean sea- 
plane bases to be developed will be at Gros Islet 
Bay in St. Lucia; this site is only 25 miles south of 
the French island of Martinique, the status of which 
has caused concern for the United States government 
ever since France’s surrender to Nazi Germany in 
June. Other land-plane and seaplane bases, primar- 
ily for patrol squadrons, will be established at 
Antigua—midway between St. Lucia and the exist- 
ing United States base at San Juan-Culebra-St. 
Thomas—and at British Guiana, on the northeast- 
ern coast of South America. In the Bahamas, United 
States patrol vessels will have use of the waters of 
Abraham Bay at Mayaguana Island, north of the 
important Windward Passage between the Atlantic 
and the Caribbean. Additional facilities at St. Lucia, 
and valuable strategic sites at Trinidad, are still be- 
ing considered by the British and American govern- 
ments. 


INTER-AMERICAN DEFENSE TALKS. As fog 
bases in Latin America, Secretary Hull on October 
14 stated that no change of sovereignty over any 
Latin American territory was contemplated, although 
joint defense talks with most of the Latin Ameri- 
can governments were being conducted within the 
framework of agreements signed at the Panama 
and Havana Conferences. Under-Secretary Sumner 
Welles repeated these points on November 13, when 
he denied that the United States had ever sought 
“directly or indirectly to obtain the lease or cession 
of air and naval bases in Uruguay.”’ He indicated, 
however, that this country might accept invitations 
to share in the use of such bases in South America, 
The diplomatic formula according to which Wash. 
ington is negotiating with Latin American govern- 


republic is to construct on its own territory what- 
ever bases are needed for continental defense, while 
the United States stands ready to provide all pos- 


of this nature is desired. This formula apparently 
is acceptable to most of the Latin American gov- 
ernments concerned, although a majority of them 
would doubtless follow the lead of Chile, Argentina 
and Uruguay in refusing to countenance the idea 
of United States bases on their territory. Despite 
a State Department denial that it was negotiating 
with the Mexican government for a pact similar to 
the United States-Canadian agreement which in Av- 
gust created a Joint Permanent Defense Board, per- 
sistent reports in Washington anticipate the conclu 
sion of a special defense arrangement between this 
country and Mexico. 


NEW BASES IN THE PACIFIC? On several oc 
casions, government leaders in Washington have in- 
dicated a desire for additional air and naval outposts 
to reinforce hemisphere defense in the Pacific, and 
some of the new Latin American bases presumably 
will be constructed on the western coasts of Central 
and South America. Despite possible agreement with 
Great Britain covering bases in the Far East, final 
decisions regarding their use by this country will 
have to await a clearer formulation of American 
Far Eastern policy. That naval cooperation might be 
extended to the Netherlands Indies was indicated on 
November 14 in the announcement from Batavia 
that the Dutch naval base at Surabaya would be em 
larged to accommodate capital ships. The largest 
Netherland warships, it should be noted, are cruisers 


of only 8,350 tons. A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 


 — 
VOL. 
—_- 


H 
tt 


vers | 


we at ay pest 
ments seems to be that each participating American | 


tion 
expel 
Alba: 


| tured 
sible technical and financial assistance whenever aid | 


whicl 
towa. 
Pogr: 
migh 
attacl 
colun 


the Ii 


| and | 


point 
mour 
trary 
hand 
unab 
mour 
simp) 
the C 
Pr 
new 
may 
stand 
while 
tachn 
main 
it cas 
haras 
Italy’ 
Aege 
these 
from 
AD 
Greel 


