




plant 
17,0¢ 
ober 


red f¢ 


sioner, 
rate of | 


French 
utation 
rted to 
Laval’s 
oming 
sue, as 
ssal of 
fechin, 
rt plot- 
iment, 


ncomi- 
1 Over 
arlan, 
forces, 
it was 
1 mes- 
) resist 
ullists 
ig gest 
deliv- 
ortly. 
ferent 
© situ- 
e that 
pared 
nours 
ent to 
West 
=ssure 
os in 

bunds 

Vichy 

étain 

peech 


> for 


Vichy 
ordi- 
ould 
xiled 
ite gic 
TT 


S 








= 


q 


paRignicAlL Kve™ 
ade SRRAL Libr 7 
ea. or mt 


General Library 


7 NOV6 19h 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Yo. XXII, No. 3 


NovEMBER 6, 1942 





NEW ISOLATIONISM HAMPERS GLOBAL WAR EFFORT 


wn losses this country has suffered in the Battle 
of the Solomons should not be underestimated 
in the effect they may have on the course of the war; 
but neither should they be allowed to throw the 
picture of -global war out of focus. It is natural that 
the American people, who after months of waiting 
on the defensive had welcomed the prospect of an 
offensive against Japan based in the Solomons, should 
be not only disappointed but even dismayed by our 
naval losses. Yet the events of the past week may 
have the beneficial result of making us more tolerant 
toward the British; and force us to realize, as we 
have not yet sufficiently done, the grimness of the 
task that confronts us before victory can be achieved. 

To argue, however—as some have done in these 
dificult days—that our men could have been spared 
the ordeal they are undergoing at Guadalcanal if 
planes and other equipment we have sent to Britain, 
Russia and China had, instead, been placed at their 
disposal, is to revive the concepts of isolationism in 
inew form. This argument assumes that the United 
States is fighting this war alone against the Axis 
powers—primarily Japan—and has no responsibili- 
ties or obligations except to itself, when the fact is 
that, had it not been for resistance by Britain, Russia 
and China, this country would not even have had a 
chance to train men and turn out war material in 
telative security, as it is doing today. True, the re- 
sistance of Britain, Russia and China was inspired, 
in large part, by motives of self-defense—just like 
our resistance after Pearl Harbor. But this only goes 
to prove that defense by each of the United Nations 
has contributed, and is contributing, to the defense 
of all. 

DANGER OF DEADLOCK. The significance of 
the present phase of the war, and hence its intensely 
critical character, is twofold; first, there is a rising 
demand, well expressed by Mr. Willkie in his 
broadcast of October 26, for transition from self- 








defense to all-out offense — and not tomorrow, ofr 
the next day, but right now; and, second, there is 
a danger that if the United Nations do not take 
the offensive, a deadlock may develop both in 
Europe and Asia, with Germany and Japan re- 
maining in command of the strategic positions and 
resources of the respective continents. Such a dead- 
lock could not be broken, in Europe, by Russia alone, 
for while Russia continues to display extraordinary 
defensive powers, it is not in a position now—nor 
is it likely to be in the spring—to launch a counter- 
offensive. Nor does our attempt to defeat Japan by a 
process of “island-hopping’” seem to offer much 
prospect of success at the present time. Direct attacks 
on the German “fortress” of conquered Europe and 
on the island-fortress of Japan appear increasingly 
necessary. The question that laymen cannot answer 
with any degree of assurance is: To what extent are 
such direct attacks feasible in the present state of 
preparedness of Britain and the United States? 

Military defeats inevitably bring criticism of mili- 
tary and political leaders, providing a natural safety 
valve for popular emotions, and, as Mr. Willkie 
said in his broadcast, public discussion of war issues 
—which are issues of life and death for all of us— 
is not only permissible but highly desirable. Such dis- 
cussion, however, should not prevent us from remem- 
bering that this country’s present leaders long ago 
pointed out the dangers of the international situa- 
tion, the inadequacies of our military preparations, 
and the urgent need of perfecting our defenses— 
all this at a time when millions of Americans of both 
political parties found it difficult to believe that the 
situation was as critical as it was described and per- 
sisted in the conviction that this country could ride 
out the storm alone and unaided. Recrimination to- 
day by either party is sheer waste of energy, which 
could be much more usefully applied to the prose- 
cution of the war. 














saiaieaiiatiadads 
— 





NEED FOR CONSTRUCTIVE CRITICISM. 
What would be disastrous for the United States, and 
the other United Nations, would be to allow per- 
sonal or national ambitions and conflicts to divert 
our attention from the task of winning the war in 
the shortest possible time. Friction is bound to arise 
among any group of human beings working for a 
common end. It exists among the Nazis just as much 
as among the United Nations, and becomes all the 
more dangerous in totalitarian countries for being 
forced to seethe undercover instead of exploding into 
public criticism, as it does in the democratic coun- 
tries. But sacrifice of common ends—especially when 
this is a question of national survival—to private 
ambitions or quarrels is tantamount to criminal ir- 
responsibility. Such irresponsibility, wherever it 
appears, is peculiarly dangerous at this moment, 


U.S. WINS FIRST ROUND IN SOLOMONS—AT HEAVY COST 


The Navy report of November 1 on the great 
fleet air battle of October 26 between Japanese and 
American forces east of the southern Solomons con- 
tains welcome news: two enemy battleships, two 
aircraft carriers, and three cruisers were hit, while 
100 planes, and probably 50 more, were destroyed. 
Since some of these vessels were struck time after 
time, it is quite possible that sinkings occurred later, 
when the battle was over. At any rate, the Japanese 
fleet soon withdrew, and the counteroffensive in the 
Solomons, which had seemed a bid for a speedy de- 
cision, reached the end of its first round. Not only 
do American troops retain all the ground they have 
held on Guadalcanal with its precious airfield, but 
on October 30 our surface ships bombarded enemy 
positions there for over two hours. Optimism con- 
cerning the final outcome is still not warranted (for 
example, the damage, as contrasted with sinkings, 
suffered by our vessels on October 26 has not yet 
been announced), but the enemy withdrawal of ships 
suggests a consideration too often overlooked—that 
the Japanese are having troubles of their own and do 
not find the path of reconquest an easy one. 


JAPAN'S NAVAL LOSSES. In recent weeks the 
Japanese fleet has suffered the loss of two destroyers 





Is London more anxious than Washington to begin 
the work necessary to carry into effect the common 
principles of post-war reconstruction? READ— 


As Britain Sees the Post-War World 


by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


October 15 issue of ForREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P_A. members, $3. 











Page Two 








when Germany—although not Japan—may be nearg 
the point of fatigue than could have been anticipate 


earlier this year; and when nothing would be y 
helpful to Hitler as widening of the rifts both withiy 
and between the United Nations. Only constag 
vigilance on our part against any attempt to soy 
dissension among us can guard us against defey 
from within, such as France suffered before it eve 
came to grips with Germany. But such vigilang 
should not exclude—on the contrary, it should jp. 
clude—honest and straightforward public discussion, 
of problems that threaten the unity of the Unite 
Nations, such as India, provided these discussion, 
take as their common ground the common desire ty 
win the war, and the peace after the war. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





and one heavy cruiser, while hits have been scored 

on other vessels of these categories, as well as air 

craft carriers and battleships. An important part of) 
this destruction has resulted from very effective! 
bombing of the main Japanese bases in the south 

west Pacific by aircraft under the command of Gen-) 
eral MacArthur. On the night of October 28, for| 
example, two and perhaps more enemy vessels, in-) 
cluding a warship, were hit in an attack on Rabaul} 
in New Britain, northwest of the Solomons. Two 
nights later three raids on Buin in the northem 
Solomons produced two hits on a heavy cruiser ot 
battleship, probable extensive damage to a light 
cruiser and aircraft carrier, the firing of an unieaa 
fied vessel, and two possible hits on a destroyer. 

Before dawn on November 1, in another attack on| 
Buin, a heavy cruiser was blown up and a light | 
cruiser severely damaged, while a merchant vessel 

received a direct hit. That night our planes struck , 
once more in an exceptionally heavy drive. 


These were among the fruits of an air campaign 
that began early in October, presumably as part of } 
a new offensive strategy adopted in conjunction with 
the appointment of Vice Admiral William F. Halsey, | 


Jr., as commander of the Solomons operations. Dur- | 


ing the entire month Buin was raided thirteen times, - 
Rabaul eleven times, and Buka in the northern Solo- 
mons nine times. Twenty-nine enemy ships were sunk 
or damaged and sixteen more possibly damaged, 
while thirteen aircraft were destroyed and seven 


others hit. The total announced United Nations’ loss | 


was five planes. 


OUR SETBACKS AT SEA. There is no doubt, 
however, that the United States Navy has suffered 
serious losses, especially in the sinking of two aif- 
craft carriers—the Wasp on September 15 in the 
Solomons and a second, the name of which has not 





Awd Frio “dd 


~ ie -  *§ FRO 





Nearer 


ipatel 
be 


Within 
nstant 
D SOW 
defea 
t eve 
rilanc 
Id in. 
ISSIONS 
Jnited 
SIONS | 
Ife th 


scored 
1S aif. 
art of 
ective 
south 


Gen} 


8, for 
ls, in- 
abaul 
Two 
rthern 
ser Of 
light 
denti- 
royer. 


ck on | 





light 
vessel 


struck | 


paign | 


art of 


. with | 


alsey, 
Dut- 


times, | 


Solo- 


> sunk | 


aged, 
seven 
s’ loss 


loubt, 
ffered 
O aif- 
n the 
as not 














—_ 
—-_—_—_ 





yet been announced, on October 26 in the vicinity of 
the Santa Cruz Islands, to the southeast. Since the 
Lexington was lost in the Battle of the Coral Sea 
last May and the Yorktown in the Battle of Midway 
early in June, this—as far as information is available 
—leaves the Navy with only three regular carriers. 
On the other hand, additional carriers are being con- 
structed, or converted from tankers and merchant 
ships. Japan, which has lost most heavily in this 
category, is thought to have two or three regular 
carriers and three to six converted ones (i.e., a total 
of from five to nine), but the value of the latter 
vessels is limited. 


Since the Japanese are able to concentrate in the 
Pacific, while we are obliged by the necessities of 
global war to use many of our vessels elsewhere, one 
factor of significance is the probable numerical su- 
periority of the enemy fleet in almost all types of 
ships. This disparity in the Solomons area is sug- 
gested not only by public information about the two 
fleets, but also by some of our recent naval com- 
muniqués, which report an engagement between 
three United States minesweepers and an equal 
number of enemy destroyers, or the success of an 
American motor torpedo boat in hitting a Japanese 
destroyer. These unequal actions presumably indi- 


Page Three 











cate the absence of larger American vessels on the 
spot—at least at the time. On the other hand, it is 
clear that throughout the Battle of the Solomons we 


have maintained air superiority, with significant re- - 


sults. Unfortunately, an advantage in the air is not 
enough, since naval craft still play an important role, 
especially in the landing of men and equipment. Vic- 
tory in the Pacific—apart from other factors—must 
wait until we have established both naval and air 
superiority, but our planes can serve to hold off the 
Japanese until our ships have been greatly augmented. 


WIDENING OF THE CONFLICT. Although 
the withdrawal of the Japanese fleet is generally re- 
garded as only temporary, it does not follow that 
the enemy plans first of all to return to the Guadal- 
canal area. A blow somewhere else—perhaps after a 
new period of recuperation and preparation—is at 
least equally possible, particularly since the conflict 
has broadened out into a struggle for the whole 
southwest Pacific area. Attention should therefore be 
given to the possibility that, having been unable to 
retake the southern Solomons by direct attack, Japan’s 
next move may be against the sea lanes essential to 


the maintenance of all our positions in the southwest 
Pacific. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


CABINET CHANGES LEAVE CHILEAN POLICY OBSCURE 


The recent reshuffling of the Chilean Cabinet has 
done little to clarify a thoroughly embroiled situa- 
tion, and Santiago remains a question-mark on the 
inter-American horizon. On October 20 the Cabinet 
Ministers resigned en masse; this followed directly 
on the postponement of President Juan Antonio 
Rios’ visit to the United States—a step which, in 
turn, was motivated by the now famous Boston 
speech of Sumner Welles (October 8), charging 
Argentina and Chile with tolerating Axis espionage. 


On October 22 new Cabinet appointments were 
announced by a much harassed Chilean President. 
Rios’ first choice for Foreign Minister was discarded 
when German Riesco showed reluctance to accept be- 
fore taking elaborate soundings. The President's eye 
then fell on Joaquin Fernandez y Fernandez, Chile's 
Ambassador to Uruguay, who was summoned home 
from Montevideo and recited the oath of office on Oc- 
tober 26. On his way through Buenos Aires, Fernandez 
was firmly taken in hand by Argentine Foreign Min- 
ister Enrique Ruiz Guifiazi, who shepherded him 
through a round of ceremonies, and presumably 
urged maintenance of a joint Chilean-Argentine 
neutrality front. Observers of the South American 
scene—recalling reports that Fernandez, as a dele- 
gate to the Inter-American Political Defense Com- 
mittee in Montevideo, had shown little enthusiasm 
for a strong hemispheric anti-Axis stand—kept their 


fingers crossed. Time alone will tell whether the new 
incumbent will represent any improvement at the 
Foreign Office over his predecessor, Ernesto Barros 
Jarpa, who had opposed a break with the Axis 
powers. 

Of the other Cabinet appointments, the most sig- 
nificant perhaps was the retention of youthful In- 
terior Minister Rail Morales Beltrami, Rios’ cam- 
paign manager during the last election. Morales has 
acted aggressively to curb Axis operations in Chile, 
pushing proceedings against three German agents 
whose detection and arrest recently called attention 
to the existence of a Nazi spy ring operating be- 
tween Chile and the Caribbean. When the three 
agents were released by a magistrate on a technical- 
ity, Morales promptly had them re-arrested by the 
use of decree power. They are to be confined on 
Quiriquina Island in the Bay of Concepcién, along 
with Hans Borchers, ex-German Consul General in 
New York City, who entered Chile illegally some 
months ago. On October 30 Morales told Ultimas 
Noticias that he was preparing special legislation for 
the suppression of Nazi activities in Chile, and that 
this would be submitted to an extraordinary session 
of Congress convening November 15. 


PUBLIC DISTURBED BY WELLES’ SPEECH. 
Public opinion in Chile seems to have been confused 
by the recent cycle of events. Two emotions have 











struggled for supremacy: first, the natural resent- 
ment of a sensitive people at what could only be 
interpreted as a rebuke from abroad; second, an ad- 
mission—often grudging—that Welles’ contention 
on the subject of espionage was perhaps well-founded 
and that Chile could not go on indefinitely running 
with the hare and hunting with the hounds. One of 
the most outspoken critics of the United States’ atti- 
tude was ex-President Arturo Alessandri, whose 
tirade against U.S. interference was broadcast as far 
afield as the pages of Bogota’s E/ Tiempo. (the 
Colombian paper disclaiming any editorial identity 
with Alessandri’s point of view). During the last 
half of October democratic and “nationalist” demon- 
strators traded blows in the streets of Santiago, while 
the United States Embassy in that capital was recur- 
rently picketed by indignant youths demanding an 
apology for the Welles “affront.” On October 29 
the demonstrations were brought to a close by a 
torchlight procession of students which ended in 
front of the Moneda Palace. Addressing the pattici- 
pants, President Rios thanked them for their patri- 
otism, but was careful to stress his sympathy for 
the democratic cause. 


INCIDENT EVOKES WIDE INTEREST IN 
LATIN AMERICA. Throughout the rest of Latin 
America, the dramatic postponement of the Rios 
visit stirred unusual interest. Such Nazi sheets as 
El Pampero of Buenos Aires gleefully exploited the 
incident as one more proof of Yankee meddling; 
on the other hand, E/ Mundo of Buenos Aires bravely 
spoke out in Washington’s defense, arguing that 
the United States was perfectly entitled to safeguard 
its interests as it pleased. Most Latin American papers 
skirted the issue tactfully. Meanwhile, from Mexico 
City, Rio de Janeiro, and Havana came reports of 
attempts to mediate between Washington and Santi- 
ago. In Caracas, where Venezuelan President Isaias 
Medina was acting as host to his recently installed 
Colombian colleague, dynamic Alfonso Lépez, the 
rumor got about that the two Presidents had their 
heads together over the possibilities of effecting a 
reconciliation between Chile and the United States. 
Obviously, the issue was one of general concern 
throughout the Americas. 


Whether or not the misunderstanding is cleared up, 
and the Rios visit materializes on a later occasion, the 
trip seems unlikely in the immediate future. Wash- 
ington is now concerned with plans for receiving 
Ecuadorean President Carlos Arroyo del Rio, who 
has received permission from his Congress to leave 


Page Four 





<a, 
a 





the country, and is expected to arrive in the United 
States in mid-November. During the past year Ecua- 
dor has played the inter-American game loyally, 
swallowing an unpalatable frontier settlement in its 
dispute with Peru, and placing strategic areas on its 
coast and in the Galapagos Islands at the dispo 
of U.S. forces (a step not officially announced un 
six weeks ago). JouN I. B. McCuLLocH © 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO F.P.A. 


The Foreign Policy Association has no endowment. 
Its operating expenses must be met by membership 
fees, subscriptions to publications, sale of literature, 
and contributions from foundations and individuals 
who believe in its research work and its educational 
program. Contributions to the F.P.A. are deductible 
in computing income tax. 


Gifts, bequests and memorial funds insure the 
progress and permanency of our work. 





The Panama Canal in Peace and War, by Norman J. 
Padelford. New York, Macmillan, 1942. $3.00 


An authoritative study of the history of the Panama 
Canal, its economic and strategic importance, and the 
operations of the Canal administration. The author em- 
phasizes the role of the Canal in the American defense 
system. 


Jefferson, by Saul K. Padover. New York, Harcourt, Brace, 
1942. $4.00 


Perhaps not as profound a study of Jefferson’s politics 
or foreign policies as some others but a vivid and charming 
picture of his personality. 


Statistical Year-book of the League of Nations, 1940-41. 
Geneva, The League, Economic Intelligence Service, 
1941. (New York, Columbia University Press, Interna- 
tional Documents Service). $3.50 


At a time when authentic figures are extremely hard to 
obtain this reliable compilation is more valuable than ever. 


The Anchored Heart, by Ida Treat. New York, Harcourt, 
Brace, 1941. $2.50 


This charmingly written story of a quaint old house on 
a Breton island is a sympathetic interpretation of the 
underlying spirit that still holds the ideal of French free- 
dom. 


Canada, Today and Tomorrow, by William Henry Cham- 
berlin. Boston, Little, Brown, 1942. $3.00 


Although extremely thin on the past and the future, the 
author gives an excellent picture of present-day Canada, 
the physical environment, the people, the economy and the 
war effort. 


The Cripps Mission, by R. Coupland. New York, Oxford 
University Press, 1942. $.75 
A brief account from the official British point of view 
by a member of Sir Stafford Cripps’ staff. An important 
document, persuasively written. Author stresses that the 
negotiations broke down primarily over “the character of 
the proposed National Government.” 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 3, NovemsBer 6, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President ; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor. Entered a8 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> ae 


Produced under union conditigns and composed and printed by union labor. 





—————— 








