resident 
*¢ which 
with 25 
1934 for 
dditional 
of such 
' 23, and 
are now 
authority 


struggle 

may be 
vaged in 
the new 
emocrats 
xpressed 
arty may 
>mocrats, 
y in this 
icans are 
bviously, 
d of the 
iding ad- 
Nations, 
d Stassen 
on Janu 
zation of 
rliament. 
McNary 
e Senate, 
or settle- 
sy which, 
trance of 


ded body 
elping to 
epublican 
atters of 
it to con- 
error of 
and im- | 


LLIOTT 


VDS 


~~ enty. oF MICH 


IGAL ROOM 
AL LIBRARY 


JAN 22 1942 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vor. XXII, No. 14 


JANUARY 22, 1943 


JAPAN IS NOT STRONGER THAN GERMANY 


T a time when the Soviet and North African 

offensives have simplified the European mili- 
tary picture by heightening the possibility of a two- 
front war against continental Germany this year, 
confusion still exists over problems of Far Eastern 
strategy. There was reason to expect that the launch- 
ing of the Anglo-American drive would end the 
dispute as to the primacy of the struggle in the 
West. Yet, partly because of misunderstanding, and 
partly because of continuing isolationist propaganda 
in this country—which now takes the form of de- 
ploring our concentration against Germany—regret 
is still expressed that we are not trying to “‘lick 
Japan first.” This attitude is naturally promoted by 
the fact that our men have so far done most of their 
fighting in the Pacific and by our apparent neglect 
of the China front. 

The United Nations will not fight with the greatest 
effectiveness and singleness of purpose until it is 
clearly understood in the United States and China, 
as it already is in Britain and the U.S.S.R., that the 
European front is decisive for the entire struggle 
against the Axis, including Japan. This conclusion 
is not the result of an arbitrary decision on our part 
or of self-interested pressure by our European part- 
ners, but is determined by the geographical location 
of the main strength of the Axis and the Allies. Two 
criteria dictate our choice between Japan and Ger- 
many: Which is mow the more dangerous? Against 
which can we exert the greatest pressure in the short- 
est time ?* 


Here it is worth noting that, in a recent public 
Opinion poll taken by mail in a leading Chinese 
city, almost one-third of the merchants, students 
civil servants and military men who replied held 
that ‘‘the United Nations should use their entire 
Strength to settle with Germany first’—a remark- 


*See ‘‘Allied Position in Far East Improved 


by African Campaign,’’ For- 
tign Policy Bulletin, November 27, 1942. 


ably high percentage in a country which has fought 
the Japanese for five and a half years. In the United 
States, although a majority favors the “Germany 
first” policy, there is apprehension concerning what 
Japan may do, “if she is allowed to consolidate.” 
On the West Coast, in particular, it is feared that 
the Japanese would like to invade the continental 
United States. No doubt they would, but surely 
invasion is also one of Germany’s desires. Our choice 
is not between the motives of the two countries, both 
of which are bent on our destruction, but between 
their respective powers to carry through their inten- 
tions. It must therefore also be asked: What might 
happen if, by concentrating on Japan, we gave Ger- 
many time to consolidate? 

WHICH HAS MORE STEEL? The comparative 
strength of Germany and Japan may be measured by 
a simple standard—industrial development, perhaps 
the most important single factor in a prolonged war 
on a world scale. Here the Nazis are clearly superior 
to their Japanese allies in electric power capacity, 
transport facilities, technical skill and the production 
of steel. A figure of 10 million metric tons almost 
certainly represents the maximum steel-making 
capacity of Japan and the Empire today—and the 
actual total may be below this; but in 1938, ile., 
before the conquest of Europe, German steel pro- 
duction was already over 23 million metric tons an- 
nually. Today the steel available to Germany is 
probably not far from 40 million metric tons. This 
difference naturally finds expression in the ability to 
produce airplanes, tanks, heavy guns, and industrial 
machinery—fields in which Germany's advantages 
over Japan are unquestioned. No one would main- 
tain that Japan possesses the power to support any- 
thing approaching the magnitude of the German 
front against the Soviet Union. 

Great emphasis is placed on the raw materials 
controlled by Japan as a result of the conquest of 


een. Be oe 


LS. = 


a. 
Se 


2S See 
3 = +. 
RO pee a 


Mi) ’ 
Ms 
1 

i] 

We 


~ a 
. 


PN oP aa oOo = et oe 


ie 
. = 


——=a=[=_aa—a—=—=—=—=—_—_=nBnnnmpo[—"—_—sCOWwPuree Two — 


Southeast Asia, with its rubber, tin and oil, but these 
supplies are valuable only to the extent that they 
can be processed. Japan’s industrial machine, with 
its limited possibilities of expansion, is incapable of 
making full use of the captured riches—a condition 
which is aggravated by shipping difficulties. Ger- 
many, on the other hand, while lacking Japan's pres- 
ent abundance of raw materials, not only commands 
a large output of synthetic oil and rubber but, be- 
cause the industry of all Europe lies at its disposal, 
is able to make better use of its resources. This does 
not mean that Japan is not powerful, but simply that 
it is less formidable than Germany. 

IS JAPAN’S MORALE EXCEPTIONAL? There 
have been many stories of the unbreakable morale 
of the Japanese armed forces, of the unwillingness 
of troops to surrender when in a hopeless position, 
of their selfless concentration on the destruction of 
their opponents. Without question, the Japanese are 
loyal to the régime and fight hard, but there is no 
indication that they fight better than the Chinese— 
whom they have not knocked out of the war in five 
and a half years; or the Russians, who defeated 
them twice in large-scale border conflicts in 1938 
and 1939; or the British, who are coming into con- 
tact with them in Burma; or the Americans, who are 
beating them back in the Southwest Pacific. The 
Japanese performance on the Buna beach-head in 
New Guinea is no more striking than the resistance 
of the entrapped Germans in Stalingrad. Such dif- 
ferences as may exist between the Japanese and the 


ARE THE FRENCH MOVING TOWARD UNITY? 


The stalemate before Tunis, chief objective of the 
entire North African campaign, continues to be a 
source of disappointment to civilians in Allied coun- 
tries who had become unduly optimistic last No- 
vember that the Axis powers would soon be ejected 
from the southern shore of the Mediterranean. Even 
though the delay. is by no means serious, and is ap- 
parently as much the result of torrential rains— 
which normally last until March—as of any man- 
controlled factors, the sense of frustration persists, 
and tends to encourage a large crop of rumors and 


= ——— 

a a 

“ > . 3 a aes re | " 
So , 


ae 


_ 
7 
° 


For the strategic and political facts behind the war 

in the Pacific, and the outlook for reconstruction in 

the Far East, read these Foreign Policy Reports: 
1. Curna’s War Economy: 2. ASIA IN A 
New Wortp Orper: 3. [NpiA’s ROLE IN 
THE Worip Conruict: 4. Tue U.S.S.R. 
AND JAPAN: 5. REPLACEMENT OF STRA- 

TEGIc MareriAts Lost In AsIA. 


25c each or 5 for $1.00 


REPORTS are published on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5 a year; to FPA members $3. 


‘ much to prevent it from consolidating its gains, 


— a 
Sen 
—— 


soldiers of the other major fighting nations are 
minor and can have no decisive influence on the 
outcome of the war. Moreover, it is not surprising 


that Japanese morale is strong, since Japan has g9 | ; 


far been highly victorious. The real test of Japan's 
internal strength will come when it suffers continu. 
ing and large-scale setbacks, not only in the Pacific 
but also on the continent of Asia. 

Many fears about Japan result from failure to 
recognize that the United Nations are already doing 


especially through the destruction of shipping. This 
activity was referred to by President Roosevelt in 
his message to Congress on January 7, when he also 
declared significantly that “the period of our de. 
fensive attrition in the Pacific is drawing to a close.” 
It will be possible to fight the Far Eastern war most 
effectively by recognizing openly that the European 
war comes first. On that basis we can move toward 
a continental land offensive against Germany with 
the utmost vigor, send to the Far East as much as 
can be spared from the primary front—the quantity 
is not so small as some are inclined to think—and 
concentrate on developing the internal economic and 
military power of such countries as China, India 
and Australia. The path of military victory would 
then lead to the most favorable conditions for Far 
Eastern reconstruction after the war. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(The first of four articles by Mr. Rosinger on war and 
reconstruction in the Far East.) 


criticism of North African politics in Britain and 
the United States. Meanwhile, strict censorship in 
North Africa fosters irresponsible statements, since 
it is impossible under present circumstances to con- 
firm or deny the many conflicting stories concerning 
that theatre of war. 


Of the many bewildering reports the most im | 
portant concerns the long “imminent’’ meeting be- 
tween de Gaulle, Fighting French leader, and 
Giraud, who seems to occupy a middle-of-the-road 
position between the ex-collaborationists and the 
Fighting French. Among the various factors explain- 


ing the delay of the conference is the objection of } tre 


the Fighting French to Giraud’s cooperation with 
Vichyites, whose continued allegiance to fascist ideas 
—in the opinion of de Gaullists—is indicated by | 
their equivocal statements concerning the Allies. 


De Gaulle feels that, unless the anti-Vichy French 


are given political as well as military recognition, | 


force 
Hea 
polit 
alth¢ 

In 


unit 


' Lon 


tact, 
selvi 


no true French interest will be represented on the | Hea 


side of the Allies during the war or in the post-wat | 


period. Eradication of all Vichy influence on the | 


Allied side is, therefore, a question of principle | 


< 


—- 


Ons are 
on the 
prising 
1 has 59 
Japan's 
continu. 
> Pacific 


ilure to 
ly doing 
S gains, 
ig. This 
evelt in 
he also 
our de 
a close.” 
yar most 
uropean 
toward 
ny with 
much as 
quantity 
nk—and 
mic and 
a, India 
y would 
for Far 


INGER 


and 


‘ain and 
rship ia 
ts, since 
| to con- 
ncerning 


nost im- 
ting be: 
ler, and 
the-road 
and the 
explain- 


ction of } 


ion with 
“ist ideas 
cated by 
> Allies. 
y French 
Ognition, 
1 on the 
post-wat 
- on the 
principle 


SS 
SS 


with the Fighting French, who apparently oppose 
any compromise on this matter. 


ANGLO-AMERICAN ACTION ? Some observers 
in Great Britain and the United States are calling 
for firm Anglo-American action to oust the Vichy- 
ites and unite the French. Such a course, however, 
needs some qualification, for it overlooks two im- 
portant considerations frequently forgotten in the 
present atmosphere of disappointment and impa- 
tience. First of all, it has been no simple matter to 
dispose of Vichy supporters since the invasion of 
North Africa, for in 1940 the Pétain government 
replaced many members of the colonial administra- 
tion who were opposed to collaboration with his 
own adherents. To be sure, there are specially trained 
administrators among the Fighting French, but even 
if experienced men were available in sufficient num- 
bers, the immediate replacement of personnel prob- 
ably was not possible without creating serious un- 
rest, thus causing further complications for Allied 
forces. However, according to a report from Allied 
Headquarters in North Africa on January 15, a 
political house-cleaning is now actually going on, 
although it will apparently take considerable time. 

In the second place, the task of securing French 
unity, while it can be encouraged by what the 
London Times has called “Allied advice and Allied 
tact,”” must rest in large part with the French them- 
selves. As British Minister of Information Brendan 


THE F.P.A. 


The Flying Tigers, by Russell Whelan. New York, Viking, 
1942. $2.50 


Fascinating story of the American Volunteer Group 
which, from bases in China and Burma, rolled up an amaz- 
ing score of victories over Japan’s air force from December 
1941 to July 1942. 


Report from Tokyo, A Message to the American People, 
by Joseph C. Grew. New York, Simon and Schuster, 
1942. $1.00 
America’s Ambassador to Tokyo until Pearl Harbor 

hammers home the importance of not underestimating the 

Japanese military menace. Emphasizes that Japan’s war 

machine, caste and system must be destroyed completely if 

the rest of the world is to live in safety. 


The Unknown Country: Canada and Her People, by Bruce 
Hutchison. New York, Coward-McCann, 1942. $3.50 


An introduction to our northern neighbor done in a 
series of vignettes of Canadian scenes—Nova Scotia, Mon- 
treal, Quebec, Winnipeg, etc. What this presentation loses 
in coherence and unity, it gains perhaps in readability. 

An Appraisal of the Protocols of Zion, by John S. Curtiss. 
New York, Columbia University Press, 1942. $1.00 
The story of one of the most widespread and damaging 

forgeries ever perpetrated. 


Page Three 


Bracken declared on January 14, neither the United 
States nor Great Britain “is backing any particular 
candidate for leadership of the French.” 
Meanwhile, among Frenchmen in London and in 
the underground movement at home, there is grow- 
ing evidence that the French themselves have taken 
up the task of cementing national solidarity, which 
was so badly lacking in France not only before the 
war but even in June 1940. The arrival in London on 
January 14 of Fernand Grenier, former Communist 
leader, marked the formal linking of the extreme 
Left with the Right and the middle-of-the-road par- 
ties which already were represented in the Fighting 
French National Committee. The Communists have 
been a leading element in the French underground 
movement, since they were able to maintain their 
party intact when all others crumbled in 1940, but 
they had not given any explicit support to de Gaulle’s 
organization’ and had, instead, conducted their oppo- 
sition to the Nazis as a separate movement. Now that 
Grenier has fallen into line with the de Gaulle 
forces there no longer remains either abroad or under- 
ground any important anti-fascist French group that 
is not represented on the National Committee. At 
the moment, therefore, the principal step that re- 
mains to be taken in achieving anti-Axis French unity 
is that which would harmonize the interests of the 
political organizations headed by de Gaulle and 


Giraud. WHINIFRED N. HADSEL 


BOOKSHELF 


America organizes to win the war: A Handbook on the 
American War Effort. New York, Harcourt, Brace, 
1942. $2.00 
Twenty articles by an impressive group of authorities 

on the nature of the conflict, the organization of our armed 

forces, the character of our economic mobilization, various 
morale factors, and war objectives. Simply and clearly 
written. 


A Democratic Manifesto, by Emery Reves. New York, 
Random House, 1942. $1.50 
A sober plea for a new international integration based 
on the general acceptance of democratic principles. Lack 
of sufficient attention to social and economic problems, how- 
ever, reduces the value of an otherwise able piece of work. 


The Background of Our War. From lectures prepared by 


the Orientation Course, War Department, Bureau of 
Public Relations. New York, Farrar and Rinehart, 
1942, $2.00 

A simplified survey of Axis aggression and the military 


March 15, 1942. Well pre- 
the services. 
Government of the Arg Republic, by Austin F. Mac- 
donald. New York, Cr ll, 1942. $3.75 
A political science text which ably meets the long-felt 
need for an exhaustive work on the subject. 


campaigns of the war prior to 
sented for the instruction of 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII 14, JANUARY 22, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign P Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DgaN, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y:, under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
One month for change of address on membership publications. 

F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
SS 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News £ etter 


JAN. 18.—The German submarine has come to be 
regatded by responsible naval authorities in Wash- 
ington as the most deadly weapon in the hands 
of the Axis. Sinkings by U-boats continued at a 
high level throughout 1942, with more than 500 
cargo ships sent to the bottom in the Western At- 
lantic alone. An internationally known shipping 
expert informed the writer that the total of 11,189,- 
000 gross tons of Allied and neutral shipping sunk 
in the four years of World War I had been “‘consid- 
erably exceeded” in the first three years of the present 
conflict. 


The need to conceal our losses from the enemy 
has kept the American people from appreciating the 
full gravity of this peril. Their justified satisfaction 
over the magnificent achievement of our shipyards 
in producing 8 million tons of shipping last year 
would be sadly diminished if it were generally re- 
alized that Axis destruction of United Nations ship- 
ping exceeded total United States launchings in 
1942. Only indirectly and occasionally does the pub- 
lic gain an inkling of our terrific shipping losses, 
when—as happened recently—rationing of gasoline 
and fuel oil was suddenly tightened as a conse- 
quence of the torpedoing of many tankers carrying 
supplies to North Africa. 


It is no exaggeration to say that the U-boat menace 
is approaching the grave turn it took in the spring 
of 1917, when one ship out of every four that left 
the British isles never returned. Admiral Harold R. 
Stark, Commander of United States Naval Forces 
in Europe, was guilty of no overstatement when he 
declared, in an interview in Washington on Janu- 
ary 8, that our “greatest enemy is the submarine,” 
adding that “our losses are something to be very 
uncomfortable about.” 


WHY U-BOAT MENACE IS SO GRAVE. One 
reason for the uneasiness here is that the Germans 
are admittedly building submarines faster than we 
can sink them. The Nazis are believed to have a 
force of 300 fast, long-range U-boats, with never 
less than 100 at sea at one time. Their losses are be- 
ing replaced at a rate of 17 to 25 a month. American 
and British bombers from time to time make raids 
on German submarine bases, but the effectiveness 
of these attacks is dubious. German bases bristle 


FOR VICTORY ° 


with anti-aircraft guns (a recent raid on the sub 
marine base at Lorient cost us six Flying Fortresses), 
and the enemy has built massive, concrete bomb shel. 
ters to protect theit underwater craft in port. 

Other factors that explain why the current U-boat 
campaign is more destructive than anything known 
in World War I are: (1) the superior armor pro. 
tection of German submarines, making them much 
more difficult to sink than the egg-shells of the last 
war; (2) the use of light Diesel engines, which en. 
ables them to operate upwards of 15,000 miles with. 
out refuelling: (3) the adoption of better tactics 
in attacking convoys, notably the use of the “pack” 
system in place of hit-and-run raids by lone U-boats, 
and clever coordination of submarine and airplane; 
and (4) the inadequacy of Allied escort protection, 
resulting from the strain on our naval and aif 
strength. In the first World War the American and 
British navies were aided not only by French and 
Italian destroyers, but were able to concentrate their 
forces in the Atlantic. In this war Japan, our former 
ally, is an enemy, compelling us to divert half our 
naval strength to the Pacific. 


AN UNSOLVED RIDDLE. In 1917, when Ad 
miral Jellicoe warned that “we are heading straight 
for disaster,” the U-boat menace was overcome in 
the nick of time only because Lloyd George forced 
the convoy system on a reluctant Admiralty. But the 
answer to Hitler’s submarine challenge has yet to be 
found. And because of this failure, Nazi submarines 
today are hampering military operations of the Anglo 
American forces in North Africa by seriously cut- 
tailing their supplies. If sinkings in 1943 continue 
at their present rate, the movement of American 
troops and supplies overseas will be gravely re 
stricted and jeopardized, while the Atlantic seaboard 
will get no relief from the existing oil shortage. 

Even fulfillment of President Roosevelt's gigantic 
schedule of 16 million tons of new shipping in 194) 
will not of itself provide the solution. Although the 
Allies have been fighting the Nazi submarine with 
convoys, patrol planes, blimps, mines, and the bomb- 
ing of yards and bases, all these measures, despite 
certain successes, have not provided the reply to the 
U-boat. Unless an answer to the riddle is discovered, 
Hitler may yet force a stalemate in this war. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


Unit 
ditio 
came 
succe 
Chu: 
com 
liftir 
the : 
Italy 
the | 
and 

men 
liber 
was 

forn 
Pren 


fron 
oper 
of t 
stru, 
stag 
and 
with 
ber 
the | 
new 
man 
the 
outs 
a su 


