Crisis 
bility 
id to 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XIX, No. 19 Marcu 1, 1940 


Entered as second- 

class matter December 

Reem /// 2, 1921, at the Post 

Office at New York, 

RAL LIBRARY 9 Py aX sods the ac 
Wty. oF OF mids, arch 3, 1879. 


For an analysis of Russia’s dramatic return to Europe’s diplo- 
matic scene as a result of the Soviet-German pact, READ: 


RUSSIA’S ROLE IN THE EUROPEAN 
CONFLICT by Vera Micheles Dean 


25¢ 


March 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


BALANCE OF POWER SHIFTS IN NEAR EAST 


— the past week attention again focused 
on the Balkans and the Near East as the 
struggle for Rumania’s oil entered a new phase, and 
a series of moves, partly shrouded in mystery, 
pointed to significant developments in Turkey. 

RUMANIA YIELDS TO ALLIES ON OIL. 
The Bucharest government, harried on all sides, has 
acquiesced in Allied demands, thereby incurring the 
tisk of immediate German reprisals. To obtain as- 
surance that the recently instituted Rumanian oil 
commission* would not divert additional supplies to 
Germany, the French and British governments had 
imposed a form of blockade on Rumania. Britain 
had suspended licenses for export of raw materials 
to Rumania, and held up shipments of metals and 
tubber in the Mediterranean. In addition, the British 
government had threatened to withdraw its guaran- 
tee of Rumania’s independence and integrity given 
last May. 


Under these circumstances Bucharest decided to 
yield, at least in part. On February 19 the Rumanian 
Minister in London delivered a note in which Ru- 
mania apparently promised to prohibit all exports of 
high-test aviation gasoline and lubricants and not 
to increase deliveries of oil to Germany. The scope 
and significance of these concessions is not entirely 
clear. According to most reports, Rumania has never 
delivered large quantities of aviation gas to the 
Reich. Nor is it certain that Bucharest has definitely 
agreed not to carry out its December 1939 agree- 
ment under which Germany was to obtain 1,680,000 
metric tons of oil during 1940—an amount almost 
double the quantity exported last year. Germany, 
however, took a serious view of these Rumanian con- 
cessions to the Allies and immediately dispatched 
Dr. Karl Clodius, its leading “commercial traveller,” 
to Bucharest. Only the future can tell whether he will 


*“German War Machine Runs into Obstacles,”’ 


Foreign Policy Bulletin, 
February 2, 1940. 


be successful in counteracting Anglo-French pressure. 

The object of a great tug of war, Rumania is 
hardly in an enviable position. On February 22 it was 
revealed that its government had felt compelled to 
call for additional military reserves, which reportedly 
will raise the strength of the Rumanian army to 
1,400,000 men by March 1. Nevertheless, Bucharest 
remains surprisingly calm. At the moment the Ru- 
manians do not fear an attack from the U.S.S.R. 
They know, too, that the Germans will not embark 
on a campaign in the Balkans until they have ex- 
hausted all peaceful means to obtain the resources of 
that area for their war in the west. At the same time, 
the Rumanian government believes Italy will use 
its influence to keep southeastern Europe free of hos- 
tilities. It has also been reassured by the calm and 
cautious attitude of Bulgaria, which wants return 
of the southern Dobruja from Rumania and seemed 
until recently to be drifting into the Soviet orbit. In 
Bulgaria — where, in a “change of the guard,” 
George Kiosseivanoff was replaced as Prime Minister 
by Professor Bogdan Philoff on February 16—King 
Boris opened the newly elected Sobranje or Parlia- 
ment on February 24 with a reassuring speech. He 
stressed that the policy of his government had under- 
gone no change and that Bulgaria was firmly deter- 
mined “to develop the best possible relations with 
all countries, great or small.” A two-day visit of the 
Rumanian Finance Minister in Sofia, which ended on 


February 23, has further served to improve relations 
between Bulgaria and Rumania. 


RUMANIAN-TURKISH ALLIANCE RE- 
PORTED. The Rumanian government is perhaps 
relying most of all on the support of Turkey. In the 
last few weeks there have been recurring reports 
that Turkey has definitely agreed to come to the aid 
of Rumania the moment the latter is attacked by 
either the Soviet Union or Germany. News from 
Bucharest that a Turkish military mission was ex- 


mr 


pected shortly in the Rumanian capital seemed to 
confirm these rumors. If true, this undertaking marks 
a reversal of the previous policy of Turkey, which 
has always fought shy of any agreement that might 
involve it in war with the Soviet Union. Fear that 
Russia would sooner or later renew its historic drive 
for control of the Straits may have induced Ankara 
to change its policy. 

Preoccupation with Rumania’s defense may have 
been the primary motive of a series of precautionary 
measures taken last week in Turkey. The extent of 
these preparations remains in doubt because com- 
munications by telephone and telegraph with Turkey 
were cut off—ostensibly by pokey several days. 
On February 19 the Cabinet decided to apply the 
national defense law which gives the government 
sweeping powers over the organization of economic 
life and authority to mobilize and declare a state of 
emergency. The Supreme War Council met the fol- 
lowing day; and on February 22 a decree established 
complete control over foreign trade for the primary 
purpose of accumulating adequate supplies for war 
purposes. All these measures—and others that were 
undisclosed—coincided with the publication of ar- 
ticles in the press calling on the people to be pre- 
pared for any eventuality by spring, and pointing to 
the possibility that war might develop in the Russian 
Caucasus or the Balkans. 


AN ALLIED CAMPAIGN IN THE CAUCASUS? 
These Turkish preparations, coming shortly after 
the concentration of large numbers of Anglo-French 
troops in the Near East, have also given rise to ru- 
mors that the Allies are planning an offensive against 
the oil fields in the Caucasus from which Germany 


Page Two 


ee | 
— 


hopes to draw increasingly large supplies in the fy. 
ture. The Allies would doubtless like to interry 

such oil shipments; and they have probably beey 
perturbed by reports that from February 17 to 2 
five Soviet tankers arrived in the Rumanian harhbo, 
of Constanza where they are storing oil for later 
transshipment to Germany. Although the oil fields 
might be bombarded from the air, the difficulty of 
land operations in the mountains of the Caucasus 
would be enormous, particularly since they would 
be carried on far from bases of supply and in ap 
area where communications are poorly developed, 
Nor is it probable that the Allies would engage in 
such a campaign unless they were absolutely sure of 
the attitude of Italy, which might easily interrupt the 


movement of supplies and troops through the Medi. 
terranean. 


There is some evidence that Ankara’s war prepara. 
tions were partly motivated by German threats that 
Soviet troops might invade Turkey unless it returned 
to a policy of impartial neutrality. Such at least was 
the charge made by certain Turkish newspapers. If 
this accusation is true, Germany may have over. 
played its hand and forced Turkey further into the 
Allied camp. At any rate, the strengthening of Tur. 
key’s defenses, as well as the reinforcement of Allied 
garrisons in the Near East, have altered the balance 
of power in that area to the disadvantage of Ger. 
many and the Soviet Union. Whatever the ultimate 
purpose, the mere mobilization of large forces by 
Turkey, France and Britain stiffens diplomatic and 


economic resistance to Berlin and Moscow through 
out the Balkans. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


SCANDINAVIANS UNITE TO PRESERVE NEUTRALITY 


While Soviet troops and airplanes continued to 
hammer at the Mannerheim Line, the Scandinavian 
countries, alarr-ed by the pressure to which they are 
being subjected by the belligerents, took measures to 
preserve their sorely tried neutrality. At a confer- 
ence held in Copenhagen on February 25, the For- 
eign Ministers of Sweden, Norway and Denmark 
agreed that their countries were victims of warfare 
carried on in violation of international law, and de- 
clared that in the future they will act as a unit, sup- 
porting each other in all negotiations with belliger- 
ents. They will not only strongly object to violations 
of international law, such as Britain’s invasion of 
Norwegian territorial waters in the Altmark case 
and Germany's systematic sinking of neutral ships, 
but will also demand compensation for war losses. 
The three Foreign Ministers, in addition, expressed 
their desire for the prompt termination of both the 
Soviet-Finnish and the Allied-German wars, and said 
that their governments would “gladly welcome any 


endeavor to initiate negotiations between the bel- 
ligerents with a view to a just and permanent peace.” 

ALLIED ARCTIC PATROL. The determination 
of the Scandinavian countries to avoid involvement 
in one or both of Europe’s wars increased as it was 
reported that Allied warships were cruising off the 
coasts of Norway and Finland. This Arctic patrol 


might have at least three objectives: to prevent the | 
use by German ships of Norway’s territorial watets | 


for the purpose of avoiding the British blockade, as 
was done in the Altmark case; to bar shipments of 
Swedish iron ore from reaching Germany through 


the Norwegian port of Narvik on the Atlantic | 
Ocean; and to relieve hard-pressed Finland by men: | 


acing Soviet communications between the Finnish 
port of Petsamo, now held by Russian forces, and 
the near-by Soviet base at Murmansk. Britain's ultt 
mate purpose may have been foreshadowed by the 
speech of Leslie Hore-Belisha on February 23, when 
the former British Secretary for War declared that 


— 
Allied inte 
and air WO 
and curtal 
Meanw! 
ment impc 
ral and on 
check the 
Sweden W 
ait force. 
ed to 
Finland | 
volunteers 
Norwa' 
Britain in 
sharp pre 
sinking oO 
over a h 
merchant 
statement 
eign Min 
Norway | 
and prop 
the Britis 
submittec 
dined by 
day Dr. | 
plify its 
examinin 
then acce 
wegian ¢ 
ports. Su 
for Nor 
visit Brit 
principal 
vessels. 


CHA} 
ister Ch 
February 
tuted “‘a 
‘other Br 
ternatior 
neutral ; 
in exten 
through 
In his E 
Mr. We 
more de 
Britain, 
tion of 
tion of 
the pre: 
no secu 
Must gi 


FOREIGN 
Headquarte 
Entered as 


Sis 


a — 


Allied intervention on behalf of Finland by land, sea 
snd air would end the doubts of Norway and Sweden 
ind curtail the duration of war with Germany. 

Meanwhile, on February 24 the Swedish Parlia- 
ment imposed rigid restrictions on the export of capi- 
wl and on dealings in gold and foreign exchange to 
check the flight of capital; and it was reported that 
Sweden would spend $22,000,000 to strengthen its 
sit force. The Swedish government, moreover, is ex- 

ed to meet public demand for more active aid to 
Finland by further facilitating the recruitment of 
volunteers and the dispatch of war material. 

Norway, for its part, adopted a firm tone toward 
Britain in the Altmark case, balancing it off by a 
sharp press attack on Germany for indiscriminate 
sinking of neutral ships, which has taken a toll of 
over a hundred Swedish, Norwegian and Danish 
merchant vessels since the outbreak of war. In a 
statement issued on February 25 the Norwegian For- 
eign Minister, Dr. Halvdan Koht, again denied that 
Norway had failed to perform its duty as a neutral, 
and proposed that “differences of opinion” between 
the British and Norwegian governments should be 
submitted to arbitration—a proposal apparently de- 
dined by Britain. In an interview on the same 
day Dr. Koht stated that Britain had offered to sim- 
plify its contraband control of Norwegian ships by 
examining them in neutral ports of loading, and 
then accepting the navicert documents issued to Nor- 
wegian captains by British consular agents in those 
ports. Such examinations would make it unnecessary 
for Norwegian ships bound for neutral countries to 
visit British control ports, thus removing Germany's 
principal justification for the sinking of neutral 
vessels. 


CHAMBERLAIN VERSUS HITLER. Prime Min- 
ister Chamberlain, in a speech at Birmingham on 


February 24, admitted that the Altmark raid consti- 
tuted “‘a technical breach of neutrality,” but he and 


‘other British officials cited frequent disregard of in- 


ternational law by Germany—notably the sinking of 
neutral ships, with heavy loss of lives and cargoes— 
in extenuation of the raid, which has been acclaimed 
throughout Britain as a daring feat of seamanship. 
In his Birmingham speech—delivered on the eve of 
Mr. Welles’s arrival in Italy—Mr. Chamberlain once 
more described the war and peace aims of the Allies. 
Britain, he said, is fighting against German domina- 
tion of the world, but does not desire “the destruc- 
tion of any people.” He again asserted that “under 
the present government of Germany there can be 
no security for the future,” and that the Reich itself 
must give proof of its good will and good faith. 


ee 


Page Three 


When it does, Germany will “not find others lacking 
in the will to help her to overcome the economic dif- 
ficulties that are bound to accompany the transition 
from war to peace.” The Prime Minister added that 
“France and Britain, powerful as they are, cannot 
and do not want to settle the new Europe alone,” 
but would welcome cooperation “in an association 
to which we shall gladly welcome others who share 
our ideals.” He declared, moreover, that Britain and 
France would continue, after the war, “that complete 
identity of purpose and policy” on which their pres- 
ent alliance is based, and which was so strikingly 
lacking in Anglo-French relations after 1919. “Only 
so,” he said, “do we believe we can establish the 
authority and the stability which is necessary for the 
security of Europe during the period of reconstruc- 
tion and fresh endeavor to which we look forward 
after the war.” 

Germany’s answer to Mr. Chamberlain was given 
by Chancellor Hitler on the same day, when the 
Fiihrer addressed a meeting at Munich in celebration 
of the twentieth anniversary of the Nazi party. The 
Chancellor denounced Britain’s “capitalistic, pluto- 
cratic’ conception of relations between nations, and 
the desire of the English to dominate the world. He 
asserted that “neither in a military nor in an eco- 
nomic way can Germany be defeated,” and that Euro- 
pean reconstruction “has already happened” without 
the participation of “old, toothless men . . . who 
dominate the greater part of the globe.” Thus, as 
Mr. Welles starts on his “exploratory” visit of Euro- 
pean capitals, the issue has once more been publicly 
joined between Britain and Germany, each of which 
regards the other as a menace to its existence and to 


the ideas it represents. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


Deadlock in China, by Lawrence K. Rosinger. 25 cents. 

America Holds the Balance in the Far East, by Robert W. 
Barnett. 25 cents. 

Our Far Eastern Record: A Reference Digest on Amer- 
ican Policy, edited by William W. Lockwood. 25 cents. 
These three pamphlets, prepared and issued by the 

American Council, Institute of Pacific Relations, present a 

treatment of the contemporary Far Eastern scene that is 

at once comprehensive, readable and accurate. Rosinger 
and Barnett analyze the military situation in China, the 
developments on the home fronts of the two Far Eastern 
belligerents, and the policies adopted by the outside pow- 
ers, especially Britain, the U.S.S.R., and the United States. 

In the latter case, an historical summary of America’s Far 

Eastern policy, as well as its current aspects, is included. 

Lockwood supplies additional background through excerpts 

from documentary sources bearing on Far Eastern issues, 

both political and economic. These clear and informative 
analyses form the best possible introduction to the Far 

East for members of study clubs and reading groups. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 19, Marcu 1, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


EB» 181 


1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DororHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHEtes Dgan, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Incorporated. National 


Washington News L etter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Fes. 26.—The prospects for renewal of Secretary 
Hull’s trade agreements program were materially en- 
hanced last week when the House passed the Admin- 
istration resolution extending the existing law for 
three years by a vote of 221 to 163. As expected, the 
division followed party lines, with only five Republi- 
cans supporting the measure and 20 Democrats vot- 
ing with the opposition. 

TRADE FIGHT SHIFTS TO SENATE. While 
Administration leaders expect a stiffer fight in the 
Senate, they were more sanguine about the outcome 
as a result of the defeat in the House of 24 amend- 
ments designed to curtail or nullify the program. 
An amendment to require Senate ratification of all 
future agreements was rejected by the House, 177 to 
157; a similar proposal requiring that agreements 
be submitted to both Houses of Congress before 
proclamation by the President was turned down by 
a vote of 161 to 144; and an amendment to exempt 
excise taxes on imported copper, lumber, coal and 
oil was defeated by a vote of 164 to 155. 

These and other amendments will represent the 
chief threat in the Senate, where the opposition 
claims a larger proportion of Democrats. An in- 
formal poll of the Senate Finance Committee which 
began hearings this week, however, indicates that the 
House measure will probably be reported without 
change by a safe though narrow margin. 

Neither the House debate nor the Senate hearings 
have produced any significant arguments for or 
against the program which had not been heard 
before. The most useful contribution to date has 
come from the Department of Commerce, in the 
form of a report showing the share of the United 
States in the total foreign trade of other countries. 
Until quite recently, Administration economists 
have been content to show the increase in our trade 
with trade agreement countries, as compared with 
non-agreement countries, without proving that this 
result was achieved by the reciprocal program. The 
Commerce Department study brings out another im- 
portant factor. Its report shows that between 1933 
and 1938 the share of the United States in the im- 
ports of 16 trade agreement countries rose from 12.2 
to 19.7 per cent. During the same period, our share 
in the imports of the 20 leading non-agreement coun- 
tries rose from 12.1 to only 14.5 per cent. This new 
data not only confirms the figures on American for- 
eign trade, but demonstrates that the trade program 


_ trade practices when hostilities end. 


ee 


has resulted in larger participation by the Unite 
States in the markets of agreement countries. 


WAR TRADE. More important to the future of 
the trade program, however, is the effect of the wa 
on our commercial relations. Significant shifts in the 
character and distribution of American exports ar 
revealed in the final trade figures for 1939, made 
public by the Department of Commerce on Febm. 
ary 14. During the last four months of 1939 exports 
from the United States rose by 23 per cent over 1938 
levels, although by no means all of this increase was 
due to the war. The largest increase in exports afte 
the outbreak of war was shown in shipments p 
Canada, which were 44 per cent higher than ip 
the same period of 1938. Shipments to Latin Americ: 
rose 42 per cent, to Asia 26 per cent, and to Europe 
11 per cent. For the entire year, however, total ex 
ports to all regions rose only 3 per cent, while ship 
ments to Europe actually declined. The falling-of 
in European trade was accounted for by the shamp 
reduction in shipments of agricultural products 
especially grain, tobacco and fruits, as well as the 
virtual stoppage of all trade with Germany after 
September. Since November, these peace-time ex 
ports have given way to shipments of basic war ma- 
terials. 


The decision of the British and French purchasing | 
commissions in the United States to buy as much 
aircraft equipment as American industry can pre 
duce, over and above American defense needs, ap 
parently marks the beginning of a lively war boom 
Despite the restrictions of the cash-and-carry Nev 
trality Act, war orders are increasing rapidly and 
may well exceed $500,000,000 before the end of the| 
year. In January, according to the latest report of the 
Munitions Control Board, France alone placed orders 
for aircraft and equipment valued at more than $81; 
000,000, and actual airplane exports to Europe for 
the month exceeded $20,000,000. 

Another problem which is beginning to cause com 
cern in Washington is raised by the new wartime 
agreements concluded by Britain and France. Mos 
of these bilateral accords deprive the United States 
of benefits promised under existing trade agreements 
and embody many control provisions which are sim! 
lar to those of the totalitarian states. Some of them, 
moreover, including the treaty between Britain ant 
Turkey, are not limited to the duration of the wat 
If this trend continues, the question may be asked 
whether any state will be able to return to liberal 
W. T. STONE | 


—_- - 
———— 


1T 
§ the 
tain 
over bell 
proached 
of Econo 
coal on t 
which let 
liable to 
attributed 
oppositio 
make a t 
German « 
After | 
had refu 
agreemen 
March 1 
man coal 
pletely d 
a small 
toutes, a: 
via the I 
council o 
man exp 
hoping t 
had acqu 
rejected | 


airplane 
coal. On 


vigorous! 
it said 
and pol 
Britain, 
April 16 
In its | 
to defen 
Stated C 
blockade 
affected 
ments m 


