



s in 
3 in- 
aved 
te in 
moc- 
t, in 
5 go- 
o aid 
Italy 


AN 


Nationd 
Editon, 








Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 


. ROOM 2, 1921, at the cant 
wou ¥ Office at New Yi 

, PAL i LIBRAR N. Y., under the act 
1 OF MiGe of March 3, 1879. 














Vou. XVI, No. 49 


OcTOBER 1, 1937 





-_ 


THE NEW FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


With this issue we introduce the Washington News Letter 
and our new 4-page Bulletin. The new Bulletin will interpret 
current international events, and will also keep F. P. A. 
members in touch with developments in national affairs as 
they affect American foreign policy. 

$2.00 a year 


Included in F. P. A. membership 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 











DICTATORS TEST ROME-BERLIN AXIS 





* ews spotlight of European diplomacy has shifted 
this week from the Mediterranean to Berlin, 
where Roman fasces and Nazi eagles perched on 
white pillars welcomed Italy’s new Caesar on his first 
visit to the Fuehrer of the Third Reich. This visit, 
whose avowed purpose was a joint appeal for Euro- 
pean peace—on terms outlined by the dictators— 
opened symbolically with an impressive display of 
Germany's armed power at military manoeuvres in 
Mecklenburg, and a surprise excursion to Essen, heart 
of Germany's armament industry. In their addresses 
to a mass meeting held at the May Field in Berlin 
on September 28 the two dictators greeted each other 
as leaders of revolution in their respective countries, 
solemnly reaffirmed their friendship—‘“‘once a friend 
always a friend,” said Mussolini—and reiterated their 
determination to defend European civilization against 
communism. 

This elaborate reception, which gave Hitler an 
Opportunity to display his artistic talents, leaves open 
the question which most preoccupies Europe. Will 
the two dictators decide to send more troops into 
Spain, in the hope of clinching the victory of General 
Franco, or withdraw from Spain, in the hope of win- 
ning Britain’s support for an anti-Communist front 
in Europe? 

That the Spanish situation was to figure promi- 
nently in the conferences of the two dictators was 
indicated by the feverish jockeying for position which 
preceded their encounter. On September 21, follow- 
ing conversations of British and French chargés 
d'affaires in Rome with Count Ciano, it was officially 
announced that naval experts of the three powers 
would meet in Paris on September 27 to discuss 

“Practical” modifications of the Nyon agreement, 
with a view to permitting Italian participation in 
the Mediterranean patrol. The following day Italy's 
permanent representative in Geneva, Renato Bova- 





Scoppa, called on French Foreign Minister Delbos, 
and told him Italy had no desire to alter Spain’s ter- 
ritorial status. M. Delbos, suspicious of Mussolini 
bearing gifts, demanded that Italy match its actions 
to its words by recalling Italian volunteers from 
Spain, and withdrawing from the Balearic Islands 
and Spanish Morocco. On September 24, while 
Mussolini was speeding to Munich in an armored 
train after further diplomatic parleys in Rome, the 
British government announced that it had proposed 
a conference of the three powers to discuss the whole 
problem of foreign intervention in Spain, with par- 
ticular reference to the withdrawal of volunteers 
which, in British opinion, must precede negotiations 
for a general Anglo-Italian settlement. On the same 
day the French chargé d'affaires in Rome, with the 
backing of his British colleague, formally invited 
Italy to a three-power conference on Spain—a move 
apparently intended to emasculate the moribund non- 
intervention committee. By these manoeuvres on 
the eve of the Hitler-Mussolini colloquy France and 
Britain intended to remove the unpleasant impres- 
sion created in Italy by the Nyon agreement, and to 
stress the possibility that Hitler might be double- 
crossed by his Fascist guest; while Mussolini ho 

to use the prospect of renewed friendship with the 
two democracies as a lever to extract concessions 
from Hitler on Spain. 

Will Hitler choose to take his stand ‘in shining 
armor” at I/ Duce’s side? Or, pondering the Kaiset’s 
experience in 1914, will he warn his Fascist col- 
league against rash adventures in Spain? Great as 
are Hitler's abhorrence of communism and his desire 
—developed since the writing of Mein Kampf—to 
endow Germany with a colonial empire, his future 
collaboration with Mussolini is hedged with diffi- 
culties. ‘The German people have not forgotten 
1915, when Italy's “sacred egoism” caused it to 


wee = 


a 


pare. See 



















































desert the Triple Alliance. The German Reichswehr 
and the Wilhelmstrasse, which in the past have al- 
ready acted as brakes on Hitler’s expansionist im- 
pulses, vigorously oppose a course which might in- 
volve Germany in Spain. Like Hitler, they seek the 
friendship of Britain, which might be jeopardized by 
outspoken support of Mussolini. An attempt by 
the two dictators to insure Franco’s victory would 
require, according to military experts, 50,000 to 
100,000 additional foreign “volunteers,” and the 
sending of such reinforcements would openly flaunt 
the determination of France and Britain to prevent 
Italo-German control of Spain. In his negotiations 
with Hitler, Mussolini is much weaker today than 
when they first met in Venice three years ago. Hav- 
ing played for high stakes in Ethiopia and Spain, he 
is now caught between two alternatives. If he suc- 
ceeds in obtaining Hitler’s help in Spain—for a 
quid pro quo such as Italian acquiescence in any de- 
signs Hitler may have on Austria——France, with 
Britain's consent, may reopen the Franco-Spanish 
frontier and permit the passage of arms and volun- 
teers destined for Valencia. Or, if he fails in his 
mission to Berlin, he may be faced with the disagree- 
able prospect of a Canossa journey to London, in 
search of British financial assistance for the develop- 
ment of Ethiopia, whose “corpse” the League As- 
sembly has not yet buried. At this stage of the 
European struggle for power the democracies, for 
the first time since 1933, hold better cards than the 
dictatorships. Their task is to play these cards in a 
manner which, while discouraging aggression, avoids 
the appearance of driving the dictators into situations 
from which there is no issue except war. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FRANCE STRUGGLES TOWARD RECOVERY 


The last few weeks have been marked by a new 
wave of pessimism concerning the economic and 
political future of France. Indicative of this senti- 
ment was a sharp slump in the franc, which reached 
a new 11-year low on September 15, representing a 
depreciation of 49 per cent over the last year. With 
the seasonal drop in the tourist traffic, which had 
bolstered the currency during the summer, the effects 
of a heavily adverse trade balance were felt more 
acutely than heretofore. For the first eight months 
of the year the import surplus reached 11,872 million 
francs, as compared with only 6,121 million during 
the corresponding period of 1936. At the same time, 

ations of a partial repatriation of French capi- 
tal hoarded abroad were not realized. Instead, lack 
of confidence on the part of French business interests 
has apparently led to some renewed flight of capi- 
tal. In the face of these unfavorable trends, the 
French authorities thought it best to let the franc 
slide and husband the small resources of the exchange 


equalization fund. 


Page Two 








— 
——— 


French financial conditions do not really justify 
such a pessimistic appraisal. Government finances 
have unquestionably ees improved by the drastic 
measures which Finance Minister Bonnet has taken 
under the special decree powers which expired at 
the end of August. By additional tax levies and 
economies, M. Bonnet has halved the ordi 
budget deficit for the current year and balanced the 
accounts for 1938. The extra-budgetary require. 
ments which must be covered by borrowing have 
also been cut substantially. To relieve the Treas 
further, the government on August 31 approved a 
decree establishing a national railway company 
which will take over and operate all the French 
railways, including two public and five privately 


owned systems. Since 1921 the Treasury has been 
compelled to advance large sums to cover railway 
deficits without, at the same time, having any rea! 


control over their management. Although the state 
will hold 51 per cent of the stock in the new com- 
pany, it will be run like a private enterprise. Treasury 
support will be gradually withdrawn within the 
next five years, after which the company must keep 
its income and expenditures balanced. 


Further financial recovery, however, awaits im- 
provement in the economic situation. Unfortun- 
ately, production continues to lag, and while whole- 
sale prices are rising more slowly than before, 
retail prices and the cost of living continue to go 
up rather rapidly. The price of wheat for the year 
1937-1938 was fixed in August at 180 francs, more 
than 40 francs higher than last year. Already labor 
is becoming more restive under the increasing cost of 
living. 

To stimulate production, the government has set 
up a series of committees representing the state, 
workers and employers to inquire into the lag in 
industrial output. It has also announced tha 
meet part of the interest charges for fifteen yeai 
on the cost of modernizing and replacing induscrial 
equipment. To help the building industry 
the slump it will grant similar subsidies for new 
construction and remodelling, in addition to certain 
tax exemptions and reductions. 


These measures may prove successful, particularly 
if there is some degree of political stability. Under 
the conciliatory leadership of M. Chautemps the 
present government is holding together remarkably 
well and may prove to be much more than a stop 
gap cabinet. The break-up of the Popular Front 
which some expected after the Radical Socialist 
Senate defeated Blum last June, now appears um 
likely. The move to unify the two Marxist patties, 
which would antagonize their Radical Socialist part 
ners in the Popular Front, has made no progress, 


(Continued on Page 4) 














stiff 


10f 
ass. 


can 
unt 
the 
bas 


tin 


for 
lea 


bee 


in 


ave 


da 
any 
nch 
tely 
een 
way 
real 
tate 


ole- 
ore, 


gol 


10re 
ibor 
t of 


| $et 
rate, 
y in 
will 
Cals 
rial 
t of 
new 
tain 


larly 
nder 

the 
ably 
stOp- 
‘ront 
alist 

un- 
rties, 
part: 
Tess, 





Washington News Letter 

















a 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Sept. 27—Washington’s Far Eastern policy has 
stiffened perceptibly during the past week. While 
the Administration has not publicly departed from 
its “middle-of-the-road” course and is unlikely to do 
so in the immediate future, it is veering away from 
the President’s tentative evacuation program and 
hack toward the older, stronger policy of protecting 
national rights and interests in the Far East. 

Evidence of the trend in Washington is seen here 
in three developments of the past few days: 


1. Decision to keep Naval forces in China. 
Three weeks ago, when President Roosevelt warned 
American citizens to evacuate danger zones or remain 
in China at their own risk, he made no comment 
with respect to naval forces in Asiatic waters. If 
his statement was intended to pave the way for a 
policy of complete evacuation, it was clear at the 
time that neither the Navy nor the State Department 
accepted any such interpretation. In Washington, 
State Department officials quietly sought to dispel 
the impression that the government contemplated 
withdrawal of all protection to American interests. 
The first public declaration, however, was the state- 
ment given out at the Navy Department on Septem- 
ber 24, asserting that the Asiatic fleet will protect 
Americans for the duration of the conflict. This 
statement was originally made in Shanghai by Ad- 
miral Yarnell, on his own initiative, three days before 
its release here. It was forwarded to Washington, 

here it was considered by the General Board, re- 
‘erred to the State Department, and made public by 
he Navy “without comment.” 

The policy of the Commander-in-chief, Admiral 
Yarnell announced, “‘is to employ United States naval 
lorces—so as to offer all possible protection and 
assistance to our nationals in cases where needed. 
Naval vessels will be stationed in ports where Ameri- 
can citizens are concentrated and will remain there 
until it is no longer possible or necessary to protect 
them or until they have been evacuated. This policy 
based on our duties and obligations will be con- 
tinued as long as the present controversy between 
China and Japan exists and will continue in full 
force even after our nationals have been warned to 
leave China and after an opportunity to leave has 


been given.” 


2. Protest against bombardment of Nanking. 
The note of September 22 was deliberately framed 
in the strongest diplomatic language yet used by the 


State Department. It was delivered to the Tokyo For- 
eign Office as a formal protest, thus automatically call- 
ing for a formal reply. It pointedly reserved “all 
rights” on behalf of the United States government and 
its nationals, and objected most emphatically “both to 
such jeopardizing of the lives of its nationals and 
non-combatants generally, and to the suggestion that 
its officials and nationals now residing in and around 
Nanking should withdraw from the areas in which 
they are lawfully carrying on their legitimate activi- 
ties.” 

3. Ambassador Johnson’s return to Nanking 
Embassy. State Department officials have made no 
attempt to conceal their pleasure at the prompt re- 
turn of Nelson T. Johnson and his staff to the 
American Embassy at Nanking, two days after the 
evacuation. They were pained and surprised at the 
unfavorable comment which was registered when 
other foreign representatives remained at their em- 
bassies. When Mr. Johnson decided to leave the 
Embassy on September 21, however, he was acting 
on general instructions which required him to with- 
draw from danger zones whenever, in his judgment, 
this became necessary. These instructions, which 
were in line with the Roosevelt policy of avoiding 
risks, have not been changed—at least not officially. 
At the same time, although the situation continues 
dangerous, the return of the Ambassador has re- 
ceived the warm approval of official Washington. 


Despite this firmer tone, the long-term objectives 
of American policy remain highly uncertain. In his 
daily press conferences and in his public speeches, 
Mr. Hull holds aloft the moral principles set forth 
in his statement of July 16, while “high authoritative 
quarters” vaguely suggest that the Administration is 
shaping its policy in Asia with an eye to other po- 
tential war-makers in Europe. Nevertheless, the 
instructions of September 20 authorizing Mr. Leland 
Harrison to serve as American observer on the 
League’s Far Eastern Advisory Committee, give him 
no authority to answer “hypothetical questions” or to 
say what this government will or will not be prepared 
to do in a given situation. Department officials know 
“nothing whatever’ about a plan to invoke the Nine- 
Power Pact. They have equally little to say about a 
general Far Eastern conference, and are extremely 
sensitive whenever the possibility of joint action is 
mentioned in a voice above a whisper. It seems we 
burned our fingers in 1932 and have no desire to 
repeat the experience. 


On the other hand, equal uncertainty surrounds 

















i 
| 
i 
| 








the Neutrality Act. Just before the President im- 
posed his partial embargo on arms carried in gov- 
ernment-owned ships, there was a fairly strong body 
of opinion in the State Department which favored 
invoking the Act, on the double ground that a full 
embargo would be less unfair to China and that fur- 
ther delay would place the President at the mercy 
of events beyond his control. It was argued that 
postponement of a decision would either force the 
President to apply the Act at a moment which might 
prove embarrassing both to the United States and 
other nations, or to nullify a law of Congress in a 
situation involving the national prestige. For ex- 
ample, if the United States were suddenly compelled 
to invoke the Act at a moment when the League of 
Nations was proceeding under Article XVII of the 
Covenant, a declaration that a ‘‘state of war’ existed 
might virtually force League members to apply the 
sanctions of Article XVI, which go into effect auto- 
matically when a state “resorts to war.” But the 
prevailing opinion, fortified by the growing deter- 
mination not to be forced into complete withdrawal 
from China, still counsels delay. 


Page Four 








Washington observers are not making predictions; 


provise American policy oni a “twenty-four-hour’ 
basis in a conflict the end of which no one can foresee. 





FRANCE STRUGGLES TOWARD RECOVERY 
(Continued from Page 2) 


because the bulk of the Socialist leaders fear that 
the Communists would soon capture control of the 
new party. Meanwhile, the Socialist decision to seek 
radicalization of the Popular Front program has met 
with the unalterable opposition of the Radical So. 
cialists and a negative attitude on the part of the 
Communists, who hold that the present program 
should be carried out entirely before a new one is 
elaborated. Political conditions may thus be ex. 
pected to remain in statu quo, particularly if the local 
elections of October 10 and 17 confirm the impres- 
sion that the French people are shying away from 
extremes of both Right and Left and showing a 
definite preference for moderation. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


The Far East in World Politics, by G. F. Hudson. 
York, Oxford, 1937. $3.00 
This succinct history of Western imperialism in the Far 
East provides admirable background material for the un- 
derstanding of current developments. 


Unhappy Spain, by Pierre Crabités. Baton Rouge, Louis- 
iana State University Press, 1937. $2.50 
An argument that the roots of the Spanish struggle 
lie in the conflict between “Grand Orient”? Masonry and 
Catholicism, and in “the utter incapacity of the Spaniard 
for self-government.” 


New 


Spain in Arms in 1987, by Anna Louise Strong. New York, 
Henry Holt and Company, 1937. $1.00 
Interesting sketches by a Loyalist sympathizer. 


The Siege of Alcazar, by Major Geoffrey McNeill-Moss. 
New York, Knopf, 1937. $3.50 
Vivid picture of incredibly sustained heroism in a small 
bit of the hell that is Spain today. 


Hitler’s Drive to the East, by F. Elwyn Jones. New York, 
Dutton, 1937. $1.00 
A journalist’s account of Nazi penetration in South- 
eastern Europe. 


Germany, the Last Four Years, by “Germanicus.” 
ton, Houghton Mifflin, 1937. $1.75 
A series of articles on German finance, agriculture and 
business which aroused considerable notice when they 
were first published in The Banker, a British publication. 


Post-War German-Austrian Relations, The Anschluss 
Movement, 1918-1936. Palo Alto, Stanford University 
Press, 1937. $4.00 
A thoroughgoing piece of research, including complete 

bibliography and pertinent texts. 


Bos- 


The Soviets, by Albert Rhys Williams. New York, Har- 
court, Brace, 1937. $3.00 
A lively commentary on all phases of Soviet life in the 
form of answers to questions most frequently asked by 
American readers. 


America’s Experience as a Creditor Nation, by John T. 
Madden, Marcus Nadler, and Harry C. Sauvain. New 
York, Prentice-Hall, 1937. $3.50 
This valuable book should correct many misconceptions 

concerning our foreign loans and in particular dispel the 

impression that these investments are almost a total loss. 


What Is Ahead of Us? by G. D. H. Cole and others. New 
York, Macmillan, 1937. $2.00 
These Fabian lectures on a variety of topics make in- 
teresting and provocative reading. Particularly recom- 
mended are those by Sir Arthur Salter and Lancelot 
Hogben. 
Anarchy or Hierarchy, by S. de Madariaga. 
Macmillan, 1937. $2.50 
A discussion of the present weaknesses of liberal democ- 
racy, with proposals for reshaping its fundamental strue- 
ture. 


War Memoirs of David Lloyd George. 
Vols. V and VI. 
$3.00 a volume. 
The concluding volumes of the British Prime Minister’s 

important war memoirs, in which he deals with the events 

of 1918 through the conclusion of the Armistice, and 
makes some pungent observations on the conduct of the 
war and on certain war leaders. 


New York, 


In six volumes, 
Boston, Little, Brown, 1936 and 1937. 


The Government of Switzerland, by W. E. Rappard. New 


York, D. Van Nostrand Co., 1986. $1.25 
Useful study of the form and working of Swiss govern- 
mental organization. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 49, Ocroser 1, 1937. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL, President; 


at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Incorporated. 
EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; 


National 
VERA MIcHELES DzgAN, Eéitor. 





An 
they can only ask how long it will be possible to im.pjeoic 


BRA! 
\ 


—_, 
VOL. 
—_ 


Octo 


reg 
post 
his 

was 
is f 
ficat 


sum 
the 
poli 
real 
als 


of 
gta 


cris 








