OV Ly i¢- 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN —= 
ae An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff class matter December 
nat had Subscription, Two Dollars a Year cg ceo Ga 
Bday N. Y., under the act 
jy. OF MICIFOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3, 1879. 
; Franck, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Y passed 
the end} Yor. XVII, No. 3 NovEMBER 12, 1937 
sence to} 
— compii- NEW YORK MEETING DATES 5 eal Libr 
reported November 13 February 5 ee ee 
, ry 
negotia- December 4 February 26 University of Michigan 
Zeeland January 8 March 12 
January 22 March 26 Ann Arbor, Michigan 
trained Mark these dates on your calendar NOW for the stimulating 
regretted and timely discussions at the Hotel Astor. 
| for Eu- 
red that} = 
sel gium’s BERLIN JOLTS BRUSSELS 
eakdown 
PRODDED into action by the announcement, on of the conference or of coercive measures against 
SREEN November 4, that Germany had offered its ser- | Japan, and proposed that it disband after inviting 
vices as mediator in the Sino- -Japanese conflict, the the warring parties to negotiate between themselves. 
Brussels Conference meekly swallowed the rebuff of | The sorry impotence of the conference was thrown 
German and Japanese refusals to attend its sessions into sharper relief by reports that Britain and France 
Machray,| and renewed its efforts for Japanese cooperation in —in return for American reluctance to make com- 
, | achieving a settlement. In a note dispatched from mitments for cooperative anti-Fascist measures in 
late. Dif-/ Brussels on November 6 the Conference acknowl- Europe—would steer clear of effective collective 
Seorge P.| edged Japan’s negative response of October 28 to _ steps in the Pacific. 
» Couneil,} the Belgian invitation; emphasized in conciliatory Despite vehement denials from both Chinese and 
reciprocal fashion that Tokyo's disclaimer of territorial ambi- Japanese sources that the two countries have agreed 
tions in China conforms with the terms of the Nine to German mediation, it is scarcely conceivable that 
Prospects) Power Treaty; and virtually invited Japan to name Hitler would have permitted his offer to become 
Rinehart,| a small group of powers with which it was asked public unless he had received some covert support 
~~ to open negotiations in order to facilitate pacific from both quarters. According to one plausible re- 
abstitution settlement. ‘As the situation now stands, Germany port the German Chancellor, taking advantage of a 
al of com-| and the Brussels Conference are thus in a sense discreet Japanese inquiry with regard to the avail- 
competing for the privilege of mediating the dispute. ability of Nazi good offices at the proper moment, 
ad. Cam- . “Ls : : 
6. $3.00 Early reports that the conference, which opened § approached a Chinese spokesman in Berlin and re- 
sivilization| on November 3, might serve to curb the arrogance ceived an encouraging response. Nazi officials un- 
ops “social) of Pascist dictatorships by strengthening the tenuous doubtedly jumped at the opportunity to score a 
y and cob community of interest among the democratic pow- coup by snatching the diplomatic initiative away 
the editors} €fS were soon belied by the course of events. In from the proponents of the conference method of 
Alfred A.| the opening session it became apparent that the settling disputes. 
delegates were split into three camps. The keynote The formulation of peace terms acceptable to 
Werké: | Speech for the Western democracies, made by Nor- both China and Japan, however, remains an un- 
University | Man H. Davis, leader of the American delegation, solved conundrum for both the Brussels conference 
| clearly indicated that these powers were determined and the Nazis. There seems to be little doubt that 
changes "| merely to urge “upon Japan and China that they both nations, now experiencing the darker side of 
out in the) resort to peaceful processes” to secure Sino-Japanese martial adventure, are gradually becoming weary of 
py John F.| COOperation “‘on a basis that is fair to each and ac- _— the conflict. Tokyo's grim preoccupation with a 
| ceptable to both.” China and the U.S.S.R., the sec- struggle apparently destined to continue for months 
arp ond group, called upon all peace-loving powers to _was signalized by the establishment on November 2 
na mars | take firm steps against this episode of aggression of an Imperial general headquarters to prosecute 
in order to discourage similar incidents in future. the war under unified command—a measure which 
.d. Nationd} Finally Italy, represented only by a subordinate off- may result in tightening autocratic military control 
d-class mattet} Cial who upheld the German and Japanese point of over the civil life of the Empire as well. The constant 
view, politely deprecated the prospects for success threat of hostilities with the Soviet Union has neces- 


— ee = 


sitated the dispatch of perhaps 300,000 men to the 
northern Manchoukuo border, where fighting is 
easiest on frozen winter terrain. Japanese successes 
in flanking operations at Shanghai and rapid ad- 
vances in Shansi merely open a vista of mote re- 
mote Chinese defense lines and increasingly severe 
guerrilla warfare. Appropriations for war purposes 
already surpass those of the Russo-Japanese conflict. 
On the Chinese side, officials must realize that even 
their dim hope for the collapse of the Japanese cam- 
paign involves a long period of economic strangu- 
lation and warfare on highly unfavorable terms. 

Nevertheless, Japan and China are still poles 
apart with respect to mutually acceptable peace 
terms. In a statement made on November 7, Chiang 
Kai-shek refused to open direct negotiations with 
Japan under any conditions save, presumably, restora- 
tion of the status guo ante. Japan’s war aims, on the 
other hand, are known to comprise the establish- 
ment of a thinly veiled Japanese protectorate in 
North China and substitution of an “anti-communist’ 
régime for the Nanking government. To the Chinese, 
who receive active support from native com- 
munists and an unknown degree of assistance from 
the U.S.S.R., the latter stipulation can only signify 
complete subservience to Tokyo in national affairs. 
Regarding the anti-communist crusade as a mere 
cloak for imperialist aims, Nanking can scarcely 
look upon Hitler as an impartial mediator or wel- 
come his intervention in the dispute. But if the 
Western democracies fail to attack the problem in a 
new and less pusillanimous spirit, China may ulti- 
mately have no recourse but to submit. 


Davi H. Popper 


ROME-BERLIN AXIS SWINGS EAST 


‘The signing on November 6 of the Rome protocol 
by which Italy—with little show of enthusiasm— 
associated itself with the German-Japanese pact 
against communism, indicates the extent to which 
the Rome-Berlin axis has swung east during the past 
year. The anti-communist pact, which other countries 
are invited to join, involves an undertaking to com- 
bat at home and abroad the activities of their “com- 
mon enemy’—the Communist International—as dis- 
tinguished from the Soviet government with which 
the three dictatorships remain officially on speaking 
terms. Since communist movements in Germany, 
Italy and Japan have been ruthlessly suppressed, the 
principal value of the pact is that it may be used 
to justify interference in any development abroad 
which, in the opinion of the Fascist dictators, re- 
veals the slightest connection with communism. 

By obtaining Italy's signature to the Rome proto- 
col, Hitler has enlarged the scope and striking 
power of his crusade against communism which, 
with the stubborn conviction of a mystic, he sin- 


Page Two 


——— 
—— 


cerely regards as a threat to European civilization, 
The potentialities of the anti-communist front are 
already indicated by Italo-German support of Franco 
against the alleged communist menace in Spain; 
German threats of interference in Czechoslovakia, 
whose pact of mutual assistance with the USSR. 
is denounced as a communist thrust at the heart of 
Central Europe; the danger that Germany, once it 
has gained a foothold in China through collabora. 
tion with Japan, may attempt to strike at the Soviet 
Union from both east and west; and Fascist propa- 
ganda in the Moslem world and in Latin America, 
where the Red peril has been used as the scapegoat 
for economic and social maladjustments. Most im- 
portant of all, Hitler’s anti-communist campaign is 
also directed at the Western democracies which, in 
his opinion, are a breeding-ground for communism 

Hitler’s fear of communist doctrine does nor seem 
to be entirely shared by Mussolini who, with tme 
Italian realism, has until now found it possible to 
muzzle communism at home while remaining on 
friendly terms with the Soviet Union. So far as Spain 
is concerned, the communist bogey merely serves 
as a convenient pretext for a policy of expansion in 
the Mediterranean which had always formed part 
of Mussolini’s imperial dream. Nor does Italy cher- 
ish any particular sympathy for Japan, denounced 
only two years ago as a threat to its commercial 
interests in Ethiopia. Faced with the necessity of re- 
paying Germany for its diplomatic support on Spain, 
Italy found that its most quickly realizable assets 
were acquiescence in the activities of Austrian Nazis, 
support of Germany's colonial demands, and ad- 
herence to the anti-communist pact. From I/ Duce’s 
point of view, the Rome protocol is valuable less as 
a thrust at communism than as an instrument of 
revenge against Britain, whose failure to recognize 
the Ethiopian conquest has offended It and 
handicapped it in obtaining financial a 
abroad for the exploitation of its new iz 
empire. 

Believing that, in spite of outward effusions, the 
Rome-Berlin axis is only a marriage of convenience, 
Britain still hopes to break it up by a separate deal 
with Italy. It is significant that, while Mr. Eden on 
November 1 made some caustic remarks about Italy's 
eagerness to satisfy Hitler’s colonial claims at the 
expense of other powers, Mr. Chamberlain persists 
in his search for a workable Anglo-Italian formula. 


Meanwhile, Britain has arranged for an exchange of | 


commercial agents with the Spanish Rebels, al- 
though still withholding de jure recognition of 
the Franco régime. This decision — regarded in 
Paris as a betrayal of the Loyalists— is due to 
the desire of British industrialists and merchants 
to safeguard their interests in the Rio Tinto cop- 


(Continued on Page 4) 


No’ 
Brusseé 
world 
even | 
adher! 
licly, 
much 
feeler 


From 
Clpit 
ostent 
ing t 
fact, 
lieved 
negot 
be en 
great 
or th 
Ber 
great 
fiture 
Unite 
Mr. ] 
Anth 
vemb 
bourt 
the [ 
the \ 


inne 


a cla 
| noun 
turn 
medi 
show 
| comy 
the / 
| be cx 
TI 
the 
seale 
offici 
bilize 
in th 
Euro 
tion 


——— 


lization, 
Ont are 
Franco 
Spain; 
lovakia, 
U.S.SR. 
reart of 
once it 
llabora- 
e Soviet 
t propa- 
\merica, 
‘apegoat 
fost im- 
Daign is 
hich, in 
munism. 
lot seem 
ith true 
ssible to 
ning on 
as Spain 
y serves 
nsion in 
red part 
aly cher- 
nounced 
nmercial 
ty of re- 
mn Spain, 
le assets 
n Nazis, 
and ad- 
1 Duce’s 
e less as 
ment of 
ecognize 
and 
issistance 


nial 


ions, the 
venience, 
rate deal 
Eden on 
ut Italy's 
is at the 
1 persists 
formula. 
hange of 
bels, al- 
ition of 
arded in 
; due to 
nerchants 
into cOop- 


W ashington News Letter 


——— 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 8—Developments of the past week at 
Brussels, Rome, Berlin and other focal points of 
world conflict have served to make Washington 
even more acutely conscious of the difficulties of 
adhering to its middle-of-the-road diplomacy. Pub- 
licly, State Department officials profess to be not 
much surprised by such events as Hitler’s mediation 
feeler and the Rome protocol linking Italy to the 
German-Japanese anti-communist pact. Both moves, 
tr is noted, have been “in the cards” for some time. 
From the beginning of the Far Eastern conflict, for- 
eign diplomats have been observing Germany's 
ostentatious neutrality in the belief that it was lead- 
ing to some such offer of mediation by Hitler. In 
fact, if the offer should materialize, and if it re- 
lieved the Brussels powers of the onerous task of 
negotiating another Hoare-Laval deal, it might not 
be entirely unwelcome—provided it did not do too 
great violence to the theoretical integrity of China 
or the established interests of the Western nations. 

Beneath the surface, however, there is evidence of 
great discomfiture and deep concern. The discom- 
fiture arises from the efforts at Brussels to push the 
United States into the position of leadership which 
Mr. Roosevelt’s Chicago speech seemed to promise. 
Anthony Eden’s House of Commons speech on No- 
vember 1, declaring he would travel from ‘Mel- 
bourne to Alaska” to get the “full cooperation” of 
the United States, was distinctly not helpful from 
the Washington view. And published reports of the 
inner conference’ working toward a democratic 
bloc has required rather elaborate explanation here. 

dilethama is now painfully acute. Having issued 
a clarion call for concerted action, and having de- 
nounced Japan as a treaty breaker, it is not easy to 
turn around with a milk and water proposal for 
| mediation which Tokyo is bound to reject. If Tokyo 
should now formally declare war on China, thus 
| compelling invocation of the Neutrality Act, which 


the Administration has ignored, the dilemma would 
be complete. 


| The concern arises more from the ultimate than 
the immediate effects of the anti-communist pact 
sealed at Rome. Looking ahead, State Department 
officials fear that Britain and France may be immo- 
bilized in Europe, with the threat of Italian action 
in the Mediterranean and German action in Central 
Europe preventing any effective democratic coopera- 
tion in the Far East. Nearer home, there is growing 


apprehension that the anti-communist front may at- 
tempt to line up the semi-dictatorial South American 
States or, in the event of civil war, actually to in- 
tervene as they have in the case of Spain. Most 
concerned are those responsible Washington officials 
who have been striving to stave off the alignment of 
the world into ideological blocs, which sooner or 
later must come into conflict. The task of preventing 
such a rigid alignment has been made much more 
difficult by the week’s developments. 

Storm clouds in the West Indies. The mysterious 
rumors of Haitian-Dominican friction, current here 
for some time, were finally confirmed last week by 
Georges Leger, Haitian Foreign Minister, now in 
this country. The serious situation now revealed ex- 
plains the efforts of the State Department to sup- 
press news of the initial clash a month ago. Troops 
are reported massed along the frontier of the two 
states. Beginning on October 3, it is declared, mem- 
bers of the Dominican army rounded up Haitian 
workers and peasants in the northwestern part of 
the Dominican Republic, and massacred them in cold 
blood. The assaults were continued for three days 
and cost the lives of at least 1000 Haitian civilians, 
including women and children. A mixed Haitian- 
Dominican commission is reported to be investigat- 
ing the affair. 

Public opinion in Haiti, it is said, is highly in- 
flamed against the Haitian authorities for attempt- 
ing to hush up the scandal, as well as against the 
neighboring government and the Dominicans resi- 
dent in Haiti. Apprehension that publicity might 
provoke riots in Haiti was apparently behind the 
attempt of the State Department and the Haitian 
government to keep the matter out of the press. It 
has also been feared that the danger of hostilities 
between the two states might upset the continental 
concord fostered by the Good Neighbor policy. 


The Trujillo dictatorship in the Dominican Re- 
public has frequently been charged with oppressive 
cruelty against its own citizens. But it is not yet clear 
to what degree that régime is responsible for insti- 
gating the massacre. For a century relations be- 
tween the two countries have been subjected to 
recurrent strain. At present Haiti, with twice the 
population of the Dominican Republic, possesses 
only half the territory; so that population pressure, 
aided by the demand of the Dominican sugar indus- 
try for cheap labor, has promoted a constant seepage 
of Haitians into the neighboring country where 
many have squatted on Dominican land. Although 


— 


the long-standing boundary dispute between the two 
states was finally settled in February 1935, cattle 
taids by Haitians across the border have caused re- 
newed friction. The Trujillo dictatorship has also 
been reported as irritated by the presence in Haiti 
of Dominican political exiles. 

Henry Norweb, United States Minister to the 
Dominican Republic, who has been in Havana as 
a delegate to the Inter-American Radio Conference, 
was ordered to return to his post. Despite the seri- 
ous concern of officials here, there are no indica- 
tions yet that Washington will step into the dispute 
by proposing the extension of good offices or that the 


= Page Four 


American powers will seek to establish a commission 
of investigation to ascertain the actual facts and 
responsibility. 


ROME-BERLIN AXIS SWINGS EAST 
(Continued from Page 2) 


per mines, the Jerez sherry trade, and Spanish 
iron ore, urgently needed for British rearmament, 
Britain’s talent for reconciling its economic inter. 
ests with its reluctance to wage war should encour. 
age the Fascist dictators in their plans for expansion 
in Eastern Europe, the Mediterranean and the Fay 


East. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Assignment in Utopia, by Eugene Lyons. New York, 


Harcourt, Brace, 1937. $3.50 


A six-year sojourn in the U.S.S.R. converts a journalist 
of Communist sympathies into a foe of all dictatorships. 
Although too voluminous, this book is a forceful state- 
ment of the worth and meaning of liberalism to both the 
intelligentsia and the masses. 


When China Unites, by Harry Gannes. New York, Knopf, 
1937. $2.50 
This loosely written account of recent Chinese history 
from the pure Stalinist point of view contains interesting 
data on Chinese communism. 


Landlord and Peasant in China, by Chen Han-seng. New 
York, International Publishers, 1936. $2.00 
A striking analysis of the agrarian crisis in south 
China, utilizing first-hand scientific data on land distribu- 


tion, tenancy, landlordism, rents, land prices, taxes, 
credits and wages. 
And Then the Storm, by Sister M. Monica. New York, 


Longmans, Green, 1937. $2.50 


A scholarly American nun, now a Franco sympathizer, 
recounts with charm her experiences in Spanish travel 
and research prior to the outbreak of the civil war. 


Monetary Review. Geneva, League of Nations, 1937. Dis- 
tributed by Columbia University Press, New York. $1.50 
This survey is indispensable to any one interested in 

recent monetary developments. It traces the progressive 
depreciation of currencies during the depression and con- 
tains illuminating sections on forward exchange, the op- 
eration of equalization funds, gold reserves and interest 
rates. 


Final Report of the Mixed Committee of the League of 
Nations on the Relation of Nutrition to Health, Agri- 
culture and Economic Policy. Geneva, League of Na- 
tions, 1937. Distributed by Columbia University Press, 
New York. $2.00 
This excellent report, which deserves wide attention, 

contains a wealth of data on essentials of a good diet and 
trends in food consumption as affected by prices, size and 
distribution of national income, education and other fac- 
tors. It shows that an astonishingly large number of 
people throughout the world are still suffering from un- 
dernourishment and malnutrition, and outlines some solu- 
tions for these deficiencies. 


Portrait of Mexico, by Diego Rivera and Bertram DP, 
Wolfe. New York, Covici-Friede, 1937. $4.75 
A collection of 249 half-tones reproducing Rivera’s most 
significant murals and paintings, accompanied by Wolfe’s 
penetrating interpretation of Mexico’s history. 


Report on International Trade. London, P E P, 1987, 
8s. 6d. 

Report on the British Social Services. London, P E P, 
1937. 7s. 6d. 


Two suggestive studies of importance, prepared by the 
Political and Economic Planning group of London. 


Supplement to the Law and Procedure of International 
Tribunals, by Jackson H. Ralston. Palo Alto, Stanford 
University Press, 1936. $4.00 


work, the last edition of which was published in 1926. 


FOR 


An inte? 


simulu 
estefi 
Whe 
This volume brings up to date Mr. Ralston’s standard jlishmen 


sonal ca 


The Career of Théophile Delcassé, by Charles W. Porter, jin Lati 


Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1936 

$3.50 

Scholarly biography of the man who built the Triple 
Entente and helped to prepare the World War. 


mined. 


f wha 
ascism 


The Settlement of Canadian-American Disputes, by P. E. that the 
Corbett. New Haven, Yale University Press, 1937. $2.50 of the « 


This study of the long series of Canadian-American 
arbitration proceedings concludes with the recommenda- 
tion that a general arbitration treaty providing for 4 
permanent tribunal be negotiated by the two states. 


International Control in the Non-Ferrous Metals, by W. 
Y. Elliott, E. S. May, J. W. F. Rowe, Alex Skelton and 
Donald Wallace. New York, Macmillan, 1937. $6.50 
This excellent and monumental survey of various inter- 

national restriction and control schemes fulfils a long-felt 

need. 

Eyes on Japan, by Victor A. Yakhontoff. New York, Cow- 
ard-McCann, 1936. $3.50 
A useful general survey of Japan’s historical and cul- 

tural backgrounds and current social, economic, political 

and international questions. 

Technology, Corporations and the General Welfare, by 


Henry Wallace. Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina Press, 1937. $1.00 


An acute analysis of the rigidities in capitalism caused 


by modern financial and economic organization. 


N. C€., University of 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 3, Novampsr 12, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonn Lasiis Bue, President; Vera Micue.es Dean, Editor. 


December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 
Entered as second-class mattef 


hitiate 
press a 
ery 
rt. 

dlving 


