


“vil 
the 
- of 
OF 
cing 
S in 
; to 
orts 


rent 
1use 
ket, 
ther 
pre. 


t in 


au- 
the 
nost 
- 0 
” Of 
rice, 
bar- 
> of 
ited 
un- 
> of 
ken 
‘Ott, 
1 to 


‘les, 
_ be 

the 

re- 
10W 
ved 
ris. 
and 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVIII, No. 23 Marcu 31, 1939 





—_— 


Should the Neutrality Act be retained? Revised? 
Repealed? For a concise summary of the Act, 
together with discussion questions, write for 


THE PROS AND CONS OF NEUTRALITY 


5 cents 


F.P.A. Club Service Bureau 


sBe)®, - \ 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 


RIODIc Al 
ad ROOM 2, 1921, at the Post 
NERA! 14, Office at New York, 
é i 4 
UNTY. OF a" N. Y., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 











University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 











FRANCE WEIGHS 


ITALY’S CLAIMS 





[N a speech in which he alternately rattled the saber 
and extended the olive branch, Benito Mussolini 
on March 26 virtually invited the French government 
to initiate conversations regarding Italy's “colonial” 
claims on France—claims for the first time officially 
limited to Tunisia, Djibouti, and the Suez Canal. 
The Rome-Berlin axis, I/ Duce declared, was un- 
breakable, and the German advance in central Europe 
was “fated to happen.”’ Concerted action against the 
authoritarian régimes would only produce a total- 
itarian counter-attack “‘at all points.” The Spanish 
issue was now virtually settled; and discussions of 
Franco-Italian problems—defined, according to Mus- 
solini, in the Italian note of December 17, 1938 abro- 
gating the Rome accords of 1935—must now begin 
if the two states were not to become still more 
estranged. In the Mediterranean Italy’s interests were 
vital; in the Adriatic they were “pre-eminent but not 
exclusive as regards the Slavs.” Since international re- 
lations were governed by force, Italy was compelled 
to arm at all costs, even if it meant the destruction of 
civilian life. 

With this amalgam of, bombast and oblique but 
conciliatory reference to current diplomatic issues, 
Mussolini apparently attempted to satisfy his fire- 
eating followers while intimating that he would not 
be unreasonable regarding colonial claims. In Lon- 
don the moderation of his demands was used to jus- 
tify a rapid British retreat from earlier attempts to 
form a ‘stop Hitler’ bloc—an attempt which failed 
because Britain was not prepared to guarantee auto- 
matic military assistance to the sorely pressed states 
of Eastern Europe. Paris appeared relieved because 
official sanction had not been given to Italian claims 
for Corsica, Nice and Savoy. To the French the stage 
appeared to be set for capitalizing on earlier over- 
tures for Franco-Italian rapprochement. The most im- 
portant of these was the announcement on March 25 


that France had decided to turn over to the Franco 
government the Loyalist fleet which had taken refuge 
in the Tunisian port of Bizerta on March 7. 

Will Italy leave the axis? While the French have 
hitherto refused to go beyond the abortive Laval- 
Mussolini agreements, they might now be disposed 
to make further concessions in return for satisfactory 
assurances from Rome. Among other things, France 
would undoubtedly insist on a commitment to with- 
draw Italian troops from Spain, where a Franco offen- 
sive was launched on March 26, following the collapse 
of peace negotiations. Italy’s fear that Hitler might 

“liberate” the Croats in Yugoslavia" and penetrate to 
the Adriatic was believed in some quarters to afford 
an extraordinary opportunity for breaking the Ger- 
man-Italian bonds which have thus far withstood all 
democratic threats and blandishments. The French 
could conceivably grant greater rights to the Italians 
in Tunisia, give Italy a voice in the administration of 
the Suez Canal Company, and establish a form of 
condominium over Djibouti and the French-con- 
trolled Addis-Ababa railway. It remains to be seen 
whether minor concessions of this type, or even an 
offer of desert territory in the hinterland of Tunisia, 
will convince Mussolini that he does not stand to 
gain more by defiance as a member of the axis than 
by agreement with the Western powers. 

In any case, French internal developments have 
been predicated on the theory that the real menace to 
France comes not from the Mediterranean but from 
across the Rhine. Taking advantage of the consterna- 
tion aroused by the collapse of Czecho-Slovakia, Pre- 
mier Edouard Daladier on March 19 secured from 
Parliament full decree powers until November 30, 
1939. Under his special authority, granted after bitter 
debate, the Premier moved swiftly to strengthen the 
French position in Europe. In the military field, the 
government assumed power to call up reservists with- 














out parliamentary formality and to increase the per- 
sonnel of the professional army. The military district 
around Metz was divided into two, each with a full 
military establishment. The French government has 
called to the colors between 125,000 and 200,000 
special fortress troops for the Maginot line; retained 
for indefinite service 90,000 conscripts who would 
ordinarily have completed their training in April; 
and added almost 3,000 officers and non-commis- 
sioned officers to the army’s rolls. 

A second group of decrees is designed to reinforce 
the industrial foundation on which defense must rest. 
The 40-hour week, already virtually abolished by 
earlier enactments, now gives way to a 60-hour max- 
imum in all basic industries, which may be exceeded 
if necessary. Rates of overtime pay have been severely 
slashed. Skilled laborers, of whom there is already 
an acute shortage, will be required to work wherever 
the government demands, with loss of the unemploy- 
ment dole as the penalty for refusal. Another decree, 
designed to secure secrecy comparable with that at- 
tained in the dictatorships, sharply restricts the pub- 
lication of military information in the broadest 
sense. Forthcoming measures are expected to prohibit 
attacks on foreign heads of states by the press, and 
perhaps to establish a government propaganda office. 
In the field of finance, new regulations cut down 
civil expenditures. 


Fighting fascism with regimentation. Thus, for 
the third time in less than a year, the Daladier gov- 
ernment has obtained extraordinary powers permit- 
ting it to exercise a freedom of action it could not 
otherwise enjoy. It is particularly significant that 
these powers were not necessitated to meet an im- 
minent threat of internal social unrest. Under the su- 


MEMEL AND RUMANIA MARK 


Losing no time after its absorption of Czecho- 
Slovakia, Germany last week advanced at opposite 
ends of its long Eastern front—in Memel and Ru- 
mania. On March 23 it forced Lithuania to cede the 
Memel Territory, an area of 1,000 square miles with 
a population of 150,000, a large majority of which 
is German. This territory, severed from Germany in 
1919 to provide Lithuania with a seaport under an 
autonomous régime, had been seized by the Lith- 
uanians in 1923. The Memel Statute, signed by Brit- 
ain, France, Japan and Italy on May 8, 1924, had 
granted the territory autonomous rights within the 
Lithuanian state. 

Following the Czech annexation, the Memel Nazis 
began mass demonstrations urging return to the 
Reich. On March 20 the Lithuanian Foreign Minis- 
ter, who had hurried to Berlin, received an ultimatum 
in which the German government suggested the pos- 
sibility of outbreaks in Memel and threatened to send 


Page Two 








ee | 
—— 


pervision of Finance Minister Paul Reynaud, France 
had turned its back on the objectives of the Popular 
Front and had partially embraced the tenets of eco. 
nomic liberalism. Recovery was noticeable if mod. 
erate; the general index of production had risen from 
81 in October to 87 in January. Capital, much of it 
fleeing from Belgium, Holland and Switzerland, had 
flowed steadily into France. But the overwhelming 
fear of war retarded private investment and appeared 
to demand measures of economic constraint. 


The steps taken by M. Daladier were ordered not 
by a national government representing all factions, 
but by one resting on a new, Rightist majority in the 
Chamber of Deputies. The Prime Minister has te. 
fused to promise that parliamentary elections will not 
be postponed, that the press will remain free, or that 
the Communist party will not be suppressed. Under 
these circumstances, the future attitude of French la- 
bor, still dispirited as a result of the unsuccessful gen- 
eral strike of November 30 will probably depend on 
whether business and financial interests are subjected 
to constraint commensurate with that imposed on 
the workers. The French experience supports the view 
that democratic governments and the dynamic fascist 
régimes cannot continue to exist side by side—not be- 
cause fascist claims must immediately result in war, 
but because, even if a temporary peace is gained by 
concessions, the nerve-racking, uneconomic arma- 
ments race forces resort to totalitarian methods in the 
sheer search for national efficiency. Regimentation 
tends to displace liberal democracy by a sort of po- 
litical Gresham’s law. How the political clock can 
again be turned back is exceedingly difficult to 
foresee. 

Davip H. Popper 


NAZIS’ EASTERN ADVANCE 


troops to “keep order” unless Lithuania ceded the 
territory within four days. Although the Lithuanian 
government accepted these demands »n March 21, it 
declared Germany’s step illegal and announced its in- 
tention to consult the signatories of the Memel 
Statute. In reply, Germany threatened to invade the 
entire country unless Lithuania’s statements were re- 
pudiated and Memel immediately surrendered. By an 
agreement signed early on March 23 Lithuania ceded 
the territory in exchange for a free zone in the port 
of Memel and a German promise of non-aggression. 

While the seizure of Memel is not itself of great 
importance, it strengthens Germany at the expense of 
Poland and the Soviet Union. The establishment of a 
submarine base at Memel will increase the Reich’s 
naval supremacy in the Baltic. Moreover, since all 
Lithuania is likely to fall under German influence, 
Poland has less hope of obtaining Lithuanian terri- 
tory as compensation for the possible occupation of 








Dan 
the 
serv 


thar 
clus 
agre 
ov 
a 
an 
Ger 
by t 
and 
ma! 
Uk: 


nie 


“st 
imy 
Ge 
see 
but 
Ru 


for 
sou 
tri¢ 
sor 
its 





ing 
red 


not 
ns, 


re- 
not 
hat 
der 


7en- 
On 
ted 

on 
lew 
cist 


Var, 
| by 
ma- 
the 
‘ion 
po- 
can 

to 


ded 


ort 


eat 
> of 


rf a 


all 
ice, 
tri- 


of 








— 
— 





Danzig by Germany. Lying less than 100 miles from 
the Soviet border, Lithuania may also conceivably 
serve as a base for German attack on Soviet territory. 


German-Rumanian Agreement. More important 
than the seizure of Memel was Hitler’s prompt con- 
dusion, on March 22, of a far-reaching economic 
agreement with Rumania. Early in March the Nazi 
government had sent a delegation to Bucharest to 
seek economic advantages beyond those granted by 
an agreement concluded in November 1938. The 
German demands were given threatening emphasis 
by the destruction of Czecho-Slovakia on March 14, 
and by the massing of Hungarian troops on the Ru- 
manian border after the conquest of Carpatho- 
Ukraine. On March 17 a report—subsequently de- 
nied—that Rumania had received an ultimatum from 
Berlin spurred Britain to hasten the formation of a 
“stop Hitler’’ front. Moreover, Britain, whose total 
imports from Rumania actually exceeded those of 
Germany during February, announced that it would 
seek means of expanding its purchases still further— 
but failed to prevent the signature of the German- 
Rumanian agreement. 

This agreement, concluded for five years, provides 
for German development of various Rumanian re- 
sources and intensified trade between the two coun- 
tries. In return for adjusting its farm production 
somewhat to German needs, Rumania will increase 
its agricultural exports to the Reich. Germany agrees 


Page Three 








to sell Bucharest war materials and to give technical 
assistance in certain agricultural processing indus- 
tries. German capital is allowed to exploit Rumanian 
mines and petroleum, as well as to develop Ru- 
mania’s railways, river navigation facilities, and 
motor highways. The Reich apparently can now ob- 
tain Rumanian oil by barter and by the use of special 
marks. The exchange rate between the mark and the 
Rumanian leu—which will affect the value of trade 
concessions—is not yet known. 

In granting the Third Reich these economic con- 
cessions, King Carol continued the cautious policy he 
has followed since Munich. Because of its valuable 
natural resources and its geographical position, Ru- 
mania clearly lies in the path of German expansion. 
In the face of internal and external dangers, King 
Carol has suppressed the Fascist Iron Guard at home 
and, in default of economic and military support 
from Britain, France and the Soviet Union, has shown 
a conciliatory attitude toward Germany and Hungary. 
The new economic agreement reflects the King’s ac- 
ceptance of Rumania’s increased dependence on the 
Third Reich. It does not, however, appear to commit 
the country irrevocably to exclusive German economic 
exploitation or political control. Meanwhile, it may 
provide a “breathing space’”’ during which the attitude 
of Britain, France and the Soviet Union will deter- 
mine whether Rumania can resist inclusion in the or- 
bit of the expanding Third Reich. Payz B. TAYLOR 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


France Overseas: A Study of Modern Imperialism, by 
Herbert Ingram Priestley. New York, Appleton-Century, 
1938. $5.00 


This detailed but discursive history of French colonial 
enterprise since 1815 recognizes that political motives may 
be as strong as economic forces in stimulating the desire 
for colonies, and concludes that the possession of colonies 
is a political li: bility rather than an asset. 


Morocco as a French Economic Venture: A Study of Open 
Door Imperialism, by Melvin M. Knight. New York, 
Appleton-Century, 1937. $2.25 
An interesting study, which concludes that the French 

colonial empire as a whole has been an “expensive national 

luxury.” 


zechs and Germans, by Elizabeth Wiskemann. New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1938. $5.00 


This volume, prepared for the Royal Institute of Inter- 
national Affairs, is probably the best book in English on 
the relations between Germans and Czechs in Bohemia and 
Moravia up to the crisis of 1938. Its full historical treat- 
ment of the pre-war period and its analysis, based on per- 
sonal observation, of the problems of the post-war period 
remain valuable even after the break-up of Czecho-Slovakia. 


Schacht, Hitler’s Magician, by Norbert Miihlen. New York, 

Longmans, Green, 1939. $3.00 

In this penetrating exposé of the Third Reich’s former 
economic dictator, the author reveals how Schacht ex- 
ploited Germany’s creditors to advance the cause of Ger- 
man rearmament. Schacht is portrayed as a clever, ego- 
tistical opportunist who, ironically enough, fell victim to 
his own methods. Although the value of the book is im- 
paired by its polemical tone and occasional inaccuracies, it 
provides instructive and interesting reading. 


The Far Eastern Policy of the United States, by A. Whit- 
ney Griswold. New York, Harcourt, Brace, 1938. $3.75 
A scholarly contribution of first rank, this study of 

American policy in the Far East spans the 1898-1938 
period. Each phase of this 40-year era, from the acquisi- 
tion of the Philippines to the contemporary American 
diplomatic reaction toward the war in China, is carefully 
analyzed and voluminously documented. Some of the state 
papers and memoirs are presented for the first time in this 
volume. All periods save the most recent are given a detailed 
and illuminating setting in world politics. The author’s 
thesis that American efforts to maintain the open door 
policy in China are futile and dangerous somewhat colors 
his emphasis and interpretation. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 23, Marcu 31, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHEeLtes DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
asm 181 F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 














Washington News Letter 





sitbes, 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


MARCH 27.—When the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee meets this week to set a date for hearings 
on the complicated issue of “neutrality” revision, it 
will have a choice of four possible courses of action. 
These alternatives, which will be weighed against the 
background of swiftly moving developments in Eu- 
rope and the Far East, may be summarized briefly as 
follows: 

1. Repeal of existing legislation. Two Senate 
resolutions calling for outright repeal are pending at 
the present time—one introduced by Senator King of 
Utah (S.203), the other sponsored by Senator Lewis 
of Illinois (S$.1745). A similar resolution is spon- 
sored by Representative Faddis (H.J.Res. 44) in the 
House. The effect of all three measures would be the 
same: to restore the pre-war status, under which the 
conduct of the United States would be governed by 
traditional neutral rights and duties as defined by in- 
ternational law. 

2. Discrimination between belligerents. The 
theory that the United States should distinguish be- 
tween an “aggressor” and a victim of aggression is 
embodied in the resolution presented by Senator 
Thomas of Utah (S.J.Res. 67). This proposal is 
based in part on the recommendations of a group of 
experts appointed by the Committee for Concerted 
Peace Efforts. It would amend existing statutes in 
two important respects: first, by authorizing the Pres- 
ident to extend the embargo on arms and ammuni- 
tion to include “the placing of restrictions” on cer- 
tain other “‘articles or materials of use in war’; sec- 
ond, by making it possible to lift any embargo 
against a victim of aggression in a case involving the 
violation of a treaty to which the United States is a 
party, provided that this action has the approval “of 
a majority of each House of Congress.” 

3. Cash and carry sales. The resolution intro- 
duced by Senator Pittman (S.J.Res. 97) and spon- 
sored by Representative Hennings in the House is 
frankly offered as a compromise. It would not dis- 
tinguish between aggressors and victims, but would 
remove the embargo on arms and ammunition and 
permit the sale of all materials to any nation able to 
pay in cash and transport American goods in its own 
(or neutral) vessels. The ‘‘civil strife” clauses of the 
existing law would be dropped, but most other fea- 
tures, including the embargo on loans and credits, 
would be continued without change. 

4. Do nothing. Several members of the Foreign 





Relations Committee and many rank and file mem. 
bers of both the Senate and House favor letting the 
present law take its course rather than making any 
change which might influence the present situatiog 
abroad. If no action is taken before May 1, the exist. 
ing law will continue in effect, with the exception of 





Section 2, which gives the President discretionary au. 
thority to apply the cash and carry provisions to ar. 
ticles other than arms and ammunition. 

What action will Congress take? For the time 
being, at least, none of the positive proposals 
for revision commands sufficient support to assure 
its adoption. The Thomas amendment is con. 
ceded almost no chance of passage at this session. 
Despite practically universal condemnation of Hit 
ler’s march to the East and the growing hostility to 
the totalitarian states, there is surprisingly little sup. 
port for an embargo policy against the dictators. This 
is due partly to fear of American involvement, and 
partly to distrust of the European democracies, par- 
ticularly Britain. Senator Borah voiced the suspicions 
of an important section of Congressional opinion 
when he declared in a radio address on March 25 that 
Germany has had ‘“‘no better friend’’ since Hitler 
came to power than “the British democracy.” 

Sentiment for outright repeal has undoubtedly 
gained in recent weeks. The ranks of the isolationists 
are split on this proposal, with men like Hiram John- 
son, Murray of Montana, and Lewis of Illinois in 
favor of scrapping existing legislation and enacting 
no substitutes. Moreover, many of those who voted in 
favor of the original neutrality law are now thor 
oughly disillusioned by the march of events abroad 
and no longer believe in the possibility of ‘‘legis- 
lating” a foreign policy. Nevertheless, Washington 
observers who have polled Congressional opinion 





during the past few days are convinced that advocates 
of repeal are still far from securing a majority. 

The Pittman compromise offers the best chance of 
agreement, but even this is not certain. Both groups 
of isolationists are opposing it on the ground that by 
supplying munitions to the European democracies we 
will be repeating the mistakes of 1914 to 1917. And 
those who favor concerted action against aggressors 
fear that it will work to the disadvantage of China 
and actually aid Japan. Unless these objections are 
overcome in the course of the hearings which are 
scheduled to begin this week, there would seem to be 
more than a possibility that the whole question of re- 
vision will be allowed to slide, without any action 


at this season. W. T. SToNE 


——— 











