ae 





e's 
the 
and 


alt 
hat 
val 
fter 
hat 
10, 
ddi- 


atio 


any 
e to 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XIX, No. 41 Avucust 2, 1940 





——— 


For a comprehensive analysis of the inter-Amer- 
ican trade problem, read: 


ECONOMIC DEFENSE OF THE AMERICAS 
by HOWARD J. TRUEBLOOD 


25c 


August 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


PBRIOVDICAL KUUM 
GENERAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF MICH. Entered as second- 





2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 
AUG 8 | é 
fe SECOND CLASS MAIL 











General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











~ HAVANA STRENGTHENS INTER-AMERICAN UNITY 





By HowarbD J. TRUEBLOOD 
Mr. Trueblood was an observer at the Havana Conference. 


&)N July 30 the ten-day Havana Conference — 
more formally known as the Second Consulta- 
tive Meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the 
American Republics—came to a close with a record 
of achievement designed to convince the world that 
democracy can act with totalitarian speed under the 
impact of an emergency. As a tangible expression of 
inter-American unity, the Havana meeting went far 
beyond any previous Pan-American conference, al- 
though the results obtained were a logical sequel to 
the foundation laid at Lima in 1938 and at the 
First Meeting of Ministers held in Panama shortly 
after the outbreak of the European war. The Ha- 
vana meeting, which took place under circumstances 
far more grave than those yet encountered by the 
American republics, represented a distinct step for- 
ward in the operation of Pan-American consultative 
machinery. The coming months will determine 
whether or not this machinery is adequate to imple- 
ment the policies formulated at Havana. 


The conference witnessed the evolution of the 
Monroe Doctrine from a unilateral declaration on 
the part of the United States to a Pan-American in- 
strument of policy. In the face of a common danger, 
the American republics have attempted to estab- 
lish a united front against the political and eco- 
nomic repercussions of the European war. This 
does not mean that a specific procedure has been 
evolved to meet all possible contingencies. On the 
contrary, while detailed methods for dealing with 
the problem of European possessions in the West- 
em Hemisphere were approved, the program of eco- 
nomic defense, which has been a matter of particu- 
lar concern to the Washington Administration, was 
left quite flexible. Failure to draw up complete blue 
prints for cooperative action along economic lines, 


however, is in no sense attributable to indecision 
or to lack of agreement on the necessary measures. 
It was recognized at Havana that, in a world situa- 
tion which is becoming increasingly fluid, economic 
problems should be dealt with in accordance with 
the circumstances existing at any given time. 

EUROPEAN POSSESSIONS. The question which 
attracted greatest attention at Havana, and which is 
of most immediate importance to the security of the 
Americas, is that of European possessions in the 
Western Hemisphere. This question was, in fact, the 
only real issue of the Conference, since the original 
United States proposal for a Pan-American mandate 
system—presented to the meeting on July 23—was 
opposed by Dr. Leopoldo Melo, head of the Ar- 
gentine delegation. The opposition of Argentina, 
which was based primarily on a difference of opin- 
ion as to the urgency of the situation, eventually dis- 
appeared, largely through the personal efforts of 
Secretary Hull. This “rift’’ between the United States 
and Argentina gave rise to serious concern over the 
success of the conference, but the ease with which 
a compromise was effected testified to the sincere 
desire of Argentina—long an outspoken opponent 
of the United States at Pan-American conferences— 
to preserve unity. There is no evidence to support the 
charge, circulated in the opening days of the Ha- 
vana gathering, that Argentina sought to sabotage 
the conference in order not to jeopardize its Euro- 
pean markets after the war. 

The immediacy of the territorial question was 
recognized in the unanimously approved Act of 
Havana, which supplemented a more elaborate for- 
mal convention to be presented to the various gov- 
ernments for approval. The Act declares: “When 
American islands or areas at present held by non- 
American nations are in danger of becoming the 
subject-matter of exchange of territories or sover- 
eignty, the American Republics . . . may establish 














== Page Two —. 





regions of provisional administration.” When the 
conditions making such action necessary cease to 
exist, the possessions would either be made inde- 
pendent, provided they are capable of self-govern- 
ment, or returned to their former sovereigns. In 
order to set the provisional administration in opera- 
tion, the Act provides for the creation of ‘‘an emer- 
gency committee made up of one representative 
each of the American Republics, said committee to 
be considered constituted from the date of the ap- 
pointment of two-thirds of its members.” This com- 
mittee may meet at the request of any signatory. In 
addition, however, any American republic may act 
alone “if the necessity for emergency action be 
deemed so urgent as to make it impossible to await 
action of the committee.” The convention, which 
requires ratification by the signatories, states that 
“the American republics reserve the right to judge 
... if some transfer or intent to transfer sovereignty, 
jurisdiction, cession or incorporation of geographical 
regions in America owned by European countries 
until September 1, 1939, may impair their political 
independence even though there has been no formal 
transfer or change in the status of the regions.” 


ECONOMIC COOPERATION. In his address be- 
fore the Havana meeting on July 22, Secretary Hull 
recommended a four-point program of cooperative 
action, providing for: (1) ‘Strengthening and ex- 
pansion of the activities of the Inter-American 
Financial and Economic Advisory Committee as an 
instrument for continued consultation with respect 
to trade matters.” (2) “Creation of facilities for the 
temporary handling and orderly marketing of ac- 
cumulated surpluses of those commodities which 
are of primary importance to the maintainance of 
the economic life of the American Republics.” 
(3) “Development of commodity agreements with 
a view to assuring equitable terms of trade for both 
producers and consumers of the commodities con- 


U.S. EMBARGO RAISES FAR-REACHING ISSUES 


As the Axis powers announced that the long- 
heralded invasion of Britain was under way, Britain 
last week extended its blockade of the European 
continent to cover Spain and Portugal which, fol- 
lowing the collapse of France, could serve as a chan- 
nel for German imports from overseas countries. 
The British blockade was reinforced by the action 
of the American government, which on July 25 
prohibited the export of petroleum, petroleum prod- 
ucts and scrap metal from the United States without 
a specific license from the administrator of export 
control, Lieutenant Colonel Russell Maxwell, and 
prevented cargoes of these materials from clearing 
for Spain and Japan. While the American embargo 
may be explained by considerations of national de- 











ee 


cerned.” (4) “Consideration of methods for im 
proving the standard of living of the peoples of the 
Americas.” The economic recommendations 4 
proved by the Conference were essentially an ampli 
fication of these points. The surplus commodj 
problem received primary attention, but the United 
States delegation took pains to deny that any vay 
marketing scheme designed to “freeze out” Germany 
was contemplated. In place of a cartel or market 
ing board plan, the declaration merely recommended 
the creation of ‘instruments of inter-American ¢. 
operation for warehousing, financing and transitoy 
disposition of the surpluses of said products, a 
well as for their orderly and systematic distribution 
and sale.” Presumably, this program is definitely 
linked to President Roosevelt's recommendation fo, 
a $500,000,000 increase in the capital of the Export. 
Import Bank. The broad outlines of Westem 
Hemisphere economic policy were laid down at Ha 
vana, but the details remain to be worked out by the 
Inter-American Economic and Financial Advisoy 
Committee, which will have the cooperation of the 
Inter-American Bank and the Inter-American Devel. 
opment Commission. 

Matters pertaining to neutrality were referred to 
the Inter-American Neutrality Committee, which 
functions at Rio de Janeiro. This body was entrusted 
with the “drafting of a project of inter-American 
convention which will cover completely all the prin. 
ciples and rules generally recognized in international 
law in matters of neutrality, and especially those con- 
tained in the resolutions of Panama.” The delegates 
also passed a resolution which provided for the sup 
pression of foreign activities tending “to subvert 
their domestic institutions or to foment disorder is 
their internal political life.” The resolution on for 
eign activities included provision for the exchange 
of information and immediate consultation “in the 
event that the peace of any of the American repub 
lics is menaced by such activities.” 


fense, there is no doubt that it will prove a blow 
to Spain, where there is a shortage of gasoline. It 
will be an even more serious blow to Japan, which 





has been drawing the bulk of its war materials from 
the United States. 


EFFECTS OF U.S. EMBARGO. An embargo on 


war materials may well be regarded by Japan, Ger 
many and Italy as a hostile measure, even if it tech 
nically falls “short of war’’—especially when the 
United States stands ready to supply Britain with 
all the airplanes and other war equipment our fac 
tories are capable of producing. From the point of 
view of the United States, however, it would be 
illogical to rally the country behind a program of 
defense, presumably designed to prevent Germat, 


= 


Italian 
this co 
potent 
sequer 
argum 
notabl 
bargo 
yasion 
in the 
Tokyc 
States 
by an 
demat 
relatic 
which 
Burm 
paren 
arrest 
is ins 
FII 
betwe 
ing t 
the I 
lapse 
and 
Mun 
East, 
destr 
distu 
have 
whic 
the | 
brea 
tions 
Be 
dout 
indi 
hol¢ 
prov 
brea 
tou 
tion 
Ger 
ing 
of ( 
ther 
as € 
tior 
sati 
pire 
leas 
hav 
bas 
FOR 


Heac 
Ente 


< 








ul 


he 
ip 
ij. 
ity 
ast 
ny 


ed 
Co. 


. 


ion 
ely 
for 


ern 
1a. 
the 
Ory 
the 
vel. 


to 
ich 
ted 
Can 
rin- 
nal 
On: 
ates 
up: 


vert 


for- 


nge 
yub- 














—_—_ 


[talian and Japanese attack on what are regarded as 
this country’s interests, while permitting the export to 

tential enemies of war materials that may sub- 
sequently be used against the United States. One 
argument commonly advanced against such action, 
notably in the case of Japan, has been that an em- 
bargo on oil would merely encourage Japanese in- 
yasion of the Dutch East Indies. Recent statements 
in the Japanese press, however, would indicate that 
Tokyo needed no encouragement from the United 
States to consider expansion to the south. Nor is it 
by any means certain that acquiescence in Japanese 
demands would necessarily improve this country’s 
relations with Tokyo. The experience of Britain, 
which yielded to Japan’s demand for closing of the 
Burma road only to discover that the Japanese, ap- 
parently interpreting this as a sign of weakness, had 
arrested prominent Britishers on charges of espionage, 
is instructive in this respect. 


FIRMNESS OR APPEASEMENT? The choice 
between firmness and appeasement, now confront- 
ing the United States both on the Atlantic and on 
the Pacific, has been widely debated since the col- 
lapse of France. Some observers contend that France 
and Britain should have continued the policy of 
Munich, and permitted Germany's expansion to the 
East, in the hope that Germany and Russia would 
destroy each other, leaving Western civilization un- 
disturbed. This course, it is said, would, at best, 
have preserved France and Britain from the disasters 
which have befallen the former and now threaten 
the latter; and, at worst, would have given them a 
breathing-space to make adequate military prepara- 
tions against the Reich. 

Both of these assumptions are at least open to 
doubt. Russia’s performance in Finland does not 
indicate that it would have been well equipped to 
hold Germany on the eastern front long enough to 
provide France and Britain with an adequate 
breathing-space. Moreover, since the Allies failed 
to utilize the eight months of war for total mobiliza- 
tion of their economic and military resources against 
Germany, they probably would have displayed, dur- 
ing such a breathing-space, an even greater degree 
of complacency and paralysis of the will. Nor is 
there evidence as yet to indicate that Hitler, who 
as early as 1923 was making a bid for world domina- 
tion by the German ‘master race,” would have been 
satished with the development of an economic em- 
pire in eastern Europe. On the contrary, there is at 
least equally good reason to believe that he would 
have used this economic empire as an even stronger 
base for ultimate attack on the West: for the real 


Page Three 








enemy of the Third Reich, and its real competitor 
for world domination, is not Russia, but the British 
Empire. And, should the British Empire collapse, its 
next competitor may be, not Russia, but the United 
States, with which it is already contending for in- 
fluence over Latin America. 

THE PRICE OF PEACE. The principal mistake of 
French and British statesmen was not that they first 
chose Munich in preference to war, and then war in 
preference to another Munich, but that they never 
squarely faced the problems created by the rise of a 
united and militant Germany in a passive world. 
Had France and Britain yielded on Poland, as they 
had already done on Austria, Spain and Czechoslo- 
vakia, they might conceivably have avoided outright 
warfare. They might have been forced, however, to 
accept the kind of German domination now imposed 
not only on France, Poland and Czechoslovakia, but 
also on countries which are regarded by Germany 
with a relative degree of sympathy, such as Denmark 
and Holland. Only to the extent that advocates of 
appeasement in France and Britain were ready to 
accept this domination in September 1939 are they 
now justified in criticizing those who rightly or 
wrongly accepted the alternative of war. Most hu- 
man beings prefer peace to war; and few today are 
unaware of the material and spiritual destruction 
wreaked by war on civilians and soldiers alike. Mere 
hatred of war, however, is purely negative. It fails 
to remedy those conflicts of interests which from 
time to time break out into open warfare, and avoids 
the fact that peace, no less than war, requires ma- 
terial sacrifices. Hitler has been far more clearly 
aware of these realities than the Western powers, 
whose leaders and peoples until recently have been 
reluctant to make either the sacrifices required by 
preparation for war, or those required to “appease” 
Germany, Italy and Japan. 

Today the price of peace is not merely abandon- 
ment of this or that piece of outlying territory be- 
longing to some small power, like the Dutch East 
Indies, but total acceptance of the revolutionary 
world order contemplated by Germany, Italy and 
Japan. Such acceptance may appear to be both desir- 
able and practicable. But, by a strange paradox, the 
leading advocates of “appeasement” in all countries 
are unalterably opposed to the kind of democratic 
revolution which might have checked the inroads of 
Nazi propaganda, and hope to preserve property 
rights by conciliating the totalitarian powers—with- 
out realizing, apparently, that under Nazism prop- 
erty becomes the servant, not the master, of the 
totalitarian state. VERA MICHELES DEAN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 41, AuGust 2, 1940. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


“eo 81 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FraANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


National 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter |’ 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
JuLy 30.—Defense legislation continues to occupy 
the center of the Washington stage, with the 
Burke-Wadsworth Compulsory Military Training 
bill, the $4,848,000,000 emergency military appro- 
priation, excess profits legislation, and a congeries of 
detailed projects sharing the Congressional spotlight. 
Temporarily at least, conscription is the greatest 
single issue on the legislative calendar. The debate 
on this question may drag on for many days in the 
Senate, where an outspoken minority has announced 
its Opposition to compulsory service. 


- In general, opponents of the legislation attack it 
as a step toward preparation of a mass army for par- 
ticipation in overseas wars. They insist that, were 
voluntary enlistment in the Army made sufficiently 
attractive, the full strength needed for American 
defense in this hemisphere could be raised without 
resort to compulsion. The administration, supported 
by the army and an apparent Congressional major- 
ity, stresses the need for large forces for hemisphere 
defense under present conditions and reiterates the 
customary arguments for peace-time conscription: 
that selective service is more democratic and fairer; 
and that it builds national morale and physique. 


ARMY EXPANSION PLANS. Enlargement of 
the Army for its new functions is already under way. 
The authorized enlisted strength of the Regular 
Army has been raised from 280,000 to 375,000, and 
intensive recruiting has thus far brought actual 
strength to about 250,000. Troops stationed in the 
continental United States are being organized in 
nine “streamlined” divisions, largely motorized and 
possessing fire-power equal to World War type di- 
visions containing twice as many men. Furthermore, 
chiefly as a result of German successes in Europe, 
the tank and mechanized elements of the Infantry 
and Cavalry are being re-grouped in a separate Ar- 
mored Corps of two divisions, including field artil- 
lery and motorized infantry. The new force will 
contain over 18,000 officers and enlisted men and 
1,400 armored vehicles—predominantly light tanks, 
scout cars and medium tanks. 

The expansion of the professional units is only a 
first step in the War Department program. Previous 
mobilization plans called for a protective mobiliza- 
tion force of not more than 1,000,000 men who would 
not be ready for service until months after war be- 
gan. These have been superseded by rising and still 
indefinite estimates of mobilization needs. In a state- 





ment published on July 17, General George C. Mar. 
shall, Chief of Staff, declared that a trained and 
fully equipped army of 2,000,000 men is an indis. 
pensable minimum for hemisphere defense and dis 
closed that the War Department objective is noy 
the formation of forty-five streamlined infantry dj 
visions and ten armored divisions. 


COMPOSITION OF PROPOSED FORCE. For 
such a force conscription is undoubtedly necessary, 
Legislation requested by the President on July % 
empowers him to call up the National Guard an¢ 
Reserve Officers for service in the Western Hemi. 
sphere and United States territories. These contin. 
gents will assist the Regular Army in maintaining 
essential activities and training the young men se 
lected under the new training system. The War De 
partment favors mobilization of the entire Guard for 
one year, except for individuals with dependents, who 
are permitted to resign. The Regular forces and the 
Guard combined might total 600,000 men, to whom 
1,400,000 would be added by compulsory service by 
October 1941. Under the Burke-Wadsworth bill as 
drafted by the Senate Military Affairs Committee, 
individuals between 21 and 31 will serve for twelve 
months. Army plans contemplate the induction into 
the armed forces of 400,000 men in October 1940; 
400,000 more in April 1941; and in October of 
that year an additional 600,000. Those who com 
plete training will be transferred to the reserves for 
a period of ten years and will be subject to call for 
periods of additional instruction. 


Granted such a program will come into effec 
this fall, some observers fear that the country, hav- 
ing appropriated billions and introduced conscrip- 
tion, may then regard itself as adequately prepared 
for any emergency. In fact, only the blue prints 
will have been adopted; actual creation of the new 
armed forces will require many years. Decisions on 
details and final objectives have been tentatively ap 
proved, but must necessarily remain in a fluid state 
until the international political situation becomes 
more stable. The “two-ocean” navy cannot be com: 
pleted for at least six years; a production rate of 
25,000 airplanes per year cannot be reached in less 
than two; and a similar time lag exists for most of 
the other complicated devices now demanded in 
great quantity by the two services. Complacency at 
this stage is therefore unwarranted. The danget 
period will continue until man power and machines 
are fused in a smoothly functioning military orgat 
ization. Davip H. Popper 











\ 


Nt 


missa 
flict i1 
bellig 
ment 
Amb: 
the Pi 
said 
US.S 
Britis 
tribu 
circle 
weig 
situa 
ment 
the | 
Russ 
than 
feeli 
bilit 
an if 
alth 
ture 
refr: 
On 
not 
“acl 
her 
tern 


mie 
Stat 
eret 
whi 
con 
and 
Cisi 
cou 





