aia 


JUL 14 194. 
Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Wichican 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 38 


JULY 9, 19438 


FUTURE DRIVES IN PACIFIC CALL FOR IMPROVED POLITICAL STRATEGY 


HE naval battle of Kula Gulf in the central 

Solomons on July 5-6 has apparently resulted in 
a new American victory over the Japanese fleet, 
although not without losses on our own part. In 
the week since General MacArthur's headquarters 
announced United Nations operations on a 700-mile 
front from New Guinea to the Solomon Islands 
the enemy has offered more resistance by sea and 
air than on land. But this means little, for the 
Allied forces have confined themselves to the seizure 
of important, but unoccupied islands, and to landings 
on the fringes of well-protected Japanese positions. 
The real test of enemy reactions will not come until an 
effort is made to take Salamaua on New Guinea, 
Munda on New Georgia island, or some other point 
of significance in Japan’s chain of outer defenses. 

DIFFERENCES FROM GUADALCANAL. Cur- 
rent operations represent a considerable change from 
the conditions that characterized the fighting for 
Guadalcanal. Today we are definitely on the of- 
fensive in the Pacific and are not simply seeking to 
defend ourselves by attacking first, as was the case 
last year. As a result of the improvement of the 
United Nations’ position on the European front, the 
shortening of the supply route to the East through 


, the victory in North Africa, and the great rise in 


American production, more naval and air power has 
become available for the Pacific. In the words of 
Secretary of the Navy Knox on July 2, “the day of 
shortages is nearing an end.” Moreover, the absence 
of a united command that drew so much criticism 
in connection with Guadalcanal is no longer in evi- 
dence: General MacArthur is in charge of the entire 
drive this year, although the forward movement in 
the Solomons is quite properly under the immediate 
Supervision of Admiral Halsey. 

The present campaign may resemble last year’s 
operations in one respect: the length of time required 
for the achievement of objectives. It will not be easy 


to seize the air bases of the central and northern 
Solomons or to take Salamaua and Lae; and months 
of combat may be expected before Rabaul, the key 
Japanese air, naval and submarine base on New 
Britain island, can be reached and subdued. These 
actions may, in fact, merge into other drives this 
fall, especially if Burma is invaded when the rains 
are over and if China becomes a more important 
center of air and land activity. Everything depends, 
however, upon the nature of the Japanese reaction 
and how much Tokyo is willing to sacrifice to hold 
its island outposts. 

POLITICS AND THE WAR WITH JAPAN. 
In the excitement created by new moves of our armed 
forces, it would be unwise to forget the military im- 
portance of our political relations with Asia. Since 
the conclusion of British and American treaties end- 
ing extraterritorial rights in China last January, there 
has been an almost complete absence of United 
Nations political action in the Pacific. Although 
statements have been made, little or nothing has 
been done to resolve the doubts of the Far Eastern 
peoples, especially in China and India, about the 
future of Allied policy in the colonial world. In the 
House of Representatives, whose members applauded 
Mme. Chiang Kai-shek so vigorously some months 
ago, it has been impossible to persuade a majority 
of the Committee on Immigration and Naturaliza- 
tion to approve a bill for the repeal of Chinese ex- 
clusion and the placing of Chinese immigration on 
a quota basis. One bill along these lines has already 
been killed, and it is doubtful whether action on an- 
other can be secured before the summer recess. 

Meanwhile, the Japanese have not been idle. In 
recent months they have not only used the short- 
comings of western policy in their propaganda 
among the peoples of Asia, but they have initiated 
a new course of their own. In occupied China they 
have sought to give the impression that the days of 


f 


i 

} 
, 
f 

i 

P 
"i 


a : 


Wate es 2 


—————————— Page Two ——_—_—_———————ea——™ 


harshness and cruelty toward the local population 
are over, and they have buttressed this policy by 
handing over to the puppet government at Nanking 
various foreign rights and properties. In southeast 
Asia they have promised independence within a year 
to the Philippine Islands and Burma, and on July 5 
they announced that Thailand, because of its co- 
operative attitude, had been ceded territories for- 
merly part of Malaya and Burma. Although our 
major Far Eastern allies, the Chinese, will hardly be 
deceived by these moves, it would be a mistake to 
think that other peoples in Asia will be entirely 
immune to the Japanese appeal. 


PUPPETS IN SOUTHEAST ASIA. Because of 
developments in Europe, Americans may have the 
impression that, just as Germany is able to secure 
the cooperation only of corrupt and traitorous ele- 
ments in the occupied countries, so Japan’s native 
support will be limited to outright Quislings. There 
is an important difference, however, between the two 
situations. In Europe the conquered countries have 
known what independence means and have had an 
Opportunity to operate their own political institu- 
tions. In ce, they cannot easily be fooled 
by the invader. The people of the Indies, Malaya, 
Burma and even the Philippine Islands have not yet 
known true national independence and, in many 


cases, are just in the process of awakening to the 
problems of the modern world. Having never jp 
ceived self-rule from their old masters, with why 
can they compare the present Japanese rule, especially 
if Japan cleverly simulates concern for native wel. 
fare? This danger is reinforced by the color issue 
which is absent from the European situation by 
operates against us in Asia. 

These conditions make it all the more importap, 
that the United Nations take decisive forward-look 
ing measures in the territories that are still unde 
their control and make promises of a substantid 
character to the nations of occupied Asia. There j 
a danger that we will fall into the error of think 
ing that all the conquered eastern peoples are like 
the native tribal groups we are meeting in the south 
Pacific, communities without national consciousness 
that can be dealt with entirely on the basis of treat. 
ing them properly after we land in their territory, 
But peoples gripped by nationalist feeling will de 
mand more than satisfactory personal behavior on 
the part of our troops and their leaders. They wil 


' want to know what their political and economic 


status is to be when the Japanese are driven out, and 


their attitude toward our military operations may be) 


strongly influenced by the nature of our reply—o 
lack of it. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


WAR TESTS RESILIENCY OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS 


The war in Europe has entered a critical phase 
whose outcome will be decided not only by sheer 
weight of armed force, but also by the political wis- 
dom and home-front cohesion of the United Nations. 
Nazi propaganda is doing everything in its power 
to divide the Allies, and pit them against each other, 
in the hope of distracting them from the main ob- 
jective of defeating the Axis. All news is grist to its 
mill, from the death of General Sikorski, Premier 
of the Polish government in London, in an airplane 
crash on July 6, to the wave of internal conflicts that 
is sweeping the United States. The Allied peoples 
will have to draw more than ever before on their 
resources of judgment and patience to meet this new 
propaganda barrage. 

BUILDING DEMOCRACY INTERNATION- 
ALLY. But in the field of political warfare, as in 
military operations, it is not enough to remain on 
the defensive. The alarm expressed by the small 
nations of Europe, through their representatives in 
London and Washington, concerning the draft 
agreement establishing a United Nations Relief and 
Rehabilitation Administration, on the ground that 
this draft envisages a great-power directorate for 
the post-war period, must be squarely faced as a 
portent of difficulties ahead. Similarly, the emphasis 
laid by General de Gaulle on the national sovereign- 


ty of France, and his opposition to Allied interven 
tion in French affairs, foreshadow the attitude tha 
the liberated countries may be expected to take one 
they are free to decide their own fate. If all that 
Britain, the United States, and Russia—each in it 
own way, or jointly—are planning to do in Europe 
is to substitute their dictation for that of Hitler, 
they will be confronted after the war with the same 
kind of resistance that has prevented—fortunatel) 
for the Allied cause—consolidation of Hitler's “new 
order.” The task that continues to face the great 
powers is how to combine efficiency in military ani 
economic operations with the greatest possible tt 


spect for the wishes and aspirations of small nation) 


which, admittedly, are not strong enough to regail 


For a discussion of the problems that face the 
United Nations in the Far East, READ— 


STRATEGY OF THE WAR IN ASIA | 
by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25c 


FOREIGN PoLicy Report, VoL. XIX, No. 3 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


—_——— 


or main 
this is tk 
multicol 
of deme 
IS DE 
people | 
velopme 
wonder 
not yet 
cratic a 
particip: 
national 
both pre 
that the 
extraorc 
Surely, 
work of 
econom: 
work un 
United | 
Britain 
no grou 
trials al 
lution. 
Nor 
Americ 
proved | 
Britain. 
played | 
ment. E 
are an 
gether | 
triumph 
States i: 
immigr 
tured in 
of these 
gether a 
and cor 
of man 
growth 
TEM 
traveled 
year car 
of the f 
the sell 
played | 
of our « 
ing is, t 
and con 


power ; 


FOREIGN 

Headquarte 
second-clas: 
one month 


G's) 


Pi 


——— 
———————— 


or maintain their independence unaided. In essence, 
this is the never-ending task of weaving together the 
multicolored and many-textured threads of the fabric 
of democratic society. 


IS DEMOCRACY THREATENED HERE? Some 
people in this country, disheartened by recent de- 
yelopments on the home front, are beginning to 
wonder how the United States which, they feel, has 
not yet successfully solved the problem of demo- 
cratic administration within its own borders, can 
participate in the far more complex tasks of inter- 
national administration. Yet such discouragement is 
both premature and unjustified. It was to be expected 
that the fabric of our society would be subjected to 
extraordinary strains and stresses as a result of war. 
Surely, there is little virtue in making democracy 
work only under conditions of political stability and 
economic prosperity. The real test is whether it can 
work under unfavorable circumstances. And while the 
United States has not yet been tried in the sense that 
Britain or Russia or China have been tried, there is 
no ground for assuming that it will not meet the 
trials ahead with at least equal courage and reso- 
lution. 

Nor is it entirely fair to say, as have some 
American and British critics, that this country has 
proved less capable of bearing the brunt of war than 
Britain. It is true that the British people have dis- 
played remarkable courage and capacity for adjust- 
ment. But it must not be forgotten that the British 
are an unusually homogeneous people, bound to- 
gether by a long rich history of trials endured and 
triumphs achieved in common—while the United 
States is still a relatively new country, built up by 
immigrants from many lands, of many tongues, nur- 
tured in many different traditions. The achievement 
of these immigrants, over the years, in welding to- 
gether a nation in spite of many threatening divisions 
and conflicts ranks as high in the turbulent history 
of mankind’s search for the good society as the 
growth of democratic institutions in Britain. 

TEMPER OF THE COUNTRY. No one who has 
traveled up and down this country during the past 
year can feel anything but admiration for the temper 
of the people as a whole, and humility in the face of 
the selflessness, thoughtfulness, and stamina dis- 
played by the men and women who make the wheels 
of our democratic society go round. What is disturb- 
ing is, that in the midst of so much intrinsic devotion 
and concrete accomplishment, a struggle for personal 
power and prestige should still be going on among 


Page Three 


those who represent the people in Congress, or are 
appointed by elected officials. 

Yet, here again, it must be borne in mind that 
part of this struggle, at least, is due to sincere be- — 
lief on the part of some of the contenders that they 
could do a more effective job for the country, could 
save lives and shorten the war, if only they could 
exercise greater authority in carrying out the respon- 
sibilities assigned to them. Such struggles take place 
in totalitarian régimes as well—but there they are 
punctuated not by publicity, but by bullets, as those 
who fail to win the argument are disposed of by their 
opponents. The vast effort to make a democratic 
society function with some degree of discipline in 
time of war inevitably generates friction, creates a 
spirit of frustration, induces fatigue. It could doubt- 
less be carried out with less conflict, fewer delays, 
a greater spirit of give and take. But in all the heat 
and dust of the debates being waged in this coun- 
try over fundamental political and economic issues, 
the people, as well as their representatives, are at least 
learning the manifold difficulties of democratic 
processes. The lessons learned in these days of crisis 
should make us more tolerant of other countries, 
subjected to similar strains under far more critical 
circumstances, notably France, and more understand- 
ing in our approach to the problems of post-war 
reconstruction. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


Short Cut to Tokyo: The Battle for the Aleutians, by 
Corey Ford. New York, Scribner’s, 1943. $1.75 


A brief, popular account of fighting in the Aleutians, 
with special emphasis on the role of the Army Air Forces. 


The Command of the Air, by Giulio Douhet, translated by 
Dino Ferrari. New York, Coward-McCann, 1942. $4.00 
The first complete English translation of a classic of 

military aviation. 


The Economic Development of the Netherlands Indies, by 
Jan O. M. Broek. New York, Institute of Pacific Rela- 
tions, 1942. $2.00 
Useful short survey of this valuable area, now under 

Japanese control. The author discusses the historical back- 

ground, the islands and their people, commcdity produc- 

tion and sales abroad, changes in Indies economic policy, 
industrial development, foreign trade, and post-war pros- 
pects. 


The Air Offensive Against Germany, by Alan A. Michie. 
New York, Henry Holt, 19438. $2.00 


From a close study of results achieved by the RAF, the 
author concludes that 1,000-plane raids on Germany’s 50 
key cities would bring about Nazi defeat in 1948. But he 
warns that such raids will not be possible unless the 
American air force adopts night-bombing and closer 
cooperation with the RAF. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 38, Juty 9, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lzzr, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


JuLy 5.—On July 12 the United States will have 
been engaged in this war for a length of time equal 
to the entire period of our participation in World 
War I. But instead of being able to celebrate a 
victorious Armistice at the end of one year, seven 
months, and five days of war as we did a quarter of 
a century ago, we have only just set our feet on the 
road to victory. This contrast between the situation 
then and now gives some idea of the magnitude of 
the present conflict as compared with the last war. 

To be sure, the military position of the United 
Nations has improved out of all recognition in re- 
lation to the picture as it was just a year ago. Then, 
the Japanese were still on the offensive in the south- 
west Pacific, after having overrun in succession 
Thailand, Malaya, the Dutch East Indies, the Philip- 
pines and Burma. The Germans were pushing ahead 
in the Caucasus, and ple were wondering 
whether Russia would be able to last through the 
summer. Rommel had captured Tobruk, driven the 
British out of Libya, and was threatening the Suez 
Canal. 


ALLIES ON OFFENSIVE NOW. Today it is the 
Allies who are everywhere on the offensive. Ameri- 
can troops have retaken Attu in the Aleutian islands, 
and in the southwest Pacific have begun an attack 
in the Solomons and in New Guinea, with the key 
Japanese base of Rabaul as their objective. Anglo- 
American forces have driven the Axis out of North 
Africa and are now threatening Sicily and Sardinia. 
The German U-boat campaign appears to have col- 
lapsed, with sinkings of Allied shipping the lowest 
in months, while the Allies for the first time are 
destroying enemy submarines faster than the Nazis 
can build them. Hitler’s expected offensive on the 
Eastern front, however, has begun, although later 
than had been generally anticipated. 

Judging by Goebbels’ radio propaganda, the prin- 
cipal hope of the Nazis now is based on the belief 
that American internal economy may collapse under 
the strain of war. Recent developments within the 
United States have undoubtedly afforded comfort 
to Berlin and justified the alarming statement in the 
Senate’s Kilgore report, published on June 21, that 
“the home front is sagging.” The remoteness of the 
United States from actual war zones has fostered 
the dangerous belief that not only business, but 
politics, can be carried on ‘‘as usual” in this country. 

The most striking illustration of this illusion was 
the recent coal strike in which John L. Lewis, in 


violation of his pledge to order no strikes for the 
duration, called out the miners from the pits and 
thereby jeopardized production of munitions for the 
armed services. But Congress, too, is an offender in 
this respect. Its revolt against the government's pro- 
posal to use subsidies as a means for rolling back 
food prices revealed: that many Congressmen retain 
the illusion that the old laissez faire economic sys. 
tem can continue to operate in time of war. The 
race riots in Detroit, too, were a disturbing symptom 
of disunity played up by Axis propaganda. 

EVILS OF DIVIDED AUTHORITY. Nor has 
President Roosevelt yet solved the problem of cen- 
tralizing authority and responsibility on the home 
front. The resignation of Chester Davis as Food 
Administrator once more called attention both to 
the division of authority and the duplication of 
effort by various war agencies. It is this state of 
affairs that provokes constant bickerings among high 
policy-making officials of the government. The ac- 
cusations and recriminations exchanged last week 
between Vice President Henry A. Wallace, in his 
capacity as chairman of the Board of Economic War- 
fare, and Jesse Jones, head of the Reconstruction 
Finance Corporation, is only the latest episode in a 
long series of such quarrels. 

The origin of this dispute goes back to April 13, 
1942, when President Roosevelt vested in the BEW 
complete control of all public purchase import op- 
erations, which had formerly been conducted by Mr. 
Jones. This directive was issued because, under 
Mr. Jones, the program of building up stockpiles of 
critical materials had failed dismally, although Con- 
gress had authorized the policy nearly 18 months 
before Pearl Harbor. But, although the President 
had conferred on the BEW power to purchase, Mr. 
Jones retained the power to sign checks, without 
which the BEW could not continue its program of 
procuring the necessary materials. The way in whic 
the RFC held up the vital quinine program illustrates 
the evils both of the prevailing system of divided 
authority and the “business as usual’ mentality. 

Hitler’s sole hope of winning this war now is to 
protract the struggle and play for time, in the hope 
that war-weariness among the United Nations, di 
visions among the Allies and, above all, a collapse 
of the American home front may compel his ad 
versaries to accept a “compromise peace’ which 
would, in effect, leave him the victor. 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


we 


“_ 


Vou. XXII 


GIR. 


“HE la 

ish an 
ident Rox 
beginnins 
and anxit 
Allied in 
would be 
ings, in t 
Axis, but 
phase of 
kind of ; 
Continen: 
the West 
man citie 
“fortress 
and in st 


HOPE 
PROBLE 
contact w 
doubts, { 
peoples | 
when the 
closer Eu 
respective 
concern | 
their ret 
States an 
could no 
has been 
poignant 
would o1 
must be 
problems 
faised an 
ington o 
United S 

The Cc 
passion | 
has been 


