PRBRIODICAL RUUm 
GENERAL | 1URARY 
UNIV. OF MICH 


General Library 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 43 


Avucust 18, 1943 


AXIS DIFFICULTIES SHARPEN PROBLEMS OF ALLIED UNITY 


ane first ten days of August appear to have 

marked the beginning of a period of growing 

ctisis in the European theatre of war. Allied victories 

in Russia and Sicily highlighted this development, 

but impending political developments, suggested by 

acrop of reports and rumors from Europe, may be 
ually significant. 

ALLIED ADVANCES CONTINUE. In the mili- 
tary sphere, the smashing Soviet victories at Orel 
and Belgorod, opening the way for a double offensive 
against the German strongholds of Bryansk and 
Kharkov, constitute the most important achievement 
and serve to remind us that the major land front of 
World War II is still in Russia. At the same time the 
capture of Catania by the British Eighth Army, the 
flanking of the German position at Mt. Etna by 
American and British-Canadian advances, and the 
surprise American landing behind the Axis lines in 
the north, augur well for a rapid conclusion of the 
Sicilian campaign. Although on the Eastern front, 
German strength has so far shown no signs of 
crumbling, and in the Mediterranean the Western 
Allies may have to occupy Sardinia and Corsica be- 
fore launching a major assault on the mainland of 
Italy or Southern France, these victories demonstrate 
the rising offensive power of the United Nations. 
Should the Russian and Mediterranean fronts be sup- 
plemented soon by the opening of_a “second front” 
in Western Europe, we could look forward even 
more confidently to the steady disintegration of Nazi 
military might. 

POLITICAL REPERCUSSIONS WIDESPREAD. 
The repercussions of Allied military pressure were 
quickly felt throughout the continent. Most signifi- 
cant, perhaps, was the cancellation by Sweden on 
August 5 of a three-year-old transit agreement with 
Germany, which permitted German troops and war 
Materials to pass through Swedish territory on their 
Way to or from Norway and Finland. This assertion 


of independence on the part of the Stockholm gov- 
ernment received popular acclaim, and is a clear 
indication of both government and public opinion 
on the course of the war. 

In the occupied countries, notably Holland and 
France, opposition to German rule reached a high 
pitch. From Helsinki came renewed rumors of moves 
intended to take Finland out of the war, while gov- 
ernments of the Axis satellites in the Balkans were 
reported to be restive also, and fearful of the fate 
that befell the fascist régime in Italy. Hungary, in 
particular, appears to have been perturbed by recent 
developments in Rome, and King Boris of Bulgaria 
faces uneasily the prospect of an Allied invasion of 
the Balkans. 

In Italy, where German Foreign Minister Joachim 
von Ribbentrop was reportedly engaged during the 
week-end of August 7-8 in trying to strengthen Nazi 
ties with the Badoglio government, peace riots con- 
tinued and the Socialist party appealed to all work- 
ers, farmers and intellectuals to join in a general 
strike to force Italy out of the war. Although latest 
reports from Switzerland indicate that the Italian 
government will not sue for peace, at least until 
peace terms more lenient than unconditional sur- 
render are offered by the Allies, it seems doubtful 
that Badoglio will be able to maintain his position 
when the full weight of Allied power is brought to 
bear on the mainland of Italy. 

HAS HITLER BEEN OUSTED? Germany, too, 
has felt the effects of the Russian victories in the 
east, the relentless air bombardment from the west 
and the threat to Italy in the south. The Madrid re- 
port that Hitler's real power has been taken over 
by a triumvirate composed of Reich Marshal Her- 
mann Goering, Field Marshal General Wilhelm 
Keitel, Chief of the High Command, and Grand 
Admiral Karl Doenitz, Commander-in-Chief of the 
Navy, should be treated as definitely suspect, but it 


may well be a preview of things to come in Ger- 
many. Should an army dictatorship take over control 
from the Nazis in order to bolster the German 
war machine, it would probably indicate both weak- 
ness and strength—weakness in that the Hitler spell 
had been broken, but a certain strength in that the 
military leaders considered it still possible to save 
Germany from unconditional surrender. 

GREATER ALLIED UNITY NEEDED. As we en- 
ter one of the major crises of the war,a meeting of Pres- 
ident Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill and Premier 
Stalin seems extremely urgent. Calculations that the 
war in Europe will be over by Christmas would be 
exceedingly dangerous, of course, but failure on the 
part of Allied leaders to have ready a common plan in 
case of the sudden collapse of the German govern- 


EXPLOSIVE CONDITIONS IN CHINA WORRY UNITED NATIONS 


Admiral Ernest J. King’s statement of August 7 
that China must be kept in the war—implying the 
danger of a collapse of resistance to Japan—deserves 
more than perfunctory notice. Although the Com- 
mander-in-Chief of the United States Fleet did not 
elaborate the point, he presumably had in mind the 
deterioration of Chungking’s military efforts and the 
gathering political storms in the Chinese capital, 
both of which threaten the country’s war effort. 
Washington is as yet saying nothing publicly about 
the situation, but some details of this growing crisis 
became known on the previous day through the 
publication in Moscow of an article by Vladimir 
Rogov, a writer recently back in the U.S.S.R. after 
a long stay in China. 

DANGER OF CIVIL WAR. According to the 
Soviet journalist's report, civil war and possible 
military disaster face China unless high-placed de- 
featists are removed from their positions of power. 
He charges that these circles are attempting to break 
the united front between the Kuomintang—the of- 
ficial party—and the Chinese Communists and that 
large numbers of Central government troops have 
already been dispatched to the areas in which the 
Communist-led Eighth Route and New Fourth Ar- 
mies are located. A move may soon be made, he 
suggests, to disarm the latter forces and destroy their 
political organization, thereby plunging China anew 
into the maelstrom of civil strife from which it 
emerged in 1937 to resist Japan. He also asserts that 
the elements responsible for the crisis “have evolved 
a theory of an ‘honorable’ peace with Japan or the 
futility of further fighting,” although not daring to 
advocate open capitulation. 

While these remarks are more specific than any 
that have yet appeared in the American press, they 
are in agreement with the general implications of 
reports reaching this country. They are likewise in 
line with the growing tendency of American writers 


Page Two 


—— 
——— 


ment—or to be prepared to reject in unison any peace 
bid from a German military clique for terms 
less than unconditional surrender — would be even 
more dangerous. And yet there seems to be a not 
wholly unwarranted fear in the United States and 
Britain that, while both the political and military 
strength of the Axis in Europe is declining, our own 
military plans are not matched in the political realm, 
It is to be hoped, therefore, that a meeting of the 
Allied leaders can be arranged in the near future 
and that, as events in Europe move toward the ulti- 
mate collapse of German power, the United Nations 
will have reached agreement on the basic problems 
which will face them in a Europe freed from Nazi 
tyranny. 
Howarb P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


to abandon many conceptions of Chinese resistance 
dating from the early years of the Far Eastern con- 
flict and to adopt a more realistic view of China's 
internal problems and war effort. A significant in- 
dication of this new attitude was the publication of 
“A Warning About China,” an article by Pearl §. 
Buck in LIFE magazine for May 10, 1943. Accord. 
ing to this well-known author: “The great liberal 
forces of the recent past in China are growing 
silent. . . . There is now no real freedom of the press 
in China, no real freedom of speech. The official 
implement of repression is an organization far more 
severe than the secret service of a democracy ought 
to be. . . . The division between the Eighth Route 
Army and the National Army still continues, in spite 
of the fact that all accept the Generalissimo as their 
leader. There are forces around the Generalissimo 
which keep apart these two great bodies of the | 
people who ought not now to be kept apart.” This 
statement is all the more significant because Miss 
Buck has been, and remains, a leading critic of the 


= 
tions state 
tion War 
Harbor “ 
had its 07 
own terri 
character: 
tions. O1 
China; tt 
ever, the 
scriptive, 
other, de 
actualitie 
distinctio 
The st 
aroused | 
a still sh: 
by Hans 
NEW YOF 
ation” pv 
Mr. Bald 
ning—in 
anese Ww 
only twe 
policing 
muniqué: 
engagem 
able to d 
field. Th 
Wishful 


The re 
not be g 
provokec 
July 30 t 
gatd suc 
principle 
ing,” an 
“permit 


shortcomings of the United States and Britain in | 
aiding and cooperating with China. | 


OTHER AMERICAN OPINIONS. At about the 


same time Creighton Lacy, member of a missionaty 
family, declared in a brief volume—Is China a De- 
mocracy?—that ‘“‘some of the factions within the 
Kuomintang” are of much “concern to true demo 
crats in China.” Although his book was on the 
whole highly laudatory of Chungking’s efforts, he 
asserted that “there are at least two groups which 
have warranted the epithet ‘semi-fascist,’ ’’ because 
they are ‘more antagonistic to Chinese communism, 
and possibly. to constitutional democracy, than they 
are to the Japanese. The tragedy is that their mem: 
bership includes some of the most prominent cabinet 
ministers, generals, and diplomats.” Some two 
months later, in the FAR EASTERN SURVEY of July 14, 
1943, T. A. Bisson of the Institute of Pacific Rela 


or other 
cape the 


governm 


What 
Shoul 
Will | 


V 


I 
REPOR 


—— 
—_—_—_ 


FOREIGN |} 
Headquarters 
second-class 
One month f 


SB» 181 


i 
—— ——— 


tions stated in an article on ‘“China’s Part in a Coali- 
tion War” that as long ago as a year before Pearl 
Harbor “two Chinas had definitely emerged. Each 
had its own government, its own military forces, its 
own territories. More significant, each had its own 
characteristic set of political and economic institu- 
tions. One is now generally called Kuomintang 
China; the other is called Communist China. How- 
ever, these are only party labels. To be more de- 
sctiptive, the one might be called feudal China; the 
other, democratic China. These terms express the 
actualities as they exist today, the real institutional 
distinctions between the two Chinas.”’ 

The statements by Miss Buck and Mr. Bisson 
aroused considerable discussion in Chungking, but 
a still sharper reaction was produced by two articles 
by Hanson W. Baldwin, military writer for the 
NEW YORK TIMES. In a “‘Review of the Chinese Situ- 
ation” published by that newspaper on July 20, 1943, 
Mr. Baldwin asserted that “Japan, not China, is win- 
ning—in a military-economic sense—the Sino-Jap- 
anese war.” He declared that Japan is maintaining 
only twenty-odd divisions in China, principally as 
policing and occupying forces, that Chinese com- 
muniqués often exaggerate the importance of minor 
engagements, and that the Japanese in China are 
able to do pretty much as they please in the military 
feld. This was followed by an article, ‘Too Much 
Wishful Thinking About China,” in the August issue 


Page Three 


———e 
TTT 


of READER’S DIGEST, in which, among other state- 
ments, he presented various criticisms of the Chinese 
Army. His views were attacked sharply by Chung- 
king representatives—notably the Chinese military 
spokesman and the Minister of Information. . 

A UNITED NATIONS PROBLEM. Space is 
lacking to consider these problems, but in subsequent 
articles the subject will be discussed in detail. Mean- 
while it is clear that the Chinese situation is causing 
apprehension in informed United Nations circles. 
Not only are American writers asking questions, but 
it is no secret that many agencies in Washington have 
been disturbed by the functioning of Chungking 
bodies with which they have been in contact. The 
Soviet attitude is also plain, since the report referred 
to at the beginning of this article appeared in an of- 
ficial publication. British sources, it is true, have had 
little to say on the subject, but this may be attributed 
to a desire not to worsen already tense British- 
Chinese relations and to the fact that, among the 
Western powers, the United States is playing the 
leading role in the Far Eastern war. But it may be 
significant that Chinese Foreign Minister T. V. 
Soong, in a London press conference of August 4, 
was questioned about Chungking’s policy on sup- 
plying weapons to the Chinese Communist troops. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(This is the first of a series of articles on the present 
political, military and economic crisis in China.) 


PUNISHMENT OF AXIS LEADERS WILL TEST STATESMANSHIP 


The recent warning to neutrals that asylum must 
not be granted to fugitive Axis leaders has already 
provoked a reply. President Roosevelt announced on 
July 30 that the United States government would re- 
gard such neutral action as “inconsistent with the 
principles for which the United Nations are fight- 
ing,’ and hoped that no neutral government would 
“permit its territory to be used as a place of refuge, 
or otherwise assist such persons in any effort to es- 
cape their just deserts.” The British and Russian 
governments were prompt to associate themselves 


What kind of peace with non-Nazi Germany? 
Should Allies establish military administration? 
Will Russia share.in administration? Read: 
WHAT FUTURE FOR GERMANY? 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


FOREIGN PoLicy Reports, Vol. XVIII, No. 22 
Reports are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


with this point of view. But the Swiss government 
now declares that “Switzerland will obviously exer- 
cise the right . . . in a manner fully to assure the 
sovereignty and highest interests of the country.” 
According to reports, Turkey may soon take a simi- 
lar line, while Sweden has for the present declined to 
commit itself. 

One need not interpret this declaration as a final 
answer to the Allied warning. As the war approaches 
a victorious conclusion, the remaining neutrals may 
well exhibit an increasing compliance with the will 
of the United Nations, and the Duce and other lead- 
ers of the Axis may be denied admittance to neutral 
countries. But suppose they are not? 

THE RIGHT OF ASYLUM. Nothing is clearer 
than the right of a nation to offer sanctuary to fugi- 
tives from abroad. Extradition treaties, whereby na- 
tions agree to surrender such persons on demand, 
invariably relate to definite and listed crimes of a 
civil nature and have no application to the present 
case. On the contrary, unsuccessful revolutionaries 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 43, AuGusT 13, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicuHeies Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


e181 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor 


A I Pe 


oe 


OOOO Page Four — 


and other leaders of lost causes have repeatedly 
sought safety in foreign countries and have gener- 
ally obtained it, except where the country of asy- 
lum, overawed by the power of the other side, has 


_ yielded up the fugitive. Switzerland, like the Nether- 


lands, takes pride in a long tradition of such hos- 
pitality, and the United States has consistently main- 
tained the principle that political refugees will not 
be surrendered nor their extradition suffered. 
Inevitably, the case of the late Kaiser will come 
to mind. Article 227 of the Versailles treaty publicly 
charged William II with a “supreme offense against 
international morality and the sanctity of treaties.” 
The exact nature of this supreme offense, however, 
was not defined, and the charge therefore remained 
essentially political. The Kaiser having fled to Hol- 
land, the Dutch boldly and quite properly refused 
to give him up, and the promptness with which the 
matter was dropped suggests that the Allies may 
never have expected to go through with the trial. 


Today it is felt that the Axis leaders are guilty of 
offenses far graver than the Kaiser’s and an effort 
has been made to formulate the charge in more 
definite terms. The United Nations propose to mete 
out “just and sure punishment to the ringleaders 
responsible for the organized murder of thousands 
of innocent persons and the commission of atroci- 
ties.” Presumably, the accused will be tried for 
specific violations of the known laws of war as em- 
bodied in the Hague convention and elsewhere. But 
even so, nothing in the accepted law of nations con- 
fers on the victorious powers any right to compel the 
surrender of the presumptive criminals by the state of 


i | 
— 


asylum; and to obtain such surrender without dam. 
age to those high principles for which the United 
Nations profess to stand will require a nice degree 
of tact, for if the Swiss maintain their present atti. 
tude against all persuasion, nothing remains but to 
abandon the whole project, or resort to threats and 
even force. The whole problem well illustrates the 
inadequacy of international law in the face of crime 
or immorality on the part of national leaders. 
TRIAL OF THE ACCUSED. Even should the 
Nazi rulers be brought to justice, the trials will have 
to be conducted with extreme delicacy. That govern. 
ments realize this is evident from their intention to 
have the accused tried by military tribunals for of. 
fenses cognizable by military law. On the one hand, 
they must avoid the danger that a full and fair 
trial of all the issues may provide a platform whence 
the fallen leader, addressing his followers as it were 
for the last time, may by a well-worded defense pro- 
vide for his own canonization in some future re. 
vival of his doctrines. Napoleon Bonaparte, who was 
summarily banished to St. Helena without the for- 
mality of a trial, nevertheless by his memoirs writ. 
ten in exile succeeded eventually in rehabilitating 
himself in the eyes of much of the world. On the 
other hand, a trial which does not give fair oppor- 
tunity for defense is hardly to be considered, and 
this means that the issue on which the accused is 
tried must be carefully defined. It should be clear, in 
the light of these facts, that the problem of dealing 
with the ringleaders referred to is not an easy one if 
high and strict standards of international conduct are 
to be observed throughout. SieRMAN S. HAYDEN 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Tokyo Record, by Otto Tolischus. New York, Reynal & 
Hitchcock, 1943. $3.00 
A newspaperman’s valuable story of a year and a half 
in Japan, including a number of months in prison after 
Pearl Harbor. His account of day-by-day developments 
throws much light on the operation of Japanese politics. 


Japan’s Military Masters, by Hillis Lory. New York, Vik- 
ing, 1943. $2.50 
An interesting discussion of the Japanese Army and its 
role in Japanese life. 


Islands of the Pacific, by Hawthorne Daniel. New York, 
Putnam’s, 1943. $2.50 
A welcome factual account of the geography, history, 
people, customs and products of an area that will play an 
increasingly important role in the news. Organized for 
reference use. 


Behind the Japanese Mask, by Jesse F. Steiner. New York, 
Macmillan, 1943. $2.00 
A useful analysis of Japanese customs and attitudes, al- 
though psychological factors are overstressed, as in the 
statement that the Japanese “sought to overcome their feel- 
ings of inferiority by a spectacular drive for power which 
has culminated in the present war.” 


The World Since 1914, by Walter Consuelo Langsam. New 
York, Macmillan, 1943. $4.00 


The fifth edition of an extremely useful reference text. 


South of the Congo, by Selwyn James. New York, Random 
House, 1943. $3.00 
A first-hand report by a British correspondent of south- 
ern Africa from Cape Town to the Congo. Although jour- 
nalistic rather than scholarly, there is much valuable ma- 
terial in this book for the student of South African prob 
lems, especially on relations between Negroes and whites. 


Balkan Firebrand, by Kosta Todorov. Chicago, Alliance | 


Book —Ziff-Davis, 1943. $3.50 

This exciting autobiography is an illuminating picture 
of Balkan history. 
The English People, by D. W. Brogan. New York, Knopf, 

1943. $3.00 

A penetrating analysis of England and its people, writ 
ten for American readers by a Cambridge University pro 
fessor. A candid and interesting book, which gains mueh 
from the fact that the author approaches his subject from 
an Irish and Scottish background, and with a wide experi- 
ence in the United States. 


The British Commonwealth at War. Edited by William 
Yandell Elliott and H. Duncan Hall. New York, Knopf, 
1943. $5.00 
This symposium is an important contribution to the his 

tory of both World War II and the British Commonwealth. 

Although it may not always hold the interest of the aver- 

age reader, it should prove extremely useful to students of 

economics, history and political science. 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


Vou. XX 


QUEEB 


» iven 


ing, 


week w! 
comes a 
by many 
conferet 
ley, rep 
United 
the larg 
ignored 
are actu 
Allied » 
tary Occ 
been re 
The day 
the ord 
years ol 
come w 
POLI 
One qu 
Allied < 
of adm 
German 
the war 
they w« 
during | 
their re 
recently 
toward 
States f 
morrow 
ambigu: 
Allied | 
isa ne 
known 
military 
gram, 
tumors 
in liber 


