V ash- 
relop- 
ouble 
ite of 
little 
neral 
Presi- 
*mber 
cared 
itious 
clara- 
neral 
right 
-Elect 
any 
ment, 
alist, 
intees 
mn in- 
‘ound 
, and 
nited 
gime. 
Sep- 
trial 
is on 
is, as 
‘onte- 
agti- 
ER 


| 
| 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vout. XIX, No. 50 


OcToBEer 4, 1940 


Look behind today’s headlines! Read: 


INDO-CHINA: SPEARHEAD OF JAPAN’S DRIVE 
AMERICA’S DILEMMA IN THE FAR EAST 
THE OUTLOOK IN SOUTHEAST ASIA 
JAPAN’S ECONOMIC OUTLOOK 
SOVIET-JAPANESE RELATIONS: 1931-1938 


SPECIAL OFFER—5 Foreign Policy Reports for $1.00 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


UC7 8 


aL ROOM 


ie ame + re? ARY 


SECOND CLASS MAIL 


General Library 


TInt at ; 
vaiversity of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Nichican 


AXIS POWERS SEEK 


TO 


ISOLATE BRITAIN 


. pengen the past ten days Britain has suffered 

two serious reverses temporarily overshadowing 
the success with which the London population has 
withstood four weeks of intensive bombardment. 
The first occurred at Dakar in French West Africa 
where, on September 25, a British naval squadron 
abandoned an attempt to protect and support a land- 
ing by the “Free French’ forces of General de 
Gaulle. The second was sustained in Berlin two 
days later, when Japan joined the Axis powers in 
a ten-year alliance designed to bar intervention by 
outside powers in both the Far Eastern and the 
European wars. 


BRITISH SETBACK AT DAKAR. The expedi- 
tion to Dakar was designed to provoke an armed 
revolt against the Vichy government in French West 
Africa and to thwart a reported German attempt to 
resume an air transport service to South America, 
using Dakar as a base. It appears to have been un- 
dertaken without adequate preparation or complete 
knowledge of the real situation in the French col- 
ony. Strangely enough, the British had permitted 
the Vichy government to send six warships through 
the Straits of Gibraltar for the apparent purpose of 
reinforcing the loyal garrison at Dakar. An at- 
tempted landing by General de Gaulle’s troops on 
September 23 met with determined and successful 
resistance. After the British fleet had exchanged fire 
with French shore batteries and warships and sunk 
two French submarines, the expedition was suddenly 
abandoned without forcing the issue, ostensibly be- 
cause neither de Gaulle nor the British wanted to 
enter into “‘serious warlike operations” against those 
Frenchmen who considered it their duty to support 
the Vichy government. 

This fiasco has further alienated France and Brit- 
ain just at a time when the French people, encour- 
aged by British resistance against German attacks, 
were beginning to hope that Britain might yet de- 


2 a ne I 


liver them from the increasingly oppressive rule of 
the Nazis. The spirit of recrimination which had 
characterized Franco-British relations after the col- 
lapse of France had been gradually giving way in 
part to tacit reliance on an ultimate British victory. 
The Dakar expedition, which provoked two retalia- 
tory French air raids on Gibraltar, has again em- 
bittered relations between the erstwhile allies and 
simultaneously dealt a serious blow to the “Free 
French” movement. The continued enforcement of 
an air-tight British blockade against France, which 
is bound to cause widespread privation among the 
French people, may further deepen the rift between 
France and Britain. 


THE PACT OF BERLIN. Of greater consequence, 
however, is the new triple alliance concluded in 
Berlin. In this agreement the Axis powers and Japan 
pledge to respect and support each other’s efforts 
“to establish and maintain a new order of things” 
in Europe and Greater East Asia respectively. Spe- 
cifically, they “undertake to assist one another with 
all political, economic and military means when one 
of the three contracting powers is attacked by a 
power at present not involved in the European war 
or in the Chinese-Japanese conflict.” While the pact 
contains no definition of what would constitute an 
attack, German spokesmen have intimated that only 
intervention of a decisive character would be con- 
sidered a casus belli. The present measure of Ameri- 
can assistance to Britain or Soviet help to China is 
apparently not regarded as falling within this cate- 
gory. 

Germany and Italy intend the new alliance pri- 
marily as a “hands-off” warning to the United States. 
By threatening this country with a war on two fronts, 
they hope to keep Britain isolated. The warning, 
however, has been accompanied by a gesture of “ap- 
peasement.” The preamble of the pact offers the 
cooperation of the three powers to any nation, in- 


— 
——s 


cluding presumably the United States, which wants 
to carve out a Lebensraum of its own in other spheres 
of the world; and the Berlin press has emphasized 
Germany's desire to respect the Monroe Doctrine 
which the Germans consider the American counter- 
part to the assertion of Axis supremacy on the Euro- 
pean continent. Such assurances are unlikely to have 
any effect on this country, which has recently had 
evidence of a Nazi plot disclosed in Uruguay, and 
knows that the Axis powers are encouraging totali- 
tarian Spain to extend its cultural and political in- 
fluence in the former Spanish colonies of the New 
World. 

SOVIET UNION IGNORED. The attitude of 
the Soviet Union toward the new alignment is not 
yet clear. The pact expressly leaves the relations of 
the three powers to Russia in statu guo. Although 
Berlin has intimated that an agreement was reached 
on the area in which Russian “leadership” is to pre- 
vail, the Kremlin remained silent except for a state- 
ment in Pravda, Communist party organ, that the 
alliance is a “further aggravation of the war and 
expansion of its realm.” While Moscow apparently 
received advance information about the alliance, it 
was omitted from the councils of the three powers, 
as it had already been excluded in practice from de- 
cisions touching the Balkans. Berlin and Rome set- 
tled the Hungarian-Rumanian conflict without Mos- 
cow’s participation; and Bulgaria, one of the few 
potential allies of the Soviet Union in the Balkans, 
is now frankly relying on the Axis powers for the 


Page Two 


Ts, 
— 


realization of its territorial ambitions against Greece 
and Yugoslavia. The Kremlin may also be suspicious 
of the recent German-Finnish agreement which per. 
mits the transportation of troops and supplies from 
Germany to northern Norway through Finland, 
Yet the Soviet Union no longer has much freedom 
of movement and may be compelled to reconcile 
itself to this latest, although unwelcome, develo 

ment. Germany, moreover, has no reason at the mo. 
ment to disturb its relations with Moscow, and ap. 
pears confident that it can bring about a non-aggres. 
sion pact between the Soviet Union and Japan simi- 
lar to its own agreement with the Soviet government, 


The omission of Spain from the triple alliance oc. 
casioned some surprise, particularly because Ramon 
Serrano Sufier, Spanish Minister of Government, had 
been negotiating for some time with German and 
Italian representatives in Berlin. Despite the tempt. 
ing offers of Gibraltar and Morocco held out by the 
Axis powers, Spain has so far resisted their pressure 
to enter the war. While the country’s economic con- 
dition may constitute an effective bar to active par- 
ticipation, the Italo-Spanish conversations proceed- 
ing in Rome this week may evolve a scheme under 
which Axis troops would be allowed to attack Gib- 
raltar from Spanish soil. The consummation of such 
an arrangement, coupled with the triple alliance, 
would set the stage for an even more intensive and 
general assault on the British Empire. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


JAPAN’S ROLE IN THE NEW ALLIANCE 


Announcement of the Rome-Berlin-Tokyo pact in 
Berlin on September 27 climaxed recent Japanese 
moves in Indo-China. Leading officials at Tokyo 
have struck varying notes in referring to Japan’s new 
ties with the Axis. With one or two exceptions, their 
statements display a marked lack of belligerency, 
despite the strong support accorded the tripartite 
pact. Emperor Hirohito’s imperial rescript of Sep- 
tember 27 expressed deep gratification over conclu- 
sion of a pact with governments which “‘share in the 
views of our empire.” Premier Konoye said that 
Japan was prepared to participate in the ‘formidable 
task of creating a new era in the entire world,” and 
warned that the new allies were “ready to display 
the power of their military alliance in case of neces- 
sity.’ Yosuke Matsuoka, the Foreign Minister, was 
much more subdued, while the Foreign Office spokes- 
man declared: “We are not changing our policy to- 
ward the United States. We have not abandoned 
hope of adjusting our relations with America.” 


RISKS AND GAINS. Since Japan must shoulder 
the major share of the risks inherent in the new al- 
liance, particularly the likelihood of increased eco- 
nomic pressure by the United States, it is natural that 


Tokyo should observe some degree of caution. Ger- 
many is in no position to supply Japan’s raw ma- 
terial deficiences, while German munitions and 
machinery cannot be sent to Japan unless the Soviet 
Union chooses to permit such shipments. If Japan 
were actually engaged in military operations against 
Britain or the United States in the Far East, there 
could be no possibility of direct military-naval sup- 
port from the Axis, so long as Britain held Suez and 
Aden. Immediate contact between the new allies can 
be established only by an agreement with the 
U.S.S.R., and both Germany and Japan are now at 
tempting to enlist Soviet cooperation—in the first 
instance, by some kind of Soviet-Japanese under- 
standing. 

Tokyo did not assume these risks without certain 
real compensations. Germany has formally recog: 
nized Japan’s leadership in creating a new order in 
“Greater East Asia.” Within this sphere lie French 


Indo-China and the Netherlands East Indies, two | 


rich colonies whose mother countries are occupied 
by German troops. By the terms of the pact, 
Hitler has thus assigned title of these colonies 
to Japan. In the case of Indo-China, German pres 


— 
sure OF 
the Fr 
Hanot 


of Get 
decisiv 
Axis. | 
the ca: 
pressu: 
erland: 


DE\ 
view, | 
will th 
bluff 1 
Japan 
newly 

The 
tablist 
garris 
into 
troops 
quarte 


Airpot 
1940 
An | 

acy in 

to the 
pean fF 

new G 

vinced 

of his 
and pt 
by his 
warra 
on the 


Burm 
Con 
Ent 

Burm 

trated 

gagin 
sketcl 

tin m: 


officia 
mats 
work 
They 

nal 

Mr 
as co 
write 


challe 


— — Page Three 
Greece sure on the Vichy government apparently facilitated ing this step, hostilities.caused by the Japanese in- 
aa the French surrender to Japan’s demands in the vasion in the northeast have been halted, with the 
. Pte Hanoi pact of September 22. This tangible evidence invading forces left in occupation of a highly strate- 
. lal of Germany’s good intentions may have been the gic area. A drastic Japanese raid on Kunming, capital 
= re decisive factor in winning Japan’s adherence to the of Yunnan province, which occurred on Septem- 
r : er . 
a om | Axis. Japan undoubtedly expects similar support in ber 30, may have been launched from the new Indo- 
evel the case of the Dutch East Indies, exerted through China air bases. Chinese troops poised on the Yun- 
h oF pressure on hostages held by Germany in the Neth- nan border are momentarily expected to begin an 
. 4 erlands. invasion of Indo-China. Thailand (Siam) has re- 
ind ap. ' . ; 
: ap DEVELOPMENTS IN INDO-CHINA. In Japan’s newed its demands for the return of territory seized 
: res- ; . . P t ° e ° 
he view, the immediate effectiveness of the new alliance by Indo-China in 1893; on September 28, according 
oni * | will thus be tested by events in southeast Asia. The to official Hanoi soutces, Thailand army planes 
nt. | bluff will have worked, at least for the present, if bombed French posts 15 miles inside the disputed 
nce oc- | Japan can proceed unhampered in consolidating its Mekong River area. No injuries were caused, how- 
Ramon | newly won position in Indo-China. ever, and on September 30 the Vichy government 
nt, had The provisions of the Hanoi pact, permitting es- announced that no reprisals would be undertaken. 
an and | tablishment of three air bases in northern Indo-China While Thailand’s pressure on Indo-China has been 
tempt- garrisoned by 6,000 troops, are being gradually put coordinated with Japan’s moves, there is no evidence 
by the | into effect. On September 26 the first 2,000 Japanese that Thailand is completely dominated by Tokyo, as 
ressure | troops landed at Haiphong and were conducted to has been sometimes alleged. 
ic con- | quarters provided by the French authorities. Follow- T. A. Bisson 
ve par- 
a THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 
’ under . tail . 
k Gib Airpower, by Al Williams. New York, Coward-McCann, Freedom’s Battle, by J. Alvarez del Vayo. New York, 
ID- 1940. $3.50 Knopf, 1940. $3.00 
of such An enthusiastic exponent of the doctrine of air suprem- Spain’s Ordeal, by Robert Sencourt. New York, Longmans, 
lliance, | acy in modern war recounts his experiences during visits 1940. 2nd ed. $3.00 
F to the air forces and production units of all the great Euro- . 
ve and pean powers except Russia. From his first contacts with the These two books, taken together, give > well-rounded 
; ; ; ares account of the conflicting forces at work in the Spanish 
new German air force, in 1936, Major Williams was con- vil S Al a Vas. 3B “ Minist d 
, vinced that it would surpass all others in Europe. Many Setebitien f War : the R . biieon’ we om "- oa th 
ILDE of his comments on problems of command, strategy, tactics na a, . it ~ ~ ra yee Te eataiinen ype ” 
and performance are keen, but their effectiveness is dulled COMES, WESOS OR SND ey Ee eee 
by his fl Saag: ip : : Professor Sencourt, concentrating chiefly on internal de- 
y his flagrantly opinionated political views and his un- ; : : : 
warranted refusal to recognize the full value of sea power velopments in Spain, writes with sympathy for the Na- 
. - P tionalist cause but with an apparent desire to state facts 
1. Gere | 0” the broad oceans. tne 
1. Ger accurately and opinions fairly. 
w ma-| Burma Road, by Nicol Smith. New York, The Bobbs-Merrill ' 
Company, 1940. $3.50 Guilty Men, by “Cato.” New York, Stokes, 1940. $1.50 
s and och ie al ; “tte 
Sovi Entertaining narrative of an adventurous trip along the Fifteen British political leaders who guided Britain 
Oviet Burma road from Kunming to Lashio and return, illus- into a series of diplomatic fiascos, and finally into a war 
Japan trated by the author’s photographs. It is prefaced by en- for which it was not adequately prepared, are condemned 
against gaging tales of Indo-China, as well as more realistic by a recital of their part in the events of the past years. 
. sketches of conditions in Yunnan, including those at the The author demands that all of them retire from the gov- 
a there tin mines of Kochiu. ernment posts they continue to occupy. 
, a United States Policy Toward China, by Paul H. Clyde. Tragedy in France, by André Maurois. New York, Harper, 
ce an Durham, Duke University Press, 1940. $3.50 1940. $2.00 
1eS Can A valuable collection of documentary texts illustrating A wise and urbane analysis of the causes—political, per- 
+) the | American policy in China since 1839, including treaties, sonal and military—of the French collapse, written from 
a official statements, and exchanges between American diplo- personal experience. M. Maurois served as a liaison officer 
- i mats and the State Department. Indispensable reference in France and Britain until last June. 
rst yor ¢ ents “ar East. : , ‘ 
° work for students of the Far East I Saw It Happen in Norway, by Carl J. Hambro. New 
under- They Wanted War, by Otto D. Tolischus. New York, Rey- York, Appleton-Century, 1940. $2.50 
nal & Hitchcock, 1940. $3.00 The story of the German invasion in Norway, as experi- 
certain Mr. Tolischus has drawn on his many years’ experience enced and recorded by the President of the Norwegian 
as correspondent of The New York Times in Berlin to Parliament. Although the facts recorded in this book are 
recog: write one of the best brief books on Nazi Germany and its on the whole well-known, it will rank high among the first- 
‘der in challenge to the world. hand historical records of this war. 
French | 7” 
5, two | FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 50, Ocroser 4, 1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
cupied Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Leer, Secretary; VERA MicHBLES DEAN, Editor. 
pact, Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
ylonies > 81 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
| pres F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


i 


So AR ETI ee ar 


a te Sa IR es 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


SEPT. 30.—Washington has given no indication 
this week of altering its present policy with respect 
to Europe or the Far East as a result of the military 
alliance between Germany, "Italy and Japan. The 
official attitude of the Administration was expressed 
by Secretary Hull at a State Department press con- 
ference on September 27, when he declared that “the 
reported agreement of alliance does not, in the view 
of the government of the United States, substantially 
alter a situation which has existed for several years.” 
Announcement of the alliance, Mr. Hull added, 
“merely makes clear to all a relationship which has 
long existed in effect and to which this government 
has repeatedly called attention.” 


No one who has understood the swift march of 
events during the past few weeks will draw errone- 
ous conclusions from this attitude of official reserve. 
Mr. Hull’s statement does not reflect unconcern; it 
does not suggest indifference to the far-reaching im- 
plications of the pact, nor does it mean that the posi- 
tion of the United States will remain unaltered for 
long. On the contrary, it points toward acceptance 
by the American people of a situation which may call 
for measures no longer short of war and military 
action no longer confined to the Western Hemi- 
sphere. Alternatives which might have been possible 
six months ago have been eliminated. Faced with a 
direct challenge, the United States is compelled to 
take new and critical decisions in both Europe and 


Asia. 


CRITICAL DECISIONS. The decisions which will 
confront Washington in the weeks directly ahead 
are primarily strategic. In the past we have been able 
to take diplomatic or political action without regard 
to the immediate strategic consequences. In the fu- 
ture we are under the necessity of measuring our 
ability to enforce every major diplomatic move by 
military or naval action. As long as the British fleet 
remains in control of the Atlantic, no threat of com- 
bined action by the Axis powers will affect the se- 
curity of the United States or weaken our aid to 
Britain in Europe. But with the prospect of a long 
war, possibly resulting in a stalemate in Western 
Europe, the potential field of military operation has 
extended to Africa, the Near East and Southeast 
Asia, and in this event the disposition of our mili- 
tary strength becomes the paramount factor in Amer- 
ican as in British policy. 

It appears probable that the diplomatic steps taken 


ed 


by Washington in the Far East last week on the eye 
of Tokyo’s alignment with the European Axis will 
soon be implemented by further economic and politi. 
cal measures. The first step, taken on September 25, 
was the announcement by the Export-Import Bank 
of another $25,000,000 loan to China. This was fol. 
lowed on September 26 by President Roosevelt's an. 
nouncement that a complete embargo would be 
placed on all exports of scrap iron and steel, except 
to the Western Hemisphere and Great Britain, be. 
ginning on October 16. These measures alone are un- 
likely to prove effective in curbing Japan’s expansion 
in the Far East. But other measures of greater im. 
portance are said to be under consideration. These 
include continued discussion with Britain about re. 
opening of the Burma Road and conversations with 
Britain and Australia regarding the use by the United 
States Navy of Singapore and other British bases in 
the Western Pacific. 

Despite these implications of steady and increas- 
ing pressure on Japan, Under-Secretary Sumner 
Welles, speaking before the Foreign Affairs Council 
of Cleveland on September 28, refrained from clos- 
ing the door on negotiations for an ‘‘equitable settle. 
ment” with Japan. Asserting that the way was still 
open to negotiation, Mr. Welles declared that “from 
the standpoint of reason, common sense and the best 


technical interests of all the powers possessing in- | 


terests in the Far East, there is no problem presented 
which could not be solved through negotiation, pro- 
vided there existed a sincere desire on the part of 
those concerned to find an equitable and fair solution 
which would give just recognition to the rights and 
the real interests of all concerned.” 

In the absence of such a solution, which must ap- 
pear remote to Mr. Welles, the problem confronting 
the United States will become largely one of naval 
strategy. Our two-ocean navy will not be ready for 
5 or 6 years, while the single fleet available today can- 
not be safely divided for simultaneous operations in 
the Atlantic and Pacific. Only in cooperation with 
Britain, Australia and the Netherlands Indies would 
we be able to match Japan’s naval power in the West- 
ern Pacific. Such cooperation, however, depends on 
the ability of the British fleet to maintain its control 
of the Atlantic. In the final analysis, our policy in the 
Far East hinges on the outcome of the Battle of 
Britain. What the Axis powers hope to do, by threat 
ening combined action in Europe and the Far East, 1s 
to block effective aid to Britain on the part of the 


United States. WILLIAM T. STONE 


Bre 
official 
line Ww: 
the fo 
— frot 
Allies, 
ade, c 
having 
contin 
concer 
beginr 
way 0 
Comp: 
roller 
Norw: 
ence O 
early | 
phase, 
can al 
attack 
presut 

WI 
carrie: 
occup 
began 
ing fc 
Germ 
gradu 
plants 
of wz 
condi 


This 

use it 
Italy’ 
probl 
stren; 
to th 
Keite 


