bn. SEY 





ich 


is 
a 


sh | 
' 











Entered as 2nd class matter 


Dr ss 

° “illtan 7: Py + FER } (} {944 
_ = —— a Os ps 

al Versi t, ae D 

Y of Mtéhinn, 7. 3 
Aan Arbor tee i 
, “Cn, 
5 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 16 


Fesruary 4, 1944 





NAZI DEFEAT FIRST STEP TOWARD AVENGING JAPANESE ATROCITIES 


HE nation-wide anger aroused by the joint Army- 

Navy report of January 27 concerning Japanese 
atrocities against American and Filipino prisoners of 
war indicates how quickly complacency disappears 
when the war is brought home to the American 
people in personal terms. The United States is a long 
way from the fighting fronts, but it is now clear that 
when Americans get a glimpse of the true face of 
the enemy, they realize deeply that this is a war for 
their own survival and feel the same hatred as mil- 
lions of people in countries directly in the path of 
the Axis. 

Yet, because most Americans lack any genuine, 
personal experience of the war, it is worth empha- 
sizing that the unspeakable treatment of the men cap- 
tured on Bataan and Corregidor is part of a larger 
picture. That such treatment—in violation of the Ge- 
neva Prisoners of War Convention to which Japan 
pledged itself after Pearl Harbor—was not reserved 
for Americans alone is suggested by the greater num- 
ber of Filipinos involved. And we know from Foreign 
Minister Eden’s statement in the Commons on Janu- 
ary 28 that captured British soldiers have been dealt 
with in an equally brutal fashion. Nor should it be 
forgotten that the actions of Japan’s military leaders 
and troops toward Americans in the Philippines in 
1942 are simply a symbol of what has been done on 
a vaster scale in China during seven years of war. In 
scope and depravity no crimes committed by Japan 
elsewhere can rival the wanton murder and rape 
committed inside defenseless Nanking by the Im- 
perial Army in December 1937. 

TWO FRONTS—ONE ENEMY. Nor is there 
anything peculiarly Japanese about the events de- 
scribed in the past week from Washington and Lon- 
don. Some commentators and persons in public life 
have tended to react in racial terms by referring dis- 
paragingly to the size or color of the Japanese. But 
the fact remains that the despicable actions of the 


enemy in Asia are not fundamentally unlike the 
vicious practices of his Nazi ally in the West. The 
sufferings and tortures inflicted by the Japanese may 
vary from those of the Nazis in detail, but they are 
certainly not different in kind. Taq think otherwise 
would be to forget the crime of Lidice against the 
Czechs, the bloody extermination of the Jews during 
the past eleven years, the murder of many thousands 
of Poles, the employment of mass graves in occupied 
Russia and the fiendish use of lethal gas chambers 
to kill civilians. 

The conclusion appears inescapable: we are not 
fighting an enemy of a particular race or nationality, 
but rather the moral degradation and corruption of 
the human spirit that are the hallmarks of fascism 
wherever it appears. We have at the present time no 
reason to distinguish between Germany and Japan 
on a moral basis. The only distinctions that are ten- 
able are those dictated by military strategy and the 
conditions required for decisive victory. 

GERMANY STILL COMES FIRST. It is neces- 
sary to make this point because advocates of a stra- 
tegy of defeating Japan first may now attempt to 
gain a new lease on life, in a last desperate effort 
to reverse the decisions reached at Teheran for an 
invasion of western Europe. In reality nothing could 
be more destructive of our objective of defeating 
Japan as rapidly as possible than to defer the plans 
of the United Nations for an all-out attack on the 
Nazi foe. Germany is more exhausted than Japan, 
is closer to the centers of United Nations strength 
and, in a political sense, is a more dangerous enemy 
than Japan. Its defeat is therefore the first logical 
objective of the Allied countries. 

It may truly be said that the path to Tokyo leads 
through Berlin, for any attempt to concentrate on 
Japan now, while allowing Germany to continue in 
the field, would result in a serious dispersion of Amer- 
ican and British strength. This is well understood 





i 
ey 
} 
ti 
he 


ed 
eer 


oe 
= - 


Ee See hres eg ep ne a 
: aoe 
ee ee ee 


ee 


in aeaina 
~ SumeeeroeeE 


PoMeNen tk 


—o nant tet rap mn 
. , apace 





RE Fp AO pee ee eee 


ees 


——————_—_—_—SSSS Page Two 


by military leaders in Washington and London, and 
it would be most unfortunate if popular clamor 
should be stirred up for the adoption of another line 
of strategy. To give way in emotional fashion to the 
desire to send a fleet immediately against Tokyo, or 
to carry out any other action not yet made feasible 
by our military position in the Pacific, might put us 
in the position of a fighter who becomes so enraged 
that he forgets his own defenses and blindly strikes 
out at his opponent. 

SHALL WE USE GAS? At least one writer has 
suggested that, because of the anger aroused by Jap- 
anese atrocities, Americans may now be less opposed 
than they would hitherto have been to the use of 
poison gas by United States forces in the Pacific. The 
launching of gas attacks, it is said, could be very 
helpful in occupying many islands under Japanese 
control. But the immediate practical repercussions 
of gas warfare are incalculable. The effects could not 
be confined to the Pacific islands, but would almost 
certainly be felt in China, Russia, England, Italy and 
Yugoslavia, and might ultimately reach New York 
or the American West Coast. The only restrictions 
on the frightfulness thereby unleashed would lie in 
whatever limitations gas may possess as an instru- 


FRENCH SEEK FULL RECOGNITION ON EVE OF ALLIED INVASION 


With the recent arrival in Washington of Edwin 
C. Wilson, United States envoy to the French Com- 
mittee of National Liberation, the provisional French 
capital in Algiers is anxiously awaiting the State De- 
partment’s decision on the authority it will recog- 
nize in France immediately following liberation of 
the country. The British seem to be attempting to 
eliminate sources of friction between themselves and 
the French Committee, as indicated by Prime Min- 
ister Churchill’s visit with de Gaulle at Marrakech 
on January 12 and 13. But Britain will recognize the 
Committee as the French provisional government 
only if the United States approves this step. It is to 
Washington, therefore, that the French look for in- 
dications of post-invasion political developments. 

Although the French Committee is not the only 
representative of enemy-occupied countries that is 
wondering about its role in Allied invasion plans— 
thus far Norway alone has succeeded in securing defi- 
nite Allied approval for its proposed provisional au- 
thority—it is in a particularly weak position because 
it has been given merely limited recognition by the 
Allies and is not a “government.” Under the circum- 
stances, the French Committee undoubtedly fears the 
United States and Britain may by-pass it, setting 
up a military régime, as in Italy. Several important 
developments, however, have recently done much to 
improve the Committee’s chances of securing Allied 
recognition as the temporary government of France. 








ment of warfare. 

Clearly the decision to use this weapon is not 
one that the United States would have the right to 
make by itself, for this country, separated as it is 
from the theatres of war by two great oceans, must 
bear in mind that the effects would be visited op 
the peoples of Allied countries much more than op 
the American people. It is true that Japan appears 
already to have used some gases in China, but it is 
very questionable whether Chungking, which has 
only a very limited chemical industry and at present 
lacks the means of importing large quantities of war 
materials, would wish to see the United Nations reply 
by using poison gas. 

The moral issue is as serious as the material one. 
The United Nations are pledged to fight this war 
with all their resources to complete victory, but they 
are also pledged to a proper regard for human de. 
cency. If the Axis should initiate gas warfare, the 
Allied countries would have to reply in kind. But it 
is not in keeping with the anti-Axis cause to descend 
to the brutality and mass disregard for human life 
that characterize the methods employed by the 
enemy. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


TOWARD PARLIAMENTARY RULE. The rec- 
ord that the Provisional Constituent Assembly made 
for itself in the session ending on January 22 te 





— 


sult of 
govert 
Comm 
and 1s 
the A: 
On 
yntari 
has al 
Befor 
all tri 
libera 
conse: 
medi 
move! 
woul. 
order 
migh 
held 
again 
Afric 
traor 
court 
crim 
in F 
form 
Nort 
R] 
mitt 
not | 
but 





inforced de Gaulle’s claim that he will not saddle 
France with a dictatorship but will follow republican 
principles. Although the Assembly was established 
by decree of the Committee of Liberation, it did not 
act as a rubber stamp, and debates were free from 
any evidence of servility. This emergence of a par- 
liamentary check on the executive seems to be, in 
fact, one of the major developments in the history of 
Free France since 1940 and marks a return to gov- 
ernment by discussion. The Assembly—which is 
made up of representatives of the resistance move- 
ment, the pre-war parliament and the colonial coun- 
cils—showed itself opposed to personal power or 


“presidential government’’ by exercising independent | 
judgment on serious issues concerning the future | 


of France. Among these questions none was more 
important than the method whereby the home gov- 
ernment would be reestablished in the wake of the 
Allied armies. The proposal of de Gaulle and other 
members of the Committee, who are eager to secure 
a popular mandate as soon as possible, that local 


elections for the provisional government be held im- ; 


mediately following liberation met with the objec: 
tion that any elections held before at least four-fifths 
of the French voters have returned to their home 
districts might be won by minority groups. As a te 





orde 
} tion 
Afr 
betv 





fere 
ville 


; 


| 
’ 
j 
’ 


' 
' 





FO! 





ne. 
Var 


de. 
the 
t it 
and 
life 
the 


reC- 
ade 

re- 
idle 
can 
hed 


not 


we 


~ 











—— 
—_ 





sult of the Assembly's insistence that even temporary 
government should not rest on minority support, the 
Committee has abandoned its original electoral plan 
and is drawing up a new one for discussion when 
the Assembly reconvenes on February 29. 

On the question of punishing Vichyites who vol- 
untarily collaborated with the Axis, the Assembly 
has also served as a clearinghouse for French opinion. 
Before the debate, the Committee had decided that 
all trials should be postponed until France had been 
liberated and a regular government installed. The 
consensus of the Assembly, however, was that im- 
mediate action must be taken to assure the resistance 
movement in France that collaborators with the Nazis 
would be brought to trial, thus preventing dis- 
orderly punishments later in which innocent persons 
might suffer. Communist members of the Assembly 
held that summary action should be taken at once 
against Vichyites now under detention in North 
Africa, but the majority was opposed to any ex- 
traordinary procedures and insisted that military 
courts—the regular French device for handling 
crimes against the state—be used. Accordingly, early 
in February a military court will try a group of 
former custodians of Vichy’s concentration camps in 
North Africa. 

REVAMPING THE EMPIRE. The French Com- 


; mittee’s hopes for full approval by the Allies rest 


not only on the adoption of parliamentary practices, 
but also on its efforts to set its colonial house in 
order. Realizing the need for further industrializa- 
tion and improvement of living conditions in its 
African colonies if real bonds of unity are to exist 
between them and the mother country in the future, 
the Committee called the first French imperial con- 
ference since 1940. The meeting was held in Brazza- 
ville, French Equatorial Africa, from January 30 to 
February 4, and the recommendations of the gov- 





What is the Western economic stake in Asia? How 
much would it cost the metropolitan countries to 
give up their empires in the East? How will the 
rest of the world adjust itself to the rise of new 
nations in a free and industrialized Asia? READ— 


INDEPENDENCE FOR COLONIAL ASIA— 
THE COST TO THE WESTERN WORLD 
by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25c 


February 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











P. age Three 


hea 














ernors of the African colonies will form the basis for 
action following the liberation of France. Another 
important modification in French overseas affairs— 
and one that should be favorably regarded in Britain 
and the United States—occurred in Beirut on January 
3, when the French-Lebanese crisis of last Novem- 
ber was officially ended. By transferring the collec- 
tion of customs and the tobacco monopoly from 
French to Lebano-Syrian authorities, the mandatory 
power took a step toward recognizing the indepen- 
dence of these Arab states as London and Washing- 
ton had urged. 

POWER POLITICS AND FRANCE. Some de 
Gaullists in Algiers are reported to be hoping that 
Anglo-American interest in good relations with 
France will be increased, not by the record estab- 
lished by the French Committee, but by the efforts 
of the two Western powers to create a sphere 
of influence in Europe. They argue that the Russian- 
Polish border dispute implies that the Allies intend 
to divide post-war Europe, with the U.S.S.R. dom- 
inating eastern Europe and Britain and the United 
States the west. French eagerness to run their own 
affairs immediately following the liberation of their 
country is understandable, but there can be no doubt 
that recognition won chiefly as a result of power 
politics could only result, sooner or later, in a con- 
flict between the Big Three that would ruin not only 
them but France. The French have nothing to gain 
from strife among the Allies, for their country is 
inevitably a battleground whenever the powers re- 
sort to force instead of collective security to assure 
their safety. 

Fortunately, it is not on an Allied scramble for 
European zones of influence, but on the imminence 
of invasion and the immediate need to settle as many 
problems as possible connected with the liberation of 
France that the French Committee’s greatest hope 
for American approval rests. As evidence accumulates 
that de Gaulle is indispensable in the liberation of his 
country, and that he and his organization are sin- 
cerely interested in maintaining democratic govern- 
ment, the possibility that the Committee will be 
recognized as the provisional government of France 
is improved. 

Wiunirrep N. HADsEL 





The Chemical Front, by Williams Haynes. New York, 
Knopf, 1943. $3.00 


Ranging from blood plasma and sulfa drugs to in- 
cendiaries and poison gas, this book offers an absorbing 
account of the scientific developments which mean so much 
in modern war. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 16, Fepruary 4, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micupies Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


S81 


Produced under union conditions and 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


composed and printed by union labor. 


le hind y+ 








or 


ar 


XIE EERE Se eerie ese Saye eeacweet 


IESE, 


pone 


ee ad tae ee 


Ora 





Re LORE DR RRS ey ene 


See Ee eee oa 


Washington News Letter 















JAN. 31.—As a result of Argentina’s severance of 
relations with Germany and Japan on January 26, 
the Western Hemisphere at last presents the unified 
anti-Axis front sought at the Third Conference of 
Foreign Ministers at Rio de Janeiro in 1942, when it 
adopted a resolution recommending that every Amer- 
ican Republic break diplomatic relations with Ger- 
many and its major allies. On January 28 Argentina 
implemented its political step by suspending com- 
munications and commercial relations with the 
Axis. 


U.S. POLICY CHANGING. Pressure from the 
United States, with the collaboration of Britain, 
forced the Argentine break. This occurred after a 
series of incidents which suggests that Washington 
is casting aside its policy of restraint toward govern- 
ments unfriendly to us. On January 25 the State 
Department announced its refusal to recognize the 
Bolivian revolutionary government on the ground 
that it was linked with “subversive groups hostile to 
the Allied cause.” On January 28 Washington sus- 
pended Caribbean oil shipments to Spain “pending a 
reconsideration of trade and general relations.” 


The State Department regards the development 
in Argentina as a mixed blessing. While the break 
with the Axis has obvious advantages for the present, 
it preserves at least temporarily the régime of Pres- 
ident Ramirez, who has been unfriendly to this coun- 
try in foreign affairs and to democracy in domestic 
affairs. Therefore, in declaring on January 26 that 
“it will be most gratifying to all the Allied nations 
to learn that Argentina has broken diplomatic rela- 
tions with Germany and Japan,” Secretary of State 
Hull added this reservation: “It must be assumed 
from her action that Argentina will now proceed 
energetically to adopt the other measures which all 
of the American Republics have concerted for the 
security of the continent.” 


With its abandonment of neutrality the Argentine 
government did not eliminate all the totalitarian 
features of the Ramirez régime, although the pro- 
Axis newspaper, Pampero, was suppressed, and on 
January 27 the three most fascist-minded Ministers 
in the Cabinet resigned: Dr. Gustavo Martinez 
Zuviria, Minister of Justice and Public Instruction. 
notorious anti-Semite; Gen. Luis Cesar Perlinger, 
Minister of the Interior, and Gen. Diego Mason, 
Minister of Agriculture. But the most influential of 
Ramirez's advisers throughout his anti-United States 


FOR VICTORY ° 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


period, Juan Peron, a leader in the so-called “colonels 
clique,” stayed on as Minister of Labor. 
Argentina's severance of Axis relations came afte 
this country’s nonrecognition of Bolivia, whig 
Buenos Aites had recognized on January 3. Eleye 
days later Secretary of State Hull said that prelim 
inary information suggested that ‘‘outside forces’ 
inimical to the United Nations had inspired th 
Bolivian revolution. These ‘‘outside forces’ were te 
ported authoritatively, although unofficially, to 
Argentinian. Washington decided to use the issue of 
Bolivian recognition as a lever to force a change iy 
either the leadership or policy of the Argentine gov 
ernment, whose strict neutrality was providing Ger. 
many and Japan with opportunities to spy on all the 
Americas from their Buenos Aires embassies. 
PRESSURE ON ARGENTINA. By diplomati 
intimation to the Argentine government and by in 
spired press articles, Washington warned President 
Ramirez of two steps this country might take: 1. ap 
plication of economic sanctions against Argenting 
which might precipitate a political crisis inside th 
country; 2. publication of a document in the Stat, 
Department's possession exposing subversive plo: 
tings in neighboring countries, which might arous 
South American opinion against Argentina. 
On January 21 the Argentine government di) 
closed a portentous concern about espionage withir 
its jurisdiction. Announcing that the British wer 
detaining Osmar Alberto Hellmuth, Argentine auxi! 
iary consul to Barcelona as an enemy agent,” th 
government said: “As information supplied by th 
British Foreign Office may imply the existence of a 
espionage organization in our country, of which Hel: 
muth was said to be a member, the government ha 
ordered an ample investigation and has given all in 
formation to the federal police.” 
Although Secretary Hull refrained from mention 








ing Argentina when he announced nonrecognition 
of Bolivia, the threat of sanctions and of disclosutt) 
still existed for the Ramirez government. Since it) 
prestige at home, however, would have suffered from 
an admission that revision in its policy resultel 
from the instigation of the United States, Argentins 
followed the line it had set for itself in the Hellmuth 
case and gave Axis espionage as its reason for break 





ing relations with Germany and Japan. Argentina’| 
change in policy has brought no alteration in tt 


Administration's nonrecognition of Bolivia. 
BLAIR BOLLES 











19: 


