


ce 


var 


ves 
la 
vas 
der 
va 
ane 
ted 


om 


~” 


W- 
ce, 
ra'§ 
the 
not 


f a 


sue 
ter- 
kie, 
944 


and 
he 


nc 
dis- 


reni- 


hat | 


lied 
liat 
Em- 
inst 
thet 
cted 


e 


FPRRIGDICAL ROOS 
@@NERAL LI6 . 
TINTYV. OF MIGI 





NOV 15 1943 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


7] 
) 
v 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 4 


NOVEMBER 12, 1943 





dae less than a week after publication of 
the Moscow accord on November 1, the Sen- 
ite’s adoption of the revised Connally resolution by 
avote of 85 to 5, and Stalin’s jubilant speech on the 
eve of the twenty-sixth anniversary of the Bolshevik 
revolution have already carried forward the work 
accomplished by the Foreign Ministers of Britain, 
Russia and the United States. The five documents 
drawn up in Moscow justify the most sanguine ex- 
pectations by mapping the general outlines of the 
post-war settlement the three powers have agreed to 
support, and by establishing machinery in the form 
of the European Advisory Commission, with head- 
quarters in London, for the discussion of specific 
ssues—many of them as yet unpredictable—that may 
arise during and after the war. 

Although the main surprise of the Moscow con- 
ference was China's participation in the signing of 
he Four-Nation Declaration — a development that 
lay presage a new era in the Pacific sector of the 
jlobal war—the conferees touched widely and boldly 





-' on the whole range of Europe’s problems. A thor- 


ough discussion of the military complexities of open- 
ing a front in Western Europe apparently resulted in 
giving satisfaction to Stalin, who on November 6 
uid that “the opening of the real second front in Eu- 
lope .. . is not far off.” 


| But, essential as a military understanding between 
the three great powers is to the speedy winning of 
the war, the political understandings they reached 
may, in the long run, prove even more important. 
Among the political highlights were (1) agreement 
on policy toward Germany; (2) formulation of a 
common policy toward liberated countries; (3) de- 
tmination to establish a general international or- 
ganization for the maintenance of international peace 
and security “‘at the earliest practicable date” and, 
meanwhile, to consult with one another and, as oc- 
asion requires, with other members of the United 








MOSCOW ACCORD CRYSTALLIZES POLICY OF GREAT POWERS 


Nations “with a view to joint action on behalf of 
the community of nations’; and (4) the decision to 
work for “a practicable general agreement with re- 
spect to the regulation of armaments in the post-war 
period.” 


COMMON POLICY TOWARD GERMANY. 
Any doubt that may have lingered in the minds of 
some people that Russia might consider a separate 
peace with a non-Nazi régime following liberation 
of its own territory is removed by the Four-Nation 
Declaration in which Britain, Russia, China and the 
United States affirm that they will “continue hostili- 
ties against those Axis powers with which they re- 
spectively are at war until such powers have laid 
down their arms on the basis of unconditional sur- 
render’’—the phrase first used by President Roose- 
velt and Mr. Churchill at the Casablanca Confer- 
ence. The four powers, moreover, declare “that those 
of them at war with a common enemy will act to- 
gether in all matters relating to the surrender and 
disarmament of that enemy’’—thus blasting the 
hopes of the Nazis that they might achieve a stale- 
mate by driving a wedge between the United Na- 
tions. The Declaration on Austria is obviously in- 
tended to detach satellite countries from Germany, 
and to light the fuse of revolt in Germany by encour- 
aging an uprising among the Austrians. 

Moreover, in a separate statement on Nazi atroci- 
ties, President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill 
and Premier Stalin put an end to speculation that 
one or other of the great powers would favor a 
“soft” peace for Germany. “At the time of granting 
of any armistice to any government which may be 
set up in Germany,” German officers and men and 
members of the Nazi party who ordered or condoned 
acts of atrocity are to be sent back to the countries 
in which their acts were committed “in order that 
they may be judged and punished according to the 
laws of these liberated countries and of free govern- 




















ments which will be erected therein.” Those “who 
have hitherto not imbrued their hands with innocent 
blood” are warned that they will suffer a like fate if 
they join ‘the ranks of the guilty.” 


POLICY TOWARD LIBERATED COUNTRIES. 
The major misunderstandings that threatened to de- 
velop between the three great powers in their atti- 
tude toward liberated countries, and had already 
arisen over Anglo-American policy in North Africa 
and Italy, were frankly faced in the Declaration on 
Italy. Britain, Russia and the United States declare 
that they are “in complete agreement that Allied 
policy toward Italy must be based upon the funda- 
mental principle that Fascism and all its evil in- 
fluence and configuration shall be completely de- 
stroyed, and that the Italian people shall be given 
every opportunity to establish governmental and 
other institutions based upon democratic principles.” 
To dispel doubts about the past, Mr. Hull and Mr. 
Eden declare that the action of their governments in 
Italy “in so far as paramount military requirements 
have permitted, has been based upon this policy.” 

In the future, the three powers agree that, subject 
to military necessities, the base of the Italian govern- 
ment should be broadened by the inclusion of repre- 
sentatives of anti-Fascist groups; all institutions and 
organizations created by the Fascist régime shall be 
suppressed ; all Fascist or pro-Fascist elements shall be 
removed from the administration and from public 
institutions; democratic organs of local government 
shall be created; and “freedom of speech, of religious 
worship, of political belief, of press and of public 
meetings shall be restored in full measure to the 
Italian people.” It is interesting to note that, while 
all these freedoms are enjoyed in Britain and the 
United States, they are not (with the exception of 
freedom of religious worship now restored to mem- 
bers of the Greek Orthodox Church) as yet available 
to the people of Russia. Whether Russia’s active par- 
ticipation in the restoration of freedom to peoples 
outside its borders liberated from Nazi and Fascist 
tule will have repercussions on its own political insti- 
tutions opens up an interesting field for speculation. 


TOWARD INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZA- 
TION. From the point of view of the United States 
the most interesting point of the Moscow accord is 


MOSCOW ACCORD BRIGHTENS PROSPECTS IN FAR EAST 


Although the Moscow agreements deal principally 
with European or world questions, their implications 
for the Far East are both specific and significant. 
This is understandable, since any far-reaching inter- 
national accord serves to clarify the problems of areas 
with which it is not directly concerned—but it is 
important that the point should be stressed. An ex- 
tended analysis would be required to develop ade- 
quately the possible repercussions in Eastern Asia, 


Page Two 








———— 


Point 4 of the Four-Nation Declaration in which th 
four powers recognize ‘the necessity of establishing 
at the earliest practicable date a general internation 
organization, based on the principle of the sove, 
eign equality of all peace-loving states, and open 
membership by all such states, large and small, fo 
the maintenance of international peace and security” 
This statement, which reflects both the views ané 
the language of Mr. Hull, was promptly incorpo, 
ated into the Connally resolution adopted by the 
Senate on November 5. To the extent that such a 
organization does become effective after the war 
it may prove feasible to fulfill the undertaking of 
Point 7 of the same declaration—‘‘to bring aboy 
a practicable general agreement with respect to the 
regulation of armaments in the post-war period’ 
Such an agreement would fulfill the expressed de. 
sire of the four powers “of establishing and main. 
taining international peace and security with th 
least diversion of the world’s human and economi 
resources for armaments.” 


As was to have been expected, no specific state. 
ment was made about contested territories such a 
eastern Poland and the Baltic states, or about the 
fate of Finland. It cannot be assumed that this prob 
lem is covered by Point 6 of the Four-Nation Dec 
laration, in which the signatories state that “after 
the termination of hostilities” they will not employ 
their military forces within the territories of other 
states except for the purposes envisaged in this dec. 
laration and after joint consultation.” At the time 
when hostilities are over the Russians may already 
be occupying the contested areas, and may also claim 
that they are part of the U.S.S.R.—not “the tert 
tories of other states.” Such questions remain to be 
discussed by the European Advisory Commission. | 


The main point is that the Moscow Conference has 
created a working relationship between Britain, the 
United States and Russia; has recognized the equal. | 
ity of Russia and China with their two Westem 
partners; has stressed the fact that a four-power 
accord must be not an end in itself but a stepping 
stone to international organization; and has assured! 
the small nations that in such an organization the| 
will have a place with the great powers. | 








VERA MICHELES DEAN 


but their essential nature is indicated in the follow 
ing summary: 
1. Shortening the War Against Japan. | 
If, as various straws in the wind suggest, mili 
tary action against Germany is to be stepped up, 
this will also hasten the day of decisive blow 
against Japan; for the sooner Germany is beaten 
the more quickly will it be possible for Britail 
and the United States to face Tokyo in ful 








Sse rtzil 


A 


— 








ester | 


power 
ping: 
ssured 
1 they 


allow: 





- mili- 
>d up, 
blows 
eaten, 
rita 
1 ful 








—_—_— 
—— 





strength. Moreover, the ability of the Moscow 
conferees to agree on leading political and mili- 
tary questions points to the frustration of Japan's 
hopes for a negotiated peace as a result of possible 
disunity among the United Nations. The Chinese 
Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, K. C. Wu, was 
quite right when he stated on November 2 that 
the agreements must “‘put the Japanese in a fear- 
ful mood.” 


2. Recognizing the Equality of China. 

The Joint Four-Nation Declaration constitutes 
the first official recognition of China’s position as 
one of the “Big Four” of the United Nations. 
It is noteworthy that this recognition takes the 
form not of rhetoric, but of simple acceptance of 
the fact that China must be one of the major 
powers responsible for future world organization. 
This is a political blow of great severity to Japan 
—especially since it should destroy any hopes 
Tokyo may have had for a “negotiated peace” 
with Chungking. It also cuts the ground from 
under the argument sometimes advanced that the 
Russians and the British “do not have the same 
attitude toward Chungking” as we do. 


4 


3. Indicating Soviet Attitude Toward Japan. 


Although the Joint Four-Nation Declaration is 
so worded as not to commit the U.S.S.R. to meas- 
ures against Japan, it actually makes no distinc- 
tion between Germany and Japan. The pact is, 
in effect, a declaration of unity of all four major 
powers against the entire Axis, both in Europe 
and Asia. It suggests that Soviet “neutrality” to- 
ward Japan has been based largely on the neces- 
sity of not being diverted from the primary task 
of smashing the Nazis, that after the defeat of 
Germany the Russians may play a larger role in 
the Far Eastern war picture (although perhaps 
still avoiding outright military action), and that 


Page Three 





What are the post-war objectives of the occupied nations 
of Europe? For a survey of the underground move- 
ments and documents of Belgium, Czechoslovakia, France, 
nae Se Netherlands, Norway, Poland and Yugoslavia 


POST-WAR PROGRAMS OF EUROPE’S 
UNDERGROUND 


by Winifred N. Hadsel 


25c 


NOVEMBER 15 issue of FOREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 




















they are expected to be influential in any Far East- 
ern settlement. This is not only important in a 
military sense, but it weakens one of the few argu- 
ments remaining to the opponents of international 
cooperation in this country — namely, that “the 
Russians are not fighting the Japanese.” * 


4. Facilitating Far Eastern Reconstruction. 


Although Europe’s problems differ in many fe- 
spects from those of Asia—a large part of which 
is colonial territory—the Moscow agreements on 
war criminals and the future of Austria and Italy 
may contain useful suggestions for Far Eastern 
reorganization. Moreover, the fact that there is 
now a greater prospect of orderly post-war devel- 
opment in Europe means that the likelihood of 
fairly orderly Far Eastern reconstruction has also 
increased, since avoidance of chaotic conditions in 
the West is a prerequisite for the satisfactory fu- 
ture growth of Asia. 


All these possibilities indicate that the results 
achieved at Moscow constitute an important contrib- 
ution to the winning of the Far Eastern war and the 
establishment of a satisfactory peace in Asia as well 
as in Europe. Undoubtedly many questions still re- 
main to be dealt with— for example, the whole 
colonial problem — but what has already been ac- 
complished will facilitate future consideration of 


these knotty points. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


*For fuller discussion of this question, see ‘‘Grant of Siberian Bases Might 
Mean Their Loss to Japan,”’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, November 5, 1943. 





Under Cover, by J. R. Carlson. New York, Dutton, 1943. 
$3.50 


Sensational story of a one-man investigation of Amer- 
ican anti-democratic movements. 


Documents on International Affairs, 1938, Vol. 2, edited 
by Monica Curtis. New York, Oxford University Press, 
1943. $7.50 
This continuation of an invaluable series brings to- 

gether the principal documents on German foreign policy 


in the year of Austria’s annexation and the Munich agree- 
ment. 


NBC Handbook of Pronunciation, compiled by James F. 
Bender. New York, Crowell, 1943. $2.75 


With the present barrage of material on basic English, 
this “three-way” treatment of how to pronounce more than 


12,000 words according to accepted American standards 
is apropos. 


Resistance and Reconstruction, by Chiang Kai-shek. New 
York, Harper, 19438. $3.50 


A valuable collection of messages and statements of the 
Generalissimo during six years of war. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 4, November 12, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FrRanK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Legr, Secretary; Verna Micue.es Daan, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


> 181 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











Washington News Letter 

















Nov. 8.—General Francisco Franco’s message of 
congratulations last week to José P. Laurel, Japanese- 
installed President of the Philippines, was the most 
spectacular in a long series of indignities that the 
United States—which is providing sanctuary for the 
Philippine government-in-exile—has suffered from 
the government of Spain. Spanish newspapers, over 
which the government in Madrid exercises strict con- 
trol, have published scurrilous and critical references 
to the United States. At meetings sponsored by the 
Falange Espanola Tradicionalista, the United States 
and the Allied cause have been scoffed at. The 
Falange, chief political force behind the govern- 
ment, has attempted to undermine our influence in 
Latin America, although with decreasing success and 
flagging energy. Spain has given token military sup- 
port to the German fight against our ally Russia, 
where from July 1941 until this fall Spanish volun- 
teers organized in the Blue Legion helped man the 
front around Lake Ilmen. 


UNITED STATES MAY ACT. Acting Secretary 
of State Stettinius told his press conference on No- 
vember 4 that the American government is giving 
serious consideration to Franco’s message to Laurel, 
and that perhaps a little later it will be possible to 
say something on the matter. This restrained com- 
ment is the closest approach to criticism of the Span- 
ish government which has come from Washington. 

The United States has not only swallowed hu- 
miliations from Spain but has gone out of its way 
to conciliate the authoritarian and anti-democratic 
Spanish government. On August 28, 1942 President 
Roosevelt proposed that the American Republics 
assist in the restoration of art treasures injured dur- 
ing the Spanish Civil War and that tourism be en- 
couraged from the New World to Spain. On Febru- 
ary 26, 1943 American Ambassador Carlton J. H. 
Hayes, speaking in Barcelona, praised the Spanish 
government for “doing so much with such obvious 
success to develop a peace economy” and assured 
Spaniards that ‘the United States stands ready to 
continue and extend any help it can give to Spain.” 
In September Britain’s Foreign Secretary Anthony 
Eden publicly criticized the use of the Blue Legion 
in Russia, but Secretary of State Cordell Hull, when 
asked to comment on September 22, said only that 
the United States has been keeping the Spanish gov- 
ernment acquainted with our interest in this matter. 
On his return from Moscow, Secretary Hull may re- 
» veal whether he feels that the time is ripe to strike 


a firm note in public respecting Spain. 


CONCESSIONS FROM SPAIN. The Roosevel 
Administration justifies its Spanish policy on the 
ground that it has accomplished its aim—to keep 
Spain neutral. In its opinion, the Franco government 
had to be bribed, and the bribery is regarded as hay. 
ing made possible the African landings of a year ago 
and the subsequent successful development of the 
war in Africa and Italy. Spokesmen in Washington 
cite four concessions gained through appeasing 
Spain: 

1. Ambassador Hayes won Franco’s agreement 
to dismiss Foreign Minister Serrano Sufier, a Falan 
extremist whose policy seemed to be leading toward 
active collaboration with the Axis in the war. 2. The 
United States has been able to buy Spanish wolfram 
while Germany, lacking the needed exchange, has 
tried in vain to procure this strategic material from 
Spain. 3. The Spanish government has agreed not to 
intern American and Allied airmen forced down on 
Spanish territory. 4. The French Committee of Na- 
tional Liberation, as a result of United States inter- 
vention, has been permitted to send a diplomatic 
delegation to Madrid. 


The makers of this policy contend that Spain has 
been won cheaply. The United States has sold petro- 
leum, sulphate of ammonia, cotton, peas, beans, 
coal, cellulose, carbon black, codfish and industrial 
chemicals to Spain, but the value of strategic ma- 
terial imports exceeds the value of these exports and 
Spain has a dollar balance here. Opponents of the 
policy hold that any price to Franco is excessive and 
some insist that Spain, unrecovered from its civil 
war, would have remained neutral without appease. 
ment. 

When the United States recognized Franco on 
April 1, 1939 it did not foresee the grip which the 


Falange would secure on him, but the Roosevelt A¢- | 


ministration is now satisfied that Franco cannot last 
beyond the war and would not be saddened by his 
fall. Both the United States and Great Britain are 
thinking of Spain’s future, and apparently desire to 
have neither the Falange nor the Left seize power 


when Franco is shoved aside. Washington and Lon: | 


don seem to lean toward restoration of the mon- 
archy, with Prince Juan, third son of the late King 


Alfonso, on the throne, in the hope that he will heal } ¢,, 


the wounds of the civil war and at the same time be 
sympathetic to British and American interests. 
BLam BOLLES 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


191% 


Com 
Nove 
the I 
upon 
desir 
their 
agair 
from 
on } 
Gaul 
since 
0: 
lead 
whic 
enco 
three 
Mor 
fron 
to v 
thou 
attit 
fied, 
Con 
the 





