—=—== 


ing for 
lent ap- 
ms can 
opment 
ly reach 
efforts 
he Ger- 
e to be 
—would 
be used 
d. The 
he Ger- 
39, to- 
sh bus- 
idly de- 
accord- 
ch. The 
oO retain 
ehavior 
1e only 
may lie 
ial loan 


ousands 
rt order 
in’s at- 
- in that 
‘alestine 
raced on 
g given 
ren and 
> imme- 
\rab re- 
id mere 
he gov- 
‘al com- 
imprac- 
y recom- 
aths be- 
ced that 
s of the 
tates on 
on the 
[any ob- 
had per- 
that no 
le. The 
| to start 
no indi- 
he event 


OPPER 


National 


BAN, Editor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y 


Entered as second 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


VoL. XVIII, No. 7 


—_ 


20th ANNIVERSARY LUNCHEON TO BE BROADCAST 


Sir Alfred Zimmern will be a principal speaker at the FPA’s 
20th anniversary luncheon on Saturday, December 10, and will 
talk on “World Organization: Retrospect and Prospect.” The 
Hon. John G. Winant, Director of the International Labour 
Office, will address the FPA from Europe over the Columbia 
Broadcasting System from 2:15 to 2:30 p.m. The program 
will also be broadcast over WQXR. 


DECEMBER 9, 1938 


1918 


1938 


In this issue of the Bulletin the F.P.A., which 
celebrates its twentieth anniversary this week, 
glances back at two decades of world affairs. 


EUROPE IN RETROSPECT 


i CORENG back at Europe in the perspective of 

twenty turbulent years, it becomes increasingly 
clear that the World War marked only a pause in 
the development of political and economic forces 
which were molding the twentieth century. The seeds 
of nationalism, social revolution and economic 
change were already at work in the so-called liberal 
capitalism of the pre-war period. Sooner or later 
they would have borne fruit without the intervention 
of war. This cataclysm merely hastened their frui- 
tion, just as the Napoleonic wars accelerated the 
growth of nationalism and revolutionary sentiment 
not only on the European continent, but also in the 
New World. 

The trend toward national self-determination, 
once a unifying force, has become an instrument of 
disruption. It brought the belated unification of 
Germany and Italy in 1860-1870. It stirred the na- 
tionalism of Poles, Czechs, Croats, Hungarians and 
others confined in multi-national states, and gained 
momentum after the war, when some of these 
peoples realized their dreams of independence. But 
the creation of new states like Poland and Czecho- 
slovakia, and the expansion of existing ones like 
Rumania and Serbia, created new minority problems. 

The oppressed, having gained the upper hand, 
were now regarded as oppressors by a new group of 
subject peoples. Each of these minorities, encouraged 
by propaganda from across the border, demanded 
reunion with its homeland or full autonomy within 
the framework of the state to which it had been as- 
signed by the peace treaties. Their national aspira- 
tions furnished a convenient pretext for Nazi Ger- 
many which, without resort to war, used Sudeten, 


Ukrainian and Hungarian grievances to undermine 
states that seemed to block its territorial ambitions. 
The doctrine of self-determination, born of the 
French Revolution, was used to justify Germany's 
demand for the “return” of Sudetenland, which had 
not belonged to the Reich, and Italy’s clamor for the 
100,000 Italians in French Tunis. 


Under Hitler and Mussolini, Germany and Italy 
resumed their territorial ambitions checked in 1918. 
The Nazis, like the German General Staff dur- 
ing the World War, sought to control the raw ma- 
terials of the Ukraine and the oil-wells of Rumania; 
while Mussolini, who in 1911 had opposed colonial 
imperialism, renewed the demands of pre-war Na- 
tionalists for expansion in North Africa. Hitler's 
basic foreign policy—which like his anti-Semitism 
can be traced to pre-war ideas—carried on in more 
dynamic form the aspirations of Pan-Germans before 
1914. The Pan-Germans had envisaged a closed eco- 
nomic system in Central Europe from which the 
German “master-race” could compete for world 
dominance with Russia, the British Empire and 
“Yankee imperialism.” The peace treaties of 1919 
were intended to end once and for all the danger 
that German militarism, aided by Magyar national- 
ism, would create the Mitteleuropa of Pan-German 
dreams by subjugating non-German peoples. Twenty 
years after a World War to check German expansion 
to the east, a resurgent Germany under Hitler’s lead- 
ership seems on the point of achieving the objectives 
of which it was balked in 1918. 

Nor can Nazism and communism, which have 
transformed the internal systems of countries east of 
the Rhine, be regarded as disconnected phenomena, 
without roots in the past. Both movements, out- 
wardly different in their national settings, starting- 
points and objectives, represent a revolt of the dis- 
possessed classes—workers and peasants in Russia, 


aT 
___——————_—_—== — 


the lower middle class in Germany—against indus- 
trial capitalism and such remnants of feudalism as 
the aristocracy, the officer class and the Church. 
Both, to the accompaniment of terrorism and repres- 
sion of dissident minorities, seek to provide the 
masses with material opportunities hitherto reserved 
for a social élite. Both mark the trend—noticeable 
in the democracies as well as the dictatorships— 
away from economic individualism toward some 
form of collectivism. Both, paradoxical as it may 
seem, represent an effort to realize the promises held 
out by the political democracy of the nineteenth cen- 
tury, which the bourgeoisie had failed to translate 
into terms of economic democracy in an era of mass 
production. 


Democracy, carried to its logical conclusion, should 
be a mass movement, not a mask for the privileges 
of the possessing classes. It can achieve its full 
fruition only if the masses are provided—not with 
equal incomes, which no system, not even that of 
the Soviet Union, can or expects to provide—but 
with equal opportunities for education and freedom 
from rigid class stratification. Democracy, if still in 
imperfect form, may be said to have been achieved 
in France, Britain, the United States, Switzerland, 
Holland, Belgium and the Scandinavian countries, 
where the governing classes have until now been 
sufficiently foresighted to pay a ransom for their eco- 
nomic privileges in the form of advanced social 
legislation. Extremist movements like fascism and 
communism—both of which, whatever their merits or 
defects, are at present hostile to Western democracy 
—gained ground only in countries where democratic 
institutions had either never existed, or had been 
artificially superimposed on a foundation of authori- 
tarianism. Only the future can determine whether 
dictatorship in these countries represents a transition 
on the road to a wider measure of social and eco- 
nomic democracy than has yet been achieved in 
democratic states, or merely the prelude to further 
civil strife. 


If the democracies have frequently failed to carry 
their own principles to a logical conclusion at home, 
they have been even less successful in developing 
democratic procedures in the international sphere. 
The democracies, no less than the dictatorships, have 
regarded force as the decisive factor in international 
politics. It does not matter whether this force was 
military or economic, or merely the diplomatic pres- 
sure effectively applied by the strong against the 
weak. The hope embodied in the League Covenant 
that force would be used collectively only when 
democratic procedures for peaceful change had been 
flouted by would-be aggressors, has not been real- 
ized—not through any fault of the League, which 
had no existence as a separate entity, but through the 


Page Two 


———e 


reluctance of all League members to alter their basic 
policies. Here, again a democratic facade was too 
often superimposed on a foundation of power poli- 
tics. To the dictatorship countries this facade had 
the appearance of hypocrisy. The failure of the 
democracies to make timely concessions by peaceful 
means merely led, as in the case of possessing classes 
in the French and Russian revolutions, to the neces- 
sity of finally yielding at the point of a gun. 

The past twenty years have destroyed many illu- 
sions which sprang from a natural human desire to 
end war for all time. They have demonstrated—if 
this needed demonstration—that peace can never be 
assured by good intentions or pious moralizing. In 
drawing conclusions from the experience of the 
post-war period, we must remember that nothing is 
final in the history of nations or individuals; that 
there are no perfect or immutable solutions for hu- 
man relations, which are always in a state of flux; 
and that as long as there is life there will be a desire 
for change, which must be met not merely by armed 
resistance, but by development of procedures per- 
mitting peaceful adjustment to new conditions. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


ASIA—THEN AND NOW 

A Rip Van Winkle, awaking today from a twenty 
years’ sleep, would not be very greatly surprised at 
the events now occuring in China. Not long before 
1918, Japan had presented the Twenty-One De- 
mands to Yuan Shih-kai’s government. Treaties 
signed as a result of those demands had strengthened 
Japan’s hold on Manchuria, entrenched the Japanese 
in Shantung province, and given Japan the valuable 
Hanyehping mines in the Hankow area. In 1938 
Japan has accomplished the principal objective of the 
Demands—reduction of China to a Japanese protec- 
torate. Japanese armies have spread over Manchuria 


and much of China’s coastal and inland regions south 
of the Wall. 


The Chinese puppet régimes in Manchuria, and at 
Peiping and Nanking, are not very different from the 
pro-Japanese Anfu clique which held sway over the 
Peking government in 1918. The Chinese political 
situation today, however, presents many new angles. 
The Kuomintang, a rather weak and discredited 
political faction in 1918, has apparently taken on a 
new lease of life. Its leader is no longer Sun Yat-sen 
but Chiang Kai-shek. The strong Chinese military 
resistance, which is holding off the attacks of nearly 
a million Japanese troops, is almost incredible when 
compared with the attitude of the Chinese in 1918. 
The Chinese Communists, with their Eighth Route 
Army, who are giving the Japanese so much trouble 
in North China, are an entirely new phenomenon. 


(Continued on Page 4) 


A ~- -— “= 


LT; 
————s 


‘ir basic 
vas too 
er poli- 
de had 
of the 
veaceful 
r Classes 
e neces- 


ny illu- 
esire to 
ited—if 
ever be 
zing. In 
of the 
thing is 
ls; that 
for hu- 
of flux; 
a desire 
y armed 
res per- 
s. 


JEAN 


| twenty 
rised at 
r before 
ine De- 
Treaties 
gthened 
apanese 
valuable 
in 1938 
e of the 
> protec- 
anchuria 
ns south 


1, and at 
‘rom the 
over the 
political 
y angles. 
scredited 
en on a 
Yat-sen 
military 
f nearly 
yle when 
in 1918. 
h Route 
1 trouble 
omenon. 


Washin gton News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Dec. 6.—Looking back over the past 20 years, no 
candid observer can help but reflect on the processes 
of democracy in the field of foreign affairs. In Europe, 
the fumbling incapacity of democracies to achieve 
either genuine pacification or the defense of their 
own interests has been amply demonstrated from 
Versailles to Munich. In our own case, it is easy to 
condemn the sudden reversals and inconsistencies 
which have marked our shifting course since 1918. 
And yet, before reaching the cynical conclusion that 
democratic institutions are incapable of formulating 
any consistent foreign policy, it may be well to recall 
some of the controlling factors which have shaped 
American policy throughout these two critical 
decades. 


Divided Responsibility. One of these controlling 
factors has been glossed over repeatedly, both by 
Europeans and Americans, often with disturbing 
consequences. It arises from the fact that, under our 
system of government, the responsibility for the 
conduct of foreign relations is divided between Con- 
gress and the Executive. For more than a century this 
divided responsibility had little practical effect, 
largely because the Atlantic Ocean and the Monroe 
Doctrine saved us the trouble of formulating any 
positive foreign policy. But in 1918, when Woodrow 
Wilson sought to lead America into a rdle of world 
leadership, our traditional system became a factor of 
decisive importance. 


Wilson sailed for Paris with the overwhelming 
support of an American public opinion which had 
fought for the ideals of democracy in a war expected 
to lay the foundations for a lasting peace. A century 
of isolation had broken down under the impact of 
the European conflict, and the American people had 
accepted Wilson’s moral precepts as its own. The 
Paris Peace Conference was to bring that “new in- 
ternational order’’ based on “‘universal principles of 
tight and justice” for which the American President 
had pleaded with such persuasive eloquence. It was 
not surprising that Mr. Wilson, despite his back- 
ground as historian, should have neglected to con- 
sider the future attitude of Congress. 

But the attitude of Congress was not the only 
reason for the American reversal of 1921. A vital 
part of Wilson’s peace aims had been directed against 
the whole theory of the “balance of power,” which 
was to be replaced by the League of Nations. Yet 


in Europe, in that spring of 1918, Wilson had been 
welcomed by statesmen who accepted the League 
as an instrument for perpetuating the alliance which 
had won the war. American intervention had turned 
the balance and brought victory to the Allied cause. 
And Europe believed that American membership 
in the League would preserve the new balance of 
power. It was inconceivable to Europeans that the 
American people, having joined the alliance in the 
midst of war, would refuse to maintain the victorious 
balance of power in the years of peace. 


It is possible that American public opinion would 
have supported Wilson on the League of Nations 
even as late as 1920 had the issue been put to a 
popular vote. It is probable that the Senate would 
have approved the Covenant had Wilson been willing 
to accept additional reservations. But neither Con- 
gress nor public opinion were ever prepared to sup- 
port American intervention in Europe or Asia for 
the purpose of redressing the balance of power. 
Advocates of the League, including President Wilson 
himself, made the mistake of trying to persuade 
Congress that joining the League would not involve 
large responsibilities or political commitments in 
Europe. But Congress—closer to public opinion than 
the Executive—was not persuaded. 


The first ten years demonstrated the futility of 
seeking peace without accepting responsibility. The 
next ten years demonstrated the futility of seeking 
to base a foreign policy solely on the popular desire 
to avoid war. Under successive Republican and Demo- 
cratic Presidents, Washington preached disarma- 
ment, professed to support the principles of inter- 
national cooperation and joined in the renunciation 
of war as an instrument of national policy. But at 
no time did Congress or public opinion permit any 
American President to accept responsibilities which 
might have influenced the balance of power. And 
when Congress spoke it echoed public opinion in 
enacting neutrality laws which offered no adequate 
substitute for an American foreign policy. 


There are many other controlling factors—internal 
and external— which have shaped the trend of 
American policy. But today Franklin D. Roosevelt, 
like Woodrow Wilson, is again confronted with the 
central problem of formulating a foreign policy 
which will command the support of Congress and 
public opinion. The Alice-in-Wonderland world of 
the anti-war pact has melted away, and once more 
Washington is compelled to face the realities of a 


Ss 
sienna 


balance of power whose control has now shifted from 
the democracies to the dictatorships. 

In the face of this shifting balance, Mr. Roosevelt 
and Mr. Hull have sought to follow a middle-of-the- 
road course. They have striven to impress the dic- 
tators with our potential strength, and to raise in 
their minds a doubt that this country will never 
fight except to defend its own shores. But they have 
made no commitments and accepted no responsibili- 
ties which might involve the American people in 
war. Since the peace of Munich, they have found 
popular support for an armament program and a 
policy of Pan-American solidarity, but they have not 
been able to stray far from the middle road. Per- 
haps, granting the uncertainties of the present bal- 
ance, and the divided responsibility for the conduct 
of foreign affairs, no other course is open to the 


United States. WILLIAM T. STONE 


ASIA—THEN AND NOW 
(Continued from Page 2) 
Their relations with the Kuomintang, especially the 
so-called national “united front,” constitutes an im- 
portant development in Chinese politics. Most im- 
pressive of all is the nationalist enthusiasm which 
grips the Chinese people and induces them to support 
their armies in the face of grave reverses. 

Japan, as contrasted with China, has undergone 
no fundamental changes since 1918. Acquiescent 
Diets still pass war budgets (which have rapidly 
mounted since the end of the World War) proposed 
by militarist-dominated Cabinets. The position of 
the Soviet Union in the Far East, however, has 
changed materially since 1918. The Bolsheviks were 
then struggling desperately to maintain a revolu- 
tionary régime at Moscow. Thousands of Japanese 


= Page Four 


troops were spreading over Siberia, where effective 
Russian control had broken down. Now the Soviet 
Union seems to have established firm rule over its 
Far Eastern territories. A large Soviet army, assisted 
by fleets of airplanes, is entrenched along the Man- 
churian borders; new Soviet railways and metallurgi- 
cal bases have been constructed; the trans-Siberian 
railway has been doubletracked—matching similar 
developments under Japan's aegis in the new state of 
Manchoukuo. 

Japan has meanwhile established relationships 
with a new set of European powers. In 1918 the 
Anglo-Japanese alliance, under which Japan had 
just aided Britain against Germany, was still in ex- 
istence. Now Japan displays considerable anti-British 
sentiment, and Japanese troops are in possession of 
Canton. Britain appears to tolerate the situation, 
even though fighting is being carried on along the 
borders of its Crown Colony at Hongkong. Germany 
has become Japan’s closest friend, and Tokyo has 
joined the Reich and Italy in an “anti-Comintern” 
pact. The activities of these new European “allies” 
are directed against Japan’s former associates — 
France and Britain. 


The United States—in 1938 as in 1918—is en- 
gaged in sending Japan notes of protest, charging 
violations of its citizens’ treaty rights in China. How 
far these protests will be backed by effective action 
remains a doubtful question. Official policy again 
seems to be at loggerheads with the activities of 
private American interests, which are assisting 
Tokyo’s violation of the open door in China by send- 
ing war materials to Japan. In the Far East, as in 
Europe, history seems to be repeating itself. 


T. A. Bisson 


The F.D.A. Bookshelf 


Liberality and Civilization, by Gilbert Murray. New York, 
Macmillan, 1938. $1.00 
A brief discussion, originally delivered as the Hibbert 
lectures, of the danger to liberal civilization inherent in 
fascism and communism. 


Conscript Europe, by Randolph Leigh. New York, Put- 
nam’s, 1938. $3.00 
A virulent protest against political and economic devel- 
opments abroad, written to show “how utterly alien the 
whole European concept of today is to the American 
ideal.” Almost half the book comprises a very effective de- 
bunking of “democracy” in Great Britain. 


Latin America and the United States, by Graham H. 
Stuart. New York, D. Appleton-Century, 1938. $4.00 
A new edition brings this standard work on inter-Amer- 
ican relations up to date. 


Geographic Aspects of International Relations, by Charles 
C. Colby, editor. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 
1938. $3.00 
Stimulating lectures by geographers on such problems 

as population outlets in overseas territories, state inter- 

vention in economic life, the control and use of water re- 
sources, boundary problems and the distribution of popu- 
lations. 

My Pilgrimage for Peace, by George Lansbury. New York, 
Holt, 1938. $2.50 
The famous British pacifist, who resigned as leader of 

the Labor party because of his opposition to sanctions 


against Italy, tells of his journeys in 1936 and 1937 on be- 
half of world peace. He reports interviews with many 
statesmen—including President Roosevelt, Hitler, Musso- 


lini, Benes and Schuschnigg—and presents in eloquent 
language the case for Christian socialism and pacifism. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 7, DecemBer 9, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lasts Bugit, President; Dorotuy F. Lager, Secretary; Vera MicHELtes DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


QR 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


