lina 


ma- 
hips 
pan 
nese 


onal 
the 
ould 
tive 
ates 
ient, 
may 


LL 


San- 
t 19, 
akia, 


-cOn- 
ased 

the 
rms 
pan- 
sure 
Por- 
imed 
Liqué 
find- 
f the 
d by 
nly a 
acted 


- the 
azar, 
tors, 
nism 
nion, 
s the 
as a 
akia. 


National 
Editor. 


- yw ti 
L LIBRA 


POREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVI, No. 45 


SEPTEMBER 3, 1937 





—_—_ 


AMERICAN POLICY IN THE FAR EAST 
by T. A. Bisson 


The objectives and methods of American policy in the 
Far East are of more than ordinary importance, for there is 
always the danger that the United States will be involved 
in any conflict which develops in the Pacific area. This re- 
port decribes United States participation in developments 
affecting the Far East. 


Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


fh 
A 
B 











General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











FAR EASTERN CRISIS BAFFLES POWERS 





URING the past week, while the area of 

hostilities was extended in north and south 
China with appalling losses among non-combatants 
in the Shanghai zone, three important develop- 
ments challenged the attention of foreign powers 
and demonstrated the far-reaching implications 
of the crisis. 

First, the serious wounding of the British Am- 
bassador to China by Japanese airplanes on Au- 
gust 26 aroused public opinion far more than the 
previous loss of Chinese lives, and on August 29 
drew a sharp note from the British government 
demanding the “fullest measure of redress.” The 
note charged Japan with flagrant disregard of 
“one of the oldest and best established rules of 
international law’ —that attacks on non-com- 
batants “are absolutely prohibited,” whether in- 
side or outside the area of hostilities—and refused 
to dismiss the attack as an accident. On the con- 
trary, declaring the shooting to be “inexcusable,” 
the British requested “a formal apology by the 
Japanese government,” suitable punishment for 
those responsible and assurance that measures 
will be taken to prevent a recurrence of such 
events. 

The second development came in the form of an 
announcement from Nanking on August 29 that 
China had concluded a non-aggression pact with 
the Soviet Union, binding each signatory not to 
aid a third state committing aggression against 
the other. The Nanking communiqué made it clear 
that the pact does not obligate the U.S.S.R. to 


) come to China’s aid in the present conflict, but is 


confined to reaffirming the principles of the 
Kellogg-Briand Pact. China linked the new pact 
directly to its undeclared war with Japan and 
asserted that “great hopes are entertained” that 
it will prove a turning point in the Far Eastern 
situation—causing Tokyo officials to voice the sus- 
Picion that the agreement contains a mutual as- 
sistance clause. 





The third important development was an official 
declaration from Tokyo on August 26 that Jap- 
anese naval forces had ordered a strict blockade 
of the Chinese coast, extending approximately 800 
miles from the mouth of the Yangtze River in 
the north to Swatow in the south. An explana- 
tory statement from the Japanese Foreign Office 
declared that this measure, taken in “self defense,” 
would apply solely to Chinese shipping and would 
exempt “peaceful commerce” carried on by third 
parties. On the same day, however, a spokesman 
for the Japanese naval commander in Shanghai 
cast doubt on the nature of the blockade by de- 
claring that “foreign shipping along the China 
coast may be halted by Japanese warships” exer- 
cising “the privilege of pre-emption toward for- 
eign bottoms carrying a cargo that in time of 
war would constitute contraband.” 

To all foreign powers engaged in the China 
trade, and to the United States in particular, these 
conflicting declarations present an issue bristling 
with legal difficulties and fraught with the danger 
of serious incidents. Under international law, 
pre-emption is the right of a belligerent to seize 
conditional contraband (i.e., articles not recog- 
nized to be “absolute” contra 1) found on neu- 
tral vessels and destined for . .. enemy—provided 
there is just compensation. Although neutral 
shipping has been interfered with in the past by 
states not technically at war under the form of 
a pacific blockade, the rights of protagonists and 
third parties have not been clearly defined. Quite 
apart from legal niceties, the facts are that a 
blockade of the China coast is in full force, that 
Japanese naval commanders, despite protesta- 
tions from Tokyo, are apparently prepared to in- 
terfere with neutral shipping, and that serious 
incidents involving not only the “rights” but the 
honor and prestige of foreign powers may result. 

This situation confronts the United States with 
an issue of major importance affecting both its 




















short-term and long-term policy in Asia. Up to 
this point, one of the chief reasons against invok- 
ing the Neutrality Act was that it might force 
an open declaration of war and lead to a blockade, 
thus extending the area of conflict and terminat- 
ing any remaining possibility of settlement. With 
a blockade actually in force, however, the State 
Department is forced to choose between declaring 
that a state of war exists and thus invoking the 
Act, or ignoring the blockade until such time as 
American munitions ships are seized off the coast 
of China. If the latter course is followed, as 
seems to be indicated by Washington, the United 
States may protest the legality of Japan’s naval 
action, proclaim its rights and reserve its freedom 
of action. The State Department has more than 
one precedent for such a course. Applied to the 
present situation, this course invites almost certain 
controversy and injects the added danger of an in- 
cident involving the sinking of American ships. 
The reality of this danger is emphasized by the 
departure of the American freighter Wichita, 
which sailed from Baltimore last week with 19 
Bellanca airplanes consigned to China. Under the 
circumstances, refusal to recognize that war exists 
becomes meaningless. It no longer aids China, it 
does nothing to advance peace, and it hastens 
precisely the kind of incident which the Neutral- 
ity Act was designed to avoid. 

Whether or not application of the Neutrality 
Act will hamper a constructive long-term policy 
depends upon what is meant by “constructive.” 
Joint action by the powers to curb Japanese ag- 
gression would require considerably more than 
moral endorsement of the general principles enun- 
ciated by Secretary Hull on July 16, and Ameri- 
can intervention without any assurance of sup- 
port from other states would be ineffective, if not 
disastrous. That much, at least, was demonstrated 
by the experience in Manchuria and Ethiopia. If 
the objective of American policy is to prevent the 
spread of hostilities, however, cooperation with 
other neutrals is not rendered impossible by the 
neutrality law, despite its obvious shortcomings 
in the Far Eastern situation. Wriuiam T. STONE 


THE ROLE OF THE SOCIAL SCIENTIST 
(Mrs. Dean has just returned from a two months’ stay 
in Paris, where she attended the International Studies 
Conference as a member of the American delegation.) 

While bombs plough up the fields of Spain and 
hurl death into Shanghai streets, visitors to the 
Paris Exposition are thrilled at the Palace of 
Discovery by a magnificent display of man’s au- 
dacity in mastering disease, piercing the secrets 
of stars and atoms, and harnessing nature to his 
will. Undismayed by knowledge of his own mor- 
tality and the possible finiteness of the universe, 


Page Two 














the scientist, on a battlefront which spans the 
world, strives not only to preserve life but enrich 
it. Yet outside his laboratory, humanity, with 
growing indifference, accepts “the deliberate jp. 
crease in the chances of death” inflicted by modern 
warfare. And the belief in destiny, in a force 
beyond human control which religion throughout 
the ages has offered as solace to the living, is of 
little avail to non-combatants mowed down by air- 
planes man-made and man-controlled. 

In this state of continuous crisis, when the 
values of civilization are daily menaced by wanton 
destruction, what is the réle of the social scien. 
tist? Shall he wait in his library until the present 
becomes the past before he ventures to draw 
up its balance-sheet? Or, like the physician jp 
time of plague, shall he go out among the stricken, 
and by examining living matter make the diseage 
itself yield a hint of its remedy? Too often, both 
in Europe and the United States, the scholars whe 
have undertaken to inform public opinion disseet 
the clauses of still-born treaties while undeclared 
wars rage beneath their windows. Too often, 
alleging the need for objectivity, they avoid dis- 
cussion of controversial issues on whose solution 
hangs the existence of millions. Too often, dis- 
couraged by the breakdown of this or that set of 
institutions, they give up the fight before it is 
well begun. Too often, mesmerized by hollow 
formulas of goodwill, they take refuge in the 
obvious, fearing to probe the living tissues of 
international relations. Yet failure to grapple 
with realities, unsightly or discouraging as they 
may be, is essentially a betrayal of the intellect 
by the intellectuals. The mind exists not merely 
to photograph events or register ideologies. It 
must reach conclusions—but these conclusions, to 
be valid, must be based on knowledge of things 
as they are, not as they might or should be. The 
physician is not content with diagnosis; he seeks 
to find a remedy—not a remedy whose curative 
powers depend on the advent of Utopia, but one 
which may afford relief here and now. If the social 
scientist is to fulfill his calling, he must do more 
than define his problems. He must, with the dar- 
ing, patience and imagination displayed in the 
physical sciences, devise the processes by which 
these problems may be—not finally solved, for life 
rejects finality—but alleviated. In the age-long 
struggle for peaceful adjustment of relations be 
tween men and nations there are moments of dis- 
couragement; there is no defeat. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





International Politics: an Introduction to the Western 
State System, by Frederick L. Schuman (2nd edition). 
New York, McGraw-Hill, 1937. $4.00 


A revision of a standard college test. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 45, SepremMBeErR 3, 1937. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND Lessig BugLt, President; Ester G. OcpEn, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


National 











