——— 
—<—<—<—<—<—<—}. 


man beings 
ns to work 
omic or 

oO achieve— 
: > eventually 
it respective 
of freedom 
Balkans be 
But we can 
e Ourselves 
to see to it 
, from eco- 


ES DEAN 


) 


Staley. Mon- 
..75 

ared for the 
tives. Staley 
e under pro- 
sently unde- 
to the reper- 
ndustrialized 


sconomic, Fi- 
sague of Na- 
3, 1944, $3.25, 
buted by In- 
2 University 


ions between 
1 and break- 
mergence of 
stabilization 


yek. Chicago, 


f the faculty 
nes the case 
} a wealth of 
hat planning 


real, Interna- 


f the I.L.0., 
fecting work- 
through the 


, Parties and 
alter H. Mal- 
r Council on 


t gives back- 
of politics in 
their govern- 


rated. National 
iditor. Entered as 
ase allow at least 


ns 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


SEP 1 4 1945 


a Wn ater pretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vo. XXIV, No. 47 


SEPTEMBER 7, 1945 


OCCUPATION PAVES WAY FOR STERN POLITICAL MOVES IN JAPAN 


bbe Japan’s formal acceptance of the docu- 

ments of unconditional surrender on September 
1, the struggle against Japanese aggression has en- 
tered a new phase in which—to use the words of 
Secretary of State Byrnes—our main function will be 
to bring about “the spiritual disarmament” of the 
Japanese people and ° ‘to make them want peace in- 
stead of wanting war.” It is not an accident that be- 
tween the time of the Japanese surrender statement 
of August 14 and the landing of our first troops on 
August 28 American spokesmen avoided answering 
the propaganda of the Japanese radio. But now it is 
apparent that, as the security of our forces increases 
Washington is giving greater public attention to 
political developments in Tokyo. 

Although considerations of security are not yet 
entirely a matter of the past -only a portion of 
the occupying armies has arrived in Japan — the 
genuineness of the military surrender has be- 
come clear. On August 29, after some Ameri- 
ican troops had already gone ashore near Tokyo, 
Secretary Byrnes considered it appropriate to refute 
the argument advanced in an Imperial rescript and 
other Japanese statements that the atomic bomb was 
the chief cause of Japan’s defeat. Mr. Byrnes pointed 
out that the Japanese, apparently recognizing the 
hopelessness of their position, had unsuccessfully 
asked for Russia’s mediation some time before the 
atomic bomb was used. This statement is im- 
portant, because any future Japanese move to- 
ward military resurgence would probably rest in part 
on the view that Japan was not defeated in a genuine 
test of national strength, but had to yield temporarily 
because of an unusual scientific development. 

DEMOCRACY FOR JAPAN? At the opening 
of the surrender proceedings on September 1 General 
MacArthur stressed the importance he attaches 
to freedom, tolerance and justice. When the cere- 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit 


mony was over, he made his first clear-cut reference 
to political questions, declaring that in Japan “free- 
dom of expression, freedom of action, even freedom 
of thought were denied through suppression of lib- 
eral education, through appeal to superstition and 
through the application of force.” Stating that “we are 
committed by the Potsdam Declaration of principles 
to see that the Japanese people are liberated from 
this condition of slavery,’ he made the following 
pledge: “It is my purpose to implement this com- 
mitment just as rapidly as the armed forces are de- 
mobilized and other essential steps taken to neutral- 
ize the war potential.’ On the same day Secretary 
Byrnes emphasized that steps would be taken to en- 
courage democratic reforms, so that Japan’s peasants 
and industrial workers may have a voice in govern- 
ment. Of the general objective of American occupa- 
tion policy he declared that we expect eventually to 
see in Japan a peaceful government, “broadly based 
on all elements in the population.” 

America’s course will be judged by the man- 
ner in which these statements are implemented rather 
than by the words themselves, but they ate worth 
quoting because they provide a verbal basis on which 
a farsighted, effective policy can be developed. Gen- 
eral MacArthur and Secretary Byrnes recognize that 
strict military and technical controls, although es- 
sential, will not guarantee a permanently peaceful 
Japan unless fundamental political changes occur at 
the same time. If further proof of this fact is re- 
quired, it can be found in the cleverness of Japan’s 
official propaganda in recent weeks, a propaganda 
which has sought to divide the Allies, enlist the sup- 
port of the Japanese p eople for the existing régime, 
and satisfy the occupying authorities that the cab- 
inet of General Higashi-Kuni is taking the country 
along the road to democr acy. Certainly nothing could 
be more shrewd than the plans announced in Tokyo 


to the Foreign Policy Association. 


to hold national elections in January, presumably in 
the hope of securing a mandate from the people be- 
fore a thorough awareness of defeat permeates the 
nation and new political groups can organize them- 
selves effectively. It remains to be seen what attitude 
the Allies will take toward these arrangements. 

TRENDS IN SOVIET POLICY. Meanwhile, in 
another part of the Far East, the policies of the 
U.S.S.R. are assuming more concrete form. In a vic- 
tory address of September 2, Generalissimo Stalin de- 
clared that southern Sakhalin and the Kurile Islands 
would become Soviet territory “and from now on 
will nct serve as a means for isolating the Soviet 
Union from the ocean and as a base for Japanese 
attacks on our Far East.” At the same time the Rus- 
sian announcement that troops of the Chungking 
government have arrived in Manchuria and taken up 
the protection of Manchurian cities together with 
Russian forces indicates that the terms of the 
Chinese-Soviet accord are being implemented. 

In recent days the Russians have shown clearly 
that their pledge to deal only with the Central gov- 
ernment and not to interfere in China’s internal af- 
fairs does not mean that they are indifferent to Chi- 
nese developments. Twice, on August 29 and 31, the 
Red Army newspaper, Red Star, discussed the situa- 
tion in China. The publication stated that only if 
China followed a democratic course and cooperated 
with the democratic states could it secure the under- 
standing and support of “world-wide democratic 
forces and the peoples of the Soviet Union.” Again, 
on August 31, the Soviet radio at Kharbarovsk said 
that the U.S.S.R. was “watching with interest and 
concern” the Kuomintang-Communist negotiations in 


Page Two 


es 
——— 


Chungking. “It is imperative,” the broadcast urged, 
“that China take the road of unity without delay.” 


PROSPECTS FOR CHINESE UNITY. As a re. 
sult of the conversations between Generalissimo 
Chiang Kai-shek and the Communist leader, Mao 
Tse-tung, the internal situation in China appears to 
have eased, although the troops of both sides are still 
engaged in a race to reoccupy Japanese-held territory, 
The Communists continue to stress the formation 
of a democratic coalition government and the right 
of Communist forces to receive the surrender of Jap. 
anese troops in their areas. The Chungking govern. 
ment has issued no formal statement on its position, 
but its views were clarified in the V-J Day mes. 
sage issued by the Generalissimo on September 
3. “The most important condition for national 
unity,” he stated, “is the nationalization of all armed 
forces in the country.’ He pledged the expansion of 
civil liberties, abolition of wartime press censorship 
“within a specific time limit,” and the promulgation 
of a law legalizing “‘all political parties.” While at- 
taching great importance to early convocation of the 
National Assembly which will adopt a constitution, 
he said the government was prepared to consult all 
leaders beforehand and to consider a reasonable in- 
crease in the number of delegates. No specific refer- 
ence was made to his talks with Mao, but various 
straws in the wind suggest that, while many difficult 
issues face those who are working on the problem of 
long-term Chinese unity, the prospect that a Kuomin- 
tang-Communist formula will be found are brighter 
than they have been for a long time. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


LEND-LEASE RECKONING FORCES SHOWDOWN ON TRADE POLICIES 


When World War I ended, Allied statesmen 
symbolized the completeness of their victory by 
obliging Germany to sign the Treaty of Versailles 
on June 28, 1919, exactly five years after the murder 
of Archduke Francis Ferdinand at Sarajevo. The end 
of World War II was marked by a similar dramatic 
circumstance, for General MacArthur formally ac- 
cepted Japan’s surrender within a day of the sixth 
anniversary of Hitler's attack on Poland. In both 
cases these historic teversals were achieved at tre- 
mendous cost in human lives and effort. The disas- 
trous consequences of failure on the part of the 
Allies of World War I to keep the fruits of victory 
won in 1919 caused President Truman to warn the 
American armed services in a broadcast on V-J Day 
that the United States must now turn to “the grave 
task of preserving the peace” because “civilization 
cannot survive another war.” 

TIME FOR STOCKTAKING. Cynics discount 
the pledges the United Nations are now making, and 
predict that the Allied peoples will return to peace 


having learned nothing and forgotten everything. | 
Already there are signs that a wave of oblivion is | 


sweeping this country, and what may be described 
as complete emotional disarmament is taking place. 
This swift change of mood is, in one sense, reassut- 
ing, for it indicates the fact that this country, along 
with the other United Nations, not only fought to 
end the threat to national security but to disprove 


the Axis thesis that war affords Opportunities for | 


mankind’s highest development. 

From another point of view, however, the speed 
and enthusiasm with which the United States has 
resumed what it considers the prerogatives of peace 
hold a threat for the future. Neither this country 
nor any of its Allies has labored under any illusions 
that the period of wartime cooperation would not 
be followed by another period of hard bargaining 
on behalf of national interests. But it was widely 
hoped that an abrupt transition from international 
collaboration to national bargaining such as that now 
under way over the final lend-lease settlement be- 


—— 


tween B 
Exact 
sume W: 
Allies \ 
underst 
“which 
Presidet 
part of 
ity, and 
port to | 
there cc 
a cash | 
tended. 
$42 bill 
obligati 
war anc 
“it wou 
and he 
home.” 
howeve 
off lenc 
State E 
had lef 
States 9 
does n 
ments t 
Wha 
 ternatin 
cipient: 
not ma 
ington 
will so 
of fina 
to Am 
ire ar 
| trolled 


| appare 
Britain 
benefit 
perial 

} sar 
and se 
countr 
| HAI 


Dur 
Unitec 
have ¢ 
policy 
Hull, 
the F; 
seat ai 
point 
simila 
régim. 

the U: 


ey 
SS 


cast urged, 
t delay.” 


. Asa re- 
neralissimo 
ader, Mao 
appears to 
les are still 
d territory, 
formation 
1 the right 
der of Jap- 
ng govern- 
'S position, 
Day mes- 
September 
f national 
all armed 
pansion of 
censorship 
mul gation 
While at- 
tion of the 
stitution, 
consult all 
sonable in- 
cific refer- 
ut various 
ny difficult 
sroblem of 
a Kuomin- 
re brighter 


OSINGER 


[CIES 

everything. 
oblivion is 
- described 
cing place. 
e, reassur- 
itry, along 
fought to 
0 disprove 
nities for 


the speed 
States has 
s of peace 
is country 
y illusions 
would not 
bargaining 
vas widely 
ternational 
s that now 
lement be- 


Sa 
ee 


tween Britain and the United States might be averted. 

Exactly what form lend-lease reckoning would as- 
sume was never entirely clear during the war, for the 
Allies who received American aid did so on the 
understanding that payment should take any form 
“which the President deems satisfactory.” That the 
President would consider writing off the debt as a 
part of the cost of the war appeared to be a possibil- 
ity, and President Truman seemed to give added sup- 
| port to this view on August 30 when he declared that 
there could be no thought on our part of securing 
a cash payment for the lend-lease aid we have ex- 
tended. “If a debt approaching the magnitude of 
$42 billion were to be added to the other enormous 
obligations of foreign Governments [incurred in the 
wat and required for reconstruction },” he explained, 
“it would have disastrous effects upon our trade . . . 
and hence upon production and employment at 
home.” This statement apparently did not mean, 
however, that the United States proposed to write 
off lend-lease, for on the following day Secretary of 
State Byrnes altered the impression the President 
had left by pointing out that, although the United 
States was not seeking repayment in money, “that 
does not mean that there are no lend-lease settle- 
ments to be negotiated.” 

What Mr. Byrnes had in mind as a possible al- 
‘ternative to repayment in dollars by lend-lease re- 
cipients, and in return for certain future loans, was 
not made immediately clear. But reports from Wash- 
ington have since indicated that the United States 
will soon propose to Britain that it adopt a series 
of financial measures which, in effect, would open 
to American businessmen those markets in the Em- 
| pite and Middle East which are now virtually con- 
trolled by the British. Stated in blunt language, this 
apparently means that the United States plans to ask 
Britain to forego or greatly reduce the economic 
benefits it formerly gained from its system of im- 
perial trade preferences and from the sterling bloc 
asa means of fulfilling its lend-lease commitments 
and securing any future long-term loans from this 
country. 

HARD BARGAINING WITH BRITAIN. In all 


During the past year the methods used by the 
United States in dealing with the Argentine problem 
have come full circle, from the firm nonrecognition 
policy pursued by former Secretary of State Cordell 
Hull, through the policy of conciliation under which 
the Farrell government secured recognition and a 
seat at the San Francisco Conference, to the current 
point of view of the State Department that is very 
similar to that of Mr. Hull, that the Buenos Aires 
fégime has “fascist” characteristics unpalatable to 
the United States. Washington’s tacit admission that 


Page Three 


fairness to the United States it must be admitted 
that Britain is neither able nor willing to go further 
into debt, and some alternative to cash repayments 
for financial aid must therefore be found. In seeking 
such an alternative, however, it is necessary to keep 
several broad considerations in mind lest our eco- 
nomic policy jeopardize our political policy, which 
requires continuation of the closest possible coopera- 
tion with Britain in many parts of the world. First, 
there is the nature of the lend-lease debts themselves. 
These debts can clearly never be repaid, not only 
because of the technical difficulties involved in re- 
payment to which President Truman referred, but 
because there is no equivalent in dollars or any type 
of economic preferences for the lives of those Allied 
fighting men who, by using the equipment with 
which the United States supplied them, helped fight 
our common battles. In the second place, as long as 
we maintain high tariffs, the British can hardly 
escape the conclusion that the United States is sup- 
porting international free trade not because of de- 
votion to free trade ideals but because its tremen- 
dous industrial power enables American businessmen 
to meet competition from any quarter. 

Britain, for its part, feels entitled to follow a trade 
policy that serves its interests. British industries have 
suffered greatly during the war and must be retooled 
before their products can be subjected to world- 
wide competition. In shaping our economic policy 
toward Britain, moreover, we must consider the 
possible long-range political results of measures 
which, if carried through to their logical conclusions, 
would force Britain to become a virtual satellite of 
the United States. Faced with such a prospect, it is 
within the realm of possibility, at least, that the 
British would prefer to tighten up control of the 
Empire and even lower their standard of living in 
an effort to exist without additional economic aid. 
Yet such a course of action, which would obviously 
contribute neither to the solution of potentially ex- 
plosive problems in India and the Middle East nor 
to the prosperity of the United States, could impair 
the very peace that American lend-lease has just 


helped to win. WinirrepD N. HADSEL 


U.S. RETURNS TO HULL’S FIRM POLICY ON ARGENTINA 


“appeasement”’ tactics had not proved successful was 
contained in a speech delivered in Boston on August 
24 by Nelson Rockefeller, whose resignation as As- 
sistant Secretary of State in charge of Latin Amer- 
ican affairs was announced the following day. 

Mr. Rockefeller condemned the Farrell govern- 
ment, as distinguished from the Argentine people, 
for having failed to live up to the vital promises 
given its American neighbors. If the facts Mr. Rock- 
efeller enumerated, and which must have been 
known to Washington last April, are squarely 


4 
¥ 
: 
. 
tc 
q 

} 


faced, the conclusion is inescapable that the United 
States and the other signatories of the Act of Chapul- 
tepec failed to gauge the real intentions of the 
“colonels’’”’ régime in Buenos Aires with which we 
attempted to strike a bargain. 

Although Mr. Rockefellet’s indictment resembles 
at many points the State Department memorandum 
issued on July 26, 1944, Washington policy has 
made some notable advances since that time. For Mr. 
Hull's criticism of the Buenos Aires dictatorship was 
rejected at that time by the Argentine people as un- 
warranted interference in their internal affairs. To- 
day such statements as those of Mr. Rockefeller, and 
of former Ambassador Spruille Braden in Buenos 
Aires on August 29, are welcomed and wildly ap- 
plauded in every sector of Argentine opinion. Diplo- 
matic recognition of the military régime had enabled 
this country to send as Ambassador to Buenos Aires 
Mr. Braden, who established direct contacts with the 
Argentine people and expressed as no Argentine had 
been able to do the will of the people to return to 
constitutional government. Mr. Braden’s appoint- 
ment as Assistant Secretary of State on August 25 
should assure the Argentines of continued United 
States support for their efforts to achieve democracy. 

EXTREMISTS IN THE SADDLE. The diplo- 
matic tug-of-war between Buenos Aires and Wash- 
ington, in which the Argentine people have thrown 
their weight on the side of the United States, has 
seriously weakened the position of the Farrell gov- 
ernment. President Farrell appears to have lost any 
control he may have had over Vice President Perén 
and his “‘nationalist’’ supporters. The excesses of this 
group are such that even top-ranking military leaders 
are growing cool toward the régime which sprang 
from their ranks; and resignations of Cabinet Min- 
isters are so frequent as to pass almost unnoticed. 
Despite the patent opposition of almost all elements 
of public opinion, however, Perén persists in his 
Presidential ambitions. He would like to come be- 
fore the voters as the candidate of the Radical party, 
largest of the Argentine political parties, and for 
this purpose is packing the Cabinet with isolated 
Radicals, who are then promptly read out of the 
party as “collaborationists.”” This procedure would 
not be possible if the Radical party were better or- 
ganized and more cohesive. The party is reported to 
be unwilling to ally itself with the other opposition 
groups—the Conservatives, Socialists, Communists, 
Democrats and Progressive Democrats—in a nation- 
al democratic union. 


Page Four 


ee 
—, 


As the time approaches for the elections, to be 
held early in 1946, the internal crisis mounts steadily 
The authorities have dropped all pretense of impar. 
tial maintenance of law and order. V-J Day celebra. 
tions in the capital of a country which had beep 
at war with Japan were violently disturbed by unj. 
formed soldiers under orders, and by rioting groups 
of armed persons described as ‘‘nationalists,” while 
the police stood idly by. When other bloody events 
occurred during the following days, university, col. 
lege and public schoolteachers throughout the nation 
left their institutions in a two-day protest strike 
against the government. These are conditions border. 
ing perilously upon civil war, and the government, 
in failing to take immediate action to restore order | 
and provide for free elections, is moving head-on to \ 
a conflict of an even more serious nature. =. 

FRANCO’S FUTURE UNSETTLED. What will 
happen in Argentina will inevitably be conditioned 
by the temper of the Big Three toward a nation like 
Spain which, in their view, gave aid and comfort to 
the Axis enemy. The end of the war, it was assumed, 
would deal the death blow to Franco’s régime; and, 
as a matter of fact, the Potsdam decision to bar 
Spain from the United Nations organization, coupled 
with the Labor victory in Britain, seemed to fore 
shadow more severe treatment for the “Junior Axis.” 
It is impossible to overestimate the effect such a } 
policy would have on the entire Ibero-American 
world. Since then, however, the Labor government 
has indicated that Britain’s strategic interests in the 
Mediterranean area would preclude it from taking 
any action in Spain which might encourage civil wat 
in that country, and so increase Britain's problems 
President Truman’s distaste for Franco and the} 
Falange government, expressed at a press conference 
on August 23, should not be allowed to obscure the | 
fact that the United States has conceded the direction | 
of Allied policy on Spain to Britain. On September 4, 
however, the British and French Ambassadors to 
Madrid handed to the Spanish government a joint 
note calling for the withdrawal of Spanish forces | 
from Tangier within a week. 


OLIVE HOLMES 


The Pattern of Soviet Power, by Edgar Snow. New York, 
Random House, 1945. $2.75 


The pattern of Soviet power in post-war Europe and ; 


Asia is traced to the Kremlin’s efforts to safeguard the 
nation against future attacks. The author finds no political 
revolutions in territories occupied by the Red Army, but 
he observes that local police and Soviet authorities are 
sponsoring numerous changes to increase Russia’s security. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 47, SEPTEMBER 7, 1945. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dororny F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MIcHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered # 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. - 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


<> 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


1918 


Declar: 
11, cou 
missior 
machin 
detaile 
the Co 
are inte 
culmin 
settler 
they a 
work 
avert < 
tions | 
to sup 
to fur 
inform 
Foreig 
UNO, 
plans 
diplon 
\ grim 
details 
citizen 
enthu: 


| like a 


FU’ 
. Most | 
isters 
Italy, 
Europ 
mania 
| prelin 
the U 
degre 
to mz 
| speed 


