





































er 


ton, 
ents 
jurt, 
ack- 


ork, 


"1818, 
1934. 
New 
om a 
ling- 
yton, 
have 

suc- 


rard- 
rally 


—— 


ational 


Edsior. 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, a Es 





VoL. XV, No. 11 


JANUARY 10, 1936 





BOUND VOLUME XIV 
of 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
November 1934 to October 1935 


Indexed for ready reference 


$1.00 a copy 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
1921, at the Post 
/ ce at New York, 
i. “NAY under the act 
of ach 3, 1879. 


4 











Library of Congress sad 


- q Sma! 


Washington, D. C- 











THE UNITED STATES MOVES TOWARD 


ISOLATION 





HE opening of Congress on January 3 was 

the occasion for two far-reaching, although 
somewhat contradictory, expressions of American 
foreign policy. In a strongly worded message, 
President Roosevelt denounced the aggressive 
tendencies of autocratic governments abroad and 
pledged, by implication, the moral support of the 
United States to the “90 per cent” of the world 
which is striving to preserve peace. On the same 
day administration leaders in the Senate and the 
House introduced a strict neutrality bill applying 
equally to all belligerents and reflecting a desire 
to insulate the United States against the effects of 
future foreign wars 

Contrasting the “success” of the good neighbor 
policies among the American nations since 1933 
with the deterioration of the world situation, 
President Roosevelt declared that the autocratic 
nations of the world have “impatiently reverted to 
the old belief in the law of the sword or to the fan- 
tastic conception that they, and they alone, are 
chosen to fulfill a mission and that all the others 
among the billion and a half in the rest of the 
world must and shall learn from and be subject to 
them.” In the face of this situation, he added, the 
“peace loving nations... find that their very iden- 
tity depends on their moving and moving again 
on the chessboard of international politics.” 

For the United States and the other American 
nations the President declared that there can be 
“but one réle: through well ordered neutrality to 
do naught to encourage the contest, through ade- 
quate defense to save ourselves from embroilment 
and attack, and through example and all legiti- 
mate encouragement and assistance to persuade 
other nations to return to the ways of peace and 
good will.” Evidence that “adequate defense” is 
not to be the least important of the government’s 
policies was afforded by the publication of total 
estimates of 609 million dollars for the Navy and 
375 million for the Army in the 1936 budget sent 
to Congress on January 6. 


The administration’s neutrality bill, prepared 
by the State Department and introduced by Sena- 
tor Pittman and Representative McReynolds, 
makes large concessions to the strong Congres- 
sional group which fought for mandatory neu- 
trality legislation at the last session. In dropping 
its demand for wide discretion to permit the Presi- 
dent to apply embargoes against an aggressor 
state, the administration effectively removed the 
one issue which threatened to provoke controversy 
and prolong the debate in Congress. There are sev- 
eral explanations for its surrender on this issue. 
Three reasons are given in informed quarters: 

1. The disastrous Hoare-Laval deal convinced the 
State Department that American public opinion would 
not support a policy of cooperation with League mem- 
bers in applying sanctions against an aggressor. 

2. President Roosevelt was unwilling to run the risk 
of injecting a controversial foreign policy issue into the 
political campaign and chose to ride the wave of popu- 
lar anti-war sentiment. 

3. Senator Key Pittman, chairman of the powerful 
Foreign Relations Committee, privately informed the 
President and the State Department that the Senate 
would turn down any measure which allowed the Presi- 
dent to discriminate between belligerents. 

A comparison of the administration neutrality 
bill and the “mandatory” group bill, introduced 
on January 6 by Senators Nye and Clark in the 
Senate and Representative Maverick in the House, 
shows that the broad objectives of the two mea- 
sures are very similar. Both provide that all 
embargoes and prohibitions shall apply equally 
to all belligerents—although the administration 
bill adds an escape clause in the proviso “unless 
the Congress, with the approval of the President, 
shall declare otherwise.” (This proviso is ap- 
parently acceptable to the “mandatory” group.) 
Both bills provide that key war materials shall 
be limited at the discretion of the President to 
normal peace-time quotas. Both prohibit loans 
and credits, and both restrict travel by American 
citizens on belligerent vessels. 

Where the two bills differ is regarding the 









































amount of discretion to be given the President in 
deciding when and how embargoes and prohibi- 
tions are to be applied. The Nye-Clark-Maverick 
bill would make the arms embargo apply auto- 
matically on the outbreak of war, and not merely 
at any time “during the progress of war,” as in 
the administration measure. It would fix a definite 
time basis for quotas on key war materials and 
not leave this to the discretion of the President. 
It would also permit Congress to apply more 
drastic restrictions if the normal trade quota 
proved ineffective, and would tighten the provi- 
sions for prohibition of loans and credits. 

While the administration bill gives the Presi- 
dent power to proclaim that all transactions with 
belligerents are at the risk of American na- 
tionals, the Nye-Clark-Maverick bill adopts the 
“cash and carry” plan, which would require that 
all exports by sea shall be solely at the risk of a 
foreign government or national thereof. 

Finally, the “mandatory” bill goes considerably 
further than the administration measure in re- 
stricting American shipping and preventing 
American vessels from traveling in areas of bel- 
ligerent hostilities—thus marking a sharp de- 
parture from the traditional policy of “freedom 
of the seas.” 

The debate in Congress will center on the ad- 
ministration bill, which will probably be given 
the right of way in both the Senate and the House. 
The tactics of the “mandatory” group will be to 
submit amendments embodying features of the 
Nye-Clark-Maverick bill and other resolutions in- 
troduced by independent members. In view of 
the similarity of the two major bills, an agree- 
ment should be reached without great difficulty. 
To what extent it will keep the United States from 
becoming involved in war or affect future Ameri- 
can policy remains to be seen. 

Outside the United States the President’s mes- 
sage and the neutrality proposals created diverse 
reactions. His strictures on dictatorships were 
unfavorably received or suppressed in the coun- 
tries affected. On the other hand, the quota limi- 
tation for war material exports aroused criticism 
in the democratic states of Europe. French and 
British publicists broached the necessity for seek- 
ing alternative sources of supply, and indicated 
that American policy would prove a stumbling- 
block to further League sanctions against Italy. 
British comment welcomed abandonment of the 
freedom of the seas doctrine but remarked that 
the quota policy was a stiff price to pay for it. It 
also pointed out the possibility of a maritime con- 
flict between the United States and League powers 
over trade with neutrals—not discussed in the 
American proposals. WILLIAM T. STONE 


Page Two = —— 








FRANCE FACES UNCERTAIN FUTURE 


With considerable difficulty and at the expense 
of many concessions, Premier Laval managed to 
survive repeated attacks on his domestic and for- 
eign policies during the last month of the year. 
Early in December he saved his government from 
defeat by consenting to drastic bills providing for 
the disarmament of all political organizations and 
the dissolution of private semi-military forma- 
tions. On December 28 he weathered by a margin 
of only 20 votes a bitter attack on his complacent 
policy toward Italy and its aggression in Ethi- 
opia, but only after a last-minute speech in which 
he vigorously protested his loyalty to the League 
of Nations. Finally, on the last parliamentary day 
of the old year he secured the adoption of the 1936 
budget incorporating, with some modifications, 
most of his economy decrees. 


That M. Laval withstood these successive at- 
tacks was due not only to an astute policy of 
concessions but, above all, to the reluctance of 
the Left to take power before the general elec- 
tions are held next May. M. Edouard Herriot’s 
Radical Socialists, who form the strongest party 
in Parliament, are loath to take the helm now, 
especially since they realize that the Socialists 
cannot be relied upon to support them. The new 
year is nevertheless likely to witness much politi- 
cal maneuvering which will continue to endanger 
the life of the Laval cabinet. The enforcement or 
non-enforcement of the laws directed against the 
various “fascist” organizations, which were ap- 
proved by the Senate on December 24, may occa- 
sion much controversy. The financial situation 
may also prove troublesome. The budget is bal- 
anced on paper at slightly over 40 billion francs, 
but a considerable part of expenditure for arma- 
ments has been incorporated in a separate loan 
budget totaling more than 6 billion francs. More 
over, tax receipts are likely to prove disappoint 
ing, since business life is still stagnant. The de 
flationary policy of the government has not yet 
succeeded in permanently improving the precari- 
ous position of the French currency, which re- 


mains overvalued. JoHN C. DEWILDE 





Money and the Economie System, by E. M. Bernstein. 
Chapel Hill, The University of North Carolina Press, 
1935. $3.00 
The author condemns the gold standard as “intolerably 

bad,” but his plea for “planned money” ignores some prac- 

tical objections. 


Practical Socialism for Britain, by Hugh Dalton. 
George Routledge, 1935. 5s. 
An elaboration of the official program of the British 
Labour party, by a member of its National Executive. 


London, 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 11, January 10, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Sereet, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lusi Busit, President; EstHmm G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class mawer December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








An 


|<] 


