


hich 


able 


Ow- 


ives 
ish- 


nis- 
cre- 
the 
are 
lest 
‘ain 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


APR 25 1929 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 


en dl 





Ss it | 


> £0 
the 
ere 
uld 
do 
erm 
The 
vill 
ing 





8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVIII, No. 26 


APRIL 21, 1939 





—_— 


ECONOMIC PROBLEMS OF U.S. NEUTRALITY 
by Winthrop W. Case 


IN WARTIME 


A review of our economic experience in the World 
War, forecasting probable developments in the event 


of another world conflict. 


April 15 issue of FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS .. . 25 cents 











Office at New York, 
rH N. Y., under the act 
eo we of March 3, 1879. 





General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











ROOSEVELT APPEAL JOLTS DICTATORS 





aggre ROOSEVELT’S message of April 15 
to Hitler and Mussolini, whatever may have 
been its political motives, acted both as a deterrent 
and a hope. It sought to dispel any illusion the dic- 
tators might have regarding the non-participation 
of the United States in a general war. At the same 
time, it held out to the fascist dictatorships, although 
only in general terms, the hope of economic read- 
justment with the active collaboration of the United 
States. The chief weaknesses of the message were 
that it was addressed to Germany and Italy not by 
an impartial mediator, but by a statesman who had 
mercilessly flayed their actions in the past; and that, 
presumably in deference to American isolationist 
sentiment, it attempted to relieve this country of 
any responsibility for political readjustments, which 
obviously cannot be divorced from economic change. 

CREDIT SIDE OF “STOP-HITLER” COALI- 
TION. The President's message — ostensibly sent 
without previous consultation with London and Paris 
—fits neatiy into the coalition negotiations launched 
by Mr. Chamberlain immediately after the dismem- 
berment of Czecho-Slovakia. This coalition continued 
to take shape last week, when Mr. Chamberlain told 
the House of Commons on April 13 that Britain had 
pledged Greece and Rumania “all the support” in 
its power in case the independence of these two 
countries was ‘‘clearly’’ threatened and they consid- 
ered it ‘‘vital to resist with their national forces.” 
These pledges, confirmed by M. Daladier on thé 
same day, were accompanied by active negotiations 
with Turkey and the Soviet Union. On the credit 
side of the British ledger may also be listed the 
teport that Poland and Rumania might combine 
their armies under the leadership of Marshal 
Smygly-Rydz; that General Laidoner, Estonian chief 
of staff, had held military consultations with Po- 
land; that Britain and France might overcome 


Polish-Rumanian reluctance to admit Soviet forces 
to their territory by arranging only for the assistance 
of Soviet airplanes; that Bulgaria, regarded as a 
potential ally of the Rome-Berlin axis, had ordered 
the dissolution of the Bulgarian Nazi organization 
on April 11; that the British and French fleets had 
been mobilized in the western Mediterranean; and 
that tension between Hungary and Rumania had 
been somewhat relaxed on April 15, while Budapest 
pressed for a new pact extending the rights of the 
Hungarian minority in Transylvania, acquired by 
Rumania at the end of the World War. 

ANXIETY OVER SPAIN. Balanced against these 
items on the debit side of the ledger were the re- 
luctance of Greece, Rumania, Yugoslavia and even 
Poland to reciprocate British pledges of assistance for 
fear of antagonizing Germany, and the persisting un- 
willingness of the Soviet Union to promise military 
support until it had seen France and Britain in ac- 
tion against the Third Reich. .Despite the taunts of 
the Opposition, Mr. Chamberlain, apparently still 
hoping to detach Mussolini from the Rome-Berlin 
axis, refused in his speech of April 14 to regard 
Italy's occupation of Albania as a violation of the 
1938 Anglo-Italian treaty, by which the two coun- 
tries had undertaken to maintain the status quo in 
the Mediterranean. Yet Mr. Chamberlain’s concili- 
atory attitude did not prevent I/ Duce from discussing 
further collaboration with Field Marshal Goeging 
in Rome over the weekend of April 15, or from past- 
poning the withdrawal of Italian troops in Spaig to 
May 15, when General Franco is scheduled to ngke 
a triumphal entrance into Madrid. 

Meanwhile, these Italian troops, strengthened by 
additional contingents from Italy, have been mafsed 
in southern Spain, where they might cooperate ‘vith 
Spanish forces in an attack either on French Morocco 
or on Gibraltar. Germany, moreover, announced on 




















April 14 that its fleet would conduct a month's 
maneuvers off the Spanish coast in the Atlantic 
Ocean, thus providing a hint that May 15 may have 
a double meaning in the dictatorial time-table. If the 
French government still retained any illusions re- 
garding the attitude of Franco Spain, these illusions 
were destroyed by the reports submitted on April 13 
by its Ambassador, Marshal Pétain, who is said 
to have been received with utmost frigidity in 
Burgos. And if Britain had hoped to use its histori- 
cal alliance with Portugal to offset possible Spanish 
moves against France or Gibraltar, this hope, too. 
was dashed by the treaty of March 17 between Spain 
and Portugal, in which each promised not to allow 
its territory to be used for an attack on the other. 
WILL POLAND CEDE DANZIG? While Britain 
and France were thus forced to concentrate their at- 
ter‘on—and their naval resources—in the Mediter- 
ran.an, Germany was once more pressing for blood- 
less fulfillment of its claims in Eastern Europe. Po- 
lish Foreign Minister Beck, whose chief motivation 
is his long-standing hatred of France, returned to 
Warsaw with Britain’s pledge in his pocket, but 
seems to have made little progress toward comple- 
tion of the Anglo-Polish pact of mutual assistance. 
His time has been occupied by direct negotiations 
with Germany, which had demanded return of the 
Free City of Danzig and the right to construct an 
automobile road to East Prussia across Pomorze, 
known as the Polish Corridor. In the case of both 
Danzig and the Corridor, Germany has a legitimate 
claim against Poland. Unlike Czecho-Slovakia, these 
territories were taken away from the German Em- 
pire in 1919, solely for the purpose of providing 
newly reunited Poland with access to the sea. Since 
then Poland has built a port of its own at Gdynia, 
and at the present time 65 per cent of the country’s 
seaborne commerce passes through Gdynia, as com- 
pared with 35 per cent through Danzig. True, Polish 
interests in the Free City might be injured by Ger- 
man reoccupation, and the projected German auto- 
mobile road to East Prussia can only be regarded 
as an entering wedge for return of the Polish Cor- 
ridor to the Reich. But the British pledge to Poland 
was so framed as to leave the decision regarding re- 
sistance to German demands in the hands of the 


JAPAN’S ROLE IN A EUROPEAN WAR 


The sudden transfer of the United States fleet on 
April 15 to the Pacific has emphasized the close 
connection between the European and Far Eastern 
crises. American policy is clearly moving to counter 
a possible initiative by Japan in eastern Asia. What 
direction would such an initiative take? Through- 
out a month of increasing European tension, Japanese 
diplomacy has moved cautiously within a narrow 


= Page Two 








ey, 
— 


Polish government. If the Poles, although assured 
of Anglo-French support, should prefer to avoid , 
clash with Germany by surrendering Danzig, it js 
impossible for France, Britain or the United Statg 
to force Poland to fight the Reich on this issue. 
CAN STATUS QUO BE _ INDEFINITELY 
MAINTAINED? Poland’s case is typical of the prob. 
lems confronting the “stop-Hitler” coalition. The 
most that this coalition, with or without the suppor 
of the United States, can do is to redress the balance 
of power in Europe, which since 1933 has been ip. 
creasingly unfavorable to the Western democracies, 
If Britain, France and the United States can conving 
both Hitler as well as his potential victims that they | 
now have both the desire and the capacity to resist | 
force or threat of force, this would in itself mark 
a step forward from the present situation of profound 
discouragement. Unless such an assurance is con. 
veyed in unmistakable terms, Europe must resign 
itself to a series of crises which cannot but prove 
destructive to the nerves and economic systems not | 
only of Europe, but also of this hemisphere. | 
It would be extremely short-sighted, however, to 
believe that a “stop-Hitler’”’ coalition can be con. 
tent with the negative task of maintaining the ter. 
ritorial and economic status quo. It is not enough to | 
hold the lid down indefinitely, even if that were’ 
practicable. It is essential to provide outlets for 
pent-up grievances which the democracies in the past 
had done little or nothing to alleviate. This can be 
accomplished only if we realize that we are con- 
fronted with a revolutionary international situation, 
in which it would be disastrous for the democracies 
to be maneuvered into the position of die-hard con- 
servatives. Those who favor new deals in domestic 
affairs cannot, in all good faith, be adamant regard- 
ing new deals in international affairs. Difficult as 
the situation may be if Hitler decides to reject the 
President's appeal, it will be even more difficult if | 
he challenges the United States to implement its 
promise of a new deal by drafting the practical bases | 
of a new peace. The problem then will be to prevent 
negotiations with Hitler and Mussolini from becom- 
ing another Munich, which might prove even more 
dangerous for the democracies than that of last 
September. VERA MICHELES DEAN 








orbit. The authorities at Tokyo have conspicuously | 
refrained from a clear definition of policy should | 
war occur in Europe. While continued negotiations 
with the Berlin-Rome axis are reported, Japan ap- 
parently still hesitates to enter into binding com- 
mitments of a universal nature with its partners in 
the “anti-Comintern” pact. On the other hand, two 
moves by Japan during this period may have a certain 











id q 
it is 
ates 


ELY 
Ob. 


port 
1 If- 


cies, 
rince 


esist | 


und 
con- 
Sign 
rove 
; not 


r, to 
Con- 
ter. 
rh to 
were 

for 
past 
n be 
con- 
tion, 
acies 
con- 
eStiC 
zard- 
lt as 
t the 
lt if 


t its | 


VaSeS 
vent 


COM: | 


more 


last, 


iN 


ously 
ould 
tions 
| ap 
com- 
rs in 


rtain 














— Page Three 


significance. The first was announcement of Japanese 
occupation of the Spratly islands on March 31, com- 
plemented by the annexation, on April 18, of a 
group of reefs and islets 300 miles long between 
French Indo-China, the Philippines and British 
North Borneo in the South China Sea. The second 
was settlement of the fisheries dispute with the 
Soviet Union on April 2. 

A war in Europe would undoubtedly confer an 
increased freedom of action on Tokyo’s military- 
naval leaders. At the same time, any policy which 
they might adopt is circumscribed by a number of 
limitations, both military and economic. The con- 
quest of China is by no means complete, as recent 
events have shown. Pacification of “occupied” areas 
has achieved a very limited success. The minor cam- 
paigns in central China, directed against Ichang and 
Changsha, have met with unexpected stubborn re- 
sistance. The rapid capture of Nanchang during the 
last two weeks of March seemed to herald a sweep- 
ing Japanese advance. Early in April, however, the 
Chinese forces initiated a series of counter-attacks 
affecting such widely separated places as Canton, 
Kaifeng (on the Yellow River), and Paotou (Inner 
Mongolia). These counter-attacks, which capitalized 
on the extent to which Japan’s forces of occupation 
are scattered throughout China, have served to hold 
up the offensive against Ichang and Changsha and 
to indicate that China's potentialities for resistance 
still exist. 

WHERE IS JAPAN HEADED? This factor, as 
well as the serious drain on Japan’s economic re- 
sources over the past two years, would seem to place 
Japan in a less favored position than in 1914. Further 
advance, even should a European war occur, involves 
a hard choice. Should the attack be directed against 
the Soviet Union, or against Western interests in 
China and southeastern Asia? The first of these 





TT 
——————————— 





choices involves serious risk. Of the great powers, the 

Soviet Union alone commands important military 

forces which are already in the Far East. At Changku- 

feng, last August, Japan had one serious engagement 

with these forces, the result of which did not increase 
its confidence. Two weeks ago, it came to an agree- 

ment with Russia on the fisheries issue in which the 

Soviet terms were essentially accepted. Despite these 

factors, there is a strong group in the military 

command which feels that the Russian maritime 
provinces must be added to Japan’s growing empire 
before its security is assured, and preparations to- 
ward this end have been under way ever since 1931. 

If the Soviet Union becomes engaged in Europe, what 
better opportunity could arise? 


The line of least resistance, however, clearly lies 
toward the south. France and Britain, in pegticular, 
would have small military and naval forces ;at their 
disposal to protect their eastern possession: or the 
oil of the Dutch East Indies—for Japan the ‘greatest 
prize of all. The occupation of Hainan and the 
Spratly islands has already pointed the way. Only 
one serious obstacle threatens attainment of this ob- 
jective: the United States. Apprehension over the 
American reaction appears to be the chief reason 
for Japan’s delay in concluding an open military 
alliance with the axis powers. The United States has 
been the economic “‘life-line” for Japan in its effort 
to conquer China. While the American fleet has been 
stationed in the Pacific in recent years, there has 
been no serious likelihood until now that it might 
be used. Can the United States be kept neutral if 
Japan moves on French Indo-China, the Dutch East 
Indies, or British Malaya? Fear of American inter- 
vention is likely to prove the main deterrent to such 
action by Tokyo in the event of a European war. 


T. A. BIsson 





THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Germany and England: Background of Conflict, 1848-1894, 
by Raymond J. Sontag. New York, Appleton-Century, 
1938. $3.50 
A sound and suggestive narrative of Anglo-German re- 

lations, indicating that the two countries have consistently 

failed to understand each other and stressing the elements 
of conflict that have reappeared today. 


Economic Problems of the Next War, by Paul Einzig. 
New York, Macmillan, 1939. $2.50 P 
A well-known writer on finance sums up succinctly the 

measures of economic mobilization which must be taken 

by Britain in the event of war, and reaches the conclusion 
that the greater economic and financial resources of 

Britain and its allies would prove decisive. 


American Diplomacy Concerning Manchuria, by Stephen 
C. Y. Pan. Providence, R. I., Providence College Book 
Store, 1938. $4.00 
This volume deals with the application of the open door 

policy to Manchuria since 1900, including a study of the 

1900-1922 period, the Washington Conference, the Sino- 

Soviet conflict in 1929, the Japanese invasion of 1931, and 

events since the formation of Manchoukuo. Introductory 

chapters on Manchurian conditions and the open door 
principle supply a valuable background for the analysis. 


British History in the Nineteenth Century and After 
(1782-1919), by G. M. Trevelyan. New York, Longmans 
Green, 1938 rev. $3.50 ; 


An enlargement of a justly popular history. 





“ 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 26, Apri: 21, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorpofjated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND Lzsimm BuBLL, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MICHE 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Y&ar. 


i 181 


Dean, Editor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








i) 


a 
es 


Washington News L ettez 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

AprIL 17.—In Washington, where Congress still 
claims a voice in the control of American foreign 
policy, the ultimate results of President Roosevelt's 
spectacular appeal to Hitler and Mussolini must be 
considered against a domestic background which may 
prove to be almost as important as the appeal’s im- 
mediate repercussions in Europe. 


THE DOMESTIC BACKGROUND. For the mo- 
ment this background is not decisive. The gravity of 
the crisis and the sheer audacity of the President's 
action have combined to win the support of an over- 
whelming majority of Congress. The hope that the 
message will attain its ostensible purpose—to defer, 
if not to avert, the threat of war—is shared by even 
the severest critics of Mr. Roosevelt's recent foreign 
policy. But when the time comes to take the next 
step—whether it be to carry out the promise of eco- 
nomic adjustments, or to implement the President's 
implied commitment to the Anglo-French coalition 
—the domestic background will again become a de- 
cisive factor. For it would be rash to assume that 
Congress and American public opinion have grasped 
the tremendous implications of Mr. Roosevelt's in- 
tervention, and are prepared to assume the responsi- 
bility for maintaining the balance of power or under- 
taking permanent political commitments on the 
European continent. 


To the rank and file of Congress last Saturday 
morning, the President's message came as a be- 
wildering climax to a week of tension, and seemed 
to mark a reversal of Executive policy. To the Presi- 
dent and his State Department advisers, however, 
it was a bold but logical extension of the program 
pursued timidly and by indirection since the Chicago 
speech of October 1937. The message was not in- 
tended as a traditional offer of mediation, but as an 
invitation to the aggressors to pause and weigh the 
full consequences of their policies before proceeding 
further. If the decision to address the dictators alone 
was a mistake, as some believe it was, the mistake 
was deliberate. The possible results were calculated 
in advance, and naturally included the risk that the 
offer would be parried or rejected. But the calcula- 
tion also took into account the effect on world 
opinion and on the efforts to form a world coalition. 


DIPLOMATIC WARNINGS. As such, the mes- 
sage followed in perfect sequence the series of diplo- 
matic warnings which began with Mr. Roosevelt's cal- 


culated farewell to his neighbors at Warm Sprin 
on April 9, when he said: “I'll be back in the fall 
if we don’t have a war.” 


Even more pointed was the warning in the Presi- 
dent’s public address to the governing board of the 
Pan American Union on April 14, when he pledged 
the nations of the Western Hemisphere to defend 
their “American peace . . . to the fullest extent of 
our strength, matching force to force if any attempt 
is made to subvert our institutions, or to impair the 
independence of any one of our group.” The criti- 
cal reaction to this challenge, which had surprised 
several Latin American diplomats in Washington, 
was obscured by the warm support for the peace 
appeal which came over the weekend from 16 
American republics and the Dominion of Canada, 

But the most significant move was made by the 
Navy Department when it ordered the return of the 
United States fleet to the Pacific. No explanation was 
offered by the navy or the White House, but in State 
Department quarters there was ample evidence that 
officials were aware of the strategic unbalance in 
the Far East. Such are the routine maneuvers of the 
game of power politics. 


THE ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY. Few of the 
President's critics in Washington will charge that he 
is playing power politics from choice. The choice was 


not his own, and complete inaction last week might | 
possibly have led to the open clash which the entire 


world knows must end in disaster. But the responsi- 
bility of the United States from this point on is a 
heavy one. It involves not merely the calculations 
of power politics, but a sober estimate of whether 
the ends we desire can be achieved by the means at 
our disposal. If by a miracle hostilities could be 
staved off, are we really prepared to assume the po- 
litical obligations in Europe which must go hand 
in hand with any economic and military disarmament 
plan? If war comes despite our efforts to prevent 
it, do we believe we can defend our institutions and 
our democracy by joining the European “‘stop-Hitler™ 
coalition? What are the terms, and who is to de- 
fine the issues in a situation which is as much a 
product of revolutionary social forces as it is of 
rival imperialisms? It is here that the domestic back- 
ground becomes important, for the American people 
fought one war to check German hegemony — 
and then washed its hands of the consequences. It 
will take more than that to achieve peace and justice 
in the world. W. T. STONE 















mia 


| FPA 








a rR ee nwo Aa. ty &’ 





