yrenees, 
Gaullist 
Jrid. De 
| to sup- 
ig to the 
lared on 
npromis- 
> and in 


ike posi- 


AMER- 
s toward 
an affect 
1 Repub- 
r spread- 
1941 the 
His pant- 
hout the 
hip with 
2 broad- 
ers’ coun- 
road and 
radio on 
of “‘ship- 
real Ger- 
istructing 
Europe.” 
emocratic 
ister Eze- 
is govern- 
, and the 
Martin is 

all-party 
tions with 


BOLLES 
NDS 


a atl 


JQVICAL KOCH 


GENERAL LIBRARY 
wniv. OF MICH 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


a * , 
ann Arbor 


, Mich. 


~FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


You. XXIV, No. 4 


NoveMsBer 10, 1944 


NEED FOR AMERICAN PARLEY HIGHLIGHTED BY ARGENTINE MANEUVER 


a an unexpected counterattack on the Western 

Hemisphere’s diplomatic ostracism of Argentina, 
the Farrell government on October 27 requested that 
the American Foreign Ministers be convened to con- 
sider its claim that Argentina’s obligations under 
the terms of the Rio de Janeiro agreement had been 
fulfilled. The memorandum, on the surface an im- 
pressively reasoned statement, calls the American 
nations to review jointly with Argentina a funda- 
mental aspect of its\international policy, stating that 
“in the American community, no authentic, stable 
order can be created on the basis of the arbitrary 
exclusion of . . . one of its members.”’ 

OFFENSE THE BEST DEFENSE. The Argentine 
proposal was shrewdly timed to crystallize growing 
sentiment on the part of Latin American countries in 
favor of an inter-American conference to consider 
post-war affairs. Repeated hints—culminating in the 
outspoken comment of Mexican Foreign Minister 
Padilla—had come from various quarters. These 
could be considered mere diplomatic soundings 
of the State Departinent’s views on the advisability 
of holding an inter-American parley in advance 
of a United Nations conference on worid organiza- 
tion. But while the Buenos Aires request is basically 
abid for Argentine participation in post-war plan- 
hing, it seems to confuse the issue. For although Latin 
American chancelleries are anxious to make known 
their views on the position of small nations in the 
United Nations organization, proposed by the Dum- 
barton Oaks document, they are loath to consider in 
such public fashion the delicate question of con- 
tinental policy toward Argentina. 

In its position as one-time leader of the South 
American continent, and as a diplomatic outcast with 
everything to gain from a conference, Argentina has 
made further postponement of consultation on either 
or both of these vital questions very awkward. To- 
day, extreme nationalists in Buenos Aires are con- 


gratulating themselves on having maneuvered the 
United States into a position where, by accepting 
the Argentine proposal, it would tacitly recognize 
the Farrell régime, and by refusing it, would fail to 
use the Pan-American machinery for peaceful settle- 
ment of disputes so laboriously erected—and might 
even give the impression in some quarters that its 
charges against Argentina cannot be substantiated. 

Argentina’s request came through the Pan 
American Union—the only diplomatic channel still 
open to that country, since the Montevideo Commit- 
tee for Political Defense of the Hemisphere formally 
dropped Argentina from membership last Septem- 
ber. It is ironic that the Farrell government availed 
itself of the consultative procedure first established 
at the Buenos Aires Peace Conference of 1936, and 
never wholly accepted by Argentina. 

PULL OF INTERESTS. The decision, in the final 
analysis, rests with all the American states. In de- 
liberating their reply, they will undoubtedly be af- 
fected by their proximity to Argentina, as well as 
by the extent to which they are included in the politi- 
cal and economic orbit of the United States. Uru- 
guay has already stated that it would take no decision 
for the time being, while Colombia and Venezuela 
promptly issued a joint statement to the effect that 
they would welcome such a conference. 

Whether or not the Argentine request is acceded 
to, it seems likely that an inter-American conference 
on post-war plans will be held shortly. Many con- 
siderations have combined to relegate United States 
concern with Latin American affairs to the back- 
ground—not the least of these being the paramount 
need for first obtaining agreement among the great 
powers on the fundamental principles of world or- 
ganization. There are indications, too, that the 
United States has purposely refrained from collec- 
tively consulting other American nations on the ques- 
tion of post-war organization, in order to avoid the 


appearance of cultivating an American bloc. More- 
over, responsible leaders in the Western Hemisphere 
believe that the most urgent Latin American prob- 
lems are related to political and economic adjust- 
ments on this continent attendant on the termination 
of the war, rather than participation in settling the 
technical aspects of security arrangements. 
“TWO-EDGED SWORD.” Whether the confer- 
ence is held at the instance of Argentina or that of 
the United States—without the presence of an Ar- 
gentine delegation—the point at issue remains the 


Page Two 


e— 
—— 


same. The question is not merely fulfillment of the |; 


Rio pledges, nor is it simply a contest for continental 
leadership between the United States and Argen- 


tina. It is whether the presence in the New World |, 


of a European-inspired totalitarian state is to be 
tolerated. As a Montevideo paper recently pointed 
out, the diplomatic victory Buenos Aires would score 
in convening the Foreign Ministers might turn 
out to be a “two-edged sword” for the Farrell goy. 
ernment, whose situation with respect to the rest 
of the continent may be greatly aggravated. 


OLIVE HOLMEs 


FRENCH MODERATES MAY HEAL DE GAULLE-COMMUNIST RIFT 


Two and a half months after the liberation of 
Paris, France still finds itself at a half-way stage 
between the war and the post-war period, deeply 
preoccupied with the problems of transition from a 
revolutionary state of resistance to Germany to one 
of law and order. So urgent are the day-to-day tasks, 
however, that the French have been unable to post- 
pone national reconstruction, and already face the 
central issue of whether the men and women of 
diverse political faiths who banded together to help 
free the country from the Nazis can now maintain 
their unity for the purpose of creating a new France. 

RECOGNITION STRENGTHENS UNITY. Of- 
ficial recognition of de Gaulle’s régime as the Pro- 
visional Government of France by the United States, 
Britain, Russia and Canada on October 23 has served 
to strengthen France's internal unity. By this action, 
tardy as it seemed to many Frenchmen, the Allies 
removed the possibility that any opponents of the 
present French government might seek support 
abroad. 

But it is chiefly because recognition restored France 
to a place in the councils of the United Nations that 
it increased de Gaulle’s strength. For French spokes- 
men have shown signs of increasing restiveness— 
particularly since the Battle for Germany opened 
this autumn—at France’s continued exclusion from 
inter-Allied discussions of the German question, in 


Recent FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS— 


ROLE OF CARTELS IN MODERN ECONOMY 
by Grant S. McClellan 
TWO U.S. SENATORS WEIGH OUR 
FOREIGN POLICY 
by Claude Pepper and Warren R. Austin 


TURKEY BETWEEN TWO WORLD WARS 
by John Kingsley Birge 


WHAT KIND OF PEACE WITH GERMANY— 
Terms Proposed by Liberated Nations of Europe 
by Winifred N. Hadsel 


25c each 


REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


which they feel France has a far more direct concern 
than any one of the Big Three. If this situation had 
persisted, the French might conceivably have looked 
for another leader than de Gaulle to obtain for their 
country the international role to which they feel it 
is entitled by its traditions and wartime sacrifices, 
Now that recognition has opened the way to 
France’s entrance into the European Advisory Com. 
mission, which is mapping the armistice with Ger- 
many—as well as the United Nations organization 
proposed at Dumbarton Oaks—de Gaulle’s leader. 
ship in the realm of foreign affairs has won the 
enthusiastic acclaim of the French. 


PURGE SHARPENS DIFFERENCES. But impor- 
tant as Allied aid in cementing national unity may 
prove, the principal obstacles to France's post-war 


harmony must be overcome by the French them. | 


selves. One of these obstacles has arisen in connec- 
tion with the purge trials now underway in courts 
throughout France. That collaborationists must be 
weeded out of public life is not open to doubt among 
the French who fought for liberation, but in carry- 
ing out this general principle they have not always 
found it easy to decide what constitutes treason. The 
moderates favor light sentences except when the 
accused delivered his. compatriots to the Germans, 
while the more radical elements—particularly the 
Communists—insist on an extensive purge that 
would cover all Frenchmen identified with Fascist 
beliefs. The fact that the Ministry of Justice is exer 
cising the right of pardon fairly extensively, except 
in cases where French men and women were de 
nounced to the Germans, indicates that the govern 
ment is accepting the moderates’ view. Whatever 
course the French may decide to follow, France’ 


allies must bear in mind that this matter is a strictly . 
French affair and that popular clamor in behalf of | 


a purge is more likely to die down quickly if action 
is taken promptly against some of the outstanding 
collaborators. 


WHAT DEGREE OF STATE CONTROL? Evea|' 


more serious than the purge as a test of French unily 
is the question of the system France should adopt 


—- 
ent of the 
ontinental 


ly pointed | 


ould score 
ight turn 
arrell gov- 
o the rest 
d. 


HOLMES 


FT 


sct concern 
uation had 
ave looked 
in for their 
hey feel it 
: sacrifices, 
e way to 
isory Com- 
with Ger- 
[ganization 
le’s leader- 
s won the 


But impor- 


unity may 


'S post-war 
=nch them- 
in connec- 
y in courts 
ts must be 
oubt among 
ut in carty- 
not always 
reason. The 
- when the 
e Germans, 
icularly the 
purge that 
vith Fascist 
tice is exer 
vely, except 
nm were de 
the govert- 
. Whatever 
w, France's 
is a strictly 
n behalf of 
<ly if action 
outstanding 


ROL ? Even 
French unity 
hould adopt 


—_— 


jn its efforts to combine the traditional French be- 
lief in individual liberty with the nation’s pressing 
need for a new economic order. The French choice 
s not between unrestricted free enterprise, on the 
me hand, and state-controlled economy, on the 
sther. According to the best reports available, it ap- 
s that the demand for nationalization comes not 
oily from the workers but also from large sections 
of the middle class, and reflects the prevailing belief 
that private control of industry was responsible for 
the ineffectiveness of French pre-war industry and, 
thus, for the military disaster of 1940. The war itself 
has also impeded the return to pre-war capitalism, 
since many leading French industrialists collaborated 
with the Germans—willingly or unwillingly—and 
the Nazis took over thousands of plants after paying 
their owners in francs secured through levies imposed 
in the French people. 


At the same time, the degree of state control the 
french will accept is by no means settled, and a 
lwely debate is now raging on the subject. The fact 
that no definite answer can be given to this question 
util national elections are held, following the re- 
turn to France of the more than two and a half mil- 
lion prisoners-of-war and workers in Germany, 
makes it impossible for the Consultative Assembly 
—which opened its first sessions in Paris on Novem- 
ber 7—to do more than debate the issue. Meanwhile, 
the government is obliged by the continuing require- 
ments of the war, and the urgent problems of un- 
employment and national reconstruction, to embark 
at once on economic policies that will be at least 
temporarily accepted by the French people, and as- 
sure a livelihood to thousands who now have no 
choice except service in the armed forces. 


De Gaulle defined a possible course in a key speech 
delivered at Lille on October 1. Declaring that the 
state should conduct the entire economic effort of 
the nation for the benefit of all, but without neces- 
urily excluding private initiative and legitimate 
profit, he proposed a “directed’’ economy that would 
apparently nationalize the mines, electrical combines, 
banks and insurance companies. What the precise 
tle of private capital would be under this scheme 
femains to be seen. 

It is the Communists, however—trather than con- 
servative circles interested in the future of private in- 
vestments—who have strongly criticized de Gaulle’s 
interim economic program. As an expression of their 
Opposition to this and other official policies, they re- 
fused on November 2 to accept the government's de- 


Page Three 


cision to disarm and dissolve the Communist-con- 


‘trolled militia, the ‘Patriotic Guard,’ and insisted on 


retaining this organization as a means of bolstering 
their bargaining power for a more leftist program. In 
the showdown between the left wing of the resistance 
movement and other elements in the government, 
de Gaulle has a distinct advantage that seems to 
insure his ultimate success. This is the existence 
among the French, despite revolutionary conditions 
that have accompanied liberation, of a kind of politi- 
cal balance-wheel that makes it difficult for the na- 
tion to move either to the extreme left or extreme 
right. The effectiveness of moderate elements in 
achieving an economic compromise that the majority 
of the French can enthusiastically endorse will be of 
the greatest importance not only to France but to 
Europe as a whole, for France’s settlement of its 
economic problems is bound to influence other lib- 
erated nations on the continent. 


WHINIFRED N. HADSEL 


The French Right and Nazi Germany, by Charles A. 
Micaud. Durham, Duke University Press, 1943. $3.50 


A careful analysis of the steps whereby the French 
Right, because of its fear of Russia and communism, 
abandoned its traditional nationalist foreign policy and 
appeased Germany. 


Great Britain, France and the German Problem, 1918-1989, 
by W. M. Jordan. New York, Oxford University Press, 
1944. $4.50. 


A scholarly analysis of the fatal disagreements between 
France and Britain in making and maintaining the Treaty 
of Versailles. The contrasts between the two nations’ 
policies on rearmament, reparation and boundary settle- 
ments are clearly presented. 


American Diplomacy in Action, by Richard W. Van 
Alstyne. Stanford University, California, Stanford Uni- 
versity Press, 1944. $5.00 


Dispensing with the usual chronological treatment of 
American diplomatic history, the author analyzes the re- 
current problems in the foreign policy of the United 
States. The three divisions of the book suggest the range 
in content: Security and the Monroe Doctrine; Expan- 
sion; and Neutrality and Isolation. This use of the “case 
method” (derived from the teaching of law) will prove 
important beyond the field of diplomatic history. 


The American Senate and World Peace, by Kenneth Cole- 
grove. New York, Vanguard Press, 1944. $2.00 


A vigorous attack on the requirement of a two-thirds 
Senate majority for ratifying treaties as an obstacle in 
establishing a post-war peace system. The author argues 
that a constitutional amendment is needed to assure demo- 
cratic control of United States foreign policy. 


Contemporary Italy: Its Intellectual and Moral Origins, 
by Count Carlo Sforza. New York, Dutton, 1944, $3.50 
A valuable collection of the author’s views and remi- 

niscences on world affairs, containing a good deal not to 

be found elsewhere. The book, however, seems too long and 
tends to lose itself in detail. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 4, November 10, 1944. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRaNK Ross McCoy, President; Dornotuy F. Lunt, Secretary; Vara Micuetes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. National 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News D etter. 


Late in the summer of 1943 representatives of two 
United States oil companies, Standard-Vacuum and 
Sinclair, and of the British Royal Dutch Shell arrived 
in Teheran as rival negotiators for a petroleum con- 
cession in southeastern Iran near the Afghan and 
Beluchistan border. On September 23, 1944, with 
Americans and British still negotiating, a Soviet 
economic mission headed by Vice Foreign Commissar 
Sergei Kavtaradze came to Teheran and requested 
an oil and mineral concession in Iran’s five northern 
provinces. On October 16 the Iranian government 
announced that decisions on all concessions would 
be postponed until the war's end. This action has 
precipitated a controversy between the U.S.S.R. and 
the United States over policy toward Iran. 


SOVIET CAMPAIGN AGAINST PREMIER. 
The United States has had a direct and solemn in- 
terest in the territorial integrity of Iran since De- 
cember 1, 1943, when President Roosevelt, Prime 
Minister Churchill and Marshal Stalin, at the Teher- 
an Conference, signed a statement guaranteeing 
Iranian sovereignty as long as the war required the 
presence in Iran of U.S., British and Soviet troops. 
After the Iranian government's decision against the 
grant of concessions, the Soviet press and Vice Com- 
missar Kavtaradze acted in a manner which, in the 
opinion of Prime Minister Mohammed Said Marag- 
hei, was aimed at forcing the fall of his government. 
The Soviet trade-union newspaper, Trud, on Octo- 
ber 22 accused Said of failing to curb Fascist ele- 
ments in his country. Soviet troops besieged the 
Iranian garrison at Tabriz, and Kavtaradze declined 
to interfere. Do these Soviet actions violate Iranian 
sovereignty ? 


Said told U.S. Ambassador Leland Morris in 
Teheran on November 3 that he thought he might 
not resign despite his earlier belief that he would 
have to give up the Premiership for the sake of good 
relations between Iran and its neighbor Russia. Said, 
formerly Ambassador to Moscow, put a halt to the 
oil negotiations at the demand of his cabinet, a 
strong minority of which, dominated by nationalist 
sentiment and fear of the future, had opposed con- 
versations with American and British oilmen. When 
the Iranians asked Kavtaradze his terms, he replied 
that he wished first to sign a general concession 
agreement and then discuss terms. The Teheran gov- 
ernment held that this procedure should be reversed. 


The conflict between the American and Soviet atti- 
FOR VICTORY ° 


RUSSIA’S CLAIMS TO IRAN OIL CREATE CONFLICT WITH USS. 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


tudes on Iran came quickly into the open. On No. 
vember 1 Ambassador Morris addressed a letter tp 
the Iranian government stating that the United States 
raised no objection to the postponement of negotia. 
tions, and that the government’s decision was ep. 
tirely within the rights of an independent natiop, 
This country’s only concern, he said, is that it should 
not be discriminated against. The British adopted , 
position similar to that of the United States. Op 
November 4 Izvestia, Soviet official newspaper in 
Moscow, complained that since ‘Britain has exten. 
sive oil concessions in southern Iran, why is the §o. 
viet Union refused oil concessions in northern Iran?” 
The Czarist government had concessions in the proy- 
inces in which Moscow is now interested, but the 
Soviet government had surrendered them in 1919, 
at a time when its leaders opposed “imperialism.” 


U.S. ACTIVE IN IRAN. Whether the United 
States would interfere with an independent Soviet 
policy toward Iran after the war is unknown. In 
Asia, as in Europe, the Soviet Union wants friendly 
neighbors. Today Iran is wary of Russia, but friendly 
to the United States. The Iranian government has 
enlisted the assistance of about 75 U.S. citizens as 
expert advisers on finances and economics, petroleum 
matters, creation of an élite corps of rural police, 
reorganization of the army’s supply services, im 
provement in public health, and modernization of 
education. The United States maintains in Iran 4 
number of service troops who operate the railway 
from Bandar Shahpur on the Persian Gulf to Bandar 
Shah on the Caspian Sea. Over this line move great 


quantities of lend-lease goods needed by the Soviet 
Union, and also about 10,000 tons a month of 
Iranian supplies. 


The presence of these service troops has been of 
direct benefit to Russia. Izvestia claims that the 
troops are there without agreement with Iran, while 
Russian and British troops patrol the country under 
a treaty with Iran signed on January 29, 1942. A 
treaty drafted by the State and War Departments to 
regularize the presence of our troops in Iran, and 
guarantee their withdrawal after the war, has beet 
in negotiation for two years. One of the obstacles 
to its conclusion is that the Iranians seek concessions 
which this government has not been disposed to 
grant, namely post-war ownership of U.S. Army it 
stallations, such as barracks. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


