ee 
—— 


ecided 


Juring | 


rround 
cialist 
nd the 
lection 
ngress 
oppor. 
‘om its 
British 
Ngress 
nisters 


-T FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


Vou. XVI, No. 25 


would 
terfer- 
regard 
1e Con. 
yernors 
ila. 

a long 

1 Con- 
rd step 
ia. The 
oration 
1s prin- 
ts with 
ction to 
and the 
and un- 
cts. It 
e repre- 
ind con- 
“liamen- 
mn prog- 
the pro- 
nt with 
sent dis- 
irrange- 
ponsible 


vided by 
s which 
rovinces 

levisla- 
onths, @ 
lishment 
when the 
aptive to 
i and the 
dia, dis- 
ck. But 
it equal- 
1 legisla- 
‘or wide- 


"2 OPPER 


.  — 


ed. National 


DEAN, Editor. 
a Year. 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


2, 1921, atthe Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


ApriL 16, 1937 


—_—«, 


DINNER AND ANNUAL MEETING 


At the F.P.A. dinner and annual meeting, His Excellency, 
M. Georges Bonnet, Ambassador of France to the United 
States, will speak on ‘“‘Democracy in the Present-Day World,” 
Thursday evening, April 22, at the Hotel Astor, New York, at 
seven-thirty o’clock. Reservations should be made in advance. 


a W. Bishop 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


TIDE TURNS IN 


SPANISH WAR 


INCE the mid-March success of the Loyalists 

against General Franco’s Italian troops on 
the Guadalajara front, the government forces 
have displayed a hitherto undemonstrated ability 
to take the offensive. On April 9 General Miaja 
began a pincer movement along the western side 
of Madrid, designed to cut off the Rebel troops 
in the University City salient. The first four 
days of fighting were inconclusive. Greater gains 
came from a campaign in Cérdoba province, 150 
miles southwest of Madrid, initiated near the end 
of March. Here the Loyalists showed unsuspected 
skill in open-field manoeuvres, coordinating ef- 
fectively the operations of several advancing col- 
umns. On March 25, after repulsing a week-long 
effort of the Rebels to capture Pozoblanco and 
open the way to the mercury mines at Almadén, 
the government troops drove southward in a 
movement which has almost reached Fuente- 
ovejuna, endangering Rebel control of valuable 
copper and coal mines. One important factor in 
Loyalist progress has been decisive mastery of 
the air, where Russian planes have figured prom- 
inently. The government navy has also dis- 
played new activity, shelling Malaga, Rebel forts 
in the Balearic Islands, and Ceuta—the Insurgent 
base in Spanish Morocco. 

Rebel gains in the north have served to coun- 
terbalance losses in the south. An offensive 
launched on April 1 in the mountainous Basque 
country has made definite progress, capturing 
Ochandiano and threatening Durango, sixteen 
miles from Bilbao, the capital of the region. Pos- 
session of Bilbao would give Franco control of a 
leading industrial center, diminish the threat to 
his rear and facilitate conquest of Santander and 
the Asturias mining region. 

Meanwhile, dissension has appeared in the 
camps of both factions. Friction between Franco’s 
Spanish troops and foreign contingents in his 
forces was responsible seemingly for mutinous 


conspiracies reported near the end of March at 
Algeciras, Malaga, and at the Tetuan airdrome 
in Morocco. Mass executions were employed to 
crush the unrest. At the same time the govern- 
ment cause was plagued by political strife, which 
was most marked in semi-independent Catalonia, 
and led to the fall of the Tarradellas cabinet at 
Barcelona on March 26. The more moderate ele- 
ments—Socialists and bourgeois Republicans— 
have stressed the policy of winning the war before 
attempting further social reforms. The growing 
strength of these groups stirred unrest among 
the more radical Anarcho-Syndicalists and the 
semi-Trotzkyite POUM. The latter were par- 
ticularly concerned over proposed reorganization 
of the forces of public order, which was expected 
to diminish the direct influence of the labor or- 
ganizations in the armed forces. When a week’s 
negotiations failed to solve the cabinet crisis 
Companys, the Catalan President, took over the 
Premiership on April 3, and formed a temporary 
ministry, representing the same groups—Left 
Republicans, Socialists and Anarcho-Syndicalists 
—as in the preceding cabinet. 

While effective establishment of the interna- 
tional patrol of Spain’s land and maritime fron- 
tiers has been delayed, various incidents at sea 
have accentuated European friction. The Insur- 
gent practice of stopping merchantmen on the 
high seas has brought warnings from France and 
Britain, as well as from smaller powers. On 
April 6 the British destroyer Garland was twice 
attacked by Rebel bombing planes while off 
Spain’s eastern coast. A prompt apology settled 


this incident, but Franco’s blockade of Bilbao was 
the cause of renewed tension. Four British mer- 
chantmen carrying food to this port were turned 
back by Insurgent warships on April 10. London 
at once ordered the 42,000-ton dreadnaught Hood 
to sail from Gibraltar, but a cabinet meeting on 
the following day led to virtual recognition of the 


ity of Michigan Libre 


Franco blockade. On April 12 Prime Minister 
Baldwin announced that, while interference with 
British shipping on the high seas would not be 
tolerated, vessels would be warned “for practical 
reasons” against going into the blockaded area. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


BELGIAN FASCISM IN RETREAT 


The cause of fascism was dealt a heavy blow 
on April 11 when the leader of the Belgian Rex- 
ist party, Léon Degrelle, was overwhelmingly de- 
feated in his campaign for election to the Cham- 
ber of Deputies from the Brussels district. This 
by-election had considerable significance as a test 
of strength: it had been deliberately precipitated 
by the resignation of a Rexist deputy and the 
liberal Premier, Paul van Zeeland, had accepted 
the challenge by personally entering the lists 
against Degrelle. In a handsome victory the 
Prime Minister polled 275,840 votes against 
69,242 for his opponent. Despite an alliance with 
the Flemish Nationalists, Degrelle obtained 4,479 
fewer votes than the total polled by the two par- 
ties combined in the elections of last May. 

The size of M. van Zeeland’s majority came as 
a surprise. Under the vigorous leadership of the 
youthful Degrelle, this Fascist party had in- 
creased with phenomenal rapidity and, following 
the elections of May 1936, had triumphantly en- 
tered Parliament with 21 deputies. If the move- 
ment now appears to be waning in strength, it is 
primarily because van Zeeland has taken much 
wind out of its sails. Through his middle-of-the- 
road economic policy the Prime Minister has 
brought Belgium far on the way to recovery. 
Since the beginning of his Premiership, a little 
more than two years ago, industrial production 
has risen 20 per cent, foreign trade 47 per cent, 
and unemployment has been cut by half. The 
budget is balanced and tax reductions are in pros- 
pect. In the field of foreign policy, van Zeeland 
has obviated much criticism by steering Belgium 
into a new course of neutrality long advocated by 
both the Rexists and the Flemish Nationalists. 
Finally, M. van Zeeland’s victory was sealed on 
the eve of the election by a statement of Car- 
dinal Van Roey in which the Primate of Belgium 
condemned the Rexist movement as dangerous to 
Church and State and counselled all Catholics, 
some of whom appeared hesitant, to vote for the 
Prime Minister. 

Supported in Parliament by a strong coalition 
of Liberals, Catholics and Socialists, van Zeeland 
can now carry on with enhanced prestige. Among 
his first tasks is to study, at the invitation of 


Page Two 


—, 
—s 


France and Britain, the prospects of closer inter. 
national economic collaboration. While London 
and Paris continue at work on a new Western, 
and possibly even an Eastern Locarno, Brussels 
will examine plans for the removal of trade bar- 
riers. In his two-day visit to the Belgian capita] 
this week Dr. Schacht, the German Minister of 
Economics, is expected to discuss not only trade 
problems affecting the two countries, but the 
terms on which the Reich would be willing to 
participate in economic arrangements of larger 
scope. Van Zeeland is also conferring this week 
with economic experts of the so-called Oslo group, 
who are now meeting in Brussels after hoa 
preliminary conferences in The Hague last month. 


The Oslo bloc, which includes the Scandinavian 
states as well as The Netherlands and Belgium, 
is working for constructive action to eliminate 
obstacles to world trade. The United States 
sympathizes with these efforts, and its represen- 
tative at the London Sugar Conference, Mr. Nor- 
man H. Davis, is exploring with British states- 
men the possibility of action in the economic 


realm. JOHN C. DEWILDE 


Guatemala, by Erna Fergusson. New York, Knopf, 1937. 
$3.00 
An engaging picture of Central America’s most colorful 
republic. 


Can China Survive? by Hallett Abend and Anthony J. 
Billingham. New York, Ives Washburn, 1936. $3.00 
Interesting but not very well organized impressions of 

two New York Times correspondents. 


World Economic Survey 1985/36. Geneva, League of Na- 
tions, 1936. Paper $1.50 Cloth $2.00 
This excellent and candid review reveals a widespread 
and substantial recovery, which rests, however, in many in- 
stances on an unsound basis. 


The Yellow Spot: The Extermination of the Jews in Ger- 
many. New York, Knight, 1936. $3.00 
Particulars of a dark chapter in Nazi policy, gleaned 
from the German press and official documents. 


Collective Security, by Arnold D. McNair. 
Cambridge University Press, 1936. 75 cents 
Despite recent setbacks Dr. McNair foresees the ulti- 

mate triumph of the principle of collective security. 


The ABC of the Federal Reserve System, by Edwin W. 
Kemmerer. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 
1936. $2.50 
In this new edition of his lucid analysis of our bank- 

ing machinery Dr. Kemmerer sharply criticizes recent 

legislation for putting too much control over money and 
credit in the hands of the government. 


Central Europe and the Western World, by Gerhard 
Schacher. New York, Holt, 1937. $2.75 
Scholarly analysis of the plight of Central Europe, with 
a plea for economic cooperation as the only possible basis 
of peaceful settlement. 


Cambridge, 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 25, Aprit 16, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasitg Bugit, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MICHELES Dean, Béitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


