pha- 


land, 
able 
uth. 


d 38 
ween 
more 


r Ma- 
y ad- 
o£ its 
ly to 
> Ru- 


e one 
-e 0 
- May 


War. 
> Out 
reanu 


nerica, 
1 Uni- 


ntered 
ith an 
tration 
alue is 


eesing. 
$1.50 
held at 
‘oblems 
ples in 
ucators 
groups. 
its dis 
impor- 


Boston, 


Colonel 
and im- 
| States 
. “there 
<1 Days 
Jar the 
usiness 
nts .«s 


‘e influ- 


National 
ass matter 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


in interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN fen Hii 





RAL 1IRP AR 
UNIV. OF Micin 


of March 3, 1879. 














You. XVII, No. 28 


May 6, 1988 





—_— 


Mr. Buell, who sailed on April 20 for a two- 
months’ visit in Europe, will broadcast from 
London on Sunday, May 8, over the Columbia 
Broadcasting System, at 1:30 p.m., Eastern Day- 
light Saving Time. His subject will be “Economics 
and Democracies.” 


MR. BUELL TO BROADCAST FROM LONDON 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











THE ROAD BACK-—TO 


1914 





HE Anglo-French conversations, held in London 

on April 28 and 29, on the eve of Hitler's visit 
to Rome, represent another milestone on the road 
back to the pre-war balance of power. Behind the 
guarded language of the communiqué issued at the 
close of these conversations lie the following devel- 
opments : 
Anglo-French Military Alliance. Britain and France per- 
fected the defensive alliance they have been developing 
since March 1936 when, following Hitler’s reoccupation of 
the Rhineland, the two countries agreed to hold consulta- 
tions between their general staffs. This alliance establishes 
far closer coordination of British and French armed forces 
than existed before 1914. The principle of unified com- 
mand, laboriously worked out three and a half years after 
the outbreak of the World War, will be brought into im- 
mediate operation in the next conflict. A French general 
will command the combined armies of the two countries, 
a British admiral will direct the allied navies, and a British 
officer will control the combined air forces from the moment 
tither of the two countries is attacked. 
Economic Collaboration. This military alliance will be 
ttinforced by economic measures in anticipation of war. 
Britain and France will begin almost immediately to pool 
their purchases of supplies, including not only aircraft from 
the United States—where a British air mission arrived on 
om 25—but also foodstuffs and essential war materials 
of all kinds. Reserve stores of ammunition, oil and other 
wat necessities will be jointly accumulated in France, so 
that Britain will not need to transport them across the 
Channel for its fighting forces when war comes. France 
proposed, in addition, that Britain finance purchases of raw 
Materials from Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania and 
Yugoslavia. These purchases would have the double object 
of preparing Britain and France for war, and of strength- 
ting the countries of Eastern Europe and the Balkans, 
threatened by Germany’s drive to the East. Britain pointed 
gut that, owing to the Ottawa agreements, the Anglo- 
Itish trade treaty and the pending Anglo-American trade 
agreement, it would not be in a position to absorb Central 
European foodstuffs in any large quantities, and suggested 
that the French proposal be subjected to preliminary study. 
Should this proposal be carried out, a race might develop 

een Anglo-French financial power and Nazi pres- 





sure to win control of Eastern European countries before 
economic necessity drives them into Germany's orbit. 
Relations with Italy. These unprecedented guarantees of 
British assistance to France in case of attack were given in 
return for substantial French concessions on points 
which might conceivably involve France in a European war. 
The French government agreed to hasten its negotiations 
for an accord with Italy, paralleling the Anglo-Italian deal 
of April 16; to support Britain in the League Council on 
the question of recognizing Italy's Ethiopian conquest; and 
to consider the re-establishment of control over the Franco- 
Spanish frontier as part of the British scheme for with- 
drawal of foreign “volunteers” and war materials from 
Spain. France, in other words, followed Britain’s lead by 
acquiescing in advance in Franco’s expected victory. 

Success of Italo-French negotiations depends to a con- 
siderable extent on the counter-offer which Hitler may 
make to Mussolini during his visit to Italy. As in 1915, 
Italy finds itself in the enviable if delicate position of in- 
viting bids both from the former Allies, who are ready to 
make diplomatic but not territorial concessions, and from 
Germany, which may be expected to offer Italy a share of 
the spoils it hopes to obtain at the expense of the London- 
Paris axis. Prime Minister Chamberlain tried to strengthen 
Mussolini’s bargaining position in this week’s negotiations 
with Hitler by delivering a fulsome speech of praise for 
Fascist Italy in the House of Commons on May 2. 


Eastern Europe. It was on problems affecting Central 
and Eastern Europe, especially Czechoslovakia, that Britain 
and France found it most difficult to reach an agreement. 
The British were not ready to go beyond Mr. Chamberlain's 
statement of March 24 that Britain would probably be “al- 
most immediately involved” in a Central European war, 
and once more recommended concessions by Prague to the 
Sudeten Germans. The French, in reply, pointed out the 
danger of yielding to Hitler who, intoxicated with easy 
successes, might then seek hegemony of the European con- 
tinent. The compromise finally reached was that Britain 
and France will separately use their influence in Berlin, 
Warsaw and Prague to urge a satisfactory solution of 
Czechoslovakia’s minority problems which, according to 
the British, must precede further political and economic 
commitments. Should the Nazis continue to be truculent, 
Britain and France will jointly warn Germany that war 
with Czechoslovakia may lead to a general conflict. 




















This compromise on Eastern Europe failed to clear 
up the situation of Czechoslovakia, rendered pecul- 
iarly difficult by the eight-point program which Kon- 
rad Henlein, leader of the Sudeten German party, 
presented at his party’s Karlsbad conference on 
April 24. Throwing off all pretense that the Sudeten 
German movement is inspired by local grievances 
against Prague’s rule, Henlein declared that his fol- 
lowers, “like Germans in every part of the world,” 
accept the Nazi ideology, and will ‘no longer tol- 
erate a state of affairs that means for us war in time 
of peace.” His program includes full equality of 
Sudeten Germans and Czechs, which would mean 
abandonment of the fundamental Czech concept 
that the Germans are a minority in the Czechoslovak 
state; establishment and recognition of the boun- 
daries of the territory settled by Germans, which is 
to be granted autonomy in “every department of 
public life”; removal of ‘‘all injustices done to the 
Sudeten Germans since 1918 and reparation for all 
damage they have suffered thereby”; appointment 
of German state employees in all German districts; 
and full liberty for Germans to proclaim their Ger- 
manism and their adhesion to “the ideology of Ger- 
mans.”” In addition, Henlein demanded revision of 
Czechoslovakia’s foreign policy which, in his opin- 
ion, “has so far ranged this state on the side of the 
enemies of Germany” and created ‘‘a Slavic bulwark 
against the German Drang nach Osten.” 


While some of these demands might be met in 
modified form by the minority statute being prepared 
by the Prague government—which Henlein has re- 
jected in advance—their complete acceptance would 
involve the establishment on Czechoslovakia’s ter- 
ritory of a totalitarian “state within a state,” and 
force Czechoslovakia into the position of Germany's 
vassal. If Henlein, prodded from Berlin, continues 
to press his autonomy demands, Prague will be con- 
fronted with two equally dangefous alternatives. 
Bither the Prague government will sooner or later 
be driven by Czech public opinion to resist these de- 
mands, thus provoking an incident which would 
give Hitler the opportunity to intervene on the 
ground that “disorder” reigns in Czechoslovakia— 
as he did, entirely without justification, in the case of 
Austria; or else Prague must defer to British de- 
mands for further concessions to Henlein, only to 
face the “peaceful” solution of economic strangu- 
lation and gradual dismemberment by Germany and 
its satellites, Poland and Hungary. In neither eventu- 
ality has Czechoslovakia unequivocal assurances of 
aid from Britain, whose course will determine that 
of France. After what has happened to Austria, the 
only way to deter Germany is to confront Hitler with 
a threat of war which is not mere bluff or wishful 
thinking, but a determined intention backed with 





= Page Two —- 





——e, 


overwhelming force. Such an intention Britain and 
France have openly proclaimed in the West, but no 
in the East, where Czechoslovakia seems fated to 
play the réle of another Belgium. 

Under these circumstances, the strengthened 
London-Paris axis represents a contribution to Euro. 
pean peace only in the sense that it is the least of 
several evils. Now that the annexation of Austria 
and the Anglo-Italian deal have, for the time being, | 
ended hope of collective resistance to aggression 
on the basis anticipated in the League Covenant, that 
hope is being transferred to the London-Paris axis, 
which has undoubtedly achieved a far greater meas. 
ure of military and economic cohesion than the | 
League has ever possessed. The Anglo-French alli. 


ance, which gives Germany a taste of its own medi. 
cine, may temporarily check Nazi expansion. Or it 
may provoke the very explosion it was designed j 


prevent. Whatever its short-run results, the Anglo 


French alliance, like the Anglo-Italian deal, fails te}: 


remedy the fundamental problems which threaten to 
provoke war. The Western democracies are allied 
once more for the entirely legitimate but not exactly 
constructive purpose of protecting their own inter 
ests. This should be clearly understood so that, if 
war is precipitated by the new system of alliances and 
counter-alliances, it will be fought under its true 
colors, and not under the slogan of “collective se 
curity,” which Britain, France and the United States 
have all in various measure served to defeat. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BRITAIN STRENGTHENS THE HOME FRONT 

In his efforts simultaneously to reduce the possi- 
bilities of a European war and to increase the chances 
for British victory should such a war occur, Prime 


ques 
taile 


Minister Chamberlain has made rapid progress both 
at home and abroad. In addition to its deal wit 
Italy and its defensive alliance with France, the 
British government has settled its h i 12204 Poe 


with Ireland, underwritten its new rearmament pte 
gram with increased taxation, and purchased food 
supplies for emergency use. 

The new Anglo-Irish treaty, negotiated by Premier 
De Valera and Malcolm MacDonald, Secretary of 
State for the Dominions, was signed in London on 
April 25 for three years. It successfully disposes of 
every important bone of contention except the union 
of Northern Ireland with Eire.* The last vestige of 
British rule over Eire is removed by the transfer of 
three naval bases—at Bere Haven, Cobh, and Lough 
Swilly—to the Dublin government. Control of these 
ports had been retained by Britain under the treaty 
of 1921, which ended “the trouble” of 1919-1920 


**Britain and Eire Seek an Agreement,”’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, Janw 
ary 28, 1938. 


(Continued on Page 4) 


the 
min 
of a 


dud 


ew” ee ee Mi a 6=— si “Se , 





BB | 


d to 


ened 
ufo. 
t of 
Stria 
cing, 
$Sion 
that 
axis, 
neas- 

the 
alli. 
nedi- 
It it 
-d. to 
l glo. 
ils te 
en to 
illied 
actly 
inter: 
at, if 
s and 
true 
e Se 
States 


AN 


INT 


POSSI 
ances 
Prime 


hoth a 


with 
, ue 
arrel 
C pio 


food 


‘emief 
ry of 
on on 
ses of 
union 
ige of 
fer of 
Lough 
these 
treaty 
)-1920 


in, Janu 


Washington News Letter 

















, ——«, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


May 2—As the Senate debate on the Administra- 
tion’s $1,154,000,000 naval expansion program 
draws to a close, the persistent and elusive question 
of what the navy is for remains unanswered. The 
question has been asked repeatedly during the two 
weeks’ debate. It has been put in many different 
forms. Senator Vandenberg asked bluntly what had 
happened to change the defense needs of the nation 
between January 21 (when the House passed the 
egular naval appropriation bill granting $549,000,- 
00, the full amount asked by the Navy Depart- 
ment) and January 28, when the President sent his 
special rearmament message to Congress. Senator 
Borah, voicing his conviction that existing appropri- 
ations were entirely adequate for national defense, 
asked what foreign policy the new program was de- 
signed to support. Senators LaFollette, Bone, Nye, 
lundeen and a dozen others who spoke against the 
bill raised specific queries about the relation of the 
proposed increase to events in the Far East. But they 
drew no response. Apart from a blanket denial that 
the new program implies or permits aggressive poli- 
ties in Europe or Asia, the only reply from Senator 
Walsh, chairman of the Senate Naval Affairs Com- 
mittee, was a repetition of the justification cited in 
the President's message—the mounting armaments 
of other naval powers. 


Naval Bases Clue to Policy. While the pages of 
he Congressional Record were barren on the central 
questi £ policy, and official pronouncements 
failed to proclaim the purpose behind the expansion 
rogram, other sources were more revealing. During 
the week, as the Senate debate droned on, several 
minor clues were provided in the form of a series 
of additional requests for naval funds. These in- 
duded the following: 


. An authorization bill, reported favorably by the 
Senate and House Naval Affairs Committees on 
April 27, requesting over $28,000,000 for im- 
proving naval bases, airfields and ammunition 
dumps in the United States and certain overseas 
possessions. Among other expenditures are $12,- 
665,500 for the Pearl Harbor naval base, to 
provide additional seaplane facilities, a new 
graving drydock large enough to take the 45,000- 
ton super-battleships requested in the expansion 
bill, and additional ammunition storage facilities; 
$75,000 for the naval station at Guam and 





$720,000 for unspecified seaplane facilities in 
the “Fourteenth Naval District,” which embraces 
the Hawaiian Islands and also Midway Island, 
now used as a stepping-stone by Pan American 
Airways. An indication that the latter item may 
be used for a military-naval air base at Midway 
Island is found in the fact that army engineers 
have recently been sent to Midway to complete 
surveys for channel improvements required for a 
seaplane base. Another item is $5,000,000 for 
a new naval air station on Kodiak Island, off the 
coast of Alaska. 


2. A special message to Congress, signed by the 
President on April 28, transmitting supplemen- 
tary naval estimates totaling $25,597,000 for the 
fiscal year 1938. Among other items, the esti- 
mates call for $5,000,000 to begin construction 
of the first two 45,000-ton battleships—the third 
pair to be laid down since January 1937—and 
public works projects at navy yards. 


In these two supplementary measures alone, the 
projects authorized will cost something over $185,- 
000,000 before they are completed. What emerges, 
however, is an indication that the new navy is de- 
designed primarily to fortify the strategic position 
of the United States in the Pacific. The building-up 
of Hawaii, the construction of super-battleships, the 
projection of air bases at Midway and other small 
Pacific islands speak more convincingly than the 
Senate debate of the Administration’s determination 
to bolster American diplomacy by a navy which is a 
dominant factor in the Pacific area. 


Washington Studies Goering’s Decree. State 
Department officials are awaiting a full report from 
the American Embassy in Berlin before taking action 
on the decree issued on April 27 by Field Marshal 
Hermann Goering ordering all Jews to report their 
property in Germany. There is little doubt here that 
the decree will affect foreign Jews with property in 
the Reich, and that if it is enforced American citi- 
zens, along with those of other foreign states, will 
be involved. But officials are unwilling to comment 
on what action, if any, this government might take 
should the property of American nationals be con- 
fiscated or otherwise interfered with by the Third 
Reich. 

Meanwhile, President Roosevelt appointed Myron 
C. Taylor, former chairman of the United States 
Steel Corporation, as the American member of the 
inter-governmental committee recently organized to 

















aid the emigration of political refugees from Austria 


Page Four 








cancellation of the land annuities, and the retaliatory 








An ii 
and Germany. At the same time, the State Depart- duties with which the Irish counter-attacked. Eire jgqi?" 
ment announced an American National Committee brought within the framework of the Ottawa trade”; 
to cooperate in furthering the project in this country. agreements, receiving a free market for its agricul? 
The members of the committee include James G. tural products. By placing British coal on the free 
McDonald, former chairman of the Foreign Policy list and pledging a minimum duty of three shillings|r, 
Association and former High Commissioner for per ton on foreign coal, the Irish government in t¢|—— 


Refugees coming from Germany; Joseph P. Cham- 
berlain, of Columbia University; Samuel M. Cavert, 
General of the Federal Council of 
Churches; Paul Baerwald, chairman of the Ameri- 
can Joint Distribution Committee, and others. 
WILLIAM T. STONE 


BRITAIN STRENGTHENS THE HOME FRONT 
(Continued from Page 2) 


by giving the Irish Free State dominion status. The 
government of Eire is expected to provide new forti- 
fications for these ports, establish anti-aircraft and 
other coastal defenses, and create a small navy. The 
Chamberlain government is thus assured that no 
hostile European power will use an embittered Ire- 
land for attacking western England. 

Britain's surrender of its three treaty ports was 
purchased at a heavy price. The Irish government 
agrees both to pay £10,000,000 as a final settlement 
of the land annuities and to give up its costly efforts 
to secure economic self-sufficiency. The annual pay- 
ments of almost £5,000,000 to British bondholders 
who had financed the purchase of land by Irish 
tenant farmers were suspended by Premier De Valera 
in 1932. The Irish government further promises to 
continue until 1987 its annual payments of £250,- 
000 for damages done during ‘the trouble.” Per- 


turn guarantees a large market for one of Britain's 
most important export products. 

Although Mr. De Valera failed to achieve his 
major objective—the abolition of partition—he has 
cleared the way toward its ultimate accomplishment, 
The Chamberlain government is expected to bring 
pressure to bear on Viscount Craigavon, the Ulster 
Prime Minister, to increase the political rights of the 
Catholic minority in Northern Ireland. Another ap. 
peal for a united Ireland was made by De Valera 
when he secured the selection of Dr. Douglas Hyde, 


78-year old Protestant and leader in the revival of ~~ 


Gaelic, as first President of Eire under its new con- 
stitution. 


Additional warning to potential enemies that 


Britain's home front is being strengthened as rapidly |May 
as possible was contained in the budget message of |ende 
Sir John Simon, Chancellor of the Exchequer. Ad- |axis 
dressing the House of Commons on April 26, the |qeat 
Chancellor introduced the largest peace-time budget |Mar 


in British history, totaling well over £1,000,000,000, 


The regular defense appropriations are estimated |the | 
at £253,250,000, augmented by £90,000,000 to be/mre. 
raised by borrowings and probable supplementary |apr 


appropriations of over £10,000,000 later in the year. 


To provide additional revenue, the government pro- |iern: 


poses to increase the basic income tax from 25 to}that 
2714 per cent, the highest rate since the immediate |friet 
post-war period. Increased taxes will be imposed on|Min 


haps the most important aspect of the new treaty is 
termination of the tariff war which has raged since 
1932. The new agreement ends both the punitive 





duties with which the British answered De Valera’s _tea, gasoline, and oil. James FREDERICK GREEN ihe | 
; (atic 
Con 

The F.D.A. Bookshelf Ron 


The German Octopus, by Henry C. Wolfe. 
Doubleday, Doran, 1938. $2.50 
An excellent popular account of the progress and pros- 
pects of Nazi expansion in near-by countries, by a journal- 
ist who is well acquainted with Eastern and Central 


Garden City, covered many highlights of the past decade’s news. His T 
comments on international radio propaganda in Europe disp 


are especially interesting. 


Japanese Expansion on the Asiatic Continent, by Yoshi 8. |ene 





Europe. The author focusses his attention on conditions 
in the countries which lie in Germany’s path, rather than 
on internal German developments. 


Hello America! by César Saerchinger. 
ton, Mifflin, 1938. $3.50 


An interesting, anecdotal account of the first years of 
international radio broadcasting, by the former European 
representative of the Columbia Broadcasting System. 
Saerchinger led such notables as King Edward, G. B. 


New York, Hough- 


Kuno. Berkeley, University of California Press, 1937 
$4.00 


"| the 


This first volume of a projected trilogy on Japan’s con- ‘on 


tinental expansion covers events to the end of the 16th 
century, when Hideyoshi invaded Korea at the head of & 
vast Japanese army. Careful use of first-hand materials, 
with full translations of key documents from Japanese, 
Chinese and Korean sources, makes it the outstanding 
work of scholarship in this field. The second volume will 


cover the Tokugawa Shogunate; and the last, events since of | 





Shaw, Ghandi and Haile Selassie to the microphone and the Restoration of 1868. alm 
ma! 

FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 28, May 6, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National Da 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lestig Busi, President; Vera Micnetes Dean, Editor. Entered as second-class mattet |~~ 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. stri 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year dus 





