————r 
cn 


fective 
Soviet 
ver its 
ssisted 
- Man- 
llurgi- 
berian 
similar 
tate of 


ships 
18 the 
n had 
in ex- 
British 
sion of 
uation, 
ng the 
ermany 
yo has 
intern 
‘allies’ 
lates — 


—is en- 
narging 
a. How 
» action 
y again 
ities of 
Ssisting 
yy send- 
t, as in 


ISSON 


' Charles 
ro Press, 


problems 
te inter- 
vater re- 
of popu- 


ew York, 


leader of 
sanctions 
37 on be- 
th many 
*, Musso- 
eloquent 
acifism. 


National 


Editor. 


BAN, 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vov. XVIII, No. 8 DECEMBER 16, 1938 


F.P.A. Christmas Suggestion 


REGULAR MEMBERSHIP $5 ASSOCIATE MEMBERSHIP $3 


A distinctive gift which your friends will appre- 
ciate throughout the coming year. An attractive 


Christmas Greeting card will announce your gift. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December’ 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


FRANCE RIDES OUT FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC STORMS 


a vote of confidence given Premier Daladier 

by the French Chamber of Deputies on Decem- 
ber 10 concludes a memorable fortnight in the 
foreign and domestic affairs of France. Sustained by 
315 Radical Socialists and Rightists who were op- 
posed by 241 Left-wingers, M. Daladier is now 
free for an indefinite period to pursue the policies 
he has formulated since the Czech crisis. Foremost 
among these policies are appeasement of the Third 
Reich, defense and development of the French 
colonial empire, and domestic recovery and rearma- 
ment under the decree-laws of Finance Minister 
Paul Reynaud.* 

The French effort to emulate Britain in securing 
tangible expression of Hitler's pacific intentions in 
Western Europe was crowned with success on De- 
cember 6, when the German Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, Joachim von Ribbentrop, and the French 
Foreign Minister, Georges Bonnet, signed a vague 
declaration of amity. The two Ministers, received 
in stony silence by a skeptical Paris crowd, declared 
that their governments “share fully the conviction 
that pacific and good neighborly relations between 
France and Germany constitute one of the essential 
elements in the consolidation of the situation in Eu- 
rope and the maintenance of general peace.’’ In the 
sole concrete stipulation of the accord, they re- 
affirmed Hitler’s pledge to ‘recognize as definitive” 
the existing Franco-German frontier. Some observers 
regarded the statement that “no question of a terri- 
torial order remains in suspense’ between the two 
powers as an indication that Germany had agreed 
not to press its colonial claims against France, pro- 
vided the Quai d’Orsay did not attempt to restrain 
Germany in its program of eastward expansion. To 
dispel the suspicion that their declaration might im- 
pair the validity of such basic instruments as the 


**’ Another 


French Recovery Program,"’ 
2 10 
18, 1938 


Foreign Policy Bulletin, November 


Rome-Berlin axis and the French alliances, the two 
nations reserved their “special relations with third 
party powers. 

Despite the purely symbolic value of the agree- 
ment, there was some anxiety in London that 
France’s rapprochement with Hitler might free it 
from its dependence on close cooperation with the 
British. At home, however, M. Daladier appeared 
to have won prestige by extricating his country from 
the virtual isolation to which it appeared condemned 
by its estrangement from the U.S.S.R., the Anglo- 
German non-aggression declaration and the Anglo- 
Italian accord. Improved relations with Germany 
were especially welcome at a moment when Musso- 
lini was demonstratively reviving Italy's grandiose 
imperial claims. The Italian revisionist demands — 
expressed by frenzied shouts for Tunis, Corsica, Nice 
and Savoy in the Italian Chamber of Deputies on 
November 30, and supported by a vigorous press 
campaign—were met by strong French protests and 
an absolute refusal to consider the cession of any 
French territory. Counter-demonstrations of loyalty 
were reported in Tunis and Corsica. 


The orientation of the Italian press would indicate 
that Mussolini at the moment has no serious designs 
on these areas. His principal objective is to obtain 
the greatest possible number of concessions from 
the French in exchange for a Franco-Italian accord. 
Il Duce desires recognition of the belligerent status 
of General Franco in Spain; cession by France to 
Italy of the Djibouti railway, connecting Addis 
Ababa with the sea, and possibly of French Somali- 
land; reduction of Suez Canal tolls, which have 
proved a burden on Italian trade with East Africa, 
accompanied by increased Italian participation in 
the Canal Company; and additional minority rights 
for the 94,000 Italians who, with 108,000 French 
inhabitants, constitute the European population of 


ha 
ie 

‘i 

- 


Ss Sut & Sew TSe ee 


Tunis. Italy's hopes depend on the degree of sup- 
port which Mussolini may expect from the Reich; 
but such assistance has not yet been openly given by 
Berlin. Possibly the Nazis, recalling Mussolini’s 
hesitant attitude in the Czechoslovak crisis, are 
determined to repay Italy in its own coin. On the 
other hand, it is conceivable that the Italian demands 
represent a concerted maneuver by the axis powers, 
designed to postpone that general appeasement in 
Western Europe which would necessitate relinquish- 
ment of German and Italian claims against Britain 
and France. 


French unity in the face of the Italian manifesta- 
tions was not duplicated on the home front, where 
the General Confederation of Labor called a 24- 
hour general strike for November 30 in protest 
against the Reynaud economic decrees. Regarding 
the strike as an illegal political weapon directed 
against its very existence, the Daladier government 
responded by requisitioning the railroads and other 
public services under military law—a move which 
subjected all strikers operating these services to 
discipline by court-martial. Reports of the number 
who struck vary considerably, but it seems clear that 
even in private industry the percentage of strikers 
did not exceed 25 to 50 per cent. Until December 5, 
however, the general stoppage paralyzed activity in 
many fields. Both the government in its nationalized 
airplane factories and private employers seized the 
opportunity to purge their plants of aggressive labor 
leadership by re-hiring workers on an individual 
basis. This maneuver gave rise to numerous protest 
strikes which gradually subsided until, on Decem- 
ber 10, the serious tie-up of maritime workers at Le 
Havre was brought to a close. 


There is little to be gained by debating the ques- 
tion whether the strike was a failure or a success. 
On the labor side, it was argued that the Reynaud 
decrees largely negated the gains achieved by the 
_ first Popular Front government in 1936 without de- 
manding commensurate sacrifices on the part of 
French industrialists. Left-wing groups also claimed 
that Daladier broke his promise to call Parliament 
into session as soon as the decrees were announced, 
and that he acted illegally by requisitioning public 
services without consulting the full Cabinet. It re- 
mains doubtful, however, whether a general strike 
constituted the appropriate response to M. Dala- 
dier’s actions. The general strike is a revolutionary 
procedure, which a liberal democratic government 
must regard as a challenge to its authority. By com- 
bating it, the government has succeeded in discredit- 
ing and weakening the French labor leadership to a 
degree not yet clearly ascertainable. But its severe 
reprisals have also alienated its Left and Center 
supporters in the Chamber. If it pursues the 


Page Two —. 


course already foreshadowed by Premier Daladier’s 
strictures, and embarks on am anti-Communist cam- 


paign, it may travel a path not easily distinguishable 
from the road to dictatorship. payip H. Popper 


NAZIS GAIN AND LOSE IN EAST EUROPE 
The shooting of Corneliu Zelea Codreanu and 


thirteen other leaders of his Rumanian Fascist Iron 
Guard “while trying to escape’ on November 30 
represented a bold attempt by King Carol to stamp 
out the movement and stave off a Nazi revolution 
which might strengthen Germany's control over the 
country. The Guard, which had lapsed into 
quiescence after Codreanu’s imprisonment last May | 
for conspiring with German Nazis, had renewed its 
campaign of terror in November. After several 
bombing attempts, three Iron Guard students on 
November 28 shot Professor Stefanescu Goanga, 
rector of the University of Cluj, who had attacked 
the Guard in a speech the week before. On the fol- 
lowing day, identical threats of death were sent to 
the Governors of Cluj and Cernauti, similar to those 
which the Iron Guard had frequently made — and 
carried out — in the past. Shortly afterward, assas- 
sins attempted to “execute” the president of a mili- 
tary court which had sentenced seventy-two Guard- 
ists to prison. The government announced that it 
would answer the shooting of Goanga by destroying 
the organization completely. The police arrested 
about 2,000 Fascists; Cluj was placed under mili- 
tary rule; General Ion Antonescu, an outspoken 
sympathizer of the Guard, was removed from his 
post; and Codreanu and his lieutenants were shot. 
On December 3 the three students who had attacked 
Professor Goanga met the same fate. By killing the 
Iron Guard's leaders and cutting communications 
between its local groups, the government has appar- 
ently paralyzed the movement for the time being. 

As a result of the predominant position in Eastern 
Europe which Germany won at Munich, however, 
Carol’s ruthless destruction of his Fascist opponents 
may prove to have been a Pyrrhic victory. The 
Munich accord robbed Rumania’s military alliances 
of their effectiveness, placed Slovakia and Ruthenia 
under German influence, and heightened the danger 
that Rumania might have to cede territory to Hungary 
or Bulgaria. Moreover, it led to an increase of Ru- 
mania’s economic dependence on the Third Reich, 
which in 1937 took 27 per cent of Rumania’s ex- 
ports and supplied 28 per cent of its imports. In 
October the German Minister of Economics, Dr. 
Funk, visited Bucharest, and on December 10 repre- 
sentatives of the two governments initialed a new 
trade agreement which seemed likely to develop their 
reciprocal trade still further. 


(Continued on Page 4) 


———___ 
$$ 


adier’s 
st cam- 
ishable 


>PER 


OPE 


lu and 
st Iron 
ber 30 
stamp 
olution 
yer the 
| into 
st May 
ved its 
several 
nts on 
oanga, 
tacked 
he fol- 
sent to 
) those 
— and 

assas- 
a mili- 
Guard- 
that it 
froying 
rrested 
r mili- 
spoken 
om his 
e shot. 
ttacked 
ing the 
cations 
appar- 
being. 
Eastern 
ywever, 
soOnents 
y. The 
liances 
uthenia 
danger 
ungary 
of Ru- 
Reich, 
ia’s @X- 
rts. In 
cs, Dr. 
) repre- 
a new 
yp their 


Washin gton News Letter 


vibes, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Dec. 12.—During the past few days Washington 
observers have encountered a new note of modera- 
tion and restraint in official utterances relating to 
national defense and Pan-American unity. There is 
still much loose talk and loose thinking on both of 
these central themes, and reports of a two-billion- 
dollar armament budget and 10,000 airplanes per- 
sist in some quarters. But for almost the first time 
since Munich, there is evidence of a restraining 
hand. 


Two Significant Denials. The first intimation 
of this restraining hand came from President Roose- 
velt a few hours after his return from Warm Springs 
last week. In answer to questions at his press con- 
ference on December 7, Mr. Roosevelt denied em- 
phatically that ‘‘pump-priming’’ or economic recov- 
ery would have any part in the new armament 
program which will be sent to Congress next 
month. The defense program, he asserted, would be 
confined to defense projects and nothing else, and 
the expenditures for increased armament would be 
placed as far as possible on a “pay-as-you-go” basis. 


The second indication of restraint came on the 
eve of the opening session of the Eighth Pan- 
American Conference at Lima, in the form of a 
broadcast by Assistant Secretary of State Adolf A. 
Berle, Jr. In a carefully worded statement, Mr. Berle 
declared that the United States had no thought of 
“proposing a military alliance’’ among the nations 
of the Western Hemisphere. “It is perfectly plain,” 
he added, ‘‘that the American continent does not 
feel that a system of military alliances is needed” 
for the defense of the New World. 


The occasion for these two denials was not the 
same. Mr. Roosevelt was seeking to check an under- 
current of opposition to some aspects of the rearma- 
ment program in Washington, while Mr. Berle was 
striving to reassure several doubtful Latin Ameri- 
can delegations at Lima. But both statements served 
the purpose of curbing the activities of certain ele- 
ments in the Administration, whose enthusiasm for 
hemispheric defense had almost upset the applecart. 


For several months, some of the President's ad- 
visers had been trying to harness the New Deal 
spending program to the chariot of national defense. 
That they had achieved some measure of success 
was indicated by the nature of some of the “de- 
fense” projects which received wide publicity, such 


as the granting of federal aid to public utilities, 
rehabilitation of the railroads and other industrial 
projects. But that their zeal had carried them a little 
too far was evident from the reaction in other quar- 
ters in Washington. 


Rumblings. Rumblings began to be heard on 
Capitol Hill some two weeks ago. Returning Sena- 
tors and Congressmen were prepared to vote for 
increased appropriations for the army and navy, but 
they were suspicious of spending for other purposes. 
Last week it became quite apparent that the reac- 
tion was taking form in a move to scrutinize the 
President's national defense program closely. If the 
program should call for a huge lump-sum appropri- 
ation to be spent on industrial preparedness, or even 
earmarked appropriations for power projects and 
railroads, it seemed certain to encounter vigorous 
Opposition. 

Other rumblings have been heard in the War 
Department. The coordination of work on the 
armament program centers largely in the office of 
Louis Johnson, Assistant Secretary of War, who is 
in charge of the industrial mobilization plan. Con- 
ferences on the program have brought in Harry 
Hopkins, WPA Administrator, Aubrey Williams, 
Deputy Administrator of the WPA, “Tommy” Cor- 
coran, and many others. Curiously enough, how- 
ever, General Malin Craig, Chief of Staff of the 
Army, has been conspicuously absent from most of 
these discussions, and apparently has not been con- 
sulted on many phases of the proposed program. 

Those who have sounded professional military 
and naval opinion have been struck by the modera- 
tion of their demands. The army wants modern 
equipment in rifles, anti-aircraft guns, artillery and 
other matériel, but most staff officers regard Louis 
Johnson’s talk of 10,000 airplanes as “fantastic,” 
and they are in no hurry to rush into a vast indus- 
trial mobilization scheme which is unnecessary for 
continental defense. The navy wants to proceed in 
an orderly fashion with its present building pro- 
gram, particularly in destroyers and small auxil- 
iaries. It is opposed to a “‘two-ocean” navy,.and it 
needs no new authorizations beyond the Vinson 
Act—which cannot be completed before 1945 at 
the earliest. 


If the President's reassuring words mean that the 
plans for pump-priming through armaments have 
been abandoned, there need be no further talk of 
two or three billion dollars for defense. And if Mr. 


ae 


—— eg oe 


+ 


fares 


Pz 


iy 
; 


Se Foueree on 


3 


a 
Sage tae 


a 


Berle’s denial is accepted, the fear that this country 
will use Pan-American solidarity as a cloak for its 
own brand of imperialism should be dispelled. Re- 
ports from Lima indicate that such fears exist, and 
that Argentina, with its close ties to Europe, will not 
sign any exclusive pledge of loyalty to the New 
World if this means turning its back on the Old 
World. Moderation and restraint, as evidenced 
again in Secretary Hull’s opening speech at Lima, 
are more effective than ballyhoo as methods of 
achieving an end. W. T. STONE 


NAZIS GAIN AND LOSE IN EAST EUROPE 
(Continued from Page 2) 


The German government answered the “‘liquida- 
tion’” of Codreanu by sharp press attacks and the 
temporary recall of its Minister, Dr. Fabricius, from 
Bucharest. This reaction in Berlin raised the ques- 
tion whether Carol had not so antagonized the Nazi 
régime as to increase Rumania’s external dangers. 
In any case, the move can hardly save him from the 
necessity of making considerable concessions in ac- 
cordance with whatever new plans Germany may 
propose for Southeastern Europe. 

Differing reactions to the Third Reich’s growing 
strength were expressed by the elections of Decem- 


Page Four —. 


ber 11 in Yugoslavia and Memel. In Yugoslavia, the 
government of Premier Stoyadinovitch, who has fol- 
lowed a policy of friendship with Germany and Italy, 
won 59 per cent of the votes. Dr. Matchek, the Croat 
leader, who ran on a platform of greater local au- 
tonomy, won a strong majority in Croatia, but ob- 
tained only 40 per cent in the country as a whole. 
In elections for the Diet of the semi-autonomous 
territory of Memel which Lithuania obtained from 
Germany after the war, the German party announced 
its adherence to National Socialist principles. After 
winning a smashing victory, it demanded full au- 
tonomy as a minimum concession, and ousted Lithu- 
anian police from the territory. The Reich has not 
indicated whether it will demand cession or full 
autonomy for Memel. Although Britain and France 
on December 12 asked Hitler to respect the existing 
treaty, they showed no intention of taking steps to 
restrain him. Since Lithuania, with a population of 
only 2,500,000, could hardly offer effective resistance 
to Germany, Hitler can probably bring about an 
Anschluss with the Memel Germans whenever he 
reaches the necessary agreements with Poland. 


PAUL B. TAYLOR 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Seven Shifts, edited by Jack Common. New York, Dutton, 
1938. $2.50 
Seven British workmen describe their daily activities— 
at steel mills, gas works, blast furnaces, etc.—in informal 
and forceful style. Their forthright discussions of work- 
ing conditions, unemployment, and housing deserve atten- 
tion from any one interested in labor and social problems. 


Dom Pedro the Magnanimous, by Mary W. Williams. 
Chapel Hill, N. C., University of North Carolina Press, 
1937. $3.50 
This book presents the results of considerable research 

in the life of Brazil’s last emperor. The volume focuses 

on personal biography, somewhat to the neglect of the 
broad economic and social currents shaping the Emperor’s 
public career. 


Limits of Land Settlement: A Report on Present-day 
Possibilities, by Isaiah Bowman and others. New York, 
Council on Foreign Relations, 1937. $3.50 
This expert study of the world’s comparatively unde- 

veloped areas demonstrates conclusively that we need not 
expect a recrudescence of the mass migration movements 
which ceased at the outbreak of the World War. Since 
most of the pioneer lands that remain are marginal in 
climate, fertility and transport, large-scale colonization 
offers little hope for the overpopulated countries or for 
political refugees. 


International Law, a treatise, by L. Oppenheim. Volume I, 
Peace. Fifth edition, edited by H. Lauterpacht. New 
York, Longmans, Green, 1937. $16.00 
An able revision of a standard English treatise in in- 

ternational law. The flood of events in international poli- 

tics since the last edition of this volume, in 1928, has ac- 
cumulated many new legal precedents and made this re- 
vision necessary. 


Italy’s Foreign and Colonial Policy, by Maxwell H. H. 
Macartney and Paul Cremona. New York, Oxford, 1938. 
$3.00 


An able and objective analysis by the Rome correspon- 
dents of the London Times and the Christian Science Mon- 
itor, who believe that the road to empire chosen by Musso- 
lini must lead to a conflict with Britain over the issue of 
supremacy in the Mediterranean. 


Blood and Steel: The Rise of the House of Krupp, by 
Bernhard Menne. New York, Lee Furman, 1938. $3.00 
A history of the Krupps.and their iron factories, from 

the 16th to the 20th centuries, written by a former em- 
ployee. Vividly told and illustrated, it presents a con- 
vineing account of the influence wielded by the Krupp 
family in German affairs and European politics, and of 
the profits made in peace and war. Although one-sided, it 
is useful as a study of both modern industrialism and the 
international munitions trade. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 8, December 16, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesiig BueLt, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


es 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


FO 


An in 


Decem 


