Cabinet | 
rt to pai 
Proposal 
ent in hj 
) longer j 
luntly 

ed. by th 
ign affain 
NCE to the 


also hay 
to be ef. 


; Proposes 
unwilli 

iew of the 
fay, whe 
on. Aboy 
* financial 
affairs jp 
increasing 
uinery, the 
rench over 
otherwise 
of author. 


LMOng the | 


HADSEL 


d A. Fite 
e, McGraw 


1 for train. 
nents’ side, 
} much-dis- 


vipelago, by 
University 


ial and po 
d scholarly 
2 Japanese 


t L. Moore. 
. $2.50 
ternational 
Ary apper- 
terials, the 
ces. 


yy, by J. 8. 
0 


with ad- 
in the light 
ic analysis 
nd to give 


ed. National 
or. Envered # 
allow at leas 


Wier va 


PCR IR At wut m 


sep 1 4 tHe 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


PERIGBEAL Room 
@ONHRAL ) eR AP’ 


University of Wich: 
wssty Of Uichizan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 


FOREIGN 


POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, ‘No. 17 


Fapruary 8, 1946 


UNITY AGREEMENT OPENS UP HOPEFUL PROSPECT FOR CHINA 


= Chinese New Year, which begins later than 
our own, beneath the watchful eyes of swaying 
dragons and to the sound of exploding firecrackers, 
today finds China at peace for the first time in sev- 
eral decades. The Japanese have been beaten, the 
warlords are silent, and the forces of the Kuomin- 
tang and the Communists have ceased fire under an 
armistice which it is now the task of the Chinese 
people to make permanent. The possibility that the 
trace will actually be a lasting one has, in fact, be- 
come brighter since January 31, when the Political 
Consultation Conference in Chungking issued a far- 
reaching unity agreement drawn up by representa- 
tives of the main elements in Chinese political life: 
the Kuomintang, Communists, Democratic League, 
and various liberal and non-partisan figures. 


DEMOCRATIC VICTORY. The contents of the 
accord are complex, and some questions about the 
apportionment of governmental posts among the 
several parties must still be settled. But the main 
feature of the agreement is that it represents a sub- 
stantial victory for the idea of democracy and unity 
in China’s national life by providing for the crea- 
tion of a transitional coalition government at an early 
date, its later replacement by a wholly constitutional 
administration, the reorganization and nationaliza- 
tion of China’s party armies, and the separation of 
military and political affairs. It also contains a high- 
ly significant “‘program for peaceful national recon- 
struction,” guaranteeing civil liberties, expressing 
friendship toward the United States, the Soviet Union 
and other countries, and announcing plans for 
agrarian, industrial and educational reforms. 

The agreement embodies the view of the Com- 
Munists and the liberal Democratic League that a 
coalition government should be created as a prelude 
to military unification. Its clauses on the powers of 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


the provinces also seem to assure the Communists 
that their local administrations will not be destroyed, 
although they will have to be coordinated with a 
national administration. Various other provisions for 
modification of the Kuomintang-proposed Draft 
Constitution alter that document considerably, in- 
corporating in it for the first time the outline of a 
genuine parliament and creating the possibility that 
it will contain unqualified guarantees of civil liberties. 

It should not be thought, however, that the new 
pact simply contains concessions by the Kuomintang, 
for the voting arrangements and numerical repre- 
sentation of the parties in various parts of the gov- 
ernment—including the State Council, which is to be 
the main organ of the temporary pre-constitutional 
régime—all favor the Kuomintang. The Communists 
had originally proposed that the Kuomintang have 
no more than one-third of the seats in the State 
Council, but the actual figure will be one-half, with 
the rest distributed among various. non-Kuomin- 
tang groups and individuals. The Kuomintang is also 
favored under the arrangements for nationalization 
of the armed forces, since its troops are to be reduced 
to 90 divisions and the Communist forces to 20 di- 
visions, preparatory to consolidation. 


MANY OBSTACLES REMAIN. The unity agree- 
ment, of course, is still no more than a document, 
with innumerable obstacles in the way of its fulfill- 
ment, but even as a verbal accord it goes beyond 
previous understandings between the Kuomintang 
and the Communists in that the two parties for the 
first time have agreed to share power in a united 
national government. It is worth recalling that the 
first Kuomintang-Communist united front of 1924-27 
broke down precisely at the point when power had 
to be shared on a national scale, and that in the 
second period of unity, during the recent war with 


oe 


. pewe®, ent te a? Gr aw. 0. o 


ime 


e 


-_ 


Japan, Chungking and Yenan maintained separate 
governments, armies and territories. The present ac- 
cord therefore represents an attempt to carry China 
to a higher level of unified development than it has 
hitherto reached. If successful, it will initiate an en- 
tirely new stage in China’s national life. 


The fact that the agreement has an immediate 
political significance is indicated by reports from 
Chungking that extreme Right-wing elements in the 
Kuomintang are expressing dissatisfaction. It is also 
noteworthy that independent newspapers in the 
Chinese capital, encouraged by the government's 
pledges of democracy and by the development of a 
freer intellectual atmosphere, are beginning to ex- 
press themselves more outspokenly than heretofore. 
One of the promising developments of recent weeks 
has been the strengthening of the position of China's 
liberal groups, which may be expected to grow con- 
siderably if the country really enters a period of co- 
alition government and constitutionalism. Especially 
striking was the action of Democratic League repre- 
sentatives in the Political Consultative Council, who 
walked out of the sessions at one point because 
police had searched the home of Huang Yen-pei, a 
League delegate. 


U.S. POLICY IN CHINA. There is no room for 
doubt that the temper of the Chinese people has 
proved a more powerful force for civil peace than 
many observers anticipated. The modification of 
United States policy, following the resignation of 
Ambassador Hurley and the appointment of General 


LATIN AMERICA WANTS U.S. ECONOMIC AID—FEARS INTERVENTION 


A remark casually dropped by Presidential candi- 
date Juan Perén to an American newspaperman on 
January 30 contained the third important accusation 
of United States interference with the processes of 
government in Latin American countries to be made 
in recent months. Perén’s statement linking the 
United States Embassy in Buenos Aires with the 
smuggling of arms to the Argentine opposition was 
only slightly less direct than that of the Mexican 
labor leader, Vicente Lombardo Toledano, who on 
December 16 accused United States business in- 
terests of running guns across the border to support- 
ers of Presidential candidate Ezequiel Padilla. In 
Brazil—also just before national elections were to 
be held—Ambassador Adolf Berle’s September 29 
speech, urging that elections be held as scheduled 
before the drafting of a new constitution, was con- 
sidered responsible by some sectors of Leftist opin- 
ion for the military coup which overturned Vargas. 
The content of these charges is not important. The 
charges themselves are significant, however, because 
they prove that a deep-seated suspicion of the United 
States still exists in greater or less degree throughout 
Latin America. It is still good campaign tactics to 


Page Two 


———— 


Marshall as a special envoy to China, has also beep 
of great value in halting recent civil strife—so much 
so that one is led to wonder whether the agreement 
of January 31 might not have been reached on sey. 
eral other occasions—for example, in the fall of 1944 
when the Japanese were approaching Kweiyang oy 
during the conversations between Chiang Kai-shek 
and the Communist leader, Mao Tse-tung, last au. 
tumn in Chungking. Although it is good to know 
that our influence has played an important part ip 
bringing about Chinese unity, it is also sobering to 
realize that this unity might have existed six months 
or a year ago, if some of the features of our current 
policy toward China had developed earlier. 

From the American point of view, one of the 
great advantages of the unity agreement is that it 
enables the United States to escape the danger of 
backing one side against another in China, and 
lessens the threat of our becoming embroiled with 
the Russians in that part of the world. There is, of 
course, no guarantee that the agreement will work, 
and it certainly is not realistic to suppose that China’s 
parties can avoid engaging in the sharpest kind of 
political competition in the years ahead. What is of 
concern to the Chinese people and the rest of us is 
that this competition be carried on by peaceful, not 
warlike, methods. We can make a continuing con- 
tribution in that direction by maintaining and devel. 
oping the middle ground policy toward which we 
have recently moved in China, while extending eco- 
nomic aid for that country’s long-term reconstruction. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


raise the cry of “Yankee imperialism,” and political. 
ly unwise for a rising Latin American statesman to 
become too closely identified with Washington poli- 


— 
services 
tion but 
may me 
denc 
jcan COU 
of a col 
ence in 
Chile’ 
at pres¢ 
catty €C 
lack of 
extreme 
Chile p: 
in Latir 
on one | 
This si 
wat pe! 
emmen 
finance 
the dev 
port Ba 
toward 
ward t 
services 
Washit 
on cop 
duced 
market 
Chileas 
three y 
for all 
ECO 
The ct 
lence, 
flects 
larly, 
harsh; 


cies. The mere fact that Perén made such an accuse 
tion—regardless of its truth or falsity—is evidence 
of the extent to which this country, in spite of its 
well-intentioned attempts to adhere to a strict policy 
of nonintervention, influences political developments 
below the border. 4 
THE “A.B.C.” COUNTRIES. It is not surprising 
that the Central American and Caribbean countries 
should accuse the United States of undue influence in 
their internal affairs. That similar resentment has 
been voiced in Argentina and Brazil, and is latent in 
Chile, is an understandable corollary of the new pre- 
ponderant role of the United States in the southem 
part of the continent. Brazil and Chile have not yet 
perhaps grasped the full implications of the changes 
the war effected in their economies and, as a matter 
of fact, may not be convinced that these changes f¢ 
quire a permanent reorientation of their foreign com 
merce, which before the war was divided between 


which 
strike 
lost tk 
Leftist 
The m 
Rios a 
annou 
tions 
ment. 
with | 
has, | 
clalist 
tion ¢ 
gener; 

Thi 


FOREIG 
Headqua 
second-c’ 
one mon 


Europe and the United States. These countries are 
eager to invite United States capital and technical | 


od 


—— 


also beep 
-SO much 
preement 
1 on sey. 


l of 1944 
‘iyang or 
Kai-shek 
_ last au 
to know 
t part in 
ering to 
kK months 
r current 


= of the 
s that it 
anger of 
ina, and 
led with 
sre is, of 
ill work, 
t China’s 
kind of 
hat is of 
of us is 
eful, not 
ing con- 
id devel. 
hich we 
ling eco- 
truction, 
INGER 


‘ION 

political. 
ssman to 
ton poll- 
1 accusa- 


evidence | 


te of its 
ct policy 


opments 


irprising 
countries 
uence in 
rent has 
latent in 
new pre- 
southern 
> not yet 
changes 
a matter 
inges fe 
ign com: 
between 
tries are 
echnical 


— 
services to assist in their programs of industrializa- 
tion but fearful of the extent to which such assistance 
may mean an abridgement of their political inde- 

dence. This familiar dilemma of the Latin Amer- 
ican countries is sharpened by the temporary absence 
of a counterpoise to United States economic influ- 
ence in the shape of European competition. 

Chile’s economic problem is particularly delicate 
at present because of the prevailing tendency to 
catty economic issues into the political arena, where 
lack of a strong moderating influence between the 
extreme Right and Left impedes a stable settlement. 
Chile provides one of the most spectacular instances 
in Latin American economic history of dependence 
on one or two exports—namely, nitrates and copper. 
This situation promises to continue into the post- 
wat period, for there are indications that the gov- 
emment is relying on export taxes partially to 
finance the loans extended by the United States for 
the development of new industries. The Export-Im- 

rt Bank has made available a credit of $5 million 
toward a public works program and $28 million to- 
watd the purchase of United States materials and 
services for a new steel plant at Concepcién. While 
Washington, in consideration of Chile’s dependence 
on copper exports, is continuing purchases on a re- 
duced scale, the permanent outlook for the copper 
market is uncertain. Even less clear is the future of 
Chilean nitrates, although during the next two or 
three years Chile is assured of a European market 
for all the fertilizer it can produce. 

ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BREED UNREST. 
The current wave of strikes, accompanied by vio- 
lence, in the nitrate, copper and coal industries re- 
fects prevailing economic insecurity and, particu- 
larly, the skyrocketing cost of living. In dealing 
harshly with the Chilean Confederation of Labor, 
which on January 29 called a general sympathy 
strike with the nitrate unions, the administration has 
lost the support of the “Democratic Alliance” of 
Leftist parties—successor to the old Popular Front. 
The moderate Radical party, to which both President 
Rios and Acting President Alfredo Duhalde belong, 
announced on February 1 that under present condi- 
tions it would refuse to cooperate with the govern- 
ment. A new government was formed on February 2 
with the participation of the Socialists. The crisis 
has, however, precipitated a split between the So- 
dialist and Communist factions in the Confedera- 
tion of Labor and, as a consequence, the proposed 
general strike failed. 

This situation has also exacerbated the sharp 


Page Three 


political division, chiefly on the question of national 
financial policy, between the Right and the Left. 
Unless the economic problem is constructively met, 
the possibility of a coup from either extreme must 
not be ruled out. In view of the Conservative gains 
in the Congressional elections of 1945 and the advo- 
cacy by some Conservative spokesmen of closer po- 
litical and economic relations with Argentina, it 
would not be surprising if the parties of the Right 
were to join forces with Chile’s young nationalists 
and with those elements in the army which are in 
intimate contact with the Argentine ‘colonels’ ”’ gov- 
ernment. It would not be the first time that a mili- 
tary dictatorship had followed in the wake of eco- 
nomic depression in Chile. 

In Brazil, where a new administration headed by 
General Eurico Gaspar Dutra took office on January 
31—the first such inauguration in twenty years—a 
fresh start toward solving economic and social prob- 
lems is being made under auspices that may prove 
as uncertain as in Chile. However, at least the 
peoples of Brazil and Chile are able to make their 
opinion known through the medium of free insti- 
tutions and popular elections. This cannot be said 
of Argentina, where the national elections scheduled 
for February 24, if held, threaten to be a mockery of 
the democratic process. 

Viewed in proper perspective, however, the ap- 
parent failure in Latin American nations of demo- 
cratic institutions as we know them in the United 
States need not be discouraging. Nor must the United 
States refrain from using its undeniable influence 
for the encouragement of democracy because the 
charge of intervention may be brought against it. 
If it is true that democracy cannot be imposed from 
the outside—and there are no indications that the 
United States proposes to do anything of this kind— 
it is also true that political, economic and cultural 
conditions which foster democracy remain to be 
achieved throughout Latin America. These nations 
should feel free to call on the United States, as the 
most advanced American power, to help them in 
creating the kind of environment in which democracy 


could develop. Outve HoLMES 


The Netherlands Indies and Japan — Battle on Paper, 
1940-1941, by Hubertus J. van Mook. New York, Norton, 
1944, $2.00 


A prominent Dutch colonial administrator defends the 
Dutch against charges that they failed to do what they 
could to defend the Netherlands Indies against Japan. The 
official texts of documents illustrative of Japanese attempts 
at commercial infiltration of the Indies add to the value 
of the book. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 17, Faemuary 8, 1946. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 Fast 38th Sereet, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MicHELEs Dgan, Editor. Entered as 


stcond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three 


oe month for change of address on membership publications. 


Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> 81 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


iu 


: 
H 
i 
| 
- 
td 
i 
4 
: 
e 
. 
; 
f 
if 


Washington News LE etter 


ATOMIC SCIENTISTS OPPOSE POLICY OF SECRECY ON BOMB 


In a letter of February 2 to Senator McMahon of 
Connecticut, chairman of the Senate’s Committee on 
Atomic Energy, President Truman expressed him- 
self in, favor of entrusting monopoly control of 
atomic energy to an exclusively civilian board, as 
proposed gn the McMahon bill (S.1717) for the do- 
mestic confrol and development of atomic energy. 
He suggested, however, that the board be composed 
of three, instead of five, members. 

Meanwhile, secrecy remains our policy while the 
Administration and Congress study the treatment of 
the bomb that would contribute most to general 
peace and our own security. This secrecy has two 
aspects. The Army keeps atomic data from United 
States scientists by “compartmentalization,” which 
means that scientists attached to one branch of 
bomb-development work do not obtain the know!l- 
edge of those attached to other branches. And the 
United States government keeps the data secret from 
other nations. After the Navy announced, on Janu- 
ary 24, that tests of the effect of the bomb on naval 
vessels would begin in May, Secretary of State James 
F. Byrnes told his press conference on January 29 
that he and President Truman had agreed that the 
governments represented on the United Nations 
Commission on Atomic Control should be invited to 
send observers. The House Naval Affairs Commit- 
tee, however, voted on January 30 to forbid the War 
and Navy Departments to disclose any data on the 
tests that would be “prejudicial” to United States 
interests. 

SCIENTISTS IN POLITICS. What we eventually 
decide about secrecy concerning the atomic bomb will 
depend on the recommendations of both the United 
Nations Commission, established on January 24, 
which has no power to force us to yield the secret, 
and the special Senate Committee on Atomic En- 
ergy, which resumed its hearings on January 16. 
Many of the physicists, doctors of medicine, en- 
gineers and other scientists who had a hand in the 
making of the bomb are fearful of the possible 
earth-shattering consequences of their own work, 
and have turned their attention to politics by pre- 
senting their views to the Senate Committee. To 
strengthen their influence as politicians, a number 
of them on December 18 founded the Federation of 
Atomic Scientists, whose opinions and findings are 
publicized through another group —the National 
Committee on Atomic Information. Both organiza- 
tions have their headquarters in Washington. 

The international concern of the members of the 


- Wallace, has openly opposed secrecy. On January 31 


i , 


Federation was voiced on January 26 by Dr. Harold 
C. Urey, physicist of the University of Chicago, who 
told the Women’s Patriotic Conference on National 
Defense in Washington that continued productiog 
of the bomb by the United States is one of the mos 
serious obstacles to world cooperation because jt 
breeds fear instead of the confidence required for an 
atmosphere of peace. Scientists in agreement with 
Urey advocate the establishment of a world gover. 
ment as the one means of preventing the disruption 
of civilization by the bomb they have devised. Wisely 
refraining from deprecating the usefulness of the 
United Nations, these politically minded scientists 
contend that, unless the world governs itself as 4 
whole, it may destroy itself. Yet proposals for world 
government, or even for some reduction of national 
sovereignty, meet with so much resistance both here 
and abroad that they cannot be regarded as immedi. 
ately practicable. 

The Senate Committee has asked the Federation 
of Atomic Scientists to prepare statements on two 
political problems growing out of the invention of 
the bomb—the technical feasibility of international 
control of atomic energy, and the steps the Federa- 
tion thinks should be taken to hasten adoption of 
international controls. The January 10 Bulletin of 
the Atomic Scientists of Chicago, reporting on the 
activities of the Federation, commented that “the 
longer the setting up and operation of an [interna- 
tional} inspection system is delayed, the more diff. 
cult it becomes to make the system effective.” 


DISAGREEMENT OVER SECRECY. The Atomic 
Scientists of Chicago also said that the maintenance 
of compartmental secrecy “prevents an integrated 
study of the technical feasibility of inspection.” One 
cabinet officer, Secretary of Commerce Henry A. 


he told the Senate Committee: “We must insist on 
following the fundamental precepts of scientific 
freedom—and avoid secrecy, suppression or com 
partmentalization of knowledge.” The men in charge 
of the Manhattan Projéct, which produced the bomb, 
are reluctant to release all available information 
among scientists until after security is assured. Still 
other scientists see security for all in the very ¢x- 
istence of the bomb. On December 3, 1945 Dr. Van- 
nevar Bush, director of the Office of Scientific Re- 


1918- 


= 
You. XX 


ECC 
sta 
food to 
than in 
man se 
tion pr 
to incr 
Judged 
country 
tion OU 
drastic. 
6,000,¢ 
six MO 
darker 
the m 
from 1 
to swe 
produc 
WH 
chief c 
dent’s 
despe: 
was n 
Last J 
) the P 


search of the Federal government, said: “I think the 
coming of the atomic bomb will stop great wars. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


