= 


auton 1 


bearings 


sermans 


that the | 


tories. 
ords the 
nations 
ve. The 
I, stated 
vent the 
' the use 
S$, Of, in 
se to an 
s neutral 
‘war ma- 


M is COM- 


1e United 
t countty 
» between 
at time to 
many for 
‘the 1943 
e Turkey, 
es of the 
‘ed States 
resources 
ndustrial- 


p its fac- \ 


y for ma- 
modities. 


ugh each 
d on neu- 
ight to re- 
he United 
ions from 
to comply 
e military 
m has fe 
. This has 
on of the 
ition indi- 
; note. On 


yndon that | 


exporting 
uiries this 


BOLLES 


NDS 


Geaeral Library 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


University of Michigan MAY 2 19M | 


Anna Arbor, Michtzan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


\ Vou. XXIII, No. 28 


APRIL 28, 1944 


W HEN the Dominion Prime Ministers gather in 
London early in May for their first meeting 
_ since 1937 they will find in Britain virtually com- 
plete agreement on the necessity of maintaining and 
strengthening the bonds of the British Common- 
wealth and Empire. This fact was clearly demon- 
strated during the Empire debate in the Commons 
on April 20 and 21 when Parliament—and then the 
: press—displayed a unity without example since 
Dunkirk. 

COMMONWEALTH AND WORLD ORDER. 
} Although Malcolm MacDonald, British High Com- 
missioner in Canada, had attacked the theory of pow- 
et blocs in Montreal on April 11, the Commons 
debate was in essence a discussion of the means by 


which Britain and the Dominions might pool their 
strength to balance the power of the United States 
| ot Russia. Prime Minister Churchill, refraining from 
any such comparisons as those made in recent months 
by Field Marshal Smuts and Viscount Halifax, as- 
sured the House, however, that he could see no in- 
compatibility between unity of the Commonwealth 
and a ‘fraternal association” of the British nations 
with the United States, and no threat to the Anglo- 
Russian 20-year alliance in such a British-American 
association. Nor could he see any inherent antagon- 
ism between Commonwealth unity and a system of 
collective security to which all nations would ad- 
| here. With such general principles, the Dominions 
| will readily agree, for they all desire the closest pos- 
sible collaboration of the Commonwealth with both 
the United States and the Soviet Union, and full 
participation as separate nations in an international 
organization. 

With the Prime Minister’s statement that the Com- 
monwealth and Empire were never more united than 
in this period of crisis, the Dominions can also agree 
in large part. But they may wonder how this im- 
perial sentiment is to be reconciled for long with 


| 


BRITAIN CALLS ON DOMINIONS FOR POST-WAR UNITY 


the growth of nationalism attendant upon their in- 
dividual war efforts. It is possible, of course, that 
membership in the Commonwealth will provide the 
surest guarantee of their national independence.. But 
it is difficult to see how this could be true if the price 
of Commonwealth unity is a common policy on eco- 
nomic and political affairs. Should British and Amer- 
ican interests diverge on a major question, Canada, 
for example, might face the choice of either break- 
ing with the Commonwealth or endangering rela- 
tions with the United States, neither of which it 
would wish to do. For this reason, Mr. Churchill's 
suggestion that machinery like the Committee of 
Imperial Defence be extended to the sphere of mati- 
time, economic and financial matters may be difficult 
to achieve. Australia and New Zealand, it is true, 
have already indicated their desire for such a change 
in the methods of consultation within the Common- 
wealth, and their desire to join in an Empire air 
system, but it seems certain that they will not gain 
Canada’s support for either proposal. If the United 
States should take part with the Commonwealth in 
joint British-American conferences, say in the south 
Pacific as suggested by Mr. Churchill, the possibility 
of disunity among the Dominions would, of course, 
be reduced. 

IMPERIAL PREFERENCES? But it is doubtful, 
in any case, if Canada will welcome the support 
given in the House of Commons to the perpetuation 
of imperial preferences. This subject, which will 
probably receive much attention when the Prime 
Ministers meet, illustrates the difficulties which will 
have to be faced in reconciling both the interests of 
Britain and the Dominions, and the interests of the 
Commonwealth and the United States. Since 1935 
the Dominions have not been as enthusiastic as they 
originally were about the preferential system set up 
at Ottawa in 1932, and Canadians in particular have 
recently been approaching the American position on 


/ 
| 
i 
H 


ee en ee 


———————— 


— 


the advantages of multilateral trade based on the 
principle of nondiscriminatory treatment. Although 
Australia and New Zealand will be less ready to 
abandon their preferred positions in the British 
market, it is unlikely that any of the Dominions 
will commit itself either way on maintenance of the 
Ottawa system until post-war markets in Europe, as 
well as the United States, can be more clearly fore- 
seen. 

The question of imperial preferences also raises a 
serious issue in Anglo-American relations. There 
is no occasion for surprise in Mr. Churchill’s an- 
nouncement that in the Atlantic Charter and Article 
VII of the Lend-Lease Agreement the British gov- 
ernment had committed neither the House of Com- 
mons nor the Dominions to the abrogation of im- 
perial preferences. But in view of the general poli- 
tical obligations assumed in Article VII by both 
Britain and the United States to seek agreed action 
directed “to the elimination of all forms of discrim- 
inatory treatment in international commerce, and to 
the reduction of tariffs and other trade barriers,” the 
general acceptance of imperial preferences during 
the Commons debate is not an encouraging omen for 
Anglo-American economic cooperation. It is only 
fair to say, however, that Congress has as yet given 
no indication that it is prepared to make substantial 
reductions in the American tariff and that, until the 
United States gives a lead, other nations are likely 


Page Two 


———., 
ee 


to adopt a defensive attitude. 


Mr. Churchill himself may have meant merely to 
make it clear before serious negotiations begin unde 
Article VII that his government expects a quid pro 
quo in terms of American tariff concessions in returp 


for any modification of imperial preferences. But if | 


this should not prove to be true, and Britain, with of 
without all the Dominions, decides—after the United 
States has offered a quid pro quo—that a preferep- 
tial system is essential to its needs, then it may be im. 
possible to reach agreement on commercial policy 
with the United States. For Britain would be main- 
taining the view—a view which was accepted reluc. 
tantly by the United States before the war—that 
preferences granted by itself or a Dominion to other 
parts of the Commonwealth need not be extended 
to foreign countries, although these countries may 
have by treaty the right to most-favored-nation treat. 
ment. As a British economist has written, this means 
that a Dominion is a separate country for purposes 


— —— - _—_— ink . pau 


of voting in an international organization “but for | 


tariff purposes the British Empire is a mystic unity 
confronting the rest of the world.” This is an inner 
contradiction in the British Commonwealth, apply- 
ing in the political as well as the economic field, for 
which an answer will have to be sought during the 
meeting of the Prime Ministers early next month. 


Howarpb P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN EUROPE REFLECT APPROACH OF INVASION 


Striking changes in the Allied air offensive against 
Germany during the past few weeks provides in- 
creased evidence, if it were needed, that the year- 
long campaign of strategic bombing may soon give 
way to invasion thrusts. As the concentrated attacks 
were being made on vital western railway junctions, 
the British Air Ministry and the United States Stra- 
tegic Air Forces issued a joint statement on April 23 
that the struggle against the Luftwaffe draws steadily 
to a close. During the past year, the RAF has con- 
centrated on larger industrial centers, while Amer- 
ican forces have attacked the more dispersed aircraft 
plants. The apparent stalemate on the Italian fronts 
was offset by indications that the formation of great 
air forces in that sector is now virtually complete. 
With these significant changes in western air war- 
fare came reports from Russia that new blows were 
in preparation there which would be joined with the 
coming invasion. The Russian armies have reached 
the German defensive positions from Poland south- 
ward along the Carpathian ranges and are dislodg- 
ing the remaining enemy forces from the Crimea. 

NEUTRALS REACT TO ALLIED PRESSURE. 
These and other anxiously awaited military events 
gave color and purpose to the many diplomatic 
moves of the week. Whether the developments came 


in the British Isles, in northern Europe or in Italy, 
all merged in the greater tasks foreshadowed by im- 
minent invasion. In addition to prohibiting any 
travel to neutral Eire, the British government an- 
nounced on April 17 that neutral diplomats were to 
be restricted in their travel within England, which 
has now become a virtual military preserve. The 


order went further by abrogating the ancient priv- | 


ileges respecting the immunity of the diplomatic 
mails of neutral representatives. Unprecedented as 


this action was, it brought almost universal approval. | 


Meanwhile, some neutral nations have yielded to 
Allied requests concerning their cooperation with 
Germany. In Turkey Foreign Minister Numan 
Menemencioglu announced on April 20 that chrome 
shipments to Germany—its most important source 
of this strategic metal—would be halted. Spain also 
found it expedient to consider restrictions on the 
activities of German agents within its borders. Swe- 
den, however, declined to suspend shipments of ball- 
bearings to Germany, pointing out that its 1943 
agreement with the Reich,* in which the British gov- 
ernment had originally acquiesced, must be honored. 
Sweden still lies within the geographic range of Get 
man military power, and has no desire to risk wat 


*See ‘“‘Washington News Letter,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, April 21, 194. 


merely to 
gin under 
quid pfo 
in return 
es. But if 
1, with or 
he United 
preferen. 
lay be im- 
ial policy 
be main- 
ted reluc. 
war—that 
1 to other 
extended 
tries may 
ion treat: 
his means 
purposes 
“but for 
Stic unity 
/ an inner 
h, apply- 
field, for 
uring the 
10nth. 


EN, JR. 


SION 
- in Italy, 
ed by im- 
iting any 
iment an- 
‘Ss were to 
id, which 
arve. The 
ient priv- 
liplomatic 
dented as 
approval. 
ielded to 
tion with 
Numan 
at chrome 


—— 


nt source | 


ypain also 
is on the 
Jers. Swe- 
ts of ball- 

its 1943 
ritish gov- 
- honored. 
ze of Ger- 
. risk wat 


\pril 21, 1944. 


— 
—_ 


now after avoiding it for nearly five years. 
FINLAND HEDGES FOR TIME. Having de- 


. layed negotiations with Russia for nearly three 
_ months, the Finnish government has apparently de- 


cided to gamble on the possibility of a better settle- 


, ment following the Allied invasion, and on April 23 


informed the nation that the Cabinet and Parliament 
had rejected Russian armistice terms a second time. 


, The chief obstacle, according to Helsinki, was the 


reparation terms set by the U.S.S.R. The Russians de- 
manded $600,000,000—a sum which, it is estimated, 
could be paid only if Finland turned over to Rus- 
sia all its exports for a period of five years. However, 
government circles in Finland are so committed to 


| German influence that they are probably unable to 


extricate themselves even if they wished to. Soviet 
Vice Foreign Commissar Andrei Y. Vishinsky, in his 
statement of April 22, said that the Finnish dele- 
gates who had met with Foreign Commissar V. 
Molotov in Moscow—removed as they were from 


’ Helsinki—had not objected to the reparation terms. 


That military strength would eventually determine 
the matter was also indicated by Mr. Vishinsky. The 
delay has, however, given the German forces ample 
time to withdraw to the south. Thus any possible 
clash of arms may well by-pass Finnish territories. 
The rejected Russian offer was couched in terms 
of respect for the Finnish people, but as the Euro- 
pean war moves to its climax the Finnish govern- 
ment can expect little further consideration from 
the U.S.S.R. 

POLITICAL SHIFT IN ITALY. During the past 
week Allied bombers operating from Italian bases 
and from Corsica smashed rail centers in southern 
and southeastern Europe in much the same fashion 
as the Allies had done in flights over Western 
Europe. In Italy, as elsewhere, political developments 
must be viewed within this larger military frame- 
work. The inclusion of the six anti-Fascist parties in 


Page Three 


What effect will the United States attitude toward 
lend-lease, foreign lending, the tariff and shipping 
have in influencing Britain’s post-war trade policy? 
READ— 
BRITAIN’S POST-WAR TRADE AND 
WORLD ECONOMY 


by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


FOREIGN PoLicy Reports, Volume XIX, No. 19 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


the Badoglio cabinet was a welcome step, which 
came only after much public criticism both in the 
United States and England. It is important for this 
reason, and although full representation of the 
Italian people has not been achieved—for one thing 
because Rome and northern Italy are still in German 
hands—there now appears to be a general willing- 
ness that the situation remain quiescent in view of 
the stupendous efforts which the invasion must neces- 
sarily entail. Henceforth, judgments on matters of 
political policy, including the arrangements for lib- 
erated areas, will be sobered judgments indeed. All 
else pales in significance in view of the inevitable 
casualties and sacrifices our armies will face when 
the initial attacks begin on Hitler's fortress from 
the west, the south and the east. 
GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


The Curtain Rises, by Quentin Reynolds. New York, Ran- 
dom House, 1944. $2.75 
Even those who carp at the projection of Reynold’s per- 
sonality can enjoy his lively reporting and admire his un- 
derstanding of significant incidents. 


A Modern Foreign Policy for the United States, by Joseph 
M. Jones. New York, Macmillan, 1944. $1.35 
A plea for modernization of the State Department and 
of the role of Congress, with specific proposals: for ex- 
ample, that policy making be separated from departmental 
administration. 


My War with Japan, by Carroll Alcott. New York, Holt, 
1948. $3.00 


A well-written account of some years of battling with 
the Japanese by an American journalist and radio broad- 
caster. Mr. Alcott’s story is not only deeply interesting, 
but throws light on Japan’s spy technique. 


Introduction to India, by F. R. Moraes and Robert Stim- 
son. New York, Oxford University Press, 1943. $2.00 
This small volume, written for American and British 

troops in India, offers a simple, direct discussion of the 
main features of Indian life, followed by an extremely 
valuable “classified information” section in which there 
are brief explanations of a multitude of subjects, ranging 
from aboriginals to Zoroastrianism. 


A Short History of the Chinese People, by L. Carrington 
Goodrich. New York, Harper, 1943. $2.50 
An important contribution to the understanding of 
Chinese history by Westerners. Professor Goodrich, with 
admirable scholarship and judgment in selecting his ma- 
terials, has compressed his discussion of the older China 
into slightly more than 200 pages. 


The Economic Thought of Woodrow Wilson, by William 
Diamond. Baltimore, Md., Johns Hopkins Press, 1948. 
(The Johns Hopkins University Studies in Historical 
and Political Science.) $2.50 cloth; $2.00 paper. 
Advances the idea that if Wilson had not had so strong 

a belief in the 1850 era’s concept of free competition he 

might have less willingly approved liquidating machinery 

of international economic cooperation established by war 
necessities. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 28, ApriL 28, 


1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; VERA MicHe es Dgan, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Thr 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


ee Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


ZB» 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter | 


APRIL 24.—Prominent American politicians have 
recently urged that the United States secure itself 
from danger of attack after the war by retaining con- 
trol of some or all air and naval bases occupied by 
our forces during the war. 

On April 18 a subcommittee of the House Naval 
Affairs Committee reported “it would be a mistake 
for the United States to ever abandon the bases” in 
the eight British Western Hemisphere possessions to 
which we obtained 99-year leases in exchange for 
50 destroyers in 1940. On April 18, also, Represen- 
tative James P. Richards, Democrat, of South Car- 
olina, said certain bases in the Pacific “should be 
permanently occupied by the United States to prevent 
future aggression.” Representative Earl Lewis, Re- 
publican of Ohio, declared before the House on 
April 17 that “now while the getting is good,” we 
should demand foreign air bases in settlement for 
our lend-lease contributions. On April 7 Governor 
John W. Bricker of Ohio, candidate for the Republi- 
can Presidential nomination, told the Union League 
Club in Chicago: “The retention of strategic bases 
and the installations throughout the world which we 
have built with our sweat and substance and for 
which we have fought with the blood and lives of 
our men is essential to our future safety.” 

WORLD SYSTEM OF BASES FOR U.S.? Many 
advocates of base-holding after the war neglect to 
specify what bases they mean. One geographically 
related set of bases obtained by the United States 
since the outbreak of the war includes those traded 
by Britain, ranging from Newfoundland to British 
Guiana, and the bases built in Brazil for air and 
naval operation which guard the Atlantic approaches 
to the Western Hemisphere. Another set includes 
some of the airfields built across Africa and Asia, to 
expedite the movement of goods to our armed 
forces. A third set, the Japanese mandated islands, 
includes the Caroline and Marshall Islands in 
the Pacific. There are United States bases also 
on islands like the Gilberts, which belonged to 


of a chain of island bases off our Atlantic shore to | 
fill the part Hawaii plays in the Pacific, many diplo. 
matic problems would arise if the United States 
owned bases outright within the realm of another | 
sovereign power. Instead of preserving our security 
in time of peace, possession of bases might involye 
us in new conflicts and discords. 
A strong military force would be required to main. | 
tain our hold on a string of round-the-world air | 
bases, whose possession would force this country ty | 
take a direct political interest in the affairs of every 
state or colony in which an airfield was situated, 
As for the Japanese mandates, the United States 
after the last war advanced the doctrine that each 
victorious power should have a voice in the disposal 
of the possessions of the vanquished. Apparently ; 
with that in mind, Prime Minister Peter Fraser of 
New Zealand proposed on April 20 that an interna- 
tional conference deal with the Pacific islands. New 
Zealand and Australia had already served notice on 
January 21—by an agreement for cooperation be. 
tween them—that they would insist on an effective | 
vote in determining the status of Pacific islands. 
DISADVANTAGES OF BASES. As was shown | 
by Pearl Harbor, distant bases owned by the United 
States proved worthless in saving us from war and 
in preventing aggression. The Philippines, Guam and 
Wake did not hold the enemy off; on the contrary, 
they quickly fell to him. The cry for bases suggests 
confusion about the nature of national security and | 
coalition war, and a failure to appreciate the change 
ableness of men’s interests. In the first place, it re 
flects the Maginot Line point of view that a country 
can maintain peace behind a wall or outer bastions. 
In the second place, it reflects the view that a country 
can alone be responsible for its own peace, although 
the history of events leading up to the present war | 
shows the international character of moves both to 
preserve and to obliterate peace. Actually, the dis- 
position of bases recovered through the common 
effort of the United Nations will depend on the kind 


19 


Britain, were seized by Japan, and now have been of international security system that may be estab | 


retaken by the Americans. In addition, this country 
has constructed bases for advance operations on 
islands which do not belong to us and which the 
enemy never occupied—such as New Caledonia, a 
French possession. 

Chairman Sol Bloom of the House Foreign Affairs 
Committee observed on April 21 that, while the secur- 
ity of this country might be enhanced by possession 


FOR VICTORY °* 


lished after the war. Advocates of base-retention for- | 
get, too, that when the Navy Department, a few | 


years before the war, urged Congress to strengthen 
fortifications at Guam, the country discouraged Con- 
gressional action. It is possible that the United States 


might fall into that indifferent attitude again and | 


refuse to maintain distant bases. 
BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


‘Tn = oo 


