


ign 


| of 
A m- 
ited 
the 
The 
1 to 
the 
tS a 


1 in 
pain 
eria 
ance 
> at- 














DICAL RUG 
GENERAL LIBRARY 
wMty. OF MIC. 


General Li 
Library Entered as 2nd class matter 


Mivers ity of Michigan SEP 17 1049 ’ 


Ann Arbor. Michizan 


t? 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL. XXI, No. 48 


SEPTEMBER 18, 1942 





WILL UNITED NATIONS LAUNCH PSYCHOLOGICAL OFFENSIVE? 


A$ the German siege of Stalingrad entered its 
fourth week, the Russian defenders, rein- 
forced with fresh reserves of men, war equip- 
ment, and planes, continued their stubborn resis- 
tance, which has been compared to “the miracle of 
Verdun.” As at Verdun, the miracle has been due 
not to supernatural causes, but to the remarkable en- 
durance of soldiers and civilians who have excluded 
from their consciousness all thought of retreat or 
surrender. This spirit, similar to that displayed by 
the British in the Battle of Britain, by the Chinese 
in their defense of China, by Americans and Fili- 
pinos at Bataan, has proved even more effective 
against the Nazis than war material. For the Nazis, 
who have placed such great emphasis on psycho- 
logical warfare as prelude and accompaniment to 
military warfare, find it far more difficult and baf- 
fling to overcome psychological than material re- 
sistance. 

WHY RUSSIANS ARE CONCERNED. It is en- 
tirely understandable that the Russians, who have 
not hesitated to sacrifice lives, weapons, and ma- 
terial resources in their all-out struggle against Hit- 
ler should find it difficult to comprehend the some- 
times seemingly half-hearted war effort of the West- 
ern powers. Their astonishment is no greater than 
that of the American defenders of Bataan, who 
found the complacency of civilians at home more 
terrifying than the hardships of their struggle against 
the Japanese. It would be a mistake to exaggerate 
reports from Moscow that Stalin was disappointed 
by the results of his talks with Mr. Churchill as far 
as the immediate opening of a second front in 
Western Europe was concerned. This disappoint- 
ment is shared by the people of Britain and the 
United States who, when they see the blows the 
Russians have succeeded in delivering at the Ger- 
mans, experience a sense of frustration at their pres- 
ent inability to fight on European soil. 


It is also true, as Mr. Churchill pointed out in his 
statement to the House of Commons on September 
7, that the Russians find it difficult to grasp the com- 
plexities of transporting war supplies over long sea 
routes. But that, too, is not surprising, since Russia 
is an inland country, whose population has had little 
first-hand experience of seafaring. Moreover, impa- 
tience with delays in the delivery of war materials 
to far-flung fronts, no matter how explicable by prac- 
tical circumstances, is certainly not limited to the 
Russians. 

What is really important about criticisms stem- 
ming from Moscow is that the Russians during the 
past quarter of a century have developed, rightly or 
wrongly, a profound distrust of Britain-and the 
United States—a distrust that only time and the most 
candid and wholehearted cooperation on the part of 
the Western powers can alleviate. This distrust in- 
evitably wells up to the surface whenever the Rus- 
sians, who throughout their history have been suspi- 
cious of “foreigners,” begin to feel that Russia is not 
being treated as an equal in the councils of the 
United Nations. Whatever may have been the reason 
for the omission, the fact that Russian representa- 
tives did not participate in the Anglo-American dis- 
cussions held in London in July concerning a second 
front has apparently created uneasiness in Moscow. 
Here, again, the Western powers are perhaps not 
sufficiently aware of the importance of psychological 
factors, not only as weapons to defeat the Axis, but 
also as tools to forge closer bonds between the Allies. 

UNDUE PESSIMISM A DANGER. The British 
and Americans have much to learn from the Rus- 
sians—not merely about military strategy, but also 
about the spirit in which to meet the German on- 
slaught. One of Hitler’s most telling arguments has 
been that Germany is invincible, and that all its 
opponents might just as well resign themselves to 
collaboration with the Reich if they are to escape de- 





oo . . 
= = 


ae Se eee 





et 


james 


LENSER Perc 


a. 





fi iat 








struction. From the moment that the Germans in- 
vaded the Soviet Union, Russia’s refusal to admit the 
possibility of defeat began to deflate this Nazi myth 
of invincibility. 

Today the Nazis would like nothing better than 
to persuade remaining doubters in Europe, and in 
the Western Hemisphere, that Russia is doomed, and 
that with the collapse of Russia the world might just 
as well reconcile itself to Nazi domination. From 
the psychological point of view—and on this front 
the United Nations still have a great deal to learn— 
it would be just as much of a mistake today to over- 
estimate Germany's power as it was once a tragic 
mistake to underestimate it. The Germans are far 
from defeated. They command the resources of Eu- 
rope, they have the advantage of operating on in- 
terior lines of communication, they can use the man 
power of occupied countries as slave labor — as 
proved once more by the Vichy labor decree of Sep- 
tember 13. But, at the height of what seemed their 
triumph in the summer of 1941, their setbacks in 
Russia began to have an increasingly disturbing ef- 
fect on the German people, and a commensurately 
heartening effect on the peoples they are trying to 
subjugate. 

The chink made by Russia in Germany’s morale 





Page Two a 





armor must be utilized by the Western powers. This 
cannot be done by preaching hate and revenge, which 
would leave the Germans with the alternative of 
either fighting to the bitter end, or submitting to 
Allied reprisals. An intelligent effort to give at least 
some of the Germans a stake in a victory of the 
United Nations should be made right now, in the 
midst of war—not for the sake of the German 
people, but for the sake of the soldiers and civilians 
of the United Nations. Our chief purpose is not 
merely to win the war—but to win it without the 
unnecessary loss of a single day, or a single hour. 
The basis on which this appeal should be made 
is neither blind revenge nor blind sentimental- 
ity. It should be made in such a way as to place 
on the Germans themselves the responsibility 
for ending the war, and clearing the ground for 
post-war reconstruction, from which, whatever may 
be our feelings now, the Germans cannot be in- 
definitely excluded. The United Nations are antici- 
pating a peace offensive by Hitler this autumn. Are 
we going to wait for Hitler to launch this offensive, 
as we have done in the case of previous military 
offensives, or are we going, this time, to take the 
initiative ? 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


INDIA’S POLITICAL CRISIS CONTINUES TO SMOLDER 


Mr. Churchill’s statement of September 10 in the 
House of Commons has inflamed, rather than alle- 
viated, India’s political problems. During six weeks 
of civil disobedience, violence has flared up in most 
of the eleven provinces and in at least two Indian 
states. By mid-August arrests were reported running 
into the thousands, while after a month, according 
to Churchill, the number of persons killed ap- 
proached five hundred. Nonviolence has taken the 
form of strikes in important industrial establish- 
ments, and of hartals, or shut-downs of shops and 
businesses by their owners. Violent action, on the 
other hand, was directed especially against transport 
and communications. Outbreaks have occurred chief- 
ly in towns and cities, but a spread to the countryside 
is indicated by the imposition of collective fines for 
sabotage on a number of villages. 


SEARCH FOR A SOLUTION. Few details are 





For a survey of India’s complex and delicate prob- 
lems, which bear directly on its war effort and on 
post-war reconstruction, READ: 


India’s Role in the World Conflict 


, by Margaret La Foy 


25c 


Vol. XVIII, No. 4, of ForeicN Poricy REPoRTS 
REporTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 





Subscription, $5 2 year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 








available concerning the efforts of various Indian 
leaders and groups to find a way out through con- 
sultations with government officials. Visitors to New 
Delhi have included representatives of Indian mod- 
erates, the Moslem League, and the Mahasabha (a 
Hindu group), as well as several persons close to 
the Congress. On August 20 the Moslem League 
Working Committee voted to consider any proposals 
for a provisional government, if the right of Pakis- 
tan—division of India into separate Moslem and 
Hindu areas—was conceded. This statement, despite 
the difficulties it posed, implied willingness to com- 
promise, but since the Churchill declaration Mr. 
Jinnah has adopted a most intransigent position. 

The Mahasabha, which has in the past criticized 
the Congress for allegedly yielding to Moslem pres- 
sure, called on August 31 for an Indian national gov- 
ernment, composed of the principal political groups, 
in order to fight the Axis. It was suggested that a 
committee establish contact with Jinnah, Gandhi, 
and others. On September 9, Dr. Mookerjee of the 
Mahasabha conferred with the Viceroy for four hours, 
presumably in connection with a statement that was 
being sent to Mr. Churchill. This declaration, which 
was said also to have the backing of various Sikh and 
Moslem leaders, was based on the August 31 pro- 
posals. 

CHURCHILL'S STATEMENT TO COMMONS. 
The recommendations were on their way to the Brit- 





sh Px 
Parlia 
ing it: 
ynese 


would 
by th 
decla: 
may 
leade 
woice 
dose 
its ef 


mem 
lives, 
Arth 
be su 
the ; 
viole 
quicl 
no re 
ed o1 
ain 

Unit 
Unit 


facts 
dg 
cont: 
ing 

rath 
vade 
hold 
iS al 
diffe 
ener 
back 
forc 
the 

beca 
enet 
cult 
peo} 
gray 


WOU 
sum 
fo s 
tow 
beer 


FOR] 
Head 


secon 
















ian 


ecw 


»d- 


to 
rue 
als 
c1S- 
nd 
ite 
m- 


Ar. 


rit- 











sh Prime Minister while he was speaking on India in 
arliament. Sharply attacking the Congress, and call- 
ng its campaign a failure, he suggested that pro-Jap- 

ese fifth columnists might be supporting its activi- 
ies. Most important, he stated that the government 
yould not go beyond the “‘settled policy” represented 
ly the broad principles of the Cripps proposals. This 
declaration was reported to have “caused much dis- 
may and bitterness” in India, where many moderate 
leaders, who had continued to work for a settlement, 
yoiced the fear that the path to conciliation had been 
dosed. Nevertheless, the Mahasabha is continuing 
its efforts toward a settlement. 

In Britain, also, regret was expressed by certain 
lnembers of Parliament, including Labor representa- 
tives, such as Lord Strabolgi, Lord Winster and Mr. 
_ Greenwood. If British opinion on India can 
be summed up in a sentence, it appears to be that 
the government cannot back down in the face of 
violence, yet must seek a peaceful solution as 
quickly as possible. The Churchill statement made 
n0 reference to this second aspect. It should be point- 
ed out, in this connection, that many persons in Brit- 
ain would welcome intercession in India by the 
United States alone or in combination with other 
United Nations. 


URGENCY OF INDIAN SITUATION. Two 
facts about India are not commonly appreciated in 
udging the seriousness of the Japanese threat and of 
continued Indian discontent. First, nationalist feel- 
ing must be measured in terms of noncooperation 
rather than of violence. As long as India is not in- 
vaded, the government will presumably be able to 
hold forceful outbreaks within limits. But if India 
is attacked, and the mass of the people remain in- 
different—or many even sympathetic—toward the 
enemy, will the defending troops be able to hold 
back the highly trained, well-equipped Japanese 
forces? Indian unrest is dangerous not because of 
the immediate military damage it may produce, but 
because the country, which is far inferior to the 
enemy in economic development, will be very diffi- 
cult to defend without the support of the Indian 
people. China’s very different experience offers a 
graphic lesson in this respect. 

The second point is that an invasion of India 
would not—as so many commentators seem to as- 
sume—require Japan to occupy the whole country or 
to strike in the north, across several thousand miles, 
toward the frontier of Iran. So much attention has 
been paid to the sensational possibility of a German- 


Page Three 








Japanese juncture that there has been a tendency to 
ignore the important question: what is the cheapest 
kind of campaign that Japan can wage in India and 
still achieve major military objectives? Such a cam- 
paign could include a drive for the airfields of Assam 
and the industry of Bengal, lying within a relatively 
small area right across the border from Japanese-con- 
trolled Burma. If the Assam airfields were seized, 
China would be cut off once more from essential 
foreign supplies; while loss of the Calcutta factory 
area and the great steel center of Jamshedpur, next 
door in Bihar province, would deprive India of the 
major part of its modern industry. A Japanese cam- 
paign might not actually be confined to these limited 
objectives, and would not necessarily prove success- 
ful, but these threatening possibilities reveal India’s 
great vulnerability, as well as the extreme importance 
of every political consideration that affects the coun- 
try’s defense. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


F.P.A. FORUM 

The Foreign Policy Association will again open 
its New York luncheon season with an all-day 
Forum on Saturday, October 3, at The Waldorf- 
Astoria. This Forum will serve as a “report to the na- 
tion” on the position of the United States and its re- 
lations with the United Nations. Viscount Halifax, 
the British Ambassador to Washington, Senator 
Warren R. Austin, and Mr. Elmer Davis, Director of 
the Office of War Information, are among the speak- 
ers who have accepted. Additional speakers for the 
three sessions will be announced in next week's 
BULLETIN. We hope that many members and their 
friends will attend. 





Last Train from Berlin, by Howard K. Smith. New York, 

Knopf, 1942. $2.75 

Absorbingly interesting and outspoken account of 
changes wrought in Germany by the invasion of Russia. 
The author, a successor of William Shirer as CBS com- 
mentator in Berlin, believes that German setbacks in 
Russia in 1941 were the starting-point of a decline in 
Nazi power. 
War Has Seven Faces, by Frank Gervasi. Garden City, 

Doubleday, Doran, 1942. $2.50 

The well-known Colliers foreign correspondent tells how 
his pre-Pearl Harbor assignments in many war areas made 
him shed his isolationist sentiments and acquire an “all- 
out-war” mentality. 
Agent in Italy, by S. K. Garden City, Doubleday, Doran, 

1942. $3.00 

The engrossing story of an anti-Nazi espionage agent 
who left Italy late in 1941. Before his departure he had 
gathered information from many Italian and German 
sources for transmission to the Allies. While some of the 
detailed facts he reports are open to question, he presents 
a convincing picture of the collapse of Italian morale and 
Nazi domination in Rome. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI. No. 48, SEPTEMBER 18, 1942. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
second-class matter December 2, 


a 





Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dgan, Editor. Entered as 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Incorporated. National 


SS eee 


‘ 
sSpepeetasss 





Washington News Letter 











Sept. 14.—Appeals by both Indian leaders and 
British Laborites that President Roosevelt should 
mediate between Mohandas K. Gandhi and the 
British government have been received with sym- 
pathetic interest in Washington, where the situation 
in India is considered as being potentially most dan- 
gerous for the United Nations. 

Prominent among Indians supporting the sugges- 
tion that Mr. Roosevelt should intervene diplomatic- 
ally was Dr. Shyamaprasad Mookerjee, deputy pres- 
ident of Hindu Mahasabha, who obtained the agree- 
ment of that minority party and the Moslem and 
Sikh minority groups in a campaign for indepen- 
dence now and settlement of internal controversies 
after the war. Others reported to be taking the 
same line included two important members of the 
Legislative Assembly and a provincial premier. In 
Britain Lord Strabolgi, left-wing Labor leader, in 
an address at Basingstoke on September 12, declared: 
“We should swallow our pride and invite the Pres- 
ident of the United States to arbitrate on India.” 

The situation in India has quieted down somewhat 
after the epidemic of riots that followed the arrest 
of Gandhi on August 9. But although Prime Minister 
Winston Churchill informed the House of Commons 
on September 10 that the course of events in that 
country has been “improving and is on the whole re- 
assuring,” dispatches to the American press from 
India indicated that the position was not better and 
might soon become radically worse. 

ARGUMENTS FOR AMERICAN INTERVEN- 
TION. The case for American intervention rests on 
two grounds—military and moral. Some military ob- 
servers anticipate that the Japanese will invade In- 
dia soon after the monsoon ends, which is usu- 
ally about this season. Those who want Mr. 
Roosevelt to mediate point to the assistance that 
was given the Japanese by disaffected natives in 
Burma and Malaya. In case of Japanese invasion, 
fifth-column activity would probably be repeated 
on a much larger scale in India—if the country 
is still in a condition of incipient civil war. Only 
Gandhi, who is at heart anti-Axis, can, so his ad- 
mirers claim, rally the Indian masses to the side of 
the United Nations. Otherwise, with India in a 
seething state of revolt, its defense against Japanese 
invaders, they argue, will be difficult, perhaps im- 
possible. 

The moral argument for American interven- 
tion is that, in the eyes of neutral countries, a 


FOR VICTORY ° 


peaceable solution of the Indian problem is the acid 
test of the sincerity of the pledges of freedom that 
President Roosevelt and Mr. Churchill gave the 
world when they signed the Atlantic Charter at seq 
on August 14, 1941. This was the point made by Dr. 
Mookerjee, who said: “If we are told this is not ap 
American affair during the war, although this war 
is supposedly a matter of life and death to your na. 
tion, how can you expect us Indians to believe that 
you will take a hand in a settlement of affairs along 
the lines of the Atlantic Charter after the war, when 
India won't matter to you?” 


The position of the United States government in 
the Indian crisis is exceedingly delicate. Although 
there is reason to believe that Washington would like 
to see negotiations for a peaceful settlement of the 
Indian dispute resumed, it is anxious to avoid doin 
anything which could be regarded by Whitehall as 
interference with the internal affairs of the British 
Empire. Hence the announcement of the State De 
partment on August 12 that American troops were 
in India only to fight the Axis and the instructions 
to them to hold aloof from internal affairs. 


CHURCHILL CLOSES THE DOOR. The possi- 
bility of American intervention has been rendered 
more difficult by Mr. Churchill’s “no compromise” 
speech in the House of Commons. The Prime Min- 
ister declared flatly that the sole basis for any further 
negotiations with the Indian Nationalists is the plan 
for Dominion status which Sir Stafford Cripps took to 
India last spring and which was rejected by the Con- 
gress. Mr. Churchill denied that Gandhi represented 
the majority of the Indian people or even of the 
Hindu masses, declared that the Congress was “a 
party machine sustained by certain manufacturing 
and financial interests,’ and asserted that the nonvio- 
lence campaign had the “intention or at any rate the 
effect of hampering the defense of India against the 
Japanese invader.” 

Only in a legalistic sense is the Indian prob 
lem purely a British affair. A peaceful solution of the 
question is of supreme importance both to the United 
States and China. Any friendly intercession on the 
part of President Roosevelt could certainly count on 
the warm support of the Chungking government. For 
it is from India that the United Nations must one 
day undertake the reconquest of Burma, preparatory 
to an offensive to drive the Japanese out of China. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


eg | 














