Entered as 2nd class matter 


Dr. William w. SisuLep 


De 


nigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vor. XXII, No. 1 


OcTOBER 23, 1942 


WOULD WARTIME PUNISHMENT OF NAZIS AID UNITED NATIONS? 


At a moment when the American press draws 
some optimistic conclusions from the mere fact 
that the Germans and Japanese have failed, during 
recent weeks, to make significant territorial gains, 
Nazi propaganda is straining every effort—not with- 
out success—to divide the United Nations, and force 
them to take actions that might steel the German 
people for continuance of the war to the bitter end. 
The Allies, who have been as slow to learn the art 
of psychological warfare as they had previously been 
to utilize the techniques of modern fighting, are in 
danger of diverting their fire from Germany and 
Japan to snipe at each other. 

PUNISHMENT OF NAZI LEADERS. The dis- 
cussion aroused by President Roosevelt's statement of 
October 7, that the United States would insist on 
punishment after the war of ‘“‘war criminals” guilty 
of barbarism against the civilian populations of con- 
quered countries, has already revealed some di- 
vergences among the Allies. The President, by setting 
Axis “ringleaders” apart from their nations, was 
wisely attempting to assure the peoples of Germany, 
Italy and Japan that they would not be held respon- 
sible in wholesale fashion for crimes from which 
they have been the first to suffer. Meanwhile, the 
Allied governments in London, acting on a similar 
ptinciple, had for months been compiling lists of 
Nazis and native Quislings who, in their opinion, 
bear the major responsibility for the cold-blooded 
executions in conquered countries that have been fap- 
idly increasing in numbers and brutality as the Ger- 
mans have found themselves stalemated at Stalingrad. 

In a belated answer of October 15 to a statement 
on this subject issued by the Allied governments in 
London on January 13, Soviet Foreign Commissar 
Molotov not only subscribed to the plans of con- 
quered countries for bringing Nazi leaders to justice 
after the war. He also demanded immediate punish- 
ment of any who have fallen into the hands of the 


United Nations—notably Rudolf Hess, who has been 
held in custody by the British since his dramatic flight 
to England in May 1941, shortly before the German 
invasion of Russia. At that time it was believed that 
Hess hoped to prevent what he considered a suicidal 
campaign against Russia by effecting some kind of.a 
settlement between Britain and Germany—or, al- 
ternatively, enlisting Britain on Germany's side in “a 
crusade against Bolshevism.” 

The Soviet reference to Hess was further empha- 
sized by the Pravda editorial of October 19, which 
declared that “it must be finally established who Hess 
is now—a criminal subject to trial and punishment 
or a plenipotentiary representative in England of the 
Hitler government who enjoys inviolability.” The 
Kremlin's insistence on immediate punishment of 
Hess seems to reflect the latent suspicion in Moscow 
that certain circles in Britain and the United States 
still are more afraid of Russia than of Germany and, 
given certain circumstances—such as the surrender 
of power by Hitler and his associates—might come 
to terms with representatives of the German army 
and industry who, in the opinion of the Russians, 
bear equal responsibility for the European holocaust. 

SHOULD ALLIES RESORT TO REVENGE? 
The British, for their part, feel that any attempt to 
punish Nazi leaders who may be held by the United 
Nations would merely bring German retaliation 
against the thousands of United Nations prisoners 
now held by the Germans—a risk, it should be 
noted, that the Russians, who have a vast number 
of prisoners in German hands, are apparently pre- 
pe ared to take. It may be do ubted th: at Nazi leaders 
in Germany would be deterred for a moment by any 
punishment visited on Hess. Yet the issue raised by 
Molotov may prove important in the psychological 
warfare now raging between the belligerents: for it 
may come to constitute a test of Allied intentions not 
only to the Russians but also to non-Nazi Germans 


who fear that their rulers, like the Kaiser in 1919, 
may ultimately escape retribution at the hands of the 
Allies, leaving the German people to pay the penalty. 
Britain and the United States, moreover, must bear 
in mind the understandable desire of the conquered 
peoples of Europe to see vengeance wreaked as soon 
as possible on those whom President Roosevelt has 
described as “war criminals.” 

Very different is the problem of Allied retalia- 
tion for brutal treatment of Allied war prisoners in 
Germany, such as shackling. The very fact that the 
Nazis are now resorting, in the case of British pris- 
oners, to practices they had previously reserved for 
the so-called inferior peoples of Eastern Europe and 
the Balkans would indicate that they have despaired 
of coming to terms with the British—a fact which 
might serve well to dispel Moscow’s suspicions about 
Hess. The shackling of British and Canadian pris- 
oners, answered in kind by the British and Canadians, 
may prove only the first chapter of a terrible ordeal. 
The Russians, for example, are reported to be tak- 
ing few German prisoners; and the Nazis have 
threatened that they will mete out to all Allied 
prisoners the treatment accorded to German captives 
by any one of the United Nations—another inhuman 


Page Two 


— 
————e 


method of sowing dissension among the Allies. 

Yet even more disastrous for the Allies than the 
sufferings of their prisoners would be any attemp; 
to answer the Germans in kind. Brutality in cold 
blood is alien to the temper and traditions of the 
Western peoples. The practice of brutality—in which 
the Nazis would in any case prove more adept 
than the Allies — would not prevent Hitler from 
continuing on his bloody course, nor would it r¢ 
lieve the plight of United Nations prisoners. And 
meanwhile, it would tend to reduce the civilian pop. 
ulations of the United Nations to the same level of 
brutalization as that preached and practiced by Axis 
leaders. The terrifying thing might then happe 
that, while losing the war on the battlefield tp 
the United Nations, the Axis powers would have 
defeated them by infecting them with the poison of| 
inhumanity. The best way both to punish the Nazis 
and to relieve Allied prisoners is to win the war a 
decisively and rapidly as possible. To permit the 
diversion, at this crucial moment, of our thought 
and energies to the mistreatment of Axis prisone 
instead of applying them to the winning of the war 
would be to serve the Axis cause. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


STAGE SET FOR NEW MILITARY ACTION IN AFRICA | 


The close coordination of strategy in North and 
West Africa with that in Europe is at present the ob- 
ject of several moves by the Axis and the United 
Nations. The most recent of the Axis’ efforts is the 
meeting, forecast by reports from Switzerland, be- 
tween Hitler and Mussolini, at which they would 
presumably discuss Italy’s role in safeguarding Axis 
transportation lines to Africa, as well as the low 
morale in Italy. The possibility that the Nazis may 
soon take over Trieste and Fiume, the two key Adri- 
atic ports, as a result of a recommendation that 
Gestapo chief Heinrich Himmler is believed to have 
made following his trip to Italy on October 10-12, 
is related to the attempt to improve their military 
position in the Mediterranean. 

AXIS STRATEGY IN AFRICA. The attempts of 
the Axis powers to safeguard their lines to Africa 


For an analysis of British plans for a new Britain, 
a new world, a new Europe and a new Empire, 


READ— 


As Britain Sees the Post-War World 


by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


October 15 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


have led to a renewal of the blitz against Malta, | 
Britain's “unsinkable aircraft carrier’ in the Medi- | 
terranean. If Malta were knocked out of the war or 
taken by the Axis, the Germans would find the prob- 
lem of protecting their flank in north Africa simpli- 
fied. They would then be more free to carry out the 
policy of defensive warfare that Goering, Hitler and 
Goebbels have recently hinted at in a series of 
speeches. Despite heavy and costly attacks, how- 
ever, Malta is still holding out, and a British com 
muniqué of October 18 reported that the enemy's 
offensive had “eased considerably.” 


The hopes of the Nazis that conquered Europe can 
be transformed into a mighty fortress capable of re- 
sisting a bitter siege depend not only on their success 
against Malta but to some extent on their ability to 
keep Vichy-French West Africa and Senegal under 
control. In the Nazi defensive strategy, Dakar holds | 
the key position, just as it would if it were to serve 
as the bridgehead for a move against the Western 
Hemisphere. The harbor at Dakar lies at one of the 
world’s foremost oceanic crossroads and is capable 
of being used as a naval base against United Nations 
supply lines running to Egypt, the Middle East, and 
India, by way of central Africa. If the Axis powers 
could cut off access to the trans-African air transpor- 
tation routes, they would oblige the Allies to ship all 
men and materials from Britain and the United 
States around the Cape, thus putting a still greater 


| + 
ih 
+ 


trar 
and 
of ¢ 
soul 
furt 
whi 
air 
als¢ 
his. 

7 
per 
Dal 
tha 
evic 
aiff 
Gal 
que 
Wi 
enc 
an 
cup 
All 
eve 
Vic 
chi 


———_—__ 
$= 


lies. 
than the 
attempt 
r in cold 
is Of the 
-in which 
re ade 
ler fre 
ild it re 
ers. And 
lian pop. 
> level of 
1 by Axis 
1 happen 
lefield to 
uld have 
poison of 
the Nazis 
1e war as 
ermit the 
thoughts 
prisoners 
f the war 


, DEAN 


st Malta, 
he Med 
1€ war of 
the prob- 
ca simplt- 
‘y out the 
litler and 
series of 
‘ks, how- 
itish com- 
> enemy's 


urope can 
ble of te- 
eir SUCCESS 
ability to 
gal under 
ikar holds 
e to serve 
» Western 
me of the 
is capable 


— ———— 


1 Nations | 
East, and | 


cis powers 
' transpor- 
to ship all 
1e United 
ill greater 


—_—_— 
—_ 


strain on Allied shipping. But Dakar is more than a 
naval base; it is also the Atlantic terminal for the 
trans-Saharan railroad that is connected by dirt road 
and branch lines with the French Mediterranean port 
of Oran in Algeria, and for the desert trail that runs 
south from Casablanca. Six or eight excellent airfields 
further increase Dakar’s strategic importance, a fact 
which reminds Americans that the city is only 1,800 
air miles from Brazil's easternmost point. It should 
also be noted that Admiral Darlan, well-known for 
his hostility to the British, is reported to be in Algeria. 

The Berlin, Madrid and Paris radio stations have 
persisted in predicting an imminent Allied attack on 
Dakar, and on October 16 the Nazi radio reported 
that “fighting activities have started on Dakar.” As 
evidence, they pointed to the alleged death of a Vichy 
airman while on a reconnaissance flight over British 
Gambia, at the hands of an opponent they subse- 
quently identified as a United States pursuit plane. 
Whether this announcement was intended merely to 
encourage further collaboration from Vichy, or was 
a means of preparing the ground for an all-out oc- 
cupation by the Axis in order to prevent a major 
Allied offensive, is still not clear. It is known, how- 
ever, that German military experts are in Dakar; that 
Vichy has ordered the evacuation of women and 
children from that area; and that planes, a limited 
number of tanks, and the last of the French motor- 
ized troops are based there. Furthermore, according 


THE F.P.A. 


Moscow War Diary, by Alexander Werth. New York, 


Knopf, 1942. $3.00 


Vivid, sympathctic impressions of Moscow during the 
first winter of the Russo-German war by the Reuter and 
London Sunday Times correspondent, who had spent his 
childhood in Tsarist Russia. 


Agenda for a Postwar World, by J. B. Condliffe. New 
York, Norton, 1942. $2.50 


Brief but comprehensive and well stated analysis of the 
major assumptions on which the United Nations must act 
to establish economic stability after the war. 


The Submarine at War, by A. M. Low. New York, Sheri- 
dan House, 1942. $3.00 


A history of submarine warfare and a sober, non-tech- 
nical analysis of its current successes and its future po- 
tentialities. 


Behemoth: The Structure and Practice of National Social- 
ism, by Franz L. Neumann. New York, Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, 1942. $4.00 


This rather legalistic but extensive and detailed survey 
of the development and functioning of Nazism reaches the 
conclusion that Hitler and his subordinates have destroyed 
the legal foundations of the German state and set up an 
instrument of arbitrary rule. 


Page Three 


to a Fighting French report of October 18, a concen- 
tration of Vichy’s modern warships are in Dakar. 


POSSIBLE ALLIED MOVES. Meanwhile, the ~ 
United Nations continue to mass their forces in areas 
bordering Vichy’s African empire on the south and 
southwest. An American Expeditionary Force, which 
landed at Monrovia, Liberia, last week, is the most 
recent of the arrivals, and marks the Americans’ 
closest approach to Dakar. Although no official ex- 
planation of their presence has been given, it is likely 
that their assignment is not only to prevent Liberia 
from falling into Axis hands but also to use the area 
as an air and naval base against the submarine “wolf 
packs” that have shifted their operations from the 
United States coast to that of West Africa and the 
South Atlantic. With bases at Dakar and Cape 
Palmas, in eastern Liberia, British naval circles 
warned recently that the initial successes of the Nazi 
submarines might be considerable. 


In conjunction with United Nations’ forces in 
Gibraltar, Gambia, Sierra Leone, the Belgian Congo, 
and Fighting French Equatorial Africa, the Ameti- 
cans in Liberia might be used in an offensive against 
the Axis in Dakar. Such a move could open the way 
for a strong Allied attack on the whole of Vichy 
Africa, and would constitute a serious threat to 
Marshal Rommel’s forces in Egypt. 


WINIFRED NELSON 


BOOKSHELF 


Uncensored France: An Eyewitness Account of France 
under the Occupation, by Roy P. Porter. New York, The 
Dial Press, 1942. $2.75 
A former Associated Press correspondent in Paris and 

Vichy narrates his experiences with both Germans and 

French in France. The author is sympathetic to Pétain 

but draws on his own interviews with Laval to portray 

the latter as a supremely unattractive opportunist in 
everything but his dislike for the British—which seems 
constant. 


The New Order in Poland, by Simon Segal. New York, 
Knopf, 1942. $3.00 


A careful, dispassionate, yet revealing account of the 
Nazis’ attempt to destroy utterly the Polish nation and 
create a colony in central Europe. The author concludes 
with a penetrating examination of Polish politics-in-exile. 


Economic History of Europe, by Ernest L. Bogart. New 
York, Longmans, Green, 1942. $4.50 


Valuable text which traces developments in economic 
institutions and the resultant changes in economic activity 
and in society. 


All-Out on the Road to Smolensk, by Erskine Caldwell. 
New York, Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1942. $2.50 
The experiences of an author turned foreign correspond- 


ent, in Moscow and at the front, during the German ad- 
vance to the east in 1941. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 1, Ocroper 23, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National ‘ 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lugr, Secretary; Vara MicHeLes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


B's 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


Oct. 19.—It is an old saying that no chain is 
stronger than its weakest link and Italy is obviously 
the weak link in the Axis. It fills approximately the 
position that Austria held in the Central powers’ 
bloc of World War I. And just as the Allies of that 
day endeavored to wean Franz Josef’s “ramshackle 
empire’ away from Berlin, so the United Nations 
today are seeking to separate Fascist Italy from its 
more powerful totalitarian partners. 

One of the mightiest blows struck in this cause was 
delivered by Attorney General Francis Biddle in his 
Columbus Day address in New York City. Mr. 
Biddle, on that occasion, announced that 600,000 
unnaturalized Italians living in the United States 
would be freed from the stigma of being classed as 
alien enemies beginning October 19. He revealed 
that this new policy was being adopted because of the 
loyalty displayed by these Italians toward the country 
of their adoption. In the ten months that the United 
States has been at war, he said, it had been necessary 
to intern only 228 Italians, or fewer than one- 
twentieth of one per cent. 

PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE. Two days later 
Mr. Biddle frankly admitted to the House Immigra- 
tion Committee that his speech was part of this na- 
tion’s psychological warfare, and predicted that the 
action would have a “tremendous effect.” As part of 
the campaign, Mr. Biddle’s speech was carried on all 
the short-wave radio stations, now under government 
control, and the British Broadcasting Corporation. 
Moscow also relayed extracts from the speech to 
conquered nations. The Attorney General declared 
further that the speech in Italian was being distrib- 
uted in Italy, presumably by airplane. 

The Rome radio affected to belittle the Biddle 
gesture. It said that “we will only oppose these 
buffoon measures with our contempt.” A spokesman 
of the Italian Foreign Office commented that the an- 
nouncement had no meaning since only a military 
order could countermand the restrictions placed on 
enemy aliens in the United States. 

The implications of the United States government's 
policy toward Italy were doubtless outlined to Pope 
Piux XII by Myron C. Taylor, personal representa- 
tive of President Roosevelt, in his two interviews 
with the Pope on September 20 and 22. Although 
there is no reason to suppose that Mr. Taylor, who re- 
ported to the President on October 16, discussed the 
matter of a separate peace with Italy, it is believed 
he pointed out to the Pope that Italy would enjoy 


om VICTORY ° 


more freedom in the event of a United Nations’ vie 
tory than it could expect under joint Mussolini-Nagj 
domination. 

ITALIAN DISCONTENT. The United States ig 
intensifying its psychological warfare against the 
Fascist régime at a time when, despite the vigorous 
censorship, an increasing volume of evidence is ac. 
cumulating to show that conditions in Italy are go- 
ing from bad to worse and that the Italian people 
are heartily sick of a conflict needlessly thrust upon 
them. Symptomatic of the unrest in Italy is the 
peasant uprising in the village of Monteleone neat 
Naples last month against government grain requisi- 
tions when, according to a London dispatch of Oc. 
tober 13, special police and troops had to be called 
out. The next day a message from Berne, Switzer. 
land, stated that Heinrich Himmler, chief of the 
Nazi Gestapo, had just concluded a three-day visit to 
Italy, during which he saw Premier Benito Mussolini 
and Foreign Minister Count Ciano. 

The reported meeting in the near future of the 
two Axis leaders is thought to be due to German 
discontent with Italy’s failure to cope with the in- 
creasing disturbances in Yugoslavia, where General 
Draja Mikhailovitch is vigorously pursuing his guer- 
rilla war against the Axis invaders. The Nazis are 
credited with planning to abolish Croatia as an “‘in- 
dependent” state, pushing the Italians out of it; to 
extend German control over the Dalmatian coast; 
and to organize a base at Trieste, which formerly 
belonged to Austria-Hungary, with a view to con- 
ducting from there Axis naval operations throughout 
the Mediterranean. 

It is difficult to check these reports, but it becomes 
increasingly clear that the Italians have not got their 
hearts in this war. Mussolini plunged his country into 
the conflict on June 10, 1940, at a moment when 
Hitler seemed certain of victory. But his calculations 
went astray. For Italy, the war has been a succession 


of military reverses in Greece, Ethiopia and Libya. 
Only where the Germans have intervened, as they did 
in the Balkans and in North Africa, have the Italians 
been saved from total defeat. Nobody in Washington 
expects an immediate collapse of the Fascist régime, 
or a withdrawal of Italy from the war now. The 
Fascist ruling clique knows that its own fate is staked 
on a Nazi victory. Nevertheless, a timely blow from 
the outside may one day snap the weak Italian link in 
the Axis chain. 


JOHN ELLIOT? 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


