



ont 
nd 


or 
he 
ir- 
1b- 
k’s 
"0. 


he 
er 


is 


ynal 
tor. 








LS 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVI, No. 4 NOVEMBER 20, 1936 





German Trade Drive in Southeastern Europe 
by John C. deWilde 


This trade drive, developed in accordance with Na- 
tional Socialist theories, has met with some success, Mr. 
deWilde declares; with the advent of more stable cur- 
rency relations, however, Germany’s share in Danubian 
and Balkan commerce will probably decline. 


November 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 









Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











Dr. William W. Bishop 
% University of Wichigan Libr 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 








i 
TS 





ITALO-GERMAN MOVES DISTURB EUROPE 





HE conference held in Vienna on November 11 

and 12 by representatives of the Rome bloc— 
Italy, Austria and Hungary—did little to clarify 
the diplomatic situation in Central Europe which 
continues to reflect confusing shifts in the policies 
of the great powers. It had been rumored that 
the conference would consider Hapsburg restora- 
tion — opposed by both Germany and the Little 
Entente; support Hungary’s demand for rearma- 
ment and territorial revision — resisted by the 
Little Entente but backed by Germany; and in- 
augurate close economic relations with Germany 
as well as the Little Entente group. Some of these 
contradictory expectations had already been dis- 
pelled on November 1 when Mussolini, speaking 
in Milan, simultaneously offered friendship to 
Yugoslavia, which has least to fear from Hun- 
garian aspirations, and urged justice for Hungary, 
which seeks return of territories now incorpor- 
ated in Czechoslovakia and Rumania. This double- 
edged appeal—ill received in Prague and Buchar- 
est—was interpreted as an attempt to split the 
Little Entente, and strengthened the rumor that 
Germany and Italy may have agreed on Octo- 
ber 25* to divide Central Europe and the Balkans 
into spheres of influence. 


The protocol signed by Italy, Austria and Hun- 
gary on November 13 justifies neither the hopes 
nor fears originally aroused by the conference. 
It contents itself with a platonic reference to 
Hungary’s desire for rearmament, and appar- 
ently fails to mention territorial revision. Austria 
and Hungary formally recognize Italy’s annexa- 
tion of Ethiopia, in return for which Italy prom- 
ises them a share in the economic exploitation of 
its new empire. Probably the most significant 
point in the protocol is the decision of the Rome 
bloc to develop trade relations with other coun- 
tries not by collective negotiations, as had been 
planned in the case of the Little Entente, but by 





i er Unite Against Madrid,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, Octo- 


means of bilateral treaties. This is regarded as a 
victory for Germany, which has found it profit- 
able to follow the policy of “divide and rule” in 
its economic relations with the countries of Cen- 
tral Europe and the Balkans, and objected to close 
cooperation between the Rome bloc and the 
Little Entente. The way is now cleared for con- 
clusion of an Austro-German commercial agree- 
ment, which will provide for raising of German 
quotas on Austrian cattle, timber, and dairy 
products, and purchase by Austria of German 
coal, manufactured goods, and armaments. 

Italy’s principal concern at the present time 
is not so much the Danubian region or the Italo- 
German accord, as its attempt to negotiate a 
“gentlemen’s agreement” with Britain in the 
Mediterranean. Mussolini apparently seeks not 
only British recognition of his Ethiopian conquest, 
but acknowledgment of Italy’s equality with 
Britain in the Mediterranean, and a promise that 
the British will not attempt to unite Yugoslavia, 
Greece and Turkey against Italy as they did dur- 
ing the Ethiopian campaign. Speaking in the 
House of Commons on November 5 Mr. Eden, 
British Foreign Secretary, said that the deteriora- 
tion of Anglo-Italian relations was due to “differ- 
ing—I regret to note still differing—conceptions 
of methods by which the world should order its 
international affairs.” He contended that for 
Britain freedom of movement in the Mediter- — 
ranean was not merely a convenience—as stated 
by Mussolini on November 1—but a “vita! inter- 
est,” adding that it was possible for both countries 
to maintain their “vital interests” in that region 
“not only without conflict with each other but 
even with mutual advantage.” 

On the same occasion Mr. Eden denied any 
intention of encircling Germany, but condemned 
the tendency of Nazi leaders—notably Goering 
and Goebbels—to blame Britain for Germany’s 
economic conditions. He made it clear, moreover, 
that any friendship offered by Britain “cannot 











be exclusive and cannot be directed against any- 
body else” —thus declining Hitler’s Nuremberg 
invitation to organize a crusade against com- 
munism under German leadership. Britain’s task 
of improving relations with Germany was not 
eased by Nazi denunciation on November 14 of 
the clauses of the Versailles Treaty providing for 
international control of the principal German 
waterways. This denunciation was regarded in 
Britain as fresh evidence that Germany prefers 
spectacular unilateral action to orderly revision 
by international negotiations. While termination 
of the waterways provisions does not in itself 
constitute a threat to European peace, it is im- 
portant in the sense that Nazi Germany has now 
denounced all but the territorial clauses of the 
Versailles Treaty. Should Hitler feel the need of 
further victories on the foreign policy front, he 
will have to make a move outside German boun- 
daries which might bring him into collision with 
other powers, notably Poland in Danzig. Fear of a 
German move to the east may have motivated the 
London visit of Colonel Beck, Polish Foreign Min- 
ister, who is reported to have sought assurances 
of French and British aid in case of aggression. 
The uncertainties of the European situation 
have been increased by the unexpected turn of 
events in Spain, where the Loyalists, rallying to 
the defense of Madrid, upset the calculations of 
Rebel generals and their foreign sympathizers. 
At a stormy meeting of the non-intervention com- 
mittee on November 12 Signor Grandi, Italian 
Ambassador in London, accused Stalin of inter- 
vening in the Spanish civil war, and declared that 
Italy accepted the challenge of communism. In 
spite of this outburst — apparently intended to 
awake Britain to the danger of Soviet aid for the 
Loyalists —the committee acquitted the Soviet 
government of three Italian charges, as it had 
earlier exonerated Germany, Italy and Portugal 
of charges brought against them by the U.S.S.R. 
Whatever the outcome of the Spanish crisis, 
France and Britain cannot indefinitely maintain 
an attitude of non-intervention in Europe’s affairs 
if they are to check the moves of potential aggres- 
sors. Signs are not lacking that, once Britain 
considers itself sufficiently rearmed, it may take 
the lead in rallying all countries opposed to ag- 
gression in a fresh attempt to organize collective 
security. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


REARMAMENT LAGS IN BRITAIN 


Acrimonious charges of waste and inefficiency 
in the development of the British rearmament 
program featured the defense debate last week 
in the House of Commons. Led by Winston 


Page Two — 












— 


Churchill, whose experiencé as wartime Minister 
of Munitions added weight to his criticisms, mem- 
bers of Parliament attacked almost every phase 


of defense policy in Britain and demanded a par-}'' 


liamentary commission to investigate the alleged 
irregularities. Prime Minister Baldwin and Sir 
Thomas Inskip, Minister for the Coordination of 
Defense, defended the government’s policy and 
denied that there were any grounds for such an 
investigation, although they did admit that cer- 
tain parts of the rearmament program, notably 
the production of airplanes, were not proceeding 
quite as rapidly as scheduled. 

The first public inkling of any hitch in the new 
British program—which calls for an expenditure 
in 1936-1937 of almost £200,000,000, Britain’s” 
largest military budget in peace time history— 
came a few weeks ago when Lord Nuffield, head 
of the important Wolseley Motor Works, with-' 





drew from the government’s “shadow scheme” 
for building new factories to assure immediate — 
expansion of production in war time. The Wolse- 
ley firm was scheduled to build one of the aircraft- | 
engine units in the scheme but, after having drawn 
up all the plans and completed its preparations 
for construction, suddenly decided to withdraw. 
Apparently Lord Nuffield and his colleagues had 
misunderstood the government’s plan, which is 
to give only enough orders to the “shadow” fac- 
tories to maintain machinery and staff, while con- 
tinuing to rely on the regular firms already sup- 
plying government needs for the increased de- 
mands of the new program. When it became ob- 
vious that no new orders were going to Wolseley’s 
other factories, Lord Nuffield declined to continue 
with the “shadow” plant. 


The increased armaments program is being | 
accompanied by active reconsideration of British © 


defense policy in general. Some naval experts, 
impressed by Britain’s Mediterranean experience 
during the Italo-Ethiopian crisis, have suggested 
that the navy should concentrate its efforts on de- 
veloping the route around South Africa instead of 
clinging to its Mediterranean bases, but.the Brit- 
ish Admiralty seems to have decided against this 
course for the present. Sir Samuel Hoare sug- 
gested during the recent Parliamentary debates 
that the réle of the British Expeditionary Force 
was also being reconsidered, and that in future 
British commitments to aid France and Belgium 
may affect only its naval and air forces. The 
French General Staff is said to have misgivings 


FC 


An | 





INERA 





as to the advisability of encumbering its trans- | 


port facilities with British troops at the begin- 
ning of a conflict, when speed is essential. 


HELEN FISHER 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 4, Novemper 20, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lesite Bug, President; EstHer G. Open, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dgan, Eéifor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








