be 


vy needs 
ations in 
-ment of 
Aarch 27 
ting a 
1, Wo 
rved fur. 
ad fallen 


an com 
1 ability 
- the oil 
0 to 8 
t should 
still face 
A merican 
> the pro. 
al affairs 
etroleum 
oil crisis, 
approx: 
t budget, 
e for the 
enditures 
offers are 
ral credit 
Ww peasant 
expected 
culties by 
lining in- 
| political 
F its pres 
x months 
unless he 
sacrifices 
pparently 


OMSON 


iterranean 


ovat Dick 


tish Right 
rhten those 
rlain’s pol 
> corporate 
ors, an op 
tion and 4 
ir Charles 
ie Mediter- 
. He urges 
League of 
t-wing eX 
erstanding 


ed. National) 
id-class matte? 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Vou. XVII, No. 24 


AprIL 8, 1938 


—_ 


THE STRUGGLE OVER SPAIN 
by John C. deWilde 


The role of European powers in the Spanish war is 
analyzed in this timely report, which surveys the efforts 
of the London Non-Intervention Committee to stop the 
flow of men and munitions, reviews the Deutschland 
incident and the campaign against “piracy,”’ and sum- 
marizes the charges and counter-charges concerning 
foreign intervention. 


April 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents a copy 


Entered as second- 


v 
ERIODICAL cus ‘mue Dees 
NI L LIBRARY Office a1 New York, 
V. OF Mic N. Y¥., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


—_— 


—_—- 


CHINA MOVES TOWARD DEMOCRACY 


— taken by the Kuomintang plenary ses- 
sion, held March 29 to April 2 in Hankow, 
exhibit the most notable democratic and progressive 
trend in Chinese political life during the past decade. 
Within China’s broad anti-Japanese front, which has 
become stronger and more united as the war pro- 
presses, an increased degree of popular initiative and 
participation has been apparent for some months. 
The Hankow plenary session placed the official 
samp of Kuomintang approval on these develop- 
ments by establishing legal channels of freer politi- 
cal expression. This liberal evolution contrasts sharp- 
ly with the results of the recent session of the Jap- 
anese Diet, which adjourned on March 26 after pass- 
ing bills consolidating Japan’s totalitarian structure. 

The creation of a People’s Political Council, 
which will include a widely representative member- 
ship, constitutes the outstanding achievement of the 
Kuomintang plenary session. Although its powers 
are not yet clearly determined, this body promises to 
hecome a full-fledged legislative organ when the 
new constitution is promulgated. Even under present 
tegulations, the People’s Political Council will be 
tepresentative not merely of the Kuomintang but of 
all party groups. This step toward democratic gov- 
€tnment is supported by the decree granting full 
freedom of press, speech and association. Such free- 
dom has already been effective for some months. For 
the first time in years, newspapers of many political 
shades, including the Communist Hsin Hua Jih Pao, 
or New China Daily, are now being published. The 
possibility of achieving these democratic reforms was 
originally considered during the negotiations which 
established the Kuomintang-Communist entente last 
spring. Exigencies of the war, which necessitate full 
mobilization of popular energy and initiative, have 
hastened the establishment of a more liberal politi- 
cal régime. 


The reforms so far adopted have not threatened 
the dominant political position of the Kuomintang, 
although they tend to modify in important respects 
the exclusive dictatorship formerly exercised by this 
party. At the Hankow sessions, several efforts were 
made to strengthen its national standing. A Kuomin- 
tang Youth Organization, established for future 
party members, broadened the base of the older 
method of party recruitment. Generalissimo Chiang 
Kai-shek became Tsung Tsai, i.e., Leader or Presi- 
dent, with the post of permanent chairman of the 
Central Executive Committee and with powers of 
“conditional veto” over the latter's actions. This 
move is not necessarily “fascist.” Chiang’s increased 
powers enable him to act more effectively against the 
dogmatic adherents of an exclusive Kuomintang dic- 
tatorship. Nor is the evolving Hankow régime “com- 
munist.” Its liberal republican basis is made evident 
in the reiteration of Dr. Sun Yat-sen’s principles of 
nationalism, democracy, and people’s livelihood as 
the basic precepts of the Chinese political system. 
These principles are receiving fuller and more gen- 
uine expression than for a decade past. 


In Japan the actions of the Seventy-third Diet 
marked out a very different path. The Japanese par- 
liament passed the regular budget of 2,868 million 
yen, as well as additional war appropriations of 
4,850 millions. To the degree that these funds are 
devoted to expansion of war industry, the reaction- 
ary alliance of the militarists and heavy industry will 
be further strengthened. Passage of the National 
Mobilization Bill gives this coalition a blank check 
it can fill in without reference to the will of the 
elected representatives of the Japanese people. This 
measure, as well as nationalization of the electric 
power industry, was forced through the Diet by vatri- 
ous bulldozing methods. Police raids on the Seiyukai 


—_—_—_—_—_— 


and Minseito party headquarters, physical attacks on 
some members of the Diet, widespread arrests of lib- 
etals and radicals, and Premier Konoye’s threat to 
organize a single Fascist party all contributed to 
passage of the disputed bills. Japan’s international 
economic position continues to deteriorate. Drastic 
import control, eliminating needed materials, reduced 
the excess of imports during January and February; 
more significant, Japanese exports also declined dur- 
ing this period. Japan’s orders for raw cotton and 
petroleum in the American market, it is reported, are 


now being held up in the hope of securing long-term 
credits for such purchases. 


On the military fronts in China, the Japanese in- 
vaders have encountered resistance which is proving 
much more difficult to overcome. Chinese operations 
on the strategic Hsiichow front in southern Shan- 
tung have exhibited unsuspected potentialities of ini- 
tiative and effective staff work. Well-conceived at- 
tacks, delivered against both flanks of the Japanese 
forces along the Tientsin-Pukow Railway, have dis- 
rupted the latter's communications in Shantung and 
held up the divisions constituting the spear-head of 
the Japanese offensive. At the end of March, Gen- 
eralissimo Chiang Kai-shek personally supervised 
successful frontal attacks on the advanced Japanese 
lines north of Hsiichow. Victory to Japan on this 
front, despite its heavy costs in men and materials, 
will not be decisive. The Japanese drive in Shansi 
province also bogged down, leaving several divi- 
sions so precariously isolated that they had to be 
supplied by airplanes. In the North China provinces 
off the railways, the Eighth Route Army has organ- 
ized an administration of seven million people, who 
are being mobilized for guerrilla warfare. The new 
Chinese puppet régime at Nanking, set up on March 
28 under Japanese auspices, was inaugurated in the 
midst of serious hostilities along the Yangtze river, 
at Lake Tai near Shanghai, and at Wuhu. The con- 
quest of China by Japanese arms, it would appear, 
is still in its initial stages. T. A. Bisson 


AFTER AUSTRIA, WHAT? 


While Germany and its new Austrian province 
were being subjected to whirlwind propaganda for a 
hundred per cent vote of allegiance to Hitler in the 
post-mortem plebiscite of April 10, Britain, Czecho- 
slovakia and the Catholic clergy of Austria jumped 
on the bandwagon by recognizing Anschluss. On 
March 27 the Catholic bishops, led by Cardinal 
Innitzer, urged their flocks to vote for union with 
Germany. This gesture of the Austrian clergy, re- 
garded by German Nazis as the first step toward 
reconciliation between the Nazi state and the Cath- 
olic church, was in sharp contrast to the silence of 
the German bishops, who had been expected to fol- 


Page Two 


——, 
— 


low suit on April 3, and to a Vatican statement of 
March 31 that the Austrian declaration had been jg. 
sued without the approbation of the Holy See. 
The one dissident note in this chorus of acquies. 
cence came, not altogether surprisingly, from Rome, 
where Count Ciano and the Earl of Perth labored to 
complete an Anglo-Italian accord which might serve 
as counter-weight to the Rome-Berlin axis. In a belli. 
cose speech to the Senate on March 30, Mussolini de. 
clared that “when some passes’’—interpreted as 4 
reference to the Brenner—‘‘are sealed, which we are 
doing, the Alps which form the rest of the great 
circle are impassable, and not only during the winter 
months.” Asserting that Italy could mobilize “four 
to five millions of first-line combatants,’ he said, 
with his eye apparently on Hitler: “This sh 
ridiculous are the polemics of certain qua be: 
yond the Alps according to which the Afri 
the formation of two army corps in Libya aud the 
participation of volunteers in the Spanish war have 
weakened us,” and boasted that the Italian army “is 
the only one since the World War which has had the 
experience of a war lived and won.” If Germany 
had hoped to divert Italy from Europe to Africa—as 
in the case of France after the Franco-Prussian wat 
—Mussolini’s speech would indicate that this hope 
may yet prove unfounded, especially once Italy 
reaches a settlement with Britain. The prospects for 
such a settlement, brutal as this may sound, would be 
aided by liquidation of the Spanish civil war, rapidly 
approaching a climax with the capture of Lerida by 
the Rebels on April 3, which threatens to drive 4 
wedge between Barcelona and Valencia. 


Little improvement, meanwhile, appeared in the 
position of Czechoslovakia, directly menaced by Ger. 
many’s eastward drive. In an attempt to meet the de- 
mands of the Sudeten Germans, Premier Hod 
broadcast a proposal on March 28 for cod: yn of 
the present regulations governing the sta f all 
minorities in Czechoslovakia, but opposed ran 
of “self-government,” which in his opinion would 
lead to disintegration of the Czechoslovak state. His 
proposal was rejected in Berlin, where the Sudetens 
are regarded not as a minority but as a national 
group “maltreated” by the Czechs and entitled 
“self-determination.” Further danger was created by 
the decision on March 29 of other minority groups 
—Poles, Hungarians and Slovak Clericals—to form 
a united front with the Sudeten Germans in pressing 


for autonomy. This movement threatens the break-up | OW 
of Czechoslovakia, confronted by the hostility of Po |" 
land and Hungary, which both hope to feast on}! 


crumbs from the German table. 


French and Soviet pledges of aid to Czechoslo}; 


vakia, and British pledges of aid to France, might 
(Continued on Page 4) 


U 


—_—_— 


APR 
Secreta 
relaxec 
Last w 
Their 

provok 
would 


New 


might 
revolu 
seen. 

Mexic 
Ameri 
fscate 
ignore 
of ex] 
Mr. 
of Me 
provic 
co's f 
is stil 
may | 
ment. 
the U 
firme: 
a frie 
now | 


Senat 
pansi 
deen 
tons 
form: 
ships 
der A 
son f 
that | 


olini de. 
ted as a 
h we are 
he great 
1e winter 
ze ‘four 
he said, 
ws how 
S be. 

C W af, 
aiid the 
war have 
army ‘is 
s had the 
Germany 
frica—as 
sian Wat 
this hope 
nce Italy 
pects for 
would be 
r, rapidly 
Lerida by 


> drive a 


ed in the 
d by Ger 
et the de- 
Hodza 
tion of 

s of all 
prant 

on would 
state. His 
- Sudetens 
1 national 
ntitled to 
created by 
ity groups 
—to form 
Nn pressing 
e break-up 
lity of Po- 
feast on 


Czechoslo |; 


ice, might 


—— 


Washington News Letter 


sithte, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Aprit 4—The response of President Cardenas to 
Secretary Hull’s statement of March 30 has visibly 
laxed the tension in Mexican-American relations. 
last week Washington officials were plainly worried. 
Their position was delicate. They had no desire to 
provoke a major conflict over the oil issue, which 
would undermine the Good Neighbor policy toward 
latin America while inviting caustic criticism of the 
New Deal at home. They did not want to spank 
Card publicly or to force a show-down which 
might lead to chaos in Mexico and possibly end in a 
revolution, the outcome of which could not be fore- 
gen. At the same time, they could not overlook 
Mexico’s failure to compensate thousands of small 
American landowners whose property had been con- 
fscated under the agrarian program, nor could they 
ignore the consequences elsewhere in Latin America 
of expropriation without compensation. 


Mr. Hull’s statement did not challenge the right 
of Mexico to expropriate the property of foreigners, 
provided due compensation was made. While Mex- 
o's response has been received with relief, the issue 
is still fraught with difficulties, and many months 
may be required to work out a satisfactory settle- 
ment. Great Britain, whose stake is even greater than 
the United States’, is apparently still pressing for a 
firmer stand, but the Cardenas note has established 
afriendly basis for negotiation which Washington 
now hopes may result in an equitable agreement. 


Super-Battleships: A formal request for construc- 

45,000 ton battleships was made by 
eahy on April 4 at the opening of the 
Senate hearings on the administration’s naval ex- 
pansion program. State Department officials have 
been most reluctant to discuss the naval conversa- 
tions in London which culminated last week in the 
formal scrapping of the 35,000 ton limit on battle- 
hips by Britain, France and the United States un- 
der Article 35 of the Naval Treaty of 1936. The rea- 
on for this diplomatic reticence is found in the fact 
that the United States, alone among the three naval 
powers, apparently objected not only to retaining the 
ld treaty limits but also to fixing any new limitation 
mm the size of future capital ships. 


A) 


The facts, as reported in diplomatic circles here, 
indicate that when the conversations began following 
Japan’s refusal to disclose its building program, both 
Britain and France—much to the surprise of the 


United States—opposed any step which would upset 
the existing naval balance in Europe. At the present 
time no continental power has laid down any capital 
ship over 35,000 tons. Germany and Russia, more- 
over, are bound by the qualitative limits of the 1936 
treaty under separate agreements with Britain, while 
Italy has seen fit to keep within the same limits. 
France argued, with considerable force, that the dan- 
ger of bringing other European powers into a new 
naval race was greater than the potential threat from 
Japan’s reported building program. The United 
States, while not suggesting the maximum tonnage 
which it proposed to build, held out for complete 
freedom to match any ships which Japan may lay 
down. In the end, Britain deferred to the United 
States, and France was compelled to acquiesce. The 
French note, however, made it clear that France does 
not intend to lay down ships over 35,000 tons as 
long as no other European power departs from this 
standard, and will continue to press for an early 
agreement on the size of future ships. Consultations 
on fixing of a new tonnage limitation will begin 
in London within the next few weeks, and there is 
every indication that the United States may again 
find itself alone in demanding the maximum tonnage. 


Naval Strategy: A possible clue to United States 
naval strategy in the Pacific was found last week in 
a routine Navy Department order which provoked 
some comment in diplomatic quarters. The announce: 
ment—unimportant in itself—revealed that the Navy 
had appointed Captain Monroe Kelly as United 
States Naval and Air Attaché to the Netherlands. 
The only previous occasion when the United States 
assigned a naval attaché to The Hague was during 
the Manchurian conflict of 1931-32. The new ap- 
pointment revived discussion of possible British, 
American and Dutch cooperation in the western 
Pacific. Because of the strategic importance of the 
Dutch East Indies, with their valuable oil reserves, 
the British and Dutch navies have long had a close 
working arrangement which was recently perfected 
in naval conversations at Singapore. Possible coop- 
eration of the United St: 
commitments—would aid any British plans for clos- 
ing of the channels from Singapore through the 
Dutch East Indies, and would permit extension of a 
long-distance naval blockade to American Samoa, 
which is now the scene of American naval maneuvers. 


WILLIAM T. STON! 


AFTER AUSTRIA, WHAT? 
(Continued from Page 2) 


be expected to give Hitler pause. What Czecho- 
slovakia must anticipate, however, is not overt war, 
but the same subversive technique which has al- 
ready served Hitler well in Germany, Spain and Aus- 
tria. This technique calls merely for Nazi propa- 
ganda among people susceptible to fear of commu- 
nism, like the German industrialists and the Spanish 
Rebels, or to “blood” patriotism, like the Austrian 
Nazis and the Sudeten Germans. Once fear or pa- 
triotism has been aroused and translated into action 
—ostensibly without German interference—then all 
that is necessary is to describe opposition to Ger- 
many’s aims as “communism” or “internal disorder,” 
which Hitler, self-appointed defender of Europe 
against bolshevism, must then intervene to subdue. 

The advantage of this technique, from Hitler's 
point of view, is that it may be used without neces- 
sarily creating a casus belli. On the contrary, it places 
the responsibility for outbreak of war not on the dic- 
tators—who by mere threats are achieving their ob- 
jectives with a minimum of bloodshed—but on 
Czechoslovakia and its allies, should they attempt to 
resist Germany. This confronts France and Britain 
with a cruel dilemma: either resist now, thus risking 
war; Of continue to negotiate with the dictators, in 
the hope that some formula may be found to pre- 
serve European peace—but always with the risk that 
conflict may eventually prove unavoidable. 

After Austria, it is difficult to urge a “firm stand” 
against the dictators—even if such a stand could be 
realistically expected from Britain, divided against 
itself on foreign policy and anxious for peace at any 
price, or France, forced by lack of internal stability 
to follow in Britain’s wake. The hour for forming a 
common front against dictatorial aggression, which 
could have proved effective in Manchuria, Ethiopia, 
and even in Spain, ran out at Berchtesgaden, when 
Britain and France demonstrated their reluctance to 
resist Germany unless their immediate interests are 
affected. A common front today would represent not 
an attempt to rally the world under the banner of 
collective security, but an effort to defend existing 
territorial arrangements in Europe by an alliance of 
anti-Fascist against Fascist countries. For such an 
alliance an argument may be cogently presented by 
those who believe that democracy will be made safe 
on the fields of Spain and Czechoslovakia, and that 
Nazism will thus be extirpated in Germany. In coun- 
seling this course, it must be realized that the dicta- 
torships, unlike the democracies, would not in the 
last resort shrink from war. The German people 


Page Four 


—— 


have been indoctrinated with the belief that war js 
not, of itself, repugnant, least of all when fou 
to maintain or achieve so-called national honor. Mere 
threat of force by Britain and France might 
longer call the bluff of dictators, who have heard ys 
moralize once too often about aggression without at 
tempting to check it either by timely concessions of 
by war. Nor would the economic weakness of Ger. 
many and Italy necessarily prove a deterrent. The 
very paucity of their economic resources calls for 4 
short war compounded of Schrecklichkeit. This was 
clearly stated by Mussolini on March 30 when he 
told the Senate that war from the air must be con 
ducted in a manner to “fracture the morale of the 
people.” 

If resistance today is fraught with risk, what of 
the alternative policy of negotiating with the dict 
tors, now followed by Mr. Chamberlain? In follow 
ing this course, it must be realized that, after Austria, 
there is no longer question of displaying ‘magne 
nimity’” toward Germany, or offering Hitler conce 
sions “on a silver platter.” Hitler is now helping 
himself without courtesy of diplomacy. The mog 
that Britain and France may hope to achieve is ook 
tection for their own territories, by sacrifice of Spaia} 
or Czechoslovakia. And even here it must be realizel 
that Germany may eventually collide with Frane 
and Britain, unless these two countries are prepared] 
to accept second-class positions in Europe, and con 
centrate their efforts on development of empires over 
seas. The anti-communist campaign for which Hitle 
has won support among reactionaries in democrati 
countries is in essence a campaign against demo 
racy. Thus an ultimate conflict with Germany might 
yet prove unavoidable—at a time when the demoe 
racies would perhaps be weaker than they are today 


Confronted by these almost equally dangerow 
courses, the European democracies, as well as i 
United States, must in weighing their decision recog 
nize one fact, no matter how unpalatable: that tw 
ty years after a world war fought to balk Ger 


hegemony on the European continent, we are (Ot 
fronted with a resurgent Germany, pursuing uf 
Hitler a foreign policy not essentially different ff 
that of the Kaiser. The fundamental question 
must answer is this. Having returned—partly throu 
our own failure to support an alternative system—t 
precarious balance of power politics, do we beli 
that by resisting Germany by force we would, 
if victorious, lay the foundations for peace—or m 
ly create fresh opportunities for war? 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 24, Aprit 8, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasime Busgit, President; Vera MicHELes Dgan, Editor. 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Natioa 
Entered as second-class mam 


An 


| 


VOL. 


April 


formr 


