r tactics 
“pack” 
U-boats, 
irplane; 
otection, 
and ait 
ican and 
mch and 
ate their 
r former 
half our 


then Ad- 
, Straight 
rcome in 
ze forced 
. But the 
yet to be 
bmarines 
ne Anglo- 
yusly cur: 
continue 
American 
‘avely fe 
- seaboard 
ortage. 
s gigantic 
g in 194} 
nough the 
irine with 
the bomb- 
*s, despite 
: ly to the 
S velll 
r. 


ELLIOTT 


NDS 


PERIODICAL ROOM 


GENERAL LIBRARY 
GNIY. OF MICH 


FEB 2 1943 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 15 


JANUARY 29, 1943 


CASABLANCA CONFERENCE FORECASTS MAJOR EFFORT IN 1943 


HE history-making ten-day conference held in 

Casablanca by President Roosevelt and Prime 
Minister Churchill to map the 1943 strategy of the 
United Nations in such a way as to achieve ‘“‘uncon- 
ditional surrender’ of Germany, Italy and Japan 
came as a climax to a period of mounting Allied 
successes in Europe and Africa. The Roosevelt- 
Churchill negotiations, begun on January 14 and 
completed on January 24, were punctuated by the 
lifting of the siege of Leningrad on January 18 and 
the fall, on January 21, of Tripoli, last bastion of 
Italy's African Empire. They were accompanied by 
the long-awaited meeting between General de Gaulle 
and General Giraud, who agreed that free French- 
men everywhere should work together for the 
liberation of France. Although no announcement 
was made, as had been anticipated, regarding the 
formation of a United Nations military council, 
Premier Stalin and Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek 
were informed at every point regarding the course 
of the Roosevelt-Churchill conversations, and Britain 
and the United States pledged themselves to give 
maximum material aid to Russia and China. 

IS GERMANY NEAR COLLAPSE? The Casa- 
blanca meeting epitomizes the far-reaching shift 
from defensive to offensive which now marks Allied 
Operations against the Axis, and the determination 
of the United Nations to retain the initiative in a 
struggle which appears to be reaching a decisive 
stage. Yet great as are the Allied victories in Russia 
and North Africa, both actually and as compared 
with the military situation existing before Novem- 
ber 1942, they do not yet appear sufficient to explain 
the atmosphere of impending catastrophe reflected in 
news stories and broadcasts emanating from Ger- 
many, unless demoralization in the Reich and on 
the Russian front has gone much further than the 
outside world had been permitted to realize. While 
a sudden collapse of Germany cannot be excluded 


from Allied calculations, it would seem wise not to 
place too much hope in the prospect of rapid disin- 
tegration within the Reich. At the same time, Allied 
strategy must include plans for dealing with condi- 
tions of chaos and anarchy that the breakdown of 
German military power might leave in its wake both 
in the Reich and in Nazi-dominated countries. 

The Russian advances, which are no longer local 
operations but parts of a closely meshed plan cov- 
ering all sectors of the Russo-German front, open 
up the possibility of a Russian thrust in the north 
against Finland, conceivably linked with a British 
landing in Norway, and of a “preventive” German 
blow at Sweden, to which the Swedish Foreign Min- 
ister, Per Albin Hansson, apparently referred in his 
speech of January 18 warning that Sweden might 
have to defend itself without warning. Russia’s vic- 
tories also create a difficult situation for Germany's 
satellites, notably Hungary and Rumania, whose 
troops, fighting reluctantly at the side of the Ger- 
mans, are reported to have suffered heavy losses on 
the Russian front, while at home their governments 
are confronted with mounting opposition to contin- 
ued collaboration with the Reich. 

The success of the Red Army in dislodging the 
Germans from fortified positions where they had 
expected to weather another winter is primarily the 
result of well-planned and well-timed operations, 
carried out with the aid of fresh reserves who had 
been undergoing training in the interior of the coun- 
try during the past year. Considerable aid, however, 
has been given both by the opening of an Allied 
front in French North Africa, which forced the Ger- 
mans to divert part of their air force from Russia to 
the Mediterranean; and by increased shipments of 
war material from Britain and the United States. 
These two countries together, according to the re- 
port made public on January 20 by Edward R. Stet- 
tinius, Jr., Lend-Lease Administrator, up to 1943 had 


Nae 
1 


Sips age aes 
nn ES = 


a 
oe 


sey 
~* 


ten. 
ass 


2°28 


~tes 


=> 


—={=====ana=SSSSSH"EEE Px Two 


shipped Russia 4,600 planes and 5,800 tanks, in ad- 
dition to other war material and foodstuffs. 
TOWARD A UNITED NATIONS COUNCIL. 
Out of this growing coordination of military and 
supply strategy on the two major fronts from which 
the assault on the “fortress of Europe” is being di- 
rected may gradually emerge the as yet officially 


undefined pattern of a United Nations Council that 


would seek to coordinate both war and peace aims. 
The need for such coordination was revealed the mo- 
ment Allied forces entered French North Africa, 
which immediately became a proving-ground of 
United Nations intentions and practices. The de 


ASIA’S PROBLEMS CHALLENGE SPIRIT 


The specific decisions reached at Casablanca will 
become known only gradually, but it is clear that, 
despite the increasing likelihood of new action in 
the Far East, the major military emphasis this year 
will quite properly be placed on operations in the 
European theatre. Under these circumstances, the prep- 
aration of the peoples of eastern Asia for a later all- 
out drive against Japan becomes a problem of major 
importance. It would be a serious error to believe 
that a fuller mobilization of the emotional, economic 
and political resources of countries like China and 
India can wait because at some future date it may 
be possible to flood the Far East with tanks, planes 
and men from the United States and Britain. A pol- 
icy of neglecting to develop Asia from within will 
simply prolong the war in that theatre and lead to 
an unnecessarily stormy period of reconstruction. 


ARE WE ACTING TOO SLOWLY IN ASIA? 
It would be false to suggest that the leaders of the 
United Nations are not aware of these facts. The 
recent renunciation of extraterritoriality, for ex- 
ample, constitutes an important step toward winning 
the war and assuring China’s full equality after the 
fighting is over. Yet, with history moving at an ex- 
traordinarily rapid pace, governmental policies some- 
times lag unnecessarily behind the times. Forward- 
looking actions that could have enormous influence 
in Asia naturally fail to arouse the expected enthusi- 
asm when they are surrounded by protocol and de- 


WHAT AMERICANS THINK 
ABOUT POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION 
On the Pacific Coast, by Chester H. Rowell 
In Upstate New York, by Paul B. Williams 


The Rocky Mountain Region, 
by Ben M. Cherrington 


25c 


January 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports— 


Reports are published on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5 a year; to FPA members $3. 


——y 
—— 


Gaulle-Giraud agreement, reached under the auspices 
of Britain and the United States, which are trying 
not to impose on the French people in advance a 
government they had not had the opportunity to 
choose, seems a hopeful portent of the methods that 
might be used in other countries liberated from Axis 
rule; while the Casablanca meeting itself gives evi. 
dence that the United Nations statesmen are thinking 
in terms of a major effort in 1943 which, by shorten. 
ing the war, would make it possible to save what is 
left of Europe before it is too late. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


OF INITIATIVE IN WEST AND EAST 


liberation instead of being carried through with 
dispatch. This was true of the treaties on extratet- 
ritoriality, which were not concluded until more 
than three months after the United States and Britain 
first announced their intention to give up special 
rights in China. 


If these treaties had been accompanied by the : 


retrocession to China of the British lease at Kowloon, 
by American moves to place Chinese immigration on 
a quota basis, or by discussions for the return of the 
British-owned but Chinese-inhabited territory of 
Hongkong, no one could have mistaken the signif 
cance of what was happening. Similarly, had the 
Cripps proposals been made before the war with 
Japan rather than at a moment when Allied fortunes 
in the Far East were at their lowest ebb, the reaction 
in India very likely would have been quite different. 
We cannot expect the people of Asia to be grateful 


for concessions that appear to be offered grudgingly 


and at the last moment. 


THE PATH TO LIBERATION. Delays in taking 
the steps necessary to arouse Asia to the fullest en- 
thusiasm for the United Nations cause can only en- 
courage the widespread view that the peoples of the 
Orient will be liberated during the war and the period 
of reconstruction by the military might and financial 
generosity of outside governments. Certainly, in 
order to destroy Japanese aggression, Asia needs all 
the help it can get, and it will also require material 
aid after the reestablishment of peace. But the be 
lief that the future of the East depends simply on 
actions abroad is in essence a new, more streamlined 
version of the “white man’s burden.”’ Despite mod- 
ern trimmings, the emphasis remains on the infer 
ority of the native populations and the superiority 
of their foreign partners. Liberation is, however, 
largely an internal process, and those on the outside 
can only hope to help create conditions under which 
the most constructive, most democratic tendencies 


of unfree or half-free people will find their ows 


expression. 


—___ 
auspices 
e trying 
lvance a 
unity to 
ods that 
om Axis 
ives eyj- 
thinking 
shorten- 
- what is 


DEAN 


ST 

gh with 
extratet- 
til more 
d Britain 
> special 


| by the 
~owloon, 
ration on 
rn of the 
itory of 
e signifi 
had the 
war with 
fortunes 
- reaction 
different. 
- grateful 
‘udgingly 


in taking 
ullest en- 
only en- 
les of the 
he period 
financial 
ainly, im 
needs all 
. material 
it the be 


imply on | 


‘eamlined 
pite mod- 
he infer 
uperiority 
howevel, 
1e outside 
der which 
rendencies 
their owl 


es 
——— 


ASIA ALSO HAS RESPONSIBILITIES. Some- 
times, it is true, the leaders and peoples of Asia 
themselves do not fully appreciate the importance 
of their initiative in helping to defeat the enemy 
and in planning for reconstruction. Emphasizing 
genuine shortcomings on the part of the major 
Allies, they may underestimate their own power 
to improve difficult situations. In India, for ex- 
ample, the nationalist leaders unwisely allowed prac- 
tical difficulties and bitter emotions to deflect them 
from the easiest course to freedom—participation in 
the war against the Axis. As a result of this policy 
and of Britain’s refusal to reopen discussions after 
the return of Sir Stafford Cripps to London, India 
is farther from independence today than it was a 
year ago, while the final achievement of freedom 
may prove a far more turbulent process than if 
agreement had been reached. 


Similarly, in China, justified complaints about the 
shortsightedness of western policy sometimes con- 
ceal Chungking’s failure to take all measures open 
to it. It is well known, for example, that the shortage 
of supplies from abroad is an important factor in 
China’s serious inflation, but it is unfortunately also 
true that bureaucratic circles in the government have 


THE F.P.A. 


How to Win the Peace, by C. J. Hambro. Philadelphia, 

Lippincott, 1942. $3.00 

An unusually forthright discussion of post-war prob- 
lems and procedures by the President of the Norwegian 
Parliament and the League of Nations Assembly. Drawing 
on his practical experience of international affairs, Mr. 
Hambro opposes any attempt by the great powers to re- 
duce the role of small nations after the war, and urges the 
creation of a “peace patrol” that would be on the alert for 
the first indications of aggressive spirit on the part of any 
nation. 


The Netherlands Indies and the United States, by Rupert 
Emerson. Boston, World Peace Foundation, 1942. Cloth 
50 cents, paper 25 cents. 

An American student of Southeast Asia describes suc- 
cinctly our interest in the Indies and concludes that we 
cannot afford to see them controlled by a hostile power. He 
suggests post-war international supervision of the Indies 
—with special Dutch weight in the administration—di- 
rected toward earliest possible independence for the islands. 


Radio Goes to War, by Charles J. Rolo. New York, Put- 
nam’s, 1942. $2.75 
The first book-length study of the use of radio as an in- 
strument of political warfare. The author analyses the 
well-planned German radio propaganda attack which be- 
gan long before the actual conflict, and indicates how the 


Allies are gradually perfecting their counter-offensive on 
the air. 


Page Three — 


impeded the development of the Chinese Industrial 
Cooperatives, thereby preventing China from realiz- 
ing certain possibilities of greater domestic produc- 
tion. If prices are high partly because the Burma 
Road is no longer open, it must be recognized that 
the failure of the government to use its full power 
against hoarders and speculators is at least equally 
important. 

Clearly, it is necessary that both the Western 
powers and the Eastern peoples make their maxi- 
mum contribution in war and peace by dealing with 
the problems that lie within their respective spheres. 
This means, first of all—since the major immedi- 
ate responsibility rests on those with greater strength 
and experience—that the West must help create a 
greater spirit of confidence in Asia by removing the _ 
various remaining discriminations, political, eco-- 
nomic and racial. On the other hand, within their 
power and experience, the peoples of the East can- 
not shirk their obligations or avoid taking steps to 
solve problems which, in the long run, will be solved 
either by themselves or not at all. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(The second of four articles on war and reconstruction 
in the Far East.) 


BOOKSHELF 


Ambassadors in White, by Charles Morrow Wilson. New 
York, Henry Holt, 1942. $3.50 
This book is a series of biographies of the men who have 
worked so untiringly to rid the American tropics of disease 
and death. It makes stirring reading. 


Fiscal Planning for Total War, by W. L. Crum, J. F. Fen- 
nelly and L. H. Seltzer. New York, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, 1942. $3.00 
A comprehensive and well-balanced treatise on war fi- 

nances, with special emphasis on the implications of total 

warfare. 


Ireland, Past and Present, by Tom Ireland. New York, 
Putnam’s, 1942. $5.00 


A convenient chronological history of Ireland, with 
special emphasis on the recent period. The author believes 
that Ireland, despite the risk involved, should grant the 
United States and Britain the use of its western ports. 


The Unguarded Frontier, by Edgar W. McInnes. New 

York, Doubleday, Doran, 1942. $3.00 

A valuable contribution to the literature of American- 
Canadian relations. In a book scholarly enough for the 
professional historian and readable enough for the serious 
layman, Professor McInnes traces the course of Canada’s 
relations with the United States from the Franco-British 
struggle for supremacy in America to the Hyde Park 
agreement of 1941. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 15, January 29, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; VERA MicHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Sp 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washin gton News Letter 


JAN. 25.—Seldom in the age-long history of wars 
has there been such an imposing example of hemi- 
spheric solidarity against a common enemy as is now 
presented by the New World after Chile’s action 
in breaking off relations with the Axis on January 
20. Of the 21 American republics, 12 are now at war 
with the Axis, 8 others have severed relations with 
the Fascist bloc, and only one, Argentina, still con- 
tinues to harbor agents of Germany, Japan and Italy 
on its territory. 

Chile’s rupture with the Axis marks the successful 
conclusion of a bitter political battle between friends 
and foes of this step lasting nearly a year. It was on 
February 1, 1942 that Juan Antonio Rios was elected 
President in a campaign waged chiefly on an anti- 
Axis platform. In his inaugural address on April 2 
he promised that Chile would ‘‘faithfully carry out 
her duties of continental solidarity.’ But it was not 
until more than nine months later that the Chilean 
Senate, by a vote of 30 to 10, gave effect to the reso- 
lution of the Rio de Janeiro conference of January 
1942 calling on all the American republics to sever 
relations with the Axis. This decision seems to have 
been well received in Chile. The rumored split in 
the cabinet has not yet materialized, and even the 
newspapers that opposed a break now urge coopera- 
tion with the government. 

AXIS THREATS. The Santiago government's ac- 
tion in finally crossing the Rubicon conjures up the 
immediate danger that the flow of supplies from 
Chile to the United States, especially copper (more 
than half our copper imports come from Chile) , 
may be interrupted by enemy action. This might 
happen either as a result of sabotage within the coun- 
try or as a result of attacks by Japanese submarines. 

Internal sabotage might be caused by the 20,000 
German nationals in Chile who live chiefly in 
‘the southern agricultural region, the 12,000 Italians 
who are spread out all over the country, and the 700 
Japanese who live mostly in the strategic ports and 
mining centers of the north. But Chilean authorities 
immediately after the break took measures to sup- 
press Axis espionage and sabotage, and it is believed 
that under energetic Rail Morales Beltrami, pro- 
democratic Minister of the Interior, all fifth-column 
activities will be sternly suppressed. 

A threat to Chile’s maritime communications was 
delivered by Tomokazu Hori, Japan’s radio spokes- 
man, who in a broadcast on January 22 said that 


FOR VICTORY ° 


the Santiago cabinet could no longer reckon with 
“considerate treatment” of its shipping by the Axis, 
Chilean power stations situated on the coast are also 
Open to attack by enemy submarines. But more 
than thirteen months have elapsed since Pearl Har. 
bor, and the balance of naval strength in the Pacific 
has since shifted so decisively in favor of the United 
States that it is doubtful whether Tokyo could now 
make good its boast. 

ARGENTINA HOLDS ALOOF. In 


any case, 


Washington considers complete liquidation of the | 


Axis espionage ring in Chile so important that it is 
willing to risk even the temporary suspension of im- 
ports in order to achieve that end. The memorandum 
submitted by the United States to the Emergency 
Advisory Committee for Political Defense of the 
Continent in Montevideo on January 22 shows how 
dangerous Nazi spy activities are. The memorandum 
disclosed that Buenos Aires was the headquarters 
of the German espionage and sabotage services 
which collected and transmitted to Berlin informa- 
tion about movements of Allied merchantmen and 
warships, U.S. armament production, troop move. 


——————————————— 


ments from the United States to overseas theatres of | 


war, and so on. Many ship sinkings can be directly 
ascribed to this Nazi espionage service. 


It is a great aid to the cause of the United Nations | 


that this organization can no longer function in 


Chile under the aegis of the German Embassy. It | 


seems probable, however, that Nazi agents will be 
able to continue their activities in Argentina. The 
Argentine government’s intention to adhere to a 


policy of rigid neutrality, difficult though that has | 


become now that Chile has deserted it, was affirmed 
by President Ram6én Castillo on January 21, when 
he told newspapermen categorically that Argentina's 
international position “will not change.” 

While the policies of Chile and Argentina have 
until now been parallel, they have never been identi- 
cal. The neutrality of Chile was a matter of tem- 
porary expediency, while that of the Argentine gov- 


ernment is a matter of policy. Traditional jealousy of | 


“Yankee” leadership in South America, a role to 


which Argentina itself aspires, and fear of repercus- | 


sions of a democratic victory on a society based on 
the domination of a semi-feudal landowning caste 
which the government represents, are the principal 
reasons why the Argentine cabinet continues a policy 
of isolation. JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


— 
VoL 


