



@® 


7,'= @ He TV 


d 
d 


\- 


y 
| 


_ — -z 
~ « 


= oe Ft =" 


—_ — 


Sa bake SG 





5 > 





Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 


2, M92 at the Post 
Office Tew York, 
B.. ound: the act 
4° eee 


32 | 1879. 
?, 

<—~/ 

SA 


a 














Wee V, No. 27 


May 1, 1936 





® EUROPEAN MILITARY POLICIES 
by David H. Popper 


Aft analysis of recent trends in military thought and or- 
ganization among the Continental states which presumably 
would become embroiled at the outset of a European con- 
flict—France, Germany, Italy and the Soviet Union. 


May 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 











WILL NANKING RESIST JAPAN? 





HE sudden elevation of Shigeru Kawagoe, for- 

mer Consul-General at Tientsin who worked 
closely with the Kwantung Army, to the post of 
Ambassador at Nanking offers one more indica- 
tion of the pressure steadily applied by Japan to 
reduce China to the status of a protectorate. 
This policy is officially formulated in the “three 
point” program, elaborated by Premier Hirota 
when he occupied the Foreign Ministry, which 
calls for recognition of “Manchoukuo” by Nan- 
king, suppression of anti-Japanese activities in 
China, and joint Sino-Japanese military action 
against communism. 


Encroachments in North China 


As its main weapon in enforcing Nanking’s 
acceptance of the “three point” program, Japan 
has dismantled and refashioned the political struc- 
ture of north China. Unwillingness to risk an 
open military occupation led to the collapse of 
Major-General Doihara’s ambitious five-province 
“autonomy” scheme last November, but in Hopei 
and Chahar provinces Japanese domination has 
become nearly complete. The former “demili- 
tarized area” in northern Hopei is now ruled by 
Yin Ju-keng’s puppet régime. With its capital 
at Tungchow, only twelve miles from Peiping, this 
East Hopei Autonomous Anti-Communist Coun- 
cil has been gradually assimilated to ‘“Manchou- 
kuo.” Its armed force of about 15,000 troops is 
officered by Japanese, while several hundred 
Japanese troops are also stationed at Tungchow. 

A second body, the Hopei-Chahar Political 
Council, set up at Peiping last December under 
Japanese pressure, occupies a much less clearly 
defined position. Its chairman is General Sung 
Cheh-yuan, who controls the 29th Army—a force 
of some 55,000 men. His Council consists mainly 
of a set of notoriously pro-Japanese figures, in- 
cluding one or two members of the former Anfu 
clique. Several Japanese advisers are attached 


to the Council, but it also maintains direct con- 


nections with Nanking, from which it receives 3 
monthly subsidy said to total approximately one 
million yuan. This “semi-autonomous” political 
status is matched by the undefined limits of its 
territorial control. In Hopei the Council exerts 
no influence over Yin Ju-keng’s “autonomous” 
state. In Chahar, the northern and eastern dis- 
tricts are dominated by General Li Shou-hsin, 
also a Japanese puppet. The rest of Chahar is 
presumably under the jurisdiction of the Hopei- 
Chahar Council, although Japanese military mis- 
sions at Kalgan and other cities are directing 
further advances in Chahar and Suiyuan provinces. 

Japan’s economic penetration of north China 
has also assumed serious proportions. In recent 
years enormous quantities of Japanese sugar, 
rayon, cotton cloth, salt and flour have been 
smuggled into north China with the connivance 
of Japanese officials. According to Japanese 
sources, goods worth 250 million yuan were 
smuggled into China in 1935. These operations 
have recently been facilitated by Yin Ju-keng’s 
admittance of goods into his area at rates from 
one-fourth to one-tenth those of the Chinese Mari- 
time Customs. As a result, he is obtaining rev- 
enues of 2 million yuan a month, while the Tientsin 
customs receipts was reduced by 3 million yuan 
in March. 


Chiang Suppresses Anti-Japanese Movement 


Since December 1935 a broad movement of re- 
sistance to Japanese aggression has developed 
among the Chinese people. Touched off by the 
student mass demonstrations, this movement has 
spread to college professors and _ intellectuals, 
middle and primary school teachers, women’s or- 
ganizations, newspaper reporters and editors, 
workers’ and farmers’ groups, and business or- 
gans. At Peiping and Shanghai, these various 
groups have coordinated their activities in local 
National Liberation Associations, with an uncom- 
promising anti-Japanese program. The Peiping 


ome es 
ee 
me 










































Association’s manifesto calls for the uniting, or- 
ganizing and arming of the Chinese people in a 
war against Japan, to be financed by confiscation 
of Japanese properties in China. It demands com- 
plete freedom of assembly, speech and press, re- 
lease of political prisoners, and an end to civil war. 

Despite rumors that the Nanking régime is 
preparing to fight Japan, Chiang Kai-shek has 
taken vigorous steps to suppress the growing 
anti-Japanese movement, thus carrying out one 
of the items in Hirota’s “three point” program. 
On February 20 the Nanking government issued 
an emergency law to cope with anti-Japanese 
activities. By this law, troops and police are em- 
powered to use “force or any other effective 
means” to dissolve meetings and parades, to sup- 
press propaganda in the form of writings, pic- 
tures or lectures, and to punish all persons who 
give shelter to violators of these provisions. Since 
the issuance of this edict, the Chinese police have 
raided the dormitories of Yenching and Tsinghua 
Universities at Peiping, and Futan University at 
Shanghai, in order to arrest the leaders of the 
student organizations. At times the whole stu- 
dent body has resisted these arrests, suffering 
brutal clubbings from the police. Publications 
issued by the Liberation Associations have also 
been suppressed. Despite these measures, the 
student agitation continues, new periodicals are 
appearing, and the work of the Associations is 
gaining wider support. 


Communists in the Northwest 


A third factor in the Chinese political situation 
is the emergence of Communist armies in the 
northwestern provinces, where their program of 
drastic land reform and establishment of Soviets 
has gained wide popular support. Eighteen 
months ago the main body of the Chinese Com- 
munists began a long trek from Kiangsi province, 
their old base, westward toward Szechuan. In 
the spring of 1935 this army effected a juncture 
in western Szechuan with the second largest Com- 
munist army in China. After several months’ rest, 
the combined forces moved north and defeated the 
main government army blocking an advance into 
Kansu. In the autumn of 1935, after this victory, 
the Communist armies again divided. One force, 
under Chu Teh, moved back into western Szechuan 
to consolidate a base in that area. The other 
force, under Mao Tse-tung, marched north into 
Kansu and Shensi, where it joined local Com- 
munist armies. Early in 1936, a section of these 
forces crossed the frozen Yellow River into Shansi 
province, where it is still operating. 

Consolidation of this northwestern base would 


Page Two 








have two important effects. It would offer re- 
sistance to the spear-head of Japanese penetra- 
tion into Inner Mongolia. Small Communist raid- 
ing parties, seeking to cut the Peiping-Suiyuan 
Railway along which the Japanese are advanc- 
ing, have already been reported in Suiyuan prov- 
ince. In the second place, direct Communist 
operations against the Japanese would afford ad- 
ditional stimulus to the anti-Japanese movement 
in north China, and thus exert further pressure 
on the Nanking régime. Mao Tse-tung, the politi- 
cal leader of the Chinese Communist movement, 
has openly offered to join forces with Chiang 
Kai-shek in a united front against the Japanese 
invaders. Despite repeated threats, the leaders 
of the Kwantung Army have so far failed to move 
Japanese troops against the Communist concen- 
tration in the northwest. Instead, they have per- 
mitted Chiang Kai-shek to send six divisions of 
government troops into Shansi province to fight 
the Communist forces. 

The Nanking government is now faced by op- 
position on three fronts: continued Japanese 
aggression, growing resistance to Japan from the 
Chinese people, and Communist advances in the 
northwest. It cannot waver much longer between 
the clear alternatives raised by this situation. 
Chiang Kai-shek must either choose to become an 
outright tool of Japan, or mobilize the country 
for a united and determined struggle against the 


invader. T. A. BISSON 
EDITORIAL CONTEST AWARDS 


Two hundred and forty-one college students 
participated in the recent Editorial Contest 
sponsored jointly by the F. P. A. and The Nation. 
Papers were sent in from 115 colleges, and 38 
states. The first prize of $50 was awarded to 
Marion Josephine Donnelly, a senior studying 
economics at the University of California, and the 
second prize of $25 to William H. Haight, Jr., a 
senior student of journalism at the University of 
Wisconsin. Five third prizes, each consisting of 
a subscription to The Nation, were awarded to 
Dorothy G. Jacquelin, University of California; 
Janette Lewis, University of Colorado; Dorothy 
B. Jackson, Mt. Holyoke College; Marion Short, 
New Jersey College for Women; and Louis Fein- 
stein, Temple University. Fourth prizes, con- 
sisting of Student Memberships in the F. P. A. 
were won by William R. Trimble, Reed College; 
George Alsberg, Black Mountain College; Mar- 
jorie H. Guess, William Smith College; William J. 
Burns, University of Illinois; and Katherine 
Causey, University of North Carolina. 


M. A. STEWART 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 27, May 1, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Leste Bugit, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MicHEeLes Dean, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


SE pT OD 











i Jaane to 


pili cin Sai ae Win Nt Actin Mins hn am 











] 


