


BESS ZF ERS BI 


rVive 


DUS, 
ment 


ondi- 
ntral 


since 


tates 


New 


hno- 
» the 

the 
»viet 


Uni- 


1 its 
viet 


tional 
DEAN, 
Year. 


— 1946 








WB 2.9 19 





; Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library <neionten 


7? . 
University of wran: 
*¥eeoetyY Of liichieca 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 41 


JULY 26, 1946 





N the eve of the peace conference opening in 

Paris on July 29 relations between the prin- 
cipal Allies of World War II have reached a stage 
of deterioration far more alarming for the future 
of the world than the atomic bomb; for the bomb 
is merely a symbol of the profound anxiety that 
grips peoples everywhere. The chief problem of the 
Paris negotiators is not how to make peace with 
the former enemies but how to keep it among the 
former victorious Allies. 


ALLIES STRUGGLE FOR GERMANY. Wher- 
ever one turns strife is rampant, and human beings 
who have not yet cleared away the rubble of war 


| wearily face the threat of new conflicts. In China 


General Marshall’s efforts to bring about a recon- 
ciliation between the Central government and the 
Communists have proved fruitless, and civil war 
has flared up anew. In Germany the four powers 
which had undertaken to prevent the resurgence of 
German nationalism are fostering it by their dis- 
agreement about the political and economic future 
of the country which, even though defeated and 
partially destroyed, retains incalculable potential- 
ities to determine the destiny of Europe. Will the 
Germans turn to Russia, even more than they did at 
Rapallo in 1922, when the Soviet government was 
still weak and itself opposed by the Western world; 
and will the coalition of Germany's industrial skill 
and Russia’s manpower, dreamed of but not 
achieved by such diverse leaders as Bismarck, Rath- 
enau and Hitler, become a reality? If such a coali- 
tion is to be prevented, what can the United States 
and Britain offer to Germany, which before the war 
was their principal competitor for world markets 
and whose economic recovery beyond the point 





where it can pay for essential imports they can hardly 
| welcome? Will Allied control of Germany develop 


AMERICANS ViEW PEACE NEGOTIATIONS WITH GREATER REALISM 


into a sort of auction for German support, with the 
Western powers and Russia trying to outbid each 
other? Compared to this struggle for domination of 
Germany, the peace treaties with Italy and the Axis 
satellites in Eastern Europe which are to be con- 
sidered by the Paris Peace Conference dwindle to 
peripheral importance. 


Nor is it possible to argue that the Allied con- 
testants are animated solely by the desire to weaken 
or ultimately destroy each other. Other motives be- 
sides ambition for strategic power complicate the 
picture. The United States and Britain genuinely 
fear that Russia will use its control of Eastern Ger- 
many to impose on the entire country the practices 
made familiar by the Soviet system, and thus defeat 
democratization of the Germans. Yet they have not 
defined their own concept of a central administra- 
tion of Germany for which they have been pressing 
since last autumn, apparently assuming that central 
economic administrations for trade, finance, and so 
on can be established without the need for creating 
central political institutions. France, invaded by Ger- 
many three times in one generation, with equal sin- 
cerity opposes a centralized political framework 
for the Reich, fearing that it will again breed mili- 
tarism, and for reasons both of strategy and urgent 
economic need France demands the detachment of 
the Ruhr and administration of the area by an inter- 
national commission. Russia sounds disingenuous to 
its wartime Allies when, after having claimed Ger- 
man territories for itself and Poland, it now opposes 
further “dismemberment” of the Reich. But there 
is little doubt that its demand for additional repa- 
rations out of the current production of an econom- 
ically united Germany is due first of all to its own 
vast needs for reconstruction, which cannot be filled 
promptly either by Russia’s industrial facilities, 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


—_—_— 





sae Te eae Ee a, ee SNS ee ee Senne bee ra Or owe - 
- - AME P STS : —— i FR ° he i" oa « —s oe 


an 


: 
ig } 
Fy 
va 
ii 
x 
$: 
: 
ae 


a, ewer, Revise 
ee ee ee ae oe 

















—— - Page Two 


severely damaged during the war, or by purchases 
in this country, where Moscow can have no hope 
for the time being of obtaining a loan. Russia itself 


is experiencing the ferment of postwar readjust- 
ments. 


STRIFE CONTINUES UNABATED. Meanwhile, 
this struggle over Germany, which has occupied the 
centre of the European stage since V-E Day, in- 
evitably affects the relations of the great powers 
with the other nations of the continent. Poland is 
threatened by civil strife between the Left-wing gov- 
ernment of Premier Bierut, which sees salvation for 
the country only in close collaboration with Russia, 
and other elements ranging from the Peasant party 
headed by former Premier Mikolacjzyk, who has the 
sympathy but not the material support of the West- 
ern powers, and Catholic groups on whose behalf 
Cardinal Hlond has protested against the present 
composition of the cabinet. France and Italy, both 
disillusioned by the character of peace negotiations 
—France because of Russia’s opposition to detach- 
ment of the Ruhr, Italy because of the peace terms 
concerning Trieste, the African colonies, and ces- 
sion of the Briga-Tenda area—are experiencing a 
new wave of nationalism. This nationalist sentiment 
may weaken cooperation between Europe’s Com- 
munist parties, thus in a sense counteracting the in- 
fluence of Russia, but at the same time it divides the 
two Latin countries which together might have given 
stability to the Mediterranean area. Nor is conflict 
limited to former theatres of war. In Latin America, 
now that the restraints of war have been lifted, 
latent unrest is bursting into violent explosions, as 
in Bolivia, or threatens political strife, as in Chile. 


NEW TEMPER OF USS. To all those who, in 


spite of warnings during the war, had hoped that 
the end of hostilities among nations would bring 








i 
ee 


to a close the period of turmoil the world has ex. 
perienced since the turn of the century, the present 
course of events cannot but seem disheartening. Ye 
much encouragement can be drawn from the temper 
with which the United States emerges from the 
agonizingly grinding conferences of the Big Fou 
Foreign Ministers graphically described by Secretary 
of State Byrnes on July 15. Until now this country, 
absorbed in the building of a continent and seem. 
ingly remote from the centers of strife in Europe and 
Asia, had looked upon world affairs with a detach. 
ment that sometimes appeared to other peoples as 
verging on frivolity. Now that through force of 
circumstances we have become immersed in the af. 
fairs of other continents, which are also our affairs, 
a more serious attitude is being developed by the 
American people toward problems of foreign policy; 
and this new attitude should make it possible for the 
United States to play a far more effective role in 
the world. 


The nation is neither in the exalted mood induced 
by war emergency, nor in the mood of apathy that 
some observers thought they detected a few months 
ago. We have lost some of our illusions—illusions 
that colored President Wilson’s idealistic approach 


to the peace settlement of a quarter of a century | 


ago; but in their stead we are acquiring new convic- 
tions which should give a concrete character to our 
policy, too often in the past formulated in terms of 
lofty, but abstract, generalities. This new realism 
need not spell opposition, in season or out, to the 
desires of other countries, and especially of Russia. 
What it can spell is a determination to define our 
own objectives, limited though they may seem at any 
given time, and then to back up these objectives 
with adequate military and industrial power. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


CAN U.S. PREVENT FULL-SCALE CIVIL WAR IN CHINA? 


SHANGHAI—As civil war begins anew in China, it 
becomes urgently necessary to realize why the Chi- 
nese situation is of vital concern to the United States. 
Putting the matter briefly, it is in the interest of the 
United States that China should make a maximum 
contribution to world peace and prosperity. At pres- 
ent, however, China is contributing to neither, for 
its civil strife brings close the danger of another 
world war, while chaotic economic conditions make 
it extremely difficult for the people to buy goods, or 
for Chinese and foreign firms to carry on business. 

Because of the tense state of American-Soviet re- 
lations and the common talk of World War III, 
some people in the United States may consider it 
logical to build up China as a Far Eastern military 
base. Out here it is widely felt that this view exerts 
an important influence on American policy. There 
are high Chinese leaders who are inclined to think 
that the United States will inevitably support the 


Kuomintang against the Communists in an all-out 
civil war because of fear of Russia. Yet if we should 
come to think of China principally as a base for 
resistance to Russia, we would find ourselves under 
the necessity of objecting to leaders opposed to 
China's military preparations, no matter how bene- 
ficial their policies might be for China’s internal 
welfare. 

INTERNAL REFORMS NEEDED. A few ex- 
amples will make this problem concrete. (1) One 
of China’s greatest needs today is to reduce military 
expenditures, so that a larger precentage of the 
budget can be devoted to the well-being of the 
people. Clearly, efforts to build this country into a 
strong strategic base would keep military expendi- 
tures high, irrespective of the contribution the United 
States itself might make. (2) China desperately 
needs agrarian reform to raise the peasant’s standard 
of living. Moreover, it is only through an increase 





— 
in mass 
come a 
s. 
ricipati 
Chines« 
econom 
toward 
ments \ 
could | 
progres 
the Ku 


interes: 
ities at 
tion to 
approd 
to allo 
fault. | 
while 
| offer t 
Sinc 
in WO 
most | 





a larg 
certail 


gave 
pointe 
is an’ 
certai 
Chin< 
to th 
woul: 
The 
quite 
Ame 
that 
of al 
come 


C, 
Apa 
offer 
ernn 
gian 


on 
the 
capi 
trac 
| tior 
thre 
Sta 


the 
wil 
Wi 





he 


lat 
ths 
ns 


ch 





a | 


r 1C- 
ur 


sm 
he 


ur 


ny 
res 


ut 


Id 





el 
— 





in mass purchasing power that this country can be- 
come a great market for foreign, as well as domestic 

s. Yet if China were to prepare itself for par- 
ticipation in a future Soviet-American conflict, the 
Chinese government would hardly be interested in 
economic change, but would rather bend its efforts 
toward suppressing the progressive or radical ele- 
ments which advocate reform. (3) Again, few things 
could be more beneficial for China than to have the 
progressive elements, which undoubtedly exist in 
the Kuomintang, take over the leadership of the 

. Yet these are the very people who are least 
interested in developing China’s military potential- 
ities and who would most prefer to turn their atten- 
tion to the problems of peaceful reconstruction. To 
approach China largely in military terms would be 
to allow Russian political influence to spread by de- 
fault. It would be a confession that the United States, 
while anxious to make use of China, had little to 
offer the Chinese people politically. 


Since a policy of stressing China's military role 
in world affairs would offer encouragement to the 
most militaristic people in the central government, 
a large section of the Chinese people would almost 
certainly hold responsible any foreign power that: 
gave such encouragement, as Mme. Sun Yat-sen 


pointed out on July 23. Lest it be thought that there 





is anything partisan in this outlook, it is equally 
certain that if the United States were neutral in 
China, and Russia poured out military assistance 
to the Chinese Communists, most of the people 
would show great hostility toward Russian policy. 
The fundamental attitude of the Chinese people is 
quite simple: they are neither pro-Russian nor pro- 
American, they are only pro-Chinese. They know 
that a Soviet-American war might be fought first 
of all on their soil, and they have no desire to be- 
come a battleground for other powers. 


CAN CHINA SERVE AS MILITARY BASE? 
Apart from all these considerations, China at present 
offers a pitiful picture of a potential base. The gov- 
etmment is weak and commands only partial alle- 
giance from the people, it faces a strong political 


Page Three 














and military opponent in the Chinese Communists, 
its administrative structure creaks and is marked by 
far greater corruption than in more modern coun- 
tries, its economy is chaotic and suffers from a fan- 
tastic inflation, and its heterogenous troops are in 
various stages of training and development. China 
cannot become strong militarily unless it fortifies 
itself economically and politically, and this can be 
done only if military considerations are minimized 
and emphasis is placed on the creation of a modern 
coalition régime. The logical outcome of a military 
approach to China would be a policy of increasing 
American armed intervention, to make up for the 
power deficiencies of the Chinese government. Ac- 
tually, however, at latest reports, General Marshall's 


‘return to the United States is to be followed by 


the withdrawal of American marines. 


Only one policy can satisfy the real interests of 
China and the United States: to start from the 
premise that full-scale civil war must be stopped, 
that China needs an indefinite period of peace for 
reconstruction, that the main economic and political 
emphasis should be on welfare and democracy, that 
peace cannot be achieved except through the co- 
operation of all political groups and parties, and that 
the best way to attain peace in China is to avoid en- 
couraging the militarists and to make our support 
truly conditional on the establishment of democratic 
unity, in accordance with President Truman’s state- 
ment of last December 15. 


Since the Japanese surrender the United States 
has poured hundreds of millions of dollars into 
China in one form or another—lend-lease, our pre- 
dominant share of UNRRA aid, technical assistance, 
the cost of our armed forces, the extension of a 
cotton loan, etc.—but it appears to many Americans 
over here that much of this money has gone down 
the drain. Our assistance will begin to bring genuine 
returns only when China has a progressive coalition 
government, emphasizing reconstruction, not war. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(Second in a series of articles on United States policy in China.) 


EMPHASIS ON IMPORTS NEEDED TO BALANCE U.S. LOAN POLICY 


The economies of other nations are dependent 
on the United States as never before, for this is 
the only country which has adequate productive 
capacity and loan capital to assist in restoring their 
trade and industry; yet the current economic situa- 
tion here is such as to create grave uncertainty 
throughout the world. Price controls in the United 
States have been allowed to lapse owing to differ- 
ences over the provisions of a new OPA law. By 
the end of the week a compromise price control law 
will have been enacted, but whether the new measure 
will be effective in preventing an inflation spiral re- 


mains to be seen. Fear prevails abroad that the 
United States may experience an uncontrolled rise of 
prices followed by a sharp deflation. If this should 
occur, other nations feel reasonably certain that 
public opinion here will move toward increased pro- 
tectionism, as it did after World War I. 

BRITISH MAY AVOID USING LOAN. The 
most striking example of this uncertainty is the 
situation of the British loan, which was signed by 
President Truman on July 15. In return for the loan, 
Britain undertook to join this country in a program 
of freer multilateral trade, involving important 





See Set Hee 


a 


ei 
[ 
¥ 


4 — et 


wig os 











trade concessions by the British. When the agree- 
ment was drawn up last summer, London measured 
the real value of the loan in terms of prices then 
prevailing. In the meantime, however, American 
ptices have gradually but steadily increased. Since 
the demise of OPA, the upward trend has accel- 
erated. It is not surprising, therefore, that on July 
19 the Financial Secretary to the British Treasury 
announced in Parliament that, although the dollar 
credits had been granted, Britain did not necessarily 
have to draw on them. He further implied that if 
inflation went unchecked here, London might not 
make much use of the loan. Given the precarious 
balance of payments position of Britain, it is a 
plausible assumption that if the loan is not fully 
used, that country will not remove its trade restraints, 
but instead will probably increase them. Whatever 
course Britain elects to follow will serve as an ex- 
ample to other countries which face similar balance 
of payments difficulties. In short, it is clear that the 
threat of inflation is a setback for the American pro- 
gram to promote freer world trade. Stated in another 
way observers abroad, remembering the interwar 
period, have come to think of the American econ- 
omy as being highly unstable; they fear another 
boom and bust, with dire effects on their already 
strained economic systems. 


NO LOANS TO RUSSIA AND CHINA NOW. 
The British loan has been regarded throughout as 
a special measure; loans to other countries must be 
made from the resources of the Export-Import Bank. 
But commitments already undertaken by the Bank 
have reduced its remaining lending power to about 
$350 million. This sum is obviously much less than 
the amounts Russia and China want to borrow. On 
July 18 the President announced he would not re- 
quest Congress to increase the lending power of 
the Bank during the present session; as a result, no 
credit commitments for Russia and China are to be 
made before 1947. Observers agree that Congres- 
sional sentiment at the present time is definitely 
averse to a grant of credit to Russia. In China, little 





JUST PUBLISHED— 


CHILE: MICROCOSM OF MODERN 
CONFLICTS by Olive Holmes 


25 cents 
July 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month 
Subscription $5.00; to F.P.A. members, $3.00 











Page Four 











— 


progress has been made toward a unified govem 191 
ment and military establishment, which Truman; 
statement of December 15 declared to be the condj 
tion for a loan to China; in fact, it now appears thy 
a full-scale civil war may be starting in that county, 


LOANS OR GIFTS? Foreign loans are essentially 
a stopgap measure; they merely provide recipieny 
with dollar exchange to enable them to meet ba. 
ance of payments problems during the difficult per. 
od of transition to peacetime trade and industry, 
If they are not to be gifts, they must be paid off; an 
if they are to be repaid, this country must increas 
its purchases of goods and services abroad. Accord. 
ing to a forecast of the Department of Commerce 
United States loans and investments abroad 
total as much as $30 billion by 1951, including some} Vo 
$10 billion of prewar private foreign investments 
It is not to be expected that all of this debt will be 
repaid, leaving the United States with no foreign 
investments; but more than $10 billion of intergoy. T! 
in E 





ae 


ernmental debts must be paid back, and service 
charges on the whole must be met. To effect this 
transfer of funds, debtors must find dollars; this) phe 
they must do for the most part by selling in due and 
course more to this country than we buy from them } Dr. 
With shortages of goods in the United States anda | ve 
continued rise in prices, this is the time for Wash ‘ 
ington to initiate boldly a sizeable reduction in tariff} ™ 7 
rates. The emphasis of our foreign economic polig he 
must be increasingly shifted from exports to im on 
ports, if we are not to give away goods by financing s 
their sale abroad with loans that cannot be repaid | 
The lessons of the nineteen-twenties are clear—| for 
either the proportion of imports in our foreign trade e 
must rise, or exports will drop once loans to cover . 
payment of interest on outstanding debts cease. ™ 

There was not a steady and sustained flow of capital 
abroad in the interwar period; when the flow de El 
clined rapidly after 1928 the underlying weakness | fe 
of the world’s economic structure became all too soon | tr 
apparent. Looking to the future, we have no assut-} 8% 
ance today that the outward flow of American cap | of 
ital will be stable and steady. Unless the structure} ct 
of foreign trade is geared to this country’s creditor th 
status, there will be no lasting balance and stability | 4 
in the world economy. Instead there will ensue, Pp 
eventually another era of debt defaults, with ac | 
companying recourse to trade and exchange controls |v 
—in short, economic warfare with adverse political | 
repercussions. r 
HAROLD H. HUTCHESON 


(The last of three articles on postwar commercial policy.) 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol., XXV, No. 41, Juty 26, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National | 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Screet, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES DEAN, | 
Editer. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Yeat. 
Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Re *! Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


