ie pre-war 
German 
aS signed, 
| and Brit. 
1e Charter 
territorial 
expressed 
will the 
espect the 
EF govern. 
| out—for 
n Poland? 
ing of the 
' question 
the Char. 
rief eight 
: political 
‘munation; 
nen in all 
1 between 
object of 
economic 
the Char- 
ries ‘“wish 
it restored 
of them,” 
that “the 
reign and 
e military 
European 
1 with the 
ignty? 
_ Whether 


end above | 


he United 
who op- 
t week in 
ing inter- 
epublican 
> Wiscon- 
wever, to 


nm April 5 | 


return to 
chosen by 
$ summer 
nal or the 
ing in the 


BOLLES 
ign policy.) 


NDS 


a _ 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


De 


A..F 
‘vor, Nich, 


5 


|| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


' You. XXIII, No. 27 


ApriL 21, 1944 


—_— 


NATIONAL REGIMES NOT A.M.G. 


A® the belligerents gird themselves for the show- 
down of invasion of Western Europe, the gov- 
ements of the conquered countries perfect their 
arrangements for that moment when they will have 
the opportunity of resuming administrative functions 
on their own soil. At an earlier stage in negotiations 
between Britain and the United States, on the one 
hand, and the exiled governments on the other, it 
had been assumed—especially in Washington—that 
during this transitional period the liberated countries 
would be administered by an Allied Military Gov- 
ernment which, on the restoration of public order, 
would transfer its authority to native civilian admin- 
istrators freely chosen by the people of each nation. 
This procedure, however, did not prove acceptable 


' to the governments representing countries which 


had stubbornly resisted Nazi rule for several years, 
and had no intention of being treated on a par with 
Germany and its satellites. 

PREPARING FOR LIBERATION. It now seems 
settled that, when Allied forces enter the countries 
of Western Europe—France, Belgium, Holland and 
Norway—they will be accompanied by civilian affairs 
units composed of the citizens of these countries, 
specially trained for a wide range of administrative 
duties. In anticipation of this moment, all four coun- 
tries have set up special agencies concerned with in- 
ternal reconstruction, which have not only mapped 
out plans for political readjustments, but also for 
telief and rehabilitation coordinated with the work 
of UNRRA. Similarly, the government of Czecho- 
slovakia, whose liberation has been brought appre- 
ciably nearer by Russian advances in the Carpathian 
fegion, has worked out detailed plans both for col- 
laboration between the Czechoslovak underground 
and the Red Army, and for the reconstruction of the 
country on the basis of close understanding with the 
US.S.R., Britain and the United States. 

AGREEMENT IN WESTERN EUROPE. The 


TO RULE LIBERATED COUNTRIES 


formulation of such plans by the representatives of 
the countries of Western Europe and Czechoslovakia 
has been greatly facilitated by two factors. First, 
except in the case of France, a considerable measure 
of agreement had been achieved within each of them 
before the German invasion concerning the funda- 
mental issues of national life—an agreement that has 
been cemented by sufferings endured in common dur- 
ing the war years, and enhanced by continuous com- 
munication between the governments-in-exile and the 
movements of resistance in their homelands. Second, 
owing to this very cohesion, the governments of Bel- 
gium, Holland, Norway and Czechoslovakia look 
forward with confidence to their return following 
Germany's defeat. King Haakon of Norway and 
Queen Wilhelmina of Holland have indicated that. 
they will consult the wishes of their peoples in any 
political reorganization that may be undertaken dur- 
ing the post-war period; while Prime Minister Piérlot 
of Belgium (who expects King Leopold to resume 
the throne) and President Benes of Czechoslovakia 
have pledged themselves to submit their governments 
to popular plebiscites. 

EASTERN EUROPE IN TURMOIL. In contrast 
to Western Europe and Czechoslovakia, where hope 
exists for an orderly transition from Nazi rule to 
free administration of a democratic character, the 
exiled governments of Poland, Yugoslavia and 
Greece continue to be rent by divergences which 
mirror the cleavages within their conquered home- 
lands. These cleavages, in turn, have created serious 
doubts as to the return of the governments-in-exile 
to their countries unless they meanwhile undergo 
drastic reorganization. It now seems clear that Brit- 
ain and the United States will have little to do with 
the liberation of these countries, that there will be 
no Anglo-American invasion of the Balkans (except 
possibly for British operations in the Greek islands 
and conceivably on the mainland of Greece), and 


that Russia, rather than its Western Allies, will play 
a decisive role in that area. While some Western ob- 
servers continue to believe that Russia will seize this 
opportunity to advance the cause of communism in 
Eastern Europe and the Balkans, evidence available 
so far would indicate that the Russians are willing 
to work with any group, whatever its political com- 
plexion, which is ready to speed the end of the war 
and to collaborate in a friendly spirit with the 
U.S.S.R. in the post-war period. This policy has al- 
ready been followed by Moscow with respect to the 
Badoglio government, whose broadening—through 
the admission of representatives of the six-party 
junta which includes Communists—was advocated 
by Soviet Assistant Commissar of Foreign Affairs 
Vishinsky on April 16. The following day the 
Badoglio cabinet resigned, thus clearing the way for 
the formation of the wider coalition urged by the 
Allies. 

At this critical moment, when the groups that are 
to participate in the reconstruction of Europe are 
coalescing or emerging from hiding, it is important 
for Americans to bear three considerations in mind. 
First of all, our experience in Italy clearly demon- 
strates the difficulties that would be faced by any 
Allied commission in trying to take over the admin- 
istration of liberated countries. It is therefore highly 
desirable that the civilian administration of the 
United Nations in Europe should be carried out to 
as great an extent as possible by native administra- 
tors, provided, of course, that they do not interfere 
with military operations. As it is, Allied administra- 
tors will have their hands full in trying to rule, even 
temporarily, over Italy, Germany, and Axis satellites. 

In the second place, it is important for Americans 
of European origin to realize that the future of their 


Page Twd 


—— 
— 


former homelands must be determined primarily by 
those who live there, not by Americans. It seems up. 
fortunate, for example, that citizens of Italian origin § 
should threaten the present Administration with loss 
of their political support because the American goy. 
ernment, in conformity with public opinion here, has 
sought to broaden the base of the Badoglio govern. 
ment. The sooner the Italians themselves can admin. 
ister their own affairs, the better. But there is cop. 
siderable confusion among those Americans who, 
one day, berate the United States for strengthening 
the position of Badoglio, and the next attack it for } 
urging the inclusion of other elements in the 
Badoglio government—just because they happen not 
to approve of some of these elements. 

And, finally, we must be prepared for many dis. 
appointments and deceptions in the return of Europe 
to non-Fascist and non-Nazi forms of administration, 
Years of repression and terror, the execution or im- 
prisonment of active or potential leaders of demo- | 
cratic movements, sheer physical fatigue and moral 
discouragement, have taken their toll of Europe's 
populations. Time and patience will be required be. 
fore we can see the flowering on the continent of in- 
stitutions and practices resembling those of Britain 
and the United States. The most tragic thing that 
could happen now would be for us to become dis- | 
couraged about prospects for democracy in Europe. | 
These prospects exist, the seed of liberty is strong— } 
but whether it will grow and burgeon will depend 
on the measure of faith we can show in the peoples 
of that ravaged continent, and the degree of assis- 
tance we are ready to give those groups which show | 
themselves genuinely concerned with the welfare of 
their peoples. 


EE — 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


PHILADELPHIA CONFERENCE TO DETERMINE ROLE OF I.L.O. | 


The International Labor Conference, which opened 
in Philadelphia on April 20, was convened by the 
Governing Body of the International Labor Organ- 
ization in the belief that the war situation makes it 
imperative that “consideration should be given to the 
social problems that will arise during the last period 
of the war and after the close of hostilities.’’ While 
the prepared agenda of the conference is far-reach- 
ing in scope, I.L.O. officials do not aim at the adop- 
tion of precise international conventions as has been 
done in the past. Instead, it is expected that special 
attention will be given to a restatement of the pur- 
poses and procedures of the I.L.O., which may go 
far toward determining the competence of the organ- 
ization in the broader field of financial and economic 
problems that bear upon labor standards and social 
security. 

REPRESENTATIVES AT THE CONFERENCE. 
Approximately forty countries were expected to at- 


tend the conference, although the official delegations 
of all these nations had not been announced at the 
time of the opening session. Every effort has been | 
made by I.L.O. officials to arrange for the presence of | 
delegates from the U.S.S.R., which automatically | 
ceased to be an I.L.O. member when it was expelled | 
from the League of Nations in December 1939, 


after its attack on Finland. Before the meetings, | 


controversy developed over seating the Argentine 
delegation, as well as applicants from the Italian 


government. | 


The I.L.O. is a unique international organization 
in that it affords representation not only to govern- 
ments but also to employers and workers—the func- 
tional groups directly concerned with the problems 
with which it deals. Because of this, the full slate of 
the United States delegation was determined only 
after a controversy regarding the labor delegate had 
been ended by the withdrawal of a demand on the 


——:! 
marily by 
S€eMS un. 
ian Origin 
with loss 
ican goy. 
here, has 
O govern. 
in admin. 
re iS Con- 
ans who, 
igthening 
ack it for 
; in the 
ippen not 


nany dis- 
yf Europe 
istration, 
nN Of im- 
of demo- 
nd moral 
Europe's 
juired be- 
ent of in- 
f Britain 
hing that 
come dis- 
1 Europe. 
strong— 
1 depend 
e peoples 
of assis- 
ich show 
relfare of 


DEAN 


‘legations 
ed at the 
has been 
esence of 
matically 
expelled 
er 1939, 
meetings, 
Argentine 
e Italian 


anization 
) govern- 
the func- 
problems 
1 slate of 
ned only 
sgate had 
id on the 


. 
yY tt 


; 


ee" 
—_—_—_ 


part of the Congress of Industrial Organizations that 
it be represented in the American delegation along 
with the American Federation of Labor. On April 16 
President Roosevelt named Mr. Robert J. Watt, In- 
ternational Representative of the A.F.L. since 1936, 
as sole representative of organized labor. Mr. Henry 
|. Harriman, vice chairman of the New England 
Power Association and former president of the U.S. 
Chamber of Commerce, was appointed the employer 
delegate, while Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins 
and Senator Elbert D. Thomas of Utah were named 
as government representatives. 

AGENDA PLANNED IN LONDON. The 
agenda for the present conference was prepared by 
the Governing Body of the I.L.O. in London last 
December. Support for the program outlined in the 
agenda was given by Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden 
when he said: “I hope to see the I.L.O. become the 
main instrument for giving effect to Article V of 


_ the Atlantic Charter [freedom from want}.” Mr. 


Eden stated further that ‘‘your Organization will no 
doubt scrutinize plans for economic and financial re- 
construction from the point of view of the social 
objectives at which you aim.” 

On this broad basis the discussions of the con- 
ference center on the following agenda: (1) future 
policy, program and status of the I.L.O.; (2) recom- 
mendations to the United Nations for present and 
post-war social policy; (3) organization of employ- 
ment in the transition from war to peace; (4) social 
security: principles, and problems arising out of the 
war; and (5) minimum standards of social policy in 
dependent territories. 

FUTURE OF THE I.L.0. Although the breadth 
of the plans envisaged under the agenda is to be wel- 
comed, little evidence other than Mr. Eden’s general 
statement has been given by the governments most 
vitally concerned that any such program of action is 


Page Three 


Nothing will be more important in the realization 
of an expanding world economy in peacetime than 
settlement of the Lend-Lease problem. For an 
analysis of the contribution of Lend-Lease to vic- 
tory and the peace, and an outline of a Lend-Lease 
settlement, read: 


REACHING A LEND-LEASE SETTLEMENT 
by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


April 15 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


to devolve upon the I.L.O. It must also be admitted 
that there has been little time in the four months 
since the London meeting to investigate fully all of 
the problems raised. More specifically, the Allied 
governments are far from agreement on such matters 
as the maintenance of stable exchange rates, the crea- 
tion of an international development bank, interna- 
tional arrangements regarding the world’s oil re- 
sources, and the appointment of Labor Commission- 
ers in areas liberated from Axis domination. These 
and other proposals made by the International Labor 
Office are to be discussed during the Philadelphia 
meeting. 

It thus does not appear that the United Nations are 
prepared to enlarge the authority of the I.L.O. to in- 
clude direction or supervision of broader economic 
matters. The creation of the United Nations Relief 
and Rehabilitation Administration suggests that, at 
least in the immediate reconstruction period, new 
agencies will be set up to deal with specific problems, 
instead of entrusting these problems to already exist- 
ing agencies. However, the minimum proposal—that 
the director of the I.L.O. be authorized to submit an 
annual report on economic and financial develop- 
ments throughout the world—may win support. The 
present supervisory functions of the Organization 
with regard to labor and social welfare standards 
would be enhanced by such powers of ‘“‘scrutiny,” 
however limited. 

Much interest attaches to whatever changes may 
be effected in this autonomous organ of the League 
of Nations, with its long experience in international 
collaboration and its unique method of functional 
representation. Although its powers may not be 
greatly enlarged, definition of its future status gives 
significance to the present discussions which may, 
albeit indirectly, clarify intended action on the part 
of the United Nations in the post-war period. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


The American Way, edited by Dagobert D. Runes. New 
York, Philosophical Library, 1944. $1.50 
An interesting selection of excerpts from President 
Roosevelt’s public speeches and letters, designed to show 
the principles motivating his actions. 


Betrayal from the East, by Alan Hynd. New York, Robert 
M. McBride, 1948. $3.00 
Describes Japanese espionage in the United States as 
excitingly as in his earlier book on similar German ac- 
tivities. 
Top Hats and Tom-Toms, by Elizabeth D. Furbay. Chi- 
cago, Ziff-Davis, 1943. $3.00 


Vivid description of life in the American-Liberian coastal 
strip, with bits of Liberia’s historic background. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 27, Aprit 21, 1944, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lust, Secretary; Vana Mice es Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


@» 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


prebdengy 


APRIL 17.—The forthcoming commercial negotia- 
tions between a German trade mission, which is to 
arrive in Ankara on April 29, and the Turkish gov- 
ernment will test current Allied efforts to reduce the 
trade of European neutrals with the Axis. On April 
13 the United States and Britain delivered notes to 
Sweden and Turkey, requesting the termination of 
shipments to Germany of ball-bearings and chrome, 
respectively. Previously the United States had asked 
Eire to send home Axis diplomats in Dublin,* and 
Washington and London had asked Portugal and 
Spain to cease shipping wolfram to Germany. Secre- 
tary of State Cordell Hull on April 9 stated Amer- 
ican policy toward neutrals: “We can no longer 
acquiesce in these nations’ drawing upon the re- 
sources of the Allied world when they at the same 
time contribute to the death of troops whose sacri- 
fice contributes to their salvation as well as our own.” 


NEUTRALS FACE DIFFICULTIES. As_ the 
United States found out during its periods of neu- 
trality in 1914-17 and 1939-41, belligerents and 
neutrals seldom agree on the nature of neutral rights. 
Secretary of State Lansing on December 1, 1916 em- 
phasized that impartiality should be the essence of 
neutrality: “It is not the part of a neutral to sit in 
judgment or to compare the conduct of belligerents 
in carrying on hostile operations against one an- 
other.” The belligerent, however, may sit in judg- 
ment on the neutral. According to Hyde’s Interna- 
tional Law, “in a broad sense neutral territory be- 
comes a base of operations whenever it is a source 
or station from which a belligerent state as such 
augments its power of doing harm to the enemy.” 
The true neutral tries to guide its conduct by estab- 
lished principles, while the belligerent often acts on 
considerations of expediency. 

Allied exasperation with any neutral country 
whose activities are helpful to the Axis is under- 
standable. Modern war is a struggle between fac- 
tories as well as between armies, navies and _ air- 
planes. To destroy enemy factories the USAAF and 
the RAF are bombing German industrial centers 
night and day; to starve enemy factories of essential 
raw materials the Allies blockade Europe. But the 
Allies cannot blockade overland shipments within 
Europe. Thus Germany obtains Turkish chrome for 
making armor plate and high-speed cutting tools, 
and Portuguese and Spanish wolfram for hardening 


"See S. S. Hayden, ‘‘Allies Move to Safeguard Invasion Plans by Isolating 
Eire,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, March 17, 1944. 


FOR VICTORY ° 


= 
its war steels. Having for years bought ball-bearings ) 


in Sweden, where they were invented, the Germans 

seek them more urgently than ever now that the 

Allies are bombing German ball-bearing factories, 
On the other hand, international law accords the 


| 
| 


neutral a recognized status, which neutral nations | 
have an understandable desire to preserve. The | 


Hague Convention of 1907, in Article VII, stated 
that “‘a neutral power is not bound to prevent the 


export [by private concerns} in transit, for the use | 


of either belligerent of arms, ammunitions, or, in 
general, of anything which could be of use to an 
army or fleet.” Article VI, however, forbids neutral 
governments to supply a belligerent with “war ma- 
terial of any kind.” 


The Allies’ position with respect to Sweden is com- 
plicated by the fact that in September 1943 the United 
States signed a trade agreement with that country 
which recognized the existence of commerce between 
Sweden and Germany. Sweden agreed at that time to 
cut in half its ball-bearing exports to Germany for 
1944, although the Nazis had requested that the 1943 
shipments be doubled. While Sweden—like Turkey, 
Spain and Portugal—draws on the resources of the 
Allied world through trade with the United States 
and other United Nations, it also draws on resources 
controlled by the Axis. Sweden, heavily industrial- 
ized, depends on Germany for coal to keep its fac. 
tories going. Turkey depends on Germany for ma- 
chinery parts and dozens of consumer commodities. 


REACTION OF NEUTRALS. Although each 
belligerent makes the same sort of demand on nev- 
trals, the latter stubbornly cling to their right to re- 
main neutral. Through quiet diplomacy the United 
States has obtained a number of concessions from 
neutrals but, when neutrals have refused to comply 
with requests that seemed essential for the military 
security of the Allies, the Administration has te- 
sorted to blunt, public dealings with them. This has 
not always proved successful. The reaction of the 
Stockholm press to the Allied representation indi- 
cated that Sweden would reject last week’s note. On 
April 16, however, it was reported from London that 
Turkey has suspended the license for exporting 
chrome to Germany, pending official inquiries this 
week. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


(The last in a series of four articles on 
American foreign policy.) 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


19 


“co 
— 


| W! 


