— 


ican 


Nese 
of 
sec. 
ities 
of. 
they 
eign 
will 
pton 


Lan. 

has 
x its 
Ons 
ghai 
ated 
ll be 


NCes, 


stab- 
r the 


IN 


“eiler. 


ion it 
ent is 
e eco 
learly 
| Fas 
>, The 

hier- 
their 





National 
Editor. 


Ss 

. r 
ign ro 
HS 
of ve 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


Ani tion of current international events by the Research Staff 
Aa Cy Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


Vv 
9 FoREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
. 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


yy 





Vou. XVIII, No. 21 MarcH 17, 1939 





— 


GERMANY’S CONTROLLED ECONOMY, by John C. 


deWilde. A penetrating estimate of the stability of Nazi 
economy. March 1 issue. 


FOREIGN EXCHANGE CONTROL IN LATIN AMER- 
ICA, by Herbert M. Bratter. The first comprehensive 


survey of foreign exchange controls in Latin America. 
February 15 issue. é 


Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents each 


1p 92 (Gee 
MAK 42 933 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 
University of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 











INTO CZECHO-SLOVAKIA 





HITLER DRIVES WEDGE 
AZI tactics, made familiar by the Austrian An- 


N schluss and the Sudeten crisis, have been ap- 
plied to Slovakia, central province of the rump 
Czecho-Slovak state, which had obtained autonomy 
from Prague after the Munich accord. On March 10 
President Hacha of Czecho-Slovakia, alarmed by ru- 
mors that the Slovak Hlinka guards might stage a 
pro-German putsch with the aid of the German 
minority, proclaimed martial law in Bratislava and 
ousted Joseph Tiso, Slovak Premier. Tiso, dupli- 
cating the action of Seyss-Inquart in Austria last 
March, appealed to Hitler to restore order. On March 
13 he flew to Berlin, where he was received with high 
honors by the Nazi government, which until then 
had professed disinterestedness in Czecho-Slovakia’s 
internal problems. Following a conference with Tiso, 
Hitler apparently demanded the reorganization of 
Czecho-Slovakia into three ‘independent’ states— 
Bohemia,’ Slovakia (enlarged by Moravia, part of 
which would be assigned to Germany), and Car- 
patho-Ukraine; establishment of a German “protec- 
torate’’ over the three new states, which would in- 
clude customs and currency unions with Germany, 
and adherence by them to the anti-Comintern pact; 
dissolution of the greater part of the Czecho-Slovak 
army, and transformation of the rest into a simple 
police force; immediate solution of the “Jewish ques- 
tion” by introduction of the Nuremberg laws, hither- 
to rejected by Prague; and establishment of a new 
Czech government, which would be even more sub- 
servient to German demands than that of Premier 
Beran, representing the Czech Agrarians who had 
worked for the downfall of Benes. On March 14 
Prague, having no other alternative, acquiesced in the 
establishment of an ‘independent’ Slovak state. 

A glance at the map shows why Germany wanted 
to end Prague’s rule over Slovakia. As long as the 
Czecho-Slovak state remained united, even though 





weak, it could place countless minor obstructions in 
the path of Germany's advance to the east. With Ger- 
many in control of Slovakia, the way is open for Ger- 
man penetration of Carpatho-Ukraine, which the 
Nazis have long regarded as the most convenient 
springboard for a Greater Ukraine movement. Ger- 
man influence in that region, which was also granted 
autonomy in the post-Munich reshuffle, seemed on 
the point of being thwarted on March 6, when the 
Prague government dismissed Julian Revay, Minister 
of Communications for that province, on his return 
from a mysterious visit to Berlin; entrusted General 
Prchala, its representative in the Carpatho-Ukraine 
Cabinet, with restoration of order; and warned the 
Ukrainian Fascist organization to remove all terrorist 
elements from its ranks. In Slovakia, as in Carpatho- 
Ukraine, the German Nazis are using the grievances 
of backward regions, which had resented the post- 
war domination of Czech officials, to break up what is 
left of the Czecho-Slovak state and to force Prague 
to become a vassal of the Third Reich. 

Germany was obviously in a strong strategic posi- 
tion to impose its will on Prague, deprived by the 
Munich accord of its natural defenses and fortifica- 
tions—especially since France and Britain, which at 
Munich had promised to guarantee the frontiers of 
the rump state, did nothing to implement their 
pledge. Now that Poland and Hungary have satisfied 
some of their own claims to Czecho-Slovak territory, 
however, they are less prepared than last September 
to acquiesce in German designs on Prague, which di- 
rectly menace their own independence. On March 14, 
when Slovakia’s separation from Prague was consum- 
mated, Hungary was reported to be rushing troops 
into Carpatho-Ukraine, through which it hoped to 
establish a common frontier with Poland. This com- 
mon frontier—balked by Hitler after Munich—is no 
longer opposed by Rumania, one of Czecho-Slovakia’s 














partners in the Little Entente. During the visit of M. 
Garfencu, Rumanian Foreign Minister, to Warsaw on 
March 4, Poland and Rumania apparently agreed 
to surrender their defenses against Germany's drive 
to the east by military and economic collaboration. 
Both countries decided to negotiate with the Western 
powers regarding orderly emigration of their surplus 
population—largely Jews—to overseas colonies; but 
refused, for the time being at least, to adopt anti- 
Semitic legislation modeled on that of Germany, and 
declined to join the Rome-Berlin axis. 


If France and Britain had hoped, last September, 
to divert Germany from the West by encouraging its 
drive toward the Soviet Ukraine, their hopes were 
temporarily disappointed not only by Hitler's delay 
in pushing east, but by Russia’s reluctance to be 
drawn into a conflict with the Third Reich. When 
Hitler, after Munich, shifted his attack toward the 
West, where he demanded satisfaction of Italy's 
Mediterranean claims and return of the German col- 
onies, Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union breathed 
easier, hoping that the storm had been diverted from 
their heads to those of the Western powers. On 
March 10 Stalin told the eighteenth all-Union con- 
gress of the Communist party that the “fuss” made by 
the Western press about Soviet Ukraine was intended 
“to raise the ire of the Soviet Union against Ger- 
many, to poison the atmosphere, and provoke a ‘con- 
flict with Germany without any visible grounds for 
it.” The Slovak episode is a brutal reminder that 
Hitler’s technique consists in creating constant di- 
versions, from east to west, and again from west to 
east, in an attempt to distract and divide his op- 
ponents, confuse their preparations, and deliver a 
blow where it is least expected. This technique is just 
as dangerous for the Soviet Union as for the Western 
democracies—unless, of course, the U.S.S.R. is pre- 
pared to come to terms with Germany. Hitler’s battle 
for control of Eastern Europe is by no means won. 
But he can be checked only if the Western powers, 
having strengthened their own armaments, are ready 
to supplant Germany as a market for the foodstuffs 
and raw materials of the Danubian countries, and to 
provide them with the credits and free exchange 
which Germany is not in a position to offer. 


This, in turn, depends on the success Mr. Cham- 
berlain and M. Daladier may achieve in stabilizing 
the situation in Western Europe, where Germany and 
Italy, until last weekend, had concentrated their bar- 
rage of propaganda and threats. The Spanish con- 
flict, confused by dissension in Loyalist ranks, has 
hardly been clarified by various rumors regarding 
secret negotiations M. Bonnet is said to be conduct- 
ing with Italy behind a screen of official denials. M. 
Bonnet has been so constantly under fire since last 
September, not only on the part of the French and 


Page Two 








—— 
— 


foreign press, but of some of his Cabinet colleagues 
as well, that the question is often asked why Premie; 
Daladier retains him in the Cabinet. One explanatiog 
is that he fears that M. Bonnet, who is known to 
aspire to the Premiership, might prove more danger. 
ous outside the government than in; another is that 
M. Bonnet serves as a lightning-rod to divert popular 
criticism from M. Daladier. This ambiguous policy 
is hardly calculated to win American support for 
France's avowed determination to resist Italo-Ger. 
man pressure in the Mediterranean. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BRITAIN STRENGTHENS MILITARY POSITION 


For the first time since the Munich agreement, 
Great Britain seems to be taking an increasingly pos- 
itive lead in Western diplomacy. In recent weeks 
the British government has resorted with unusual ef. 
fectiveness to the Rooseveltian precept— ‘speak soft- 
ly and carry a big stick” —because its new weapons 
are rapidly growing to enormous proportions. At the 
same time that he announced defense estimates for 
1939-1940 totaling £580,000,000 and arranged for 
an expeditionary force to France, Mr. Chamberlain 
suggested a five-power conference in Europe and 
even hinted at disarmament discussions. It is not im- 
possible that 1939 may see an impressive revival of 
British prestige and influence, which have been over- 
shadowed recently by the diplomatic victories and 
military conquests of the Rome-Berlin axis. 


Striking evidence of new strength and confidence 
was revealed on March 10 by Sir Samuel Hoare, 
Home Secretary and a member of Mr. Chamberlain’s 
“inner Cabinet.” After asserting that Britain no 
longer feared either a knock-out blow in a short wat 
or the financial strain of a long struggle, Sir Samuel 
Hoare discussed at length—obviously for foreign 
consumption—the possibility of a five-power confer- 
ence. According to Hoare such collaboration, which 
apparently would include the hitherto neglected So- 
viet Union, would be approved by the United States 
even though no one asked or expected American in- 
tervention. This bid for cooperation reinforced an 
announcement, made on the previous day by an “offi- 
cial spokesman” for Prime Minister Chamberlain, 
that Britain might propose disarmament negotiations 
after settlement of the Spanish war and Italo-French 
differences. 


Various factors are contributing to Britain’s strong- 
er policy in Europe, the Mediterranean, and the Far 
East. In annexing the Sudetenland, Germany attained 
an objective which lay outside the British sphere of 
influence and which could not be blocked except by 
an Anglo-French offensive across the Rhine. Germany 
has a free hand for further expansion to the east, but 


(Continued on Page 4) 











II 


ues 
nier 
tion 
1 to 


| ger- 


ular 
dhicy 

for 
Set 


iON 
ent, 


pos. 
eeks 
| ef- 
oft. 
Ons 
the 
for 
for 
lain 
and 


| of 
ver- 
and 


“nce 
are, 
Lin's 

no 
wat 
quel 
ign 
fer- 
nich 


ates 
| in- 
an 


ain, 
ions 
‘nch 


ng: 

Far 
ined 
> of 
t by 
any 

but 





Washin gton News Letter 














— 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


MARCH 13.—Whatever may be the economic and 
financial results of the agreements reached with 
Brazil last week, no one in Washington underesti- 
mates the political importance of these accords. For 
in its exchange of notes with Sefior Aranha, the Ad- 
ministration has not only launched its counter-attack 
on the Fascist economic penetration of Latin Amer- 
ica, but has formally proclaimed a new departure in 
American diplomatic practice which carries wide im- 
plications. Taken in conjunction with other recent 
moves, they underline the determination of the Ad- 
ministration to employ the broad powers of the fed- 
eral Treasury and the Export-Import Bank as new 
instruments of diplomacy on a world scale. 


Terms of Brazilian Accord. In the Brazilian 
agreements the two governments make the following 
specific commitments: 


1. The Export-Import Bank undertakes to establish ac- 
ceptance credits for the Bank of Brazil to assist the Brazilian 
government in lifting restrictions on foreign yous 9 
These credits, amounting to $19,200,000, will be repayable 
in instalments over a period of two years. The Export- 
Import Bank further agrees to cooperate with American 
manufacturers and exporters in extending long-term credits 
to facilitate the purchase of American products needed by 
Brazil to develop its transportation facilities and industrial 
capacity. 

2. The United States Treasury agrees (subject to the 
approval of Congress) to provide up to $50,000,000 in 
gold to the Brazilian government for the establishment of a 
Central Reserve Bank, repayment to be made from Brazil’s 
future gold production. President Roosevelt will present to 
Congress a request for the necessary authorization to carry 
out this loan. 


3. The United States further agrees to maintain a finan- 
cial attaché at its Embassy in Brazil, and to press for legis- 
lation authorizing the loan of government experts to assist 
Brazil in developing non-competitive agricultural products 
for which a market may exist in this country. 


4. In return, the Brazilian government agrees to issue a 
decree freeing the foreign exchange market for commercial 
transactions, thus assuring funds for the payment of im- 
ports from the United States. 


5. Brazil undertakes to resume interest and amortiza- 
tion payments on its dollar bond indebtedness, beginning 
July 1, 1939. The terms of a “‘transitional arrangement,” 
covering payments on national, state and municipal dollar 
bonds amounting to $357,000,000, will be continued with 
the Foreign Bondholders Protective Council, Inc., of New 
York. 

6. The Brazilian government proposes to guarantee 
American investors’ treatment equal to that now or here- 
after accorded its own nationals. 


Economic Advantages. The economic benefits of 
these arrangements are fairly obvious. Should Brazil 
remove exchange restrictions, the door would be 
open to wider trade relations with the United States, 
and Brazil would free itself to some extent from 
the German system of blocked-mark trading. By ex- 
tending long-term credits, American exporters may 
be able to increase their share of the Brazilian mar- 
ket. And by resuming payment on defaulted dollar 
bonds, Brazil may encourage new American invest- 
ments and thus stimulate development of its natural 
resources. 


These commercial advantages will not be over- 
looked when the Administration goes to Congress 
for authority to carry out the $50,000,000 gold loan 
tentatively promised by the Treasury. There will be 
questions, nevertheless, regarding the wisdom of po- 
litical loans which put the government in the foreign 
banking business. It will also be pointed out that, un- 
til last year, Brazil has been exporting nearly twice 
as much to the United States as it bought in the 
American market—a fact which suggests that the 
obstacle to American exports may be more funda- 
mental than lack of exchange. 


Other developments this week served to empha- 
size the political significance of the Brazilian ac- 
cords and the new departure in American diplomacy. 
On March 13 Senator Key Pittman, Chairman of the 
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, introduced a 
bill authorizing the War and Navy Departments to 
manufacture and sell arms and implements of war to 
“any American Republic.” The measure provided 
specifically for the building of warships in United 
States government navy yards and the production of 
ordnance and anti-aircraft equipment in government 
arsenals for Latin American states. An additional 
stipulation, expected to provoke sharp debate in view 
of the recent French air mission affair, authorizes the 
President to impart secret information and sell secret 
military equipment to these countries under certain 
safeguarding conditions. Following the preliminary 
announcement of this bill, Mr. Sumner Welles, Act- 
ing Secretary of State, informed correspondents at 
his press conference that the State Department was 
heartily in favor of the. general objectives of the pro- 
posal advanced by Senator Pittman. 


Thus, to the Treasury and the Export-Import Bank 
must be added government trade in armaments as 
instruments of the new diplomacy. 

W. T. STONE 














BRITAIN STRENGTHENS MILITARY POSITION 
(Continued from Page 2) 

in the west it must take the offensive and attempt, as 
in 1914, to defeat Britain and France on their own 
ground. The British are now prepared, as they were not 
in 1938, both to offer vigorous defense and to launch 
a counter-offensive in two directions: by air, against 
Germany's western industrial regions; by land, across 
the Belgian and French frontiers. The government de- 
clares that both men and anti-aircraft guns are ready 
for the defense of London, and that the deficien- 
cies revealed by the September crisis are eliminated. 
The War Minister, Mr. Leslie Hore-Belisha, an- 
nounced on March 8 that Britain has already com- 
pleted plans for sending to France an expeditionary 
force of nineteen divisions, comprising almost 300,- 
000 men—in contrast with the five divisions of less 
than 100,000 sent in August 1914—and closely co- 
ordinated with the French army. 

Time is on the side of the British, who are hitting 
their stride in rearmament just as Germany, Italy and 
Japan are becoming financially winded. The British 


Page Four —. 








——— 


government proposes, in its estimates for 1939-1949, 
to raise the defense loan limit from £400,000,000, 
voted in 1937 for a five-year period, to £800,000,000 
—the equivalent, on a per capita basis, of abou 
$10,500,000,000 for the United States. Out of a total 
budget of approximately £1,278,000,000 for the next 
fiscal year, Britain will spend £580,000,000 on arm. 
aments, divided as follows: navy, £149 million; 
army, £165 million; air £208 million; civilian de. 
fense and other, £57 million. The Air Minister claims 
that Britain will soon possess 1,750 first-line air. 
planes at home and 500 overseas, and will have at 
least 2,370 planes for home defense in April 1940. 
Nine new capital ships are provided for, so that by 
1942 the British can operate simultaneously in Euro- 
pean and Asiatic waters. Even though still vulnerable 
to air raids across the English Channel, which is no 
longer the safeguarding moat of earlier times, Brit. 
ain is preparing to continue to rule the seas while 
keeping a balance of power on the Continent. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Survey After Munich, by Graham Hutton. Boston, Little, 
Brown & Co., 1939. $2.50 


Mr. Hutton appraises the salient political, economic and 
strategic features of the new Danubia which is being 
forged by the Nazis in Eastern Europe; concludes that the 
region is still far from a fief of the Rome-Berlin powers; 
and emphasizes the difficulties which would confront the 
fascist states in case of a general European war. 


The Defence of Democracy, by F. Elwyn Jones. New York, 
Dutton, 1938. $2.50 


An able examination of the aims of the axis powers and 
the methods by which their doctrines are propagated on 
every continent. Mr. Jones urges a united policy of firm 
resistance to aggression by the Western democracies, the 
Soviet Union and the smaller states of Europe. 


Imperial Japan: 1926-1928, by A. Morgan Young. New 

York, William Morrow, 1938. $3.00 

An informal and readable account of Japan’s domestic 
and foreign politics since 1926 by the former editor of 
The Japan Chronicle. Mr. Young observed events at first 
hand for ten of these years, and his study is full of re- 
vealing data both of men and of affairs. This is a valuable 
sequel to his earlier work, Japan in Recent Times: 1912- 
1926. 


The Far East: An International Survey, by Harold S. 
Quigley and George H. Blakeslee. Boston, World Peace 
Foundation, 1938. 75 cents 


A revision and enlargement of The Pacific Area: An 
International Survey, published by Dr. Blakeslee in 1929, 
this volume constitutes the most useful handbook on inter- 
national issues in the Orient. In succinct form, it deals 


with Manchoukuo, treaty rights in China, the positions of 
the various powers in the Far East, navies and air routes, 
and historical backgrounds. Its value is greatly enhanced 
by twenty-five documentary appendices. 


My Scotland, by A. G. MacDonell. New York, Funk and 
Wagnalls, 1937. $2.50 


A witty commentary on Scottish history and culture, 
well written and illustrated. The author urges renewed 
resistence to English domination, which he believes has 
brought economic hardship in recent years. 


Canada and Her Great Neighbor: Sociological Surveys of 
Opinions and Attitudes in Canada Concerning the 
United States, edited by H. F. Angus. New Haven, Yale 
University Press, for the Carnegie Endowment for In- 
ternational Peace, 1938. $3.75 


An exhaustive analysis of the impression (not alto 
gether favorable) which Americans, individually and col- 
lectively, make upon their neighbors. This excellent work 
on the formation of public opinion—through personal con- 
tacts, education, newspapers, magazines, motion pictures, 
radio, etc.—should prove of great value to any one study- 
ing international relations or sociology. It also provides an 
unusually acute commentary upon our national life, by 
allowing Americans to see themselves as the Canadians 
see them. 


The United States and Santo Domingo, 1798-1873: A 
Chapter in Caribbean Diplomacy, by Charles Callen 
Tansill. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1938. $3.50 


A detailed and documented monograph on the relations 
between the two countries,.containing an exhaustive his- 
tory of President Grant’s fruitless attempt to annex the 
Dominican Republic. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 21, MarcH 17, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Leste Buett, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera Michetes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


<a 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








FC 


— 
VOL. 
—_—_ 


“ri | = a 


ma: 
the 
cell 
Ha 


anc 


all 
ate 
at 


th 





