






Nationa 
Editor 


ir. 





FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 





Vot. XV, No. 14 


JANUARY 31, 1936 





RELIGION IN THE THIRD REICH 
by Mildred S. Wertheimer 


The three-year struggle of National Socialism to coordinate 
the Evangelical church with the totalitarian state. 


Conflict between National Socialism and Catholicism, par- 
ticularly over control of education. 


January 29 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 








Enrered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at che Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














*rlodica) Division 
’ 

















ITALY ADVANCES — LEAGUE RECONNGHTERS 





& a desperate effort to win a decisive victory 
before the heavy rains begin in June, Italian 
troops have taken the initiative in southern Ethi- 
opia and after allegedly killing 10,000 Ethiopians 
have advanced about 280 miles from Dolo beyond 
Noghelli. General Graziani is now close to 
Allata, a center which controls communications 
between Addis Ababa and the South. This ad- 
vance represents a radical change in Italian 
strategy. At first General Graziani attempted to 


= march up the Fafan valley for the purpose of cap- 


turing Harar which dominates the Jibuti railway 
and other connections between Addis Ababa and 
the sea. With the failure of this campaign Grazi- 
ani’s forces have been diverted to the extreme 
southwest in an effort to dominate the colonization 
zone promised Italy under the MHoare-Laval 
agreement. It remains to be seen whether, from 
these inland points, the Italians will be able to 


protect their lines of communication. 


The final outcome of the war will probably be 
determined in the north. Here the Ethiopians 
claim that in the biggest engagement of the cam- 
paign they have surrounded Makale and cut off 
two Fascist columns attempting to rescue the be- 
sieged troops. Rome has denied this claim, as- 
serting that the Ethiopians have been repulsed 
with a loss of 5,000 casualties in comparison with 


8743 dead and wounded Italians. 
& 


4 The Mediterranean Bloc 
' In an effort to remove the danger of an Anglo- 
Sltalian war, Mr. Eden, British Foreign Secretary, 
Presented a memorandum to the League Council 
mon January 22 providing for mutual assistance 
}under paragraph 3 of Article XVI of the Cov- 
Henant. According to this memorandum, the British 
government had sought to ascertain, “in the event 
of special measures of a military character being 
aimed at Great Britain by Italy,” whether other 
Mediterranean powers would collaborate in re- 


sisting such measures. The memorandum de- 
clared that France, Turkey, Greece and Jugo- 
slavia had agreed to provide such aid, on condi- 
tion of reciprocity. Czechoslovakia and Rumania 
endorsed this understanding, which means that 
both the Balkan and the Little Entente are solidly 
behind Britain. Spain, a country where Fascist 
sentiment is strong, declined to give such concrete 
assurances, although generally reaffirming its 
obligations under Article XVI. 


The establishment of this Mediterranean bloc 
brought forth on January 24 the “most formal 
reservations and protest” from the Italian gov- 
ernment. It intimated that the mobilization of 
the British fleet last August before the Council 
had taken any action was “extraordinary” and 
that formation of the Mediterranean bloc di- 
rected against Italy itself constituted a threat to 
European peace. Pointing out that France had 
agreed to come to Britain’s aid only when it acted 
in accordance with a League decision, Italy de- 
clared that the sanctions thus far applied were 
acts of individual League members, and not of 
the League Council or Assembly. The Italian 
statement closed by stating “in the most explicit 
manner” that the Italian action in Ethiopia which 
was “of a colonial character .. . is not designed to 
represent, and never will represent, a threat to 
European peace.” 


It might have been expected, following the 
Mediterranean military consultations, that the 
League would proceed to impose an oil embargo. 
The League Committee of Eighteen, however, de- 
cided to appoint an expert committee to study the 
effect of such an embargo on Italy and also the 
possibility of preventing tankers belonging to 
League powers from carrying oil from non-mem- 
ber states to Italy. This delay in strengthening 
sanctions is discouraging in the face of intensified 
hostilities. Nevertheless, precedents of im- 
portance are being created and the League has 






















































already gone further than ever before in at- 
tempting to check an aggressor. 


Two Disputes Aired 


At its January session, the League Council also 
induced the government of the Free City of Dan- 
zig to put into effect a decision of the World 
Court which had declared illegal a number of 
decrees revising the penal code in accordance 
with Nazi philosophy. Although not challenging 
the validity of the Danzig elections last April, the 
League is nevertheless safeguarding in the Free 
City civil rights which Hitler has openly flouted 
in Germany. The Council, in addition, eased 
tension between Uruguay and the Soviet Union, 
created by Uruguay’s abrupt decision on Decem- 
ber 27 to break off diplomatic relations on the 
ground that the Soviet legation in Montevideo 
was a center of Communist propaganda. In 
bringing this incident before the League, 
M. Litvinov declared that Uruguay had no right 
to sever relations with another League member 
without first placing the dispute before the Coun- 
cil. M. Guani, the Uruguay representative, 
declined to prove his government’s charges on 
the ground that it was strictly a “domestic” affair. 
The Council finally passed a resolution on Janu- 
ary 24 expressing hope that relations would be 
only temporarily interrupted, since Uruguay had 
refused to give proof of its charges and the 
U.S.S.R. was willing to leave the question to in- 
ternational public opinion. These two controver- 
sies show that, even in an age of unprecedented 
nationalism, the League may serve to cushion the 
shock of disputes which might otherwise prove 


serious. RAYMOND L. BUELL 


POLITICAL MANEUVERS IN FRANCE 


Faced with defeat in the Chamber of Deputies, 
Premier Pierre Laval and his cabinet of national 
union resigned on January 22 after a little more 
than seven months in office. Two days later the 
veteran Radical Socialist Senator Albert Sarraut 
succeeded in forming a new ministry. 

The resignation of the government was pre- 
cipitated by the decision of the Radical Socialists, 
who form the largest party in the Chamber, to 
withdraw their support from M. Laval. On Janu- 
ary 19 the party’s executive committee voted a 
resolution of censure against the cabinet, and 
ordered all Radical Socialist deputies to join in 
defeating the government. After this action, the 
retirement of the six Radical Socialist ministers 
from the cabinet and the resignation of M. Laval 
became inevitable. 

The fall of the Laval government marks a 


Page Two 








——— 
— 


definite victory for the left-wing Radical Social. 
ists led by Edouard Daladier, who has now beep 
elected the party’s president. With the approach} 
of parliamentary elections scheduled for thist 
spring, the Radical Socialists showed an increas.§ 
ing desire to disassociate themselves from a cab.— 
inet whose domestic and foreign policies had be. 
come unpopular. Despite its participation in th} 
government, the party played an active réle jp 
the anti-fascist Popular Front, which includaf” 
all the Left groups hostile to M. Laval. It col. 
laborated in drafting a program of minimum eco.f 
nomic, financial and political demands which wa 
published by the Popular Front on January 11, 4 
Agreement on this common program, together>_ 
with the repudiation of M. Laval by the Radical 
Socialists, will probably insure that all the Left} 
groups, including the Communists and Socialists ) 
will support each other in the forthcoming elec. 
tions. 

M. Sarraut’s cabinet shows a distinct shift to- 
ward the Left, although the Right is still repre. 
sented by Georges Mandel and General Felix 
Maurin. The appointment of Marcel Déat, a 
prominent neo-Socialist, to the Air Ministry and 
of Joseph Paul-Boncour as Minister of State and 
delegate to the League of Nations was evidently 
designed to secure the support of the Socialists. 
Former Premier Pierre-Etienne Flandin, who ha: 
become Minister of Foreign Affairs, is expected 
to bring the government the support of the 
Centre. Only the extreme Right and Left are 
therefore likely to oppose the cabinet. 

The new government will probably confine itsel!f 
to routine business pending the elections, whichf 
may now be advanced from May to the end of 
March. It must, however, deal with the serious§_ 
financial situation of the treasury, which will 
have to borrow more than six billion francs dur- 
ing the next few months for current expenses} 
Tax receipts are still running far below estimates, 
and the 1936 budget failed to provide revenue for 
a considerable part of the appropriations for 
national defense. Since the French market i: 
scarcely in a position to absorb further govern: 
ment loans, an effort is being made to obtain 
credits from a consortium of British banks. The 
cabinet also faces decisions in the field of foreign 
policy. Although it will probably proceed cau: 
tiously, the new government is expected to shov 
a greater willingness than its predecessor to co 
operate with Britain and the League of Nations 
M. Flandin, although orginally opposed to Leagu: 
sanctions, is known to be anglophile and M. Pau! 
Boncour has always been an advocate of collect. 


tive security. JOHN C. DEWILDE 





ocala tei ek dbs Ok! i tan Ol Rade 


poker ber en ean 


En 





Mes eStore ita Coll sarc ee eS 



















FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 14, January 31, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nations 4 
RaYMOND Lesitzs BugELL, President; Esrmmn G. OGpEn, Secretary; Verma Micuetes Dean, Editor 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 








Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., ander che Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. i 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 









~~ 
—_ 


‘ial. 
een 
ach 
this 
eas. 
Cab. 

be. & 

the 
e in 
udes 
COl- 
CO. 
Wai 
; 
ther F 
dical F 
Left 
lists, 
elec. 
































































= 


PROFIL Ue oat 


Td a Ais Diaries 


t to- 
pre. 
Felix 
at, a 
and 
- and 
ently = 
lista. F 
o> hash 
ected E 
the i 


t are 


PP ae Tiles Peni R Le 


itself 
which 
id of 
rious 
will 
; dur: 
onses. 
nates, 
1e forh 
s fore 
cet isfy 
yvern- fF 
ybtainke 
The 
yreignh, 
| cave 
show 
to co 
itions : 
Cague 
Paulf 
collec-F 
[LDE 


i cachoin dee tin etal 


ae 



























Nation: Be 
i, Edie 
ar. 










BOOK 


GENERAL 


Dictatorship in the Modern World, by G. S. Ford, ed. 


Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 1935. $2.50 
Thought-provoking surveys by eight able writers. 


The Lords of Creation, by F. L. Allen. New York, Harper, 


1935. $3.00 
Dramatic history of the financial dictators of the United 


States since 1900. 
The Mind and Society, by Vilfredo Pareto. 


New York, 
Harcourt, Brace, 1935. 4 vols. $20.00 

An over-rated work setting forth the non-logical sources 
f conduct. 


History of Western Civilization, by Harry Elmer 
Barnes, with the collaboration of Henry David. New 
York, Harcourt, Brace, 1935. 2 vols. $10.00 
An exhaustive inquiry into all aspects of mankind’s 
evelopment in the West. 


ar and the Private Investor, by Eugene Staley. New 
York, Doubleday, Doran, 1935. $4.50 
Indispensable to all who would probe deeper into the 
auses of war. 
History of American Foreign Relations, by L. M. Sears, 
second edition, revised and enlarged. New York, Crow- 
ell, 1935. $3.50 


Brings an excellent background guide up to date. 
nternational Security, by P. C. Jessup. New York, Coun- 
cil on Foreign Relations, 1935. $1.50 

A timely analysis of the ways in which the United 


States can contribute to the prevention and repression 
of war. 


> 


- 


ECONOMIC 


\ations Can Live at Home, by O. W. Willcox. 
Norton, 1935. $2.75 
The author maintains that almost all nations can obtain 
an adequate supply of foodstuffs at home, provided the 
st scientific “agrobiologic” methods of cultivation are 
employed. 


The New Deal and Foreign Trade, by Alonzo E. Taylor. 
New York, Macmillan, 1935. $3.00 
A critique of Secretary Wallace’s “planned middle 
irse” in foreign trade which somewhat exaggerates the 
obstacles in the way of the Administration’s present for- 
eign trade program. 


Silver Dollars, by William P. Shea. 
1935. $1.00 
Another misleading plea for silver. 


Economie Planning, by G. D. H. Cole. 
1935. $3.00 
A popular writer on socialism foresees a slow but in- 
evitable transition to planned economy. 


4 


imerica Must Act, by Francis Bowes Sayre. New York, 
World Peace Foundation, 1936. 75c. cloth; 35c. paper. 
\n outline of what we must do to assure jobs, wages, 
narkets and peace. 


The Formation of Capital, by Harold G. Moulton. 
ington, Brookings, 1935. $2.50 
An analysis of the relation of national income to capi- 
tal investment, which concludes that our present economic 
system requires “a larger flow of funds through consump- 
tive channels rather than more abundant savings.” 


The Cotton Crisis. Institute of Public Affairs, Southern 
Methodist University, Dallas, 1935. 
A thorough discussion of the cotton problem, particu- 
larly as it was affected by the A.A.A. 
The Boom Begins, by L. L. B. Angas. New York, Simon & 
Schuster, 1985. $2.00 
The author of The Coming American Boom foresees an 
inflationary upswing in business. 


New York, 


New York, Putnam, 


New York, Knopf, 


Wash- 


NOTES 














EUROPE 


Germany’s Foreign Indebtedness, by C. R. S. Harris. New 

York, Oxford University Press, 1935. $2.90 

An extremely useful guide through the maze of Ger- 
many’s foreign debts and defaults. The author concludes 
that Germany will be unable to resume service on its for- 
eign debts so long as it maintains the gold parity of the 
mark and at the same time indulges in a program of in- 
ternal economic expansion. 


The Soviet Union and World Problems, edited by Samuel 

N. Harper. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1935. 
2.50 
This series of notable lectures, delivered at the Eleventh 

Institute under the Norman Wait Harris Memorial Foun- 

dation held at Chicago University in June 1935, constitutes 

an outstanding contribution to the study of Soviet foreign 
policy. 

An Economic Survey of the Colonial Empire (1983). 
don, His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1935. $7.50 
This invaluable reference book on British colonies may 

be obtained from the British Library of Information in 

New York City. 


Britain’s Air Policy: Present and Future, by Jonathan 
Griffin. London, Gollancz, 1935. 5/. 
The author makes a strong case for the inadequacy of 
the proposed Western European air Locarno. 


The Last of Free Africa, by Gordon MacCreagh. New 
York, Appleton-Century, 1935. $4.00 
Spirited account of an expedition to Ethiopia, supple- 
mented by a foreword and epilogue on that country’s 
present diplomatic entanglements. 


The Spirit of Geneva, by Robert de Traz. New York, Ox- 
ford, 1986. $2.25 
An optimistic, philosophical interpretation. 

Peace in the Balkans, by Norman J. Padelford. New York, 
Oxford, 1935. $2.00 
A useful discussion of recent Balkan conferences. 


The Next Five Years. New York, Macmillan, 1935. 5/ 
An admirable effort by 152 Englishmen to formulate a 
program of action for Britain. 


Deutschland Und die Vereinigten Staaten in der Welt- 
politik, by Alfred Vagts. New York, Macmillan, 1935. 
2 vols. $15.00 
A monumental contribution to American diplomatic his- 

tory. 


Lon- 


Etat des Forces en France, by Pierre Frédérix. 
Gallimard, 1935. 15 fr. 
The best available survey of conditions in present-day 
France. 


Paris, 


FAR EAST 


War and Diplomacy in the Japanese Empire, by Tatsuji 
Takeuchi. New York, Doubleday, Doran, 1935. $4.50 
An excellent scholarly analysis of the conduct of Jap- 

anese foreign relations, illustrated by case studies of 

eighteen key diplomatic events in the history of modern 

Japan. 

China’s Millions, by Anna Louise Strong. New York, 
Knight Publishing Co., 1935. $2.50 
A new edition of the author’s first-hand account of the 

Chinese revolutionary upheaval in 1927, with three addi- 

tional chapters on the Nanking government. 

The Sino-Japanese Controversy and the League of Nations, 
by Westel W. Willoughby. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins, 
1935. $5.00 
A comprehensive and authoritative treatment of the 

Sino-Japanese dispute. 

The Japan Year Book, 1924. 
Association of Japan, 1934. 
A valuable reference work. 


Tokyo, The Foreign Affairs 
$5.00 














THE FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION 


and 
THE NATION 
announce 
AN EDITORIAL CONTEST 
for 


COLLEGE STUDENTS 


on the subject 


WILL NEUTRALITY KEEP US OUT OF WAR? 





First Prize $50 

Second Prize $25 

Five Third Prizes Five subscriptions, each for one year, to The Nation 
Five Fourth Prizes Five Student Memberships, each for one academic year, 


in the Foreign Policy Association 





CONDITIONS 
The Contest is open to all undergraduate college students. 


Entrants must write an editorial of not more than 1000 words on the subject: WILL NEUTRALITY KEEP US 
OUT OF WAR? 


Manuscripts must reach the Student Secretary, Foreign Policy Association, 8 West 40th Street, New York, 
N. Y., not later than March 15, 1936. 


A copy of the editorial must also be submitted to the local campus newspaper on or after March 15. Students whose 
manuscripts are refused by their college newspapers are not barred from this Contest. Where there are several 
entrants in one school, college papers may wish to sponsor a campus editorial contest to determine which manuscripts 
they will print, and are free to publish these any time after March 15. 


Each editorial must be accompanied by student's signed statement that the editorial is original and noc 
copied from any source, together with the name of the college newspaper to which he expects to submit it on or after 
March 15. The endorsement of an instructor, giving name, department and school address must also appear 
on the student's statement. Neither student’s signature nor teacher’s endorsement should appear on editorial. 


Manuscripts will be judged on the basis of factual information, logic and effectiveness of presentation. 


Prize winners will be announced in the May 1 issue of the Foreign Policy Bulletin, and the editorial winning 
first prize will appear in the May 6 issue of The Nation. 





JUDGES 
RAYMOND L. BUELL PauL U. KELLOGG 
President, Foreign Policy Association Editor, Survey Graphic and The Survey 
FREDA KIRCHWEY WILLIAM T. STONE 
Editor, The Nation Vice-president, Foreign Policy Association 





SPECIAL OFFER TO CONTESTANTS 


If you will enclose 35 cents in stamps, we will send you The New American Neutrality, and The Dangerous Year, both 
by Raymond L. Buell, and a list of suggested readings on the subject of the contest. (Acceptance of this offer is optional.) 











1s] 


| 





