





PRRIODICAL — 
GENERAL Ut AR 
wetiv. © ° 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


” 


University of Michigan“e 2 10). 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y 








‘OV- 
lem 
rina 
dea 
pite 
ting 
r to 
Au- 
per- 
clu- 


this 


| oc 
2 in- 
rosts 
and 
ably 
ntral 
with 
final 
will 
rican 
ht be 
d of 
tavia 
e ef 
rgest 
1isers 








Vor. XX, No. 6 


NovEMBER 29, 1940 





GREEK VICTORY STRENGTHENS BRITISH IN NEAR EAST 


HE striking victories of the Greek army against 

the Italians overshadowed the diplomatic maneu- 
vers of the Axis powers in the Balkans during the 
past week, and greatly strengthened Britain’s posi- 
tion in the Near East. Greek troops have not only 
expelled the Italian invader, but have penetrated 
Albania at four points. On November 22 they cap- 
tured the important Albanian town of Koritza from 


| which the Italians had launched their ill-starred drive 


toward Salonika; and two days later they reached 
Pogradec, a frontier village which the Italian army 


| might have used as the starting-point for a flank 


attack through Yugoslavia. To the southwest, Greek 
columns advanced on Argyrokastron, through which 
the Italians had directed their thrust toward Yanina, 
and threatened Porto Edda, an Italian debarkation 
point. Greek conquest of the southern and most 
mountainous part of Albania appears possible, con- 
trary to every original expectation. The Italians, 
handicapped by insufficient preparations, have been 
unable to utilize their superior equipment in the 
mountains, and have retreated steadily before the 
simple and highly individualized tactics adopted by 
the Greek Evzones. 

Provided the Greeks manage to consolidate their 
new positions and do not overextend their lines, they 
may prove able for a considerable period to with- 
stand other Italian attacks from Albania. Mean- 
while, the British air force, supported by small de- 
tachments of troops, has set up bases on the Greek 
mainland and on the island of Crete, from which 
it can bomb Italian objectives more effectively and 
harass Italy’s supply lines to Albania and Libya. 
Italy's control of the Dodecanese Islands in the 
Aegean has also been jeopardized, particularly since 
these islands are already reported to be suffering 
from a severe shortage of supplies. 


AXIS MANEUVER IN THE BALKANS. These 
Greek-British victories are especially important be- 


cause they come at a time when the Axis powers are 
attempting to line up the Balkans in support of their 
“new order” in Europe. Already the Hungarian, 
Rumanian and Slovak Premiers have visited Ger- 
many to formalize their adherence to the tripartite 
pact concluded on September 27, 1940 by Germany, 
Japan and Italy. Hungary signed the pact on Novem- 
ber 20, while Rumania and the German protectorate, 
Slovakia, followed on November 23 and 24 respec- 
tively. In accordance with the hierarchical order 
which the Axis powers are seeking to establish, the 
smaller nations were not admitted as equal part- 
ners. They will be represented on the joint technical 
commission, which is to implement the pact, only 


when the questions under consideration touch their 
interests. 


Up to the present Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Tur- 
key have given no indication that they will heed 
repeated German and Italian admonitions to join 
this alignment; and they have probably been en- 
couraged to oppose such demands by the successful 
resistance of the Greeks. Strong Axis pressure has 
been exerted in Belgrade and Sofia because their two 
governments could greatly facilitate another attack 
on Greece. The Vardar River valley through Yugo- 
slavia affords relatively easy access to Salonika; and 
from the Bulgarian mountains German troops might 
descend on the narrow Aegean littoral held by 
Greece. For Italy the subjugation of Greece is abso- 
lutely necessary, not only to recover its prestige, but 
to dislodge the RAF from its new bases. While Ger- 
many has hitherto regarded the Greek campaign as 
an exclusive Italian venture and still continues to 
maintain diplomatic relations with Greece, it cannot 
permit the Italians to collapse or suffer an irreparable 
blow. The first definite indication of Berlin’s new 
attitude came on November 24 when the Diplo- 
matisch-Politische Korres pondenz, semi-official organ 
of the Foreign Office, accused the Greek Premier, 

















a 
one 








General Metaxas, of being a British tool, and of en- 
larging the scope of the war. 


Despite their obvious interest in winning over 
Yugoslavia and Bulgaria, German spokesmen had 
to admit on November 25 that no further acces- 
sions to the tripartite pact could be expected for 
the time being. Even Bulgaria, which hopes to re- 
cover access to the Aegean at the expense of Greece, 
has managed to resist the blandishments of the Axis 
powers. Soviet pressure may have affected Bulgaria's 
policy, the more since Russia and Germany do not 
yet appear to have completely adjusted their con- 
flicting interests in the Balkans. On November 22, 
for instance, the official Soviet news agency, Tass, 
denied specifically that Hungary’s adherence to the 
Axis-Tokyo alliance had taken place “with the co- 
operation and full approval of the Soviet Union.” 
Moscow's new Ambassador to Berlin, Vice Foreign 
Commissar V. G. Dekanozoff, is known as an expert 
on the Balkans and the Near East—two subjects on 
which further negotiations with Germany will un- 
doubtedly prove necessary. 


TURKEY RESISTS GERMAN PRESSURE. Ger- 
many also appears to have had no success with Tur- 
key, which still stubbornly follows an independent 
course. Ankara’s determination to resist attack was 
re-emphasized on November 22 when, as a precau- 
tionary measure, martial law was declared in the 
Turkish districts adjoining both sides of the Dar- 
danelles and the Bosporus. The Germans, however, 
are assuring Turkey that they harbor no designs on 
its territory, and want solely to insure its neutrality 
in the eastern Mediterranean conflict. While con- 
trol of the Turkish Straits would give the Reich 
greater bargaining power in its relations with the 
Soviet Union, a German attempt to conquer Tur- 
key would be extremely difficult. To reach the 
oil fields of Iraq or Palestine and Egypt, a Ger- 
man army would have to cross the Straits in the face 
of enemy fire and traverse more than a thousand 
miles of terrain in which communications are wholly 
inadequate. Realizing the strength of their position, 
the Turks are not inclined to surrender their present 
policy of benevolent neutrality toward Greece and 
Britain in return for a worthless guarantee against 
aggression by the Axis. On the other hand, Turkey’s 
offensive strength is so limited that it may hesitate 





COMING F.P.A. DISCUSSIONS 
Date Place Topic 
Nov. 28 St. Paul The Paradox of Canada 
Minneapolis How Much Can We Defend? 

“Dec. 3 Pittsburgh j American Policy in the Far East 
Dec. 4 Hartford The Struggle for the Mediterranean 
Dec. 5 Worcester Showdown in Asia 
Dec. 6 Boston Lessons for U.S. in Fall of France 
Dec. 7 Providence The Far Eastern Situation 

New York Does Europe Face Famine? 








Page Two 











el 
————eee, 


a long time before actively joining the war against 
Italy and Germany. 

Although thwarted for the moment in the Balkans, 
the Reich can draw considerable encouragement from 
the progress of its war against the British Isles 
where it believes the war will, in the last analysis, 
be decided. German raiders and submarines cop. 
tinue to sink British merchantmen at a rate which 
justifies Britain's growing concern about the avail. 
ability of sufficient shipping facilities. The Germans 
have followed up their devastating raid on Coventry 
by air attacks of equal intensity on the ports of South. 
ampton, Liverpool and Bristol, the vital industrial 
city of Birmingham and other towns in the Midlands, 
As yet the RAF seems unable to stage similar mags 
raids against German industrial centers. Its scattered 
attacks on German munitions factories apparently 
have not inflicted damage on a scale comparable to 
that wrought by the Luftwaffe on British plants, 
The disparity in industrial resources seems to be | 
widening to Germany's advantage. Only greater aid } 
from the United States in the form of ships and war 
supplies can narrow or close that gap. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


W. T. STONE TO BROADCAST 
“American Aid to Britain” will be discussed by | 
William T. Stone, Vice President of the Association 
and head of its Washington Bureau, on the FPA’s 
radio program on Sunday, December 1. These broad- 
casts are given every Sunday, from 2:15 to 2:30 p.m 
E.S.T. If you have not been able to hear the pro- 
grams, please urge your local radio station to carry 
the broadcast. We are eager to have your comments 
and those of your friends. 








Beyond German Victory, by Helen Hill and Herbert Agar. 
New York, Reynal and Hitchcock, 1940. $1.00 
A tract for the times in which the authors call for im- 
mediate action against Hitler. They are at their best in 
demonstrating how the Nazis are immensely strengthened, 
not weakened, by each successive campaign. 


Chronology of Failure: The Last Days of the French Re 
public, by Hamilton Fish Armstrong. New York, Mae 
millan, 1940. $1.50 


Writing with his customary insight and skill, Mr 
Armstrong tells the absorbing story of the Nazi Blitzkrieg 
in the West and the collapse of France. His day-by-day at 
count is at once dramatic and reliable; his analysis of the 
causes of the French defeat is singularly well-balanced. 


Haiti and the United States, 1714-1938, by Ludwell Le 
Montague. Durham, Duke University Press, 1940. $3.00 
An exceptionally careful and interesting study of the 

Republic of Haiti—its strategic situation, history, govert- 

ment, people, economy and foreign trade. 


Inside Asia, by John Gunther. New York, Harper and 
Brothers, 1939. $3.50 


An excellent companion to Inside Europe, this work has 
already served to introduce many readers to the intricacies 
of Asiatic politics. Beginning with Japan and China, it 
ranges through the wide field covered by southeast Asia, 
India, and the Near East. 





Ente: 


L by 
tion 
> A’s 
oad- 


p.m. 
pro- 
arty 


ents 


\ gar. 


r im- 
st in 
ened, 


h Re- 
Mae- 


Mr. 
krieg 
Ly ac 
»f the 
anced. 


1 Lee 
$3.00 


f the 
)vern- 


r and 


‘k has 
cacies 
na, it 

Asia, 























TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA 


By JOHN I. B. McCULLOCH 





Throughout Latin America, interest has been 
stirred by the creation in Madrid of a vaguely defined 
Consejo de Hispanicismo, a propaganda organ by 
means Of which the Franco government hopes to 
extend its influence over the former Spanish colonies. 
Since relations between Spain and the Latin Ameri- 
can republics have been none too cordial in recent 
months, and since Spain’s gravitation toward the 
Axis powers has aroused general concern, this most 
recent step on the part of the Madrid régime has 
been coldly received in the Latin republics of the 
New World. 


PROGRESS IN ECONOMIC COOPERATION. 
Several months ago the United States Congress au- 
thorized the Export-Import Bank to increase its 
lending facilities by half a billion dollars, in order 
to help the countries of the Western Hemisphere. 
Since then, the largest credits granted by the Bank 
have gone to Brazil: $20,000,000 for aid in the con- 
struction of a steel mill, and a further $25,000,000 
which will be made available to the Bank of Brazil 
in the shape of a revolving fund to facilitate pur- 
chases from the United States. A smaller credit has 
been granted to Costa Rica, a Cuban commission 
is now in the United States negotiating a loan, and 
other similar arrangements are pending. The most 
significant development on the economic front, how- 
ever, was the arrival on November 13 in Washington 
of an Argentine financial mission headed by Dr. 


Rail Prebisch, general manager of the Argentine 
Central Bank. 


Last January negotiations for a reciprocal trade 
agreement between Argentina and the United States 
were broken off, and economic relations between 
the two countries are far from satisfactory. The crux 
of the problem is the fact that the United States is 
itself a producer of Argentina’s leading commodi- 
ties, cereals and meat, and is therefore not in a posi- 
tion to offer a market for Argentine exports. Ar- 
gentina’s chief customer, Great Britain, has been 
forced by wartime conditions to pay for Argentine 
commodities to a considerable extent in “blocked”’ 
sterling. On September 19, alleging scarcity of ex- 
change, Argentina imposed a temporary ban—sub- 
sequently lifted—on imports from the United States. 
To meet the various issues raised by this problem, it 


has been suggested that the United States, Argen- 
tina and Great Britain might establish a tripartite 
arrangement, whereby this country would sup- 
ply the funds for ‘“unfreezing’” Argentine balances 
blocked in London. At present, negotiations are in 
an exploratory stage, and the Washington Admin- 
istration has not yet committed itself to definite 
measures. Should Argentine-United States economic 
relations be placed on a more satisfactory basis as a 
result of current discussions, this country will have 
moved a long way toward satisfying one of the basic 
prerequisites of any genuine ‘Hemisphere defense.” 


NEW MEXICAN PRESIDENT TO BE INAU- 
GURATED. The inauguration of General Manuel 
Avila Camacho as President of Mexico on Decem- 
ber 1 is the most important impending event in 
Latin American domestic politics. The installation 
of the new Mexican régime will bring to an end a 
long-drawn-out post-election struggle between fol- 
lowers of Avila Camacho and supporters of Gen- 
eral Juan Andreu Almazan, his chief opponent at 
the polls. In recent weeks there has been a notice- 
able dwindling of Almaz4n support, and many of 
the defeated candidate's chief advisers have made 
their peace with the government. The appointment 
of Vice President-Elect Henry A. Wallace to repre- 
sent the United States at the inaugural ceremonies 
is seen as a final blow to Almazan hopes. In effect, 
this amounts to a recognition on Washington's 
part of Avila Camacho as successor to Lazaro 
Cardenas. Presumably Wallace’s visit will be the 
occasion of fresh negotiations with regard to mat- 
ters still pending between the two republics—notably 
the oil situation and agrarian claims. 

The inauguration of Avila Camacho for a six-year 
term may bring in its wake new domestic problems 
for Mexico. Behind his candidacy have been aligned 
two diametrically opposed groups: the left wing, 
headed by Vicente Lombardo Toledano, secretary 
general of the dominant Mexican labor confedera- 
tion; and the right wing, represented by such close 
associates of Avila Camacho as ex-President Emilio 
Portes Gil. A sharp struggle between these two rival 
groups is anticipated, with the new President’s own 
sympathies enlisted in favor of the conservative 
faction. 


For more extensive coverage on Latin American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS. For sample copy of this publication, write to the 
Washington Bureau, Foreign Policy Association, 1200 National Press Building, Washington, D.C. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 6, NoveMBER 29, 1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Laer, Secretary; Vera Micugeres Dean, Eéitor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


S81 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 25.—With aid to Britain approaching a new 
peak, there are indications that the rapidly expand- 
ing needs of the British Empire may lead to a re- 
newed Congressional battle over America’s relation 
to the war early in the next session. At first glance, 
this may seem surprising, in view of the fact that 
both major parties are committed to the policy of 
supporting Great Britain, and that Congress has 
approved or accepted virtually every measure pro- 
posed by the President. And yet, if the prevailing 
views of Congress are examined more closely, they 
reveal divergent assumptions which are likely to 
touch off a new debate. 


TWO HYPOTHESES. It is important to remem- 
ber that the program of aid to Britain has been 
supported in Congress by different groups for dif- 
ferent reasons. According to one group, full as- 
sistance to Great Britain is a moral obligation as 
well as a political necessity. Many who accept this 
hypothesis believe that Britain is fighting “our war,” 
and that it would be better for the United States to 
go to war itself, rather than face the kind of world 
which would follow a Nazi victory. Consequently, 
they would be prepared to take whatever steps are 
necessary—even to the point of military intervention 
—in order to prevent an outcome of the war which 
would leave the United States alone in a world dom- 
inated by a hostile and victorious totalitarian bloc. 


The second group maintains that support for 
Britain is essential in order to “gain time” for the 
completion of our own program of national defense. 
Many who hold this view are prepared to give all 
possible economic and diplomatic aid short of war, 
in the belief that it will keep war away from the 
New World; but they reject the thesis that this is 
“our war” and hold that it would be suicidal for the 
United States actively to enter the war now. Faced 
with the choice of immediate intervention in Europe 
or fighting later in the Western Hemisphere, they 
would take their stand on the Hemisphere defense 
line. 

Up to the present, these divergent assumptions 
have not hampered the effective application of the 
Administration’s program. As the election demon- 
strated, both groups concede that the vital interests 
of the United States would be adversely affected by 
an Axis victory, and both recognize that the effective- 
ness of our defense program will depend upon 





Britain's ability to resist. So far, however, the funda. 
mental issues have not been presented candidly 
either side, at least in open debate. Political leaders 
who privately believe that the United States must 
throw its full weight into the balance continue to 
assert in public that we can turn the balance without 
direct military intervention, ignoring the fact that 
half-measures are not likely to be effective in total 
war. On the other hand, those who hold that the 
United States can safely take its stand in the West. 
ern Hemisphere, regardless of the outcome in Europe 
and Asia, continue to close their eyes to the possi. 
bility that a defeated Britain might even be forced 
to join a victorious Axis bloc, thus confronting this 
country with a far more formidable problem in Latip 
America. Finally, both groups have probably over. 
estimated Britain’s strength, and underestimated the 
extent to which the United States has become the 
decisive factor in the balance of power. 


BRITAIN’S INCREASING NEEDS. Lord 
Lothian’s frank statement of British needs, made in 
an interview on his return from London on Novem: 
ber 24, may bring about a more frank and realistic 
appraisal of America’s relation to the war. But it 
may also sharpen the opposition of that section of 
Congressional opinion which favored aid to England 
only to gain time for our own defense program. By 
his blunt warning that England faces a long war, 
that the British government is nearing the end of 
its financial resources, and that it will need financial 
aid as well as more “planes, munitions and ships for 
the tough year ahead,” Lord Lothian compelled Con- 
gress and the American public to recognize that this 
country has already become the decisive factor in 
Britain’s calculations for 1941 and the ensuing years 
The demand for the use of American ships, even 
more than the need for loans and credits, will pre 
cipitate Congressional debate. For the logical sequel 
to sending American ships into the war zone is to 
provide American naval convoys, thus bringing the 
war close to the United States. In November 1939 
Congress passed a revised Neutrality Act, setting 
rigid limitations on the use by belligerents of the 
American merchant marine and American financial 
aid. Up to the present that Act has prevented any 
incident which would be regarded by the United 
States as a casus belli. At its next session Congress 
must decide whether or not maritime and financial 
aid to Britain are sufficiently important to the United 
States to justify the risk of war. 

W. T. STONE 


~— 








Vor 


tect 


ap} 


