ian port 
lies for 
ned the 
has not 
alliance. 
nber 19 
/ashing- 
d would 
hreat to 
tees ob- 
Minister 
re Occu- 
be will- 
to drive 


. Under 
d to M. 
ons with 
reported 
ting, the 
nce with 
AO peace 
e ability 
once the 
bases on 
tered by 
inns they 
States if 
Atlantic 
e) protect 


a would 
vernment 
nland on 
-, But the 
sin 1939 
un antici- 
W ashing- 
ki. 
LLIOTT 


VDS 


PERIODICAL ROOM 
GENERAL Liber Ary 
UNIV. OF » 


= 
Amin 


General Library 


‘? > 
JNLiVve 


JAN 8 1943 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


rsity of Michigan 


Arbor, Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


VoL. XXII, No. 12 


JANUARY 8, 19438 


HE task of establishing military government in 

territories now occupied, or that may be occupied 
by the United Nations, involves and will continue 
to involve decisions of the gravest political charac- 
ter, as can be seen by the crisis persisting in North 
Africa and the even more complex situation in Yugo- 
slavia. Under the practice of the United States, 
which corresponds in general to the accepted practice 
of other civilized countries, military government in 
occupied territories is exercised by the commander 
in the field under the direction of the President as 
Commander-in-Chief. Once Congress has declared or 
otherwise initiated a state of war, the prosecution of 
hostilities devolves upon the President, subject to 
subsequent criticism or questioning by Congress. 

SHOULD CIVILIAN PERSONNEL REMAIN? 
The War Department's Basic Field Manual of Mili- 
tary Government provides, as part of a policy of 
“economy of effort,” that existing civilian personnel 
in occupied territory should be retained “so far as 
reliance may be placed upon them to do their work 
loyally and efficiently.” It is the responsibility of the 
military commander and his subordinates to select, 
among civilians of the occupied territory, persons 
who appear qualified to exercise civilian authority as 
governors, mayors, sheriffs, and so on. This very se- 
lection may, obviously, determine the future charac- 
ter of the civilian administration in the given terri- 
tory, and is therefore fraught with consequences, 
especially at a time when, as today, the whole world 
isin the grip of social and political change. 


Possibility of Martial Law. In this connection, 
three major problems loom with respect to terti- 
tories that are occupied or may be occupied by the 
United Nations. In some countries, for example 
Yugoslavia—although a similar situation might con- 


| Ceivably arise in Poland and elsewhere—the military 
| 

| 1. This is the third in a series of articles on the reconstruction of 
| Europe. 


ROLE OF MILITARY ADMINISTRATION IN RECONSTRUCTION? 


commander may find himself confronted with such 
a state of internal disorder and conflict between con- 
tenders for power that, in addition to establishing 
military government under which civilian authority 
would continue to function, he may have to proclaim 
martial law. Under martial law, which corresponds 
to what is known in Europe as a state of siege, the 
exercise of civilian authority may be suspended, and 
various restrictions may be placed by the military 
government on the rights of individual citizens. 
Proclamation of martial law is usually regarded as 
a last resort, when all other efforts to restore law and 
order have failed. This measure could have been 
adopted in North Africa, but General Eisenhower, 
complying with the procedure outlined in the Basie 
Field Manual, preferred to follow the procedure of 
establishing military government, and entrusted 
civilian administration to French authorities—thus, 
among other things, assuring the legal continuation 
of French rule over Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia. 
As a matter of fact, the arrangement made in North 
Africa is in the nature of a compromise. General 
Eisenhower is the military commander-in-chief, but 
General Giraud and the Imperial Council he heads 
exercise both military and civilian authority under 
his control. Should the members of the Imperial 
Council find it impossible to reach an agreement, and 
fail to give American forces necessary aid in the 
prosecution of the North African campaign, Gen- 
eral Eisenhower might be confronted with the neces- 
sity of either assuming complete military control or 
even of proclaiming martial law. Either of these 
steps would concentrate all authority in his hands 
and, it is believed, might ultimately create complica- 
tions regarding return of North Africa to the French, 
whose rule over that territory would thus have been 
suspended. Suspension of French rule might open 
the way both to unrest among Arab chieftains, which 
could endanger the rear of the American forces, and 


to demands on the part of natives for some form of 
self-government under the terms of the Atlantic 
Charter. It is therefore thought that General Eisen- 
hower, if at all possible, will prefer to maintain the 
present arrangement. 

Use of Native Personnel. The second major prob- 
lem that may arise in occupied countries concerns 
the kind of civilian personnel the military com- 
mander may think it advisable to retain or appoint. 
In Germany, for example, retention of Nazi and 
Nazi-appointed officials would make the task of 
United Nations military administration hopeless 
from the start, since there is a basic conflict between 
the United Nations and the Nazis regarding such 
matters as civilian administration of law, rights of 
individuals, and so on. In such a situation, it may 
seem imperative to remove the ranking personnel of 
the civil service, law courts, and schools, and tem- 
porarily appoint to key positions civilians of the oc- 
cupying power or powers until such time as subordi- 
nate native personnel has been sifted and retrained. 
Non-German civilian administrators appointed for 
this purpose would, of course, be directly responsible 
to the military commander. Infinite care would have 
to be taken that such temporary administrators per- 
form their functions in a manner that would not be 
regarded by the German people as a form of reprisals. 

Selection of Native Administrators. The third 
problem, which may arise both in Axis and Axis- 
occupied countries, concerns the actual selection of 
the natives to be entrusted with civilian administra- 


AMERICAN RELIEF PROGRAM GETS 


The failure as yet of Generals de Gaulle and 
Giraud to unite not only postpones restoration of 
French solidarity but complicates the American re- 
lief program in North Africa. If the United States 
distributes supplies in cooperation with the present 
administration, it inevitably strengthens the position 
of that régime; if it does not, it risks delays that 
may cause popular dissatisfaction serious enough to 
endanger our military position in the entire area. 

On January 1 the War Department announced that 
“many thousands of tons’ of food, clothing, and 
other essential materials are being rushed to the 
civilian population. In addition, “some hundreds of 


Are the “governments-in-exile” helping the United 
Nations’ war effort? Are they in contact with their 
conquered peoples? What are their post-war plans? 
Read— 


ALLIED GOVERNMENTS IN LONDON—War 
Efforts and Peace Aims by Winifred N. Hadsel 


25c 


December 15 issue of ForEIGN Poticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5 a year; to FPA members $3. 


Page Two — 


tion. The first preoccupation of the military com. 
mander, and justifiably so, is restoration of order, 
There is therefore apt to be a tendency, on the part 
of military commanders, to select for civilian ad. 
ministration those who give evidence of willingness 
and ability to maintain order. The possibility might 
thus arise that elements who had once enjoyed ay. 
thority, and might be regarded as ‘‘respectable citi. 
zens,’ would be entrusted with power, although they 
may no longer represent the altered sentiments of the | 
people—thus immediately creating the danger that 
the people will be alienated by the military adminis. 
tration. This danger might be averted if, while the 
war is in progress, the Allied governments in London 
made some attempt to conform closely to the known 
sentiments of their peoples living under Nazi rule. | 
No one who has witnessed the havoc, human and 
material, wrought by revolutions can fail to hope 
that the changes impending in Europe can be 
brought to maturity through evolution and adjust. 
ment of conflicting interests rather than by a series 
of explosions. The military governments that the 
United Nations may establish in occupied countries 
will be in a position either to perpetuate anarchy on 
the continent, or to facilitate Europe's transition from 
an uneasy recent past and a brutal present to what 
it must be hoped will be a better future. To do the 
latter, the military administrators must have a gen-, 
eral idea of the lines along which the continent is 
developing and may be expected to develop on cessa- 
tion of hostilities. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


UNDER WAY IN NORTH AFRICA 


thousands of dollars worth” of tea, sugar, and cot- 
ton cloth which were carried by the invasion fleet are 
being distributed. The original purpose behind these 
shipments was that of barter, for it was known that 
money would not secure local supplies or labor for 
our expeditionary forces, since there were few goods 
to be bought in an area which the Vichy govern- 
ment has drained of almost all movable reserves.’ 
More recently, American supplies have been used in 


attempts to secure the friendliness of the local popu 
lation. Milton S. Eisenhower, Associate Director of | 
the Office of War Information, returned last week! 
from this theatre of the war with the plea that mort 
food, especially wheat and meat, be rushed to that) 
area by February 1 lest “serious trouble’ develop | 
among the impoverished Arab masses and dissident| 
Frenchmen. During the two months since the invé 
sion there have been signs of lack of enthusiasm fot 
the cause of the United Nations not only among 
certain former Vichy officials but among some of 
the inhabitants. It was with this situation in mind that 
Mr. Eisenhower insisted that the United States offet 
concrete evidence of its concern for the welfare of 
the natives. 


—<$<$<$—_ 


ary CcOm- 
o£ order, 
the part 
ilian ad. 
Llingness 
ty might 
oyed au. 
able citi. 
ugh they 
its of the 
ger that 
adminis. 
vhile the 
1 London 
e known 
lazi rule. 
man and 
to hope 
can be 
d adjust. 
a series 
that the 
countries 
archy on 
ion from 
to what 
o do the 
e a gen- 
itinent is 
on Cessa- 
DEAN 


ICA 


and cot: 
fleet are 
ind these 
own that 
labor for 
sw goods 
. govern 
reserves. 
n used in 
cal popu- 
rector of 
ast week 
hat more 


d to that! 


develop 
dissident 
the inva 
siasm fot 
y among 
some of 
mind that: 
ates offet| 
elfare of| 


| 


————— 
———— 


EFFECT ON EUROPE. There have been no of- 
ficial indications as yet that one purpose of American 
relief for North Africa is to influence the peoples of 
occupied Europe, but that result must inevitably 
follow. Despite strict censorship by the Axis, the 
news of a steady stream of supplies for North Afri- 
can civilians will assuredly leak through into Europe. 
There, where hunger has been used as an instrument 
of Nazi control for more than two years, this report 
may help to inspire new hope and encourage fresh 
resistance to the Axis. 

Supplies for North Africa are merely the begin- 
ning, then, of world-wide use by the United States 
of food both as a means of securing victory and of 
building peace. During and after World War I the 
United States was engaged in giving relief to Europe 
for a decade, 1914-24, from the time when aid was 
extended to Belgium until supplies were brought 
into famine-ridden Russia. In World War II the 
needs for assistance are many times greater, and the 
demands to be made on us may extend over an even 
longer period of time. It may be well at the outset, 
therefore, to consider three questions which are cer- 
tain to arise in connection with this venture—ques- 
tions which have already come up in North Africa. 


How can we build up surpluses of such required 
staples as wheat, meat, wool, cotton, and medical 
supplies? Frugality at home is obviously only part 
of the answer, for it is clearly impossible for the 
United States alone to furnish all the goods which 
the stricken areas of the world will presumably need. 
It is essential, therefore, that arrangements be made 
for joint action by those nations which may be ex- 
pected to have surpluses on hand now and later, 
and that plans be laid for helping the liberated areas 
restore their own agriculture in a relatively short 
time. Herbert H. Lehman’s organization for Foreign 
Relief and Rehabilitation is, in fact, now studying 
the food situation in cooperation with the British 
Inter-Allied Committee on Post-War Requirements. 
At the same time the Lend-Lease Administration, as 
well as the international wheat pool formed by the 
United States, Argentina, Canada, and Australia in 
the spring of 1942, are at hand for relief purposes. 
But no over-all international organization has yet 
been established, despite the probability that needs 
will outrun supplies even if all surpluses are tapped. 

How much shipping space can be found for relief? 
So far as present supplies to North Africa are con- 
cerned, shipping is limited not only by military re- 
quirements but by sinkings which, according to a 


Page Three 


recent estimate, amount to approximately one mil- 
lion deadweight tons per month. In the future, 
transportation on land may become another major 
problem. The Nazis have torn up some railroad 
lines to repair shortages elsewhere, the RAF has 
destroyed engines and freight cars in its raids on 
German communications, and roads and automobile 
equipment throughout Europe are badly in need of 
repair. All of this means that relief workers will first 
have to install transport facilities in many areas be- 
fore they can carry out their main tasks. 

Who shall distribute relief? In North Africa the 
already existing rationing system is being used for 
American supplies, and relatively few American ad- 
ministrators are on the spot where goods are actually 
sold to the population. The result is that the present 
French régime benefits by the distribution of food. 
Serious as this political problem is, it is only a fore- 
taste of what may be expected in Europe, for in many 
continental areas there may be a lack of workable 
governmental machinery as well as food and cloth- 
ing. Here, therefore, large staffs of trained Allied 
personnel will be required to serve as the shock 
troops of relief until governments can be set up. In 
establishing these new régimes we will probably 
be embarrassed by a host of contenders, all charac- 
terized by their claims to be the true representatives 
of their people and by their eagerness to establish 
themselves by distributing food. 

It is, therefore, only by the fullest cooperation be- 
tween the partners in the war that relief can be suc- 
cessfully secured, transported, and administered. 
“Food is a Weapon” is more than a mere slogan, for 
it can be used either to harm or to preserve democracy 


and peace. WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


F.P.A. ANNOUNCEMENTS 


The Foreign Policy Association broadcast over 
the Blue Network on Saturday, January 9, from 
1:15 p.m. to 1:45 p.m., will be on AMERICA LOOKS 
TO THE FUTURE IN THE Far East. Hugh Byas, au- 
thor of Government by Assassination; Catherine 
Porter, author of Crisis in the Philippines; and Law- 
rence K. Rosinger, F.P.A. research associate, will 
discuss the subject under the chairmanship of James 
G. McDonald. 

The January 23 luncheon topic in New York will 
be AsiA Looks TO THE FuTuRE. Members of the 
Canadian Institute of International Affairs will come 
to New York for round tables on February 6, instead 
of January 23. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 12, January 8, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Bx 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


i 

H 

t 

me 

4 

, 

rp) 
ny 
ip! 
Ry 
RY 


vi 

i 

H 
a 

‘ 
i 

y 


a are 
_ =e 16 oes So 


Washington News Letter 


sdb ee, 


JAN. 4.—The recall of the Chinese Military Mis- 
sion, headed by Lieut. General Hsiung Shih-fei, to 
report to Chiang Kai-shek, which became generally 
known on December 31, is a direct consequence of 
the Chinese Generalissimo’s dissatisfaction with the 
treatment China is receiving from its Allies, and 
especially the United States, in the war. While Gen- 
eral Hsiung himself has preserved a diplomatic si- 
lence concerning his recall to China (a spokesman 
for the National Military Council at Chungking 
said on January 2 that he will return to the United 
States after making his report), Dr. Lin Yutang, 
noted Chinese author and publicist who is now re- 
siding in this country, was more candid in protesting 
against what he called the “shabby” treatment of 
the Chinese Military Mission. He declared that ‘‘the 
enormous reservoir of goodwill between China and 
America is being severely drawn upon.” 

The Chinese are discontented with the decision of 
the American and British military authorities to fol- 
low a global strategy of concentrating first on Ger- 
many and merely attempting to “contain” Japan 
until the Wehrmacht has been smashed. Chungking 
believes that this is a dangerous policy to pursue be- 
cause it may enable Japan to intrench itself in its 
conquered territories and mobilize the vast stores of 
raw materials lying at its disposal there, with the 
result that the task of Allied reconquest will be long 
and costly. This fear, incidentally, seems to be shared 
to some extent by Joseph Grew, our former Ambassa- 


dor in Tokyo, and by Premier John Curtin of 
Australia. 


CHINESE FEEL SLIGHTED. The Chinese argue 
that the time element cannot be ignored by the United 
Nations. Well-informed Chinese in Washington 
voice the fear that grave internal disorders may occur 
if their war with Japan, now in its sixth year, is 
greatly prolonged without effective outside aid. Ap- 
prehension has even been expressed that some of 
Chiang Kai-shek’s old enemies, whom he has so far 
been able to control, will get out of hand. The Chi- 
nese also regard it as a slight that General Hsiung 
has been left cooling his heels in Washington by the 
Combined-Chiefs-of-Staff Committee, as the Ameri- 
can and British groups that control Allied strategy are 
called. They point out that China is the only one of 
the United Nations with the exception of Britain 
that has maintained a permanent military mission in 
Washington. But although General Hsiung has 
been here nine months, only once during that time 


FOR VICTORY °* 


was he called into consultation by the Allied 
High Command, despite China’s vital interest in the 
development of the Pacific campaign. 

Furthermore, the Chinese do not conceal their dis. 
appointment at the very limited amount of material 
assistance they are receiving from the United States. 
This is accounted for to a large extent by the fact 
that since the loss of the Burma road last spring, 
China has been cut off from access to supplies from 
its allies save by the air route. 

As President Roosevelt’s Report to Congress on 
Lend-Lease Operations for the period ending De. 
cember 11 stated, “since the loss of Burma, air trans- 
port across the Himalayas from India has been the 
only direct means of bringing lend-lease supplies into 
China. Cargo planes are plying this dangerous route 
regularly, but the quantities they have been able to 
carry so far have been small.” 

Although this report promises that ‘we shall find 
ways to send more,” the Chinese think that the 
United Nations might do more for them right now 
by (1) flying more combat planes with pilots into 
China to cooperate with their struggling armies and 
(2) by making a determined effort to reconquer 
Burma and so reopen the life-line to their country. 


DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS. Chinese irritation 
arises from a belief that the Western powers re- 
gard the war as primarily a struggle to preserve 
Anglo-Saxon imperialism, which was noted by Wen- 
dell Willkie during his stay at Chungking. 

Chinese fears that the provisions of the Atlantic 
Charter do not apply to them may be removed by 
relinquishment by the Anglo-Saxon powers of their 
century-old extraterritorial rights in China. An- 
nouncement was made in Washington and London 
on October 9 that the United States and Britain were 
prepared to give up their special privileges in China, 
ever a source of irritation against them. On Octo- 
ber 24 Secretary of State Cordell Hull handed a draft 
treaty to Dr. Wei Tao-ming, the Chinese Ambassa- 
dor, by which the United States would abandon the 
entire system under which American citizens have 
enjoyed special rights in China since 1844, and there 
is good reason to believe that these negotiations will 
very shortly lead to a successful conclusion. 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


Your Career in Defense, by S. C. Davis. New York, Har- 
per, 1942. $2.00 


A practical little guide toward finding a place in the 
work of the “Victory Program.” 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


