


Beel2\ \\ J 


— 
= 
ge 


fense 
“nitial 


Sam- ‘ 


y the 
t that 
g de. 
ently 








PERIODICAL KYUm “> 


GENERAL LIBRARY 
WHY. OF MICH 


ral Library 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


AUG 30 194) 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN rOLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XX, No. 45 


Avucust 29, 1941 





—_—_— 


SOUTH AMERICA WEIGHS COURSE OF WAR 


By VERA MICHELES DEAN 


Mrs. Dean has just returned from a visit to Brazil, Argentina, 
Chile and Peru. 


me spectacular struggle between Germany and 
Russia and the mounting tide of revolt against 


most | Hitler's “new order’ among the conquered peoples of 


clear. 
1 Mr. 
t ap- 
ction. 
Ms to 


e de 
als is 
*riOus 
ACTOSS 
tional 
} may 
ss the 
.S. to 
ugust 
ressel. 
from 
a still 
| dan- 
6,684 
1941. 
build: 
being 
which 
venty- 
h out 
0 Out 
ng if 
nd to 
e Jap 


sooner 


LDE 





| 


| 





Europe, have had a profound effect on the countries 
of South America, where public opinion registers 
changes in the international temperature with the 
delicate precision of a thermometer. When Germany 
was Winning an uninterrupted series of victories in the 


west, many Latin Americans, with varying degrees of 


resignation, had come to accept Nazi victory as in- 
evitable. But a subtle change in the political atmos- 
phere made itself felt soon after the German invasion 
of Russia. It might have been expected—and this was 
the expectation of Nazi propaganda—that fear of 
Communism would range the predominantly Catho- 
lic countries of South America on the side of Ger- 
many. What impressed Latin Americans, however, 
was that, for the first time, the Nazis had encountered 
military resistance which had thwarted their Biitz- 
krieg methods. And they attributed Soviet resistance 
not merely to Russia’s military and inductrial pre- 
paredness, but to the effectiveness of a rival ideology 
which had proved a match for Nazism. 


PREOCCUPATION WITH EXPORTS. To ap- 
preciate the effect that this change in opinion regard- 
ing the course of the war may have on South America, 
itis essential to understand that the countries of that 
continent, far from seeking security within a closed 
Western Hemisphere system, are keenly aware of 
their links with Europe and Asia. Until now their 
principal exports have consisted of foodstuffs and in- 
dustrial raw materials. Their chief concern is to find 
amarket for these exports at the best price they can 
obtain. They are consequently far more export- 
minded and, to that extent international-minded, than 
many sections of the United States. It is to their ad- 


vantage to have the great industrial powers—Britain, 
the United States and Germany—compete for their 
products, rather than have one great power monopo- 
lize the purchase of their exports, as the United States 
is in many respects doing today, when war and the 
British blockade have closed South America’s Euro- 
pean markets. From a purely materialistic point of 
view, many South Americans do not want to see the 
complete victory of either group of belligerents, 
which might leave the victors in a position to dictate 
political and economic terms to raw material-produc- 
ing countries. Many of them would prefer to see the 
war end in a draw, which would make it possible for 
South America to prosper by renewed economic com- 
petition between the great powers. 

IS SOUTH AMERICA PRO-NAZI? Some North 
Americans—who may themselves have hesitated to 
aid Britain—contend that South Americans are luke- 
warm toward the democratic cause, and attribute this 
lukewarmness to pro-Nazi sympathies. This is a mis- 
interpretation of public sentiment in South America. 
True, many of the countries to the south of us have 
not yet reached the stage of political and economic 
development propitious to the full functioning of 
parliamentary institutions; but the vast majority of 
the people are pro-democratic and anti-totalitarian by 
temper and tradition, even more than by intellectual 
conviction. Nazi propaganda, which stresses the inef- 
fectiveness of parliamentary institutions in countries 
where they function—as in Argentina and Chile— 
and denounces Anglo-Saxon “imperialism,” has made 
relatively little headway except in military and upper 
class circles. Even there admiration for the Nazis is 
due primarily to the awe aroused by the efficiency of 
the German war machine, and to the preference of 
military and upper class groups for a “‘strong govern- 
ment’ in their own countries. This does not mean that 
Nazi influence in South America should be under- 
estimated for a moment. On the contrary, it can-yet 














— 





= Page Two 





prove very dangerous, because it is concentrated 
among key people who in case of a crisis might con- 
trol strategic positions in each country affected. 

The real influence in South America is neither Ger- 
man, nor Italian, nor Spanish. In fact, many South 
Americans resent any attempt by Madrid to direct 
their course, somewhat in the way that North Ameri- 
cans often resent pressure from Britain. The real Eu- 
ropean influence among educated South Americans 
stems from France, which was relatively disinterested 
in that continent. Because France—far more than 
Britain or the United States—was regarded as the true 
prototype of democracy and culture, its defeat has 
proved a personal tragedy for many South Ameri- 
cans. The defeat of France has also been interpreted 
as a great blow to the prestige of Latin peoples in 
general. The reaction to this event has taken two 
forms: on the one hand, there is a tendency to ration- 
alize the defeat of France, and the subjection of other 
Latin peoples—Spain, Italy, Rumania—by contend- 
ing that the Germans are invincible; on the other 
hand, there is an effort to discover how the countries 
of South America, with their predominantly Latin 
settlers, can overcome the weaknesses revealed by the 
Latin countries of Europe. 


WHAT SOUTH AMERICA THINKS OF U.S. 
In this period of painful readjustment, South Ameti- 
cans are re-examining their concept of the United 
States, and of the réle the United States might play 
in the Western Hemisphere. For them President 
Roosevelt remains the protagonist of a New Deal in 
hemisphere affairs. But they still wonder whether 
the Good Neighbor policy is merely an emergency 
measure, or has become an intrinsic part of our atti- 
tude toward South America. At the moment, the 
South American countries realize that the United 
States is the only market for their exports, and the 
only source of essentiz! manufactured goods — al- 
though it becomes increasingly difficult for them to 
obtain manufactured goods from the United States, 
owing partly to our own armament needs, and partly 
to lack of shipping facilities. Although the former 
agitation against “Yankee imperialism” has some- 
what abated, especially now that the Communists 
have adopted the party line of cooperation with Brit- 
ain and the United States, many South Americans 





What is the economic and strategic importance of 
Central America for the United States in the 
present emergency? Read: 


THE RESOURCES AND TRADE OF 
CENTRAL AMERICA 


by A. Randle Elliott 


25¢ 








September 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 











——) 
still feel that the United States exploits their tp 
sources without adequate. compensati:n. Yet th Th 
realize that, in many cases, their countries have not ‘ 
reached the level of technical development whig 
would permit them to take over operation of ming ind 
and public utilities now operated by American y miles 
British interests, and that withdrawal of foreign capi, gan 3 
tal might precipitate an economic collapse. As a rem, 
edy, they urge that the United States, instead of giy. 
ing loans which might be difficult to liquidate, pay 

higher prices for their strategic raw materials, such 

as copper; and advocate careful control of Foreign | aa 
capital in the future. nae 


The South American countries are not, on the ively 
whole, afraid as yet of Nazi invasion. At the same} ordi 
time, they have become increasingly aware of Nazi a 
activities within their borders, and are beginning tp nore, 
take various measures—as in Bolivia, Chile, Argen. | bick t 
tina and Uruguay—to check these activities. While OR 
the countries on the east coast are concerned with the Si 
Germany's plans for the future, on the west coast of Re 
Chile and Peru fear that, in case of war in the Far 
East, Japan might seek to establish a foothold on the | “tous 
Pacific coast or sabotage their mines. War in the Far |. ¢ 
East would also deprive these countries of a market a tt 
in Japan, which has been bidding against the United 
States for the minerals of Chile, and has purchased 
three-quarters of Peru’s 1941 cotton crop. 





aumt 


devel 
form 
mina 
If some concrete incident should convince the | Sovie 
countries of South America that the Axis constitutes | main 
a direct danger for that continent, they would un-} inco 
doubtedly support United States measures for defense | Sovie 
of the Western Hemisphere, because they are pas | with 
sionately attached to their political independence. | fusec 
But until that danger has eventuated, many of them} Ite 
feel that defense of their territory by the United | aoi 
States might prove almost as disastrous for theif; uit) 
independence as invasion by Germany—and perhaps | the | 
more lasting. In the midst of these mixed hopes and | ede 
apprehensions, the most important and immediate} mpc 
task for the United States is to demonstrate three | by n 
things: first, that this country is rapidly becoming 4 | ‘oun 
center of culture which could, to some extent at | se 
least, replace France in the hearts and minds of South | the 
Americans; second, that it is concerned with defense | ttal 
of democracy not only for the sake of material ad | the 
vantage, even on a lend-lease basis, but for the sake Pers 
of high ideals; and third, that it is prepared, from | whil 
the military and industrial point of view, to make Brit 
good its challenge to Nazism. For the South Amett | ‘1 
cans, too, are preoccupied with the kind of “new | ‘hal 
order” that may emerge out of this conflict. They | — 
find Nazi methods repugnant, but they want to make - 
sure that the new order anticipated by Britain and | fa 





Enter 
the United States will offer them political and eco a 
nomic participation on a basis of true equality. 








Dor | 


1g to 
rpen. | 
V hile 
with 
COast 
> Far 





n the 
e Far 
arket 
nited 
1ased 


: the | 
itutes 
1 un 
fense 
pas- 
lence. 
them 
nited 
their | 
rhaps 
5 and 
-diate 
three 
ing a 
nt at 
south 
fense 
il ad- 
- sake 











a 


Page Three 








BRITAIN AND U.S.S.R. ACT TO CHECK NAZI INFLUENCE IN IRAN 


The invasion of Iran on August 25 by British and 
Soviet forces opened up a new theater of hostilities 
yd spread the European war many hundreds of 
giles farther from the Polish Corridor, where it be- 

almost two years ago. General Sir Archibald 
Wavell, who had been transferred on July 1 from 
(giro to India, was in charge of the British armies 
yhich, supported by naval units in the Persian Gulf, 
were attacking eastward from the Iraqi border and 
westward from Baluchistan. Soviet troops were mov- 
ing southward into Iran from Trans-Caucasia and 
Turkestan, west and east of the Caspian Sea respec- 
tively. While little information is yet available re- 
ding the size of the opposing forces, Iran is 
thought to have a well-trained army of 100,000 or 
more, as well as a larger number of reserves, but to 
lick tanks, heavy guns and airplanes. 

ORIGIN OF THE CONFLICT. Great Britain and 
the Soviet Union justified their action by the refusal 
of Reza Shah Pahlevi, ruler of Iran, to eject the large 
qumber of German technicians, businessmen and 
‘tourists’ reported to be in the country. After 
in emphatic warning by the British government 
in the early spring that it was concerned over 
developments in Iran, the British made numerous 
formal and informal representations at Teheran, cul- 
ninating in a virtual ultimatum by Britain and the 
Soviet Union on August 16. The Iranian government, 
maintaining that only 640 Germans were in Iran— 
incontrast to the two or three thousand cited in Anglo- 
Soviet accusations—apparently agreed to request the 
withdrawal of small numbers each month, but re- 
fused to order a general expulsion. 

Iran has sought ever since the outbreak of war to 
woid such a showdown, in order to safeguard the 
unity and independence that it has achieved only in 
the past two decades. In 1907 Britain and Russia 
ded their long struggle for control of Persia—an 
mportant gateway to India and the Indian Ocean— 


| y negotiating a treaty which divided the unstable 


country into spheres of influence. Russia was to exer- 
ise predominant influence in the north, Britain in 
the south, while the Shah was relegated to the cen- 
tal portion. The Soviet government, shortly after 
the revolution, renounced its rights in northern 
Persia, but Britain retained much of its influence, 
while the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company—in which the 
british government has a majority holding—enjoyed 
‘virtual monopoly in the rich Persian fields. Reza 
Shah Pahlevi, who came to power in 1925, labored 


—— 





F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: TWO YEARS OF WAR 
Speaker: John C. deWilde 
Date: Sunday, August 31 
Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 

Station: NBC, blue network 











incessantly to modernize the economic, social and 
political life of the country, to revive a nationalistic 
spirit, and to end British and Russian control. The 
Trans-Iranian railway, a notable engineering achieve- 
ment, was completed in 1938 without resort to for- 
eign capital and with American rather than British 
technical assistance. In 1940 the Shah secured a re- 
vision of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company's conces- 
sion, and won a guaranteed minimum annual pay- 
ment of £4,000,000. At the present~time Iran, like 
some other countries that have experienced British 
imperialism, appears willing to risk eventual Nazi 
domination in order to thwart a traditional opponent. 
ANGLO-SOVIET AIMS. By taking preventive ac- 
tion, the British and Russians hope to head off a 
German coup as effectively as Britain acted in Iraq 
and Syria. In fact, they probably welcomed Iran’s 
rejection of their ultimatum and the resulting oppor- 
tunity to occupy the country. Iran, ranking fourth in 
world oil production, has held its output at approxi- 
mately 78,000,000 barrels for the past four years. 
The principal producing areas are at Masjid-i-Sulai- 
man and Haft Khel in the southwest part of the 
country, less than 100 miles from the Iraqi border, 
and are connected by pipeline to Persian Gulf ports. 
Their importance to the belligerents is equaled only 
by the strategic position of Iran as a whole. The ad- 
vance of the Nazi forces to the Black Sea and re- 
treat of Marshal Budenny’s army eastward across the 
Dnieper places Germany within eventual striking 
distance of the Caucasus and Iran. Britain therefore 
finds it necessary to extend its long line of defense, 
now running from Egypt through Iraq, even farther 
to the north and east. With the Ukraine seriously 
menaced, Britain also needs the Trans-Iranian rail- 
way as a relatively convenient route for supplies to 
the U.S.S.R. This railway runs from Bandar Shahpur 
on the Persian Gulf to Bandar Shah on the Caspian, 
where supplies would have to be transshipped by 
water. Another railway extends westward from 
Teheran, but does not yet connect with a short line 
in northern Iran that reaches the Soviet border. 
JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULIETIN. Vol. XX, No. 45, Aucust 29, 


1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MichHetes DEan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
Sis 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 

















Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

AuG. 25.—Prime Minister Churchill’s radio broad- 
cast of last Sunday, as viewed by Washington circles, 
reveals important decisions which the Roosevelt- 
Churchill conference reached concerning the Japanese 
threat in the Pacific. The immediate program appar- 
ently envisages an effort on the part of the United 
States, firmly supported by Britain, to convince Tokyo 
that any further aggression will meet with determined 
resistance, possibly involving the use of force. 

Two aspects of the Churchill broadcast offer clear 
evidence that this country is taking the lead in cur- 
rent dealings with Japan. The British Prime Min- 
ister explicitly declared that the United States was 
“laboring with infinite patience to arrive at a fair 
and amicable settlement which will give Japan the 
utmost reassurance for her legitimate interests.’ The 
warning which followed—that, in case these nego- 
tiations failed, Britain would range itself ‘“‘unhesi- 
tatingly at the side of the United States’—also indi- 
cated that the diplomatic initiative at Tokyo was 
being left in American hands. The strong wording 
of this pledge, nevertheless, suggested that Britain 
and the United States had agreed on specific defense 
measures in the Pacific, should Japan fail to heed the 
danger signal. 

NEGOTIATIONS AT TOKYO. Several days 
earlier, Washington correspondents had elicited an 
admission from Secretary Hull that important nego- 
tiations were being held in Tokyo. Referring to a 
two-hour conversation between Ambassador Grew 
and the Japanese Foreign Minister, Mr. Hull stated 
on August 19 that the talk had covered ‘‘many sub- 
jects” in addition to the issue of repatriating Ameri- 
cans from Japan. On the following day, moreover, 
he had declined to discuss the Ambassador's com- 
prehensive report to the State Department, said to 
include “Japanese proposals for settlement of trade 
difficulties.” Diplomatic conversations have mean- 
while continued, both in Washington and Tokyo. On 
August 25 Secretary Hull described these talks as 
purely informal and emphasized that any agreement 
with Japan would have to accord with the basic prin- 
ciples of American policy enunciated on July 16, 1937. 

Washington quarters, although not unduly optimis- 
tic, are satisfied that the United States holds the 
strongest cards in the diplomatic game now being 
played with Tokyo. During the past week or ten days, 
with the exception of belligerent press statements, 
Japan has made no additional forward move. Instead, 


there has been a noticeable effort by the Jap | 
authorities to lessen the prevailing tension in 
Pacific, except for refusal to permit about 100 Amep. 
cans to depart on the President Coolidge. In this lat 
ter case, it now seems likely that Americans will be 
permitted to leave Japan for Shanghai, where they 
can obtain passage to this country. 

The United States and Britain, together with the 
Dutch East Indies, are now in a position to offer | 7— 
strong inducements to Japan in exchange for definite | — 
commitments. Despite the bold front maintained by 
Tokyo, it is clear that the freezing regulations, which | 
have largely halted trans-Pacific trade, have proved } TI 
a body blow to Japan’s economy—especially if that | 4 f 
economy is expected to sustain the burden of a new | Marc 
war. Before trade is resumed, Japan will undoubtedly | Gern 
have to meet conditions laid down by Washington } unde 
and London. No inkling of these conditions has yet | alme 
been given. They would undoubtedly require pledges | armi 
of Japan’s good behavior both as regards Thailand } Rep 
and Siberia, guaranteed perhaps by a limitation on | had 
Japanese forces in Indo-China and by non-interfer-| the « 
ence with shipments of American materials to Vladi- | of th 
vostok. As the test case on the latter issue approaches, | parr 
Japan has still refrained from more than unofficial | dura 
protests through its press and diplomatic spokesmen} p 


FURTHER U.S. MOVES. New measures, more: } prog 
over, threaten Japan’s economic prospects. Export | shal 
control orders issued on August 1 make it extremely | 00! 
unlikely that Japan will again be able to buy Ameti- | exac 
can aviation gasoline during the emergency, even \ gatc 
should a basis for resumption of trade be found. On | clea 
August 22 came a Presidential proclamation raising | and 
the duty on crab meat, paste and sauce from 15 to | com 
224 per cent— an action taken to equalize pro- | és 
duction costs in accordance with a Tariff Commission } dail 
recommendation. In 1940 Japan supplied about 90 } Pier 
per cent ($3,269,000) of the American market is Rex 
this product. Pet 

There is as yet slight indication of the extent to | ord 
which the Soviet Union may be cooperating in a joint | md 
Far Eastern program. The projected tripartite com | Mju 
ference at Moscow will presumably consider specific ; #t 
measures through which the three powers can deal | Stu 
concertedly with the situation in the Pacific. Many | "é 
Washington observers feel that the Japanese threat | tor 
will not be finally removed until a unified British | ©n 
American-Soviet policy, linked to that of China and | ™ 
the Dutch East Indies, is tirmly applied in the Fat | So 


, | 
East. T. A. BIssoN a2 








oo 





