lants, 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library PERIODICAL ROOM 
JENERAL LIGRARY 
University of — UNIV. OF MICH. 


Yl EOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





evel: An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
lisap. FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
1,460 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


mbat 





ToL XX, No. 47 
at 14 Vo. XX, No 


SEPTEMBER 12, 1941 








ritain 


-alled AS Nazi forces hammered at Leningrad in the 
ronth twelfth week of the Russo-German war, the 
} that | outcome of this gigantic struggle on a front stretch- 
. He ing from the Arctic to the Black Sea continued to 
uring hang in the balance. Preparations made in 1939 for 
7 | thorough American coverage of the battle areas by 
ed in press and radio proved unavailing on the eastern 
have front, where information on far-flung operations has 
a of had to be gleaned principally from the official com- 
nal is] ‘muniqués of the two belligerents. In spite of the 
¥ pet | paucity of independent news, it is possible to discern 
ny 3 the main lines along which the war between Germany 
ected | and Russia is developing, and the effects it may have 





“aa on the larger conflict that is sweeping the world. 
men | STRATEGIC GAINS AND LOSSES. Contrary to 


nified | he Predictions of some pessimists, the Red Army has 
both | Maintained organized resistance in the face of fierce 
and unremitting attacks by the bulk of the German 
| forces. It has displayed not only the kind of physical 
pons¢ { and moral endurance which Russian soldiers demon- 
rgan- } strated in the first World War, but also command 
t cre | of technical equipment, some of which, notably 
itions | tanks, seems to compare favorably with that of the 
d in ) Germans. While Germany has enjoyed air superiority, 
ell as | the use of airplanes has not had the demoralizing 
d M. | efect on the eastern front, with its vast terrain, that 
, was} ithad in the thickly populated sections of Western 
rector | Europe. Both sides are thought to have experienced 
i¢ the | heavy losses of men and matériel, although precise 
Sup- | figures are lacking; and the German forces, in their 
ce of | advance, have been harassed by guerrilla troops and 
inde | by the “scorched earth” policy of the retreating 
ar the | Russians. 

, the} In three months of intensive warfare, the Germans 
's be | have occupied one-fiftieth of the territory of the 
usted [USSR.; have seized important industrial centers in 
o en | Western Russia and the Ukraine, notably the rich 
New | iton ore region of Krivoy Rog; have occupied the 
DE Estonian port of Tallinn on the Baltic, and that of 











itor, | RUSSIA GIVES ALLIES CHANCE FOR SHOWDOWN WITH NAZIS 


Nikolaevsk, on the Black Sea, with heavy losses to 
Soviet shipping and shipbuilding; and have forced 
the Russians to take severe economic losses, the most 
spectacular of which was the blowing up of the 
Dnieprostroy dam, erected at great cost to the Rus- 
sian people in terms of unfulfilled consumption 
needs. Meanwhile the Finns, fighting in conjunction 
—but apparently not in close collaboration—with the 
Germans, have recaptured the territory lost during 
the Soviet-Finnish war of 1939-40, including the city 
of Viborg, which the Russians destroyed in large part 
before withdrawing. 

The Germans, however, have not yet occupied the 
four key cities along the 2,000-mile front—Leningrad, 
Moscow, Kiev and Odessa—all of which have so 
far withstood attacks from land and from the ait. 
According to Virginio Gayda, official Fascist spokes- 
man, the Nazis would be satisfied with occupation of 
these centers, and would not press beyond them to- 
ward the Urals, previously described by this same 
editor as the goal of the German advance. From the 
point of view of the Nazis, capture of these key 
points seems essential before winter sets in—other- 
wise, the German armies may have to dig in on the 
eastern front, in the hope of launching a decisive 
offensive next spring. 

RUSSIA’S MORALE. Some observers who had 
predicted the resistance of the Red Army had never- 
theless felt qualms about the morale behind the 
lines, believing that the Russian people, subjected 
for twenty years to privations and purges, might 
seize this opportunity to revolt against the Stalin 
régime. So far as can be determined from censored 
dispatches, this does not seem to have been the case. 
The Russian people have never in their history 
proved adept at wars of offense; but again and again 
they have stubbornly resisted foreign invasion. Their 
resistance today cannot be attributed solely to Com- 
munism—although there is no doubt that in Com- 

















munism the Nazis have encountered an ideology 
comparable in staying power to their own. Russia’s 
resistance stems primarily from aroused nation- 
alism, carefully nurtured in recent years by Soviet 
propaganda, which emphasized the national more 
frequently than the socialist “fatherland.” This na- 
tionalism is so marked that even Russians hostile 
to the Soviet régime have for the most part done 
everything in their power to aid Russia, setting aside 
religious and political differences for the time be- 
ing. Among the Russian exiles, many of whom have 
been for years living in poverty far greater than that 
of the majority of recent refugees from Europe, the 
Nazis have found only a handful ready to play the 
réle of Quislings. The Soviet decree of August 28, 
ordering the transfer to Siberia of Germans settled 
since the eighteenth century in the Volga region, 
would indicate fear on the part of Moscow that 
traitors might appear in the ranks of the German 
population, as they did elsewhere in Europe. So far, 
however, nothing has been heard of acts of treason 
among Russians—although a skeptic might point out 
that the Soviet government, more forehanded than 
others, had rid itself of potential Quislings during the 
many purg>s of recent years. 


RUSSIA ALONE CANNOT DEFEAT GER- 
MANY. The resistance of the Russian armies and 
civilian population, however, cannot be counted on 
to defeat Germany. True, the Germans, in their Rus- 
sian campaign, have had to expend vast reserves of 
airplanes, tanks, fuel, and other war material. They 
have suffered heavy losses of man power, which they 
can afford less well than the Russians. They have 
lost “face’’ in the conquered countries and in other 
parts of the world, where some defeatists had as- 
sumed Germany was invincible on land and in the 


BRITISH UTILIZE RESPITE TO STRENGTHEN NEAR EAST FRONT 


Taking advantage of the Axis powers’ preoccupa- 
tion in Russia, Great Britain and its allies are en- 
deavoring to establish, by the occupation of strategic 
points and the movements of men and matériel, a 
strong Near Eastern front extending from Libya 
around the eastern end of the Mediterranean to the 
Caspian Sea and the borders of India. Such a line 
would have a high defensive value in the event of an 
Axis attempt to break out of Europe by striking at 
the Suez Canal. It would also become important if 


Page Two 





ANNOUNCING— 


New York LUNCHEON DISCUSSIONS, to be held at the 
Hotel Astor on the following Saturdays, at 12:45 p.m.: 


October 18 January 10 
November 1 February 7 
November 29 February 28 
December 13 March 21 

















—<———— 


air, no matter what Britain might do on the hj 
seas with the aid of the United States. The prolongs 
tion of the Russian campaign, never popular with 
the German masses, has also had repercussions jp 
Germany, where renewed Communist activities ay 
reported from industrial centers. 
It would be dangerous, however, to deduce from 
this that Germany is on the point of being defeated 
or that it will suffer a collapse from within. By hold. 
ing the German armies on the eastern front, Russi; 
has afforded Britain and the United States an jp. 
valuable opportunity to coordinate and expand thei 
industrial and military resources for a final shoy. 
down which might really bring the world war to, 
close—the sooner the better from the point of view 
of the conquered peoples, faced with a winter of 
starvation and disease. But this showdown remaix 
to be faced. It will have to go beyond the material 
aid to Russia, which is to be discussed in Moscow by 
a British mission headed by Lord Beaverbrook and 
an American mission headed by W. Averell Harri 
man. Whether the showdown takes the form of a 





armed invasion of the continent (predicted by some | 


Britishers for next spring), all-out raids on Ger 
many, renewal of the battle of the Mediterranean, 
or all of these combined, none but the general staff 
can now predict. But one thing can be regarded a 


certain. The more difficult Germany's position be 


comes in the east, the more likely it is that the Nazis 
will launch campaigns in other directions, no matte 
how great the risk or cost involved. The war is e- 
tering another critical phase. The final decision ma 
rest with those of the belligerents who maintain thei 
morale and military preparations most effectively 
during the present lull on the western front—whid 


is bound to be temporary. Wer, MICHELES DEAN 


the Nazi war machine overran or outflanked the Red 
Army and threatened to drive toward India or the 
Persian Gulf. 


Moreover, a strengthened Allied position in the 
Near East may become a base of attack, as it was dur 
ing General Wavell’s Libyan campaign. If the British 
are to capitalize on Hitler’s present difficulties ani 


j 








inflict telling blows on the Axis, they cannot be com 
tent with an air offensive alone. The Mediterraneat 
area appears to offer the best opportunities for a full 
scale invasion of Axis territory. By clearing the Fasc 
forces from Libya, the Allies would open the way 
for surprise attacks against the whole southern littord 
of Europe, especially the Balkan and Italian penit 
sulas. 


The reinforcement of Allied armies in Egypt 4p 
pears to be going forward rapidly. A large proportiol 
of American lease-lend equipment, particularly tanks 


} 


| 








visiOr 
regio 
Briti: 
temb 
three 
pears 
Liby: 
Ti 
Briti 
ous. 
high 
the ¢ 
liver 
ish a 
these 
therr 
their 
A 
stone 
and 
Briti 
mori 
date. 
thre 
istra 
tives 
cons 
whil 
free 
In 
requ 
swif 
lowe 
sent 
ern 
with 
(fan: 
the | 
men 
mat 
defi 


FORE 
Heade 
Entere 





t of 


larti- 





of an 
some | 


nean, 
staffs 
ad as 
1 be 
Nazis 
vatter ( 
iS €- 
| May 


tively 
which 
BAN 

















oa 


consigned to Great Britain has been carried in Ameri- 
can ships to Suez, while the British are sending ma- 
ériel direct to Egypt through the Mediterranean. 
The delivery by air of American warplanes will be 
ed up when the Pan American Airways ferry 
service via the Caribbean and Brazil to West Africa 
under way. Some time must elapse, however, be- 
fore the Allied forces in the Near East can be ex- 
ed to act, for their losses in three major retreats 
were high and they need ample quantities of the 
latest equipment to operate against the German di- 
yisions which have been sent to the Mediterranean 
region to stiffen the Italians. Despite the vigilance of 
British naval vessels, which were reported on Sep- 
tember 5 to have sunk a cruiser, a large liner, and 
three supply vessels headed for African ports, it ap- 
pears that the Axis has recently sent large convoys to 
Libya. 

Two pockets of resistance in East Africa make the 
British position in that region difficult but not danger- 
ous. An Italian force is still active in the northern 
highlands of Ethiopia, while in French Somaliland 
the officials remain loyal to Vichy and refuse to de- 
liver their colony to the de Gaullist forces. The Brit- 
ish apparently feel that the diminished importance of 
these outposts does not justify a direct attack on 
them and are relying on the blockade to bring about 
their ultimate surrender. 

ALLIES DIFFER OVER SYRIA. In Syria, key- 
stone of the Allied Near Eastern defense structure 
and important land connection with Turkey, the 
British and Free French are attempting to raise native 
morale and fortify the northern border of the man- 
date. Full cooperation of the Allied forces appears 
threatened by differences of opinion over the admin- 
istration of the territory. The de Gaullist representa- 
tives now in control of the civil government tend to 
consider Syria a portion of a new French empire, 
while the British wish to implement their pledge of 
freedom to the native peoples. 

In Iran the armistice that the Teheran government 
fequested after 80 hours of hostilities marked by 
swift British and Russian invasions has been fol- 
lowed by protracted negotiations. The Allied repre- 
sentatives presumably want occupation of the north- 
em part of the country by Russia, of the southwest 
with its valuable oil fields by Britain, unlimited 


| transit facilities on the trans-Iranian railway from 


the Persian Gulf to the Caspian Sea, and the intern- 
ment or expulsion of the 700 Axis nationals esti- 
mated to be still in Iran. The delay in reaching a 
definitive settlement appears due to the natural de- 


Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: U.S. IN THIRD YEAR OF WAR 
Speaker: William T. Stone 
Date: Sunday, September 14 
Time: 2:15 p.m. E.D.S.T. 
Station: NBC, blue network 











sire of the Iranians to temporize and to the mutual 
distrust of Britain and Russia, which have been rivals 
in Iran for a century and a half, 


STRUGGLE OVER TURKEY. The intense diplo- 
matic struggle between Allied and Axis representa- 
tives in Ankara points to the possibility of military 
action in the near future to force Turkey, now the 
only remaining neutral in the Near East, to yield to 
one of the opposing sides. Although it was expected 
that the Germans, after their successful conquest of 
Greece, would turn on Turkey, Hitler held his hand, 
preferring to bring the Turks within the Axis eco- 


_Momic system by trade treaties rather than attempt 


an armed invasion. Now, however, the Germans may 
find it necessary to open up a new front against 
the Russians in Asia Minor. By controlling the 
Dardanelles and using Turkish bases in the eastern 
part of the Black Sea, the Nazis could move against 
the Soviet oil fields and mineral resources in the 
Caucasus. The British and Russians hope that the 
effect produced by the Red Army's heroic resistance 
and the growing power of the Allied forces will en- 
courage Ankara to preserve its neutrality, even in the 
face of strong German pressure. The future of the 
Battle of the Near East largely depends on the Inonu 
government's decision. 


Louis E. FRECHTLING 





Bomber’s Moon, by Negley Farson. New York, Harcourt, 
Brace, 1941. $2.00 


The author of Way of a. Transgressor reports on Lon- 
don under the blitzkrieg of last winter. His observations 
are interesting but less significant than his previous works. 


Problems of Modern Europe, by J. Hampden Jackson and 
Kerry Lee. New York, Macmillan, 1941. $1.75 


An attempt to portray by maps and pictorial charts “the 
problems of Europe which the people of this generation 
must solve if their civilization is to survive.” The method 
is successful when presenting statistics on production, 
population, minorities, etc., but inadequate in dealing with 
political concepts like “the. League and disarmament.” 


Great Britain Under Protection, by Frederic Benham. New 
York, Macmillan, 1941. $2.50 


A valuable survey of economic developments in Great 
Britain from the financial crisis of 1931 to the outbreak of 
war, with emphasis on the effect of the tariff and imperial 
preference. : 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 47, SEPTEMBER 12, 1941. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


1 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Incorporated. National 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Peateie” 


ee 


FOS e. eo ewes 


Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

SEPT. 8.—The alleged German attack on the U.S. 
destroyer Greer, coupled with the sinking on Septem- 
ber 8 of the American freighter Steel Seafarer in the 
Red Sea, has produced a variety of reactions in Wash- 
ington. Interventionists fear that failure to demand 
prompt and energetic action in these cases, as well as 
the earlier sinking of the Robin Moor, will encourage 
Germany to increase its attacks on American ships. 
They are distressed by what they consider the un- 
willingness of the American people to defend the 
nation’s “rights’’ on the high seas. Isolationists and 
pacifists, on the other hand, are jubilant that the 
American people still refuse to become excited and 
allow incidents of this character to drag them into 
war. Few opponents of the Administration are will- 
ing to challenge the Navy's assertion that the Greer 
was attacked, but they regard the incident as the 
inevitable result of the President's decision to in- 
augurate the Atlantic naval patrol and push the 
country’s defense outposts to Iceland, which lies 
within the combat zone proclaimed by the Nazis. 

GERMANY EXPLOITS ANTI-WAR SENTI- 
MENT IN U.S. The German government has 
handled the Greer affair in such a way as to appeal 
to American anti-war sentiment. After the Navy De- 
partment announced that the Greer had been attacked 
on September 4 while on its way to Iceland, a Ber- 
lin communiqué confirmed the clash on September 6 
but charged that the German U-boat had fired two 
torpedoes only after the destroyer had sought to 
sink it with depth bombs. This “attack,” the com- 
muniqué stated, demonstrated “that President Roose- 
velt, despite his previous assertions to the contrary, 
has commanded American destroyers not only to re- 
port the location of German U-boats and other Ger- 
man craft, as violating neutrality, but also to pro- 
ceed to attack them.” To strengthen suspicion of the 
Administration's foreign policy the German govern- 
ment further accused President Roosevelt of provok- 
ing “incidents for the purpose of baiting the Ameri- 
can people into war.” 

SHIPPING SITUATION IMPROVED. Wash- 
ington is now waiting to see what steps the President 
will take to uphold the “freedom of the seas” on 
which he has laid so much stress in recent speeches. 
In view of the sharp reduction in shipping losses 
during recent months, it is believed that the Presi- 
dent may have difficulty in justifying the adoption of 
more far-reaching measures to protect shipments of 





munitions. In July the Germans are said to hayg 
sunk only about 210,000 tons of merchant shippi 

in contrast to 597,193 and 504,272 tons in April a 
May respectively. Figures for August are still yp. 





known, but the British have announced that losses = 
in the Atlantic were “not less satisfactory” than ip 
July when approximately 164,000 tons were sunk 
This improvement is attributed in part to more ef. 
ficient operation of the convoy and patrol system, vo. 3 
British air patrols over the Atlantic have been greatly | — 


extended, and the anti-aircraft equipment of mer. 
chant vessels has been strengthened. The Americaa 
naval patrol has also released many British warships T* 
for actual convoy duty. £0 
The American and British governments still doubt, past f 
however, that the present reduction in sinkings will | count 
prove permanent. They know that the German air | lence 
fleet hes until recently accounted for a large propor. | quent 
tion of the losses, not only by bombarding ships and { |ines 
port facilities, but also by guiding submarines to their | fcatic 
prey. While the diversion of the Nazi air force to } ¢gspec 
the eastern front has for the moment minimized the } ;etali 
danger to shipping, the coming fall and winter may ) gppai 
witness a renewal of the aerial assault on the Atlantic, | in Sc: 
Meanwhile, the volume of shipping available to | em I 
the British is still shrinking even at the current rate | italiz 
of sinkings. During July, for example, American | M. 
shipyards completed only 59,895 gross tons of ocean: | posit 
going merchant vessels. Ship deliveries will remain } from 
relatively low for the balance of the year, but are } gle | 
scheduled to rise sharply during 1942. In the first | unios 
half of that year 236 vessels of 2,400,000 dead: | ciatic 
weight tons are to be completed; and in the second } try ; 
half, about 338 vessels of approximately 3,646,000 | scath 
tons. Provided sinkings can be kept at their present | way. 
level, it should prove possible during 1942 to add \ Nati 
to the volume of shipping tonnage. thus strengthen: | fessi 
ing Britain for large-scale offensive action against | were 
Germany. tiviti 
In some quarters the Administration is believed to | inati 
be aiming at ultimate repeal of the Neutrality Act, | Osle 
which prevents American ships from engaging in di } only 
rect traffic with the British Isles. Since the British and | "ciy 
American merchant marines are already effectively | weg 
pooled, such a course would not immediately relieve | the 
the shipping shortage. Its protagonists argue, how | who 
ever, that it would constitute an unequivocal reasset | 2,00 
tion of the traditional American doctrine of freedom } but 
of the seas and enable the American merchant fleet } régi 
and navy to assume direct responsibility for supplying | man 


Britain. JoHN C. pDEWILDE | Men 




















