Pe 





wa 


Ss 


yuld | 
on 
em- 





has | 
con- 
tory 
rent 
 £e- 
arge | 
1 by 
rom | 
ula- 

, al- 
idia 
sul- 
om- 
the 
ions 
for 
ufh- ’ 
ags. 
ned, 
eate 
ntry 
wat | 
cut | 
ded 


s of 





JAN 19 1949 


General Librar gpttered 2s 2ad claak aaa 


nauVe 2 te. 
ersity of Michigan 


Ain Arbor, Nich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 11 


—_ 


JANUARY 2, 1942 





ALLIES MAP OUT UNIFIED STRATEGY 


HE Churchill-Roosevelt conversations in Wash- 

ington, held in collaboration with representatives 
of the British Commonwealth of Nations, the Allied 
conference in Chungking, and the Eden-Stalin parley 
in Moscow, have all paved the way for the unified 
command of Allied military and economic forces that 
has seemed imperative since the entrance of the 
United States into the war. The Anglo-Soviet nego- 
tiations, according to an official communiqué issued 
on December 29, were concerned not only with meas- 
ures necessary to encompass “the utter defeat of Hit- 
ler Germany,” but also with measures “to render 
completely impossible any repetition of German ag- 
gression in the future.” It was also reported that the 
British and Soviet negotiators had achieved unity of 
views regarding post-war organization of peace and 
security in Europe—an announcement intended to 


| allay fears that still exist in some Allied quarters 


regarding the ultimate objectives of the Kremlin. 


NAZI DIFFICULTIES IN RUSSIA. At the Mos- 
cow conference the British apparently agreed with 
Stalin on the necessity of concentrating Russia’s war 
efforts on the struggle against Germany, instead of 
dissipating them on two widely separated fronts. This 
decision seems logical at a moment when the Russians 
are pressing the Germans in all sectors, from Lenin- 
grad to Sevastopol, and are forcing them to abandon 
large quantities of war material in what the Nazis 
still describe as an “‘orderly withdrawal,” but what 
Soviet military leaders and foreign correspondents 


| characterize as a hasty retreat. 


The difficulties experienced by the Germans in 
pets a line of defense for the winter months 
had already been admitted in Goebbels’ appeal of 
December 20 for all available warm clothing, and by 
the announcement on December 21 that Hitler had 
telieved Field Marshal von Brauchitsch, Commander- 
in-Chief of the German Army, of his post, and had 


personally assumed charge of military operations. 

The dismissal of von Brauchitsch, followed by rumors 
of other oustings, among them Marshal von Bock, 

commander of the central front in Russia, and 
Colonel-General Guderian, chief of armored warfare, 
continues to be regarded as an indication of funda- 
mental disagreement between the army and the Nazi 
party concerning both the campaign in Russia and the 
military operations to be undertaken during the win- 
ter months. So far as outward appearances are con- 
cerned, Hitler may have proved right in calculating 
that his personal appeal for loyalty would serve to 
strengthen German morale. He may also convey the 
impression to the people that his wholesale ouster of 
military leaders is merely a move to substitute his 
“intuition” as a “common soldier’ for the technical 
opinions of the aristocratic officer class. Yet the re- 
verses suffered by the Germans on the eastern front 
cannot be indefinitely concealed from the people be- 
hind the lines, who are beginning to get an idea of 
the heavy toll in lives paid for the unsuccessful Rus- 
sian offensive. These reverses come at a time when 
the British have inflicted serious losses on Axis forces 
in Libya, which find it increasingly difficult to obtain 
supplies and reinforcements because of Britain’s 
naval preponderance in the central Mediterranean. 


FREE FRENCH PLEBISCITE. That Hitler will 
waste no time in distracting Germany’s attention from 
the eastern front by thrusts in other directions is indi- 
cated by reports of German troop movements at oppo- 
site ends of the continent—in Bulgaria, with Turkey 
presumably the first objective, and in occupied France, 
presumably for the purpose of strengthening the Axis 
position in Africa. As the lines in Europe draw tighter 
and tighter, the position of France becomes more de- 
cisive than ever before. It is generally believed that 
Marshal Pétain, whose efforts to collaborate with 
Germany had been premised on the assumption of an 





bi 
' 

is 

| 
a 
ie 
is 
it 


or 


a; 


- ret —s ee 
5 ERR NEE ES Uy ae a as 


q 





{ 


5 
5 
I 
; 
' 
q 


’ 
. 
« 
i 
i] | 
| 














early German victory, has been shaken in this belief 
by Russia’s continued resistance and by the entrance 
into the war of the United States. A slight, but al- 
ready noticeable, stiffening has already made itself 
felt in Vichy, and the United States apparently in- 
tends to do everything in its power to strengthen the 
Marshal’s hand. This explains Washington’s unfav- 
orable reaction to the occupation, by the Free French 
naval unit of Vice-Admiral Muselier, of the French 
islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon off the coast of 
Newfoundland on December 24, followed by a pleb- 
iscite on Christmas Day, which resulted in a 90 per 
cent vote for de Gaulle. 


Occupation of St. Pierre and Miquelon could not 
have been wholly displeasing to Washington, since 
shortly before that incident the United States and 
Britain had been considering ways and means of con- 
trolling radio stations on the two islands which had 
been broadcasting weather information regarded as 
useful to German submarines. It came, however, im- 
mediately after the announcement on December 18 of 
an accord between Rear Admiral Horne, of the United 
States Navy, and Rear Admiral Robert, High Com- 
missioner of the French island of Martinique, in which 
the signatories promised to maintain the status quo 
of French possessions and naval vessels in the Carib- 
bean. Washington's vigorous protest of December 26 
against what was described as an “arbitrary action” ap- 
pears to have been due less to concern for the Monroe 
Doctrine than to the desire to avoid any move that 
might alienate Vichy at this critical juncture. Yet any 
attempt by the United States to oust the French forces 
from the islands would have disastrous repercussions 
on the de Gaulle movement, and might discourage 
other French possessions overseas—among them the 


Page Two 











Se 


strategic colonies in North and West Africa—from} some / 
opposing the policy of French collaboration with the by poi 
Axis. produ 

The incident of St. Pierre and Miquelon gives , Japan’ 
foretaste of the many delicate and baffling problems especi: 
the United States must face in its relations with By. many 
rope. The announcement on December 28 that this) the Al 
country and Britain had assured states now occupied] 1939, 
by the Axis that everything possible would be done} unt 
to restore their full independence at the end of the} fective 
war will doubtless hearten the governments-in-exile | that | 
which to the best of their ability have been aiding the strang 
British. It was indicated in Washington, however) Tp, 
that this assurance does not mean mere restoration of 
the small uneconomic national units set up at the 
Paris Peace Conference, but looks to the development 
—following Hitler's defeat—of economic and mil- 
itary cooperation on the continent. 

In mapping out such cooperation, the British and 
Americans will have to maintain a nice balance be-} nean 
tween those who—through necessity, or preference,| sow ; 
or desire to collaborate with Germany—remained on}! o¢ 
the continent, and those who left the occupied coun-| obtaii 
tries to form “free” movements overseas. The free} a nqu; 
movements, if skillfully used, could prove a valuable| in 19 
fifth column for the Allies. But, to prevent future dis-| lies 
sension in Europe, they would have to be used in such} jad | 
a way as not to antagonize those of their compatriots 
who stayed at home, and bore the brunt of Nazi con-| 
quest. Unpleasant as Washington’s attitude toward 
the St. Pierre and Miquelon incident naturally ap- 
pears to the Free French, it must be regarded as only by c: 
one small piece in Allied world strategy, in which it supp 
is still hoped, rightly or wrongly, to enlist France and If 


its colonial empire. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


factor 
Japan 
mater 
stocks 
Japan 


' ficient 





seriol 
| Gern 
| confl 

can t 


east 


TOKYO’S SUCCESSES CONFRONT ALLIES WITH URGENT DECISIONS nava 


As the war in the Pacific enters its fourth week, 
Japanese forces are pushing forward in many areas. 
Although their rate of advance has been slowed up as 
the Allies have recovered from the blows of the sur- 
prise assault on December 7, it is apparent that for 





Forthcoming FPA Meetings 
January 6 St. Paul Inside Nazi Germany 
January 10 Bethlehem Hitler Can't Win 
Boston The Americas in a Globa! War 
New York How Strong Is Japan? 
Philadelphia Japan Strikes the First Blow 
Providence Our Army and Navy in Modern 
War 
January 13 Columbus Strategy for Victory 
St. Paul Our Navy in National Defense 
January 14 Hartford How Strong Is Japan? 
Minneapolis Our Navy in National Detense 
January 15 Elmira The Far East 
Worcester Searchlight on the Far East 
January 17 Springfield The Far East 
January 22 Baltimore The Americas in a Global War 
January 23 Pittsburgh The Latin-American Front 
January 24 Boston All the Fighting Fronts 











weeks and possibly months to come the Nipponese | P!” 
will continue to hold the offensive. sited 
The broad outlines of Tokyo’s strategy are un- hy 
changed. Expecting to knock out the Philippines, " F 
Japanese armies are driving from seven bridgeheads “e 7 
on Luzon island toward Manila, and have overrun 7 
most of Mindanao, second largest island in the archi- : 
pelago. By compelling the Hongkong garrison to) ““! 
capitulate on December 25, the Japanese are able to my 


move supplies safely to the forces operating in the 
Malay jungle, now less than 200 miles from Sing: C 
apore. Meanwhile, air and sea attacks are continuing Roo 
against the British and American island outposts | “¢ 
which guard the main route from Hawaii to the East | Por" 
Indies and Singapore. The direct line from the United | : 
States to the Philippines is now cut, the Japanese hav- | t 
ing occupied Guam on December 11 and Wake Island | — 
on December 24. 


Head 
Enter 


JAPAN'S SUPPLIES. Despite the gravity of the @ 





situation in the Pacific, a tendency is apparent in 





=> 
from 
1 the 


eS 4 





—— 








some Allied quarters to discount the Japanese menace 
by pointing to the overwhelming superiority of Allied 
productive power. These observers maintain that 
Japan's industrial system is weak and vulnerable, 


Page Three 





| 








F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: WHAT ARE HITLER’S CHOICES? 
Speaker: Louis E. Frechtling 











lems| especially since it has been dependent on imports of Date: Sunday, January 4 

Ew} many vital raw materials from sources controlled by Braye a ae — renga rowbto 

this the Allies. (About 75 per cent of Japan’s imports a or station, please consult your local newspaper 

Pied} 1939, of which half were raw materials, came from ot 

Jone} countries outside the yen-bloc.) If the Allies can ef- London, emphasis is placed on the necessity of check- 
‘the! fectively blockade Japan, it would seem at first sight ing and defeating the principal enemy, Germany, 
xile,| that the empire could be defeated by economic and of considering the Far East as a secondary theatre 
; the} strangulation. of war, if not a side issue. 


The reactions of two Allied “second-class” powers 


ver Iculati 

se calculations fail , “gf ayn 

n of ang fail to take several important in the Far East to this line of reasoning is indicative 
factors into consideration. The first is that while the ; . . : 

the be of the difficulties which must be overcome if Allied 
Japanese do not possess sources of some critical raw oe A 

nent world planning is to be successful. Australian and 


mil- 


| materials, they have been able to accumulate large 


stocks and have drastically reduced consumption. 
Japan's oil resources, for example, are considered suf- 
ficient to sustain the war effort for two years. In the 
meantime, Tokyo will endeavor to secure control of 
new sources of supply. If they succeed in seizing all 
of Malaya and the East Indies, the Japanese would 


Netherlands Indies spokesmen have recently ex- 
pressed their apprehension that the major Allies are 
either too complacent about the Far Eastern situation 
or have decided to write off Singapore and the East 
Indies altogether. Mr. John Curtin, Prime Minister 
of Australia, stated on December 27 that while his 
country realizes the danger of dispersing strength on 


free ee mote heer rquuphey (6 rye barrels many fronts, ““we refuse to accept the dictum that the i 
able asally) Gn (905 per eae hase peodaction Pacific struggle is a subordinate segment of the gen- I 
dis- ary : and commer (90 $ f cont); as well as _. eral conflict.” Batavia officials, in requesting replace- { 
uch a aa (20 pur cont); Ste-eee (1-4 Be ~~ nt) ; ments of matériel, have voiced similar sentiments. q 
iots ages lp A walleye! Ppa ype es So Added weight is given to these expressions by the 





serious deficits in many metals and minerals, but 
Germany's experiences in the last war and the present 
conflict have demonstrated that production for war 


achievements of Dutch and Australian forces. Em- 
ploying 500 to 1,000 planes (largely American), and 
a navy of 5 cruisers, 7 destroyers, and 22 submarines, 


= es 
So nS 


ii 
f 
| 
i 
ali 
i 
0 


4P’) can be maintained under very unfavorable conditions : 

nly! by careful use of machinery, strict conservation of {M6 ule” Nae supply vena, Shing ta | 
1 : 4 : ’ 4 i 

and| ‘vebaebrbumeaee ber 25. Australian troops have borne a large part of i 


tows 


If the Japanese defeat the Allied forces in South- 
east Asia, they will also obtain the principal air and 

_ naval bases of that area. By occupying these strategic 
points, the Japanese will greatly increase their defen- 

_ sive power against the time when the arsenals of de- 
mocracy produce sufficient planes and ships to make 
an Allied offensive in the Far East possible. The Al- 


pees 


the burden of defending Singapore and British islands 
in the Pacific. 

Without increased aid from Britain and the United 
States, however, these and other Allied forces in the 
Far East cannot resist indefinitely. Unless the Wash- 
ington conferees find it possible to send this assistance 
soon, the future of peoples in East Asia and through- 


x 


ese 


ee 3 


un- 
1€S, 


ads 


lied drive will be much slower and more costly if the 
British are thrown back to India and the Americans 


out the world will be seriously affected. 








fun 
4j. | 0 Hawaii. Speed and determination to reinforce the Louis E. FRECHTLING 
to | Far Eastern garrisons are therefore necessary. If this ca 
| cannot be accomplished, the war in the Pacific might Their Finest Hour, edited by Allan A. Michie and Walter 
to oni f apis... "- . . & Graebner. New York, Harcourt, Brace, 1941. $2.50 
the ee _ — First-hand accounts of Britain’s critical campaigns of 
ng- One of the major decisions to be made during the the summer and fall of 1940, as told by the flyers, navy and 
ing Roosevelt-Churchill discussions and the staff confer- army men, and civilians who took part in it. 
sts | ences which follow them will be to assess the im- France My Country, by Jacques Maritain. New York, 
| ~ + . 
ast | portance of the Far East in world strategy, and then prgansnentio & re kam —% ee 
. : ‘ n understanding philosopher’s plea for trust in the 
red to determine the strength of the forces to be employed people be loves deupie bis ewasenets a Guu uae 
av- | in the defense of that area. Both in Washington and France because of separation of political and moral aims. 
) 
nd | — 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 11, January 2, 1942. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRaNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Let, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dagan, Editor. 
he Entered as Second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
7 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
in 





F. P. A. Membership, including Foreign Policy Bulletin, Five Dollars a Year 





, a. . 
—~ A 


nee 


a ian ae 





Washington News Letter 




















Dec. 29.—As had been expected, virtually no infor- 
mation has been divulged concerning the conferences 
occasioned by Prime Minister Churchill's visit to 
Washington from December 22 to 28. In his state- 
ment on December 27 President Roosevelt revealed 
only that “excellent progress” had been made toward 
“the marshaling of all resources, military and eco- 
nomic, of the world-wide front opposing the Axis” 
and that the conferences would continue for an “‘in- 
definite period of time.’’ The President and Prime 
Minister thoroughly canvassed the whole situation 
and were joined in their discussions during the last 
two days by Canadian Premier Mackenzie King. Lord 
Beaverbrook, the British Minister of Supply, con- 
ferred at length with officials of the OPM, SPAB and 
the War and Navy Departments, while British Army, 
Navy and Air chiefs mapped out plans with heads of 
the American fighting services. The Chinese and Rus- 
sian Ambassadors and the Netherlands Minister were 
included in some of these conferences. 


CHURCHILL STATES THE PROBLEM. The 
problems uppermost in the discussions, which were 
initiated before Churchill’s arrival in Washington, 
were adumbrated in the British Prime Minister's im- 
pressive speech before Congress on December 26. He 
pointed out that although ‘‘our resources in man pow- 
er and materials are far greater’ than those of the 
Axis, ‘only a portion of your resources are as yet 
mobilized and developed, and we both of us have 
much to learn in the cruel art of war.” In the past, 
limitations of man power and matériel had prevented 
Britain from mobilizing adequate strength in all 
existing and potential theatres of war, so that prepa- 
rations for an effective campaign in North Africa had 
made the dispatch of sufficient reinforcements to the 
Far East impossible. In the future, Mr. Churchill in- 
timated, the United States and Britain will face sim- 
ilar and difficult problems of allocation until ‘the 
full marshaling of our latent and total power can 
be accomplished.’’ Meanwhile, he predicted “‘a time 
of tribulation” in which “some ground will be lost 
which it will be hard and costly to regain” and “many 
disappointments and unpleasant surprises await us.” 
Finally, he hoped that “the end of 1942 will see us 
quite definitely in a better position” and that “the 
year 1943 will enable us to assume the initiative upon 
an ample scale.” 


Against the background of this speech, it may be 
surmised that the following problems occupied the 
attention of the Washington conferences: 


—] 
I. GRAND STRATEGY. In order to insure a successfy 
offensive in 1943, it appears essential for Britain, the 
United States and their allies to retain control of 
Singapore and most of the Netherlands Indies in the 
Far East, strengthen the British Isles against possible 
invasion, establish firm control over North Africa, 
check a possible German advance through Turkey, 
and keep supplies flowing to the Soviet Union. Sing 
it will probably be impossible to carry out simultane. 
ously all these tasks, which involve the movement of 
men and supplies to widely scattered areas, the Al- 
lies must decide jointly where their limited strength 
can be utilized most effectively during the next year, 
Decisions on this vital problem will, of course, not 
be made public. A supreme inter-allied war coundl| ~. d 
may ultimately be created to lay down the broad plans “o 
for the distribution of available supplies and forces, 











deno 
II. MILITARY COOPERATION. In his press confer) 14 , 
ence on December 23 Mr. Churchill deprecated sug. the 
gestions of an unified military command, and frankly sain 
declared that no man was capable of shouldering such) 7 
a heavy responsibility. It is expected that over-all) |, 
military, air and naval plans will be coordinated} ae 
through continuous discussions. In specific areas) 4, 
where joint operations are necessary, a supreme com-| feld 
mand may be established. Conversations in Chung-| |), 
king and Singapore during the past week point in this whi 
direction. | ae 
III. COORDINATION OF PRODUCTION AND TRANS-| any 
PORTATION. Unified control of all shipping facilities} 4 
seems especially necessary in view of the dearth of| 


merchant vessels and the tremendous distances sepa- | ing 
rating the areas of active war operations from Britain) 4; 
and the United States. Some coordination of produe- 
tion and supply has already been effected through the 
agency of the Lend-Lease Administration. The Joint, ;, P 
War Production Committee of Canada and _ the 


United States has already drawn up a set of principles | ay 
which will guide the pooling of the production facil- ott 
ities and resources of the two countries. These prin- ait 
ciples, approved by President Roosevelt on December | de 
22, envisage the integration of requirements, produc = 
tion and resources, joint allocation of scarce materials} “ : 
in order to attain the hightest possible output, and | € 
removal of all “legislative and administrative bat- wi 
riers . . . which prohibit, prevent, delay or otherwise | a 
impede the free flow of necessary munitions and wat ) he 
supplies between the two countries.” This Joint War by 


Production Committee might eventually be broad- 
ened to include representatives of all the nations 


fighting the Axis. JoHN C. deWiLpE P 








