army 
imits 
ants 
more 


beral 
vhich 
- and 
ro be 
istic 
EN 


Jational 
Editor. 





|FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





PERIODICAL ROOA Cm pond 
GENERAL LIBRARY 2, 1921, -at the Post 
UNTY. OF MICH. Office at New York, 


N. Y., under the act . 
of March 3, 1879. 














Vou. XVII, No. 42 Aucust 12, 1938 





For accurate and unbiased information on the Genoral Library 


Spanish situation, read: 


The War in Spain, by C. A. Thomson 

The Struggle Over Spain, by J. C. deWilde 

U.S. Neutrality in the Spanish Conflict, by R. L. Buell 
Spain: Civil War, by C. A. Thomson 

Spain: Issues Behind the Conflict, by C. A. Thomson 


SPECIAL OFFER—5 Foreign Policy Reports for $1.00 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michican 








—$—— 





LT 


LOYALISTS STRENGTHEN RESISTANCE 





SCENT exhibitions of Loyalist strength, together 

with the snail-like progress made by the “non- 
intervention” program, have again damped expecta- 
tions of an early end to the Spanish war. Although 
the text of the London committee’s proposal for 
withdrawal of “volunteers” was published on July 11, 
no answer has yet been received from General 
Franco concerning the attitude of the Insurgents. 
On July 26 the Loyalist government coupled accept- 
ance of the plan with a number of observations. Its 
note declared that the plan did not provide for as 
eficient supervision of maritime frontiers — across 
which the Insurgents receive the bulk of their sup- 
plies — as of land borders. Consequently it suggested 
control of all major ports, including those on the 
Canary Islands, instead of merely four on each side; 
and urged that foreign naval patrols cover all of the 
Spanish coast line. It emphasized the importance of 
airdrome supervision, since Italian and German 
planes can fly into Spain, whereas shipments of Soviet 
aircraft to the Loyalists come only via sea and land. 
The Loyalist authorities also suggested that the 
counting of foreigners begin with technicians—avi- 
ators, artillerymen and General Staff personnel—and 
urged the need of withdrawing foreign war material 
as well as troops. 

Meanwhile, Insurgent bombing of British mer- 
chant ships, halted for a time apparently by protests 
from London and pressure from Rome, has been re- 
sumed. The freighter Dellwyn was sunk at Gandia 
on July 27, and a Danish control officer ‘of the Non- 
Intervention Committee killed. Although the British 
destroyer Hero witnessed the attack, a government 
spokesman in the House of Commons later defended 
its failure to act on the ground that merchant ships 
were protected outside but not inside Spanish terri- 
torial waters. The Lake Lugano was sent to the bot- 
tom at Palamos harbor on August 7. 


Within the peninsula, the Loyalist forces, far from 
revealing any sag in morale, have reinforced their 
determined defense with local offensives on the 
Ebro River in Catalonia and near Teruel. Since May 
General Franco has hurled his best troops against 
the 60-mile front between Teruel and the sea, :in an 
effort to drive through this mountainous terrain to 
Valencia. Castell6n de la Plana, on the coast road, 
fell on June 13. A month later the attack shifted.to 
the Teruel end of the line, where the Insurgents 
sought to advance down the road from Teruel to 
Segorbe and Sagunto. By July 22 Franco's troops, 
aided by their decisive superiority in airplanes and 
artillery, were at the gates of Viver, 45 miles from 
Valencia, but there desperate resistance on the part 
of the Loyalists brought their advance to a stop. 
Two days later came the announcement that an In- 
surgent offensive in the western province of Estrema- 
dura, had conquered 3,000 square miles of territory, 
thus forestalling any Loyalist attempt to drive a 
wedge to the Portuguese border and split Franco's 
western area in two. 

While Franco was reorganizing his forces after 
the check at Viver, the Loyalists seized the oppor- 
tunity to cross the Ebro on July 25 and made a 15- 
mile advance which brought them for a short time 
into the streets of Gandesa, regional headquarters 
for the Insurgents. Caught by surprise, General 
Franco assigned 150 bombing planes to the task of 
blasting the Loyalists in their new-won positions, 
while he rushed up reserves. On August 1 General 
Miaja launched a diversion which brought the cap- 
ture of the promontory at Camerena south of Teruel; 
later, he reported gains near Albarracin to the west. 
But these moves did not prevent a large-scale In- 
surgent counter-offensive on the Ebro, which sought 
to push the Loyalists back across the river. The 
lattet’s position was precarious, for constant bomb- 


sae | 








| 
k 
i 
4] 


i a ee 





me Pag loo See 


ing of pontoon bridges had made it difficult to bring 
up supplies. 

The renewed striking power of the Government 
forces, along with the drains on Insurgent reserves 
from their extended offensives, promises to prolong 
the struggle. General Franco possesses a clear-cut ad- 
vantage in the air, with an estimated 700 bombing 
and fighting planes, as opposed to 300 in the hands 
of the Loyalists. Italian troops have again been ac- 
tive; on July 12 it was announced at Rome that the 
Italian air fleet in Spain had brought down 577 
Opposition planes, and during the previous three 
months had dropped 1,440 tons of bombs. The Gov- 
ernment forces were dealt a heavy blow on June 2 
with thé closing of the French frontier, which previ- 
ously had been their chief avenue of supply. They 
suffer from a severe food shortage behind the lines. 
Y& cheir resistance continues so tenacious as to re- 
vive the possibility of a military stalemate, again 
opening the door for some form of mediation. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


ITALY TURNS TOWARD ANTI-SEMITISM 


The Italian government announced on July 14 its 
first serious move toward an anti-Semitic policy 
similar to that of Nazi Germany. Ten Italian pro- 
fessors, who had examined the “race problem” 
under the auspices of the Ministry of Popular Cul- 
ture, issued a report which was given great publicity 
in the Italian press. This racial credo is presented in 
ten propositions, the most important of which de- 
clared that the majority of the present Italian popu- 
lation is “Aryan”; that a pure Italian race exists; 
that it is time the Italians frankly adopted a racial 
policy, though “this does not mean that German 
racial theories should be introduced in Italy’; that 
Jews do not belong to the Italian race and have never 
been assimilated; and that the characteristics of 
Italians must not be alrered by intermarriage. 


Publication of the ‘race memorandum” has been 
followed by a spirited press campaign and by signs 
that definite measures against Jews are being pre- 
pared. On July 25 Achille Starace, Secretary General 
of the Fascist party, announced that the principal ac- 
tivity of Fascist cultural institutions during the com- 
ing year would be “inaugurating and popularizing” 
Fascist racial principles. He said that the creation of 
the Italian empire had raised the danger of ‘“‘hybrid- 
izing” the Italian race, and that laws to prevent this 


had already been drafted. 
A decree excluding foreign Jews from Italian 





—— 
—— 





schools during the coming term was announced on 
August 3. Since the total number of foreigners ar. 
tending Italian schools in 1936-1937 was only 2,612, 
this measure cannot affect many persons. It is re. 
ported that plans are under way to eliminate 
Austrian and German Jewish refugees from Italy, 
and to establish more stringent regulations concern. 
ing the activities of Italian Jews. A comprehensive 
law is being formulated for presentation to the 
Fascist Grand Council in October. This law is ex. 
pected to follow the rough outlines of Nazi legisla. 
tion. 


Until recently, Italian Fascism had shown little 
sympathy for Nazi racial theories or anti-Semitic 
measures. Adherents of the Hebrew faith in Italy 
number only about 50,000, nearly all of whom have 
long been both residents and citizens of Italy. Les 
than two in every 1,000 of the Italian population 
are persons of Jewish blood. Late last year, however 
after the establishment of the Rome-Berlin axis, 
extremists were allowed to spread considerable 
anti-Semitic propaganda. Although a government 
organ announced on February 15 that Mussolini did 
not intend to take ‘‘political, economic, or moral 
measures” against Jews, there has since been a grow. 
ing trend toward anti-Semitism. Italy has cooperated 
with Germany on various issues affecting refugees. 
Moreover, Jews in high public office in Italy have on 
the expiry of their terms been replaced by non-Jews. 
Mussolini denies that he is imitating National So 
cialism, but it seems probable that his new anti 
Semitic policy is a concession to Germany, intended 
to help weld the two countries more closely together. 


The new racial policy has led to immediate con 
flict with the Catholic church. In a speech on July 16, 
the Pope condemned “exaggerated nationalism’ 
which, he said, had reached the stage of “true apos- 
tasy.” Five days later, he reminded a group of 
ecclesiastical assistants of Catholic Action 
ganization which maintains important youth active 
ties, that “catholic means universal, not racist of 
separatist.” Fascist authorities then threatened to 
declare membership in the Catholic Action associa: 
tions incompatible with membership in the Fascist 
party. On July 28 the Pope amplified his attack on 
“separatism” and “racism” and warned the party 
that a blow at the Catholic Action was a blow at the 
church and the papacy. Two days later, Mussolini 
answered by declaring his intention “to go straight 


ahead.” PauL B. TAYLOR 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 42, Aucust 12, 1938. 


Pe 








Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Screet, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasise Bust, President; DonotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Miche.es Dean, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under che Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Incorporated. National 


Two Dollars a Year. 





|=| 


THI 


Augi 


on 4 
Sibe 
port 
will 
Sov: 
Japs 
pyir 
Aft 
fror 
indi 
prac 


Aug 


tion 


pare 
chat 
For 


~ 1 Ma 


bore 
regi 
rito 
Pek 
Agi 
forc 
corr 
ing 
of 
plas 
up | 


con 


of 1 
this 


For 








