rk, 


ive 
ont 
nd 
‘he 

is 
th- 
on 


rk, 


the 
ew 
for 


onal 
itor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVIII, No. 18 


—_—_— 


FEBRUARY 24, 1939 





CONTEST 
Prepare a Club Program 


ona 


Headline Book or World Affairs Pamphlet 


Ist Prize, $25.00 2nd Prize, $10.00 


Registration fee, 20 cents Contest closes April 10 


For further details, write to F.P.A. Club Service Bureau 


MAR 13 1939 





PERIODICAL R Entered as second- 
GENER AL LIBRARY class matter December 
UNTY. of MICH 2, 1921, at the Post 


Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Nichican 











——— 
TT 


EUROPEAN POWERS STRUGGLE TO CONTROL SPAIN 





 ytsiamayin reoccupation, on February 18, of ter- 
ritory in East Africa which it had promised to 
Italy by the 1935 accord, and the announcement that 
the French and British fleets would hold joint ma- 
noeuvres in the Mediterranean beginning February 23, 
were the answer of the Western powers to reports of 
Italian mobilization in Europe and Africa. Accord- 
ing to these reports Mussolini, in the past two 
months, has mobilized 500,000 men, of whom 100,000 
are stationed in Libya, bordering on French Tunis; 
and rumors are rife that he will have one million 
men under arms by the end of March, when he is ex- 
pected to confront France with formal demands. 
The area reoccupied by France is a strategic twelve 
and a half mile strip of coastal territory between 
French Somaliland and Italian Eritrea, commanding 
the Strait of Bab el Mandeb at the entrance to the Red 
Sea. Across this strait lies the Arabian kingdom of 
Yemen, which has hitherto been on friendly terms 
with Italy, but recently sent emissaries to Paris on a 


. secret mission. The French reoccupation is justified 


on the ground that Italy, on December 22, denounced 
the 1935 accord, which was never actually carried out 
owing to the outbreak of the Ethiopian war. 

These moves and counter-moves in the Mediter- 
ranean were precipitated by the liquidation of the 
Spanish civil war, brought appreciably nearer by the 
refusal of President Azafia, now in Paris, to return to 
Madrid or sanction continuance of the struggle. Now 
that France and Britain are making a determined ef- 
fort to “squeeze” Germany and Italy out of Spain, 
the Fascist powers, with the cooperation of Japan, 
are expected to stage a simultaneous “squeeze’’ play 
in Central Europe, the Mediterranean and the Far 
East. While another Munich is not out of the ques- 
tion—the defeat of the Loyalists may, in itself, con- 
stitute a setback for France and Britain—the position 
of Germany and Italy is not as favorable as it was 


last September. The Western powers, for the time 
being at least, have abandoned their stake east of the 
Rhine, and can concentrate their military efforts in 
the Mediterranean. If Italy and Germany are to ob- 
tain territorial advantages in this region, they must 
attack the Western powers, now occupying defensive 
positions, which are usually stronger both from the 
military and from the psychological point of view. 
Nor is it certain that Hitler is prepared to do more 
than reciprocate Mussolini's verbal assurances of sup- 
port during the September crisis. While Germany 
continues to press for colonies and economic conces- 
sions, it has no immediate advantages to gain in the 
Mediterranean; and an actual conflict in that area 
might prove a severe test of the Rome-Berlin axis. 
France and Britain are meanwhile pursuing the 
dual policy of strengthening their armaments, and at 
the same time holding out to the dictatorships the 
promise of non-territorial concessions as a reward for 
good behavior. On February 16 Britain announced 
its decision to spend the staggering sum of over two 
billion dollars on armaments during the financial 
year 1939-1940, principally on naval construction. 
This decision—which caused the German press to de- 
nounce Britain’s disregard of the “Munich spirit” — 
was followed by the news two days later that trade 
missions representing the government and the Fed- 
eration of British Industries would visit Germany 
early in March to discuss a price and marketing agree- 
ment in an effort to avert a threatened trade war be- 
tween the two countries. Improvement in trade would 
not be unwelcome to the Third Reich, whose January 
trade figures showed a 12 per cent decrease in ex- 
ports and a 13 per cent decrease in imports as com- 
pared with the preceding month.* Simultaneously the 
Left press in France featured reports that M. Bonnet, 


**‘Hitler Demands Colonies and Trade,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, February 
3, 1939. 


h 


paneer 


et gs eee oe 








——— 








aoa 











whose secret diplomacy during the September crisis 
had aroused es sa suspicion, was secretly nego- 
tiating with Mussolini regarding the possibility of 
granting Italy a free port in Jibuti. 

Germany countered these Franco-British moves by 
accelerating the expansion of its navy, especially 
ocean-going submarines; announcing plans to en- 
large and modernize the Kiel Canal, ostensibly to 
meet the threat of Soviet naval construction; and at- 
tempting to increase its commerce with Danubian 
countries. On February 13 it signed a commercial ac- 
cord with Italy, providing for increased barter be- 
tween the two totalitarian systems and a preferential 
freight rate on goods from Austria to Trieste, whose 
future as an outlet for Austro-Hungarian trade had 
been jeopardized by Axschluss. Signs multiplied, 
however, that Germany’s drive to the East, which had 
seemed a foregone conclusion after the Munich ac- 
cord, was encountering increased resistance in the 
Danubian region. On February 15 the Hungarian 
Premier, Bela Imredy, who had advocated an anti- 
Semitic policy, was forced to resign on the technical 
ground that one of his great-grandfathers was a 
Jew. The new Cabinet formed by Count Paul Teleki, 
representing the Hungarian aristocracy which has op- 
posed anti-Semitism, is expected to continue Imredy’s 
policy, grant land concessions to the peasants, and 
resist German domination. A similar gesture of inde- 
pendence was made by Poland, which in accordance 
with its policy of balancing its powerful neighbors 
against each other, concluded a comprehensive trade 
agreement with the Soviet Union on February 19. 


Meanwhile, a new factor was injected into Eu- 
rope’s confused political picture by the death on 
February 10 of Pope Pius XI. The election of a new 
Pope, which must begin not later than March 1, 
promises to have far-reaching consequences. Dr. von 
Bergen, German envoy to the Vatican, intimated 
on February 16 that the Fascist dictatorships hoped 
for the election of a “worthy successor” who would 
be alive to the problems of “a new world.” The in- 
creasing influence of the Western Hemisphere, which 
contains about one-third of the world’s Catholic pop- 
ulation and a large portion of its wealth, has raised 
the question whether the Sacred College would de- 
part from its tradition of electing an Italian and se- 
lect a Pontiff from among the Cardinals of this hem- 
isphere. Whoever is finally chosen for this high office 
will be faced with the difficult task of reconsidering 
the position of the Church in a world swept by revo- 
lution. Since the war the Vatican has opposed 
régimes, no matter what their political complexion, 
which challenged organized religion, supporting 
those which either favored or tolerated the Church’s 
activities. This explains the apparent paradox of the 
Church’s hostility to Nazi Germany—and Communist 





— Page Two — 











—— 


Russia— and its support of Franco Spain. The same 
inconsistency has been revealed by Western liberals, 
who have condoned in Russia and Spain the attacks 
on the Church which they condemn on the part of 
Greater Germany where—at least so far as Austria 
is concerned—the Church paved the way for Nazism 
by its determined hostility to the Austrian Socialists, 
As in the years preceding the World War, the Cath. 
olic Church may be expected to play an important 
réle in the increasingly complicated game of power- 


olitics. 
P VERA MICHELES DEAN 


IS A RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR IMMINENT? 


While Japan has been quietly consolidating its 
seizure of Hainan Island, a fanfare of publicity has 
developed over the imminence of a Russo-Japanese 
war. The news reports have stressed various factors; 
the alleged concentration of Japanese troops on the 
Siberian and Outer Mongolian borders, incidents on 
the Manchoukuo frontier, speeches in the Diet affect- 
ing the Soviet-Japanese fisheries dispute, and the pos- 
sibility of transforming the “‘‘anti-Comintern pact” 
into an outright German-Japanese-Italian alliance. 


There can be little doubt that negotiations looking 
toward a formal military alliance have been taking 
place in Berlin, Rome and Tokyo. The guess may be 
hazarded that the initiative comes from Berlin, and 
that hesitation has developed mainly in the Rome 
and Tokyo sides of the triangle. Influential military 
groups in Japan, represented by Ambassadors Oshima 
and Shiratori at Berlin and Rome, are working for 
such an alliance. There is a good chance that their 
efforts will be successful, since the influence of the 
more cautious elements in Japan has steadily dimin- 
ished in recent months. If the alliance were consum- 


mated, however, it might be difficult to decide wheth- | 


er the Western democracies or the Soviet Union 
would be more immediately menaced by the coali- 


tion. Germany and Italy now seem to be directing 


their attack against France and Britain, while in the 
Far East Japan has followed suit by occupying 
Hainan. Cooperation apparently exists without a for- 


mal alliance, but it is not at present directed against 
the U.S.S.R. 


The debate in the lower House of the Diet on 
February 14 culminated in passage of a unanimous 
resolution on the fisheries question which demanded 
“swift, appropriate action, not stopping at the use of 
force to protect Japanese rights and interests.’’ This 
prearranged debate was obviously designed to 
strengthen Japanese diplomats at Moscow in the cut- 
rent fisheries negotiations. The Soviet Union has re- 
cently adopted a strong attitude on this question. In 
negotiations before December 31, the Japanese re- 


(Continued on Page 4) 








rua 
abr 


cru 


suf) 
pro 
ing 
ges 
Eu 
nev 
the 
loo 


sor 
but 
Sin 
pr 


yee 


rul 
me 





Ct 
OS- 
ct” 


ing 
ing 


me 
ary 
ma 
for 
eir 
the 
in- 
im- 
th- 
ion 
ali- 


ing” 


the 
ing 


‘Of- 
inst 


ous 
Jed 
of 
‘his 

to 
“ur- 

re- 
In 





Was hington News Letter 





sibbes, 











— 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Fes. 20.—President Roosevelt’s statement on Feb- 
ruary 18 that “ominous” diplomatic reports from 
abroad might force him to curtail his Caribbean 
cruise with the Navy has occasioned almost as much 
surprise and concern in Washington as it apparently 
produced in London and Paris. On the surface, noth- 
ing has happened within the past few days to sug- 
gest an ominous turn for the worse. Dispatches from 
Europe have contained no particularly alarming 
news, and Administration leaders in Congress and 
the Cabinet have assumed that the immediate out- 
look, while critical, was not desperate. 


A thorough canvass of informed opinion among 
Administration advisers on foreign policy throws a 
somewhat different light on the immediate situation, 
but fails to confirm Mr. Roosevelt's apparent alarm. 
Since mid-December the State Department has been 
proceeding on the assumption that 1939 would be a 
year of recurrent crises in Europe and the Far East. 
Recent events have confirmed these assumptions. 
While it is difficult to sift the truth of reports and 
rumors reaching the State, War and Navy Depart- 
ments, the following summary seems to represent the 
general consensus of opinion: 


The next crisis in Europe appears to be centered in the 
Mediterranean and North Africa. Mussolini, who has re- 
ceived no benefits from the Rome-Berlin axis, is likely to 
announce formally Italy's claims when the Spanish civil war 
terminates—possibly within the next few weeks. Reports 
reaching Washington indicate that Mussolini has quietly 
mobilized about 400,000 men in Italy and strengthened 
Italian forces in Libya, near the Tunisian frontier, and in 
Ethiopia, near Jibuti. It is possible that he may have a 
million men under arms by the end of March or early 
April. 

These developments will assume larger significance only 
if Germany gives diplomatic and military support to its 
axis partner. So far, there is no tangible evidence of large- 
scale German mobilization, although some reports indicate 
small German troop concentration in Austria near the 
Italian border. Should the crisis come to a head, Britain 
and France would face the alternatives of resisting the 
combined pressure of the axis powers—possibly at the risk 
of war—or accepting another “appeasement” conference. 
If war should result, Japan might be expected to move 
against the Dutch East Indies, while Germany would exert 
pressure on Holland. 


This hypothesis is strengthened by Japan’s recent occu- 
pation of Hainan, a move which is interpreted in some 
quarters as the first step in a triple play, timed with action 
by Germany and Italy in Europe. In any event, Washing- 
ton is inclined to link developments in the Far East with 


those in Europe, and to give more weight to 
manoeuvers in Southeastern Asia than to its r 
movements in Manchuria. 


apan’s 
troop 


At this point informed Washington opinion is divided 
on how Britain and France would meet such a crisis should 
it develop. There is a belief in some quarters that London 
and Paris may feel strong enough to reject any Italian 
demand for concessions in the Mediterranean or Africa. 
The general opinion, however, looks toward a second 
“appeasement” conference. In this situation Germany, 
which does not desire a war but which seeks to weaken the 
ties between London and Paris, might be expected to urge 
a peaceful adjustment. The Chamberlain government may 
also be expected to urge concessions, in which case France 
would be compelled to acquiesce and presumably make the 


major sacrifice. 


While this analysis presents a somber picture, it con- 
tains nothing essentially new, and fails to support Mr. 
Roosevelt's professed alarm. It is possible, of course, 
that the President had received last-minute informa- 
tion which is not available elsewhere in Washington. 
But the first effect of his statement has been to revive 
doubt and suspicion in Congressional circles. Since 
early in January, Congress has been conditioned to a 
“crisis” atmosphere, in which the national defense 
program has been pushed rapidly through the House 
by an overwhelming vote of 367 to 15 and sent to 
the Senate. In this atmosphere the long-threatened 
foreign policy debate has not quite come off. Despite 
the outcry against secrecy, Congressional critics have 
sidestepped the issue of airplane sales to France and 
hesitated to launch an attack on the President's pos- 
itive policy. Administration leaders have found some 
support from Republicans and anti-New Deal Demo- 
crats, who are willing to go along with the President 
on foreign policy if they are convineed that his pro- 
gram is devoid of political considerations and is help- 
ing to reduce the danger of ‘war. 


But the latest hints of threatening developments 
in Europe have raised new questions in the minds of 
both friends and critics of the Presidential policy. Is 
Mr. Roosevelt playing politics after all? Does he 
know what London and Paris really intend to do 
should a new crisis develop this spring? Is he merely 
seeking to strengthen Britain and France to enable 
the democracies to talk on equal terms with the dic- 
tatorships, or is he seeking to block any European 
conference? If he has assurances that Britain and 
France will resist, does he expect the United States 
to underwrite the European status quo and nothing 
more ? 


W. T. STONE 








———— ———— Page Four ae 


IS A RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR IMMINENT? 
(Continued from Page 2) 


fused to accept the Russian dictum that 40 of the 
280 Japanese fishery lots had to be withdrawn for 
“strategic reasons.” The Soviet authorities then al- 
lowed the annually renewed modus vivendi on the 
fisheries to lapse, and for the first time a non-treaty 
situation has existed since the beginning of the year. 
According to normal procedure, the 40 fishery lots 
under dispute would be auctioned at Vladivostok on 
February 24—and would presumably be taken by 
Russian instead of Japanese bidders. If this occurs, 
the next move would be up to Japan. In order to 
maintain its alleged rights to these lots, which in- 
clude shore canneries on Kamchatka, the Japanese 
would have to engage in a landing operation with 
combined military-naval forces. It remains to be seen 
whether Japan would go to such extremes in defend- 
ing a small fraction of its Kamchatka fisheries. The 
normal compromise may yet result, although it ap- 
pears more difficult this year. 

Circumstantial evidence lends support to the re- 
ports that Japanese troops have been withdrawn from 
the central fronts in the Hankow area. Both the size 
and destination of these withdrawals, however, is 
uncertain. The step may have been motivated by a 
desire to minimize the strain on Japan’s economic po- 
sition caused by the extensive military operations in 





ee 


China during 1938. Official figures show a decline of 
1,541 million yen in Japan’s total foreign trade last 
year, of which 422 million was in exports and 1,119 
million in imports. These drastic trade losses have re. 
sulted in appreciable inroads on Japan’s stocks of raw 
materials, ranging well over 50 per cent in the case 
of cotton, wool and American lumber—the only com- 
modities for which statistics are published. The small 
favorable balance of 61 million yen in merchandise 
trade, moreover, does not at all reflect the actual 
drain on Japan’s foreign exchange resources in 1938. 
Exports increased mainly in the yen bloc areas of 
Manchuria and China, but fell off greatly in coun- 
tries paying for goods in currencies which supply for- 
eign exchange. Japanese exports to the United States, 
for example, declined by $77,381,000 in 1938. As a 
result, Japan found it almost as difficult to balance 
its international payments as in 1937. Gold shipments 
to the United States aggregated $168,739,643 (625 
million yen) in 1938, as against $246,470,005 (845 
million yen) in 1937. Japan’s remaining gold stocks, 
estimated at 500 million yen, are only one-fourth of 
the total held two years ago. With gold reserves and 
war materials depleted, it would be foolhardy for 
Japan to engage in a war with the Soviet Union, un- 
less it had an ironclad guarantee that Germany would 
simultaneously attack the U.S.S.R. from the west. 
T. A. Bisson 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


The Real Conflict between China and Japan, by Harley 
Farnsworth MacNair. Chicago, University of Chicago 
Press, 1938. $2.00 
The author believes that the “real conflict” is in the con- 

trasting world outlook and psychology of China and Japan. 

Whatever judgment one may have as to this thesis, there 

can be no dispute regarding the fascinating quality of 

Mr. MacNair’s study or the meticulous documentation of 

his points. The deep-lying urge to conquest and world 

dominion in Japan is nowhere revealed so clearly as in the 
extracts quoted in the concluding chapters of this book. 


Malaysia, by Rupert Emerson. New York, Macmillan, 

1937. $5.00 

This thorough treatment of colonial administration in 
Malaysia concentrates mainly on the direct and indirect 
exercise of British rule in the Straits Settlements and the 
Federated and Unfederated Malay States, with a briefer 
analysis of Dutch policy in the Netherlands Indies. The 
discussion of the origins and background of British and 
Dutch administration in their Malayan dependencies adds 
greatly to the value of this excellent study. 


Germans in the Cameroons, 1884-1914, by Harry R. Rudin. 
New Haven, Conn., Yale University Press, 1938. $4.00 
A scholarly volume based on first-hand research which 

concludes that German accomplishments in the Cameroons, 

considering the comparatively short period of occupation, 
were remarkable. 


The Forgotten Peace: Brest-Litovsk, March 1918, by John 
Wheeler-Bennett. New York, Morrow, 1939. $5.00 
A scholarly and admirably documented study of the 
treaty imposed by Germany on a prostrate Russia in 1918, 
which clearly shows that Hitler’s drive in the direction of 
the Ukraine owes much of its inspiration to the plans of 
the Kaiser’s General Staff. 


Deep Furrows: Pioneer Life in the Collective in Palestine, 
by Abraham Ben-Shalom. New York, Hashomer Hatzair, 
1937. $1.35 


This stimulating discussion of life in an agricultural 
collective reflects the enthusiastic idealism responsible for 
the success of Jewish pioneering in the Holy Land, despite 
the political factionalism which often hampers the Zionists’ 
work. 


Woodrow Wilson, Disciple of Revolution, by Jennings C. 
Wise. New York, Paisley Press, 1938. $3.75 
This biography culminates in a wordy attack on the 
war President, based on historical theorems which are 
probably unique and certainly inaccurate, at least in part. 


History of American Foreign Relations, by Louis M. Sears. 
New York, Crowell, revised and enlarged edition, 1938. 
$3.50 


Brings up to date an extremely useful source of back- 
ground for today’s confusions. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 18, Fepruary 24, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Screet, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasiie Buzit, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Miche.es Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


> * 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








col 


nif 
en 
ha 


the 
the 
ab! 
Fri 
Fr. 
tre 
the 


se 





