HLAI 


1vasions 
vars, the 
yrtresses 
up new 
nst the 
d show- 
news in 
ilure of 
- Ameri- 
General 
rmy Air 
gust 15, 
»t good 
ant over 
ned for 
erforms 
feet and 
ale pro- 
if main 
ish Spit- 
Japanese 
t and in 


be mak- 
British 
ortresses 
xes, and 
nachines 
besides, 
fighters. 
magnifi- 
1e newer 
Ira C. 
mand in 
daylight 
bombing 
Jay, and 
tr bombs 
he secret 
ey could 
altitudes 
sritish of 
on Fri- 
erational 
nich they 
y's latest 
orth Sea. 
lamaged, 
was lost. 
LLIOTT 


| 
| 


General Library 


Ann Arbor. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


University of Michigan 


Nichtecan 


SEP 4 tag 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vot. XXI, No. 46 


SEPTEMBER 4, 1942 


THREE YEARS OF NAZI CONQUEST FAIL TO QUELL EUROPE 


AS World War II enters its fourth year, the out- 
come of the global conflict remains undecided, 
with the balance inclining slightly, and as yet for the 
most part in terms of intangibles, in favor of the 
United Nations. Using conquered Europe as a spring- 
board, the Nazis are hammering relentlessly at Rus- 
sia, which three years ago had hoped to divert Nazi 
lightning to the west; and the Western powers are 
now experimenting with ways and means to divert 
Nazi forces from the east back to the Western front. 
While the lessons of Dieppe are being sifted for such 
clues as they may yield regarding the organization of 
large-scale invasion of the European coast, British and 
American air forces are blasting at German produc- 
tion and railroad centers, aided, from the east, by 
the Russian air force. It still remains to be proved, 
however, that air raids alone, unsupported by action 
on land, can succeed in breaking the Nazis’ hold on 
Europe. 


HITLER’S PLANS FOR EUROPE. At this criti- 
cal juncture, Hitler would like nothing better than to 
create the impression that Europe has acquiesced in 
his plans for a “‘new order’ and has turned its back 
on the Atlantic world. To give these plans an air 
of reality, he intends to summon a European confer- 
ence in three weeks when, the Nazis claim, Russia’s 
fate will have been sealed. The principal object of 
the conference would be to ratify the reorganization 
of Europe, whose easternmost border would be set at 
the Volga River—thus throwing Russia back into 
Asia, in accordance with the famous tenets of Mein 
Kampf. Following this conference, Hitler is expected 
to seek a compromise with Britain and the United 
States, possibly using “the danger of Japan to white 
civilization” as an inducement for suspension of hos- 
tilities against Germany. Meanwhile, the Nazis are 
deploying every effort of propaganda and coercion 
to weaken the national economies of conquered coun- 
tries by shuttling their industrial and agricultural 


workers to other parts of the continent, by closing 
their factories, and by appropriating their financial 
and raw material resources for the benefit of the 
Nazi war machine. 

GROWING TIDE OF RESISTANCE. Yet at 
the very moment when Hitler is seeking to consolidate 
his conquests, it becomes increasingly evident that the 
one thing he cannot achieve today, while there is 
still hope he may be defeated, is the pacification of 
Europe. If the Nazis had been as clever as they be- 
lieved themselves to be, they would have sought, 
from the start, to win prostrate Europe with prom- 
ises of a better world for all—for the conquered 
peoples as well as for the victorious Germans. In- 
stead, in three years of war, they have given a fore- 
taste of the treatment they plan to inflict on Europe 
—and on other parts of the world—if they emerge 
as final victors. Most Americans, with no first-hand 
experience of Nazi terrorism, find it difficult to un- 
derstand what superhuman qualities of courage and 
faith in ultimate liberation must be summoned forth 
by the conquered peoples to resist Nazi rule. Am- 
bassador Grew’s recital, on August 30, of some of 
the tortures inflicted by the Japanese on American 
citizens, is but a small example of what has been 
suffered, in certain cases for years, by those subject 
to Nazi domination, including German dissenters. 
Yet information from occupied territories indicates 
growing resistance both among the peoples whom 
the Germans had hoped to exterminate—notably the 
Poles and Czechs; and among those they had hoped 
to win to the “new order’—notably the Dutch and 
Norwegians. 

WILL HATE BLOCK RECONSTRUCTION ? 
This resistance, most understandably, is generating 
a hatred against the Germans which the Americans, 
and even the British, may find it difficult to compre- 
hend fully. Any weakening of Nazi rule would be a 
signal for revenge, not only against the Germans, but 


pevermerrs = 


setts ae eo ey 


cee 


rte 


= SIS St 


i 
41 
ql 
HH} 
+ 
a 
a} 
| 
thy 


also against those among the conquered who, for 
one reason or another, have acquiesced in “collabora- 
tion.” Fear of revenge, in turn, strengthens the de- 
termination of the Nazis, and of collaborationists 
like Laval and Quisling, to uproot all potential op- 
position. 

Out of these elements of resistance and hatred, 
held down by the Nazis at the point of a gun, how 
can stability be brought to Europe? The late Italian 
historian Guglielmo Ferrero advanced the thesis that 
the French Revolution precipitated a series of “great 
panics,” in which governments that did not enjoy 
“legitimate” authority—from Napoleon to Hitler, 
Mussolini and their satellites—repressed the people, 
for fear that the people might otherwise challenge or 
destroy their authority, and that this vicious circle 
could be broken only with restoration of some form 
of “legitimacy.” If by legitimacy is meant the restora- 
tion of political and economic conditions that existed 
in Europe—or elsewhere—before 1939, then the pos- 


CAUTION REQUIRED IN JUDGING FAR EASTERN DEVELOPMENTS paig 


Recent events in the Solomon Islands and China 
emphasize the need for careful judgment, if the 
American public is not to make the mistake of re- 
garding battles as wars or superficial aspects of a 
problem as the problem itself. We need to appreciate 
fully the enemy’s strength, without minimizing our 
own, and to understand the present role of the Far 
East in the world-wide strategy of the United Na- 
tions. After thorough consideration of the issues, 
Washington and‘London decided some months ago 
that the European front is primary in this stage of 
the war. It is clear, therefore, that at the present time 
we cannot expect to do more than hold our positions 
in Asia and bring about certain improvements of a 
limited character. Naturally, the situation may 
change if Japan becomes involved in difficulties on 
a new front or if a successful United Nations offen- 
sive in the West permits a subsequent diversion of 
men and supplies to the Far East. 

How then, are we to judge the Battle of the 
Solomons? Our forces, distinguishing themselves for 
courage and determination, have seized a number of 
important islands, beaten off a Japanese “reconnais- 
sance in force,” and damaged or destroyed a num- 


JUST PUBLISHED— 


Asia in a New World Order 


by Owen Lattimore 


(Political Adviser to Chiang Kai-shek since 1941, and 
Director of the Walter Hines Page School of Inter- 
national Relations at Johns Hopkins University.) 


25¢c 


September 1 issue of ForEiGN Poticy Reports 
REporTs are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


Page Two 


———eeee, 


——.— «_—ra———— 


sibility of stabilization would indeed appear remote; 
for the Nazis have swept into the discard not only |’ 7} 
the men but frequently the institutions that ruled 


aspec 

Europe, and the conquered peoples may have to ceil 
begin from scratch once the war is over. Rowe 
But legitimacy can be interpreted in the more pro- objec 


found sense of reaffirmation of certain accepted val- | ya¢ 
ues of human conduct—what Ferrero calls “honesty” | ¢.:-¢} 
—which might gradually alleviate the destructive 
lack of confidence and lack of integrity, among both 
individuals and nations, that has been so character- 
istic a phenomenon of our times. From the furnace 
of war, in which so many familiar objects and beliefs ) Cy¢] 
have been charred beyond recognition, are emerging jecti 
certain values that the Nazis have not succeeded in } ¢-j, 
destroying. In the final balance, these intangible val- | yyy 
ues may yet prove more weighty than the hatreds | aje 
Hitler has created, and prove Europe’s most valuable prel 
contribution to post-war reconstruction. T 


VERA MICHELES DEAN with 


rail 
ber of Japanese planes and ships. At the same time, | sum 
the trap prepared for the enemy in the related sector } opet 
at Milne Bay, on the swampy southeastern tip of | sire: 
New Guinea, is a tribute to the foresight of the re- 
sponsible military leaders. Yet the action in the south- 
west Pacific remains a limited offensive, restricted so | The 
far to the southern islands in the Solomon group. No | 
decisive engagement with the Japanese fleet has taken 
place here, and Japan’s formidable striking power | V7 
has not really been thrown against us. Not only may} 
Japan return to battle in the southern Solomons, but | bi 
further thrusts against vital points protecting Aus-| N 
tralia are quite possible. And even though Japanese | #°¢ 
efforts to drive toward Port Moresby on the southern 
coast of New Guinea, whether by way of the Coral | /¢? 
Sea, Milne Bay or Kokoda, have been thwarted, the | 
threat to this important base is not over. dow 


JAPANESE WITHDRAWAL IN CHINA. While | ?*2 
our advances in the Solomons have been carried 
through against the will of the Japanese, a some- 
what different situation exists in China. Since July 
18 our Chinese allies have retaken most of the towns | Am 
seized by Japan in its offensive of late spring and | cu 
early summer, as well as the greater part of the } y,;, 
Chekiang-Kiangsi railway, which the enemy forces | est 
held during the first two and a half weeks of July. | p 
Although these gains are welcome, they are appat-| 
ently due more to a planned Japanese withdrawal } 4 
than to the strength of the Chinese troops or the aid = 
of the small United States air squadron. All through 
the war the Chinese, plagued by Jack of artillery, | .5. 
have found it extremely difficult to recapture walled | Hes 
cities. Only a deliberate Japanese evacuation, based , *° 
on a sharp reduction of the Japanese armies in East 
Central China, can explain the retaking of so many | a 


———— 
—$— 


' remote; 
not only 
at ruled 
have to 


10re pro- 
pted val- 
honesty” 
structive 
ong both 
haracter- 
furnace 
d beliefs 
merging 
eeded in 
rible val- 
: hatreds 
valuable 


DEAN 
rs 


me time, 
ed sector 
n tip of 
f the re- 
he south- 
ricted so 
‘oup. No 
1as taken 
g power 
only may 
10ns, but 
ing Aus- 
Japanese 
southern 
he Coral 
rted, the 


A. While 
1 carried 
a some- 
ince July 
he towns 
ting and 
t of the 
ry forces 
of July. 
'e appat- 
thdrawal 
rr the aid 
through 
artillery, 
‘e walled 
yn, based 
s in East 
so many 


—_— 
a 


rotected and unprotected towns in such a short time. 

These developments therefore have a threatening 
aspect. They suggest three possibilities, not neces- 
sarily mutually exclusive: that the Japanese troops 
were urgently required elsewhere; that the essential 
objectives of the campaign had been achieved; or 
that, in the view of the Japanese military, nothing 
further could be gained by continuance of the cam- 
paign. The first possibility would point toward Jap- 
anese action on a new major front, perhaps Siberia 
or India, for no single current sector in Asia is im- 
portant enough to necessitate the withdrawal from 
| Chekiang and Kiangsi. Or Japan’s immediate ob- 
| jective may be to strengthen its present positions by 

striking on many existing fronts, for example 
Yunnan, the southwest Pacific, North China, and the 
Aleutians; but this would presumably be simply a 
prelude to action elsewhere. 

The two other alternatives mentioned above deal 
with the objectives of the East Central China cam- 
paign. Clearly, the plan for a Shanghai-Singapore 
tailway, which was given great prominence early this 
summer. was far beyond the scope of the Japanese 
operations. Likewise, although Japan probably de- 
sired to prevent bombings of its cities from such ex- 


THE F.P.A. 


The South Seas in the Modern World, by Felix M. Keesing. 
New York, John Day, 1941. $3.50 


An invaluable source of information on the Pacific Isles. 


War as a Social Institution: The Historian’s Perspective, 
edited for the American Historical Association by Jesse 
D. Clarkson and Thomas C. Cochran. New York, Colum- 
bia University Press, 1941. $3.50 


Not only historians, but geographers, anthropologists 
and military experts contribute essays to a rather uneven- 
ly balanced book. 


Japan’s Continental Adventure, by Ching-Chun Wang. 
New York, Macmillan, 1941. $2.00 
Beginning with the invasion of Manchuria and coming 
down to the middle of 1940, the author discusses various 
phases of Japan’s program of aggression in a series of in- 
teresting and informative essays. 


Central America: Challenge and Opportunity, by Charles 
Morrow Wilson. New York, Henry Holt, 1941. $3.00 


A sympathetic but highly informative study of “Middle 
America,” a term the author applies to the Caribbean 
countries of Central America, Colombia, Cuba, and the 
island of Jamaica. History, economics and the “man of 
Middle America” are all considered from the human-inter- 
est point of view. 


Barriers to World Trade, by Margaret S. Gordon. New 
York, Macmillan, 1941. $4.00 
A sound survey and description of devices employed by 


nations in the last pre-war decade to restrict and direct 
international payments and trade. 


Page Three 


— 
Senuipaneenttl 


cellently located airfields as Chuhsien and Lishui, 
the campaign exceeded the requirements of this 
goal. It must be noted, moreover, that even though 
these bases have been given up, the Japanese suc- 
ceeded in keeping them out of use during the im- 
portant summer months, which may have been all 
they were looking for. 

CHINA THE CHIEF OBJECTIVE. It still seems 
true that the main objectives of the Japanese was 
to weaken China economically and politically by 
striking at the links between two important eastern 
provinces and the heart of the interior.* This as- 
sumption is strengthened by the fact that the Jap- 
anese withdrawal began immediately after the har- 
vest in Chekiang and Kiangsi, or while it was still 
going on. As much as possible of the crop was prob- 
ably seized, and this section of Free China will doubt- 
less face a very difficult winter. On the other hand, 
comfort can be derived from the consideration that, 
if the Japanese hoped to produce immediate fissures 
in China’s political structure and spirit of resistance, 
they failed to achieve their objective. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


*L. K. Rosinger, ‘‘Campaign in China Foreshadows New Japanese Front,” 
Foreign Policy Bulletin, July 17, 1942. 


BOOKSHELF 


The Founding of the T’ang Dynasty, by Woodbridge Bing- 
ham. Baltimore, Waverly Press, 1941. $3.50 
A scholarly monograph on the period when the Sui 
Dynasty collapsed and the T’ang Dynasty took its place 
in the early seventh century, with new light on the life of 
the great second T’ang emperor, Li Shih-min, who laid 
the foundation of the dynasty’s greatness. 


Chile, Land of Progress, by Earl Parker Hanson. New 
York, Reynal and Hitchcock, 1941. $1.75 
A very pleasantly written but somewhat sugar-coated 
description of the country, with chapters on its land and 
people, history, culture, industries, social progress and 
political policies. 


Documents on Foreign Relations, July 1940-June 1941, 
edited ky S. Shepard Jones and Denys P. Myers. Boston, 
World Peace Foundation, 1941. $3.75 


Third volume in a valuable compilation series. 


Transportation and National Defense, by Joseph L. White. 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1941. 
$1.50 
A disappointing study which fails to come to grips 

with the question whether our transportation facilities are 

adequate in the present emergency. 


New Directions in Our Trade Policy, by William Diebold, 
Jr. New York, Council on Foreign Relations, 1941. $2.00 


An intelligent discussion of the Hull trade program and 
the impact of the war on commercial policy. The author 
comes to the conclusion that liberal trade policies are un- 
likely to be restored after the war. 


| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 46, SEPTEMBER 4, 1942. 


second-class matter December 2, 


ape 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lugr, Secretary; VERA MiIcHELES DEaNn, Editor. Entered as 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 


Incorporated. National 


1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


peed eng 


| Washington News Letter 


AuG. 31.—On the third anniversary of World 
War II the outlook for the United Nations seems 
more hopeful than observers in Washington dared 
anticipate two months ago, when the Germans were 
launching their offensive in the Ukraine and Marshal 
Erwin Rommel was racing madly for Alexandria. 
When 1942 opened, it was generally considered that 
this year would be the Fuehrer’s last chance to win 
the war. Athough his armies continue to gain vic- 
tories, these are on a lesser scale than his earlier 
triumphs, and it now seems certain that the Nazis 
are not going to put Russia out of the war this year. 

The bright spot in the war picture, as seen in the 
capital, is the capture of six of the strategic Solomon 
islands by the United States Marines. Over the week- 
end, the conservative Navy Department issued a 
summary of the operations, stating that the Marines 
had consolidated their hold on the Guadalcanal- 
Tulagi area and were now engaged in mopping up 
the remnants of Japanese opposition. 

AMERICA’S FIRST OFFENSIVE VICTORY. 
The Solomon Islands fighting is a milestone, since it 
constitutes the first offensive victory won by the 
United States in World War II. Tulagi harbor and 
the Guadalcanal airfields are the first bits of territory 
wrested back from the Japanese by American troops. 
They have considerable strategic value, for the 
Solomon Islands in Japanese hands were a menace to 
our line of communication with Australia, while 
Guadalcanal is a useful base from which U.S. bomb- 
ers can attack the Japanese in New Guinea. 

But, more important perhaps than even the stra- 
tegic significance of the Solomon Islands victory is 
its psychological value. Its moral effect is comparable 
to some extent to the tonic effect of the capture of 
Fort Henry and Fort Donelson by the Federal armies 
in the spring of 1862 on public opinion in the North 
during the Civil War. Many serious reverses and 
grave disappointments lay ahead for the Unionist 
cause, but these brilliant successes were auguries of 
ultimate triumph. 

Other encouraging developments recently have 
been Brazil’s entrance into the war, the sharp reduc- 
tion in ship sinkings by Axis submarines in the At- 
lantic during July, and the fine performances of the 
Flying Fortresses, not one of which has yet been shot 
down in the now almost daily raids over Europe. 

The outstanding military surprise of the year, how- 
ever, has undoubtedly been the showing of the Chi- 
nese armies. When the Burma Road was cut last 
spring and the Japanese launched an offensive four 
months ago to gain complete control of the Hang- 


chow-Nanchang railway, grave fears were enter. 
tained that China would shortly be forced to capitu. 
late. On the contrary, the amazing Chinese, by their 
unexpected counter-attack, have retaken 200 miles 
of the railway and, by regaining the airfields at 
Chuhsien and Lishui, have put the flimsy industrial 
cities of Japan within range of American bombers, 
Even if it be true, as some military critics are inclined 
to think, that the Chinese successes are due in part to 
withdrawal of Japanese troops for use in another 
theatre of war, possibly India or Siberia, Chiang 
Kai-shek’s armies cannot be denied the glory of 
having won the outstanding victories of the war to 
date against the Japanese. 


DARK SPOTS. The dark spots on the war hoti- 
zon are Russia and Egypt. The Nazi threat to gain 
control of the Caucasus oil wells remains grave, and 
Stalingrad, threatened as Moscow was last year, can- 
not look for relief to an approaching winter as the 
Russian capital could in 1941. But, whatever the out- 
come of this super-Verdun battle, it is now certain— 
as it was not last spring—that Russia will not be 
knocked out of the war as an effective fighting force 
this year. Dr. Joseph Goebbels has already predicted 
a second winter campaign in Russia, and the Nazi 
authorities are appealing to the civilian population 
for warm clothing for the troops. 

More threatening is the position in Egypt, 
where Marshal Rommel on August 31 launched a 
major thrust at Alexandria, 70 miles away. Despite 
losses inflicted on German and Italian convoys in 
the Mediterranean by American and British bombers 
and by British warships, the Nazi leader is known 
to have obtained considerable reinforcements in men 
and supplies of late. A Nazi conquest of Alexandria 
—which, by assuring the Axis complete domination 
of the Middle East, would jeopardize the United Na- 
tions’ supply line to Russia from the south and seti- 
ously menace India from the west—would repre- 
sent Hitler's greatest succéss since the fall of France. 

Still, as the summer of 1942 slips into autumn, 
the conviction grows: in Washington that the tide is 
surely, even if almost imperceptibly, turning in favor 
of the Allies. As Ambassador Joseph C. Grew, just 
returned from his post at Tokyo, broadcast on 
August 30, the Japanese will not be easy to beat but, 
given determination on the part of the American 
people to pay the price and see the war through, it 
can be done. And what Mr. Grew said of the Jap- 
anese applies with equal force to the Germans. 


JOHN ELLIoTT 


VoL. 


| int 
ad 


no 
| th 
OF 


