


fol wl 





9 
& 
it 
ge of 


Fos 


in the 
allace 
gainst 
ussia,” 
id not 
~CTOSS- 
evade 
| peace 
efused 
ch cer. 
ave Up 
ank of 
Ameti- 


evising 
etween 
yrecked 
). Sena- 
‘ered a 
il, con- 
en and 

House 
ditional 
uct asa 
ches of 


.epubli- 
svelt on 
» would 
d_ plans 
ation in 
attempt 
rile the 
interna 
stood to 
ig a bit 
tionists. 
concrete 
shington 
uctive— 
> United 
| reality, 
y victory 
e peace 
LIOTT 


1DS 


ns 








PERIOVICAL ROSA 
GENFRAL LIBRARY 
mYEv. OF MICH 





MAR 26 1943 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


University of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, Michizan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 23 


MarcH 26, 1943 





PUBLIC OPINION READY FOR ADOPTION OF POST-WAR PRINCIPLES 


HE Ball-Burton-Hill-Hatch resolution, taken to- 

gether with Mr. Eden’s visit to the United States 
and Mr. Churchill’s radio address of March 21, have 
raised the question of the extent to which it is ad- 
visable to define post-war plans while the outcome 
of the war remains in the balance. British spokesmen 
appear to agree with American officials that it would 
be both impossible and undesirable to postpone 
consideration of the post-war settlement until the 
war has been won. Where there appears to be dif- 
ference of opinion, among both the British and the 
Americans, is as to the scope that discussions should 
be encouraged to take at this particular time. 

GENERALITIES OR DETAILS? It is, of course, 
true that to formulate all details of a post-war settle- 
ment in advance, when we have no clear idea of the 
kind of world we shall face after the war, is not 
only premature but might actually jeopardize the 
prosecution of the war. At the same time, it is also 
tue that people throughout the world are weary 
unto death of platitudes about international collab- 
oration, and long to know more concretely what 
specific measures can or should be taken to avoid 
the recurrence of catastrophic conflicts, and especially 
how post-war developments will affect their own 
lives and those of their children. Can a middle course 
be found between empty generalities which, because 
of their very vagueness, arouse neither opposition nor 
support, and a bill of particulars which would arouse 
untimely controversy ? 

Perhaps a beginning might be made by seeking 
agreement on a few major principles which will be 
needed as underpinning for any effective interna- 
tional organization, whatever the exact form it may 
take once the war is over. Some of these principles are 
gradually emerging from the speeches of United 
Nations officials and from public discussions in coun- 
tties which still enjoy freedom of expression. Among 
them the following are the most important: 


Need for Regional, as Well as World Organization. The 
belief is gaining ground that, valuable as the experience 
of the League of Nations undoubtedly is, mere restoration 
of the League would not serve to stabilize the world. In- 
stead, people are thinking in terms of regional, or conti- 
nental, federations—for Europe, Asia, and the Western 
Hemisphere—which would be both ready and able to act on 
matters affecting the given region or continent, but would 
be linked together into a world organization endowed with 
authority to act on matters affecting the world as a whole— 
for example, a major conflict in any region. Such a 
it is believed, would be more flexible than the League of 
Nations and, at the same time, would encourage a stronger 
sense of responsibility on the part of the various nations 
concerned. 


Rights of Small Nations Must Be Respected. Such re- 
gional or continental federations, however, should not be- 
come a screen for attempts by any one of the Big Four— 
China, Russia, Britain or the United States—to dominate 
the areas over which they might have a special influence 
after the war, or to create a new intercontinental balance of 
power. Mr. Churchill strongly emphasized the point—some- 
times overlooked in the United States—that the small na- 


tions of Europe must play an important part in post-war 
reconstruction. 


No Nation Can Expect Utopia. While the rights of all 
nations, large and small, should be respected, no nation, 
as Mr. Churchill pointed out, can expect complete fulfill- 
ment of all its hopes and aspirations. This point must par- 
ticularly be borne in mind by the new national states formed 
in Europe after 1919 which, as a result of their belated uni- 
fication and their centuries-long efforts to resist the en- 
croachments of powerful neighbors, have tended at times to 
be more intransigent than older and more stabilized nations. 


No Territorial Aggrandizement for Any One. If the 
United Nations are agreed—as would be indicated by their 
adherence to the Atlantic Charter—that they have no de- 
sire for territorial aggrandizement, then no exception should 
be made to a one no matter how convincing a case 
can be presented by any one of the United Nations on its 


own behalf. The controversy precipitated by the London 
Times editorial of March 10 concerns the possibility that 
Britain might be willing to let Russia have a free hand to 
asure its territorial security in Eastern Europe. Such a move 
would merely open the floodgates for similar territorial de- 
mands by others among the United Nations. The answer 

















to all demands for territorial security should be made not by 
satisfying piecemeal the particular claims of each nation, but 
by ee ar efforts to achieve international security 
through co ion between nations. It might be recalled 
that it was only after the breakdown of collective security 
at Munich that Russia demanded the Baltic states as the 


= any assistance it might have given Poland against 


y- 

International Organization Mast Have Force at Its Dis- 
posal. There is overwhelming agreement today that no inter- 
national organization will prove effective unless it has force 
at its di The exact details of how an international 
force might be formed and used need not be settled in ad- 
vance, but of this principle would give substance 
to any blueprint of world organization. 

Relief No Substitute for Reconstruction. There is a tend- 
ency in the United States to believe that it will prove enough 
to ship food—should food be available at the end of the 
war—or to sign checks in order to effect the rehabilitation 
of Europe and Asia. That, obviously, would be the easi- 
est way out—but an unconstructive way that would con- 
tribute little to world stabilization. Money given to relief 
agencies, no matter how generously, cannot bring the dead 
back to life, or assure a normal future to undernourished 
children, or erase from the mind of Europe’s surviving 
— memories of the horrors and brutalities they 
ave witnessed. A much harder, but far more constructive, 


Page Two 





——., 
a 





approach to post-war planning is not to concentrate merely 
on relief of the victims of war, but to prevent recurrence 
of wars in the future. 

Most of the ideas discussed above find expression 
in the resolution drawn up by Senators Ball, Burton, 
Hill and Hatch. By crystallizing the feelings of the 
American people on the major issues of international 
relations the four Senators have provided a basis op 
which the United States, in partnership with the 
other United Nations, could subsequently proceed 
from the general to the particular. While some per. 
sons in the Administration may fear that Senate dis. 
cussion of this resolution at the present time might 
do more harm than good, a public debate on the 
subject would at least have the good effect of clear. 
ing the atmosphere. It might also turn out to justify 
the views of those who, after observing public opin. 
ion throughout the country, believe that, in this in. 
stance, the American people are ready to go much 
further in the direction of international collaboration 
than they are sometimes given credit for in New 
York and Washington. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


CAN DEPRESSION AFTER THE WAR BE AVOIDED? 


Reconstruction tasks infinitely greater than those 
arising from previous conflicts will confront the 
United Nations at the close of the war. Even now, 
with victory still a long way off, damage by daily 
bombings and other military operations far surpasses 
the total devastation wrought by World War I. 
Accompanying this material destruction are wide- 
spread starvation and complete collapse of the na- 
tional economies of a score of formerly independent 
countries now under enemy occupation. When the 
fighting ceases, reconstruction on an unheard-of scale 
will be imperative if anything approaching normal 
life is to be restored in countries destroyed by war. 


TRANSITION FROM WAR TO PEACE. 
Outstanding among the measures to be taken 
will be reconversion of industrial plants to peace- 
time production, rebuilding of devastated regions, 
and repatriation or permanent settlement of refugees 
and other displaced human beings. All of these steps 





AMERICA'S BATTLEFRONTS 
Where Our Fighting Forces Are 


25c 


The /atest Headline Book for every one who has a husband, 
brother, son, or friend in the armed forces. It tells you the 
things you want to know about the many countries where 
our men are stationed—from Iceland to the Caribbean, 
from the Southwest Pacific to North Africa. 


Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 East 38th Street, New York 











will present difficult problems—none, however, im- 
possible of solution, given the huge technical facili. 
ties of an age in which mass-production methods, 
improved by wartime exigencies, are at the disposal 
of mankind. All have a common denominator: they 
will necessitate large-scale public funds and force 
the continuation of governmental “deficit financing” 
for some time after the last battles have been won. 

In all probability, this time there will not be 4 
clear demarcation line between war and peace. Peace 
making will not be a single event but a long-drawa- 
out process. In certain parts of the world, as Prime 
Minister Churchill implied in his speech of March 
21, fighting will come to an end and material re 
construction will commence while battles are stil 
raging elsewhere. It is therefore likely that wat 
controls of production, rationing, and high taxation 
will not be relinquished immediately, for it is only 
by maintaining at least some of these controls after 
the peace that indispensable large-scale reconstruc 
tion can be achieved. 

Given an orderly and gradual demobilization, 
maintenance of the necessary controls, and a populat 
will to carry over into peacetime some of the m* 
terial sacrifices accepted for the sake of victory, the 
economic reconstruction of a war-torn world maj 
prove easier than it seems at first. The vast trans 
portation facilities of all kinds now mustered’ fo! 
war will be available for repatriation of soldies 
and civilians, while the huge industrial plants former 
ly producing war goods will be able to turn oil 
myriads of prefabricated houses, household furnish 





eT 


nerely 
rence 


SS1ON 
irton, 
ional 
1S On 
1 the 
oceed 
> per- 
e dis. 
night 
n the 
clear. 
ustify 
opin. 
1S in- 
much 
ration 


AN 


r, im- 
facili- 
thods, 
5 posal 
: they 
force 
cing” 
won. 
be a 
Peace: 
|rawn- 
Prime 
March 
ial re- 
e still 
t wat 
xation 
s only 
s after 
nstruc 


zation, 
opulat 
1e ma 
ry, the 
d may 
trans 
ed: fot 
oldiets 
‘ormer 
rn out 
urnish 








rs 
—_ 





ings, foodstuffs, clothing, etc., thus permitting mil- 
lions of people to return to normal life. 

In spite of its paramount importance, however, 
reconstruction will not be the foremost economic 
problem of the post-war period. Lasting prosperity 
can result neither from temporary measures, nor 
from permanent unemployment subsidies, which do 
not create goods. The decisive moment in our eco- 
nomic life will come when transitional measures 
have been taken and the demand for abandonment 
of wartime controls and government financing of 
production grows stronger. Will it be possible, then, 
to revert to a large measure of free enterprise and 
yet maintain full employment? Will it be possible 
to avert, in the future, the depressions and mass un- 
employment of the past? 

THE WAY OUT: ECONOMIC EXPANSION. 
The answer can be in the affirmative, but only if 
the United Nations undertake a bold expansion of 
their industrial and agricultural output. From the 
technical point of view, full employment is as feasible 
in peace as in war. In practice, it can be brought 
about either by the concerted efforts of capital and 
labor, through self-imposed discipline, or by the gov- 
ernment, through control over production. It must be 
achieved, in one way or another, if wars and revo- 
lutions are to be prevented. Economic expansion can 
be fostered in various ways, nationally and interna- 
tionally. The good-neighbor policies, lowering of 
tariffs under a world-wide system of reciprocal trade 


Page Three 





TT 








agreements, free access to raw materials, elimination 
of such practices as monopolistic control of produc- 
tion, restrictive patents, narrow trade-union rules, 
etc.—all designed to keep prices high by “organizing — 
scarcity” through artificial limitation of output— 
would represent a stride forward. 

But the greatest stimulus to full employment will 
be the sizeable increase of consumption in each and 
every country. Even in the industrially most ad- 
vanced nations, millions of people are normally un- 
able to increase their consumption of goods because 
they lack purchasing power. To bring buying power 
up to the level necessary to reach full employment 
will be the primary task of the future. Industry can 
accomplish it, to its own advantage, by a production 
and employment policy directed primarily toward 
maximum consumption. The state can achieve it by 
compulsory production schemes. Each country will 
choose the method it prefers but, in most cases, a 
combination of the two will probably have to be 
adopted. Freedom from want cannot be attained so 
long as both private industry and the state vie for 
exclusive power over the means of production of a 
nation. Only their continuous, sincere collaboration 
in the drive for permanent, full employment after 
the war can widen the road to economic democracy. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


(This is the third in a series of four articles on post-war 
economic reconstruction.) 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Patents for Hitler, by Guenter Reimann. New York, Van- 
guard Press, 1942. $2.50 


A most interestingly written study of pre-war business 
agreements between various American and Nazi corpora- 
tions with emphasis on their detrimental effect on the war 
production of the United Nations. 


Latin American Backgrounds, by Winifred Hulbert. 1935. 
Paper, 60 cents; cloth, $1.00. 


rs of the Caribbean, by Carol McAfee Morgan. 1942. 
1.00. 


On this Foundation; The Evangelical Witness in Latin 
America, by W. Stanley Rycroft. 1942. $1.00 


These three books, published by the Friendship Press 
(New York), are written from the viewpoint of the Evan- 
gelical Church, with emphasis on the advantages which 
missions are offering the poorer classes. Miss Hulbert 
provides an excellent geographical and historical back- 
ground for an understanding of present-day problems. 
Mrs. Morgan gives a colorful account of a recent tour of 
the West Indies, enlivened by human touches which reveal 
the soul of the Caribbean peoples. The third book, written 
by a former Vice-Principal of the Anglo-Peruvian College 
at Lima, Peru, stresses the spiritual values and work of 
the Evangelical Church, and paints a picture of a diversi- 
fied Latin America. 


The Road We Are Travelling, 1914-1942, by Stuart Chase. 
New York, Twentieth Century Fund, 1942. $1.00 
The first of a series of six short books dealing with post- 
war problems, in which Mr. Chase explores the great eco- 
nomic trends of our age with his usual skill and clarity. 


The ABC of Latin America, by Frank Henius. Philadel- 
phia, David McKay Co., 1942. $1.50 


A reference manual of facts, country by country. Too 
brief to serve its purpose fully, it is in spots inaccurate 
as well. 

The Educational Philosophy of National Socialism, by 
George F. Kneller. New Haven, Yale University Press, 
1941. $3.50 
Probably the most scholarly analysis of the ideological 

basis and content of Nazi education. Based on a thorough 

examination of all the available source material. 


America in World Affairs, by Allan Nevins. New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1942. $1.00 
Concise and workmanlike introduction to American for- 

eign policy, written originally for British readers. 

The Assembly of the League of Nations, by Margaret E. 
Burton. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1941. 
$4.50 


A useful historical study. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 23, Marcu 26, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


Nationa} 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHeres Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at leasi 


One month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


QB 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











Washington News Letter 

















Mar. 22.—The nonpartisan resolution sponsored 
by Senators Ball, Burton, Hill and Hatch may prove 
as important a landmark in American political his- 
tory as the Lend-Lease Act adopted in March 1941. 
The sponsors of this proposal have pondered well 
the lessons of 1919. They have noted the two factors 
chiefly responsible for Senate rejection of Woodrow 
Wilson's League: (1) that it was permitted to be- 
come the football of party politics; (2) that it was 
the victim of the yearning for “normalcy” and the 
aversion to all international commitments which 
swept the country after the wave of Wilsonian 
idealism had spent itself. 

Promoters of the Ball resolution intend to avoid 
the first of these fatal errors by keeping their scheme 
on a nonpartisan basis. Two of the Senators initiat- 
ing it, Ball and Burton, are Republicans, and their 
resolution has received the indorsement of Wendell 
Willkie and the “whole-hearted support” of 26 
freshmen Republican members of the House. 

NOT TOO SOON. The need to proceed now with 
the building of the future League is one of the points 
stressed by the four Senators. To those who argue 
that it is too early, Senator Hill, for instance, replies 
that now is the very time to strike, while the iron is 
hot and before the inevitable wave of post-war wear- 
iness and disillusionment overtakes the American 
people. It will be recalled in this connection how 
men like the late Senator Henry Cabot Lodge shouted 
from the housetops in 1916 for a League to Enforce 
Peace, only to turn savagely on the practical embodi- 
ment of this blueprint three years later. 

It is probable that the Ball resolution will be con- 
siderably watered-down in the committee room. Sena- 
tor Connally, chairman of the Senate Foreign Rela- 
tions Committee, has expressed opposition to the 
holding of an immediate conference by representa- 
tives of the United Nations, as called for in the reso- 
lution, on the ground that such a meeting would 
hamper prosecution of the war, sow seeds of dis- 
sension among the Allies, and precipitate a bitter 
controversy on the floor of the Senate. A somewhat 
similar view seems to be entertained by Anthony 
Eden, British Foreign Secretary, who is reported to 
have told Congressmen on March 18 that it was too 
early at this stage of the war for the United Nations 
to plan in detail for the post-war period. 

What is likely to emerge from the committee stage, 
therefore, is a simple declaration promising Ameti- 
can participation in an international organization, 


FOR VICTORY ° 


armed with an international military force, to pre. 
vent future wars of aggression. A manifesto of this 
character would probably have President Roosevelt's 
blessing, judging by his statement at a press confer. 
ence on March 19 that a Senate pronouncement de. 
claring the United States is ready to help maintain 
future peace would help the world situation. But 
even such a comparatively modest result would mark 
a big advance over the rival Gillette resolution, which 
would merely commit the Senate to the vague gener. 
alities of the Atlantic Charter. 

TO TELL THE WORLD WHERE WE STAND. 
The supreme merit of the Ball resolution is that it 
would commit the Senate, in principle, to United 
States participation in a league to enforce peace, 
As things stand at present many nations, recalling 
the bitter experience of 1919 when the Senate re. 
fused to honor a promissory note signed by the 
President of the United States, hesitate—not with- 
out justification—to seek their security in a future 
world organization in preference to-assuring it by 
the expedient of territorial aggrandizement at the 
expense of their neighbors. Senate adoption of the 
Ball resolution now would have precisely the reverse 
repercussions of the historic “round-robin” signed 
by 39 Senators in January 1919, which first warned 
Europe that no treaty was binding on the United 
States until it had been ratified by the Senate. 

The Ball resolution would also have a beneficial 
psychological effect on the always critical relations 
between the executive and legislative branches of the 
United States government. It would associate the 
Senate, ever jealous of its prerogatives, with the for- 
eign policy of the President and the State Depart- 
ment. Many a treaty negotiated by the executive 
branch of the government has been wrecked on the 
shoal of the Senate’s power of confirmation through 
a two-thirds majority. It has been pointed out that, 
in the two wars fought by the United States in the 
past 50 years, the peace treaty with Spain secured 
ratification by a margin of one vote, while the Treaty 
of Versailles was rejected. So crippling is the Sen- 
ate’s veto power on the conduct of American foreign 
policy that Senator Pepper has just introduced a 
proposal requiring only a simple majority vote in 
both houses of Congress to ratify a treaty. If this 
method had prevailed in 1919, the United States 
would have entered the League of Nations, and 
World War II conceivably might have been averted. 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 








