
















ry of 
- eC 
the 
t dis. 
inder 
Mr. 
Serve 
rticle ; 
sal in 
rice,” 
in its 








| that 
‘oved 
this / 
f the 
1 the 


| and 
ease, 
louse 
“The > 


upon 
com: 
pro- 
said 
cem- 
eeps; 
tank 
| tons 
other 
nent; \ 
- and 





f pe / 


in in- 
craft 
tons 
and 


.ES 


§ 


Genera) 


a Of M: 


MAR 2 1 1944 


Entered as wh class matter 


bibrary 


*Chizs - 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


AFbor, Nic 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 22 


MarcH 17, 1944 





ALLIES MOVE TO SAFEGUARD INVASION PLANS BY ISOLATING EIRE 


IRE'S :cappearance in the news sharply reminds 

the world that a base for Axis diplomacy, es- 
pionage, and relaying of information still exists 
within 100 miles of Britain’s coast—a perilous situa- 
tion as preparations to invade the Continent approach 
the final stages. The Allied governments took formal 
note of this when our State Department appealed on 
February 21 to the Dublin government for removal 
of Axis consular and diplomatic representatives in 
Eire, adding the hope that this step would take the 
form of a diplomatic rupture. The British govern- 
ment, taking no steps of its own, expressed concur- 
rence in the American action. Assurances were added 
that the note was not an ultimatum and that no move 
toward invasion was contemplated. 

Premier de Valera’s rejection of the proposal was 
prompt and decisive, his immediate oral refusal be- 
ing followed by a conclusive note on March 7. It is 
also reported that full mobilization of the Irish army 
has been ordered, and a general state of alert pro- 
claimed. These preparations have not been put to 
the test, but that the Allied attitude also is firm is 
plain from the British order of March 13 halting all 
but essential government travel between the two 
islands. Steps have also been taken to check travel 
across the partition line between Eire and Northern 
Ireland. Meantime the United States government has 
teleased the text of a note stating that an Irish re- 
quest in January to charter an American ship was 
refused. It appears that two ships formerly so char- 
tered were sunk, presumably by enemy action, and 
that the Irish refused to protest the act, alleging 
want of evidence. 

WHY NEUTRALITY? The policy of neutrality 
is accepted by the Irish people almost without ques- 
tion, and only one member of parliament—Mr. 
James Dillon—openly demands intervention. This is 
true notwithstanding the enlistment of over 100,000 
Irishmen in the British forces and the employment in 


Britain vf at least 100,000 more. To most of agri- 
cultural Ireland, isolated and poorly informed, world 
events and even the war seem remote. Moreover, the 
notion of allying himself with the British is still 
highly unpalatable to the average man. The Irish 
tradition of hatred for English rule, and resentment 
of a long line of grievances has grown weaker with 
time and change; but the habit of mind still lingers, 
and the partition issue remains very much alive. 

Even if he himself felt otherwise—which he does 
not—Mr. de Valera would find himself obliged 
to defer to this body of public opinion; and criticisms 
based on the moral duty of nations to support the 
Allied cause, or the gratitude which Ireland should 
feel for British protection serve only to infuriate 
the Irish people and their leaders. The government 
lost 10 seats in the 1943 elections, and while it is 
still strong enough to govern, it is no longer secure. 
It is therefore inevitable that Mr. de Valera should 
seek to increase his popularity in the country, and 
anything like a foreign challenge to Irish sovereignty 
presents him with the perfect issue. 

The fact remains that this close attention to local 
interests is certain to make Irish statesmanship look 
narrow and provincial to the world outside—and 
wilfully so, since Irish leadership is well aware of 
developments abroad. It is therefore but just to add 
that the Irish wartime attitude, both official and un- 
official, has been far from hostile to the United Na- 
tions. Suspected Axis spies and saboteurs have been 
under close police surveillance. When U.S. Minister 
Gray complained that enemy agents in the German 
ministry and in the countryside had been sending 
radio messages home, the government was able to re- 
ply that the German Minister had been deprived of 
his radio sender, and that while five paratroopers— 
not two, as alleged—had indeed landed in Ireland 
with radio equipment, they had all been rounded up. 
In addition, it has been pointed out that very few of 


































ee al <. 
-~ aaniedh ott we ee oe a 
ee ernie uf 


the Allied airmen forced down in neutral territory 


have been interned, most being set free on the ground 


that they were “not on operational flights.” The 
popular feeling toward Americans is traditionally 
cordial, and friendship for the English has risen to 
unprecedented heights, largely because of Britain's 
steadfast respect, to date, of Ireland’s neutral claims. 

WHAT CAN WE DO NOW? As a result of 
this good feeling and cooperation within, and per- 
haps even beyond, the legal limits of neutrality, 
Irish aid to the British war effort has been percep- 
tible. Against this must be set certain other facts. 
The lack of naval bases in Ireland was sorely felt 
during the most critical period of U-boat warfare, 
for the Irish flatly refused to reopen to British use 
the three ports turned over to them by the Chamber- 
lain government. The so-called Irish Republican 
Army, illegal but inadequately repressed, has been a 
constant threat to Britain’s efforts and a temptation 
to German agents in search of saboteurs. Undoubt- 
edly there has been some leakage of valuable infor- 
mation through I.R.A. members operating in Britain, 
and the gravity of this situation must increase in 
proportion to the imminence of invasion. 

Mr. Churchill's statement that Eire will be cut off 
from the world may indicate that economic sanctions 
are intended. If applied, their effect could be de- 
cisive, for the country depends on Britain for coal 
and the U.S. for oil and wheat. However, the poli- 
tical setback to the U.S. and Britain if stronger eco- 
nomic measures were taken—except in case of proved 


Page Two 



























—— 
necessity — might be serious. It is significant that 
Mr. de Valera appealed to Prime Minister Mackenzie 
King for the good offices of Canada, chief spokes 
man for the smaller nations. Great power will always 
be suspect to those whom it can endanger, and the 

coercion of Eire could not but breed uneasiness ) 
among the other small peoples of Europe and else. 
where. Nor can the possible effect upon the British 
Commonwealth be overlooked. In Canada itself, for 
example, there is unanimous support for the United 
Nation’s cause and much resentment of the Irish 
attitude of aloofness, while the Prime Minister 
has in this case associated himself with the British 
position. Reports indicate, however, an under 
lying approval of Irish insistence on the right to 
take an independent position. This strong national 
feeling cannot be ignored in London without danger 
to imperial unity. As for Washington, the Adminis. 
tration is certainly aware of the strong pro-Irish ele. 
ment in this country and probably not unaware of 
the traditional allegiance of this element to the 





Democratic party. 

It therefore seems likely that the U.S. and Britain 
will move with caution, and improbable that force 
will be used on Eire where it has been withheld 
against Turkey, Spain and Argentina. The determin. 
ing factor will presumably be the danger to Allied 





— 


Puch¢ 
The | 
mitte 
it wa 
popu: 


eratic 


"have 


Algie 
sistant 
alters 
enem 
ticule 
Comi 
civil 

if the 
const 
Com 


, inate 


parti 
man: 
wher 
Fren 


| the | 


ilarl 
and 
r 


trial 


military secrecy, for the political consequences even \ Fret 
of strong moves would hardly be comparable to a | wan 


military disaster in Western Europe. 
SHERMAN S. HAYDEN 


PUCHEU TRIAL REFLECTS VIEWS OF FRENCH UNDERGROUND 


With the pronouncement of the death sentence 
on Pierre Pucheu by a special military court in Al- 
giers on March 11, the first trial of a high Vichy 
collaborationist reached its conclusion. The trial, 
which is expected to be only the first in a series that 
will continue in France after the country’s libera- 
tion, has met with divided reaction among French- 
men in North Africa. Recent arrivals from France 
regard the trial and its verdict with complete ap- 
proval, while those who have been abroad for some 
time contend it was a mistake and should have been 


postponed until after the enemy was forced out of 


France. Only then, they argue, can all the evidence 
be assembled and a court appointed by a regularly 
elected government be constituted. 

WILL ALL VICHYITES BE FOUND GUILTY ? 
The formal indictment against Pucheu consisted of 
four charges: (1) alleged acts against the security 
of the state; (2) treason; (3) illegal arrests; 
and (4) malfeasance in office in connection with 
the three preceding charges. The court found 
the defendant, who had served first as Minister of 
Industrial Production and later as Minister of the 
Interior jn the Vichy government from February 


1941 until April 1942, innocent of the charges of 
“acts against the security of the state’’ and “illegal 
arrests.’ Pucheu was found guilty, however, of 
“treason,” specifically of collusion with the Nazis. 
The fact that he was not convicted of subverting the 
internal security of the French state merely because 
he had belonged to the Vichy cabinet means, in ef- 
fect, that Pétain’s totalitarian régime that supplanted 
the republic based on the ideals of the French Revo- 


lution was not indicted in so far as purely domestic — 


affairs are concerned. Moreover, the court was not 
willing to declare that every one who had supported 
Pétain—at least during the period from June 1940 
until November 1942, when the United States and 
Russia had official representatives at Vichy and there 


was still a semblance of an independent French pol- | 


icy—must be ruled out of the new France. This dis- 
tinction between the earlier and later phases of 
Pétain’s régime may prove important because most 
observers agree that thousands of Frenchmen whose 
patriotism was without question followed the “hero 
of Verdun” during the first period of his rule. 
THE TRIAL VIEWED POLITICALLY. Like 
most trials connected with offenses against the state, 


’ part 
tras 
Rep 
to : 
Na: 





of | 
Fre 
sun 
ide 
cur 
nec 
seC 


} 


| 











BREFSI 


~ 


8B i 


Kes. 


PESR FS 


ited 
rish 
Ster 
tish 
der- 
- to 
nal 
ger 
nis- 
ele. 
> of 


tain 
orce 
eld 
nin- 
lied 
ven 
fO a 


s of 
egal 
of 
azis. 
- the 
ause 
1 ef- 
nted 
evo- 
estic 


not | 


rted 
1940 

and 
here 

pol- 
| dis- 
s of 
most 
hose 
hero 


Like 
tate, 





—_ 
— 





Pucheu’s case was of major political importance. 
The trial was clearly intended by the French Com- 
mittee of National Liberation, under whose auspices 
it was held, as an effort to assure the Committee's 
popularity in France at the time of the nation’s lib- 
eration. Members of the French underground who 
have recently come to North Africa insist that the 
Algiers authorities would not be accepted by the re- 
sistance movement unless they first demonstrated un- 
alterable opposition to all who cooperated with the 
enemy. Among the newcomers the Communists, par- 
| ticularly, have been intransigent on this point. The 
Committee, on its part, has long held the theory that 
civil war may best be prevented in post-war France 
if the leading collaborators are destroyed by properly 
constituted legal authorities. Only in this way, the 
Committee contends, can widespread and indiscrim- 
| inate killing of persons who may or may not have 
participated in handing over the state to the Ger- 
mans be prevented. Whether this theory will work 
when put to the test remains to be seen, but the 
French Committee is not alone in advancing it, for 
| the European Allies and the United States have sim- 
ilarly promised to try war criminals in the occupied 
and enemy countries. 

THE TRIAL VIEWED LEGALLY. Legally, the 
trial of Pucheu left much to be desired by many 
Frenchmen in Algiers. Those who are critical had 
wanted the trial to be an example of legal perfection, 

' partly because they desired to create a striking con- 
trast to the farcical 1942 Riom trials of the Third 
Republic's leaders, and partly because they hoped 
to show the glaring differences between arbitrary 
Nazi methods and French justice. Although the court 





_— 





of five judges was constituted with a careful view to 
French practices and the defendant was allowed to 
summon witnesses and make a public defense, the 
ideal of a perfect trial could not be attained under 
current circumstances. Much of the testimony was 
necessarily delivered in secret for reasons of military 
security and much evidence that would have been 


Page Three 





How can a new world order be created? Can Eu- 

| | rope’s liabilities be turned into assets? What are 

the prospects for a federation of nations? READ— 

ON THE THRESHOLD OF WORLD ORDER 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


January 1944 issue of HEADLINE SERIES 
Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 East 38th St., New York 16 
== 














Seana 
a 





pertinent was not available in Algiers. Above all, 
the suspicion and hatred in the courtroom was hardly 
conducive to the cool atmosphere associated with 
justice during more normal times. 

Legal difficulties arose particularly in connection 
with the charge that Pucheu had personally handed 
over French hostages to the Nazis to be shot. Al- 
though there was no evidence at hand to support this 
charge and General Giraud declared that he had 
seen a document while he was still in France that 
indicated Pucheu’s refusal to carry out the German 
demand for hostages, the prosecution dwelt at length 
on the allegation. By doing so the impression was 
created that mere hearsay would be considered as 
acceptable evidence. It should be noted, however, 
that some of the testimony that seemed extraneous 
to Anglo-American observers was not so regarded by 
French jurists. Under the Roman law used in French 
courts, the rules of evidence are much looser than in 
common law and permit the introduction of facts 
having only an indirect bearing on the case. 

REPERCUSSIONS ABROAD. The French Na- 
tional Committee has taken the view that the trial 
of Pucheu was strictly an affair among Frenchmen 
and of no concern to the Allies, which is understand- 
able in view of the struggle it has been making to 
constitute itself as the recognized French authority. 
But any question bearing on the possibility of civil 
war in France is of concern in London, Washington 
and Moscow, as well as in Algiers, and may influence 
the negotiations that are now going on for full recog- 
nition of the French Committee as its nation’s pro- 
visional government. WINIFRED N. HADSEL 
BLAIR BOLLES HEADS WASHINGTON BUREAU 


Blair Bolles, member of the editorial staff of the Wash- 
ington Star since 1935, has been appointed director of the 
Washington Bureau of the Foreign Policy Association. The 
appointment was effective March 15. 

Mr. Bolles has specialized in writing on foreign affairs 
at The Star. He has contributed articles on foreign and 
domestic politics to Harper's, The Nation, American Mer- 
cury, American Magazine, Liberty, Saturday Review of 
Literature, Free World, and others. He reported on Eur 
at war last year when, as a member of a group invited by 
the Swedish government, he visited Sweden, and also Eng- 
land, Portugal and Bermuda. Mr. Bolles is a regular con- 
tributor to the North American Newspaper Alliance and, 
with Duncan Aikman, was co-author in 1939 of America’s 
Chance of Peace. 

Mr. Bolles was born in St Louis, Missouri, on February 
26, 1911, and was educated at Phillips Exeter and at Yale. 
He was a reporter for the Washington Herald, Universal 
Service and the New York American before he joined the 
Washington Star. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 22, 


MakcH 17, 1944, 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lagt, Secretary; Vera Micueres Daan, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


oe month for change of address on membership publications. 


BS 181 


F,. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 

















Washington News L ettec 








191 

















Marcu 13.—Ever since Louis D. Brandeis became 
chairman of the Provisional Executive Committee 
for General Zionist Affairs during World War I, 
U.S. citizens have taken an active interest in the 
development of Palestine as a “Jewish National 
Home,” to which Jews could migrate from all parts 
of the world. The pressure of the Brandeis commit- 
tee and of English Zionists led to the Balfour dec- 
laration of November 2, 1917, which declared that 
establishment of the national home was one of Brit- 
ain’s war aims. 

SEEK WHITE PAPER ABROGATION. Amer- 
ican interest is currently reflected in identical resolu- 
tions recently introduced into the Senate and the 
House, urging that “the United States shall use its 
good offices and take appropriate measures to the 
end that the doors of Palestine shall be opened for 
free entry of Jews into that country.” The objective 
of the resolution — sponsored by Senators Robert 
Wagner of New York and Robert Taft of Ohio, and 
by Representatives James Wright of Pennsylvania 
and Ranulf Compton of Connecticut—is abrogation 
of the White Paper on Palestine issued by the British 
government on May 17, 1939. This White Paper, 
setting forth the principle that Jews should number 
not more than one-third of Palestine’s population, 
ordered that Jewish immigration into the territory 
cease on March 31, 1944. As of September 30, 1942, 
the population of Palestine was officially estimated 
to include about 1,000,000 Arabs and nearly 500,000 
Jews—a ratio of two to one. 

On May 23, 1939 Winston Churchill, then out of 
office, told the House of Commons that the one-third 
principle meant ‘‘destruction of the Balfour Declara- 
tion.” In 1930 the Council of the League of Nations, 
which had mandated Palestine to Britain, adopted 
the principle that Jewish immigration into the man- 
date was to be limited only by the territory’s “‘eco- 
nomic absorptive capacity.’” The Treaty of Sevres of 
1920, which settled the peace between the Allies 
and Turkey (from which Palestine was carved), and 
the preamble to the mandate specifically recognized 
the Balfour Declaration. But the 1939 White Paper 
apparently doomed the Jews—suffering from their 
minority position in European countries and perse- 
cuted actively in Germany by the Nazi regime—to 
be a minority group in Palestine. 

Arab agitation brought about the transition from 
the humanitarian promise in the Balfour Declara- 
tion to the compromise in the White Paper. As early 


FOR VICTORY °* 





as 1920, in the Muslim Nebi Musa celebrations 
Arabs displayed their animosity toward Zionist Jews} | 
During the middle 1930's German and Italian agenis 
fed the Arab apprehension that they might becom, 
a minority in Palestine, and the British government 
after laying aside a proposal for partitioning Pale. 
tine into separate Jewish and Arab states, issued a 
White Paper out of concern for the safeguarding of 
British interests in the predominantly Arab Middle 
East. Arabs presented their point of view directly tp} Vol 
the American Congress on February 25, 1944 by; 
message from Jamil al Madfai, president of the Iraq RU! 
Chamber of Senators, addressed to Vice Presiden 
Wallace and to Speaker Rayburn of the House: "| 
am convinced,” he wrote, “that any increase of Jey. 
ish immigration into Palestine would eventually re rabi 
sult in bloodshed and certainly in disturbed condi ily 
tions which would not contribute to the happiness of 
the Jews settled in that country or to that of the; od 
Arabs.”’ F 


The considerations which caused the British goy. 
ernment of Neville Chamberlain to issue the White 
Paper in 1939 press today upon the United State) 
which has direct strategic interests in the Middle | P° 
East. Ten days ago General George C. Marshall, 
Army Chief of Staff, called those interests to the 
attention of the Senate Foreign Relations Committe 
in an executive session, and urged the Committee tp 
defer action on the Wagner-Taft Resolution. The 
House Foreign Affairs Committee had previously) ,¢, 
held four public hearings on the Wright-Compton| ; 
Resolution and may report it to the House. ¢ 


PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT OFFERS HOPE) Ru 
Prime Minister Winston Churchill has not renouncel} Me 
the White Paper policy which he criticized before he} iza 
became Prime Minister. On November 10, 196 | wit 
Oliver Stanley, British Colonial Secretary, said that‘ or 
the policy stands with one modification: that immi| ant 
gration of roughly 31,000 would be permitted be| In 
yond March 31, 1944 to complete the quota of} se 
75,000. President Roosevelt on March 9 told Rabbil pr 
Stephen S. Wise of New York and Dr. Abba J. Silver | pe 
of Cleveland that the United States had never given » Wk 
its approval to the White Paper, and authorized them| in 
to say: “The President is happy that the doors of} «re 
Palestine are today open to Jewish refugees; and that| all 
when future decisions are reached full justice will be! Rt 
done to those who seek a Jewish national home.” | 











BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS |* 





