ht still 
of the 
democ- 
yovern- 


ington 


Jomura 
Ic, was 
sr. And 
ade his 
stilities 
United 
hour,” 


of this 


| States 
; in the 
Ameti- 
to as- 
an they 
th Hit- 
Roose: 


aiming | 
_ which | 


We are 
und the 
»f com- 
to con- 
intil it 


ar aims 
ly must 
d, they 
ople in 
ind un- 
ve face 
ill have 


TONE 


—— 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Dr. William #. Bishop De 


e fT. 2 — e 7 . 4 re 
* VMaversity of Michigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 5 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXI, No. 5 


—_—_ 


NOVEMBER 21, 1941 


SHOWDOWN APPROACHES IN THE PACIFIC 


ohhh aersgay the Diet in emergency session at 
Tokyo, the Tojo Cabinet has set the stage for 
the conversations which Saburo Kurusu, its special 
envoy, has opened at Washington. While Mr. 
Kurusu has kept the discreet silence of an experi- 
enced diplomat, the Cabinet leaders in Japan have 
continued to pitch their “demands” against the 
United States on a high level. There is little evi- 
dence, however, that these bargaining tactics have 
made a serious impression on Washington officials, 
who maintain a noncommittal attitude regarding 
the negotiations and stress the unlikelihood of fur- 
ther compromise with Japanese aggression. 


DIET SESSION OPENS. The opening statements 
before the Diet by Premier Tojo and Foreign Min- 
ister Togo have been particularly firm, showing few 
signs that Japan is prepared to alter the expansion- 
ist policy it has pursued for ten years. Speaking in 
his capacity as War Minister on November 16, Gen- 
etal Tojo stressed the efforts of Japan’s military 
forces to ‘crush the Chungking régime,” to “accel- 
erate construction” of Greater East Asia, and to 
“complete all necessary preparations to meet any 
eventualities.”” On the following day, speaking as 
Premier, he declared that Japan was exerting the 
utmost effort to prevent the spread of the European 
war into East Asia, but coupled this statement with 
two demands: first, that third powers “refrain from 
obstructing’’ a Japanese victory in China; and, sec- 
ond, that they “nullify” the “economic blockade’’ of 
Japan and “refrain from presenting a direct military 
threat” to the Empire. The only reference to the 
Axis alliance was made by Shigenori Togo, the For- 
tign Minister, who stated that the three-power pact, 
“fortunately” established owing to the similarity of 
views between Japan and the Axis, had contributed 
to construction of new orders in Europe and East 
Asia and to “prevention of the spread of the war.” 


These statements by the Cabinet leaders at Tokyo 
carry on the “war of nerves’’ in the Pacific that has 
become even more intense since the new Japanese 
government entered office. They are, in part at least, 
a reply to Prime Minister Churchill’s statement on 
November 10 that Britain would declare war “‘with- 
in the hour” if Japanese-American hostilities started, 
and to his significant warning that, with a large part 
of the American navy in action against the ‘common 
foe,” Britain now felt “strong enough to provide 
powerful naval forces and heavy ships, with the 
necessary auxiliary vessels, for service, if need be, 
in the Indian and Pacific Oceans.” They are also an 
answer to the frank speech by Secretary Knox at 
Providence on Armistice Day, when he declared that 
the Pacific, no less than the Atlantic, ‘‘calls for in- 
stant readiness for defense.’ In its dealings with 
Japan, Knox said, the United States had been “long- 
suffering and patient to a degree almost unmatched 
in the history of international relations,” but a time 
comes “when to go further would mean that our lib- 
erality and forbearance would be misunderstood.” 


The emergency Diet session has provided the 
Tojo Cabinet with an excellent sounding board for 
its statement of the Japanese case. After passing 
necessary financial bills, the Diet meeting is also 
expected to demonstrate the “iron solidarity” of the 
Japanese nation, for which Premier Tojo has called. 
Instead of the criticism often voiced by previous 
Diets, there will probably be smooth passage and 
unanimous approval of all measures. Yet the value 
of this outward unanimity may be questioned. Under 
the present Cabinet, to a much greater extent than 
previously, the Japanese Diet has been relegated to 
the status of the German Reichstag. The fact that 
General Tojo had to take charge of the Home Min- 
istry, with its powerful levers of control over the 
police system and local government, is a strikin 
indication of the need felt for a strong hand on the 


home front. This necessity is not so much immedi- 
ate and actual as it is potential—reflecting the fears 
of an international crisis that may lie just ahead. 

PREPARATIONS FOR SHOWDOWN. As the 
conversations beg.n in Washington, both sides are 
making every effort to strengthen their military-naval 
positions against the threat of a final showdown in 
the Far East. The large-scale mobilization of addi- 
tional Japanese troops that began this summer is 
being steadily continued, with extensive reinforce- 
ments sent to Manchuria and to Indo-China. Con- 
centrations in Indo-China have led to reports that a 
Japanese drive on the Burma Road is imminent— 
presumably designed to coincide with a collapse of 
the Washington negotiations. If such a move were 
directed through Yunnan province, where it might 
well be halted by Chinese troops operating in ex- 
tremely mountainous terrain, its consequences might 
not prove much more serious than recent Japanese 
campaigns in China and the action would amount to 
a face-saving device for the Tojo Cabinet. If the 
invasion swung more to the south, through Burma 
or even through Thailand, there is every possibility 
that a general conflict would speedily develop in the 
Pacific. 

The gravity of the existing situation is indicated 
by Washington’s decision of November 15 to with- 
draw the American marines stationed at Peiping, 
Tientsin and Shanghai. Up to the present, these 
forces have greatly helped to protect American in- 


GERMANY FACES WINTER WITH DECLINING MORALE 


With its armies still far from ultimate victory in 
Russia, Nazi Germany is entering the third and 
worst winter of the war. Signs are multiplying that 
the German people are becoming discouraged at the 
prospect of an indefinite continuation of warfare 
and the privation it entails. The victorious conclu- 
sion which in the past has repeatedly seemed to be 
within their grasp now appears more remote than 
ever before. Government propaganda, through press 
and radio, has had to remind the people forcefully 
of the tragic consequences of defeat and to hold out 
a vision of future abundance as an incentive for 
perseverance. 


CHEERLESS PROSPECTS. Life in Germany this 


READ— 
LABOR PROBLEMS 
by John C. deWilde 


25¢ 


The fifth in a series of ForEIGN Poticy Reports on the de- 
fense economy of the United States examines the strike 
situation and the record of the Mediation Board. September 
15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy Reports, which are published 
on the 1st and 15th of each month. Subscription, $5 a year; 
to FPA members, $3. 


Page Two 


———t 


terests in Japanese-occupied China, especially with, 
in the International Settlement at Shanghai. They 
number barely 1,000 officers and men, however, and 
would obviously risk becoming hostages if war broke 
out. Their withdrawal at this time emphasizes that 
the service which they might continue to render jp 
China is not considered worth the risk. Much mor 
significant, especially as regards the strategic coop. 
dination of Anglo-American naval forces, was 
Churchill’s statement that Britain could provide 
heavy naval vessels for action in the Far East. 
These military-naval preparations reflect the im. 
passe that has been reached in the Pacific. The trade 
embargo, as well as the increasing unity of Anglo. 
American-Soviet policy, press Japan to take action 
before it is too late. Since no easy “opening’’ has pre. 
sented itself, Tokyo hopes that the concessions it| 
may offer will be sufficient to permit renewal of 
trade, but does not give up the chance to take ag. | 
gressive action if a favorable opportunity arises| 
later. On these terms, Japan would continue to im. 
mobilize the better part of the American navy 4| 
Hawaii, a full Soviet army in eastern Siberia, and 
considerable British and Dutch forces in southeast 
Asia. Merely staving off Japanese action now is 
therefore not enough. The forces immobilized in the| 
Pacific are desperately needed in the Atlantic and in| 
Europe, and it is this urgency which must somehow} 
be met if a settlement with Japan is to emerge from 
the Washington negotiations. T. A. Bisson 


winter will be drab and dreary. There will be slightly| 
less food than last year, since the 20 per cent cut 
in the meat allowance made last May will be com 
tinued and potatoes, the great German staple, will 
be rationed for the first time. Although rations will 
remain sufficient to prevent serious malnutrition, 
particularly because vitamin pills will be distributed 
to school children, expectant and nursing mothers, 
and workers who perform heavy labor, the German 
diet will be extremely monotonous. Provision has 
been made for the distribution of only two cans of 
preserved vegetables per person for the entire winter 
season, and one pound of fish twice a month. In con- 
trast, the British people will enjoy more bountiful 
Christmas dinners this year than last. Prime Mir 
ister Churchill could report to Parliament on No- 
vember 12 that “minimum food imports’ into| 
Britain would “now probably be achieved and even} 
slightly surpassed,” and that the Ministry of Food| 
had been able to amass “‘stocks of bulky articles of 
our diet which amount to double what we had if 
September 1939.” 


In Germany the supply of consumers’ goods, 
which has never been large, is still steadily contract 


———— 


ing. G 
tional s 
winter 

tobacco 
der to | 
which 

before, 
liquors 
househ 


being | 
SIG! 


govern 
indicat 
Lackin 
many 
tangib 
warnit 
ceased 
tablish 
and e! 
terest 
year a 
excess 
tive ti 
sums 
into 
while, 
Alt 
use of 


| stress 
| war i 


tem, | 
econo 
large 
20,00 
out ¢ 
ing s 
ties V 
tailm 
weak 
dustr 
abilit 
M¢ 
is, ab 
longe 
popu 
ment 
edge 
was 
Das 
Josey 
FOREI 
Headan 


Entere 


ott, 
Sos ae 
we 


—<—$—t 


ly with. 
ver, and 
at broke 
izes that 
ender ip 
ch more 
21 COOF. 
Cs, Was 
provide 
5t. 

the im. 
he trade 
3 Anglo. 
€ action 
has pre. 
ssions it 
ewal of 
take ag. 
Y arises 
e to im 
navy at 
‘tia, and 
Outheast 
now is 
-d in the 
c and in 
omehow 
‘ge from 
SISSON 


> slightly 
cent cut 
be con- 


ple, will 
ions will | 
\utrition, | 
stributed | 
mothers, | 
German | 
sion has | 
cans of | 
‘e winter 
. In con 
ountiful | 
ne Min- | | 
on No-| 
ts” into 
ind even} 
of Food 
ticles of 
> had in 


goods, 
contract 


\ MORALE DETERIORATING. 
| is, above all, anxious about public ania The pro- 
| longed campaign in Russia, which has never been 


— 


ing. German civilians have had to shoulder addi- 
ional sacrifices in order to clothe the army for the 
winter campaign in Russia. Beginning December 1 
tobacco, cigars and cigarettes will be rationed in or- 
der to insure sufficient supplies for the armed forces, 
which absorb 40 per cent of the output. A month 
before, heavier taxes had been imposed on tobacco, 
liquors and champagne. Such scant supplies of 
household articles and semi-luxuries as remain are 


being rapidly depleted 


SIGNS OF INFLATION. Although the German 
government is still in a strong position financially, 
indications of inflation have begun to worry officials. 
Lacking confidence in the future of the Reichsmark, 
many Germans have been purchasing anything of 
tangible value regardless of cost. Despite repeated 
warnings, this type of inflationary buying has not 
ceased. To discourage spending, the Reich has es- 
tablished “iron savings’ accounts on which workers 
and employees may make deposits and receive in- 
terest provided the accounts remain frozen until a 
yeat after the end of the war. Dividend payments in 
excess of 6 per cent have been subjected to prohibi- 
tive taxation, and corporations are expected to put 
sums ordinarily spent for replacements and repairs 
into “post-war investment balances” which, mean- 
while, will be at the disposal of the government. 

Although Germany has made remarkably efficient 
use of the limited economic resources at its disposal, 
stresses and strains are constantly evident. With the 


war in Russia the burden on the transportation sys- 


tem, long one of the weakest links in the Nazi wa: 
economy, has greatly increased. The conquest of a 
large part of the Soviet Union has added about 
20,000 to the 50,000 miles of German railways with- 
out correspondingly increasing the amount of roll- 
ing stock. At the end of October German authori- 
ties were compelled to order a further drastic cur- 
tailment in passenger traffic. Another source of 
weakness is the rapid depreciation of German in- 
dustrial equipment owing to constant use and in- 


| ability to make essential repairs and replacements. 


The g 


government 


popular, has added to the widespread discourage- 
ment. Recently the authorities have frankly acknowl- 
edged that popular confidence in ultimate victory 
was beginning to wane. In an article published in 
Das Reich early in November, Propaganda Minister 
Joseph Goebbels reiterated that Germany could and 


Page Three 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: WAR OR PEACE IN THE PACIFIC? 
Speaker: T. A. Bisson 

Date: Sunday, November 23 

Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over NBC 

For station, please consult your local newspaper 


would win, but only with the “gigantic application 
of the national energies of the entire people.” As 
the reward of success, he held out the prospect of 
“raw materials, freedom, nourishment, Lebensraum, 
the basis for social reform of our state and the op- 
portunity of full development for the Axis powers.” 


But it is significant that Goebbels dwelt much more 


extensively on the dire fate which defeat would have 
in store for the German people—the complete ex- 
tinction of their national existence. This fear of de- 
feat is unquestionably the strongest cohesive force 
today in Germany. It can hardly be combated by 
promising the Germans a fair and equitable peace, 
for the Nazi government reminds them constantly 
of the 14 points with which President Wilson “en- 
snared’’ Germany in the last war. In the end, Ger- 
man morale can be broken only by convincing the 
German people that they cannot win. As long as 
some hope of victory remains, Germany will stand 


firm. JoHN C. pEWILDE 


ANNUAL MEETING DATE CHANGED 


The Annual Meeting of the Foreign Policy Asso- 
ciation has been advanced to Monday, December 8, 
at 12:15 p.m., at the Hotel Astor, to correspond with 
the new date of the December luncheon which will 
take place at 12:45 the same day. 

Proxies for the Board of Directors (ballot printed 
in last week’s Bulletin) must be returned to National 
Headquarters not later than Friday, December 5. 


Berlin Embassy, by William Russell. 
Dutton & Company, 1941. $2.50 
A chatty, informative account of everyday life in war- 
time Berlin written by an immigration clerk in our Em- 
bassy who was a keen observer. 


New York, E. P. 


The Dragon Stirs, by Henry F. Misselwitz. New York, 
Harbinger House, 1941. $3.00 


A former N-w York Times correspondent reviews the 
concluding ph: ses of China’s nationalist revolution as seen 
at first hand in 1927-29. 
Bigland. New York, Macmillan, 


Into China, by Eileen 


1940. $3.00 

Personal adventures and misadventures on a trip into 
China along the Burma Road, told with vigor, wit and 
charm. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, 


Theo 181 
raed 


5, NovEMBER 21, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 
FRANK Ross McCoy, 


at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor 


National 
Editor. 


Association, 
President; DorotHy F. Lggr, Secretary 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. 
VerA MIcHELES DEAN, 
Three Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter ai ea 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Buliding 

Nov. 17.—The military and political consequences 
of revision of the Neutrality Act are plainly evident 
in Washington this week as Administration leaders 
prepare to meet the challenge of intensified naval 
warfare in the Atlantic and the test of a major 
diplomatic showdown with Japan involving the 
issue of war and peace in the Pacific. The immediate 
strategic consequences will be no less decisive be- 
cause of the narrow margin of the Administration’s 
victory, which was recorded in the historic vote of 
212 to 194 by which the House adopted the Senate 
amendments of November 13. For, whatever the 
explanation for the closeness of the final division— 
and there can be no doubt that the vote was influ- 
enced in part by dissatisfaction with the Adminis- 
tration’s handling of the domestic labor issue—the 
fact remains that a clear majority of both Houses 
have now rejected the philosophy of passive defense 
in favor of the President’s bold policy of action. 

STRATEGIC CONSEQUENCES. The first results 
are seen in the plans formulated by the Navy to im- 
plement the action of Congress. Even before Presi- 
dent Roosevelt signed the joint resolution on No- 
vember 17, the Navy had completed preparations 
for the arming of American ships at the rate of 
about 100 ships a month. In a statement issued a 
few hours after the action of Congress, Secretary 
Knox made it clear that the Navy had also worked 
out detailed plans for the coordination of American 
and British naval operations on the high seas so as 
to assure more effective delivery of war supplies. 
Colonel Knox declared that ‘both the ships and the 
men” will be available to deliver defense aid ma- 
terials wherever needed. 

Thus, for the first time since the beginning of the 
war, American vessels will be able to call at Halifax, 
the chief British supply port in Canada; to proceed 
directly to ports in the British Isles; and to pass 
through the former combat areas to the Russian port 
of Archangel on the White Sea. Presumably, Ameri- 
can crews will be available for British as well as 
American ships plying the ocean routes. 

But the results of last week’s action will have an 
even greater effect on Allied shipping policy and the 
projection of a joint American-British naval strategy 
in both the Atlantic and the Pacific. The basis for 
such a joint strategy has already been established in 
the working arrangements between the American 
Navy and the British Admiralty. Since President 


Roosevelt's “‘shoot-on-sight” order of September j 
American warships have been engaged in cog 
duty in the Atlantic. Up to the present time, he 
ever, units of the American fleet have patrolf 
North Atlantic waters only as far as Iceland, whe 
they establish contact with British warships whic 
take the convoys the rest of the way to British ports 

While this system has enabled the British to cop. 
centrate their naval strength in the area of greates ~ 
danger, it has not proved entirely effective. The ney| Y** 
American base in Iceland is well north of the shor. 
est shipping routes to Britain, and in winter weathe 
it is difficult for the convoy vessels to make conta 
without dangerous delays. | 

No plan for joint naval command can be cop. 
sidered as long as the United States is not an active 
belligerent. In the near future, however, it seem 
probable that the British and American fleets will be 
employed in accordance with a grand strateg) 
worked out in consultation between the two coun 
tries. Such a strategy would necessarily embrace both 
the Atlantic and the Pacific. In the Atlantic, Ameri 
can destroyers and other light surface vessels might 
be assigned to support the British Navy in protect 
ing the western approaches to the United Kingdom 
and the northern route to Russia. Units of the 
American Navy might also be assigned to service in| 
the South Atlantic. WI 

With this extension of American naval forces in Weys: 
the Atlantic, Britain might be able to release a com), 
siderable number of vessels for duty in the Pacific.|. 
In fact, Prime Minister Churchill’s recent Statement| jin, b 
that the British are in a position to transfer not only 
battleships but also auxiliary vessels to the Far East) ) ;. 
suggests that some such move may actually be undei| _ 
way. Whether or not this is so, it is an established} , a 
fact that the United States and Great Britain have) 1. 
between them over 30 capital ships, as comparfel| ». 
with 10 for Japan and not more than eight or nie | ase 
for the Axis powers. The United States Navy has) on 
kept secret the present disposition of its forces be) \4 
tween the two oceans, but it is also a known fatt) yy. 
that the American battle fleet is still based in the) 4; 
Pacific and that the land, naval, and air defenses of| 
the Philippines have been greatly strengthened dur/ ,.; 
ing the past year. Thus even a relatively small British 
fleet based on Singapore would fortify the position 
of the Western powers and alter profoundly the} ),,. 
naval balance in the entire Pacific area. Navi 

These are the potential consequences of last week's} 4 


historic decision. WILLIAM T. STONE Sh 


HE 

Ma: 
Vichy | 
yasion 
betwee 
the sun 
a confe 
versary 
are all 
pattern 
order” 
play ai 
of Bri 
Contin 


