erence 
anches 
nsider 


e very 
on the 
War? 
»s took 
ooking 
sunced 


jointly 
subject 
es not 
inning 
includ- 
branch 


nd for 
Public 
, with 
e pur- 
mphlet 
ig-time 
wledge 
mphiet, 
288, iS 
vokings 
rith so- 
ig the 


‘s Com- 
‘iduals: 
s Insti- 
rersity ; 
ederick 
Pacific 
dation ; 
inistra- 
| Post; 
nic Re- 
ve Sec- 


ing ina 
is with 
respon- 
For the 
a grant 
idation. 
, Wash- 
)GDEN 


& 
4 
* 
+ 


hak et eS ee 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
cs Office at New York, 
™ N. Y., under the act 


of Maseh-3,_1879. 
Z| la —~ 
> =~ 
Ye %\ 


VoL. XV, No. 21 


Marcy 20, 1936 “— 


JAPAN’S TRADE BOOM 
Does It Menace the United States? 


by T. A. Bisson 
An extremely valuable study of Japanese trade, re- 


futing the alarmist statements circulated in the United 
States regarding Japan’s inroads on the American market. 


March 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


oy 7 Pag ) 
sriodical Diviggon, wr» 


< 


» ey 
ibrary of Congress. “Al” 


.ghing ton, D. C. 


LEAGUE POWERS SPLIT ON HITLER OFFER 


by Mildred S. Wertheimer 


LONDON, March 17—The British are very 
anxious to negotiate and have brought great 
pressure on Berlin, but the cabinet apparently 
realizes its legal international position is funda- 
mentally weak. The French, holding Britain to 
its Locarno promise of assistance, achieved Mon- 
day’s harsh but legally water-tight telegram to 
Berlin. If the Germans refuse to negotiate except 
on their own terms, economic and financial sanc- 
tions by other Locarno powers are not ruled out. 
It seems probable that a new Anglo-French alli- 
ance may result from the present crisis, but this 
would not solve the Eastern European problem. 

The Germans are reported very nervous at the 
possibility of such an alliance. Hitler’s move was 
undoubtedly motivated by the serious internal 
economic, financial and political situation. Ger- 
man leaders are sharply divided. This, plus the 
coming elections probably strongly influenced the 
stiff French attitude. British opinion deplores 
the flagrant treaty violation but insists on nego- 
tiations. The sugar coating on Hitler’s pill has 


; had the desired effect in Britain where there 
' seems to be little understanding of Hitler’s ulti- 


} mate foreign policy aims. 


It is reliably reported, 


| however, that there is a split in the cabinet, Eden 


' and five other Ministers threatening resignation 
» unless Britain honors its solemn word under Lo- 


carno. The whole situation is confused, tense and 


| very serious, but I have the personal impression 


) that there will be no war now. 
| EUROPE LOOKS GIFT HORSE IN THE MOUTH 


On March 15 the League Council, which at 
3ritain’s suggestion had convened in London 


| instead of Geneva, invited Germany to be repre- 
» sented at a meeting summoned to discuss remili- 
} tarization of the Rhineland in violation of the 
| Locarno treaty. The Hitler government replied 


on the same day that it was prepared to attend 


' “in principle,” subject to two conditions: that its 


representatives would participate on a basis of 
equality; and that the Council snould consider 
not only the Rhineland question but also Hitler’s 
March 7 peace proposals alsbald—a phrase trans- 
lated by the League Secretariat as “forthwith” 
and denounced by the French as a fresh provoca- 
tion, but later interpreted by the Germans as “in 
due course.” On March 16 the Council informed 
Berlin that Germany would participate on the 
same terms as other powers guaranteed by the 
Locarno treaty—France and Belgium—“that is, 
with full rights of discussion, the votes of the 
three powers not being counted in calculating 
unanimity.” With regard to Hitler’s peace pro- 
posals, Germany was notified that “it is not for 
the Council to give the German government the 
assurances it desired.” On March 17 Germany 
accepted the Council’s invitation, with the pro- 
viso that it can at the same time discuss Hitler’s 
peace terms with the Locarno powers—Britain, 
France, Belgium and Italy. 


The Council’s decision to invite Germany was 
adopted only after preliminary stormy discus- 
sions, in which France, supported by Poland, 
Rumania—which spoke for the Little Entente— 
and the Soviet Union urged economic and financial 
sanctions against Germany. Such sanctions, ac- 
cording to the French, would promptly subdue 
Germany, whose economic situation has steadily 
deteriorated in recent months. The British—so 
eager for sanctions against Italy—opposed any 
move which might aggravate the international 
situation and insisted on serious consideration of 
Hitler’s peace proposals. The British cabinet— 
as in 1914—is profoundly divided on the Euro- 
pean crisis. The majority, headed by Mr. Bald- 
win, resist sanctions against Hitler and are re- 
luctant to give France ironclad military guaran- 
tees as a substitute for Locarno. In this attitude 
they are supported by a preponderant section of 
the press, by opinion in Parliament, and by such 
diverse personalities as the pro-Fascist Viscount 


Rothermere, the liberal Lord Lothian and the 
Labor party leader, Clement R. Attlee. A mi- 
nority of the cabinet, led by Mr. Eden, Foreign 
Secretary, and Viscount Halifax, Lord Privy Seal, 
urge assistance to France and support of the col- 
lective system; they have the backing of two 
former Foreign Secretaries—Sir Austen Cham- 
berlain and Sir Samuel Hoare, as well as Winston 
Churchill and Lord Cecil, president of the League 
of Nations Union. British opinion—like that in 
the United States—is more impressed with Ger- 
many’s past wrongs than with the future wrongs 
it may commit to right them; is so eager to avoid 
war that, Micawber-like, it seeks to temporize, in 
the hope that “something will turn up” to avert 
a fatal outcome; and either fails to grasp, or else 
disregards, the fact that the present crisis lies not 
on the Rhine but in Eastern Europe. 


GERMANY’S NEW DRANG NACH OSTEN 


Now that the smoke of the Rhineland coup has 
cleared away, it becomes more and more obvious 
that the Nazi government, faced with economic 
deterioration and political friction at home, was 
in urgent need of new pageants, fresh bulletins 
of victory from the diplomatic front as a sub- 
stitute for the meat, eggs and butter now being 
sacrificed for armaments. The march into the 
Rhineland was well timed for the staging of an- 
other plebiscite on March 29, which will give 
Hitler one more opportunity of rallying the Ger- 
man people and impressing the world with its 
unanimity and devotion to the Leader. But the 
question must be asked: How many more times 
will the Nazis have to adopt the device of pre- 
cipitating an international crisis to consolidate 
their power?—and how often can that device be 
used without provoking war? 

Germany has already played its trump cards: 
withdrawal from the League; rearmament; the 
Rhineland. Even if it should demand return of 
German colonies, this is the last card it can play 
without raising the issue of territorial revision 
in Europe. Nor will remilitarization of the Rhine- 
land or return of the colonies relieve the eco- 
nomic and social tensions now tightly bottled up 
by the Nazi dictatorship. If, as Hitler claims, 
Germany’s population—whose growth is sedu- 
lously fostered by the government—needs “soil” 
and “room to live,” it will not find them in Africa, 
where only 21,000 Germans had settled before 
1914; nor in France and Belgium, thickly popu- 
lated and heavily industrialized. It can only find 
them —as Hitler has already stated in Mein 
Kampf, for all the world to read —in Eastern 
Europe, where it claims territory on two counts: 
to effect the racial unity of the German people; and 


Page Two 


—— 


to destroy that “demon”—communism—which noy 
holds sway over the Ukraine, rich in grain an 
mineral resources. Hitler is at present methodi. 
cally carrying out his Mein Kampf program by 
seeking to win if not the friendship at least the 
neutrality of France and, if possible, drive » 
wedge between France and Britain. The British 
have some ground for taking Hitler’s profession: 
of peace on the Rhine at their face value: thes 
professions are sincere. At present Hitler has m 
desire for war in the West. What he wants is « 
free hand for expansion in the East—by peacefu 
penetration if possible; by force if necessary— 
once Germany has completed its rearmament, or 
has found it cannot arm further without obtaining 
raw materials outside its borders. 


Germany’s attempt to divide Europe into twc 


camps, between which it could hold the balance— 


playing the réle of dictator in European politics} 


to which it has long aspired—places France in a 
most difficult dilemma. It is not impossible that 


France might extract a military alliance from> 


Britain as the price of abstention from sanctions 
against Germany. 


A British alliance wouldfy 


temporarily strengthen France’s security. But once . 


the Nazis have refortified the Rhineland, France 


—no longer able to march into Germany—woul/ : 
lose all influence in Eastern Europe and sinky” 
to the position of a third-rate power. Such a def 


velopment would play directly into the hands of} 


Hitler. It would also hasten the orientation of the 
Little Entente and Balkan countries, directly 
menaced by Nazi territorial ambitions, toward the 
Soviet Union—the only great power actively in- 


terested in blocking Germany’s eastward expan-> 


charrette 


sion. Some observers contend that war between} 
Germany and the Soviet Union is outside thef- 


realm of possibility because the two are sep- 
arated by a barrier of “neutral” buffer states 
Yet when Germany attacked France in 1914, it 
was not across a common frontier, but through 
neutral Belgium. As economic conditions in the 
Soviet Union improve, the neighboring “neutrals” 
—Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, even Poland—may 
conceivably experience unrest and disaffection. 
What more simple, then, for Nazi Germany than 


P= er 


to claim that communism menaces these coun-f 
tries and to take them into “protective custody?” 


No responsible statesman would, at this juncture, 
want to assume the onus for launching a pre- 
ventive war against Germany. But no statesman 
who takes a long view of the European situation 
can fail to recognize that Hitler’s pledge of non- 
aggression in the West promises not peace but 
war—in Eastern Europe. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 21, Marcu 20, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND Lgsiig Bugit, President; EstHEeR G. OGDEN, Secretary; Vera Micuetrs Desn, Edstor 
Entered as second-class macter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


An | 


> Ss 


~~ | eh 


~~ et of 


