ted 


2CO- 
rina 
and 
Lies, 
tion 


rina 
‘ical 
lave 
ican 
1 of 
rs— 
adio 
orief 


1ew- 


cern 
ikers 
- the 
d by 
d in 
rican 
mete 
n if 
1S if 
erest 


ER 
ban 


Jations! 
DEAN, 
2 Yeat. 





PRRMMHEAL tet” 
FRRBRAL IBRAR’ 
UetY. o& MICH 


JUN 20 1¢ 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


University of Michigan 











Ann Arbor, Michigan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 35 


JuNE 14, 1946 





WILL FOREIGN MINISTERS HAVE TO ENTRUST PEACEMAKING TO UN? 


POR the fourth time since V-J Day the Foreign 

Ministers of the great powers will meet on June 
15, and attempt to break the deadlock between Russia 
and the Western Allies which has thus far prevented 
completion of peace treaties with Italy and the other 
Axis satellites. During the month that has elapsed 
since the Ministers last conferred at. Paris, their 
deputies have been trying to iron out some of the 
problems that have blocked progress on the settle- 
ments, and they are reported to be in agreement on 
several specific recommendations. 


DEPUTIES FAIL TO END DEADLOCK. When 
these recommendations are examined, however, they 
are found to deal only with very minor points, in- 
duding the size of Rumania’s land, sea and air 
forces, and the limitations which should be imposed 
on Bulgaria’s army and military aviation. The depu- 
ties have also decided that all Italian frontiers 
should be demilitarized to a depth of 20 kilometers, 
and they have gathered information on Italy’s border 
disputes with France, Yugoslavia and Austria. In 
connection with the more fundamental issues raised 
by the peace treaties, the deputies have been ham- 
pered by the same disparity of views that arose 
during the meetings of the Foreign Ministers them- 
selves. There has been disagreement on even such a 
seemingly minor question as the size of Bulgaria’s 
naval strength, for Russia wishes Bulgaria to 
have a large Black Sea fleet while Britain and the 
United States—who are reluctant to see the balance 
of power in Southeastern Europe radically shifted 
at the expense of Greece and Turkey—oppose this 
plan. Moreover, Soviet opposition to the Anglo- 
American proposal that freedom of commerce and 
tavigation of the Danube be guaranteed is un- 
diminished, since Moscow suspects the Western 
powers of intending to use this guarantee as a means 


of influencing Eastern European affairs. Above all, 
the deputies have been unable to cope with the basic 
issues in the Italian treaty, and have avoided de- 
bate on such vexed questions as whether peace 
should be made with Austria in the immediate future 
and whether new Allied arrangements should be 
devised for Germany. 


NEW TASKS FOR UNITED NATIONS? Since 
the Foreign Ministers will convene under circum- 
stances which could hardly be less propitious, the 
prospect clearly exists that one or more of the great 
powers may seek a different method of writing the 
treaties. There have been hints that Britain and the 
United States might, as a last expedient, draft sep- 
arate agreements with the former enemy states. But 
the only alternatives suggested are those for calling a 
21-nation conference and Secretary Byrnes’ proposal 
of May 20 that if all else fails, “the United States will 
feel obliged to request the General Assembly of the 
United Nations under Article 14 of the charter to 
make recommendations with respect to the peace 
settlements.” This suggestion has been widely re- 
garded, notably in Moscow, as a diplomatic threat 
designed to produce workable compromises among 
the Foreign Ministers. Yet if the impasse continues 
at Paris, Mr. Byrnes may press his suggestion and, in 
so doing, raise more searching questions than have 
thus far been posed concerning the powers of the 
United Nations organization. 

The chief problem raised by Mr. Byrnes’ pro- 
posal is that the UN was founded to keep the peace 
once it had been established, rather than to make the 
treaties concluding World War II. While the Char- 
ter should be sufficiently flexible to permit an evo- 
lution along lines different from those laid down 
at San Francisco, any effort to expand the jurisdic- 
tion of the United Nations can succeed only if there 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 








ooo 








is unanimous agreement among the great poweis. 
As Soviet spokesmen have already indicated, Russia 
will strongly oppose discussion of the peace treaties 
by the Assembly, for Moscow realizes that it would 
be unable to marshal majority support on disputed 
questions. If, therefore, the Foreign Ministers fail 
to reach agreement at Paris, the United States may 
find itself obliged to choose between a course of 
action that might cause withdrawal of the Soviet 
Union from the United Nations, or acceptance of fur- 
ther postponement of the European peace treaties. 


This question, affecting the entire future of the 
United Nations organization, emerges at a moment 
when the prestige of the Security Council is being 
challenged by the Iranian and Spanish cases. Brush- 
ing aside technicalities that have obscured the dis- 
pute over Azerbaijan, the Iranian case has demon- 
strated the Security Council does not have sufficient 
authority to handle issues in the face of opposition 
from a great power. Confronted by this fact, the 
State Department has been considering proposing 
the appointment of a committee of inquiry which 
would, in effect, require the Security Council to 
grapple with the charges of continued intervention 
in Iran instead of merely recognizing a Russian fait 
accompli in Azerbaijan. Whether the Council could 
name such a committee without Russia’s approval, 
however, is extremely doubtful. 


Lack of agreement on Spain among the great 
powers has also raised questions concerning the 


SIAM AND FRANCE AT ODDS OVER DISPUTED TERRITORIES 


Following a flurry of speculation suggesting that 
the Security Council was about to be presented with 
a new threat to peace, Secretary-General Trygve Lie 
ruled that Siam’s protest of May 27 against French 
troop movements on Siamese territory was only the 
filing of information and not a formal plea for 
United Nations intervention. Although Pride Pany- 
myong, Paris-educated Siamese Premier, did ask 
Mr. Lie for sympathy, assistance and cooperation, 
he made no reference to Article 35 of the Charter 
which requires non-members who appeal to the 
United Nations to accept in advance the Charter’s 
obligations of pacific settlement. Any United Na- 
tions member, according to Article 35, may bring 
up such a dispute but, in the present instance, in- 
tervention by third parties so far has been limited 
to statements by British and American spokesmen 
that they would support a Siamese attempt to bring 
the issue before the Security Council. The Royal 
Siamese Legation in Washington explained, how- 
ever, that it had received no instructions from Bang- 
kok to present a formal complaint. 

WHAT FRANCE WANTS FROM SIAM. 
France has two interests at stake in this border con- 
flict. One of them is the desire to regain two areas 


Page Two 











ee 
ee 


effectiveness of the Security Council. Recognizing 
the difficulty of securing wholehearted and s 
action by the Council the s subcommittee — 
which was appointed on April 29 to investigate the 
Polish charge that the present Spanish governmen 
constitutes a threat to international peace and s¢ 
curity—advised on June 6 that the Spanish problem 
be placed before the Assembly when it meets ig 
September. The subcommittee further proposed that, 
unless the Franco régime is withdrawn and certaig 
conditions of political freedom are fully satisfied 
the Assembly recommend that diplomatic relations 
with Franco be terminated by all the United Na. 
tions. In suggesting action by the Assembly the sub. 
committee was influenced by the strong desire on 
the part of the Australian Foreign Minister, Dr. H, 
V. Evatt, to strengthen the role of small nations 
in the organization. Whatever the reasons fo; 
the proposal, however, the Security Council's ac 
ceptance of the subcommittee’s report would be a 
step toward strengthening the position of the As 
sembly as an instrument to maintain peace whe 
the great powers are in disagreement. Seen in broad 
perspective, the significance of this and other at 
tempts currently being made to place a broader con. 
struction on the Charter, especially on the power 
of the Assembly, is that they reflect the disappear. 
ance of the unanimity achieved by the great powers 
during the war which, it was hoped, would be car 
ried over into the work of the U.N. 
WINIFRED N. HADsEL 


containing about 25,000 square miles and one mil 
lion people, which the Vichy government, under 
Japanese pressure, ceded to Siam in 1941 from the 
French Indo-Chinese lands of Laos and Cambodia | 
Since the end of the war, the French have naturally 
sought to get them back. The British have already 
negotiated a treaty restoring Burmese and Malayan 
territories taken by the Siamese under somewhat 
similar circumstances. Franco-Siamese negotiations 
in Saigon have thus far produced no result, a fact 
which induced French military men to demand 3 
show of strength to hasten Siamese acquiescence. 
French troops, however, crossed the Mekong rive! 
border into Siam on May 24 at a point between 
the two disputed regions. This puzzling fact can 





be explained by the second French aim, which is to 
seize Indo-Chinese guerrillas, reportedly as many # 
20,000 in number, who are concentrated in this area. 
These guerrillas are nationalists who fled across the 
river from French armed forces engaged in ft 
establishing French control in Laos. Most of them 
are said to be Tonkinese or Laotians who refuse t0 
abide by the Franco-Annamite settlement of March 
6, in which Annamite leader Ho Chi Minh agreed 
to restoration of French authority in Indo-China i 








BRsBserifs il 


gz 


ndet 
. the 
dia. 
rally 
eady 
ayan 
what 
tions 

fact 
nd a 


rivet 
ween 


is to 
any as 
area. 
s the 
1 fe 
them 
se to 
{arch 
reed 


na if 








—_ 


return for French recognition of the Republic of 
Viet Nam (in northeastern Indo-China) as a free 
sate within an Indo-Chinese federation. It is hardly 
surprising that Siam, which has been a buffer be- 
tween rival French and British imperialisms for 
many years, is sympathetic to the aspirations of the 
Indo-Chinese for independence. Since these armed 
guerrillas frequently go back across the Mekong 
to raid in Laos, French officials have demanded that 
they be handed over by the Siamese. 


AIMS OF SIAMESE DIPLOMACY. The Si- 
amese point out that the disputed Laotian terri- 
tory was originally taken from Siam by the French 
in a treaty of 1904, and that the Cambodian terri- 
tory in question was seized by France through a 
similar treaty in 1907. Siamese schools for some 
time indulged in irredentist propaganda emphasiz- 
ing the Thai (Siamese) character of the people in 
the disputed areas. The astute diplomats of Siam 
insist that all they want is an impartial plebiscite to 
determine the wishes of the people. 

Memories of their success in arousing American 
support to moderate the harsh treaty terms which 
the British sought to impose on them in December 
1945 undoubtedly influence the Siamese in their 
present policies. They know that the United States 
State Department on January 16 publicly refused 
to recognize Siamese acquisition of the two areas, 
and they perhaps calculate that if they now for- 
mally demand United Nations intervention, they 
will only antagonize France while failing to regain 
the territories. Hence the present moderate tactics, 
which are intended to muster the support of world 
opinion in order to strengthen Siam’s bargaining 
position with France. The Siamese Foreign Minister 
has also used the incident as the occasion for a 
formal inquiry as to ‘‘the possibility of the rapid in- 
clusion of Siam’s name in the list of members” of 
the United Nations. On May 31 it was reported that 
all French troops had withdrawn across the Mekong, 
and that parts of the border were closed by Siam to 
halt the entrance of Annamite rebels. 

Siam’s diplomats have also placed much stress 
on “rice diplomacy.” As Siamese Foreign Minister 
Direck Jaiyanama recently declared: “We have no 
army to bargain with the French about these prov- 
inces but we still have our rice fields, which did not 
suffer through the war.” Only ten days before Pride 
Panymyong’s cable to Mr. Lie, a gloomy note in the 
world famine crisis had come from Saigon when 
the French announced that the Indo-Chinese rice 
surplus this year would be only about 300,000 tons, 





Page Three 





a 
— 


instead of the usual figure of more than 1,500,000. 
The Siamese Premier capitalized on this situation by 
pointing out to the Secretary-General that people in 
the area attacked by the French were being forced 
to abandon their rice fields at a time when the Si- 
amese were “striving to the utmost to fulfill their 
obligation to produce and deliver the maximum 
quantity of rice to the famine stricken areas.” 

FRENCH TACTICAL ERRORS. In a good strate- 
gic position because of the United States attitude 
toward the disputed areas, the French have blun- 
dered badly in their tactics, for their armed aggres- 
sion has prejudiced their case before world opinion. 
Both the United States and Britain, as early as 
May 7, had asked them to guard against violating 
Siamese territory. But colonial military leaders still 
think in terms of raising French prestige by rever- 
sion to the outmoded 19th century idea expressed 
in the view that ‘‘the natives understand only force.” 
These tactics are doing France a disservice, just as 
they did in the Syrian crisis and in the harsh suppres- 
sion of native uprisings in Algeria in May 1945; they 
may jeopardize France’s plan to strengthen its colo- 
nial ties by the creation of a French Union. 

On June 1 it was revealed that the French Foreign 
Office had tried to improve its position by belatedly 
requesting the United States and Britain to draw 
the attention of the Siamese government to the fact 
that the disputed territories had not been returned. 
By coincidence, on the same day, the information 
office maintained in New York by the French 
Colonial Ministry ended its activities, an economy 
measure which is unfortunate because France needs 
able spokesmen to explain its colonial role to the 
American public. The Franco-Siamese controversy is 
by no means ended. The death on June 9 of 20- 
year-old King Ananda Mahidol of Siam, who was 
due in Washington for an official visit on June 19, 
has stimulated new interest in the politics of that 
ancient kingdom. 





VERNON MCKAY 





Science and Scientists in the Netherlands Indies, edited by 
Pieter Honig and Frans Verdoorn. New York, Board for 
the Netherlands Indies, G. E. Stechert, 1945. $4.00 
About seventy specialists have contributed to this beauti- 

fully illustrated study of scientific endeavors in the Neth- 

erlands Indies. The articles on economic developments are 
useful to the student of political conditions. 


China Fights On, by Pan Chao-ying. New York, Fleming 
H. Revell, 1945. $2.50 


A survey of China’s struggle against aggression since 
1931, written by the Vice-Director of the Institute of 
Chinese Culture in Washington, D.C. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 35, Jung 14, 1946. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporared. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; DororuHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dagan, 
Editor, Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


ae 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








Washington News Letter 











ANGLO-AMERICAN UNITY IN EUROPE TO BE TESTED IN PARIS 


The pattern of international relations has per- 
ceptibly altered since the interruption of the Foreign 
Ministers’ meeting in Paris last month. The United 
States, which a few months ago was content simply 
to champion Britain in the latter’s differences with 
the Soviet Union, has become the originator of policy 
in the effort of the Western powers to prevent the 
spread of Russian influence beyond the line from the 
Baltic Sea to the Julian Alps. British Foreign Minister 
Ernest Bevin, speaking to the House of Commons on 
June 4, indicated that Britain fully approves the 
leadership taken by the United States, and one of 
the tasks assigned to the new British Ambassador in 
Washington, Lord Inverchapel, is to lend support to 
this policy. 

BYRNES LEADS. The reopening of negotiations 
of the Foreign Ministers in Paris on June 15 will 
provide a twofold test of the potency and perma- 
nence of American leadership and British willing- 
ness to go along with it. In the first place, the meet- 
ing ‘vill determine whether the energetic condemna- 
tion of Russian policy which has characterized 
public statements and inspired newspaper articles 
in the United States during the past three weeks has 
persuaded Moscow to conciliate the West. The sec- 
ond test of the firmness of Anglo-American concord 
will come if Russia indicates at Paris that adverse 
American opinion has not deflected it from opposi- 
tion to three main tenets of United States policy— 
a settlement in Eastern Europe satisfactory to this 
country, consideration of a peace treaty for Austria, 
and agreement on a long-term treaty for control of 
Germany. If Russia proves obdurate, Byrnes intends 
to abandon the search for agreement through the 
conference of Foreign Ministers of the United 
States, Britain, France and Russia, and to invite 21 
nations to confer and accept with modifications the 
peace terms the great powers may propose. Present 
indications are that Britain would back the United 
States in this course if the U.S.S.R. again objected to 
the calling of such a conference. Bevin told the 
House of Commons: “If we cannot get agreement 
in a four-power council of Foreign Ministers, then 
we should take our work before the conference of 
21 nations.” 

BEVIN AGREES. Bevin praised other American 
proposals which Russia has not accepted. He said 
the 25-year treaty for control of Germany which 
Secretary of State Byrnes offered at Paris was “‘some- 
thing which would give us peace in Europe and 


allow for normal development over a sufficieg 
period to eradicate the warlike spirit and Nazism 
from Germany.” He favored putting the questigg 
of Austria on the Foreign Ministers’ agenda, anj 
Byrnes will take to Paris the draft of an Austriay 
peace treaty. The United States is determined tha 
Yugoslavia shall not have the territory of Venezi; 
Giulia which Italy claims, and Bevin said that Brit 
ain could not accept the granting of this area tp 
Yugoslavia. Developments elsewhere underline the 
parallelism of American and British policy. On May 
27 the two governments sent similar notes to Ru 
mania, criticizing Prime Minister Groza for not per 
mitting free elections and for censoring news. from 
the United States and Britain. Britain has not fully 
supported the announcement by Lieut. General Ly 
cius Clay, U.S. Army Deputy Military Governor in 
Germany, that exports from the American to the 
Russian zone of occupation in Germany of dis 
mantled plants scheduled for reparations were be 
ing suspended. However, news did come from Lon. 
don on June 5 that Britain has invited the United 


States and western European countries to set up 2| 


committee for the purpose of facilitating trade with 
the British zone. Such activity might divert to the 
West material that Russia claims. The British gov. 
ernment also has given vague indications to the 
United States that it will accept the proposal of the 
Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry that 100,000 
European Jews be admitted to Palestine, but many 
members of Congress doubt whether Britain will 
accept it in the end. Britain and the United States 
agree in their refusal to intervene in Spain to over 
throw Franco. 

In time, however, Britain may be unwilling to 
follow the United States unreservedly, especially if 
the vigor of our foreign policy should appear to be 
carrying both countries toward the catastrophe of 
war. Britain, in the conduct of foreign policy, must 
take into account the attitude of the Dominions. 


New Zealand and Australia make the same com | 


plaint about the United States that this country com 
monly makes about Russia—that Washington is it- 
considerate of small nations. Another factor that 
may disturb the close alliance of America and Britain 
is economic. While Bevin has said that he favors the 
suggestions of the United States for world commet- 
cial agreements, the Colonial Office encourages 
British colonies to set up preferences that reduce 








American trading opportunities. BLAR BOLLES 


