of eco- | 
ermany. | 


id trade 


OWwever, 
ch a de- 


WILDE 


JFOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


DEC? 1997 


2, 1921, at the Post 
at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Vou. XVII, No. 6 


DECEMBER 3, 1937 


— 


Christmas 1937 


Choose an F.P.A. Membership for several of the 
friends on your Christmas list. I+ will be a deeply 
satisfying—and _ distinctive—gift. 
REGULAR MEMBERSHIP — $5.00 a year 
ASSOCIATE MEMBERSHIP — $3.00 a year 
STUDENT MEMBERSHIP — 60c a semester 


An F.P.A. greeting card will be sent in your name to 
announce each gift membership. 


¢ Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michizan 


FOREIGN PROBLEMS UNITE 


FRENCH LEFT 


HE conversations held by Premier Camille Chau- 

temps and Foreign Minister Yvon Delbos 
with British officials in London early this week en- 
abled the British government to sound out the French 
on possibilities of a settlement with Germany. While 
Downing Street is apparently persuaded that the re- 
cent exchange of views between the German Fihrer 
and Lord Halifax was hopeful enough to warrant 
further negotiations, the Quai d’Orsay remains to be 
}convinced that the acceptance of Hitler’s terms in 


ew York, 


»-German 
. transfer 
European 


- William 
1937. 15s. 


recovery, 


and good 


ought on 
and high 


est rates, | 


weather. 
rd an in- 
eal, 


roblem of 


n Osgood 


nsylvania 


he Anglo- 
| in Ger- 
itains in- 
ir imperi- 
adroitness 


whole or in part would really be conducive to Euro- 
pean peace. 

In considering the background of the London 
conversations, it is well to remember that the various 
elements composing the French Popular Front gov- 
|erment are held together primarily by their com- 
mon opposition to the advance of fascism at home 
and abroad. In the days of the Weimar Republic 
most of the French Left heartily favored a Franco- 
German rapprochement, but since then the situation 
has changed. Both Communists and Socialists en- 
thusiastically vote record appropriations for national 
defense, and these armaments are, of course, in- 
tended to restrain the fascist powers. If the Popular 
Front has hitherto followed a cautious, rather than 
militant anti-fascist foreign policy, it is because the 
French people are on the whole pacifist, and above 
all because France has had to rely on the support of 
the conservative and vacillating British government. 
Today the French are showing increasing signs of 
impatience with their neighbors across the Channel. 
While London is apparently preparing to abandon 
the Spanish Loyalists to Franco, a recent congress of 
the French Radical Socialist party of which both 
me and Delbos are members, manifested a 
strong desire to have non-intervention in Spain either 
terminated or strictly enforced. The same congress 
was also seriously concerned over the Italian threat to 


vital French communications with North Africa and 
recent uprisings in French Morocco, which were 
generally ascribed to fascist instigation. 

The French government would welcome some ar- 
rangement with Germany provided it insures limi- 
tation of arms and protects the interests of France’s 
allies in Eastern Europe. But Delbos’ projected visit 
to Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Rumania 
is sufficient evidence of France’s determination to 
reassure these countries that they will not be left 
alone to deal with Hitler. Nor are the French par- 
ticularly anxious to surrender their colonies or man- 
dates in the cause of Franco-German understanding. 
While they are willing to go along with the British 
in this question, it is significant that the Radical So- 
cialist congress of last October termed “even the 
hypothesis of a redistribution of colonial mandates” 
“inconceivable” and “useless.” The French thesis is 
that Germany should have a new economic, rather 
than a new territorial settlement. 

By taking a firm stand with respect to Germany 
and Italy, the Chautemps government can at the 
same time consolidate its position at home. On the 
surface the second Popular Front cabinet is still 
firmly in the saddle. Although somewhat tired of its 
alliance with the Socialists and Communists, the 
Radical Socialist party decided at its recent congress 
to remain in the Popular Front, apparently realiz- 
ing that the only alternative in the present Parlia- 
ment would be an even more unpalatable coalition 
with the Right and Centre. The Socialists, meeting 
in national council on November 7, were persuaded 
by their leader, Léon Blum, not to heed the urging 
of the extremists and withdraw their ministers from 
the government. The chronically critical financial 
situation has also greatly improved. The slump in 
Wall Street and Bonnet’s financial measures have 
combined to stimulate considerable repatriation of 


capital, so that the French exchange equalization 
fund is reported to have reconstituted entirely its 
assets of gold and foreign currencies. 

Yet, fundamentally, there are serious fissures in 
the Popular Front government. Many Radical So- 
cialists are still disgruntled over the failure of the 
Socialists to withdraw a number of their candidates 
on the second ballot in the local elections of October. 
Since the Radical Socialists were the only Popular 
Front party in these elections to make a gain in popu- 
lar vote over last year, they are determined to press 
their advantage and continue on the cautious eco- 
nomic and social course epitomized by M. Bonnet’s 
policy. The Socialists, on the other hand, are tiring 
of the “pause” in economic reforms and champion a 
“forward” policy. It is noteworthy that M. Bonnet’s 
recent exposition of French finances in the Chamber 
drew much more applause from the Right and 
Centre, than from the Left. 

Problems of foreign policy have thus become par- 
ticularly pressing just when the Popular Front needs 
to reaffirm its unity. By a singular coincidence, the 
discovery of a plot against the French government 
enables the Chautemps cabinet simultaneously to 
emphasize the need for unity to defend the French 
Republic against the forces of fascism or royalism at 
home. On November 23 the Minister of Interior, 
Marx Dormoy, announced that the police had seized 
considerable stocks of arms and uncovered a well- 
organized conspiracy to seize the government on 
behalf of a secret order called the Cagoulards ot 
“hooded ones.”” The plot apparently aimed at the 
establishment of a dictatorship and the restoration of 
royalism, but no well known leaders of the rather 
unimportant but highly vocal royalist movement have 
been arrested in this connection. While this fantastic 
conspiracy can hardly be regarded as a real threat to 
the Republic, it may serve for a time to maintain the 
unity of the Left. Joun C. pEWILDE 


FRICTION WITH MEXICO 

Indications of increasing cloudiness have recently 
interrupted the long spell of “good weather’’ in 
Mexican-American relations, which dates from the 
Morrow-Calles agreement of 1928. The upsurge of 
nationalism, so potent a factor in the Mexican Revo- 
lution during the last quarter-century, has since 1934, 
when President Lazaro Cardenas took office, stimu- 
lated a new campaign against the dominant position 
of foreign capital. This nationalist emphasis has 
favored both the rise of native capitalism and a trend 
in government policy toward state socialism. 


The position of United States capital has been 
affected by three policies of the Cardenas adminis- 
tration: agrarian reform, protection of labor, and the 
recapture of natural resources. On October 23 it was 
announced that during the last three years 25,000,000 


Page Two 


—— 
ee 


acres carved from great estates—some of them 
American-owned — have been given to 569,009 
peasants organized into 5,985 communal villages, 
Following large-scale division of cotton and wheat 
lands in the Laguna region of north-central Mexico 
during the fall of 1936, President Cardenas initiated 
a similar program for the henequen plantations of 
Yucatan in August 1937, and two months later fo, 
the Yaqui River valley in the northwestern state of 
Sonora. While the Mexican constitution provides for 
compensation to owners of expropriated lands, the 
government declares that funds are at present lacking 
for indemnification. 

But oil has proved historically a more sensitive 
nerve than land in creating friction between Mexic 
and the United States. The Cardenas administration 
has not moved directly toward nationalization of the 
petroleum industry as it did with the Nationa! Rail- 
ways in June 1937. The foreign oil companies, hoy 
ever, find themselves in danger from a pincers move- 


ment, with growing demands from labor on the one! 


hand, and increasing taxation and government in-| 
tervention on the other. A government petroleum| 
company, endowed with valuable reserves, threatens| 
them with potential state competition. Moreover, 
final settlement of the demands of 18,000 oil work- 
ers, which resulted in a 13-day strike last May, is 
still hanging fire. On November 10 representatives 
of both British and American petroleum companies 
declared they would refuse to accept the govern; 
ment’s long-delayed decision on the oil wage ques! 
tion if the award exceeded the 13,000,000 pesos for} 
merly offered by the companies. 

This solidarity on the part of foreign capital may 
have been breached by Cardenas’ apparent at 
tempt to drive a wedge between the British anc 
American petroleum interests. The former, which 
control 60 per cent of Mexican oil production, hav 
investments approximating $225,000,000, as com 
pared with an estimated $125,000,000 of United 


States capital. On November 4 President Cardenai 
ordered the nationalization of sub-soil rights 
350,000 acres of lands in southern Mexico undet 
lease to the Standard Oil Company of California of 
its subsidiaries. In contrast to this hostile move 


against an American corporation, the Mexican gov. 


ernment on November 12 signed a contract with the 
Eagle Oil Company, a subsidiary of the Royal Dutch’ 
Shell, enlarging the extent of its concessions in the 
Poza Rica field, at present Mexico’s richest oil-pro 
ducing area. In return the Eagle Company agreed 
to give the government from 15 to 35 per cent 0 
the petroleum produced. | 
This move was interpreted in some quarters 4 
evidence that the government had abandoned i6 
hopes of nationalizing the oil industry. Financié 
(Continued on Page 4) 


rece 
the 
Tor 
office 
Cubs 
settle 
Dict: 
cepte 
to V 


— 
—————, 


of them 
569,000 
villages, 
id wheat 
| Mexico 
initiated 
ations of 
later for 
| State of 
vides for 
ands, the 
it lacking 


sensitive 
n Mexico 
nistration 

1 of the 
yal Rail- 
ues, how- 
ers move- 


n the one! 


ment in- 
yetroleum 
threatens 
Moreover, | 
oil work-| 
t May, is 
sentatives 
companies 
e govern 
age ques 
pesos for: 


pital may 
arent at 
‘itish and 
er, which 
tion, have 
as com 
o£ United 
Cardenas 


rights i) 

ico under 
|ifornia of 
tile move 
Kican gov) 
t with the 
yal Dutch’ 
ons in the 
st oil-pro- 
ny agreed 
er cent of 
| 

juarters al 
\doned if 
Financid 


W. ashington News Letter 


[ns 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 30—A challenge to inter-American peace 
machinery. While the State Department continues 
to focus its major attention on the Far East, diplo- 
matic circles in Washington are becoming increas- 
ingly disturbed by threatened hostilities in the West- 
ern Hemisphere which, if not checked, may challenge 
the effectiveness of existing inter-American peace 
machinery. Reports reaching Washington this week 
ot only confirm the gravity of the wholesale mas- 
< Haitian men, women and children on the 
Dominican border in early October, reported in a 
recent News Letter, but indicate that tension between 
the two small Caribbean states is mounting daily. 
To make matters more serious, the tender of good 
offices made at Haiti’s request by the United States, 
Cuba and Mexico has done little to advance a 
settlement of the conflict. The Dominican President- 
Dictator, General Rafael L. Trujillo, has not ac- 
cepted the tender, but instead has sent special envoys 
to Washington and the other two capitals, appar- 
ently with the object of postponing conciliation 
measures. Mediation has been further delayed by the 
failure of Trujillo to appoint members to a Mixed 
Haitian-Dominican Commission which was reported 
to be investigating the affair. 

This situation, it is admitted here, presents a chal- 
lenge to the elaborate machinery created over a 
period of years for the preservation of peace in the 
Americas. Neither country has yet ratified the new 
treaties signed at the Pan-American conference held 
in Buenos Aires last year, but both are parties to two 
important instruments which have been in force for 
many years. These are the so-called Gondra treaty 
signed at Santiago in 1923, and the Inter-American 
Conciliation treaty signed at Washington in 1929, 
under which American states agree to submit all 
controversies, including those affecting national 
honor and independence, to ad hoc commissions of 
inquiry for investigation and report. In addition, the 
treaties set up two permanent committees composed 
of the three senior diplomatic representatives of the 
American nations in Washington and Montevideo, 
with authority to organize the commissions of in- 
quiry, and also to exercise conciliatory functions 
“either on their own motion when it appears that 
there is a prospect of disturbance of peaceful rela- 
tions, or at the request of a party to the dispute.” 

If the two governments can be induced to settle 
the present difficulty through the tender of good 


offices by the United States, Cuba and Mexico, such 
a course may provide the least dangerous solution. 
Otherwise, a request from Haiti alone can automati- 
cally set the machinery of the conciliation treaties in 
motion and permit a prompt and impartial investiga- 
tion on the spot. Even in the absence of such a re- 
quest, however, the permanent committee in Wash- 
ington has full authority to act on its own initiative. 

Washington cool to Quezon feeler for dominion 
status. If President Manuel Quezon is looking to 
Washington for an answer to his recent statement 
that he would welcome proposals looking toward a 
“dominion status” of the Philippines—if they came 
from someone else—he is likely to be disappointed. 
At the moment Washington has nothing whatever to 
say, and the chances are that President Quezon will 
get no encouragement for some time at least. 

It is believed here that President Quezon’s trial 
balloon was launched in the hope that Japan’s ex- 
pansion in Asia would increase sentiment in the 
United States favoring retention of the Philippines 
under dominion status as a symbol of American in- 
fluence in the Far East. While it is known that a 
few high officials fear that American retirement 
from the Philippines would gravely jeopardize 
American prestige in the Orient, the Administra- 
tion has not yet changed its policy. In any case, no 
recommendations will be sent to Congress until 
after the return to Washington of the Joint Prepara- 
tory Committee which has been re-examining eco- 
nomic relations with the Islands. The Committee 
report, which was to have been written ini the Philip- 
pines, has been delayed by differences of opinion 
between the Philippine and Ai members, 
and the new recommendations will probably not 
be ready for Congress until some time in the spring. 

Whatever the attitude of the Executive, the real 
power to alter the Independence Act rests with Con- 
gress. Observers here agree that, in its present mood, 
Congress is not likely to agree either to make very 
substantial economic concessions or to create a new 
“dominion status.” Senator Tydings, a co-author of 
the Independence Act, said a few days ago that 
while he and others would be glad to consider pro- 
posals made by the Filipinos themselves for a modi- 
fication of the Act, he regarded the matter as “fin- 
ished business.” The agricultural interests, which 
helped to push through the present Act in order to 
eliminate competing Philippine products such as 
sugar, cocoanut oil, and hemp, are not likely to re- 
verse themselves now. Moreover, the present concern 


nerican 


of Congress over the danger of involvement in a 
Far Eastern war has strengthened the desire to ter- 
minate our obligations at the earliest possible mo- 
ment. This feeling is reinforced by the belief in 
Army circles that the Philippines would be a liability 


in a Pacific war. WILLiaM T. STONE 


FRICTION WITH MEXICO 
(Continued from Page 2) 
stringency was believed to have forced the shift. 
Extensive grants of rural credits in connection with 
the program of agrarian reform, and large expendi- 
tures for roads and railroads, irrigation systems and 
other public works had exhausted the public treasury. 
Moreover, revenues from oil taxes had been severely 
curtailed by recurrent strikes. This factor had some- 
what cooled Cardenas’ former cordiality to organ- 
ized labor, and twice within recent months he has 
warned the workers that continuing unrest was en- 
dangering the whole social program of his admin- 
istration. On November 25, it is true, he invited the 


Page Four 


ae 
—, 


National Railway Workers Union to assume respon- 
sibility for operation of the National Railways, on 
condition that the union pledge the government pay. 
ment of 14,000,000 pesos annually, to be used for 
amortization of indebtedness, taxes, repairs and re. 
placement. But this move may have been motivated 
by the hope of thus eliminating the threat of strikes, 

Two factors which have contributed materially to 
the success of the Cardenas administration have been 
the friendship of the United States and the prosper. 
ity resulting from Washington’s silver purchase 
program. Present difficulties over land and oil have 
raised the question whether Mexico is disposed to 
apply reciprocally the Good Neighbor policy. Its 
position is strengthened, however, by the fact that 
for the United States today cordial relations with 
Latin America are more important than protection 
of investments in that area. Moreover, if Washington 
casts its influence against the extension of fascism 
into Latin America, it may find in Mexico an active 


ally. CHARLES A. THOMSON 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


East and West: Conflict or Co-operation? edited by Basil 
Mathews. New York, Association Press, 1936. $1.75 
A symposium dealing with the past and future relation- 

ships of Occidental and Asiatic civilizations, from the 
point of view of the missionary movement and the Chris- 
tian associations. Outstanding among the ten contributions 
are Kenneth Scott Latourette’s history and evaluation of 
the missions in Asia, and G. E. Taylor’s essay on the 
political and social development of modern China. 


Peaceful Change: A Study in International Procedures, 
by Frederick Sherwood Dunn. New York, Council on 
Foreign Relations, 1937. $1.50 
An examination of the much-discussed conflict of the 

“have” and “have not” nations which cuts a clean swath 

through the familiar forest of propaganda and verbiage. 

Written for the Tenth International Studies Conference, 

this volume represents incisive thinking and careful 

writing. 

Latin America, Its Place in World Life, by Samuel Guy 
Inman. Chicago, Willet Clark & Co., 1937. $3.75 
A friendly advocate of Latin America presents a broad 

and popular survey of its development, with major em- 

phasis on the modern period. The volume includes chap- 
ters on labor, communism, the student movement, and the 

Buenos Aires Conference. A series of annotated bibli- 

ographies are a valuable feature. 


Background of War, by the editors of Fortune. 
York, Alfred A. Knopf, 1937. $2.50 


A collection of six articles from Fortune, dealing with 
Britain, France, Germany, the Soviet Union, the Spanish 
civil war, and modern armaments, in a spirited and often 
astute manner. British foreign policy and the Spanish 
background are particularly well treated. 


New 


England Goes to Press (1815-1987), by Raymond Postgate 
and Aylmer Vallance. Indianapolis, Bobbs-Merrill, 1937. 
$2.75 


A well-written and impartial survey of British news- 
paper opinion on important developments in British for- 
eign policy, commencing with the battle of Waterloo and 
ending with citations interpreted as “the epitaph of col- 
lective security.” The authors appear to regard the press 
as a mirror of public opinion rather than a primary force 
in its formation. 


Forty Years of American-Japanese Relations, by Foster 
Rhea Dulles. New York, Appleton-Century, 1937. $3.00 


This terse and interesting history rests on the thesis 
that the American attempt to uphold the Open Door policy 
in the Far East, which contrasts so sharply with our 
course of non-entanglement in Europe, has been a prac- 
tical failure. Our intervention in Eastern Asia, the 
author asserts, has been abortive in that it has not main- 
tained equality of commercial opportunity in China or the 
territorial integrity of that country, nor has it checked 
the rising power of Japan. American influence and pres- 
tige are held to have declined because our statesmen have 
applied a policy which the country will not support by 
armed force. Here is challenging background material 
for protagonists both of neutrality and of international 
cooperation. 


Cooperative Enterprise, by Jacob A. Baker. New York, 


Vanguard, 1937. $2.00 


Mr. Baker, who was a member of President Roosevelt's 
Inquiry on Cooperatives, presents in simple form a wealth 
of data on the cooperative movement abroad, and outlines 
some possibilities for development in the United States. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 6, Dscemper 3, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lgsiig Busi, President; Vera MicuHetes Dean, Editor. 


Incorporated. National 
Entered as second-class matter 


December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


An int 


— 


— 
Be 
B 
detect 
ment 
Hitler 
| Europ 
| —not 
hither 
Britisl 
—wid 
visit t 
by wi 
colon: 
tral a 
Thi 
to be 
to sat 
in Af 
turn, | 
conse 
struct 
West 
quo 
The : 
only 
Euroy 
berm: 
pires, 
whict 
onies 
not y 
willis 
IS rez 
own 
| Britis 
strate 
ritori 
lattes 


