ent’s 


that 
tion, 
New 
t-day 
macy 
eday, 


ns in 
tries. 


York, 


t and 


Pub- 


0 the 


nance 
York, 


» view 
 Wwin- 


Bayler 
1943. 


narine 
ymuni- 
| bom- 


‘arago, 


mobil- 
hology 
sychol- 
the de- 
swehr. 





National 
ntered as 





@BNERAL LIBRARY 
TNIV. OF MIGH. 


*ERIGDIGAL ROOM Sener 





Entered as 2nd class matter 


eV" we 
ae 


y at 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 42 


Avucust 6, 19438 





aoe resumption of Allied air raids on Italian cities 
on August 2, after Marshal Badoglio had indi- 
cated that, far from contemplating ‘unconditional 
surrender,’ he would try to preserve for Italy some 
of the spoils of war and would permit German oc- 
cupation of northern Italy and of Italian ports on 
the Adriatic, throws into sharp focus the political 
problems created by deterioration of the Axis’ mili- 
tary position. There seems to be no doubt that the 
Italian people are weary of war, and unwilling to 
make further sacrifices for the sake of defending 
Hitler's “fortress of Europe.” But Badoglio and 
presumably King Victor Emmanuel, to whom the 
Marshal is personally devoted, while recognizing 
Italy's weakness as against the Allies, are not yet 
prepared to face the consequences of defeat, nor 
are they ready to break with Germany. It is true that, 
should a break be made, the Germans would be in 
a position to wreak havoc on Italy. The rulers of 
Italy are thus faced with a choice between evils— 
with this qualification that, while the Germans have 
made it clear they cannot or will not save Italy from 
the United Nations, the Allies are promising to lib- 
erate Italy, with honor, from the Germans. 

WILL BADOGLIO SURRENDER? The reluc- 
tance of the new Italian government to wrench Italy 
out of Hitler’s grasp is being taken by Britain and 
the United States as the test of its intentions. As in- 
dicated in Mr. Churchill’s speech to the House of 
Commons on July 26 and President Roosevelt's 
broadcast on July 28, any government that repudi- 
ated Fascism, preserved order, and dissociated itself 
from Germany, would have received a hearing from 
the Allied military chief in that theatre of operations. 

On this point there appears to have been some 
misunderstanding in this country and in Britain. The 
acceptance, by General Eisenhower, of “uncondition- 
al surrender’ on the part of the King or Marshal 
Badoglio would not necessarily have had the effect, 





END OF FASCISM ENHANCES PRESTIGE OF DEMOCRACY 


or carried the intent, of recognizing either of these 
men as the future government of Italy. In fact, there 
is much to be said, psychologically, for having the 


King and Badoglio accept, publicly, the onus of sur-  ’ 
render, instead of insisting, as some observers have ™ 


done, that Eisenhower should deal only with an anti- 
Fascist régime. One of the arguments used by Hitler 
against the Weimar Republic was that it was re- 
publican representatives who signed the “shameful” 
Treaty of Versailles. Let us not make the mistake 
this time of saddling surrender on the very people 
who opposed Fascism and the war. It would have 
been better if Mussolini, himself, had had to sue 
for peace. But now that he has been deposed, those 
who were, with him, responsible, actively or pas- 
sively, for Italy’s entrance into the war—and not 
Mussolini’s opponents—should be the ones to ask for 
“unconditional surrender.” At the time this is done, 
however, the Allies should make it perfectly clear 
that the Italian people will have an opportunity to 
elect a government of their own choice within a 
specified period after surrender, and decide for them- 
selves whether they want to perpetuate the monarchy, 
establish a republic, or devise some other form of 
administration. 

DEMOCRACY CANNOT BE IMPOSED. Mean- 
while, the Allies could make no greater mistake than 
to assume that, the moment Fascist institutions have 
been abolished, the Italian people will adopt a demo- 
cratic pattern similar to that of Britain, Western 
Europe and the United States. The Italians have 
demonstrated again and again their love of liberty— 
but when they think of liberty, it is more in terms of 
the individual’s life than of freedom achieved 
through mutual accommodation within a close-knit 
political and economic community. Civilian courage 
in opposing encroachments on individual liberty is 
essential for the successful functioning of demo- 
cratic institutions. The Germans, and to a lesser 





: 
iG 
j 





i —_—K_Kz—X—[_—_—_—____— = —= Page Two 





degree the Italians, have shown themselves lacking 
in this quality. Defeat alone, however, will not 
produce civilian courage overnight. The most the 
Allies can do is to create, within Italy, conditions 
under which the Italians can develop democratic 
practices of their own. And for this AMGOT is in 
@ position to set a valuable example by the use of 
fair methods in the treatment of the population, and 
in its readaptation to peacetime living. 

THE LIMITS OF INTERVENTION. But Allied 
assistance to the Italians—and this will be even more 
true when the time comes for liberating the con- 
quered peoples of Europe—cannot take the form of 
intervention in internal affairs. Such intervention, no 
matter how benevolent in intent or beneficent in 
effect, would eventually provoke an anti-foreign re- 
action among the liberated peoples—and first of all 
among anti-Fascists who now urge Anglo-American 
intervention on their behalf. The extent to which 
intervention is a matter of subjective judgment—or 
rather emotion—has been strikingly demonstrated by 
events in North Africa and Italy. Some Americans 
who, in the past, had vigorously opposed interven- 
tion by the United States in Nicaragua and Haiti, on 
the ground that it constituted infringement on the 
liberties of those countries, seem to find nothing para- 
doxical in demanding that London and Washington 
intervene in the affairs of European countries, and 
dictate the kind of government or economic system 
they should have after the war. This demand is based 
on the assumption that it will be “good” for these 
countries to adopt democratic institutions—which 
might be true. But in countries where the soil has 
not been fertilized by history for the growth of such 
institutions, it is worse than foolish to insist that 
they should be planted forthwith—for without 


“BATTLE OF THE TROPICS” HELPS ALLIED WAR EFFORT 


The months that have passed since the Japanese 
attack on Pearl Harbor have witnessed a series of 
significant changes in the economic life of the West- 
ern Hemisphere. America’s tropical lands, hitherto 
practically neglected by man, have become the scene 
of a number of new and far-reaching activities. From 
the forests of southeastern Mexico to the jungles of 
the vast Amazon basin, men are now battling their 
way forward—building roads, fighting tropical dis- 
eases, developing river traffic—to secure access to the 
wealth of these previously untapped regions. 

PIONEERING ON A NEW FRONTIER. This 
new activity is, for the most part, directly a result 
of the Japanese conquest of southeastern Asia, which 
suddenly deprived the Allies of their main — and 
sometimes only — source of certain tropical prod- 
ucts indispensable for war. To make up for this loss, 
the Allies have had to introduce or intensify by all 
means available the production of these or similar 








<a —— 
—— 








proper nourishment they will wither away, thus 
merely creating fresh doubts about the vigor of de. 
mocracy. 

Yet this is the very moment when there should 
be least room for such doubts. The most importany 
aspect of Mussolini’s downfall is not that Italy has 
begun to yield to superior military force, but that 
Il Duce and his followers recognized the defeat of 
Fascism before Italy itself had been ovezrun. It js 
essential for sound post-war reconstruction not only 
that the United Nations should achieve mili 
victory over the Axis, but that the Axis leaders should 
confess their own failure. Future German and Italian 
historians could still argue that the Allies won be. 
cause of the superior force at their command. But it 
would be difficult for them to deny that it was faith 
in a cause, combined with force, which finally sealed 
Allied victory. Why did small, isolated Malta, sub. 
jected to thousands of air raids, refuse to give up, 
while Sicily staggered at the first blow? Peoples of 
the same origin inhabit both places. Yet the people 
who were free preferred death to loss of freedom, 
while those who were unfree considered loss of life 
too high a price to pay for servitude. This is a lesson 
worth pondering in the United States, as political 
controversies and race riots tend to obscure the chal- 
lenge to democratic statesmanship we are meeting 
on the battlefronts. We are all bearing common 
burdens, sharing a common tragedy. Our capacity to 
see the world struggle as a task we have in common 
with each other, and with other peoples around the 
globe, will determine our capacity to preserve and ad- 
vance human freedom, whose indestructible value is 
being vindicated by the self-destruction of Fascism. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


products in the lands of the Western Hemisphere, 
where natural conditions most closely duplicate those 
of the territories temporarily lost to the enemy. 

Quite naturally, the United States took the lead in 
this pioneering work. With the approval and active 
cooperation of the governments of all Latin Ameti- 
can countries concerned, it sent scores of specialists 
to tropical America, developed new botanical varie 
ties, introduced drastic sanitary measures, and 
shipped food and other supplies, often by air, t0 
create bearable living conditions in hitherto inhos 
pitable regions. This gigantic effort is considered by 
many as a second, if minor, campaign fought along 
side the main conflict, a war of man and scien 
against nature. This campaign is currently changing 
the economic pattern of many parts of the Westem 





Hemisphere. 
QUEST FOR RUBBER BLAZES TRAIL. Fits 
in importance among the tropical products lost t 
















ascism. 


/EAN 


sphere, 
e those 
ny. 

lead in 
1 active 
Ameti- 
ocialists 
1 varie: 
s, and 
air, t0 
| inhos- 
ered by 
- along: 
science 
ranging 
Y ester 


L. First 
lost te 














a 
——— 





the Allies with the Japanese conquest of south- 
eastern Asia is rubber. Before Pearl Harbor, prac- 
tically all the natural rubber used in the United States 
—representing a value of some $3,000,000 a year— 


| came from British Malaya and the Netherlands East 


Indies. With these territories now under enemy con- 
trol, the largest source of natural rubber still ac- 
cessible to the United Nations is the Amazon basin, 
where the rubber-gathering industry first originated. 
In order to make up for the sudden loss of Asiatic 
rubber sources, the United States decided to revert 
to South American production and to resume, prac- 
tically overnight, tapping of the millions of rubber 
trees growing wild in the Amazon and in other parts 
of the American tropics. 

The tapping of wild rubber trees growing sparsely 
in hot, tropical areas of dense forests and flooded 
lowlands infected with dangerous diseases is, how- 
ever, no mean problem. Aside from all other diffi- 
culties of opening up previously unsettled territories 
(the Brazilian state of Amazonas, for instance, three 
times as big as Texas, has a population of only 
450,000), two indispensable and gigantic tasks — 
sanitation and settlement—must be accomplished be- 
fore production can begin. The new areas must be 
rendered as safe as possible for the human race, and 
the thousands of men needed to collect the precious 
latex must be found and transported to the spot. 

The greatest battle so far waged by science against 
the American tropics had its start in the spring of 
1942, when a North American health mission, 
headed by Dr. George M. Saunders, member of the 
Washington Institute of Inter-American Affairs, ar- 
tived in the Amazon to collaborate with Brazilian 
authorities in the opening of the world’s greatest 
wild rubber region. Some twenty medical posts have 
since been opened along the Amazon and its tribu- 
taries by Dr. Saunders and his health mission, and 
it is expected that by the end of 1943 a complete 
chain of hospitals, floating dispensaries and other 
health centers will be in operation there. 

The second part of this huge colonization program 
is also well under way. An army of workers, which 
may reach some 100,000 men toward the end of 1943 
or the early part of next year, is being recruited from 
all surrounding regions, transported to the rubber 
lands, housed in newly built cities, and fed and cared 


Page Three 





JUST PUBLISHED— 
CAN EUROPE’S REFUGEES FIND 
NEW HOMES? 
by Winifred N. Hadsel 


25c 


August 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
Reports are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members $3. 

















—————— 


for through the cooperative effort of United States 
and Brazilian authorities. The Amazon jungle is be- 
ing slowly mastered, and from 1944 on it is ex- 
pected that it will yield some 70,000 tons of natural 
rubber annually. This quantity, although represent- 
ing only about 10 per cent of the needs of the United 
States, is considered vital, principally for war uses 
in which synthetic rubber alone is not satisfactory. 

The program developed for Brazil is comple- 
mented by many similar, smaller-scale projects now 
under way in all tropical countries of America. Wild 
rubber trees are being tapped wherever they can be 
reached. Plantations of abaca, the source of Manila 
hemp, and of similar fiber plants, are being set up in 
the Caribbean islands; derris and other roots con- 
taining rotenone, one of the most powerful insec- 
ticides, are being grown on experimental farms from 
Costa Rica to Brazil; and cinchona trees are~being 
planted in the highlands of Central America for the 
extraction of quinine—to mention only a few devel- 
opments. 

Some of these new projects will probably be aban- 
doned when the war is over. But the pioneering work 
undertaken to meet war needs will not have been 
in vain, since scores of valuable tropical products 
from hardwoods to drugs and insecticides will, for 
the first time, have been made accessible to man in 
the Americas. ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


SOUTH AFRICA SUPPORTS SMUTS 

The decisive 107 to 43 victory of Field Marshal 
Jan Christian Smuts in the South African general 
elections, reported in London on July 30, has been 
welcomed in Britain and the whole Allied world. It 
represents a parliamentary majority of 64 in support 
of the war today, compared with the narrow margin 
of 13 when the Union of South Africa declared war 
in September 1939. Fears that Dr. D. F. Malan’s 
opposition party might be able to obtain enough seats 
to impede the South African war effort, or even to 
take the Dominion out of the war and break its 
Commonwealth ties, have been definitely dispelled. 
Moreover, it seems clear that Field Marshal Smuts 
will now have a much freer hand, not only to plan a 
reconstruction program for his own country, but also 
to share in the formulation of Allied plans for the 
post-war world. This victory for an outstanding dem- 
ocratic statesman, coinciding as it did with Musso- 
lini’s downfall, has strikingly demonstrated that de- 
mocracy is rapidly gaining strength as the war 
proceeds, H. P. W. 


PITTSBURGH BRANCH TO BROADCAST 
On Saturday, August 7, members of the Pittsburgh 
Branch of the FPA will participate in a 30-minute 
radio program — ‘The Editors’ Round Table” — 
broadcast over Station KQV from 10:15 to 10:45 p.m. 
The subject will be “Winning the Peace.” 












ee Ee 
r ae . 


The Guilt of the German Army, by Hans Ernest Fried. 
New York, Macmillan, 1942. $3.50 
A well documented book on German militarism and the 
part played by the Imperial officers’ caste in the develop- 
ment of national socialism. 


Inter-American Statistical Yearbook 1942, by Raul C. 
Migone (ed.). El Atenco, Buenos Aires, and Macmillan, 
New York. $10.00 


This 1,000-page book of statistical tables on Latin Amer- 
ica with explanatory text in four languages is a unique 
compilation of data touching a large number of economic 
and social factors. Most of the tables are complete up to 
1940, and sometimes to 1941. 


The Transition from War to Peace Economy, League of 
Nations, Geneva and Princeton, 1943. Paper, $1.00; 
Cloth, $1.50 


This report of the League of Nations Committee on Eco- 
nomic Depression, is the first detailed study on the subject 
by an official international body. It examines the effects of 
war economy and the domestic and national problems of 
transition from war to peace. 


The Wind that Swept Mexico: The History of the Mexican 
Revolution 1910-1942, by Anita Brenner. New York, 
Harper, 1943. $3.75 
The first part of this book is a short and vivid story of 

Mexican politics from the reign of Diaz to our days; the 

second, a unique collection of 148 historical photographs. 

Both very sympathetically portray the aspirations of the 

Mexican people and the highlights of the Mexican revolu- 

tion. 


The Chilean Popular Front, by John Reese Stevenson. 
ee University of Pennsylvania Press, 1942. 
1. 


A good study of Chile’s significant political development 


from 1920 to date, preceded by a short outline of Chilean 
history down to 1920. 


Ecuador, by Albert Franklin. 
Doran, 1943. $3.50 
In this informative and entertaining book, Mr. Franklin 
vividly describes the topography, people, local customs, 
politics and personalities of one of the least known South 
American countries. 


New York, Doubleday 


Japan and the Opium Menace, by Frederick T. Merrill. 
New York, published jointly by the Institute of Pacific 
= and the Foreign Policy Association, 1942. 

1. 
Interesting, authoritative account of the opium problem, 
with special emphasis on Japan’s encouragement of opium 
production and addiction in Chinese territory. 


The Government of French North Africa, by Herbert J. 
Liebesny. Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 1943. $1.50 
This first of a series of African Handbooks, edited by 

H. A. Wieschhoff, summarizes the complex legal and ad- 

ministrative organization of the French possessions. It 

helps one to understand some of the political problems of 
the American and British invading forces. 


a air Page Four = 
THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 





| 
| 





Why a Jewish State? by Leon I. Feuer. New York, Richard 
R. Smith, 1942. $1.00 


A clear presentation of the Zionist view that only 4 





Jewish state with complete control over the immigration — 
and land policies of Palestine can solve Europe’s Jewish 
problem. FS 


The Making of Modern Britain, by J. B. Brebner 
Allan Nevins. New York, W. W. Norton, 1943. 
A vigorous description and interpretation for Ameri 

readers of the moving forces and outstanding leaders jj 

British history from the Roman conquest to the outbreak 

of World War II. 


Men in Motion, by Henry J. Taylor. New York, Doubleday, 

1943. $3.00 

A plea for limited post-war commitments by the United 
States based on the thesis that Europeans will not help 
themselves if the United States makes it easy for them to 
turn to us. The author despairs of Europe—‘a pauperized 
and congested appendage of Asia”—unless large-scale 
emigration takes place, but the U.S., he contends, must not 
open its doors. 


The Struggle for Airways in Latin America, by W. A, M. 
Burden. New York, Council on Foreign Relations, 1943, 
$5.00 
A valuable survey of the whole Latin American air pic 

ture, with an interesting account of the break-up of Ger- 

man and Italian air lines during 1940-41. The maps, charts, 
illustrations and tables add greatly to the usefulness of 
this attractive volume. 


England’s Road to Social Security, by Karl de Schweinitz, 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1943. 
$3.00 
A timely study of England’s efforts during six centuries 

—from the Statute of Laborers in 1349 to the Beveridge 

Report of 1942—to provide social security for its people. 


Don’t Blame the Generals, by Alan Moorehead. New York, 

Harper, 1943. $3.50 

A vivid story by an Australian newspaperman of the 
North African theatre from August 1941 to August 1942. 
Although Moorehead’s account covers the Middle East and 
even reaches India, the fall of Tobruk and the final des 
perate defense of Egypt are the highlights of this book. 
The English title, A Year of Battle, however, is more 
descriptive of the contents of the book than the American, 


International Air Transport and National Policy, by Oliver 
J. Lissitzyn. New York, Council on Foreign Relations, 
1942. $5.00 
This book is a notable contribution to the history of ait 

transport up to Pearl Harbor, particularly in its political 
aspects. Although now out of date in certain respects, it is 
indispensable to a knowledge of the complex problems 
facing the United Nations as they plan the air transport 
policies of the future. 


War without Inflation, by George Katona. New York, 
Columbia University Press, 1942. $2.50 
A timely study of inflation, price-fixing, rationing, ta 
ation and saving in wartime. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 42, Aucust 6, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor. Entered # 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


in 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 

























































i <4, 


oD 


r~™ Cm ch 4S MS FD Oo ares ff PF «cr 


