









and 


illa 
neir 
two 
lift 
hth! 
‘ant 
vith ' 
ese 
ave 
side 
hat 

| be 
uld | 





her 

















PERIGDICAL ROG 
GENBRAL LIBRARY 
WAV. OF MICH, 


General Liorary a 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Wich. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





VoL. XXIII, No. 47 





SEPTEMBER 8, 1944 — 


FEAR OF COMMUNISM—NAZIS'’ LAST HOPE FOR SOFT PEACE 


HE closer the Allies come to victory over the Axis 
in Europe, the more we are forced to realize what 
should have been obvious all along—that the end of 


hostilities will only mark the beginning of seismic 


readjustments in a continent torn by war and civil 
strife, involving revision, sometimes from day to 
day, of the theories and preconceptions many of us 
have developed about European affairs. The para- 
mount need for wartime cooperation had clamped 
the lid tight on divergences among the United Na- 
tions regarding the post-war world. Germany's mil- 
itary defeat is bound to spring open a Pandora’s box 
of troubles from the Atlantic to the Black Sea. 


END OF WAR WILL RAISE NEW PROB- 
LEMS. The prospect of post-war ferment may dis- 
hearten those Americans who have long believed that 
Europe was incurably addicted to intrigues and wars. 
It is, in this respect, fortunate that unrest in the 
Asiatic colonies controlled by Western powers and 
the rise of nationalism throughout South America 
give evidence that political, economic and social con- 
flicts are not limited to Europe. But it is there that 
the United Nations will experience the first test of 
their ability to work together in peace as they have 
done in war. The Dumbarton Oaks Conference rep- 
resents a determined attempt by the four great 
powers to devise international machinery to avert 
future wars. This conference, however, is not em- 
powered to deal with the problems of political 
change, immediate relief, and long-term reconstruc- 
tion which, next to liberation, head the priority list 
of liberated nations. The manifold issues raised by 
the as yet unsettled Russo-Polish controversy, the 
surrender of Finland on September 4, Rumania’s 
claims against Hungary—just to mention a few—re- 
veal the need, more urgent than ever, of a conference 
of all the United Nations or at least the creation, as 
suggested by the British, of a United Nations Com- 


mission for Europe supplementing, or preferably 
replacing, the European Advisory Commission on 
which the United States, Britain and Russia alone 
are represented. As in France, so elsewhere, people 
will not have much time to waste on jubilant 
victory parades. They are eager to get down to the 
task of rebuilding their shattered institutions and 
disorganized economies, and the most constructive 
thing the United States, Britain and Russia can do is 
to help them in this task. 


EUROPE MUST SHARE IN DECISIONS ON 
GERMANY. The efficacy of the aid rendered by the 
great powers will necessarily depend on the manner 
in which, as well as the objects for which, it is of- 
fered. The reconstruction of Europe cannot be effec- 
tively undertaken by the great powers unless they 
have the voluntary cooperation of the liberated coun- 
tries. Discussion of what comes first—agreement 
among the great powers, or agreement between the 
great powers and the small nations—threatens to 
become as tenuous as the medieval debate about the 
number of angels on the point of a needle. What- 
ever may seem desirable in theory, in practice it is 
unimaginable that the countries of Europe, with 
France once more emerging as their acknowledged 
leader and spokesman, can long be left sitting on the 
doorstep while the great powers discuss the future of 
the continent, and especially the key problem of 
what to do about Germany. The report that repre- 
sentatives of France are to join the Dumbarton Oaks 
conferees on September 10 are encouraging. For to 
Germany's neighbors its fate is not merely a provoca- 
tive subject for forum debates—it is a matter of life 
and death. We in this country who have been spared 
the horrors of Lidice and Lublin, who have not 
lived at the mercy of the Gestapo, who have not seen 
those we love dragged out of our homes for deporta- 
tion, torture or execution, have a heavy responsibility 






ee 





i 
\ 
if 

? 

te 
fe 
Ne 
a 
Pe 
fs 
te 
rm 


Pee ae Te 


amass ee pe ee 


~ te, 








for whatever judgments we may reach concerning 
Germany and its relations with the rest of Europe, 
and the world. 


There is no need for us to fan hatred against the 
Germans. The hatred expressed by the people of 
Florence has been echoed in every country subjected 
to Nazi rule. What we must be on guard to avoid is 
commiseration with the Germans in the hour of their 
defeat. Harsh as the Allies’ demand for “uncondi- 
tional surrender” may have appeared at the time it 
was made, conditions on the continent revealed in 
the wake of invasion should convince even the most 
doubtful that no other approach to the Germans is 
practicable at this moment. The few Germans who 
have been in a position publicly to dissociate them- 
selves from the Nazis—notably the generals who 
joined the Free German Committee in Moscow— 
lend strength to a policy of no compromise. The 
burden of their statements is not remorse for the 
sufferings inflicted by the Germans on Europe, but 
regret that, through a series of tactical errors at- 
tributed to Hitler and his Nazi advisers, as distin- 
guished from the professional soldiers of the General 
Staff, Germany failed to achieve its military objec- 
tives. We need not despair of finding Germans, after 
the war, with whom it may prove possible to estab- 
lish satisfactory working relationships. But in fair- 
ness to the millions of Europe who have perished 
in the unceasing struggle against the Nazis, and to 
our own dead as well, the nature of such relation- 
ships should be stated to the Germans only after their 
military defeat has been consummated on their own 
soil, and after their military, as well as political lead- 
ers, have surrendered without any previous promises 
or commitments on our part. 





This does not mean that the United Nations them- 
selves should abstain from formulating their plans 
concerning Germany until military victory has been 
achieved. On the contrary, they should do so as swift- 
ly as possible, for their decisions about Germany's 
future will shape all other developments on the con- 
tinent. In this critical hour, when the hopes of so 


Page Two 





Recent FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS— 
U.S. PLANS FOR WORLD ORGANIZATION 
by Vera Micheles Dean 
BREAKING UP THE JAPANESE EMPIRE 
by Lawrence K. Rosinger 
U.S. FOREIGN TRADE AND WORLD ECONOMY 
by H. P. Whidden, Jr, 
STRUGGLE FOR A NEW FRANCE 
by Winifred N. Hadsel 
BRETTON WOODS MONETARY CONFERENCE 
25c each 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











eee 





— 





— ; 


many so long oppressed have suddenly been renewed, | 
the Nazis still have a valuable card up their sleeve 
which they are playing with all the ingenuity at their 
disposal. They argue once more that Germany has 
fought and bled not to advance its own national in. 
terests at the expense of weaker countries, but out of 
sheer altruism, to save Europe from Bolshevism. 
Much as the course of events during the past five 
years has discredited this argument, it retains suffi- 
cient influence over the minds of some people in all 
countries to give the Nazis at least the hope that 
it may swing the balance in favor of Germany in 
the very hour of defeat. 


IDEOLOGICAL DEBATE CONTINUES. The 
form in which the latest version of the “crusade 
against Bolshevism” is being presented is not new. 
The Nazis are taking advantage of the views ex- 
pressed by some strong anti-Nazi spokesmen who, 
while highly critical of the Hitler system, at the 
same time assert that a fundamental and allegedly 
irreconcilable conflict exists between Christianity and 


Communism, and that the defeat of Germany may. 


merely assure domination of Europe either directly 
by Russia or, indirectly, by elements inspired by 
Communist doctrines. These spokesmen show a 
marked tendency, that early Christians might have 
questioned, of making private property an intrinsic 
attribute of Christianity. To the millions in Europe 
who, under conditions of unspeakable suffering, 
struggled for liberty irrespective of the loss of prop- 
erty the thesis that a conflict exists between Christian- 
ity plus private property on the one hand, and Com- 
munism on the other, may appear unconvincing. The 
Nazi argument, however, which continues to play on 
fear of Communism, is not addressed to the victims 
of German conquest. It is addressed primarily to the 
United States where, Hitler’s propagandists hope, the 
desire to protect private property from the possible 
depredations of Communism might yet soften the 
terms imposed on Germany. 


The ideological debate of our times is by no means 
over, Mr. Churchill’s declaration notwithstanding. 
It is merely entering another phase. In essence it 
raises the question whether the end of the war will 
see Europe moving to the Left—and thus, seemingly 
at least, toward Russia; or to the Right—on the as- 
sumption, current in some quarters, that the United 
States and Britain would prefer conservative forces 
to be in the ascendant. This question can be answered 
only by re-examining anew Russia’s objectives and 
policies in Europe; the stake of the Western democra- 
cies in that continent; and the temper of the liberated 
peoples. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(This is the first of a series of four articles on Europe's 
problems as seen from the United States.) 


Y 


I 


PHIL 


Fron 


}ihe A» 
The Al 


jantly 
steps t 
it has 

formal 
yfavorit 
policy, 
dsm oO 
1943 | 
fo Inc 
people 


war 


tions 
Pears 
some 
ident’ 
tions. 
State 
post 
howe 
furoy 
after 
Depa 
fetur 
inspi 
becat 
him | 
TI 
was 
lin L 
|expr 
icy « 
pub! 
part 
tele; 
imp 
as f 
‘@ 
Pres 
lve 
Am 
con: 


7 
] 











ns 
2. 

it 
ill 
sly 
aS- 


ed 


ed 
nd 








W. ashington News oF ie ettez 


‘ 

















From the day this country entered the war against 
jihe Axis, the United States government, regarding 
ihe Allied coalition as an essential union to be vig- 
}jlantly maintained, has sought to avoid taking direct 
steps that would embarrass its Allies. For this reason 
ithas suppressed any temptation to acquaint Britain 
formally with the existence of public opinion here 
ylavoring freedom for India. In keeping with that 
policy, President Roosevelt took no action on criti- 
dsm of Britain made to him in a report on May 14, 
1943 by William Phillips, his personal ambassador 
9 India, who reported that the Indian Army and 

ple would not participate ‘with any force in the 
jwar” until they received a promise of liberty on a 


ippecific date. 


ANGLO-AMERICAN RELATIONS DIS- 
TURBED. Congressional comment following revela- 
lions concerning this report on July 25 by Drew 
Pearson, Washington newspaperman, has now in 
some measure frustrated the objectives of the Pres- 
ident’s policy by disturbing Anglo-American rela- 
fions. On July 19, 1944 Phillips wrote Secretary of 
State Cordell Hull that he wished to retire from his 
post as political adviser to Gen. Dwight D. Eisen- 
hower, Supreme Allied Commander for the Western 
furopean Offensive, which he had taken temporarily 
after his return from India. The fact that the State 
Department postponed announcement of Phillips’ 
feturn until two weeks after publication of the letter 
inspired charges that the diplomat was withdrawing 
because wide knowledge of its contents had rendered 
\him unacceptable to the British government. 


Through a State Department denial that Phillips 
was coming home because he was persona non grata 
lin London, the United States government promptly 
expressed its formal intention of continuing the pol- 
he of not embarrassing an ally. After the letter’s 
publication, however, Sir Olaf Caroe, of the De- 
partment of External Affairs in New Delhi, had 
telegraphed the India Office in London that it “is 
impossible for us to do other than regard [Phillips] 
as persona non grata and we could not again receive 
i,” although he still bears the designation of the 
President’s personal representative in India. How- 
lever, on August 31 the Earl of Halifax, British 
jAmbassador in Washington, denied that Phillips was 
considered persona non grata in London. 


These strong denials failed to curb Congressional 


FOR VICTORY °* 

















PHILLIPS INCIDENT INDICATES U.S. CONCERN WITH FUTURE OF INDIA 


critics. On August 30 Representative Calvin D. John- 
son of Illinois, Republican member of the House 
Foreign Affairs Committee, introduced a resolution 
asking that Sir Ronald Campbell, British Minister in 
Washington, and Sir Girja Shankar Bajpai, Indian 


‘Agent General in Washington, be declared persona 


non grata “should they continue in their efforts to 
mold public opinion in the Phillips case.” On the 
following day Chairman Bloom of the House For- 
eign Affairs Committee renewed the denial of any 
connection between Phillips’ resignation from Hisen- 
hower’s staff and publication of his letter. Neverthe- 
‘ess, on September 2 Senator Albert B. Chandler of 
Kentucky charged that British officials “put obstacles 
in the way” of Phillips’ work “as soon as they found 
out” about the letter, and he thereupon made public 
the Caroe telegram. 


OTHER CRITICISMS OF INDIAN POLICY: 
The British government’s anxiety to deny, that it had 
forced Phillips’ recall is based in some degree on a 
wish to protect the principle of nonintervention by 
one government in the affairs of another. Whether 
the United States will observe this principle with 
respect to India after the war in Europe is over ap- 
pears questionable. India is an important base in 
the war against Japan, and the United States may 
show even greater interest in Indian affairs when 
the struggle in Asia becomes our major military 
problem. 


Moreover, general comments made during the 
war, but not brought formally to British attention, 
by officials and special agents of the government in 
Washington on the advisability of granting freedom 
to colonial possessions suggest that the United States 
will officially concern itself with this problem at the 
peace table. In November 1942 President Roosevelt 
said that the history of the Philippine Islands, whose 
independence has been promised by the United States 
for 1946, “provides a pattern” for the evolution of 
colonial areas toward liberty. On March 21, 1944 
Secretary of State Cordell Hull said that imperial 
powers should “help the aspiring peoples to develop 
materially and educationally, to prepare themselves 
for the duties and responsibilities of self-government 
to attain liberty.” And in June, shortly before leaving 
on his trip to China, Vice President Henry Wallace 
proposed that the “trustees” of colonial areas in Asia 
announce dates for the beginning of independence 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





a 
tema 


See NAS SOP 


oe 
Oh. gee cmap: Ba 








sauna naNENIREnennanieennmenen 
ee 








and self-government. Thrusting aside in advance 
possible objections that American interest might 
amount to intervention, he explained that “it is im- 
portant that America have a positive policy toward 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


India’s Problem Can Be Solved, by DeWitt Mackenzie. 
New York, Doubleday, Doran, 1943. $3.00 


Journalistic discussion of the background of the Indian 
question and developments centering about the Cripps 
Mission. Mr. Mackenzie has no ready-made solution to 
offer and is well aware of the difficulty of reaching an 
agreement. But he holds the firm belief that Hindus and 
Moslems can, and usually do, get along together. He also 
stresses the part that a provisional government could play 
in further mobilizing wartime India in the struggle against 
Japan. 


The Indian Problem: Report on the Constitutional Prob- 
lem in India, by R. Coupland. New York, Oxford Uni- 
versity Press, 1944. $5.00. (Consists of three volumes, 
bound as one: I. The Indian Problem, 1833-1935; II. In- 
dian Politics, 1936-1942; III. The Future of India.) 


This British account constitutes an exhaustive treatment 
of various Indian constitutional questions and adds much 
to our factual knowledge of the subject. The author, a 
member of the Cripps Mission, presents what is essentially 
an official view of the Indian situation. His main emphasis 
is on the conflict between Hindus and Moslems and the 
» necessity of the Indians “getting together” before the con- 
stitutional problem can be settled. He also presents a plan 
for the regional organization of India. 


Peoples of India, by William H. Gilbert, Jr. Washington, 
Smithsonian Institute, 1944. (War Background Studies, 
No. 18.) 


A brief discussion of the geography of India, its cul- 
tures, races, castes and tribes. The material presented is 
in itself informative, but greatly overstresses one side of 
India, namely, its diversity. Indian nationalism, so essen- 
tial to an understanding of the “peoples of India,” is vir- 
tually ignored. In fact, the work of the Indian National 
Congress is summed up in a single inadequate phrase: 
“The largest and most influential political group and 
favoring independence.” 


Subject India, by Henry Noel Brailsford. New York, John 
Day, 1943. $2.50 


A distinguished British author argues for the complete 
independence of India, declaring: “We must hand over the 
reality of power to an Indian national government now, 
and clear the road to independence by withdrawing our 
support of the princes.” The book is important not only for 
its careful discussion of Indian affairs, but also because 
it indicates the existence in Britain of a portion of public 
opinion that is critical of official policy. 


The “Bombay Plan” for India’s Economic Development. 
New York, Institute of Pacific Relations, 1944. (Mimeo- 
graphed for private distribution.) 

The full text of a plan which has given rise to consid- 
erable comment in the United States and Britain. Drawn 
up by a group of Indian industrialists, it suggests not 
only the great economic development of which India is 
capable, but also the determination of many Indian busi- 
ness leaders to reorganize Indian economy. 


Page Four 
















7791. 
this area . . . because in Southeast Asia there 19 
conflicting forces in operation that have in them the) 
seeds of future wars.” 






BLarR BOLLEs 


Day, 1944. $3.00 

A revised edition of an invaluable account of Indiay H 
village life, first published in 1930. Written with dees) | 
sympathy for and understanding of the Indian people by) Wa 
a Western woman who went to live in the “Village of Fiyg) 
Trees.” 


Revolution in India, by Frances Gunther. New York) 
Island Press, 1944. $1.00 
A critical commentary on British policy in India, ex 
pressing the view that “a gigantic struggle of heroic pro} 
portions” is going on between “the English will to rule 
and the Indian will to freedom.” 


Asia’s Lands and Peoples, by George B. Cressey. New t 
York, McGraw-Hill, 1944. $6.00 
A comprehensive survey of the Asiatic continent andj i 
adjoining areas, with special emphasis on China, the) give: 
Soviet Union, Japan and India. Professor Cressey, a dis} obse 
tinguished geographer, has synthesized in this volume the} 
work of many years. His approach is a broad one, based off W he 
the view that “geography deals with all the items that give} Burc 
personality to the face of the earth.” after 
I See a New China, by George Hogg. Boston, Little, Brown} Ger 
1944. $2.50 
An organizer for the Chinese Industrial Cooperative R 
presents in these pages a vigorous account of the confli@] dev: 
between old and new ways of life in China. A small book} sion 
but full of shrewd insights into Chinese conditions. cd 


Chiang Kai-shek: Asia’s Man of Destiny, by H. H. Chang) ; 
New York, Doubleday, Doran, 1944. $3.50 any 


A biography of the Generalissimo drawn largely from) ©OW 
his own writings and speeches and from materials reflect} ind: 
ing the official Chinese point of view. The author picture terr 
Chiang Kai-shek as a leader who wishes to join the im ‘ 
dustrial techniques of the twentieth century to the social clai 


a, 
Voiceless India, by Gertrude Emerson. New York, Johy ] 
a 





VoL. 










| 


philosophy of Confucius. lan 
The Road to Teheran, by Foster Rhea Dulles. Princeton} Mo 
Princeton University Press, 1944. $2.50 Ru: 


A short history of the 150 years of peaceful relations T's: 
between Russia and the United States. The author wisely 7 
refrains from drawing lessons for the future, but he does, the 
establish the “parallelism” of the foreign policies of the} to | 
two nations during the greater part of that history despite | Sat 
the divergent political systems in each counry. 


The Nazis Go Underground, by Curt Riess. New York the 
Doubleday, Doran, 1944. $2.50 is | 
An argument that the plans the Nazis have laid fort shc 

their post-war underground organization can be frustrated; me 

only by a German revolution from the Left. 





| no 
Invasion Diary, by Richard Tregaskis. New York, Random] 4, 
House, 1944. $2.75 of 
The author of Guadalcanal Diary does a competent, » 
interesting and sympathetic story of the invasion of Sicily lig 
and southern Italy, particularly in his picture of hos | dis 
pitalized casualties. 








ce! 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 47, Sspremper 8, 1944. Published weekly by che Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National co 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micugres Dean, Editor. Encered # 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at leat y (); 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year St 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





QB's! 





mi 


wt 


