'S 


"homason 
declared: 
Ve Service 
1 21 both 
he Senate 
hearings 
ct beyond 
D. Eisen. 
imittee to 
J. May of 
ension of 
1as of the 
ks. 
Secretary 
Jarren R 
the testi- 
tion ‘“was 
or extend. 
ys earlier 
> had pre 
situation,” 
‘etain the 
| be ready 


develop 

> wartime 
f anxiety 
ingerously 
: problem. 
juirements 
by vague: 

rage other 
he climate 
ed. Repre- 
f Florida, 
requires 4 
n effective- 
es we Calfl- 
Sommunist 
Ve cannot 
*s are not 
of politi 
1 regain 4 
statesmen 

y with any 
ent of the 
r civic and 
oned alto- 
ternational 


BOLLES 


Genera) Library 


University o¢ 


APR 16 1946 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


OMMITIEAL REO 
St. "OKAL LIBZAR™ 
BRIY. OF MICH 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 25 


Aprit 5, 1946 


PROBLEMS OF ORDERLY CHANGE RAISED BY IRANIAN DISPUTE 


HEN the Security Council on March 29 ac- 

cepted Mr. Byrnes’ proposal that the United 
Nations should ask both Russia and Iran for infor- 
mation concerning the status of their negotiations, 
it postponed until April 3 a decision as to the action 
it might take on Iran’s appeal. In accordance with 
its expressed determination to deal at this stage with 
procedure and not with substance it did not attempt 
to come to grips with the basic issues raised by that 
appeal. The discussions of the Council in the former 
gymnasium of Hunter College in the Bronx, how- 
ever, have already served to focus world opinion on 
these issues, and have brought out two points of 
crucial importance for the future of the United 
Nations. 

DIFFERENCES IN CONCEPT OF EQUALITY. 
The first of these points is a fundamental difference 
between Russia and the Western powers concern- 
ing the concept of equality of nations. In his answer, 
on the eve of the Council session, to three questions 
posed by Hugh Baillie, president of the United 
Press—an answer repeatedly referred to by Am- 
bassador Gromyko — Marshal Stalin stressed “the 
equality of states’’ in the United Nations. In view 
of this statement, Russia’s persistent refusal to dis- 
cuss the Iranian situation in the Council until April 
10 has seemed to many observers disingenuous and 
unsportsmanlike. The other countries represented on 
the Council would not contend that all nations, 
great and small, are really equal in power and in- 
fluence. But several of them insisted that every one 
of the United Nations, no matter how weak or back- 
ward, must have the right to appear before the 
Council on its own behalf without undue delay, and 
present any complaints it may have against a great 
power on terms of legal equality. 

The Council, acting on this concept of equality, 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


had no choice but to make it possible for Iran to 
state whether it favored the postponement demand- 
ed by Moscow, and if not, why not. Only after 
Iran's views about the proposed postponement had 
been ascertained, was it possible for the Council to 
address identical inquiries for information to Mos- 
cow and Teheran. Had the Council, after giving 
Russia an opportunity to explain why it was urg- 
ing a postponement (an opportunity of which Mr. 
Gromyko did not avail himself except to refer to 
newspaper interviews given by Marshal Stalin and 
Iranian Prime Minister Ghavam), then merely asked 
Iran for written information, as suggested by the 
Australian delegate, Colonel Hodgson, it would not 
have afforded equal opportunity for a hearing to a 
small country bringing a complaint against a great 
power. Although Colonel Hodgson sought to demon- 
strate that the Council, had, in effect, adopted his pro- 
posal, and might have averted Russia’s withdrawal 
by accepting it in the first place, that is not an ac- 
curate description of the course taken by the Council. 

IS COUNCIL TREATING RUSSIA AS AN 
EQUAL? But admitting the validity of the Coun- 
cil’s decision to reject Russia’s demand for post- 
ponement by a 9 to 2 vote, and to invite Iran, fol- 
lowing Mr. Gromyko’s withdrawal, to appear and 
present his views about the proposed postponement, 
the question of equality calls for further analysis. 
Russia has made no secret since Dumbarton Oaks 
that its idea of equality is equality among the great 
powers. This concept is at the core of the veto 
power reserved for the Big Five—and we should 
not forget that the United States was just as in- 
sistent as Russia on inclusion in the San Francisco 
Charter of the veto on action by the Council. Where 
the United States differs from Russia is in contend- 
ing that the veto should not be applied to dis- 


cussion of a controversial issue—although it may 
prove in practice difficult to draw the line between 
discussion and action, since obviously the final de- 
cision in any controversy will be affected by the 
discussion that precedes it. But viewing the Coun- 
cil’s debate on Iran in the light of its definition of 
equality, Russia contends that it is not, in effect, 
being treated by the Big Five as an equal, since the 
Council has shown a concern about the presence of 
Russian troops in Iran which it has not thus far 
displayed about the presence of British troops in 
Greece or Egypt for example, or American troops 
in Iceland or China. 


The weakness of Russia’s case in the eyes of the 
world is threefold. First, it failed to comply with 
the terms of the Anglo-Russian-Iranian treaty of 
1942, under which all foreign troops were to have 
been withdrawn from Iran by March 2; second, 
judging by the testimony presented by the Iranian 
Ambassador, which Russia has not sought to deny 
officially, Moscow, in the course of direct negotia- 
tions with Iran undertaken with the approval of the 
Security Council, sought to obtain political, terri- 
torial and economic advantages in return for the 
withdrawal of its troops; and, third, Russia declined 
to vouchsafe any information at the Council table 
as to the reasons why it sought a postponement of 
discussion about Iran—leaving the world to assume, 
rightly or wrongly, that it had hoped to obtain from 
Teheran, by April 10, the concessions it had been 
unsuccessfully pressing for during Prime Minister 
Ghavam’s visit to Moscow. 

In fairness to Russia, however, it must be recog- 
nized that other great powers are using pressure 
of one kind or another on small nations to obtain 
new privileges (the United States, during the war, 
sought to obtain oil concessions in Iran), or retain 
old ones (Britain appears loath to relinquish the 
right to maintain troops on Egyptian soil, which 
it has enjoyed under a ten-year treaty with Egypt 
whose termination is being demanded by Cairo). 
Nor does the reported Russian proposal for the 
creation of a joint stock oil company, in which 
Russia would have 51 per cent of the shares, and 
Iran 49 per cent, differ materially from the setu 
of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, through which 
British interests obtain oil from Iran. It is proper 
to insist on Russia’s fulfillment of treaty obligations, 
for if every nation feels free to flout treaties, all 
hope of world order will have to be abandoned. But 


Page Two 


a 
a 


it would be unrealistic to assume that Russia alone 
among the great powers uses its influence to obtain 
from small countries privileges they might not other. 
wise grant. What is needed is not merely reform of 
Russia's practices, but reform of the practices of all 
great powers in their relations with small nations, 
It is encouraging, in this connection, that the United 
States has decided to relinquish on May 20 bases it 
had acquired in Cuba during the war. 

U.N. MUST ACT ON BASIC ISSUES. The 
second important point revealed by the Council's 
debates on Iran is that if the United Nations are to 
give effective protection to small nations, they must 
do more than require strict compliance with treaties, 
If all nations agreed on the desirability of main- 
taining the existing order of things, the status quo, 
there would be little reason ‘for conflict. It is when 
one nation or another attempts to alter existing 
conditions that clashes occur. 

The Council, which in London requested Russia 
and Iran to submit a report to the present session 
on their direct negotiations, has legitimate reason 
to seek information as to the status of these nego- 
tiations; and it is unfortunate that Britain and the 
United States, instead of waiting for this report, 
by-passed the United Nations and sent individual 
notes to Moscow inquiring why Russian troops had 
not left Iran by March 2. But it is even more im- 
portant for the Council to find out why Russia wants 
political, territorial and economic advantages. If, 
upon investigation there should appear, for ex- 
ample, to be justification for Russia’s demand for 
oil concessions, the Council would need to deter- 
mine whether exploitation of Iran’s resources by 
great powers can be carried out in such a way as to 
serve the interests of the Iranian people, who have 
hitherto had little share either in governing them- 
selves or in deriving material benefits from their 
country’s natural wealth. Russia’s unilateral inter- 
vention in Iran is open to criticism. The remedy, 
however, is not counter-intervention by Britain and 
the United States, but joint efforts under United 
Nations authority to find a workable compromise 
that would avert a conflict among the Big Three, 
yet would not impose intolerable sacrifices on small 
nations. But before the Council can initiate such 
action, the Big Three must agree among themselves 
to subordinate their national ambitions to the inter- 
ests of the international community. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


UNITED NATIONS SET UP NARCOTIC DRUGS COMMISSION 


On January 29 Arthur Henderson, British Under 
Secretary of State for India and Burma, spoke to 
the United Nations Assembly in support of a pro- 
posal to create a Commission on Narcotic Drugs, 
which would report directly to the Economic and 


Social Council. This speech was doubly important. 
Not only did it come from a high official in the 
India Office (India occupies a key position in a pro- 
gram of further progress of opium control) but it 
also welcomed “the proposal of the United States 


— 
povernm 
jimitatio: 
dom wil 
jlong th 
Inforr 
partmen 
opium-St 
since Br 
duding 

Brunei. 
of fricti 
China a 
removec 
ernment 
present 

The 1 
United 

nations- 
United 

Netherl 
This Co 
mittee 
will re 


Brazil: 

Rouge 
With | 
} organize 
as Unit 
Brazil’s 
current 
jand div 
particul 


Brazil, 
$2.75 
A rep 
latin A 
a speci: 
part of 
frontier 
the spec 
springi 
stabilit: 
The Int 
terna 
eime! 
tiona 
ment 
A fo: 
istrativ 
does nc 
} that it 
nations 
great v 


The Si 
York 
A lo 

a sing] 

—— 

FOREIG 

Headqua 

scond-c! 

me mon 


BS 


———_— 


ia alone 
O obtain 
ot other. 
‘form of 
es of all 
nations, 
> United 
bases it 


iS. The 
council's 
IS are to 
ey must 
treaties, 
£ main- 
tus quo, 
is when 
existing 


| Russia 
- Session 
» reason 
se Nego- 
and the 

report, 
dividual 
ops had 
ore im- 
ia wants 
ges. If, 
for ex- 
and for 
> deter- 
irces by 
ay as to 
ho have 
g them- 
m their 
il inter- 
remedy, 
ain and 
United 
promise 
- Three, 
mn. small 
te such 
mselves 
le inter- 


DEAN 


portant. 

in the 
1 a pro- 
) but it 
1 States 


o—_————" 


vernment for immediate action to get an opium 
imitation convention,” adding: “The United King- 
dom will give their warmest support to any action 
slong these lines.” 

Information has been received by the State De- 

ent from Hong Kong and Singapore that all 
opium-smoking monopolies have been abolished 
since British re-occupation of these territories, in- 
duding North Borneo, Sarawak, Labuan and 
Brunei. Thus an ancient evil has ended, and a point 
of friction between Britain on the one hand, and 
China and the United States on the other, has been 
moved. Similar action by the Netherlands Gov- 
emment obviously must await settlement of the 
present political difficulties in Indonesia. 

The new Commission on Narcotic Drugs of the 
United Nations Organization has fifteen member 
nations—China, France, United Kingdom, U.S.S.R., 
United States, Canada, Egypt, India, Iran, Mexico, 
Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Turkey and Yugoslavia. 
This Commission replaces the Opium Advisory Com- 
mittee of the former League of Nations. Delegates 
will represent their respective governments. The 


THE F.P.A. 


Brazil: People and Institutions, by T. Lynn Smith. Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana State University Press, 1946. $6.50 


With this detailed study of Brazil’s population and social 
organization, Professor Smith has placed Brazilian, as well 
as United States, readers in his debt. At a time when 
Brazil’s agricultural problem is largely eclipsed by the 
arrent emphasis on industrialization, the chapters on 
land division, tenure, rural communities and the like are 
particularly instructive. 


Brazil, by Preston E. James. New York, Odyssey, 1946. 
$2.75 


A reprint of the section on Brazil from the same author’s 
latin America, which has become a classic in the field. In 
a specially written conclusion, Mr. James finds at least 
part of the solution to the problem of Brazil’s “hollow 
frontier” in the new cities—themselves an expression of 
the speculative nature of the national economy—which are 
ringing up in the interior and provide what there is of 
stability and permanence in the Brazilian scene. 


The International Secretariat: A Great Experiment in In- 
ternational Administration, by E. F. Ranshofen-Werth- 
eimer. Washington, Carnegie Endowment for Interna- 
tional Peace, 1945. Distributed by International Docu- 
ments Section of Columbia University Press, $4.50 


A former official of the Secretariat discusses the admin- 
istrative development of the League of Nations. While he 
does not try to excuse any failures of the League, he feels 
that it definitely proves the possibility of large-scale inter- 
national administration. This study therefore should have 
great value in the case of the United Nations Organization. 


The Story of Woodrow Wilson, by Ruth Cranston. New 
York, Simon and Schuster, 1945. $3.50 


A long-time friend of the Wilson family compresses into 


Page Three 


reduction in membership from twenty-five nations 
at the last meetings of the League Opium Advisory 
Committee to fifteen, and the expectation that rep- 
resentatives with administrative and technical ex- 
perience will be the delegates, are improvements 
based on lessons of the past. 


The inclusion of Iran, whose name was not on 
the list of countries proposed by the United States 
delegate, is open to question. Iran’s past record in 
opium does not justify such membership. Iran has 
refused to adopt any international treaty obliga- 
tions which affect its fredom to sell opium to any 
and all purchasers. Years of pressure by the League, 
as well as forceful representations by the United 
States government on the basis of the Judd Resolu- 
tion* have been without results. Therefore, those 
countries which have long suffered from smuggled 
Iranian opium will watch carefully how Iran’s opium 
policy is affected by its membership on the new Com- 
mission on Narcotic Drugs. 


HELEN HOWELL MOORHEAD 


*See Foreign Policy Bulletin, July 21, 1944. 


BOOKSHELF 


ing much space to his great fight for the League of Na- 

tions. 

The German Talks Back, by Heinrich Hauser. New York, 
Henry Holt, 1945. $2.00 


Civil Life in Wartime Germany, by Max Seydewitz. New 
York, Viking, 1945. $3.50 


Re-Educating Germany, by Werner Richter. Chicago, Uni- 

versity of Chicago Press, 1945. $3.50 

Three books dealing with the effects of Nazism on the 
German people by Germans who had gone into exile. All 
three authors insist that “another Germany” always ex- 
isted in opposition to Hitler, and they conclude that it 
should now be encouraged by moderate peace terms which 
will seem overgenerous to many readers. 


Poland, edited by Bernadotte E. Schmitt. Berkeley, Uni- 
versity of California Press, 1945. $5.00 

Belgium, edited by Jan-Albert Goris. Berkeley, University 
of California Press, 1945. $5.00 


These two volumes in the United Nations Series, pub- 
lished in an effort to present reliable and comprehensive 
information about the characteristics and problems of the 
various Allies, are written by a carefully selected panel 
of scholars and are ably edited. Belgium is the only general 
book of recent date on that country, and Poland also makes 
a notable contribution to the study of a controversial sub- 
ject. 


America’s Stake in Britain’s Future, by George Soule. 
New York, Viking Press, 1945. $2.75 
Anglo-American economic cooperation must prove the 
cornerstone of world trade revival, and it is this require- 
ment which Mr. Soule has admirably explained in his book 
which also briefly sketches Britain’s critical economic po- 
sition today, as well as its plans for domestic economic 


4single volume a biography intensely personal yet devot- reconstruction. 
*OREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 25, Aprit 5, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 
teond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
me month for change of address on membership publications. 

F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dellars a Year 
Be 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


a x - 
- _ 
LG 


Washington News Letter 


sttbee, 


i 


ATOMIC ENERGY REPORT POINTS WAY TO INTERNATIONAL CONTRO] 


The proposals laid before the Senate Committee 
on Atomic Energy by Under Secretary of State Dean 
Acheson on March 25 and released for publication 
by the State Department on March 29, advocate 
international control of atomic energy and industrial 
use of the atom bomb secret for peacetime civilian 


purposes. Congress, on the other hand, seems to 


favor national control under an arrangement em- 
phasizing the military usefulness of the secret. 

ARGUMENTS FOR INTERNATIONAL CIVIL- 
IAN CONTROL. Despite the skepticism of Con- 
gress, which is revealed by the votes of the Senate 
Committee on Atomic Energy, the proponents of 
international civilian control outside Congress have 
been increasing in numbers. The publication of the 
book One World or None has fortified the argu- 
ments of the internationalists. New committees to 
advocate international control have been created— 
the Emergency Committee for Civilian Control of 
Atomic Energy, which has the support of 59 na- 
tional organizations, and the Tri-State Committee 
of Educators, Scientists and Religious Leaders on 
Atomic Energy and Related Problems, of Pennsyl- 
vania, Ohio and West Virginia. The National Com- 
mittee on Atomic Energy, established some time 
ago, held a conference in Washington on March 26 
at which Secretary of Commerce Henry A. Wallace 
challenged the supporters of military control. 

The report presented to the Senate Committee 
by the group of experts headed by Mr. Acheson 
strengthens the position of these citizen committees 
for two reasons. First, it discloses that it is possible 
to distribute uranium to industrial consumers with- 
out fear that it will be used for military purposes, 
because the material can be so “denatured” that it 
will provide energy for peacetime uses but not 
enough energy for use in bombs. Secondly, the report 
proposes a workable method of international regula- 
tion through control of uranium at its source, instead 
of the international inspection of factories which 
had been previously discussed, and had been recog- 
nized as extremely difficult to administer. 

The report was prepared by five distinguished 
men, headed by David E. Lilienthal, chairman of 
the Tennessee Valley Authority, under the guid- 
ance of a Committee on Atomic Energy appointed 
on January 7 by Secretary of State James F. Byrnes. 
The Committee consisted of Mr. Acheson, John J. 
McCloy, former Assistant Secretary of War, Dr. 
Vannevar Bush, director of the Office of Scientific 


Research and Development, Dr. James B. Conan 
President of Harvard University, and Maj. Gey 
Leslie R. Groves, in charge of the Manhattan Dj 
trict Project which developed the atomic bomb afte, 
physicists had urged the War Department to invest, 
gate the possibilities of such a weapon. 


SHOULD MILITARY SHARE IN CONTROL) 
Yet at least two of the members of the Committe 
sponsoring the report on international control sup 
port individually a degree of American militay 
supervision which could compromise internation| 
control. Although President Truman on March \ 
for the second time stated that he favored civilian 
control, General Groves consistently has sustaine 
the military view that atomic energy is useful chief) 
in weapons. Dr. Bush said on March 15 that the 
military should not be “unduly hampered’’ in thei 
use of atomic energy. The case for the military viey 
impresses the Senate Committee. On March 12 it 
approved by a vote of 6 to 1 an amendment offered 
by Senator Arthur Vandenberg, Republican of 
Michigan, for the creation of a military liaison com- 
mittee empowered to review decisions of the 
Civilian Commission on Atomic Energy, which 
would come into existence upon enactment of the 
McMahon Bill. When Committee Chairman Brien 
McMahon, Democrat of Connecticut, objected to 
the Vandenberg amendment, the Committee ap 
proved it once more on March 13 by 10 to 1. 

Unusual difficulties will confront the United States 
in making its policy effective, whether it decides o 
an international civilian control, or on a militay 
control that would be essentially national. The 
scientists indispensable for the advancement of 
atomic experimentation resent military influence 
Scientists acquainted with some aspect of atomic 
energy are forbidden to travel abroad and may not 
discuss certain areas of their work with one another. 
They are also required to withhold certain informa 
tion from their students. ‘Science simply will not 
go forward under military domination,’ Dr. Ed 
ward U. Condon, director of the National Bureau 
of Standards, said on March 5. Dr. Irving Kaplas, 
chairman of the executive committee of the Asso 
ciation of Manhattan Scientists, New York area, 
said on March 17 that military control of atomic 
energy would work against the future peacetime de 
velopment of atomic energy in the United States 


BLAIR BOLLES 


