FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


. May 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 

sritish 

s, the} Yor. XVI, No. 40 JULY 30, 1937 
which} — 

litical THIRD LEADERSHIP INSTITUTE ON 

s stil] INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 

r, has Mortimer Schiff Camp, Mendham, New Jersey 


Sports and recreation will be combined with study and 
discussion of international problems under the guidance of 


@ fen « ~ 4 


yi Universi 


ds its expert leaders, in an informal atmosphere beside a beautiful ie f nl 
nation a , Sous people—16 to 25—are cordially invited to Ann Arbor, Mich. 
attend. 
n ton- Sponsored by the F.P.A. and the New Jersey Joint 
hough Council on International Relations. 
treaty One week—August 22 to 29 Total expense $25 
cruis- 
as the 
— BRITAIN SEEKS TO BREAK SPANISH DEADLOCK 
| Safe. Ai 
. from HE unwillingness of Europe to plunge into check the illicit arrival of foreign planes was to 
to ob- war despite the existence of innumerable be explored. 


irritants, is demonstrated by recent events in 
supple. Spain. At the beginning of July the non-inter- 
1 with vention agreement appeared to have broken down 
’s non. because Germany and Italy had once more with- 
yn hag} drawn from the naval patrol and France had 
ts Far} followed Portugal in suspending international su- 
of this) Pervision of its frontier. Although the latter 
- Blacki two governments promised to maintain existing 
remain| @mbargoes, the outside world had little assurance 
Japan that such embargoes would really be enforced 
-match}| in the absence of foreign observers. 
e Brit- 
nion is 
within 
erefore 
t made 
naval 
agreed 
. heavy 
treaty. 
rtaken, 
ximum 
th, not} 
nt ton- 


Unable to agree on any solution of the dead- 
lock, the members of the Non-Intervention Com- 
mittee agreed on July 9 to invite Britain to draw 
up a new compromise. Five days later the Brit- 
ish government submitted an ingenious scheme 
which would restore international supervision of 
the land frontiers and retain the foreign ob- 
servers on ships bound for Spain. In addition, 
Observers would also be stationed at Spanish 
ports to perform the duties hitherto undertaken 
by the naval patrol, which would be abolished. 
Second, the British plan would grant limited 
belligerent rights to Rebels as well as to Loyal- 
ists. Although belligerent war vessels would not 
sionally} be allowed to molest ships carrying foreign ob- 
p guns} servers and flying the flag of the Non-Interven- 
plicitly tion Committee, they could stop on the high seas 
e maxl-; other ships carrying contraband goods as defined 
1 is at} by the Non-Intervention Committee. Third, all 
tes an-| foreign “volunteers” would be withdrawn from 
000-ton} Spain under the supervision of an international 
h guns. commission; and the recognition of belligerent 
‘SHER | Tights would become effective only when the 
Non-Intervention Committee was of the opinion 


Nationa that “substantial progress” had been made in 
an, Editor) Such withdrawal. Finally, the possibility of sta- 


Year. 


tioning foreign observers at Spanish airdromes to 


In the House of Commons on July 15 Mr. 
Clement Attlee, leader of the Labor Opposition, 
attacked these proposals as “unjust, ill-conceived 
and dangerous”; while General Franco asserted 
that recognition of belligerency should not be 
made dependent upon any conditions. Never- 
theless, at a surprisingly peaceful session on 
July 16, the 27 members of the Non-Intervention 
Committee accepted the compromise in principle. 
Subsequently, however, sharp disagreement arose 
between the Fascist powers, which demanded 
that recognition be extended to Franco at once, 
and the non-Fascist powers, which refused to 
accord such recognition until after the with- 
drawal of foreign volunteers had been ar- 
ranged. Despite efforts to find a solution through 
resort to sub-committees and questionnaires, no 
agreement has yet been reached. The deadlock 
which arose following the alleged attack upon 
the Leipzig in June remains unsolved. 


By agreeing to abolish the naval patrol and 
recognize Franco’s belligerency, the British plan 
favors the Rebels. Once accorded belligerent 
status, Franco could blockade the Valencia and 
Barcelona coasts by virtue of his control of the 
Spanish navy. However, after the gains made 
by the Rebels during the first year of the civil 
war, it would hardly violate international law 
to recognize them as belligerents. Yet before 
making this concession, Britain and France must 
make sure that Germany and Italy will really 
withdraw from Spain and consent to localize the 
war. The refusal of these powers to accept such 
terms is increasing the fear, both in Britain and 
France, that the real Fascist objective is not to 
fight bolshevism but to establish a protectorate 
over Spain so as to undermine the British posi- 
tion in the Mediterranean and the French posi- 


ty of Michigan Library 


— 


fH 4 
| } 
i 
* 
f 
ij 
4 
iy 
Z 


EDS 


tion in Europe. Britain has shown concern over 
reports that fortifications have been erected on 
the Spanish mainland near Gibraltar and has 
been disturbed by the trade agreement signed 
by Franco on July 19 under which the bulk of 
the iron ore of the Basque country will be ex- 
ported to Germany. A certain stiffening in Brit- 
ish policy may be indicated by Foreign Minister 
Eden’s speech delivered in the House of Commons 
on July 19. “This country has every intention 
of defending its national interests in the Mediter- 
ranean... ,” he declared; and then added sig- 
nificantly, “It has always been and is today a 
major British interest that no great power should 
establish itself on the eastern shore of the Red 


Sea”—a warning to Italy not to establish a pro- 


tectorate over Yemen. 


In France the Chautemps government, forced 
to adopt a financial policy distasteful to the 
Popular Front, may be obliged to make conces- 
sions to its Socialist and Communist supporters 
by adopting a more rigorous policy toward Spain. 
The attitude of the workers of many countries 
was expressed on June 24 when the Socialist 
and Trade Union Internationals, meeting in Paris, 
demanded that the arms embargo against the 
Valencia government be lifted. If Germany and 
Italy do not soon agree to the restoration of an 
effective non-intervention agreement, France will 
probably lift the arms embargo, thus intensifying 
rivalry over the peninsula. 


Meanwhile, during July the Valencia govern- 
ment, beginning the greatest offensive of the war, 
succeeded in pushing back the Rebels about 10 
miles on the Madrid front and capturing the 
strategically important village of Brunete. By 
July 25, however, Franco’s troops had recaptured 
the village after fierce fighting. Whether this 
victory will prove decisive or merely inaugurate 
a new deadlock no one can predict. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


NORTH CHINA TENSION ,CONTINUES 


New and serious clashes in the Peiping area, 
on July 25 and 26, have markedly diminished the 
prospects for peaceful settlement of the Sino- 
Japanese dispute. While Nanking maintains that 
the only agreement of which it is cognizant mere- 
ly provides for withdrawal of both the Chinese 
and Japanese fighting forces, the Chinese offi- 
cials concerned have not denied that on July 19 
they assented to a settlement published in Tokyo 
on July 23. Under its terms the Hopei-Chahar po- 
litical council, the governing body of the semi-au- 
tonomous area in which the military disturbances 
have occurred, agrees to: (1) tender due apology 


Page Two = 


for the original incident and punish those held 
responsible; (2) remove from official posts “per- 
sons impeding good Chino-Japanese relations”; 
(3) suppress the Communist party completely; 
(4) control “anti-Japanese movements and anti- 
Japanese education”; and (5) transfer to remote 
areas the troops involved in the original clashes, 


If these terms are whole-heartedly fulfilled the 
Hopei-Chahar area will become another satrapy 
of the Japanese military, and the door will be 
open for easy penetration of all North China. Of- 
ficials who dare to oppose Tokyo’s orders will be 
removed. Every agency of Chinese nationalism 
or anti-Japanese propaganda—including, perhaps, 
the educational institutions in the Peiping district 
—will be promptly suppressed. 


When Japanese troops failed to leave the 
scene of conflict, as the Chinese had believed 
they would, the subordinate officers and the 
rank-and-file of the Chinese troops refused 
to withdraw. Only a small portion of the 
strongly anti-Japanese Thirty-seventh Division 
has left the Peiping area. Their patience ex- 
hausted, Japanese military commanders on July 
26 issued an ultimatum stating that the remainder 
must be evacuated by noon, July 28. Moreover, 
recent skirmishes have involved troops which the 
Japanese had regarded as relatively partial to- 
ward them, and hence suitable to replace the 
Thirty-seventh Division in the Peiping garrisons. 
The morale of the native soldiery has also been 
bolstered by the arrival on the scene of General 
Hsiung Ping, vice-chief of staff of the Nanking 
government’s armies. His arrival, the only physi- 
cal evidence of Nanking’s support, has been fol- 
lowed by a perceptibly stiffer attitude on the part 
of the Chinese leaders. 


In the face of Japan’s determination not to yield, 
expressed before the Diet by Koki Hirota, Japanese 
foreign minister, on July 27, the ultimate decision 
for peace or war lies squarely with the Nanking 
government. Chiang Kai-shek is obviously con- 
fronted by a dilemma. On the one hand, his 
preparations for war are not yet complete; on the 
other, the inflamed nationalist sentiment of the 
Chinese people demands defiance of Japan. The 
situation calls for the most delicate maneuvering, 
either for an honorable compromise or for satis- 
faction of the Japanese in such obscure form that 
the country at large is not aware of Nanking’s 
surrender. The Chinese central government 
would rather fight later than fight now, but it is 
still too soon to determine whether Japan will 
force an immediate solution of the controversy. 


DAVID H. POPPER 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 40, Jury 30, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp LesLiB BugELL, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MicHeELes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


One Dollar a Year. 


i 
FOF 


An inte 


EEE 
Vou. XV 


is lit 
proc 
imp 
This 
and 

August 1 


—— 
—_—_———— 


L 
W. 


lish cor 
sea, ant 
and Ja 
Tientsi 
ment o 
for the 
The Ja 
repairi 
warfar 
tegic r: 
The 
collaps: 
scale J 
culties 
equipp 
vanced 
piratio 
defend 
west o 
towarc 
ly dep! 
tsin, a: 


) the pu: 


Preser 
traines 
quick]: 
a shor 


