m— 8 DP OO =~ 2D RB Phos WS YO 


—_ | 


1 rt A ew OD bee OD ee 


ors 


© ON =e t me 8 OD OF ort @& ¢ ' 


—_— 


— 


ono S — » 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL. XV, No. 52 OcTOBER 23, 1936 





THE HULL TRADE PROGRAM 
by David H. Popper 


An analysis of the reciprocal trade program—a prominent 
issue in the present election campaign. Shall it be continued? 
Are current criticisms based on fact? Would the alternative 
course proposed by certain critics prove politically or 
economically possible for the United States? 


October 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at che Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under che act 
of March.4, 4879. 











Periodical Division, 
Library of Congress, 


Washington, D. €. 











BELGIUM REVERTS 


TO NEUTRALITY 





ITH King Leopold’s sudden announcement 

on October 14 that Belgium would resume a 
policy of neutrality and maintain a stronger mili- 
tary establishment to discourage any attempt to 
violate Belgian territory, another pillar in the 
structure of collective security has crumbled. The 
King’s statement cites four causes for Belgium’s 
decision to revert to its pre-war status: reoccupa- 
tion of the Rhineland which, “by ending the Lo- 
carno arrangement, has almost brought us back 
to our international position before the war’; 
German rearmament; the improbability that for- 
eign military aid could reach Belgium in time to 
parry the swift initial blow of a modern army; 
and the apparent impossibility of preserving in- 
ternational security through application of the 
League Covenant. The King, moreover, calls for 
an “exclusively Belgian” policy which aims “solely 
at placing us outside the quarrels of our neigh- 
bors” —a reference to the distaste with which Bel- 
gium regards the possibility that it might be 
drawn into a European conflict by way of the 
Franco-Belgian alliance and the Franco-Soviet 
pact. All these considerations had affected public 
opinion in Belgium, large sections of which now 
favor a policy of neutrality and will accept a 
longer period of compulsory military service only 
if such a policy is adopted. 

What had first seemed an outright repudiation 
of Belgium’s international obligations was reduced 
to a statement of future policy in the course of 
diplomatic conversations held in Brussels, London 
and Paris on October 15-17. The Belgian Foreign 
Office indicated that the country will for the pres- 
ent continue to observe its obligations under the 
League Covenant, the Franco-Belgian alliance of 
1920 and the London agreement of April 1, 1936, 
which provided for military staff conversations to 
prepare for possible German aggression. Bel- 
gium’s prospective course of action, however, is 
to be cast in a radically different mold. Although 


it welcomes guarantees of its territory, Belgium 
will not join any Western European security pact. 
In due time Belgium will seek to free itself from 
the punitive provisions of Article XVI of the 
League Covenant. It also intends to terminate all 
military accords as soon as it believes the situa- 
tion in Western Europe has been clarified by nego- 
tiation of an agreement replacing the Locarno 
treaties of 1925. 

While the abrupt announcement of Belgium’s 
defection dismayed the French, Britain—reported 
to have been consulted in advance—received the 
news with relative calm. A rearmed Belgium, it 
was felt in London, would actually aid France and 
Britain in combating German aggression in the 
West. This point of view failed to take into ac- 
count the possibility that Nazi aggression else- 
where, which might eventually involve Britain, 
would be encouraged by the breakdown of collec- 
tive security in Western Europe. That Hitler 
might be proceeding on this assumption was indi- 
cated by the terms of a German note on the organ- 
ization of collective security, delivered in London 
on October 15. Germany’s conditions further dim 
the hope for convocation of a new Locarno confer- 
ence at an early date. Scrapping all dependence 
on League principles, the Hitler government has 
proposed a vague four-power pact in which Brit- 
ain, France, Germany and Italy would guarantee 
the integrity of Belgium and the Netherlands. 
Each power would decide for itself whether an 
act of aggression calling for armed assistance to 
the victim had been committed. Hitler refuses, 
moreover, to link the proposed pact directly or in- 
directly with the treaty structure of Eastern 
Europe. Any agreement concluded on this basis 
would leave the Reich relatively free to embark 
on the Eastern crusade foreshadowed in Hitler’s 
Mein Kampf without fear of attack from the rear. 


Although such a development would in the end 
be fraught with danger for Britain, the Conserva- 











tive party’s foreign policy seems for the present 
to be limited to superficial pacification of the dis- 
cordant elements in Europe pending completion 
of its rearmament program. This purpose was 
clearly suggested by Britain’s reaction to a Soviet 
note of October 12, urging the establishment of a 
naval blockade of Portuguese seaports to cut off 
the flow of munitions to the Spanish Rebels. The 
Earl of Plymouth, acting chairman of the London 
non-intervention committee, refused the Soviet re- 
quest for an immediate meeting and gave no inti- 
mation of the date on which Portugal, Germany 
and Italy would reply to Soviet charges that they 
were violating the non-intervention agreement. 
The Soviet Union, whose press has been filled with 
angry protests against Fascist aid to the Rebels in 
Spain, was reported to be planning new moves for 
the benefit of the Spanish Loyalists. 


As a Rebel triumph approached in Spain, Fas- 
cism scored another coup in Danzig. On October 
14, Nazi leaders in the Free City dissolved the 
Social Democratic party and arrested many of its 
leaders, thus acquiring the two-thirds majority in 
the Diet necessary for “legal” change of the Con- 
stitution to permit the establishment of a total- 
itarian state. Neither the League nor Poland ap- 
peared inclined to challenge this step. On Sep- 
tember 30, the League withdrew its High Commis- 
sioner, Sean Lester, although he will continue his 
work until a successor is appointed. Meanwhile 
Poland, like Belgium, was engrossed in the task of 
preserving a tenuous neutrality between potential 
antagonists—a course into which both countries 
had been forced by the failure of Europe to con- 
front disturbers of the peace with the threat of 


collective action. DAVID H. PopPER 


KINGS’ APPEAL ENDS PALESTINE STRIKE 


After nearly six months of violence and blood- 
shed, the Arab general strike in Palestine was offi- 
cially brought to an end on September 12, the date 
of an important Moslem holiday. The announced 
objectives of the strike—stoppage of Jewish im- 
migration and of land sale to Jews, and the grant- 
ing of autonomy to the Arab community—were 
not attained, but the Arab leaders saved face by 
appearing to yield to a personal appeal sent, at 
the direct request of the Arab Higher Committee 
in Palestine, by the Arab rulers of Saudi Arabia, 
Iraq, Transjordan and the Yemen. The presence 
of the new military commander of Palestine, Lieu- 
tenant-General J. G. Dill; the 15,000 fresh British 
troops which have entered the country during the 
past month; and the threat of martial law, for 
which proclamations had already been printed, 





Page Two —= 





played a major part in bringing about the Arab | 
decision. Growing dissatisfaction among the 
strike-impoverished Arab population, and the im- 
minence of the citrus fruit export season—ex- 
pected to be more lucrative than usual this year 
because of curtailed Spanish production—also in- 
fluenced the Arab leaders. 


Business has been resumed throughout Pales- 
tine, although the six-month stoppage of com- 
merce has raised a number of difficult problems 
of adjustment, in particular that caused by the 
new all-Jewish port at Tel Aviv, created since the 
beginning of the disorders and now handling 
much of the traffic which formerly passed through 
the Arab harbor at Jaffa. The end of the strike 
has also brought about the practical cessation of 
guerilla warfare waged by roving Arab bands, 
whose leaders have now returned to the military 
positions in Iraq and other Arab countries which 
they had resigned in order to take command of the 
Palestine terrorists. Sporadic sniping and attacks 
on Jewish colonies still continue, but on the whole 
the country has regained such a measure of peace 
that the royal commission, appointed in July to 
determine the causes of the disorders, is expected 
to leave England soon to begin its inquiry. 

The intervention of the Arab kings introduces 
a new element into the Palestine situation. It 
gives official sanction to the inclusion of Palestine 
Arabs in the general pan-Arab movement and sets 
a precedent which mray have important effects on 
future controversies. One immediate result is the 
rise of anti-Semitic agitation in other Arab coun- 
tries, particularly Iraq. HELEN FISHER 





The Tumult and the Shouting, by George Slocombe. New 
York, Macmillan, 1936. $3.50 


Personal and diplomatic adventures of a celebrated Brit- 
ish foreign correspondent. 


The United States and Europe, 1815-1828, by Edward H. 
Tatum, Jr. Berkeley, California, University of Cali- 
fornia Press, 1936. $3.00 
An interesting and valuable criticism of the conven- 

tional view of the Monroe Doctrine. 


Chile: Land and Society, by George McCutcheon McBride. 
New York, American Geographical Society, 1936. $4.00 


A detailed and comprehensive investigation of landhold- 
ing in Chile, and a work of fundamental importance to all 
students of Latin America. 


Realism and Nationaliam, 1852-1871, by Robert C. Binkley. 
New York, Harper, 1935. $3.75 


A valuable survey showing the breakdown of the Euro- 
pean concert system in favor of competitive nationalism, | 
and the rise of the materialistic philosophy. 


Public Finance, by Harley L. Lutz. New York, Appleton- 
Century, 1936. $4.00 


New edition of a standard work. > 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 52, Ocrosper 23, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Sereet, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lesire Bue, President; EstuHmm G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera Micueies Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class mater December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 














