de 


| 


on these 
! author. 
defense, 
defense 
ctant to 
, lead to 
ast. 
nportant 
e Execu- 
ened in 
offer to 
\porarily 
nned his 
cut the 
can neu- 
| parried 
n of the 
xtent of 
terial to 


in other 
d to ex- 
he Presi- 
t of the 
$2,000,- 
ord vote 
e Senate 
, proviso 
port on 
; well as 
owers in 
Export- 
Commis- 
oration, 
al diplo- 


1 to em- 


1ancellor 
ministra- 
lis is the 
n is pre- 


If Hitler 


ration is | 


1 of eco- 


with a | 


sent to 
new ap- 
resident 
of either 
another 
STONE 


> wal 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vout. XVIII, No. 28 


—_—_—_— 


May 5, 1939 


For a realistic appraisal of our present military pro- 
gram, highly important at a moment when national 


defense expenditures are rapidly increasing, read: 
AMERICAN DEFENSE POLICIES by David H. Popper 


May 1 issue of FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS .. . 25 cents 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


General Library 


La Lf ' an 
University o- Michig 


Qi n Arbor. Mich. 
. p 
ow ype 
Peary we 
wl ) 
GO a: 
A\ 


ll 


HITLER REAFFIRMS EXPANSIONIST PROGRAM 


AS had been anticipated, Chancellor Hitler's reply 
to President Roosevelt's proposals, delivered 
before the Reichstag on April 28, constituted a com- 
plete rejection. In one of his best propagandist 
efforts, the Fuehrer poured scorn and ridicule on 
every one of the American suggestions—in a man- 
ner cleverly calculated to destroy their effect on the 
German people and the world at large. Germany 
was willing enough, he asserted, to give assurances to 
nations which felt themselves menaced, but only as 
the result of bilateral negotiations and on a recipro- 
cal basis. The Reich could not afford to disarm in 
the naive expectation that its “just” claims would 
be met; nor could it put its trust in economic con- 
ferences, all of which had ended in failure. Germany, 
Hitler intimated, would continue to rely on the 
“bloodless” methods it had pursued with such suc- 
cess in recent years; and President Roosevelt would 
do better to confine his efforts to the defense of the 
American continent, which the German government 
had no intention of attacking. 


PACTS WITH BRITAIN, POLAND ABRO- 
GATED. Actually only a relatively small part of the 
Fuehrer’s address was devoted to the President's 
note. The major portion consisted of the customary 
indictment of the Versailles Treaty and a lengthy 
justification of Germany’s recent policies. The only 
significant pronouncements related to the abrogation 
of the Anglo-German naval agreement of June 18,, 
1935 and the 10-year pact of friendship and non- 
aggression concluded by Poland and the Reich on 
January 26, 1934. Denunciation of both these ac- 
cords, confirmed by notes published on April 28, had 
been regarded as a foregone conclusion ever since 
the negotiation of a virtual Anglo-Polish alliance. 
The exchange of pledges of assistance by Poland and 
Britain, Hitler argued, had removed the assumption 


on which both agreements were based—that neither 
country would ever wage war against Germany. 

Termination of the Anglo-German naval agree- 
ment, which limited the Reich’s naval tonnage to 35 
per cent of the British, is in itself of little practical 
importance, since Germany will be unable for some 
time to build rapidly enough to reduce Britain’s tre- 
mendous margin of superiority. But it reflects Ber- 
lin’s bitterness against London, which is once more 
accused, as in pre-war days, of encircling the Reich. 
While the German government has at present no 
desire to attack Britain directly, it is clear that Gott 
strafe England will again be the rallying cry of any 
war in which Germany may become involved as a 
result of its policy of continental expansion. 


More important is the abrogation of the Polish 
agreement, which follows Poland’s refusal to enter- 
tain German demands for Danzig and an extraterri- 
torial railway and automobile highway through the 
Polish Corridor connecting East Prussia with the 
Reich. The German government claims — but the 
Poles deny—that these demands, presented at the 
end of March, were accompanied by an offer to con- 
clude a 25-year non-aggression pact; to protect Po- 
land’s economic interests in Danzig, particularly by 
establishing a free port; and to invite Warsaw’s par- 
ticipation in a guarantee of Slovakia’s independence. 
These proposals, so reasonable on the surface, dem- 
onstrate once more how astutely Hitler chooses his 
ground so as to avoid giving his opponents a justifi- 
able cause for war. 

HITLER’S TECHNIQUE OF ATTRITION. 
Speculation on the timing and direction of Ger- 
many’s next step is rife again. Hitler may find it 
expedient to abstain from any dramatic coup at 
Poland’s expense so long as the present temper in 
Britain and France compels resistance to any “direct 


SE 
a 


= —— 
— — 


action.”” He will probably count on steady and con- 
tinuous pressure to keep the atmosphere so critical 
that satisfaction of German demands will appear to 
be the only remedy. Should Poland yield, a new issue 
on which war would be joined may not arise for 
some time, unless Britain and France deliberately 
precipitate a conflict. The Reich will not necessarily 
demand more territory on the continent, provided 
the countries of Eastern and Southeastern Europe 
agree to coordinate their economic life with that of 
Germany along the lines laid down in the German- 
Rumanian treaty of March 23. In this area the Ger- 
man government may carve out an exclusive “sphere 
of influence,” proceeding gradually so that no issue 
will at any time be sufficiently important to pro- 
voke war. 

DETERIORATION OF GERMAN ECONOMY. 
This technique is made essential by Germany's own 
internal economic situation. Many signs indicate 
that the country’s economy could not stand the strain 
of a prolonged war. Reserves which would normally 
be utilized only in wartime are already being used and 
have been partly or wholly exhausted. The labor 
shortage is so acute that the government has ex- 
tended the working week to 60 hours in many in- 
dustries essential to national defense, and forbidden 
workers and employees in many branches to leave 
their jobs without the consent of the labor offices. 


EUROPE ON THE ALERT 


The impression made on Europe by Hitler's 
Reichstag speech was at once less pacifying and less 
alarming than that of his previous addresses. The 
Fuehrer’s reiteration of his peaceful intentions — 
doubtless sincere, since he still hopes to achieve his 
objectives without a general war—no longer had 
the effect of lulling Germany’s neighbors into the 
false sense of security produced by Munich. At the 
same time, their very awareness of critical times 
ahead, with or without armed conflict, removed that 
sense of helpless panic which has hitherto been one 
of Hitler’s principal weapons against the democra- 
cies. Paradoxical as it may seem, the state of hyper- 
tension created by Hitler’s policy has diminished the 
fear of armed conflict, since war, destructive as it 
would obviously be, may soon seem less ruinous and 
nerve-racking to Germany's neighbors than present- 
day “peace.” 

WILL POLAND FIGHT FOR DANZIG? This 
feeling is illustrated in the case of Danzig, brought 
to a head by Hitler’s denunciation of the German- 
Polish non-aggression pact. While Danzig had his- 
toric ties with Poland, its population was predom- 
inantly German in 1919, when the Paris Peace Con- 
ference separated it from the Reich to provide Po- 
land with access to the sea. Warsaw’s fighting mood 


Page Two 


4 
—— 


Hundreds of small commercial and artisan enter. 
prises have been closed to provide workers for in. 
dustry. Despite considerable replacement and exten. 
sion of plant, industrial machinery and equipment 
are in many cases showing serious signs of de. 
terioration under the strain of continuous opera. 
tion. The government has published an impressive 
three-year-plan to replenish the depleted rolling 
stock of the railways, but it is doubtful that enough 
labor and material can be found to remedy the grave 
deficiencies of the transportation system. Meanwhile, 
the government is rapidly exhausting every device 
to obtain money for its many enterprises. On May 1 
it inaugurated a new financial plan involving the 
payment of public orders through the wholesale 
issue of tax-anticipation warrants which may be used 
by industrial entrepreneurs up to 40 per cent in | 
discharging obligations to other concerns, and thus 
add to the danger of inflation. Taxation is already | 
very high; and it is significant that widespread pro- 

test induced the government on April 27 to reduce | 
the new tax on income-increment from 30 to 15 per | 
cent. While these various measures do not threaten | 
financial or economic collapse under existing circum- 

stances, they do indicate that the Reich will be dis. 

inclined to face a war which would overstrain its | 
resources. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


FOR HITLER’S NEXT MOVE 


diminished in recent years by the construction of the 
Polish port of Gdynia—than to its belief that, once 
Germany reoccupies Danzig, it will soon seize the 
Polish Corridor, which is Danzig’s natural hinter- 
land and had a predominantly Polish population in | 
1919. After seeing Czechoslovakia partitioned by 
piece-meal concessions—of which it took its share— 
Poland has no intention of suffering a similar fate, 
and has indicated its determination to fig ht i if Ger 
many uses force to secure its demands. 


Should Poland decide to fight for Danzig and the 
Corridor, can it count on Franco-British support? 
The semi-official British communiqué of April 1,* | 
clarifying Mr. Chamberlain's March 31 pledge to 
Warsaw, stated that, in the case of Danzig and the | 
Corridor, “it is up to Poland to decide if at any 
moment it feels its independence threatened.” | 
ports from Paris and London following sna | 
speech suggested the possibility that Britain and 
France, as in the case of Czechoslovakia last Septem- 
ber, might urge Poland to make territorial cessions 
for the sake of preserving peace. Should this occur, 
Hitler's method of winning bloodless victories ovet 


is due less to the economic value of the Free City— | 
| 


*‘‘Chamberlain Speeds Stop-Hitler Coalition,’’ 


Foreign Policy Bulletin, 
April 7, 1939 


$$ 


2 enter. 
for in. 
d exten. 
uipment 
of de. 
} Opera- 
pressive 
rolling 
enough 
re grave 
anwhile, 
y device 
1 May 1 
ying the 
holesale 
be used 
cent in 
ind thus 
already 
ead pro- 
> reduce 
> 15 per 
threaten 
+ Cifcum- 
l be dis- 


train its 


/ ILDE 


e City— 
mn of the 
lat, once 
seize the 
1 hinter- 
lation in 
oned by 
|, share— 
ilar fate, 
t if Ger 


r and the 
support? 
\pril 1,* 
ledge to 
and the 


f at any | 


ed.”’ Re- 
Hitler's 


rain and | 


- Septem- 
cessions 
iS occuf, 

ries ovet 


icy Bulletin, 


— 
— 


the least powerful of his opponents would register 
another triumph, and the renewed faith of small 
sates in the leadership of Britain and France 
might be irrevocably destroyed. The real question 
is whether the British-led coalition should now join 
issue with Hitler at every point menaced by the Third 
Reich, no matter how defensible Germany’s claim 
may be on historical or legal grounds, or allow the 
Reich to recover another pre-Versailles territory be- 
fore coming to grips with it. 


HOW STRONG IS THE ROME-BERLIN AXIS? 
If the prospect of a general war on behalf of Danzig 
and the Corridor seems distasteful to France and 
Britain, it is hardly more attractive for Italy, which 
until now has avoided an open military alliance 
with the Third Reich, and has no desire to forfeit 
any advantages it may gain in the Mediterranean 
for the sake of winning German victories on the 
Eastern front. Hitler, of course, may be expected to 
use all the pressure at his disposal to retain Italy 
within the axis, and seems ready to pay for Italian 
aid in Eastern Europe by German technical and mili- 
tary assistance in Africa. General Goering has just 
inspected Libya, where the Italian government hopes 
to find homes for 80,000 colonists by 1941, and 
his visit was closely followed by that of Colonel 
General Brauchitsch, Commander-in-Chief of the 
German army, who reached Rome on April 30. The 
French suspect that the axis powers are planning to 
establish a sort of Mittel-Afrika—corresponding to 
the Nazi Mittel-Europa—by connecting Italian 
Libya with the former German Cameroons (now 
under a French mandate), from which they could 
menace Egypt and the Suez Canal, to say nothing 
of cutting Britain off from the Union of South 
Africa. The Libyan preparations, coupled with the 
possible visit of German warships to Italy and the 
tepeatedly postponed withdrawal of Italian troops 
from Spain, suggest that the axis powers hope to 
distract Franco-British attention to the Mediter- 
tanean while Hitler delivers a blow at Poland. 


The Rome-Berlin axis, however, is not free from 
stress and strain. Fear of a general war troubles the 
Italian people, who seem less and less enthusiastic 
about collaboration with Germany. In Spain, Ger- 
man technicians are seeking to exploit resources of 
mercury and pyrites in direct competition with Italy. 


The settlement of the Croatian problem forecast on , 


April 26, which would grant Croatia autonomy in 
all fields except finance, defense and foreign affairs, 
promises to strengthen the internal position of 
Yugoslavia and increase its resistance to the pres- 


Page Three 


sure of the axis powers. Meanwhile, Rumania hopes 
to counterbalance Germany's growing economic in- 
fluence by closer ties with Britain, which has sent 
to Bucharest a mission headed by its chief economic 
adviser, Sir Frederick Leith-Ross, and with the United 
States, where it is negotiating for resumption of war 
debt payments. 

In this tense period of “no peace, no war,” which 
Hitler’s speech did nothing to relieve, the best course 
for the Western democracies is to remain on the 
alert for Germany’s next blow, which is sure to be 
struck where it is least expected; convince Germany, 
if possible, that any further attempt to use force or 
threat of force will meet with concerted resistance; 
and yet leave the door open for future adjustments, 
which must be compatible with the interests not 
only of Germany, but of other states. If war is 
avoided, the eventual settlement must be reached by 
general negotiations, not imposed at Hitler’s Diktat 
which, if Czech experience is any guide, would be 
even more drastic than the Versailles Diktat he has 


so vigorously denounced. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FPA BOARD ANNOUNCES STAFF CHANGES 

The Board of Directors announces with deep re- 
gret that Mr. Buell has resigned as President of the 
Foreign Policy Association, as of July 1—when his 
six-month leave of absence expires—in order to carry 
on his work as Round Table Editor of Fortune. Mr. 
Stone is continuing as Acting President. 

Mr. Buell has been associated with the F.P.A. for 
twelve years (1927-1939), first as Research Director 
and, following Mr. McDonald’s resignation in 1933, 
as President of the Association. During this period, 
Mr. Buell developed the Research Department 
which, under his direction, achieved the objective 
of putting scholarship to work, and made a dis- 
tinguished contribution to knowledge of interna- 
tional affairs in the United States. The members 
of the F.P.A. may be assured that Mr. Buell will 
retain an active interest in the Association. 


The Board of Directors also announces that the 
F.P.A. has just inaugurated an extensive research 
program on Latin America. To assist in this program, 
Howard J. Trueblood, economic analyst and for 
several years manager of the Foreign Securities Di- 
vision of the Standard Statistics Company, has been 
appointed to the Research Department as Latin 
American expert. Under this program, the Associa- 
tion will study raw material resources, problems of 
trade competition, and political and economic trends 
in Latin America. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 28, May 5, 


1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND Lustre BUELL, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micustas Dagan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


iste 181 
te 


Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


sibben, 


ibd beings 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


May 1.—Whatever its effect on the immediate 
future of Europe, Chancellor Hitler's reply to Presi- 
dent Roosevelt has not altered the fundamental po- 
sition of the United States. It has not deflected the 
White House and the State Department from the 
course on which they have embarked, nor has it 
changed the attitude of Congress in any important 
respect. In appraising the Washington position, how- 
ever, it is still necessary to distinguish between the re- 
actions of the Executive and those of Congress. For it 
is difficult to conceal the fact that the arguments so 
adroitly advanced by Hitler have served to accentu- 
ate, rather than reduce, the division of opinion be- 
tween the two policy-forming branches of the gov- 
ernment. 


STATE DEPARTMENT REACTION. Within 
the Executive, Hitler's answer from Berlin has con- 
firmed the worst fears of the President and his State 
Department advisers. While Secretary Hull has 
maintained official silence, it is apparent that the 
State Department has no illusions regarding the sig- 
nificance of the Reichstag speech. In Hitler's de- 
mands for “living room’ in Europe they recognize 
a formal proclamation of Germany's “right” to pro- 
ceed with its own dynamic revision of the status quo. 
In his offer to negotiate individually with large and 
small powers, they see no chance for peaceful ad- 
justments except on Germany's terms and in har- 
mony with the needs of the Reich. In the termination 
of the Anglo-German naval accord, they read a 
warning to Prime Minister Chamberlain not to in- 
terfere with further adjustments on the continent. 
And in their opinion, the denunciation of the 10- 
year non-aggression pact with Poland presages an- 
other showdown backed by the threat of force, with 
Poland cast in the rdle of Czechoslovakia. 


This threat of force, however, has apparently 
strengthened the determination of the White House 
and the State Department to proceed with a positive 
policy. Up to this point, the President has acted on 
the conviction that Hitler would not attempt any 
“forceful” solution in Europe if he was quite certain 
that his action would precipitate a general conflict. 
There is no evidence in Washington that this basic 
conviction has been altered by the developments of 
the past few days. On the contrary, there is every 
indication that Hitler's ironic counter-attack has 
strengthened the belief that war can yet be averted 


® 
by a show of firm resistance. While the Washing. (iad 


ton Administration cannot dictate the course of Lop. 
don or Paris, it clearly intends to do all in its powe 
to indicate that the time for resistance may be near 
at hand. 

CONGRESS AND NEUTRALITY. If Hitlers 
speech confirmed the fears of the Executive, it also 


increased the fears of Congress. While a few mem. 
bers of both Houses professed to see some hope for | 
peaceful settlement, the vast majority were more | 


concerned by the threat of war and the dread of | 


American involvement. To those who have opposed 
the President's active intervention in Europe, Hitler's 
answer gave convincing proof that the United States 
should keep “hands off” from now on. The isolation- 
ists, who had hitherto seen no chance of calling a 
halt, found in the reply a final opportunity to register 
effective resistance. Even among those who have sup- 
ported the Executive program, there were some who 
counseled a course of greater caution in the future 


Only a small minority urged a policy of measures | 


“short of war.” 


While Hitler’s speech has widened the gap be. 
tween the President and Congress, there is no cer- 
tainty that this gap will prove enduring. For the 
moment, Congress has not accepted the President's 
assumption that the vital interests of the United 
States are involved in the European conflict. Nor 
has it concurred in the President's belief that meas- 
ures “short of war” will stop Hitler's European 
expansion. At the same time, a majority of both 
Houses are clearly hostile to Germany's recent ex- 
pansion, and overwhelmingly in favor of the Anglo- 
French coalition. 

The significance of this sentiment was shown this 
week, when informal polls of the Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee revealed increasing support for 


the Pittman amendment to the Neutrality Act, which 
is privately favored by the State Department precisely 
because it permits the export of munitions to Britain 
and France. Simultaneously, the President has sought 
to persuade Congressional leaders, who still suspect 
his motives, that he is determined not to send Ameti- 
can troops to fight on European soil, and that his ef- 
forts to support the Anglo-French coalition will be 


confined to economic measures. In the end, the posi- | 


tions of Congress and the Executive seem destined 
to become merged, if and when the Anglo-French 
coalition is in danger of defeat by the dictatorships. 


W. T. STONE 


