



re- 


vet 
iri- 
re- 


4 


ein. 
ess, 


ibly 
rac- 


Jon, 


tish 


ional 
ditor. 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL. XV, No. 12 


JANUARY 17, 1936 





THE NEW AMERICAN NEUTRALITY 


by Raymond Leslie Buell 
The pros and cons of the new “neutrality”; the Neutrality 
Act of August 24, 1935; the administration and “isolationist” 
bills now pending before Congress. 


Can the United States remain neutral? 


January 16 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
a oe N. Y., under the act 
Y g ¢ [42a March 3, 1879. 











Periodical Division, 
Tibrary of Congress, 


‘ashington, D. C. 











_JAPAN BEATS A_ RETREAT 





AT LONDON 





T the London naval conference, no less than 

in China, the smooth progress of Japan’s 
war chariot has been brought to a jarring halt 
during recent weeks. The thorough airing given 
the Japanese delegation’s demand for naval parity 
in early December proved somewhat disillusioning 
to Tokyo, especially in view of the lead taken in 
this matter by Great Britain. Asa result, Japan’s 
delegates agreed temporarily to shelve discussion 
of a “common upper limit,” and the conference 
proceeded to a consideration of British proposals 
for an advance exchange of information on build- 
ing programs. Progress along this line was halted 
on January 8, when Admiral Nagano refused to 
engage in further discussion of such proposals un- 
til his delegation’s demand for parity had been 
granted. This statement at once provoked a crisis. 
Far from yielding, however, the other conferees 
allowed it to be suggested that the conference 
would continue after the threatened withdrawal of 
the Japanese delegation, and that Germany and 
the Soviet Union would be invited to attend fur- 
ther sessions. Faced with complete isolation, 
Tokyo beat a hasty retreat. New instructions is- 
sued by the Japanese Cabinet on January 12 
ordered Admiral Nagano to refrain from with- 
drawal unless the conference rejected the parity 
principle outright. 


This lessened intransigence on naval matters, as 
well as the hesitation evinced in the north China 
“autonomy” program, illustrates Tokyo’s dilem- 
ma. The bitter domestic campaign against the 
“betrayal” involved in the 5-5-3 ratio precludes 
any thought of surrender on the parity issue by 
Japanese leaders. On the other hand, there is a 
tardy realization of the benefits which accrued to 
Japan by reason of the limits imposed on British 
and American naval construction. Not only would 
the costs of maintaining parity place an additional 
strain on Japan’s finances. Politically, such money 
would be ill spent if it encouraged Anglo-Ameri- 


can cooperation in defense of the Western stake 
in China. 


The emphasis of Tokyo’s China policy has al- 
ready shifted to meet this new situation. Faced 
by an aroused Chinese nationalism, which has 
temporarily blocked the path of “cooperation” 
with Nanking, Japan has halted its drive into 
north China and thereby lessened the immediate 
threat to Anglo-American interests. At the same 
time, there has been a marked increase in Jap- 
anese provocations against the Soviet Union. Jap- 
anese forces have occupied northern Chahar and 
entered Suiyuan, extending the encirclement of 
Outer Mongolia. Renewed “incide.ts” have oc- 
curred on the border between Outer Mongolia 
and “Manchoukuo.” On January 9 Soviet border 
guards seized a Japanese military plane which 
had landed 25 miles inside the Siberian frontier 
near Vladivostok. Finally, there have been fur- 
ther reports that Japan’s army leaders are seek- 
ing to conclude a military agreement with Ger- 
many. These events may be a hint to the Western 
powers that Japan’s actions in north China are 
solely directed toward preparing the base for an 
attack on the Soviet Union. Should this thesis 
be accepted by Britain and the United States, the 
serious risks of war now existing in the Far East 
would be intensified. Such an outcome of Anglo- 
American cooperation in the Orient would provide 
an ironical commentary on the efficacy of “power 
politics.” A Japanese attack on the Soviet Union, 
especially if seconded by Germany, could least of 
all be localized. Any support accorded to this en- 
terprise opens up the shortest route to a world- 
wide conflict. 

If Anglo-American cooperation on Far Eastern 
issues is to justify itself, it must be conducted in 
such a way that it strengthens the collective se- 
curity system. The machinery for such action al- 
ready exists in the Far Eastern Advisory Com- 
mittee of 22 nations, set up by the League Assem- 









































































bly in February 1933 to enforce the verdict ren- 
dered on the Manchurian dispute. At the time, 
the United States accepted membership on this 
committee, while the U.S.S.R. refused. Since then 
the Soviet Urion has resumed relations with the 
United States and entered the League. Despite 
the weaknesses revealed by the Hoare-Laval deal, 
the League machinery has proved a formidable 
obstacle to Mussolini’s expansionist program in 
Ethiopia. If it can achieve a satisfactory Ethi- 
opian settlement, the way will be open for the Far 
Eastern Advisory Committee to deal with the 
problem of Japanese aggression in China. A 
combined Anglo-American-Soviet effort exerted 
through this committee and backed by the other 
League members would change the whole outlook 
in the Far East. 


T. A. BISSON 


THE GERMAN REFUGEE PROBLEM 


In presenting his letter of resignation as High 
Commissioner for German Refugees on December 
27, Mr. James G. McDonald made a moving appeal 
on behalf of an international solution of a grave 
humanitarian problem. According to this letter, 
“more than half a million persons, against whom 
no charge can be made except that they are not 
what the National Socialists choose to regard as 
‘Nordic,’ are being crushed. .. It is being made 
increasingly difficult for Jews and ‘non-Aryans’ 
in Germany to sustain life. Condemned to segre- 
gation within the four corners of the legal and 
social ghetto which has now closed upon them, 
they are increasingly prevented from earning 
their living. Indeed more than half of the Jews 
remaining in Germany have already been deprived 
of their livelihood. In many parts of the coun- 
try there is a systematic attempt at starvation of 
the Jewish population ....” The threat of a new 
exodus of refugees, which seems imminent, de- 
mands the “friendly but firm intercession with the 
German Government, by all pacific means, on the 
nart of the League of Nations, of its Member- 
States and other members of the community of 
nations.” Although about three-quarters of the 
80,000 refugees have been settled in new homes, 
the task of caring for the remaining thousands 
can not be borne by the office of the High Com- 
missioner or by the cooperating private organiza- 
tions; it should be entrusted to an organization 
directly under the authority of the League. 

A step toward carrying out Mr. McDon- 
ald’s wishes was taken on January 9, when a 
League expert committee proposed that the Coun- 
cil name a new High Commissioner and authorize 
him to work much more closely with the League 


Page Two LS ———_———————— — 



























































——— 








than has heretofore been permitted. For example, 
the services of the Secretariat would be available f 
to him and he would be expected to present direct. f 
ly to the Assembly in September a comprehensive F 
program for the handling of the refugee problem. 
The committee also recommended that a confer. Ff 
ence be called to negotiate an international con. 
vention for the legal protection of refugees inf 
foreign countries. It is significant not only that 
Germany refused to publish Mr. McDonald’s let. 
ter of resignation but also that Soviet Russia and— 
fascist Italy are opposed to effective League in. fF 
tervention on behalf of refugees. Even if the ex-§ 
perts’ report is adopted, the cost of supporting 
refugees must continue to be borne by private 
philanthropy; yet if the task is to be effectively 
discharged, direct financial support from govern- 
ments is essential. 


1} 


Should the Nazi government allow Jews to leave 
the country with their property, the situation 
would be improved. Such emigration, however, 
is now forbidden except to Palestine, on the 
ground that Germany cannot suffer the loss of the 
capital involved. One method of meeting this ob- 
jection was proposed early in January, when it 
was suggested that the Council for German Jewry 
organize a plan of assisted emigration on behalf 
of the 90,000 Jews under 35 years of age. Ac- 
cording to the plan about half this number would F 
be settled in Palestine, and the remainder in other | 
hospitable countries. In order to secure Nazi con- [ 
sent for the project, an appeal would be made to 
the Jewish communities throughout the world to 
raise a sum of $15,000,000, with which to pur- 
chase German exports. It is believed that the F 
Nazi government, thus assured of receiving for- § 
eign exchange, would consent to the mass emigra- 
tion of these Jews and their property. So many fF 
objections, however, are being voiced against > 
any subsidy to German exports that it seems > 
doubtful whether this ambitious program will f 
prove practicable in its present form. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 





The Gay Reformer: Profits before Plenty under Franklin 
D. Roosevelt, by Mauritz A. Hallgren. New York, 
Knopf, 1935. $2.75 
A trenchant criticism of the Roosevelt administration. 


Stalin: A New World Seen through One Man, by Henri 
Barbusse. Translated by Vyvyan Holland. New York, 
Macmillan, 1935. $3.00 
The author of a searing World War novel extols Stalin, 

who in his opinion has not only defended the Bolshevik 

revolution against the “counter-revolutionary” Trotzsky, 
but has made a notable contribution to world peace by his 
policy toward national minorities. 


OPENER FEA LT hg Fea te fay ge Pe 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 12, January 17, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Screet, New York, N. Y. RarMonp Lasiig Buagit, President; EstHen G. Ocorn, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dagan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class mater December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., umder the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 







