r two per- 
> have de. 


; in Ven 
in Island, 
ind China, 
e develop 
petroleum 
tates and 


2 pipeline, 


y to insist ; 


companies 
Ss Operate. 
companies 


| February 
of Okla 


2 arran 
O interna- 
“breeding 
a membet 
ate Com- 
on Febru- 


BY 
K 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
William , Bishop 


wr, 


1 De 


rr 4 
Valversity of Nicht: .- Library 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 


| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIII, No. 19 


FEBRUARY 25, 1944 


—_ 


HE dismissal of the chiefs of the Japanese 
Army and Navy general staffs, announced in 


.| Tokyo on February 21, attests to the progress that 


is being made against the enemy in Asia. Plain- 
ly, the period of the slow defensive-offensive, dat- 


‘ing from the invasion of Guadalcanal in August 


1942, is over as far as the Pacific Fleet is concerned. 
During the present month the enemy in Asia has 
been hit hard from many directions. We have taken 
Kwajalein and Eniwetok atolls in the Marshalls, 
have shelled Paramushiru, Rabaul and Kavieng by 
‘sea for the first time, and have sunk at least 19 Jap- 
anese vessels and destroyed more than 200 Japanese 
planes in a bold carrier-based air attack on Truk, the 
enemy's “Pearl Harbor’’ in the South Pacific. The 
continuity of these movements, the vast area they 
cover and the depth of their penetration into Japan’s 
oceanic empire justify the statement by Secretary of 
the Navy Knox that our surface craft “go where 
they please.” 


CHINA THE MAIN FRONT. But if the Jap- 
anese Navy is meeting its match, this cannot yet be 
said of the enemy Army, entrenched in a vast land 
domain from Manchuria to Burma. Recently two top 
.American commanders have emphasized in specific 


.| terms the nature of the task that lies ahead on the 


continent of Asia. On February 8 Admiral Chester 
W. Nimitz told newspapermen: “My objective is to 
| get ground and air forces into China as soon as pos- 
| sible. I don’t believe Japan can be defeated from 
‘the sea alone.” To this he added the unequivocal 


| 
| 


/ 


olition of | “laration: “I believe Japan can be defeated only 


yn of the 
nments of 
or a righ 
let whete, 


BOLLES 
NDS 


from bases in China.” 
Five days later, Lieutenant General Joseph W. 


| Stilwell declared that Admiral Nimitz’s naval drive 


across the Pacific to the China coast ‘‘must be sup- 
sported heavily by an aggressive Allied land and air 
offensive projected from the interior.” Asserting that 
vital China-based air operations cannot wait for a 


UNITY IN CHINA NEEDED FOR DEFEAT OF JAPANESE ARMY 


penetration of the blockade by land or sea,” he 
stated that facilities are being prepared inside China 
to service “the largest and newest cargo carriers avail- 
able.” 


CONDITIONS IN CHUNGKING. These re- 
affirmations of China’s decisive position in Pacific 
strategy must heighten American interest in that 
country’s internal situation, which has been very dif- 
ficult for a long time. The United States will natur- 
ally welcome any developments that tend to strength- 
en the hard-pressed Chinese government and armed 
forces for the trials that lie ahead. 


But such developments appear to be few and far 
between. In the economic sphere inflation is reach- 
ing increasingly fantastic levels as a result of the 
Japanese blockade, the limitations of domestic pro- 
duction, and the absence of an effective policy 
against hoarders and speculators. Recently Chung- 
king food prices rose 22 per cent in one week, a phe- 
nomenal jump reportedly linked to extraordinary 
spending after the annual settlement of debts at New 
Year’s time. Of course, inflation is not as serious a 
matter as it would be if China had a highly indus- 
trialized economy rather than its present decentral- 
ized agricultural system. But Chinese prices are now 
well over 200 times above their pre-war levels, and 
the effects—limited for a time to urban centers—are 
being felt increasingly among the peasants, who con- 
stitute the backbone of the nation and its war effort. 

On the political front the news that Finance Min- 
ister H. H. Kung has replaced Foreign Minister T. 
V. Soong as Chairman of the Board of Directors of 
the Bank of China appears of unusual significance, 
although detailed information about the change is 
lacking. Dr. Soong, an outstanding banker, has long 
been regarded abroad as one of China’s most mod- 
ern, efficient and incorruptible leaders. His loss of a 
post held since 1935 seems to be a personal and po- 
litical triumph for his brother-in-law, Dr. Kung, 


e- 


2 
- 
a ae a ey 


om~ ea 
2s 3é--c 


=. 


= 
_————“e © »@-s 


a 


—_"s « 6 + es @ © 6 Geeware ers Oe © +e eee ee = 


-—° & ot « 


3! 
‘° 
4 
Bis 
i 
‘ 
j 
| 


- 


who, in addition to being Finance Minister and Vice- 
President of the Executive Yuan, is also Governor 
of the Central Bank of China. Whether Dr. Soong 
will remain in office as Foreign Minister now be- 
comes a question of considerable interest. 
PROBLEMS OF UNITY. Relations between the 
Chungking government and the Chinese Commu- 
nists continue to trouble the internal situation. Both 
are fighting Japan, but have not succeeded in re- 
establishing the unity that existed between them dur- 
ing the first few years of resistance. Since 1940 
Chungking has maintained a strict blockade against 
the Shensi-Kansu-Ninghsia Border Region, which is 
the supply base and headquarters area of the Com- 
munist-led Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies. 
Recently the issue of the blockade came to the fore 
when Mme. Sun Yat-sen, widow of the famous 
Chinese nationalist leader and sister of Mme. Chiang 
Kai-shek, issued a statement in which she attacked 
“the diversion of part of our national army to the 
task of blockading and ‘guarding’ the guerrilla 


Page Two 


areas.” On February 16 Dr. K. C. Wu, Vice-Mi 
ister of Foreign Affairs, admitted that Central troo 
are stationed in the Northwest, but declared that iy 
regards them as police forces rather than as blocka; 
ing armies. 

The formulation of a compromise for the adjus. 
ment of internal differences is China’s affair, but thy 
United States would have every reason to welcome; 
settlement at the earliest possible moment. The mij 
itary situation demands it, for the separation of im, 
portant northern areas from the rest of fightiny 
China is an obstacle to defeat of the enemy. If Chin)' 
is to serve with full effectiveness as the decisive lanj 
and air front against Japan, its entire territory shoul 
be available for unified operations, and sections of 
its troops should not be engaged in watching ead 
other rather than the invader. In the Far East, as jy 
Europe, the attainment of political harmony is &! 
sential to rapid and complete victory in battle. | 

| 


LAWRENCE K. ROsINGER | 


AMERICAN PEOPLE DISTURBED BY SILENCE ON FOREIGN POLICY | 


While the speed and striking power of our opera- 
tions in the Pacific already exceed the most optimistic 
calculations for this stage of the war, both the po- 
litical and military situation in Europe remain in a 
state of deadlock that only a large-scale Allied in- 
vasion can break. The sobering effect of the struggle 
for the Italian beachheads is due not merely to a 
loss of lives seemingly out of proportion to the re- 
sults thus far achieved. It is due primarily to the in- 
escapable conclusion that, unless Germany suffers 
an as yet unforeseeable internal collapse, the struggle 
for other bridgeheads into Europe may prove equally 
arduous and bitter. 

But, as we face the grim days ahead, we must con- 
stantly endeavor to see them in the perspective of 
still grimmer days already experienced by the peoples 
of conquered Europe. The men and women of our 
generation have many ordeals in store for them. 
But few ordeals can outmatch, in terms of frustra- 
tion, the surrender at Munich or, in terms of sheer 
desperation, the evacuation of Dunkerque, the Ger- 
man break-through at Sedan, the siege of Stalin- 
grad. Knowledge of what the human spirit has al- 
ready endured in our lifetime should steel us for 
whatever the future may yet disclose. 

It cannot be repeated too often, however, that our 
capacity for endurance would be enhanced manyfold 
if we could look to the coming months and years 
not only with grim determination but with faith and 
buoyancy. It is this quality of buoyancy, this assur- 
ance that the war is being fought not merely for 
physical survival, but for enlargement of the lives 
we are seeking to preserve, that gives such drive to 
the Russians in spite of nearly three years of exhaust- 
ing war, and lends unflagging courage to Europe's 


underground movements. That is also why it is of 
such paramount importance that the United State 
as invasion nears, should become identified as cleat 
ly as possible not with the forces in Europe that sym 
bolize weariness and decay, but with the vigorow 
new forces crystallized by resistance to Nazi rule) 
Yet even now, at the zero hour, when it is obviou| 
that political weapons will prove at least as decisive 
as military operations in deciding the future of the 
continent, the United States officially appears reluc 
tant to show open sympathy for the anti-Fascist ele 
ments whose unremitting efforts have prevented con 
solidation of Hitler's “new order.” And while w 
ourselves continue to maintain ambiguous lal 


with Fascist sympathizers, for example, in Spain- 


not to speak of the supporters of King Victor Em 
manuel of Italy—we paradoxically expect the cour: 
tries of Latin America to reject Axis influence so 4) 
to strengthen our own position in the Western Hem 
isphere. | 

POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY LACKING. Mil 
tary considerations can be invoked to justify mati 
moves that would otherwise appear highly disheatt 
ening. But military considerations do not justify lac 
of a basic philosophy in our approach to the moral 
crisis of our times. On the contrary, persistent op | 


portunism in our relations with conquered Europt 


can only produce a weary cynicism, both here ant 
abroad—a cynicism which in itself could become’ 
grave military liability for the United Nations. The 
silence of President Roosevelt and other America! 
officials on the political trends that have been rapit 
ly developing on the continent since Teheran can, 
course, be explained by calculated circumspection 0 
the eve of invasion. Or it may be considered unws 


Vice-Mj, 
tral troop 
‘ed that ne 
is blockad 


the adjus. 
Lit, but th 
welcome j 
. The mil 
ion of im 


f fight 

y. tf Chik 
cisive land 
Ory should 
sections of 
hing eac 
East, as jy 
ony is ¢| 
ttle. 


OSINGER 


[CY 
ny it is of 
ted States 
d as clear 
> that sym 
> vigorow 
Nazi rule} 
is obvious! 
as decisive 
ure of 

ears reluc 
‘ascist ele 
ented con 
while we 
s relation’ 
n Spain-} 
Tictor Em 
the cout 
ence so a 
tern Hem' 


IG. Mil 
tify many] 
y disheart 
ustify la 
the moral 
sistent op 
ed Europt/ 
here and 
become 4 
tions. The 
Americal) 
een rapid 
an can, df 
pection 0 
ed unwis 


—_ 
—_ 


to discuss controversial issues of foreign policy in 
an election year. True, the President may think that 
indirect measures, such as the arrangements about 
Arabian oil, may do more to make it impossible 
for this country to return to isolation after the war 
than any further statements of policy. Whatever the 
reason for this silence, the net effect is to bewilder 
and depress public opinion here at the very moment 
when its full—and above all fully informed—sup- 

rt is essential for impending operations. And mean- 
while the available physical strength of those who 
are resisting Hitler within the ‘fortress of Europe” 
is understandably running out, due to shortages of 
both food and arms. 

At this juncture, announcement on February 18 of 
the Baruch report on post-war preparations for this 
country’s reconversion to peacetime conditions seems 
to put the cart before the horse. It is true that in- 
ternational reconstruction will depend not on our- 
selves alone, but on the collaboration of other na- 


PageT 


meree 


heo 


tions, and therefore appears less directly feasible 
than reconstruction at home. But the Baruch report, 
quite rightly, states that the question asked by every- 
one is: “How am I going to make a living for myself 
and for those dear to me when the war is over, in a 
manner of my own choosing?” What it does not 
point out is that the war will not in actuality be 
“over,” nor will anyone have much “choosing” of 
his or her own to do, unless the United Nations suc- 
ceed in achieving a measure of stability in world 
affairs. The Baruch report strikes a welcome note of 
optimism when it says: ‘There is no need for post- 
war depression.” But hope for the future would run 
even higher if this country were to take the lead in 
saying, with equal confidence: “There is no need for 
post-war international anarchy”—and act on this be- 
lief. To avoid discussion of this issue, even in an elec- 
tion year, is to do less than justice to the courage 
and common sense of the American people. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


How To Think About War and Peace, by Mortimer J. 
Adler. New York, Simon and Schuster, 1944. $2.50 


Rigorously logical demonstration that perpetual world 
peace is an actual possibility but capable of being realized 
only if genuine world federation is established. Recogniz- 
ing the nations’ present concern with their sovereignty as 
an enormous obstacle, the author nevertheless believes steps 
toward establishing the world state can be taken now— 
although complete results may not be achieved for 500 
years or so. 


The White Brigade, by Robert Goffin. New York, Double- 
day, Doran, 1944. $2.00 


Dramatic story of Belgian underground groups. 


New Zealand, by Walter Nash. New York, Duell, Sloan 
and Pearce, 1943. $3.50 


A picture of the smallest of the British Dominions at 
peace and at war by the New Zealand Minister to the 
United States. Of particular interest are Mr. Nash’s ideas 
on world organization and the liquidation of imperialism 
in the Pacific. 


What is the Western economic stake in Asia? How 
much would it cost the metropolitan countries to 
give up their empires in the East? How vill the 
rest of the world adjust itself to the rise of new 
nations in a free and industrialized Asia? READ— 


INDEPENDENCE FOR COLONIAL ASIA— 
THE COST TO THE WESTERN WORLD 
by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25c 


February 1 issue of ForREIGN Poticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 


Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


One Continent Redeemed, by Guy Ramsey. Garden City, 
New York, Doubleday, Doran, 1943. $2.50 
One of the more worth-while books in the flood gener- 
ated by the North African campaign. The author writes 
dramatically and with understanding of the tangled poli- 
tical situation. 


These Are the Generals. New York, Knopf, 1943. $2.50 
Biographical vignettes of seventeen prominent American 

military chiefs. 

Latin America and the United States, by Graham S. 
Stuart, fourth edition, thoroughly revised. New York, 
Appleton-Century, 1948. $5.00 
Brings up to date a useful reference text. 


Empire, by Louis Fischer. New York, Duell, Sloan and 

Pearce, 1943. $1.00 

A stimulating and forceful discussion of India and im- 
perialism by a journalist who argues for rapid realization 
of colonial independence. At the same time, some of the 
author’s judgments on the prospects of Anglo-Soviet-U.S.- 
Chinese cooperation for a better world seem wide of the 
mark after the Moscow, Cairo and Teheran conferences. 


Come Over Into Macedonia, by Harold B. Allen. New 
Brunswick, Rutgers University Press, 1948. $3.00 
This reference book on the successful rural reconstruc- 

tion of Macedonia during the period 1928-38 by a director 

of the Near East Relief Foundation’s project should be 
useful to those planning to do similar work after the war. 


The Journey into the Fog, by Cornelia Goodhue. New York, 
Doubleday, Doran, 1944. $2.50 
Dramatizes a bit the facts of Vitus Bering’s life and the 
voyage in which he opened the Bering Sea and established 
Russia’s claims. 


The Hidden Enemy: The German Threat to Post-War 
Peace, by Heinz Pol. New York, Julian Messner, 1943. 
$3.00 
Strong indictment of Pan-Germanism as the movement 

which must be crushed to end the possibility of Germany’s 

again causing war. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 19, FEBRUARY 25, 1944. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lugt, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dan, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


One month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Sis 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


sibber, 


Fes. 21.—In this war, as in others, democratic 
governments have suffered from the illusion that 
they can prevent political disturbance by suppressing 
information. The censorship issue has just been 
sharpened by reports from London that the British 
government, with the support of our State Depart- 
ment, has appointed two Foreign Office officials to 
the British censorship office to strengthen controls 
on outgoing news of a political nature; and by at- 


tempts of Allied commanders in Italy to restrict the - 


news correspondents may send from the Anzio 
beachhead. 

POLITICAL CENSORSHIP IN WAR. The Lon- 
don reports have not been confirmed by British 
sources, and Acting Secretary of State Edward R. 
Stettinius Jr., said on February 15 that the State 
Department had not requested the assignment of 
the Foreign Office officials. But the war’s history 
provides previous instances of political censorship. 


- On March 26, 1942, for example, Brendan Bracken, 


British Minister of Information, told the House of 
Commons that censorship would be used to keep dis- 
patches from going abroad which were “calculated 
to foment ill-feeling between the United Nations or 
between them and a neutral country.’” Without mak- 
ing a public announcement like Mr. Bracken’s, the 
American government has practiced a rigid censor- 
ship on news of events likely to put the United States 
in a poor light abroad. To mention only one instance, 
cables reporting the Detroit race riots last June were 
held up two days. 

The facts of diplomatic disagreement cannot long 
be hidden, and their divulgence after suppression 
only heightens their disturbing effect. Political 
censorship, moreover, is contrary to the principles 
of democratic society, which strengthens itself 
through discussion and the free flow of opinion and 
information. Formally, the basic consideration of 
censorship in the United States is military security, 
but this consideration is often stretched until, as at 
Anzio, censorship is invoked to bolster civilian 
morale on the home front. That sort of censorship, 
if successful, limits the civilian’s appreciation of the 
true seriousness of the conflict. 

Official professions of distaste for excessive politi- 
cal and military censorship have been common dur- 
ing the war. On December 7, 1941, the day Japan 
attacked the United States, Brig. Gen. Alexander 


* Surles, chief of War Department public relations, 


said: “I will do my best to get the news out as rap- 
idly as I can.” Secretary of State Cordell Hull in 


FOR VICTORY °* 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


November 1942, wrote Byron Price, Director of 
Censorship: “I feel that fundamentally the long 
range interests of international friendship are best 
served by permitting the people of any country to 
know what people in friendly countries are thinking 
and saying about them, however unpleasant some of 
those opinions may be.” 

Nevertheless, the censors continue to perform 
their tasks in a manner which brings protests from 
correspondents that the restrictions go beyond the 
needs of military security. As General Surles spoke, 
the facts about the attack on Pearl Harbor were be- 
ing wrapped in a censorship blanket that even to- 
day has been only partially removed. On December 
10, 1943, when the United States censorship code 
was relaxed after two years of war, Byron Price re- 
ported that in many instances news was being sup- 
pressed ‘for no apparent reason.” 

MILITARY CENSORSHIP FOR HOME MOR- 
ALE. The Anzio case illustrates the difficulties 
which governments and military establishments run 
into when they try to bend facts to serve an end. 
Since Pearl Harbor, the American people alternately 


have been told they are too hopeful or too gloomy. | 
On the gloomy side, Undersecretary of War Robert | 


P. Patterson said on February 10 that the danger to 
American and British troops at Anzio was “not to 
be minimized.” The next day President Roosevelt 
told his press conference that the situation at Anzio 
was very tense. The reports of correspondents at the 
beachhead reflected that view. 

Concerned by the gloom that spread in this coun- 


try, the command of Lt. Gen. Mark Clark, leading { 


the Fifth Army, on February 15 forbade correspond- 
ents to use the radio at the Anzio beachhead for 
transmitting their dispatches. This amounted to cen- 


sorship by delay, and a system of political censor- ' 


ship on Anzio stories was organized at Naples. 
In Washington Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson 


said on February 17 that General Alexander was in | 


the best position to judge his own censorship require- 
ments. But the implication that the Anzio censor- 
ship decision was made elsewhere than in Italy was 
seen in General Alexander's remark that his supeti- 
ors had notified him of the damage being done to 
civilian morale in Britain and the United States. 
Director of War Information Elmer Davis, who 
holds that only information actually jeopardizing 
military security is to be suppressed, has said he will 
investigate the imposition of a censorship aimed at 
preventing home-front alarm. BLaiR BOLLES 


‘an- 
Mm me 


