


A 
Al 
C 


y, ia 
stribu. 
goods 
migh 
tes. In 
ication 
ler dis. 
yfficials 
ig that 
ustoms 
sibility 
hat the 
Argen- 
1, they 
‘ds and 
h serve 
though 
nounce 
inciple, 
>proval 


ised by 
ay take 
cted on 
nerican 
OViSiON 
British 
ep runs 
ched at 
ly after 
Foreign 
| in fe 
and fe 
used as 
to pre 
up em 


_ of the 
e threat 
ious {0 
anxious 
ut some 
countty, 
nmoned 
epublic 
erest ol 
vers that 


TONE 





Library Entered as 2nd class matter 


f 


ay 27 

is a me Z 

PES ICTICAL re S4y 
riick. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vor. XX, No. 17 


_—_ 


Fesruary 14, 1941 





NAZI MOVES IN BULGARIA FORCE BALKAN CRISIS 


HE break in diplomatic relations between Britain 

and Rumania on February 10, following Prime 
Minister Churchill’s reference to intensified German 
activities in Bulgaria, presaged the spread of hostili- 
ties in the Balkans. German pressure on Bulgaria 
appeared to have hit a snag on February 4, when it 
was announced that the pro-Nazi Minister of Agri- 
culture, Bagrianoff, had tendered his resignation, 
and was on the point of withdrawing from politics. 
In his broadcast of February 9, however, Mr. 
Churchill stated that ‘‘a considerable German army 
and air force is being built up in Rumania and its 
forward tentacles have already penetrated Bulgaria 
with, we must suppose, the acquiescence of the Bul- 
garian government.” Airfields in Bulgaria, he 
added, were already being occupied by German 
ground personnel “numbering thousands.” Mr. 
Churchill said that one of Britain’s difficulties was 
to convince some of the neutral countries in South- 
eastern Europe that the British ‘‘are going to win,” 
and reminded Bulgaria of the dismemberment it had 
suffered as a result of the first World War when, in 
spite of British warnings, it had joined Germany 
and Austria-Hungary against the Allies. Sofia of- 
ficially denied Mr. Churchill’s charges, claiming that 
the only Germans in Bulgaria were a few officers 
and men who had long been training the Bulgarian 
amy. But the British, distrusting these assurances, 
apparently decided to take the initiative in the Bal- 
kans by withdrawing their diplomatic representa- 
tives from Bucharest. This diplomatic break is ex- 
pected to be followed by a declaration of war against 
Rumania, which might permit the British to bomb 
the Rumanian oil-fields. 

BRITAIN’S FEAR OF INVASION. Of the three 
Major contingencies anticipated by the British in 
their struggle with Germany—invasion of Britain, 
German intervention in the Mediterranean, and ex- 
tension of the conflict to the Balkans—the third 


might offer Britain the best opportunity to strike at 
a point where Germany is peculiarly vulnerable. The 
British have been steadily preparing for an invasion 
since Dunkirk. The danger of invasion, to which 
Sir John Dill, Chief of the Imperial General Staff, 
referred again on February 8, is not merely an argu- 
ment advanced to enlist American aid; it is an ever- 
present danger which the British feel they would 
be foolhardy to underestimate. To counter this Ger- 
man threat, the British have recently launched day- 
light air raids on the invasion ports, but these raids, 
as pointed out by military experts, can at best have 
only a limited effect, since the British do not yet 
command a sufficiently large air force to carry out 
an aerial Blitzkrieg of German-occupied territory. 
That is the principal reason why the British are eager 
to obtain from the United States an increasing num- 
ber of long-range bombers, which have the added 
advantage that they can be flown from Canada to 
Britain without being exposed to the hazards of sub- 
marine warfare. 

While girding themselves for invasion, the British 
have apparently moved in Africa more rapidly than 
either they or the Nazis had anticipated. So far, 
German intervention on behalf of Italy has been 
limited to the use of German dive-bombers, based 
on airfields in Sicily, against British naval units 
in the central and eastern Mediterranean. The 
most spectacular dive-bombing operation was that 
directed against Malta on January 19 when, accord- 
ing to Mr. Churchill, the British brought down 90 
out of 150 German Stukas which were seeking, 
among other objectives, to disable the aircraft-carrier 
Illustrious. The Mediterranean is still controlled by 
the British navy which was able, on February 9, to 
shell Genoa with little opposition from the Italians; 
and on land the Greeks, with British advice and 
assistance, continue to press the Italian forces, now 
in process of reorganization. 











i 
i 
; 

be 


a cr 
Se ee 
. F eae 








It is in the third theatre of war, the Balkans, that 
the Germans might most effectively relieve Italy. 
German airplanes based on Rumanian or Bulgarian 
airfields might strike at the Greek army from the 
rear. On the other hand, German use of Rumanian 
or Bulgarian territory for war purposes would lay 
these countries open to attack by the British; and it 
is hoped in London that German operations in Bul- 
garia will bring Turkey into the war on Britain's side. 


Qualified observers have expected for months that, 
after consolidating their gains on the continent, the 
Nazis would attempt to strike at the British Em- 
pire simultaneously from several widely separated 
areas, in the hope of invading the British Isles and, 
meanwhile, crippling British forces in Africa and 
the Mediterranean, possibly with the assistance of 
France and Spain. These operations, it was believed, 
would coincide with renewed efforts to divert the 
attention of the United States from the Atlantic to 
the Pacific by some spectacular Japanese move in 
the direction of Southeast Asia, facilitated, perhaps, 
by a Soviet-Japanese non-aggression pact. The date 
when these closely interlocked attacks are to be 
launched remains, of course, a Nazi secret; and 
equally secret are the exact geographic areas in 
which they will be set off. Mr. Churchill, in recapitu- 
lating on February 9 the achievements of the British 
since Dunkirk—when it was widely assumed that 
Britain was about to collapse—pointed out the vari- 
ous contingencies that the British must bear in mind, 
and warned his people, above all, against overcon- 
fidence, “the worst of martial crimes.” 


At the same time, Mr. Churchill reiterated his be- 
lief in Britain's ultimate victory—on the assumption 
that the United States is ready to supply Britain with 
“all that is necessary for victory.” Britain, he re- 
peated, does not need men (explaining that the 
present war, unlike that of 1914-1918, is not a war 
of mass armies), but needs “most urgently” war 


Page Two 





ed 
on 


materials of all kinds and ships in which to transpog 
these materials. Mr. Churchill’s speech was, ip , 
sense, an answer to the statement made by Colon¢d 
Lindbergh who, in testifying before the Senate Fo,. 
eign Affairs Committee on February 6, declared th 
Britain, even with American aid, cannot win, anj 
consequently urged the United States to retain all it 
production of airplanes and other war material fo, 
eventual defense “against the strongest powers of 
Europe and Asia.” 

It is obviously impossible for any man, no matte; 
how well informed, to determine in advance the oy. 
come of a complex conflict which may, in accordance 
with Nazi plans, proceed with the deadly accurag 
of an iron-clad timetable or, as already indicate 
by the course of Italian operations in Albania and 
Africa, may be fraught with accidents and dete: 
mined by imponderables. All that can be said at this 
moment is that the British themselves believe the 
can win, and that there is little sentiment in Britaip 
—least of all in Labor circles—in favor of a “nego 
tiated” peace with Germany which, according to the 
British, would under present circumstances be ; 
peace imposed (not negotiated) by Germany. And 
among the imponderables, is the belief in a British 
victory that, after an initial period of apathy ané 
despair, is gaining ground in occupied countries 
Contrary to the statement of the American Youth 
Congress on February 9, denouncing the war in Eu. 
rope as one primarily of exploitation in which one 
empire is engaged with another in a struggle for 
domination of the continent rather than for the lib 
eration and freedom of the continental peoples, there 
are millions in Europe, irrespective of class or wealth, 
who believe there is a real difference between the 
kind of influence, unconstructive as it often proved, 
that Britain exercised on the continent before Av 
gust 1939, and the outright domination exercised by 
Germany. VERA MICHELES DEAN 





BRITISH VICTORIES BOLSTER PETAIN’S POWER 


While Hitler's deputy, Rudolf Hess, assured the 
German people on February 9 that a supreme test of 
arms with Britain was approaching, the British gov- 
ernment hastened to exploit its military advantage 
in the Mediterranean to the utmost in the hope that 
a decision might be reached in that theatre before 
the invasion of England. Employing a brilliantly 





Have YOU read 
U.S. AID TO BRITAIN? 


It analyzes what we have already supplied; 
what else Britain needs; what more we can 
provide; and defines the risks involved. 


25¢ 


January Ist issue of Foreign Policy Reports 











executed pincers movement in which an armored de 
tachment pushed through desert wastes to cut off the 
enemy's flight, the British Army of the Nile took 
the key base of Benghazi from the Italians on Feb 
ruary 6. As the battered remnants of Marshal Graz 
ani’s forces fled to the south and west, advance Brit 
ish units acting as mechanized cavalry followed clos 
behind. By February 9 they had reached El! Agheila 
almost a third of the way from Benghazi to Tripoli 


Provided that the British can successfully maintait 
their attenuated supply lines by land and sea, tt 
seems increasingly probable that they will not hal 
until they have established contact with the Frend 
North African forces on the Tunisian border. With 
the capture of Benghazi and its airdromes, they have 











— 


‘ANSport 
S, in 4 
Colonel 
ate Foy. 
red that 
in, and 
nD all its 
rial fo, 
vers of 


Matter 
the out: 
ordance 
Ccuracy 
dicated 
lia and 
| deter. 

at this 
ve they 

Britain 
“nego 
to the 
s be a 
7. And, 
British 
hy and 
untries, 
Youth 

in Ev 
ch one 
gle for 
the lib- 

s, there 
wealth, 
en. the 
roved, 
re Av 


ised by 


EAN 


red de 
off the 
e took 
n Feb 
Grazi- 
e Brit 
1 close 
gheila, 
‘ripoli 
rintain 
sea, it 
ot halt 
French 

With 
y have 








—_— 
—— 


already enormously strengthened their defensive po- 
sition in the eastern Mediterranean. Control of the 
entire Libyan littoral, if followed by a transfer of 
military and air strength to Albania, would par- 
tially envelop southern Italy and Sicily and might 
set the stage for still more effective attack on Italian 
home territory or for military action in the Balkans. 

LAVAL COME-BACK FAILS. Britain’s victories 
seemed to play a definite part in the Cabinet crisis 
at Vichy, where Marshal Henri Philippe Pétain re- 
sisted strong German demands for the reinstatement 
of Pierre Laval, dismissed on December 13, to a 
dominant government post. After Vichy had reached 
the verge of capitulation, Pétain suddenly stiffened 
and, according to reports, refused to become a figure- 
head while Laval assumed de facto dictatorial con- 
trol. On February 8 it was announced that Laval had 
declined an appointment as Cabinet Minister. A day 
later Pierre-Etienne Flandin, who had succeeded 
Laval as Foreign Minister in December, resigned be- 
cause of German distrust, and Admiral Jean Darlan 
assumed this post as well as the Navy Ministry and 
the office of Vice-Premier. Under a constitutional 
act of February 10, designating him Pétain’s succes- 
sor as Chief of State, Darlan acquires all of Laval’s 
former powers. In his conduct of the negotiations in 
Paris regarding Laval’s reinstatement, the Admiral 
appears to have gained the confidence of the Nazis, 
who have not openly opposed the new régime. The 
counter-concessions made by Pétain to induce the 
Nazis to shelve Laval for the time being have not 
yet been revealed. 

While Darlan, unlike Laval, has not been regarded 
as an unreserved advocate of cooperation with the 
Germans, he is believed to share the former Vice- 
Premier’s dislike for Britain—a sentiment strength- 
ened by British attacks on the French fleet at Mers- 
elKebir and Dakar last summer. Pétain and Darlan 
may be expected to keep unoccupied France out of 
the area of hostilities at any cost. Both believe that 
the country needs a long breathing spell for moral 
as well as material recovery. In their view, moral 
recovery involves the eradication of democratic and 
individualist doctrines, to be replaced by an authori- 
tarian nationalism. 

PETAIN’S AUTHORITARIAN GOVERN- 
MENT. In recent weeks Pétain has taken a number 
of steps designed to cement his control of the new 
régime. By a constitutional act of January 27 he 
made all high French officials directly responsible to 
him. He also named a consultative assembly of 188 
members as a temporary advisory parliament. And 





Page Three 





— 
— 








Mr. William T. Stone will broadcast from Wash- 
ington on February 16. His subject will be “Congress 
and Aid to Britain.” FPA broadcasts are heard every 
Sunday, from 2:15 to 2:30 p.m. E.S.T., over the blue 
network of the National Broadcasting Company. 
Does your local station carry our program? 











on January 29 he organized a national committee of 
40 to act as a nucleus for an all-embracing national 
political organization. These measures were doubt- 
less inspired by Pétain’s desperate attempts to con- 
solidate the political basis of his régime in the face 
of Nazi demands. His efforts were answered by the 
formation, in Nazi-dominated Paris, of a “National 
Popular Assembly” sponsored by Marcel Déat, with 
German approval. This group, which includes a 
number of prominent French extremists of the Left 
and Right, urges complete collaboration with the in- 
vaders, in Europe and Africa, and advocates the 
radical political and social doctrines of fascism. 

It is obviously not the political strength of the 
Vichy government which has thus far restrained the 
Nazis from demanding fuller French collaboration 
in prosecution of the war. It is, rather, French con- 
trol of instruments of military power which might 
conceivably be placed in Britain’s hands if Pétain 
were pushed too far. Should Hitler occupy the whole 
of France, he might discover that the French fleet 
had been scuttled or had escaped to British ports; 
that British forces had been invited to share the 
strategically located facilities of Bizerta and other 
French overseas bases; and even that the North Afri- 
can army under General Weygand, not to speak of 
the forces in Syria under General Dentz, had cast 
their lot with Britain. Vichy was playing its trump 
card in negotiations with the Nazis when, on Febru- 
ary 7, it quoted General Weygand as flatly deny- 
ing that German troops would be permitted to use 
Bizerta against the British forces in North Africa. 
Thus despite bitter memories and deep ideological 
divergences, the identity of national interest is forc- 
ing Britain and France together once more. British 
successes strengthen Vichy’s hand, and Vichy’s re- 
sistance makes more secure all British positions from 
Gibraltar to Suez. Davip H. Popper 





Turkey at the Straits, by James T. Shotwell and Francis 
Deak. New York, Macmillan, 1940. $2.00 
A succinct, authoritative survey of the history of the 
rivalries centering on the Dardanelles, beginning with the 
fall of Constantinople in 1453 and continuing to the present 
war. 





a 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 17, Fesruary 14, 1941. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera Micueies Dgan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Bo 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 














Washington News Letter ss sei 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
Fes. 10.—Passage of the lease-lend bill by a vote 
of 260 to 165 in the House on February 8 leaves no 
doubt that the Administration has ample strength 
in Congress to secure favorable legislative action on 
its program of aid to Britain. At the same time, the 
partisan vote by which the measure was approved, 
and the limitations imposed in the series of amend- 
ments, make it equally clear that complete unity 
has yet to be achieved with regard to the funda- 
mental objectives of American foreign policy. As 
the debate shifts to the Senate, therefore, it is im- 
portant to analyze the prevailing views expressed in 
the House and the reasons for continued opposition 
on the part of a determined and vocal minority. 
THE HOUSE VOTE ON H.R. 1776. Most Wash- 
ington observers who have followed the course of 
the bill through the House are in general agreement 
on at least four broad conclusions to be drawn from 
the first stage of the debate. These are: 

1. That despite the partisan vote, there is vir- 
tual unanimity on the question of aid to Britain. 
Not more than a handful of critics challenged the 
basic principle that it is in the interest of the 
United States to support Great Britain by all 
measures short of war, and no opposition leaders 
advocated reversal of our present policy. 

2. That despite rejection of opposition amend- 
ments forbidding American naval ships from en- 
tering war zones or the use of naval vessels for 
convoying such ships, the measure in its present 
form is not regarded as a “mandate” for direct 
military intervention. The debate demonstrated 
again that a majority in Congress does not regard 
this as “our war”’ and is still opposed to military 
involvement. This prevailing view was accepted 
by Administration spokesmen who repeatedly de- 
clared that the bill “does not change our status as 
a nonbelligerent” and is not “a device to get us 
in war without consent of Congress.” 

3. That despite the delegation of large powers 
to the President, Congress is still determined to 
safeguard its own authority. This was demon- 
strated in the two most important amendments 
written into the bill. 

The first of these amendments places a limit 
of $1,300,000,000 on the value of military and 
naval equipment now in existence or under ap- 
propriation (but not new orders) which can be 
transferred to other governments, thus keeping 





some financial control in the hands of Congr 
Under the original bill the President would ha 
been free to transfer unlimited quantities of 
terial to other nations without any direct appropri. 
ation for this purpose. 

The second important amendment provides that 
any powers granted in the bill may be rescinded 
by a concurrent resolution—that is by a majority 
vote of both houses rather than by the two-thirds 
majority needed to override a Presidential veto, 
While the constitutionality of this provision may 
be questioned, it seems reasonable to assume that 
if Congress has authority to delegate its powers 
it also has authority to define the terms of such 
delegation. 


4. That despite these and other limitations, the 
House measure has not achieved the degree of 
unity in Congress which had been hoped for and 
which is essential if its purpose is to be realized. 
Ample evidence of this is found in the continued 
opposition of a minority which promises to be 
more vocal in the Senate than in the House. 
Whether complete unity can be achieved during 

the next few weeks is open to question. Neverthe- 
less, an approach toward substantial agreement 
might be made if the Administration were willing to 
accept somewhat more definite limitations. The sug- 
gestion advanced by Representative Wadsworth of 
New York to place a top limit on the amount author. 
ized under the bill might well remove the apprehen- 
sions of many members who sincerely believe that 
Congress should retain ultimate control of the pro 
gram. While rejected by the Foreign Affairs Com- 
mittee, the Wadsworth proposal, if put to a vote, 
would have commanded large support in the House. 


It is apparent, however, that the central issue now | 


posed in the Senate is not merely the extent to which 
Congress should delegate authority to the President, 
but whether it is possible to secure full confidence 
in the Administration’s foreign policy. In the field 
of foreign policy the bill gives the President unde- 
fined powers which are almost as broad as those if 
the domestic field. For if the President has authority 
to determine the amount of aid to be furnished 
Britain, he automatically gains the power to influ 


ence, if not to determine, the policies of the British |, 


government. There would be less hesitation in many 


minds if the Administration were able to clarify its |; 


objectives and to indicate how it would employ these 
broad powers. W. T. STONE 








