Foreign 
to Sec. 
sutrality 
cretion. 
lan said 
d States 
measure 
War or 
govern- 
M war.” 
ent was 
tion of- 
- Ameri- 


gue and 
ediately 
iced no 
the cur- 
lest the 
-vocable 
ook the 
circum- 
tht have 
believed 
ove was 
‘he plea 
binding 
he Presi- 
s for fu- 
ibargoes 
eaties to 
ies from 
elcomed 
lingness 
sived on 
ble” and 
lies with 


STONE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XVII, No. 50 


—- 


OcToBerR 7, 1938 


Forthcoming FPA Meetings 


October 6 Utica Europe in Crisis 

October 8 New York ..The F.P.A. Looks at Europe 
October 17 Columbus Neutrality 

October 22 Boston Europe 

October 25 Cincinnati Neutrality 

October 26 Albany Europe in Crisis 

October 26 Minneapoilis.......... Central Europe 

October 27 St. Paul Central Europe 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


AFTERMATH OF THE MUNICH CONFERENCE 


HE world has received the terms of the Munich 

Four-Power Pact with mixed feelings. The tri- 
umphal return of Chamberlain and Daladier would 
indicate that the leading democracies are willing to 
buy peace at the price of injustice to weaker peoples. 
Even admitting that Czechoslovakia had made mis- 
takes—the most serious of which was to miscalculate 
the position of France—and that its frontiers (like 
those of Poland, Italy and Rumania) violated the 
principle of self-determination, grave injury was done 
to Czechoslovakia at Munich. Woodrow Wilson 
would certainly have repudiated a conception of self- 
determination imposing great suffering on the ma- 
jority of a state’s population for the sake of a minor- 
ity, which would have accepted a far more reasonable 
compromise if it had not been for the policies of the 
great powers. The least the great democracies can 
do now is grant Czechoslovakia financial aid to re- 
construct its economic life. 

Having scored another bloodless victory, Germany 
emerges as the strongest power on the continent. The 
first step has been taken to isolate Russia from West- 
ern Europe. The whole treaty structure designed by 
France to maintain the status quo in the Danubian 
region has tumbled to the ground. Even if Hitler 
keeps his promise not to make further territorial de- 
mands, his success will undoubtedly increase Nazi 
sentiment in Hungary and Rumania; with assistance 
from Berlin, local Nazi movements which have hith- 
erto been repressed may now obtain power. A new 
Holy Roman Empire may arise—in which each Cen- 
tral European state, while nominally maintaining 
its autonomy, would become an economic and mili- 
tary satellite of Berlin. Germany may eventually be 
in a position to control the raw materials of Central 
Europe, and become the world’s greatest power. 
Many predict that it will use this power to challenge 
the Soviet Union, and then undertake to conquer 


the colonial empires of Great Britain and France. 

While such fears may be premature, the key to 
future peace lies in the problem of relations with the 
U.S.S.R. The Nazis have long wanted to isolate Russia 
from Western Europe, in order to facilitate their drive 
into the Soviet Ukraine. In the name of self-deter- 
mination Hitler may launch a movement to “liberate” 
the oppressed Ukrainians—a demand which, inci- 
dentally, would strike at Poland, with its five million 
Ukrainians in Eastern Galicia. No longer able to 
rely on its alliance with France, the Soviet Union may 
decide that it can protect itself only by coming to 
terms with Berlin. Hitler’s aversion to communism 
may not prove a stumbling-block to such a develop- 
ment, fear of which haunts Eastern Europe. Should 
Germany ever gain access to Russia’s raw materials 
and provide Russia with much-needed technicians, 
the whole world would have cause for apprehension. 

Other considerations, however, may offset these 
pessimistic speculations. Perhaps the greatest mistake 
of the Paris Peace Conference was its failure to pro- 
vide any substitute for the Austro-Hungarian em- 
pire. Since 1918, Central Europe has been divided 
up between half a dozen countries, separated from 
each other by armaments and high tariff walls. This 
situation has clearly played into the hands of Hitler. 
One of the chief obstacles in the past to understand- 
ing between the Little Entente, Hungary and Poland 
is being removed with modification of Czechoslo- 
vakia’s boundaries. As the German danger increases, 
these countries, each of which wants to preserve its 
independence, may draw together. Moreover, the 
four leading European powers have promised to 
guarantee the new frontiers of Czechoslovakia as 
soon as Polish and Hungarian claims have been sat- 
isfied. It is to the advantage of Britain and Italy to 
make this guarantee a reality, and thus contribute to 
the neutralization of Central Europe. 


In certain respects the attitude of Italy may prove 
decisive. Despite the reported existence of an Italo- 
German alliance, Italy has indicated that it does not 
wish a general war. Hitherto it had been assumed 
that, on the outbreak of war, Mussolini would attack 
Egypt or Tunis, since only in Africa can he obtain 
compensation for his support of German expansion 
in Central Europe. Yet the risks involved in this 
form of payment are enormous. Today Italy finds 
itself over-extended in Ethiopia and Spain, and is 
confronted with a serious economic situation at 
home. According to many reports, the Fascist plan 
to develop the Ethiopian empire has failed. In the 
event of a general war, Britain and France might 
seize Ethiopia; drive Italy out of Spain to the ad- 
vantage of the Loyalists; close the Suez Canal and 
blockade Italy, the most vulnerable of the great 
powers. Apparently realizing these difficulties, Mus- 
solini at the last moment threw his weight on the 
side of peace. Whether his prestige will allow him 
to go further and assist in obtaining real stability 
in Europe, including a Spanish compromise settle- 
ment, cannot be predicted. 


From the psychological point of view, the Munich 
conference, by bringing together for the first time 
the leaders of the two dictatorships and the two 
democracies, may create an atmosphere favorable to 
some form of European appeasement. Chamberlain's 
friendship pact with Hitler at last gives Germany 
the position of full equality it has so eagerly 
sought. While events may prove that conclusion of 
this pact has removed British opposition to German 
expansion to the east, a more likely result is that 
Britain, through this pact, will be able to exercise 
a restraining influence on Berlin. 


‘If the world witnesses a settlement of the Spanish 
question during the next few months, a movement 
toward closer cooperation among the Central Euro- 
pean states, relaxation of anti-Jewish persecution in 
Germany, and discussions relative to economic co- 
operation and disarmament, then the Munich settle- 
ment may prove justified. If none of these develop- 
ments take place and tension increases, the ransom 
paid at Munich by France and Britain will have been 
nothing but blackmail. 


American opinion would do well to realize that 
the Neutrality Act, v.hich in time of war would close 
our market to purchasers of munitions, has played 
into the hands of Hitler. Germany alone is said to 
have more planes than Britain, France and Czecho- 
slovakia combined. Britain and France, knowing they 
would be unable to buy planes here in time of war 
were at a disadvantage in resisting Germany. As long 
as France and Britain restrain Germany, the Americas 
are safe. But if they continue to capitulate, allowing 


Page Two —. 


— 


Hitler to secure new “bloodless” victories, the possi- 
bility of German interference in Latin America will 


automatically increase. RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 
A LESSON IN NAZI TECHNIQUE 


Prime Minister Chamberlain’s speech in the House 
of Commons on September 28 and the White Paper 
on Czechoslovakia published the same day make it 
possible to reconstruct, in part at least, the events 
which led to the four-power accord concluded at 
Munich on September 29. If any lesson can be drawn 
from a study of these documents, it is that the 
originally moderate demands of a German minority 
were fanned into open rebellion by threats and 
propaganda from Germany; that Hitler's demand for 
“self-determination’’ disregarded the wishes of mod- 
erate Henleinists and non-Nazi Germans; and that 
Hitler presented first to Prague, then to France and 
Britain, demands he did not expect them to accept, 
each time raising the ante. Then, having terrorized 
all peoples by fear of air warfare, he capitalized the 
relief created by the Munich conference to obtain his 
major objectives. 


The report submitted by Lord Runciman to Mr. 
Chamberlain on September 21 shows that the con- 
cessions made by the Prague government on Septem- 
ber 5 in the so-called Fourth Plan* embodied the 
8-point Karlsbad program issued by Konrad Henlein 
on April 24.— These concessions, however, were un- 
acceptable to the more extreme members of the 
Sudeten German party, who provoked various in- 
cidents before and immediately after Hitler's Nurem- 
berg speech of September 12. Responsibility for 
the final break, says Lord Runciman, “must, in my 
opinion, rest upon Henlein, Frank and upon those 
of their supporters inside and outside the country 
who were urging them to extreme unconstitutional 
action. 


At the same time, Lord Runciman expressed 
“much sympathy” for the Sudeten Germans, and 
made the following recommendations to Mr. Cham- 
berlain: 


1. Frontier districts between Czechoslovakia and Ger- 
many where the Sudeten population is “in an important 
majority” should be given the full right of self-determi- 
nation at once, without a plebiscite which would be “a 
sheer formality.’’ Unlike the Anglo-French proposals of 
September 18, the Runciman report does not specify the 
actual percentage which would constitute ‘an important 
majority.” 

2. Czechoslovakia “should so remodel her foreign re- 
lations as to give assurances to her neighbors that she will 
under no circumstances attack them.’’ Prague’s policy 
“should be entirely neutral, as in the case of Switzerland.” 


3. The principal powers should give Czechoslovakia 
guarantees of assistance in case of unprovoked aggression, 


*'*No War—but No Peace,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, September 16, 1938. 
+'‘The Road Back—to 1914,’ ibid., May 6, 1938. 


——_ 
=—— 
4 


man 
to a 


5 
ord 


tran 

The 
Polan 
says, | 
shado 

WI! 
Czeck 
early 
aratic 
Britis 
prepa 
as a 
the C 
“refu 
that 
incre; 
reiter 
ister’ 
ably 
Sir N 
on / 
ing” 
every 
Briti 
sona 


H 
time 
tion, 
creat 
whe: 
troo 
lain 
Hitl 
able 
gade 
was 
real; 
thar 
But, 
ther 
cept 
Sud. 
way 

N 
of ( 
vasi 
retu 


FORE 
Head 
Enter 


k= 


—————__. 
—— $$, 


€ possi- 
ica will 
UELL 


> House 
e Paper 
make it 
» events 
ided at 
> drawn 
hat the 
ninority 
ats and 
and for 
of mod- 
nd that 
nce and 

accept, 
rrorized 
ized the 
‘tain his 


to Mr. 
the con- 
Septem- 
lied the 
Henlein 
vere un- 
of the 
ious in- 
Nurem- 
lity for 
, in my 
yn those 
country 
tutional 


x pressed 
ns, and 
. Cham- 


and Ger- 
mportant 
'-determi- 
ild be “a 
posals of 
secify the 
important 


oreign re- 
t she will 
>’s policy 
-zerland.” 
oslovakia 
p gression. 


er 16, 1938. 


4. Delimitation of the area to be transferred to Ger- 
many and other technical questions should be entrusted 
to an international commission. 


5. An international force should be organized to keep 
order in the districts to be transferred pending actual 
transfer. 

These recommendations—except for the claims of 
Poland and Hungaty which, as Mr. Chamberlain 
says, complicated negotiations at this juncture—fore- 
shadow the principal terms of the Munich accord. 


While Lord Runciman was still negotiating with 
Czechs and Sudeten Germans, Britain was alarmed 
early in August by reports of extensive military prep- 
arations in Germany. When Sir Nevile Henderson, 
British Ambassador in Berlin, pointed out that these 
preparations “‘could not fail to be interpreted abroad 
as a threatening gesture toward Czechoslovakia,” 
the German Foreign Minister, Herr von Ribbentrop, 
“refused to discuss military measures,” and indicated 
that ‘British efforts in Prague had only served to 
increase Czech intransigence.” Sir John Simon then 
reiterated at Lanark, on August 27, the Prime Min- 
ister’s warning of March 24 that Britain would prob- 
ably become involved in a Central European conflict. 
Sir Nevile, following consultations with the Cabinet 
on August 30, delivered a ‘‘strong personal warn- 
ing’’ to von Ribbentrop on September 1, and ‘‘took 
every Opportunity to impress [the attitude of the 
British government} upon the leading German per- 
sonalities’”” at Nuremberg on September 9 and 12. 


Hitler’s Nuremberg speech, which for the first 
time “publicly raised the issue of self-determina- 
tion,” and subsequent Henleinist demonstrations, 
created “‘a highly critical situation’’ by September 14, 
when ‘there was an immediate danger of German 
troops . . . entering Czechoslovakia.’” Mr. Chamber- 
lain then decided to have a personal interview with 
Hitler—a plan he had had in mind “for a consider- 
able period as a last resort.’ During the Berchtes- 
gaden visit he “very soon became aware the situation 
was much more acute and more urgent” than he had 
realized. Hitler declared “categorically that, rather 
than wait, he would be prepared to risk a world war.” 
But, if Mr. Chamberlain could give him “‘there and 
then” the assurance that the British government ac- 
cepted the principle of self-determination for the 
Sudeten Germans, “he was quite ready to discuss 
ways and means of carrying it out.” 

Mr. Chamberlain expressed the belief in the House 
of Commons that his visit alone “prevented an in- 
vasion for which everything had been prepared.” He 
returned to London on September 16 and, at a Cab- 


Page Three 


inet meeting held on the same day, Lord Runciman 
submitted the recommendations embodied in his re- 
port of September 21. MM. Daladier and Bonnet, 
summoned to London on September 18, joined the 
British Cabinet in asking Prague ‘‘to agree immedi- 
ately to direct the transfer to the Reich of areas in- 
habited by a population more than 50 per cent 
German.” These terms Czechoslovakia accepted “im- 
mediately and unconditionally” on September 21, 
after it had been told that ‘‘there was no hope of new 
proposals.” 

On September 22, armed with Prague’s acceptance, 
Mr. Chamberlain went to Godesberg. There Hitler 
presented to him an outline of the terms subsequently 
embodied in his memorandum of September 23 
which, according to Mr. Chamberlain, confronted 
him with a ‘‘totally unexpected situation.” What ap- 
parently shocked Mr. Chamberlain were not Hitler's 
territorial demands which, except for the German 
language islands practically cutting Czechoslovakia 
in two, corresponded fairly closely to the “more than 
50 per cent German” formula of the Anglo-French 
proposals, but Hitler’s threat to occupy the entire 
area by force on October 1, without waiting for de- 
limitation by an international commission. Mr. 
Chamberlain told the House of Commons he “did 
not think Hitler deliberately deceived him.” The 
Fuehrer, however, told him that “he never for one 
moment supposed” Mr. Chamberlain “should be 
able to come back and say that the principle [of self- 
determination} was accepted.” 

Mr. Chamberlain transmitted the Godesberg terms 
to the Prague government, which replied on Septem- 
ber 24 that Hitler’s demands, ‘‘in their present form, 
were ‘‘absolutely and unconditionally unacceptable.” 
This refusal was followed by mounting panic 
throughout the world, culminating on September 27 
in last-minute appeals to Hitler from President 
Roosevelt, Mr. Chamberlain, and other statesmen in 
Europe and Latin America; reports that German 
forces would march into Czechoslovakia ahead of 
the October 1 deadline; and the announcement, in 
the midst of Mr. Chamberlain’s speech to the House 
of Commons, that Mussolini had persuaded Hitler 
to postpone mobilization and summon the Munich 
conference. 

This lesson is doubly instructive: because of the 
blinding light it throws on the technique by which 
Hitler rose to power in Germany, and because of the 
implications this technique, if repeated, may have for 
the future of Europe—and the world. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 50, October 7, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lgsiizg BUELL, President; DorotHy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera MicHEeLes Dean, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


QE 181 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Two Dollars a Year. 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 4—With the spectre of war removed, at least 
temporarily, it is possible to reconstruct the part 
played by Washington in the tense crisis last week 
and to weigh the effects on American foreign policy. 
What stands out most sharply in retrospect is the 
smooth and efficient functioning of the State De- 
partment in the final hours of crisis. There have been 
differences of opinion in the Department in the past, 
and there will doubtless be differences in the future. 
But in the critical days last week there was complete 
unity and perfect harmony in the inner councils of 
the Secretary of State. To this unity of purpose Mr. 
Roosevelt owes the adroit drafting and effective tim- 
ing of his successive moves. 

The steps were not left to chance. The President's 
first appeal to Hitler was planned well in advance, 
but was held for the decisive moment when negotia- 
tions seemed to be breaking down. 


The Time Table. Timing became paramount on 
Tuesday, September 27. On Tuesday afternoon 
Chamberlain’s radio speech was heard by anxious 
officials in Washington; Czech troops were fully 
mobilized and France was calling up its reserves. 
Word had come from Berlin that Hitler's troops had 
orders to march in exactly 24 hours. The door to 
negotiations seemed to be swinging shut. Then, in 
swift succession, three steps were taken in Washing- 
ton. At 2 p.m. the State Department transmitted a 
“personal and confidential appeal” from the Presi- 
dent to Mussolini. At 3 p.m. urgent instructions were 
sent to American diplomatic representatives abroad 
to express the opinion of this government that no 
step should be omitted which might contribute to 
peace. At 10 p.m. the President's second message 
was sent to Hitler. 


The actual effect of these steps may never be 
known, as they coincided with other and perhaps 
more decisive moves in London, Paris, Rome and 
Warsaw. But it is known that Mr. Rogsevelt’s secret 
appeal to Mussolini reached the Italian Foreign 
Office at 9:30 Wednesday morning, about half an 
hour before Lord Perth, the British Ambassador, 
arrived to deliver a similar message from Mr. Cham- 
berlain. Washington still insists that it had no 
knowledge of this British move at the time, but the 
fact that the two messages arrived almost simultane- 
ously must have had its effect. In any event, Musso- 
lini, the one man Hitler might be expected to listen 


to with attention, was in communication with Berlin 
within an hour. And the effect on Berlin was soon 
apparent. The story is told here that on that same 
Wednesday morning M. Francois Poncet, the able 
French Ambassador, saw Hitler and found him in a 
tractable mood, without a trace of bluff or bluster, 
Twice he referred to the President's message, in a 
manner which seemed to indicate that it had regis- 
tered. Two hours before the deadline for general 
mobilization of the German army, the invitation to 
the four-power conference was on its way. 


Unanswered Questions. Now that the final terms 
of the four-power agreement are known, many 
questions remain unanswered. No one here is pre- 
pared to say that justice has been done. Many believe 
that the price was too high and that the democratic 
states have been forced to surrender under humiliat- 
ing terms. Some insist that Chamberlain and Daladier 
could have driven a harder bargain, which might 
at least have included some guarantees to the Czech 
minorities in Sudetenland. But no one is prepared to 
say that a world war fought today on this issue would 
have been preferable to the Munich settlement. On the 
other hand, some hold that out of this crisis a firmer 
basis for peace may yet be established. On October 3 
Under-Secretary Sumner Welles voiced the hope that 
if political appeasement can be brought about, the 
way may be paved for “limitation and reduction of 
armaments,’ together with “a world-wide agree- 
ment’ on bombing of civilian populations. In these 
tasks, he implied, the United States would be pre- 
pared to cooperate. 


The course of American foreign policy, in the fu- 
ture as in the past, depends on the march of events. 
In the final hours of crisis, however, certain facts 
become self-evident: 

1. The United States did not stand aloof in the face of a 

major world catastrophe. 

The American people, while resolved not to be drawn 

into armed conflict in Europe, wholeheartedly supported 

every effort to preserve peace. 

3. The Administration refrained from making any com- 
mitment which would obligate the United States to 
armed intervention in case of war, but did not hesitate 
to invoke the moral influence of the American people 
on behalf of the principles of peaceful settlement. 


N 


The lessons of this crisis are being weighed in 
Washington. They may well be pondered by every 
one concerned with American foreign policy. 


W. T. STONE 


FO! 


An inti 


Octobe: 


ponet 
wheltr 
peop! 
berla: 
oppo 
mone 
vote 
supp' 
threa 
failes 
the |] 
Libe: 
voca 
serve 
Duff 
assul 
a £' 
wart 
arm; 
prog 
reco! 
Britt 
doll. 
an it 
M 
part 
a pr 
who 
up t 
of E 


Ger 


