










































a i | 


Be 


B88 eR 


an- 
Mr. 
iger 
Jni- 
atic 
rma- 
teen 
XiCO 
ent. 

the 
d at 


, by 
942, 


work 
rilip- 
riod 


———— 


tional 
Last, 
York 





Dr. 





Willian ®. Bisho class Matter 
* Univare: a 
“Versity of Nichican Libr 
“idrary 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 21 


MarcH 18, 1942 





BELLIGERENTS GIRD FOR SPRING OFFENSIVES 


S the tide of war engulfed Java, the United Na- 
tions were once more obliged to learn the 
axioms which, it would seem, should have been 
indelibly graven on their minds by Hitler’s successes 
in Europe. These axioms are that human courage, 
unsupported by adequate armaments, is unavailing 
against a superior enemy; and that a nation’s eco- 
nomic potential is very different from actual military 
power. While this country, which is only beginning to 
play the rdle of arsenal of democracy, seeks to achieve 
goals set for the end of 1942, at the earliest, the Axis 
powers are fighting today with weapons accumulated 
in 1941 and many preceding years. It is this margin 
of initial preparedness—which will be narrowed as 
American industry swings into all-out production— 
that gives Japan the opportunity to seize strategic 
positions in the Pacific, as Germany had previously 
seized strategic positions in Europe. 


But the defeats suffered by the United Nations in 
Europe and the Far East have not yet determined the 
outcome of the war. The present conflict is not 
merely a struggle for material possessions, to be 
measured in terms of territorial conquests, but a 
social revolution, to be measured in terms of its im- 
pact on human beings. In spite of their overwhelm- 
ing military superiority, the Nazis have not succeed- 
ed in pacifying the conquered nations. Behind the 
facade of their “new order,” the conquered con- 
tinue to undermine the Nazi system. But can this 
situation be duplicated in the Far East where, with 
the exception of the Chinese and the Filipinos, the 
native populations may feel that they are only ex- 
changing one foreign master for another—even if 
they should find Japanese rule less humane than 
that of the Western powers? Can these populations 
be expected to offer to Japan the kind of silent but 
effective resistance that Hitler faces in Europe? Or 
will each island occupied by the Japanese have to be 
wrested from them by sheer military force? 


THE CRUCIAL FRONTS. The answers to these 
questions are important, because the United Nations 
will obviously be unable, during this year of decision, 
to send men and armaments to all fronts in equal 
measure, and will have to concentrate on those 
fronts which offer the greatest promise of immediate 
success. Australia, poor in internal transportation 
facilities and lacking adequate harbors, may eventu- 
ally provide a base for an offensive against Japan— 
but this would require time, and time is at the mo- 
ment running in favor of Japan. India, too—especial- 
ly if it could be closely linked with operations from 
China—might prove a base for reconquest of terri- 
tories seized by Japan; but India’s unresolved poli- 
tical dilemma makes military utilization of that coun- 
try beyond the point already reached somewhat prob- 
lematical. Although defensive operations in the Far 
East must be stubborn, there are four strategic areas 
which seem crucial at this time, on the eve of Hitler’s 
anticipated spring offensive. These are Russia; the 
Russian Far East; the Near and Middle East; and 
Western Europe. 


1. Russia. With Hitler reported to have established his 
headquarters in Kiev, ready to throw fresh divisions into 
the fray, the Russian front assumes decisive importance. 
Berlin admits that Germany lost 1,500,000 men, dead, 
wounded and missing, in the Russian campaign. These 
losses have had to be made up by the transfer to the Rus- 
sian front of German troops garrisoning conquered coun- 
tries, by additional conscription in Germany, and by the 
recruitment of troops from Germany's allies—Hungary, 
Italy and Rumania. Bulgarian forces, which had refused to 
fight against Russia, are being used to replace the Germans 
in Yugoslavia, and simultaneously to threaten Turkey. 

Russia probably has trained man power equal to that of 
Germany and its allies, but Russian industry, which has not 
yet recovered the raw materials of the Ukraine and the 
Donetz Basin, may not be in a position to match the produc- 
tion of German factories plus that of factories operated by 
the Germans in pamemnatt 5 countries. That is why Russia is 
demanding additional war material from Britain and the 
United States—which it is difficult to send in large quan- 


See oe 


ena 


PY a Si a eee 


a4 


a Sa 


= 


= args 
Se 


eer 





tities owing to lack of shipping; and is also urging the 
creation of a second land front in Europe. 

2. The Russian Far East. At this critical juncture Russia 
is even more reluctant than it was last December to be- 
come involved in war on a second front, against Japan. 
The Russian Far East, with its valuable naval and air oe 
at Vladivostok, will probably become a theatre of war only 
if Japan attacks Russia. 

It is entirely within the bounds of possibility that Hitler 
may urge a Japanese thrust against the Russian Far East 
while he launches his spring offensive from the west. But 
Chinese and American demands that Russia should take 
the offensive against Japan are justified only if the United 
Nations can send an Glegmne number of planes to Vladi- 
vostok for attack on Tokyo and other Japanese cities. 
Otherwise, a United Nations attempt to use Vladivostok 
would merely precipitate a Japanese attack on the Russian 
Far East without relieving Russia in the west. The argu- 
ment often heard here that, if Russia wants a second front 
in Europe, it should itself open a second front in the Far 
East is not entirely valid. The Russians believe that Ger- 
many could be more promptly defeated than Japan, and urge 
the Allies to concentrate on Europe for a knock-out blow. 

3. The Near and Middle East. Control by the United 
Nations of the Near and Middle East is essential to pre- 
vent a junction of Japanese and German forces through the 
Indian Ocean, and to avert access by Germany to the oil 
resources of Iran and/or the Caucasus. If a choice has to be 
made between defense of India, on the one hand, and the 
Near East, on the other, strong arguments could be made 


————ooooaam==*=[=====[[a=a=_LL=-s-P th.) —eEoCC={={[KheNaoo>""""a"eeEeOk_ me 





— 





found effect on the whole Moslem world, and may decide was eX 
the fate of Africa. a 
4. Western Europe. It is in Western Europe that the prelim: 
second land front urgently demanded by the Russiang§ afe bet 
might be opened this spring. Rumors from many sources§ The Pp 
indicate that the Germans either expect, or are trying to} asa me 
create the ——s that they expect, a British invasion of west, 7 
Norway, and that German troops are being concentrated{  .., 
along the Baltic, especially in Denmark. Increased precay. militar 
tions in Sweden show that the Swedish government als} sepaf@ 
fears a thrust toward Scandinavia, either by Germany or by} the fo! 
the United Nations. structi 
British bombing of the Renault factory, which had} shelve 
been manufacturing war material for Germany, was} Board 
a partial answer to Moscow’s demand for a second structi 
front. Shocking as this bombing was to all friends} of sev 
of France, it must be realized that, to open a front} to Fat 
in Europe, the United Nations will have to inflict} Joint 
hardship and death on their own supporters, because Febru: 
Germany has skillfully used the conquered countries; way ¢ 
as a shield against attack on its own industries and} 4 rout 
railways. The tragic paradox is that, to liberate Eu-§ bia, W 
rope, the United Nations may first have to wreak | the ch 
destruction upon it. Yet the kindest. thing that they} weste! 
can do right now is to shorten the war as much as} of mo 
possible, and thus shorten the sufferings to which} attack 


i i Canac 
for building up a base in the Near East, and holding it at a Saee ee PL 
all costs. Events in the Near East are bound to have a pro- VERA MICHELES DEAN 1 

ence 
CANADIANS FACE CONSCRIPTION ISSUE wl 


A growing realization in Canada that the Pacific 
war may soon require direct offensive or defensive 
operations within the boundaries of Canada itself is 
profoundly affecting conceptions of war strategy and 
the vigor of war effort in the Dominion. Except for 
a brief period following Dunkerque when there was 
genuine alarm that Canada’s security in the North 
Atlantic zone might be immediately endangered, 
many Canadians (like their neighbors to the south) 
had continued until recently to think of the war as 
something which could not touch their own soil. 
Canada’s function, it was thought, would be to serve 
Britain and its European allies as an arsenal and a 
larder, an air-training ground, and a source of vol- 
untarily recruited man power. On each of these 
counts, the Canadian effort and contributions have 
been considerable. Shipments of food and muni- 
tions to the United Kingdom in 1941 amounted to 





For a survey of the keystone of the Allied defense 
structure, read: 


Allied Strategy in the Near East 
by Louis E. Frechtling 


25¢ 


February 1 issue of ForEIGN Poticy Reports (issued on the 
ist and 15th of each month. Subscription, $5 a year; to 
FPA members $3). 














$658,000,000 (Canadian); more than 100,000 men} the I 
have been trained, or are in training, in the Royal} plebis 
Canadian Air Force; and 150,000 Canadian soldiers, } early 
sailors, and airmen are now serving outside Canada. the o 


Although these phases of the Canadian war ef-} %t© 
fort are still being pushed vigorously, the shift to had § 
global war is now compelling more extensive action for o 
in other directions. In the first place, the strong pos- be re 
sibility that Alaska may have to be defended against 
Japanese attacks, and that it may also be used as a 
base for operations against Japan, increases both the 


vulnerability as well as the world strategic impor oe 
tance of western and northern Canada. A glance ata} Site 
globe also reveals the crucial position which Canada of b 
occupies across the lines of aerial communication be- “a 
tween the United States and the Far East, the Soviet 7 
Union, and northwestern Europe. - 


HIGHWAY TO ALASKA. Reports from Ottawa } situa 
within the past few weeks indicate that plans for) affe; 
military and aerial concentrations are being rapidly} A 
revised to meet this new situation. Detailed spect} tesy 
fications are, of course, a closely guarded sectet.§ of ; 
Prime Minister Mackenzie King announced on imp 
March 6, however, that an agreement had bee} Jan 
reached with the United States for the immediate} Stat 
construction of the long-projected Alaskan Highway} ficia 
across Canada. A corps of American Army engineets} mat 
























































ces 
. to 
1 of 
ited 


also 


nad 
Was 
ond 
nds 
Ont 
flict 
Use 
ries 
and 
Eu- 


1 ag 
rich 


nen 
yal 
ers, 
ada. 
ef- 
t to 
tion 
pos- 
inst 
aS a 
the 
por- 
at a 
ada 
. be 


viet 


awa 

for 
vidly 
peci- 
cret. 

on 
been 
Jiate 
way 
eer 








—_—_— 
was expected in northern Alberta this week to start 
reliminary work on the project, funds for which 
are being provided by the United States government. 
The plan for a road, originally proposed in 1930 
asa means to attract tourists to Alaska and the north- 
west, was revived in 1938 because of its potential 
military value. Investigations were conducted by 
separate American and Canadian commissions, and 
the former issued a report last May in favor of con- 
struction. The project was apparently temporarily 
shelved by the Canadian-American Permanent Joint 
Board of Defense, and priority was given to con- 
struction (by the Canadian government) of a chain 
of seven air fields leading from Edmonton, Alberta, 
to Fairbanks, Alaska. It is now revealed that the 
Joint Defense Board, meeting in New York on 
February 26, unanimously recommended that high- 
way construction should proceed without delay along 
aroute northward from Fort St. John, British Colum- 
bia, which would link up existing roads and follow 
the chain of airports. Previous proposals for a more 
westerly route were apparently abandoned because 
of mountain weather hazards, vulnerability to coastal 
attack, and inaccessibility to the central regions of 
Canada and the United States. 


PLEBISCITE ON CONSCRIPTION. Further evi- 
dence that Canadian political leaders are convinced 
that global war may require reconsideration of 
Canada’s war strategy was given on March 3, when 
the House of Commons voted to hold a national 
plebiscite (tentatively scheduled for late April or 
eatly May) on the touchy conscription issue. Before 
the outbreak of war in 1939, Prime. Minister King, 
out of deference to the wishes of French Canadians, 
had gone on record in opposition to a national draft 
for overseas service. The government now seeks to 
be released from this pledge, and the plebiscite issue 


Although hampered by the initial defeats suffered 
by the United Nations in the Far East, the United 
States continues to press forward with its program 
of hemisphere organization for victory. Significant 
advances on this front were made last week in Brazil 
and Ecuador. But disturbing developments in Argen- 
tina and Chile emphasized anew that the nations 
situated farthest from us are the ones most strongly 
affected by the Allies’ reverses overseas. 

AGREEMENTS WITH BRAZIL. Far-reaching 
fesults may ultimately be expected from the series 
of accords concluded with Brazil on March 3. To 
implement the principles affirmed at the Rio de 
Janeiro conference, it was agreed that the United 
States and Brazil will cooperate on mutually bene- 
ficial terms in stimulating the production of strategic 
Materials now sorely needed for the American war 





= Page Three 








has been phrased to this end. Technically, a vote 
of approval would not mean endorsement of con- 
scription, but simply authorization for the govern- 
ment to use its best judgment. Members of the Con- 
servative Opposition have long favored a conscrip- 
tion act, and during the Commons debate just con- 
cluded some of them sought vainly to get a forth- 
right vote on the issue. It was evident, however, that 
Mr. King was not ready to see the question voted on 
directly in this form, although there is little doubt 
of the government’s ultimate intention. Anti-con- 
scription demonstrations, it is reported, occurred in 
Montreal on February 14; a small group of Parlia- 
mentary members from Quebec still openly oppose 
a draft for overseas service; and views have been ex- 
pressed which indicate that awareness of the stra- 
tegic need for offense, rather than defense, is not 
yet universally prevalent. At the same time Cana- 
dians, no less than Americans, are going through a 
mental shake-up. Given governmental leadership, 
Canadian unity and determination for offensive op- 
erations in all fields may develop into a living reality. 

With regard to the conscription issue, it should be 
noted that Canadians have long been drafted for 
home defense, which Mr. King has now interpreted 
to include the United States and Alaska. About 
150,000 have been called under this system—some for 
part-time training and some for the duration of the 
war. In addition, nearly 400,000 men have voluntarily 
enlisted for service anywhere. Since the population of 
the United States is eleven times greater than that of 
Canada, the number of men in Canadian forces 
would be equivalent to an American volunteer army 
and navy of nearly 4,400,000. Until the United States 
can duplicate this performance. we should be slow 
to criticize Canada on its failure to adopt unrestricted 


conscription. WiILtiAM P. Mappox 


U.S. PRESSES HEMISPHERE SOLIDARITY PROGRAM 


effort. At the same time, the Brazilian government is 
to receive increased lend-lease aid, which will un- 
doubtedly be utilized for the further development of 
military installations along Brazil’s northeastern 
coast. The two countries will collaborate to expand 
raw rubber production in and near the Amazon 
valley. They will develop the Itabira iron mine prop- 
erties, source of some of the highest grade ores in 
the world, presumably to replace the Swedish ores 
once used—particularly in Britain—for special pur- 
pose steels. Both feeder railways and port facilities 
must be improved to make the iron enterprise prac- 
ticable. Washington is providing the capital needed 
for the rubber and iron ore projects. In addition, the 
Export-Import Bank has allotted $100,000,000 for 
mobilization of the varied productive resources of 
Brazil which can contribute to the Allied cause. 























Despite the sweeping terms of the agreements, a 
considerable period must elapse before their effects 
begin to be felt. Unless the war continues for many 
years, there will be no time to increase appreciably 
the yield of New World plantation rubber, while the 
far less efficient process of tapping wild trees in the 
jungle involves difficult problems of labor supply. 
Acting Secretary of State Sumner Welles may there- 
fore have been somewhat optimistic in his assump- 
tion that wild rubber production will be increased to 
60,000 or 70,000 tons a year as a result of the agree- 
ments. Plans to expand Brazil's output of minerals 
may be upset, moreover, because of the difficulty of 
obtaining and shipping machinery and equipment. 
If the accords present an encouraging blueprint for 
progress, they also challenge the ingenuity of North 
American and Brazilian technicians. 


A BASE IN ECUADOR. On the Pacific front, 
this country has likewise won ground in its efforts to 
guard the approaches to the Panama Canal. On 
March 2, government spokesmen in Ecuador re- 
vealed that a naval base is being constructed by the 
United States at Salinas, on the Santa Elena penin- 
sula bordering the Gulf of Guayaquil, and that 
North American naval and air forces are to patrol 
Ecuador's coast. The new naval station is situated 
only 800, miles from the Canal Zone. While it is de- 
nied that any concession has been made regarding 
Ecuador’s Galapagos Islands, located 860 miles 
southwest of the Canal, it may be assumed that no 
enemy could easily set foot upon them. In Washing- 
ton, the bases program is being thinly camouflaged 
as ‘defense sanitation,” under a plan of large-scale 
sanitary works, the cost of which will in most cases 
be shared with this country by the Latin American 
nations concerned. Such projects have not been ap- 
proved not only for Ecuador, but also for Venezuela, 
Peru, Colombia, Brazil and Uruguay. 


Far less satisfactory are developments in Argen- 
tina and Chile, whose determination not to sever 
diplomatic relations with the Axis has been strength- 
ened in recent weeks. As a result of elections for al- 
most half the seats in the Argentine Chamber of 
Deputies, held on March 1, Acting President Ramén 
S. Castillo appears to have gained control of the one 
remaining refractory branch of the Buenos Aires 
government and the center of popular opposition to 
fascism. Although the final election returns are not 
yet known, the Conservative party, which supported 
Castillo’s “prudent neutrality,” swept many impor- 
tant provinces, with the aid of the state of siege im- 


Page Four 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule | 
/ 


Subject: IS A FREE GERMANY POSSIBLE? 
Speaker: Dr. George N. Shuster, President, Hunter 

College; Member, FPA Board of Directors 
Date: Sunday, March 15 


Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network — ‘ 


For station, please consult your local-news paper 








posed by the federal authorities. Even in the city 9 
Buenos Aires, where elections are relatively honest 
the Radicals—spearhead of the opposition—haye 
lost their plurality to the Socialists. The goverp. 
ment’s victory reflects not so much an affinity fox the 
Axis as an understandable isolationist desire to k 
out of war, which has been enhanced by the military 
debacle in the Far East. 


Similarly, in Chile, the indefinite postponement 
of any action by Congress on the final act of the Rig 
de Janeiro conference suggests that President-eleq 
Juan Antonio Rios will not break with the ag 
gressors. In this he is now supported by the entire 
Santiago press, with the sole exception of the Com 
munist organ. Both Argentina and Chile have eveq 
right to pursue their own course in foreign policy 
But unless they assume their share of the risks of 
hemisphere defense, it certainly seems inadvisable 
that they should receive military equipment from the 
United States or enjoy any of the special economi 
benefits of inter-American solidarity—as they wouli 
apparently like to do. 

Davip H. Popper 





Defense Will Not Win the War, by Lieut. Col. W. F 
Kernan. Boston, Little, Brown, 1942. $1.50 





One of the most stimulating and timely books of th 
year. Colonel Kernan is on sound ground in warning usd@ 
the fatal consequences of defensive military policy, but ¥ 
not entirely convincing in his demand that we concentra® 
our efforts against Germany rather than Japan, or in hi 
exposition of a hypothetical offensive against Italy. 


Thailand: The New Siam, by Virginia Thompson. Nev 

York, Macmillan, 1941. $5.00 

A monumental study of Japan’s first conquest of the nef 
Pacific war, treating of Thailand’s geography, peoples, hit 
tory, politics, foreign relations, administration, economit 
and social life, education and the press. The book also coh 
tains an extensive bibliography, and is an indispensable 
reference work for all students of the new Siam. 


The Dutch East Indies, by Amry Vandenbosch. Berkeley 
University of California Press, 1941. $4.00 


Considerable additions and revisions have been made i 
this basic study of the politics, government, and social 
nomic problems of the Netherlands Indies. One of the 
American treatments of the subject. 














FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 21, Marcu 13, 1942. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


EO 


Published weekly by the Fre 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Witttam P. Maor 
Secretary; Vera MicueLes Dean, Editor; Davip H. Poppgr, Associate Editor, Entered as second-class matte 


Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationt 
istant to the President; Dorotruy F. Lat 
mber 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 














