Oa 
nt 
all 
—oeeernd 
ments 
eS not 
| con 
NS in 
Asting 
hority 
perent 
ctions 


verent 
erican 
Litions 


ving 
ity of 
ngress 
on On 
d that 
n and 
ntain- 
would 
ll had 
t was 
\meri- 
simi- 
carry- 
‘livery 
f war 
- been 
}, and 
| CONn- 
* inci- 
Allies 


Lmeri- 
Jnited 
on of 


tation 
ro the 
of co- 
in his 
vern- 
y Ssus- 
y are 
titude 
$ may 
urope 


JNE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


GN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
, soe po 


You. XIX, No. 3 NOVEMBER 10, 1939 


—_ 


AMERICA CHARTS HER COURSE 


- | by David H. Popper 


| 25¢ 
| A World Affairs Pamphlet 


Foreign Policy Association membership covers this series 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


‘ . 7 
ni yaraity Of 
wate ¥ - o i 


tf? nah? = 
mo CALteawl 


Ann Arbor. Michizcan 


—_— 


THE U.S.S.R. EXPLAINS 


ITS FOREIGN POLICY 


HILE Belgium and The Netherlands, fearful 
of German invasion, offered on November 7 
to mediate between the European belligerents, the 
US.S.R. denounced the “imperialist” aims of capi- 
talist states and, renewing its drive for world revolu- 
tion, urged workers everywhere to revolt against the 
| “ruling classes” and demand termination of the 
war. M. Molotov’s speeches of October 31 and No- 
vember 6, taken in conjunction with the manifesto 
issued by the Communist International on the 
| twenty-second anniversary of the Bolshevik revolu- 
tion, had little in them to gratify either Germany 
or the Allies. The main points of M. Molotov’s 
| speech of October 31 may be summarized as follows: 
GERMANY. M. Molotov pointed out that Russia’s 
relations with Germany had “radically improved,” 
_ and that the Soviet government was giving the Reich 
“practical cooperation” and “‘political support in its 
efforts for peace.’” He also stressed Moscow’s desire 
to contribute “in every way to the development of 
Soviet-German economic relations.” At the same 
time, he made no reference to the possibility of So- 
viet military aid for the Reich and, on the contrary, 
emphasized that the Soviet-German pact of August 
23 had bound the U.S.S.R. to remain neutral if 
Germany became engaged in war—a course, he said, 
which his government had “consistently pursued.” 
| The type of economic assistance Germany may 
expect to receive from Russia this year was indicated 
| by the announcement in Berlin on October 24 that 
the U.S.S.R. would ship 1,000,000 tons of grain and 
fodder to the Reich. An example of Soviet “politi- 
cal” assistance was a note of October 25 in which 
the U.S.S.R. refused to recognize the validity of the 
British war contraband list, contending that it vio- 
lated international law, impaired the interests of neu- 
ttals, and inflicted sufferings on civilian populations. 


POLAND. Soviet neutrality, according to M. Molo- 


tov, was “in no wise contradicted” by the entrance 
of Soviet troops into Eastern Poland on September 17 
which, he said, had been made necessary by the 
collapse of the Polish state and resulting danger 
for the security of the U.S.S.R. By this action, the 
Soviet Union had obtained an area of 196,000 square ~ 
kilometers with a population of 13,000,000, of whom 
all but one million are estimated to be White Rus- 
sians and Ukrainians. This area, following elections 
to the national assemblies of Western Ukraine and 
Western White Russia on October 29, was officially 
incorporated into the U.S.S.R. on November 1. Un- 
der the circumstances, said M. Molotov, “everybody 
realizes that there can be no question of restoring 
the old Poland.” 

THE BALTIC STATES. In summing up the mutual 
assistance pacts concluded by the Soviet Union with 
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania following the occu- 
pation of Poland, M. Molotov distinguished between 
“the policy of Czarist Russia, which brutally op- 
pressed the small nations,” and that of the Soviet 
government, “friendly” to the Baltic states. In view 
of the geographic position of these states, which 
constitute “approaches to the U.S.S.R.,” it had be- 
come necessary for the Soviet Union to establish 
air and naval bases on their territory, but he denied 
“all nonsense about sovietizing the Baltic countries,” 
attributing it to “anti-Soviet provocateurs.” 


FINLAND. Toward Finland, with which protracted 
negotiations have been carried on since October 7, 
M. Molotov adopted a definitely threatening tone. 
He denied that the Soviet Union was demanding ces- 
sion of the strategic Aland Islands or had any claims 
against Sweden and Norway. When Finland, he said, 
declined—on the grounds of its neutrality—to con- 
clude a mutual assistance pact, the Soviet govern- 
ment proceeded to discuss “concrete questions” con- 
cerning the security of Leningrad, both from the 


sea, through the Gulf of Finland, and from land. 
The Finnish negotiators, according to the Soviet 
Premier, agreed to exchange certain islands in the 
Gulf of Finland, as well as some other territory, for 
a section of Soviet Karelia. The real snag apparently 
developed over the Soviet demand for a naval base 
at Hangoe, opposite Baltic Port (where the U.S.S.R. 
had just obtained a similar base from Estonia) , which 
would permit Soviet forces to strengthen their com- 
mand over the entrance into the Gulf of Finland. 
If Finland agreed, the Soviet government, said M. 
Molotov, was prepared to abandon its objections to 
Finnish fortification of the Aland Islands, provided 
it was carried out without the participation of any 
third country. Should Finland “seek a pretext to frus- 
trate the proposed agreement,” warned M. Molotov, 
this “would, of course, work to the serious detri- 
ment” of the Finns. On November 4 Premier Gajan- 
der of Finland declared that the Soviet proposal for 
the establishment of a naval base on Finnish terri- 
tory would be “inconsistent with the country’s in- 


dependence.” 


TURKEY. M. Molotov denied that, in its negotia- 
tions with Turkey, the Soviet government had de- 
manded cession of the districts of Ardahan and 
Kars—former Russian territories occupied by the 
Turks in 1920—or changes in the Montreux con- 
vention governing the status of the Straits. All 
it wanted, he said, was a bilateral pact of mutual 
assistance limited to the region of the Straits and 
the Black Sea. Under this pact the Soviet government 
would have abstained from any action threatening 
to involve it in war with Germany; while Turkey 
would have been obligated to bar warships of non- 
Black Sea powers from the Black Sea. Turkey, M. 
Molotov stated, had rejected these proposals, and 
had “entered the orbit of the developing European 
war,” adding ominously: “Whether Turkey will not 
come to regret it we shall not try to guess.” 

JAPAN. M. Molotov commented on “the begin- 
nings of improvement in our relations with Japan,” 
signalized by the Manchoukuo-Mongolian border 
truce of September 15. By adding that Moscow 
looked “with favor on Japanese overtures” of a 
peaceful character, he lent color to reports that the 
U.S.S.R. might come to terms with Tokyo, as it has 
with Berlin. 

THE UNITED STATES. M. Molotov criticized Presi- 
dent Roosevelt's ‘‘intervention” in the Soviet-Finnish 
negotiations, which he found “hard to reconcile with 
the American policy of neutrality.” He also declared 
that the decision of the United States to lift the arms 
embargo “raises justified misgivings,” as it would 
merely aggravate and protract the European war. 
This point was made still more sharply in a mani- 
festo published on November 6 by the Communist 


Page Two 


a ee | 
— 


International, and in Earl Browder’s speech of No. 
vember 5 expressing the new Communist 
“line.” The Soviet attack on the United States g 
pears largely due to Moscow's fear that it may ny 
longer be in a position to hold the balance of powe 
between the two groups of belligerents, benefitin 
by the resulting stalemate, and that the Allies, with 
American aid, may prove stronger than Germany, 


WHAT MAKES WAR IMPERIALISTIC? The 
most significant portion of M. Molotov’s speech was 
his opening statement, in which he informed the §p. 
viet population that “radical changes” in Europe had 
rendered “certain old formulas” obsolete and inap. 
plicable; and that now Germany was striving for | 
peace, while France and Britain were seeking war, 
The Soviet Premier denounced Anglo-French efforts 
to destroy “‘Hitlerism” by saying that “religious way; | 
against heretics and dissenters’ have gone out of | 
fashion. The war aim of the Allies, he declared, was | 
not the struggle of democracy against Hitlerism, but 
the desire to preserve “their profoundly material in. 
terests as mighty colonial powers.” Such a war prom. | 
ised the working class only “bloody sacrifice and 
hardships.” 

The implication of M. Molotov’s statement is that 
the Allies, who are attempting to protect both their 
possessions and the established order in Europe, are 
waging an imperialistic war, while Germany and, 
Russia, which are acquiring territory by force or) 
threat of force, are merely pursuing altruistic aims. | 
It accords with the classic Marxist thesis that im- 
perialism is synonymous with capitalism—a thesis 
which disregards the historic fact that empires have 
been built, destroyed and rebuilt in ages when in- 
dustrial capitalism was unknown. The American 
people are legitimately interested in learning the wat 
aims of the Allies, and in discovering whether they 
hold a promise of European reconstruction. But it 
would certainly be the height of irony if, in the 
process of debunking the war aims of the Allies 
Americans should go to the other extreme of be 
lieving that German and Russian war aims are neces 


sarily any less imperialistic. VeRA MICHELES DEAN | 
ITALY TIGHTENS ITS NEUTRALITY 


By an important cabinet reorganization and 4 
series of diplomatic moves in the Balkans the Italian 
government has adopted a series of measures de | 
signed to safeguard its own neutrality and enhance’ 
its influence in Southeastern Europe. The shake-up 
in the top ranks of the Fascist hierarchy, announced 
with dramatic suddenness on October 31, was te 
garded abroad as something more than a meft 
“changing of the guard,” although the Italian press 
emphasized this aspect of the shift. Instead, foreign 
observers pointed out that the officials who wert 
dismissed—six cabinet ministers, the army and ail 


— 
force ch 
party— 
German 
Achil 
was kn 
now be 
militia, 
instrum 
ture, ha 
ro-axis 
Alberto 
ers of t 
erated 
implem 
the oth 
ricultur 
was rel 
Count 
post d 
which | 
The 
well fit 
Italian 
war. A 
ister, i! 
affairs, 
is a yc 
in Eth: 
forces 
unconr 
Fascist 
who is 
remair 


cides » 
doubt: 
ventul 
neutra 
diplor 
gover: 
forces 
progr 
in De 
for tl 
800,0 
Rome 
the It 
being 


Me 
the E 


a 
POREIC 
Headqu: 
Entered 


<> 


—=: 


of No. 
Patty 
tes ap. 
nay no 
POWer 
refiting 
S, With 
any, 
:? The 
ch was 
the po. 
pe had 
1 inap- 
ng for 
& wat, | 
efforts 
1S Wats 
Out of 
od, was 


3m, but | 
rial in. | 
’ prom- 
ce and 


is that | 
h their 
pe, ate | 
ny and 
Tce Of 
C aims. 
rat im- 

thesis 
»s have | 
hen in-| 
nerican | 
he war | 
er they 
But it 
in the 
Allies 
of be 
> Neces 
| Dean | 


Y 


and a 
Italian 
res de-| 
nhance | 
ake-up | 
ounced 
vas fe 
1 mere 
n press 
foreign 
o wert 
und aif 


— 
—_ 


force chiefs of staff, and the secretary of the Fascist 
had been prominently associated with the 
German alliance. 

Achille Starace, party secretary for eight years, 
was known for his strong pro-German views; he 
now becomes commander-in-chief of the Fascist 
militia, in whose development he has long been 
instrumental. Dino Alfieri, Minister of Popular Cul- 
ture, has been primarily responsible for the continued 
pro-axis alignment of the Italian press. Generals 
Alberto Pariani and Giuseppe Valle, military lead- 
ers of the army and air force respectively, had coop- 
erated closely with the German high command in 
implementing the Italo-German military pact. On 
the other hand Edmondo Rossoni, Minister of Ag- 
riculture since the beginning of the Fascist régime, 
was relatively well disposed toward the U.S.S.R. And 
Count Ciano, the Foreign Minister, remains at his 

st despite his ardent Germanophile tendencies, 
which had cooled since last August. 


The men chosen to assume the vacant posts are 
well fitted to assist in the pursuit of an independent 
Italian policy which would keep the country out of 
war. Alessandro Pavolini, the new Propaganda Min- 
ister, is a journalist without special bias in foreign 
affairs, while Ettore Muti, the new party secretary, 
is a young Fascist leader who played a heroic rdéle 
in Ethiopia, Spain and Albania. The Italian military 
forces will likewise be headed by officers hitherto 
unconnected with politics but outstanding in recent 
Fascist imperial ventures. Marshal Pietro Badoglio, 
who is said to be a proponent of Italian neutrality, 
remains as commander-in-chief of the armed forces. 
He is surrounded by such close associates as Marshal 
Rodolfo Graziani, veteran leader of military cam- 
paigns in Libya and Ethiopia, the new army chief. 

Mussolini’s policy of aloofness apparently coin- 
cides with Italian popular sentiment, which is both 
doubtful of the value of recent Fascist military ad- 
ventures and strongly anti-German. To defend its 
neutrality and improve its bargaining position in the 
diplomatic phase of the war, however, the Italian 
government has decided to strengthen its armed 
forces still further. A four-year military expansion 
program costing 10 billion lire, originally adopted 
in December 1938, has been amplified to provide 
for the expenditure of 17,476,000,000 lire ($873,- 
800,000). At the same time, all mention of the 
Rome-Berlin axis has vanished from the pages of 
the Italian press, and the attention of the country is 
being focused on measures of internal construction. 


Meanwhile, Italian diplomats have been active in 
the Eastern Mediterranean and the Balkans, where 


Page Three 


the Soviet Union threatens to fill the political 
vacuum left by Germany, today preoccupied in the 
West. Italy, which gave ground in Southeastern Eu- 
rope after 1935 in order to concentrate its efforts 
on Ethiopia and Spain, may now seek to regain 
some of its earlier influence. The Italian government 
has already acted to remove the suspicion felt by 
Greece since the conquest of Albania in April 1939. 
The mutual withdrawal of troops from the Greco- 
Albanian frontier in September was followed by 
publication, on November 3, of an exchange of notes 
between Athens and Rome, pledging a policy of re- 
ciprocal friendship and collaboration. A day later 
Bulgaria and Italy signed a trade treaty under which 
the former is expected to increase its agricultural ex- 
ports to Italy. Commercial negotiations with Greece 
and Rumania are also under way. 

In seeking to form a neutral Balkan bloc under 
its own auspices, Italy may ultimately clash with 
Turkey, Britain and France, which are engaged in 
the same endeavor. As long as a Soviet move against 
Rumania is feared, however, the four powers may 
maintain a loose collaboration. Important conversa- 
tions between Turks and Italians were initiated on 
November 3, while the improved relations between 
Italy on the one hand and Greece and Rumania, 
which are guaranteed by the Allies, on the other, 
suggest that a Soviet push to the south might meet 
with united resistance. In this connection it is sig- 
nificant that Britain accorded de facto recognition 
to the Italian conquest of Albania on October 31, 
when it revealed that it had asked Rome for permis- 
sion to send a consul-general to Tirana. 

VATICAN ATTACKS TOTALITARIANISM. 
The gradual shift in Italy's position may have been 
hastened somewhat by the publication, on Octo- 
ber 28, of the first encyclical of Pope Pius XII. In 
carefully measured phrases the Pontiff declared that 
the basic cause of modern evils lay in the rejection 
of a universal standard of morality in individual, 
social and international relations. While recognizing 
the value of diverse nationalities in contemporaty 
life, he affirmed the existence of a broader human 
unity of all mankind, transcending race differences. 
The encyclical condemned absolute and unrestrained 
civil authority both within the state and in the realm 
of international affairs, and was emphatic in its dis- 
approval of the treaty-breaking practices of absolute 
governments. The implied support of the Vatican 
for the Allied cause, which seemed inevitable after 
conclusion of the Soviet-German pact, has thus been 
formally expressed. It may have profound repercus- 


sions in Italy and outside. Davin H. Popper 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 3, NOvEMBER 10, 1939. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Cw 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dean, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Incorporated. National 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 

National Press Building 

Nov. 7.—Now that the Administration has won 

its long fight for repeal of the arms embargo Wash- 

ington, like other world capitals, is measuring the 

political and economic effects of the new cash-and- 

carry Neutrality Act signed by President Roosevelt 
on November 4. 


Some of the economic effects are already visible 
in the new airplane orders placed by Allied purchas- 
ing agents, and the request of American shipping 
lines to transfer the registry of vessels excluded from 
the North Atlantic trade under the terms of the new 
law and the Presidential proclamation of a combat 
area in the European war zone. But some of the po- 
litical results which were predicted six weeks ago are 
strangely absent today. There has as yet been no move 
toward further ‘‘intervention” in Europe, as opponents 
of repeal predicted, and no attempt by the Adminis- 
tration to magnify its victory. Instead, Washington 
observers find greater evidence of restraint and cau- 
tion than at any time since the outbreak of war. 


DIPLOMATIC RESTRAINT. One explanation 
for this restraint is found in the obvious desire of 
the American people to avoid military involvement 
in the war. While Congress has approved the ship- 
ment of arms and airplanes to the Allies, no one in 
Washington interprets this action as approval for 
more active American participation. On the contrary, 
they accept the fact that Congress would not have 
repealed the arms embargo unless it believed that 
American neutrality could and would be preserved. 

Another explanation is found in the character of 
the war itself. While State Department officials do 
not call this a “phony” war, they recognize the ex- 
istence of new factors which dictate caution and re- 
serve. These factors are found on the military front, 
in the new diplomatic alignments and in the psy- 
chology of the masses of the people in the warring 
countries, but above all in the undercurrent of revo- 
lution. The spectre of a possible fusion of the Nazi 
and Communist revolutions, though discounted by 
many Washington officials, has none the less altered 
some earlier calculations about the nature and course 
of the war. As a result, repeal of the arms embargo 
is accompanied by a growing belief in official quar- 
ters that the best interests of the United States would 
be served by strict neutrality and by using American 
influence to localize hostilities. Future events may 
alter this position, but for the present Washington 
will pursue a cautious policy. 


ECONOMIC EFFECTS. The first economic reper. 
cussions of cash-and-carry neutrality have come from 
the aviation and shipping industries. 

The proposed transfer of American vessels to 
Panamanian registry was launched by the United 


States Lines 48 hours after signing of the Neutrality _ 


Act, and won the conditional approval of the Mari. 
time Commission before intervention from the 
White House and the State Department held up a 
final decision. A storm of protest from Senators and 
Congressmen who had supported the Administra- 
tion bill because of its safeguards against involve. 
ment of American shipping brought a statement 


from Secretary Hull on November 7 that such a | 
transfer would violate the spirit if not the letter of | 
the neutrality law. At Hyde Park, however, Presi. | 


dent Roosevelt implied that the transaction was 
legal and had no bearing on the Neutrality Act. 
Approximately 30 per cent of the total tonnage 
of the American merchant marine is affected by the 
terms of the new law and the President's proclama- 
tion of a European war zone. Under the terms of the 
Act, American ships are forbidden to carry any pas- 


sengers or goods to ports of the three European bel- | 


ligerents. In addition, the President’s proclamation 
forbids American vessels to enter a combat area ex- 
tending from south of Bergen, Norway, to the north- 
ern coast of Spain, shutting off the British Isles and 


the Baltic sea, but not affecting travel in the Medi- | 


terranean. Opponents of the transfer of registry 
point out that the price of these restrictions was 
weighed in advance, and that unnecessary penalties 
were eliminated from the original bill in order to 
make it practicable and effective. Whatever the le- 
gality of the proposed transfer, it is an evasion of 
the purpose of Congress. 

Washington agencies in touch with Allied wat 
purchases are inclined to discount sensational re- 
ports of a flood of new orders totaling between 
$500,000,000 and $1,000,000,000. So far as is 
known, existing orders do not exceed $150,000,000, 
including the orders placed with American firms 


before the outbreak of war. Nevertheless, a fun- | 


damental shift in trade with Britain and France is 
anticipated within the next few months, and will call 


for some kind of governmental regulation if serious | 


dislocation is to be avoided. So far the only new 
machinery set up is an interdepartmental committee 
functioning under the Army and Navy Munitions 
Board to protect our own national defense program. 
W. T. STONE 


FOR’ 


An inter 


at the 


protrac 


vember 
“obstin 
| comply 
Hangor 
two cc 
Finnisl 
| The 


coincid 


of any 
ritoria| 
| by Kin 
| ber 12 
| helmir 
on No 
to con 
the us 
The 

prom 
their ; 
| agreer 
break: 


In 1 
Britis] 
Cham 
fear « 
the fi 
in set 
tespo: 
ing t 
commn 
of su 
achie 
gover 
consi 


