——= 


NCessions 


winning 
‘kyo con. 
r Chinese 
Customs 
iment in 
t the Jap. 
Mm in the 
1. Japan's 
ender £g 
inese na- 
sion, and 
mM circu 
ling that 
| powers 
> for dip. 
ton. The 
ust 18 to 
nomic is- 
f further 
views of 
account, 
nsisted— 
Tientsin 
1 rejected 
ion. 
door to 
ne of the 
duced by 
> Anglo- 
the turn 
essure in 
rced sus- 
ilities of 
id Hong: 
nghai on 
en of the 
a British 
nmanders 
ongkong, 
»f border 
blockade 
iel for a 
n against 
all along 
BISSON 


ison. New 


r Eastern 
apter has 
nts of the 


d. National 
BAN, Editor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


OF 


Vou. XVIII, No. 45 


SEPTEMBER 1, 1939 


—7_ 


F.P.A. TO BROADCAST FROM FAIR 


On Wednesdays from 8:00-8:30 P.M. during September, 
the F.P.A. will broadcast over Station WNYC from the 
Science and Education Building at the New York World’s 
Fair. The public is cordially invited to attend these meet- 
ings and participate in the discussion period. ‘“‘America 
Looks Abroad” is the title of the series. 


SEP 7 93S 
Entered as second- 


class matter December 
IOBDICAL ROUSE | 2, 1921, at the Post 
ERAL LIBRARY | ig at yee dg: 
N. -» under t act 
iv. OF MICE. of March 3, 1879. 


' 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 


EUROPE PAUSES ON BRINK OF WAR 


r Europe has so far escaped both the catastrophe 
of war and the humiliation of another Munich, 
the calm and resolute attitude of Britain and France 
have been largely responsible. The feeling of panic 
and weakness so evident during the Czech crisis last 
year has given way to confidence and determina- 
tion. The Fuehrer’s apparent expectation that the 
German-Soviet pact would cause the democracies to 
beat a hasty retreat has proved unfounded. By dis- 
abusing the last conservatives who still considered 
the Nazi Reich a bulwark against communism, the 
agreement helped to solidify resistance to German 
pretensions; and by opening all eyes to the possi- 
bility of close collaboration between the two greatest 
totalitarian powers, it clearly revealed the menace 
to the British Empire. Meeting on August 22, the 
British cabinet lost no time in affirming that the 
agreement between Moscow and Berlin would not 
affect Britain's own obligations to Poland. The fol- 
lowing day Hitler was told that London would re- 
sist the use of force “to the uttermost.” To leave no 
doubt in the Fuehrer’s mind, Parliament, convened 
in special session on August 23, quickly passed the 
Emergency Powers bill conferring sweeping author- 
ity on the government to take any measure essential 
to national safety. August 24 witnessed the final 
conclusion of a far-reaching alliance with Poland 
which commits Britain to resist indirect as well as 
direct aggression against that country. 

Meanwhile, additional reserves were called up for 
all branches of the armed forces on August 22. The 
British fleet was drawn up ready to blockade the 
entrances to the Baltic Sea at a moment’s notice; and 
the unlicensed export of essential war materials was 
forbidden. The Admiralty assumed control of mer- 
chant shipping and closed the Mediterranean to 
British vessels. To conserve the country’s gold 
stocks, the Exchange Fund allowed the pound to 


slip its moorings on August 25; two days later a 
Treasury order provisionally mobilized a large part 
of British holdings of foreign securities. 

Most significant of all, London has made no hasty 
overtures to Berlin. It was the Fuehrer who took the 
initiative on August 24 by calling in the French and 
British ambassadors to acquaint them with his de- 
mands. London refused to be hurried. Not until the 
afternoon of August 28, after three Cabinet meetings, 
did Sir Nevile Henderson fly back to Berlin with 
the government's reply. Its answer clearly indicated 
that Britain is unwilling to impose a Munich settle- 
ment on Poland. The Fuehrer has been told to nego- 
tiate directly with Warsaw. The British government 
is prepared to help bring these negotiations to a suc- 
cessful conclusion only if Germany abandons its 
menacing attitude. 

Britain’s coolness in face of the Nazi war of nerves 
has been fully matched in France. By the end of the 
week the army was two-thirds mobilized. The French 
were in no mood merely to follow the British. 
Premier Daladier answered Hitler’s unconditional 
demands for the immediate return of the Corridor 
and Danzig as early as August 26. He reiterated 
French determination to stand by Poland and offered 
cooperation in seeking a direct settlement between 
Berlin and Warsaw. 


The German government has undoubtedly been 
surprised by this show of resistance. Several intima- 
tions that the “zero hour’’ was approaching have 
passed unheeded. True, there is little proof that 
Hitler is retreating from his demands. The British 
message of August 23 was rebuffed with the declara- 
tion that Germany could not be induced “to renounce 
the defense of her vital interests.” In his interviews 
with the British and French ambassadors, the 
Fuehrer evidently demanded the surrender of Dan- 
zig and the Corridor before discussing anything else. 


— 
——— 


Later, he intimated, Germany would be willing to 
participate in an international conference to reach 
a settlement on all outstanding questions, including 
colonies and disarmament. In replying to Daladier 
on August 26, Hitler declared he could see no way 
of inducing Poland to accept a peaceful solution. In 
no uncertain terms he restated his claims and swore 
that “the Macedonian conditions on our Eastern 
frontier must be removed.” Yet, two days later, the 
British reply apparently met with a less negative re- 
ception in Berlin. 

Presumably Germany's course will be greatly in- 
fluenced by Moscow and Rome. The provisions of 
the non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union, which 
was signed on August 24, were reassuring enough 
to the German people. In particular, Article IV pre- 
vents Moscow from associating itself with any group 
of powers directly or indirectly aimed at Germany. 
Yet there is no certainty that the Russian and Ger- 
man governments have agreed upon some division 
of the spoils in the event of war. Nor is it clear to 
what extent Germany would be able to draw on 
Russia’s vast reservoir of foodstuffs and raw ma- 
terials to cover its own serious deficiencies in vital 
war supplies. Perhaps the most startling news from 
the Soviet Union is the sudden decision to postpone 
ratification of the non-aggression pact for which the 
Supreme Soviet or Parliament had been summoned 
to Moscow on August 28. 

Italy’s position still occasions much doubt. This 
country has been singularly free from war fever. 
Relatively few army classes have as yet been mobil- 
ized. While Mussolini may still remain neutral, it 
seems unlikely that he will desert his ally. The un- 
conditional alliance with Germany was signed at a 
time when Italy was already well aware of the 
Reich’s demands on Poland and of Britain’s com- 
mitment to support Warsaw against aggression. Yet 
I! Duce will probably make his influence felt in 
favor of a peaceful settlement in which he might 
press Italy’s claims on Tunis, Djibuti and the Suez 
Canal. Perhaps Berlin is anxious for Rome to stand 
aside for the moment, so that I/ Duce can later offer 
himself as ‘impartial’ mediator. 

Under existing circumstances a peaceful solution 
is not altogether precluded. For all their firmness 
the British and French may induce the Poles to give 


in at least partly to Hitler’s demands. And the 
Fuehrer himself may retreat to some extent rather 
than wage a war in which the odds would ultimately 
be against him. On the other hand, a concession by 
either side may involve an irretrievable loss of pres- 
tige. Each is determined as never before to stand 


Page Two 


A "l 
—— 


on its position. For this reason the preparations fo; 
war have proceeded undiminished. Despite reassy,. 
ances that Germany would respect their neutrality, 
The Netherlands, Belgium and Switzerland have ajj 
taken measures of mobilization to prepare for any 
eventuality. In Yugoslavia the Croat problem was 
finally settled on August 26, in time to enable the 
country to take a united stand in defending itself 
against encroachments. Europe is poised for war 
as it has been at no time since August 1914. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 
ROOSEVELT INTERVENES IN WAR CRISIS 


While Europe hovers between peace and war, the | 


American government has not been idle. On August 
24 President Roosevelt asked the King of Italy to seek 


An int 


a peaceful solution of the dispute and sent notes to | 


Chancellor Hitler and President Moscicki of Poland, 
suggesting direct negotiation between the two gov. | 
ernments, arbitration, or conciliation with the help | 


of a neutral state in Europe or an American repub- 
lic. The message to Germany was couched in vigor- 
ous terms, reminding Der Fuehrer that he had not 
answered Mr. Roosevelt's peace message of April 15, 
After the Polish President had agreed to negotiation 
or conciliation, Mr. Roosevelt immediately sent a 
second appeal to Germany. 

The most difficult problem confronting the Amer- 
ican government is enforcement of the Neutrality 
Act. President Roosevelt, who sought unsuccessfully 
to have it revised during the recent session of Con- 
gress, has announced that he will recall Congress 
when war seems imminent. Although the President 
puts the Act automatically into effect by recognizing 
a state of war, he can postpone action—as he has 
done in the Far Eastern conflict—in order not to 
hamper a particular belligerent. After proclaiming 
that a state of war exists, the President is obliged 
to prohibit the shipment of “arms, ammunition and 
implements of war’ to belligerents, the purchase or 
sale of belligerent securities, the solicitation of war 
contributions, transport of implements of war in 
American vessels, travel by Americans on belliger- 
ent vessels, and arming of American merchantmen. 
The President may forbid the use of American ports 
by foreign submarines and merchantmen, or as 4 


base of supply for belligerent warships. While the 


arms embargo will seriously affect Great Britain and ) 


France, which have already placed orders for ovet 
1,000 airplanes with American manufacturers, the 
Act will not prohibit trade in raw materials and 
foodstuffs—of greater importance to Poland's allies. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 45, SzpremBer 1, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Sa 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


| direct 
| broke 
ing, ‘ 
Polar 
dictat 
had ¢ 
Septe 
had 

fulfil 
unles 
agair 
man 
to de 
tered 
of a 
woul 
fortk 
heed 
ultin 


Bl 
| this 
alm 
| had 
It fi 
whi 
it he 
duri 
stea 
on 
note 


