—.] FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


 provi- 
S cOm- 
1 effort 
2a Was 
Ainister 
régimes 
| would 


ta, ad- 
rs, had 
is War- 
ople to 
inancial 
inances, 
Jational 
industry 
n’s for- 
owed a 
86 mil- 
ficit, at 
for the 
able de- 
32. The 
ctent to 
which it 
. of the 
‘old val- 
> United 
n Japan 
idly in- 
1938, as 
ics, was 
outbreak 
n gradu- 
is back- 
Japan's 
2m more 
isive vic 
if Japan 


iventure. 


BISSON 


uce, by Al- 
ress, 1937. 


phases of | 


The first 
origin and 
a. Treat- 
ies is also 

historical 


d. National 
d-class matter 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XVII, No. 30 


May 20, 1938 


—_ 


FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS on LATIN AMERICA 


SPECIAL OFFER—S for $1.00 or 25 cents a copy 


Fascism and Communism in South America, Dec. 15, 1937 
Mexico’s Challenge to Foreign Capital, Aug. 15, 1937 
Mexico’s Social Revolution, Aug. 1, 1937 

Brazil’s Political and Economic Problems, 1935 

Church and State in Mexico, 1935 


AY De male? 


ww VU 

Entered as second- 

class matter December 

2, 1921, at the Post 

Office at New York, 

N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


PERIODICAL 
GENERAL LipRane 


LATIN AMERICA FOR THE 


LATIN AMERICANS! 


COMMON factor underlying such widely di- 
vergent developments as Mexico’s rift with 
Britain and Brazil's fascist revolt is the new nation- 
alism which is stirring throughout Latin America, 
and which finds expression in increasing opposition 
to foreign influence. Suspension on May 13 of Anglo- 
Mexican diplomatic relations confronted Washing- 
ton with the danger of possible conflict between two 
major items in its present foreign policy: parallel ac- 
tion with Britain in world affairs, and the Good 
Neighbor program in Latin America. The Chamber- 
lain government is not expected to carry pressure on 
Cardenas to the point of challenging the Monroe 
Doctrine, but its rupture with Mexico seriously dis- 
courages hope of any compromise settlement in the 
oil controversy for Washington as well as for London. 
Following seizure of the petroleum properties by 
Cardenas on March 18, Britain protested the move 
in two notes delivered on April 8 and 21, and de- 
manded return of the holdings of the Aguila com- 
pany, Anglo-Dutch Shell subsidiary. On May 11 a 
third British note insisted on payment of an overdue 


| instalment amounting to some $82,000, prescribed 


by the Anglo-Mexican special claims convention and 
covering damages suffered by British interests during 
the 1910-1920 revolutionary period. The communica- 
tion hinted that Mexico’s failure to maintain these 
payments cast doubt on its ability to make compensa- 
tion for the petroleum properties. 

Two days later the Mexican Secretary of Foreign 
Affairs, General Eduardo Hay, handed the British 
Minister a check covering the claims instalment, to- 
gether with a note announcing that the Mexican 
government had recalled its Minister at London and 
Closed its legation there. In its final paragraph the 
note carried a sting. In reference apparently to Brit- 
ain's war-debt delinquency to the United States it 
called London’s attention to ‘‘the fact that even the 


most powerful States . . . cannot boast that they are 
up to date in the payment of all their pecuniary 
obligations.” On May 14 Mexico’s suspension of re- 
lations, which fell short of a complete diplomatic 
break, was balanced by Britain’s withdrawal of its 
Minister at Mexico City. 

While fears were expressed that this new difficulty 
might stimulate political disturbance in Mexico, its 
immediate result was further to solidify public opin- 
ion behind President Cardenas—although rumors of 
revolt by General Saturnino Cedillo of San Luis 
Potosi were again revived. In March the President 
ordered the transfer of this conservative leader from 
his present political base—where he reportedly com- 
mands a private army of 15,000 men—to the State of 
Michoacan; but execution of the order has been de- 
layed. 


The quarrel with London more directly threatens 
Mexico’s economic situation. On May 12 President 
Cardenas revealed that the British and American 
companies had been offered the right to handle for 
export 60 per cent of Mexican oil production over a 
long period, with authorization to take a proportion 
of the output in payment for their properties. He de- 
clared that “Mexico wants to keep the petroleum it 
produces in the hands of democratic nations like 
England and the United States, but if these countries 
will not accept our oil we must sell it where we can.” 
The rupture with Britain rules out for the time being 
the possibility of a compromise on the basis of this 
or any similar proposal. Earlier, the Chamberlain 
government had taken steps to close British markets 
to Mexican oil. A similar condition seemingly pre- 
vails in the United States, while Mexico, it appears, 
has been unsuccessful in opening new foreign outlets 
for its petroleum. As compared with conditions be- 
fore expropriation, some reports estimate a decline 
of approximately 70 per cent in oil production, and 


— — 
—_— ———____——. 


85 per cent in export sales. Unless a solution for 
this situation can be found, labor unrest may prove 
a potential danger and government revenues will be 
sharply curtailed, involving drastic reductions in 
appropriations for agrarian reform, public works and 
education. 


A growing nationalism, similar to that behind 
Mexico's challenge to foreign capital, played an im- 
portant rdle in events leading up to Brazil's abortive 
revolt of May 11. The movement was crushed after 
a few hours’ struggle. Fighting took place only in 
Rio de Janeiro, where the attackers captured a rail- 
road center, telephone exchanges and radio stations, 
but were repulsed at the Navy Ministry and the Pres- 
idential Palace—where President Vargas was pic- 
tured as coolly holding off the revolutionists by pistol 
fire. The rebels, chiefly fascist Integralists, sought 
elimination of the President and other high officials, 
including leaders of the army and navy. On May 13 
Vargas declared that the coup had been launched 
with “foreign help” ; among the 500 reported as sub- 
sequently arrested were six German citizens. 


The revolt found “fascists” ranged against “fas- 
cists.” The dictatorial régime set up by President Getu- 
lio Vargas last November had been hailed in many 
quarters as placing Brazil in the totalitarian camp. 
But the rebellious Integralists proclaim anti-Marxian, 
anti-Jewish and anti-democratic tenets, and have been 
considered in the past as South America’s most sig- 
nificant fascist movement. Strongly nationalistic in 
doctrine, they have denounced the power of foreign 
capital in Brazil. Before his coup of November 1937, 
President Vargas had occasionally flirted with the In- 
tegralists but, following establishment of his per- 
sonal dictatorship, he dissolved the fascist group 
along with other parties. 


Nor was he disposed to concede the Integralists a 
monopoly on the gospel of nationalism. Vargas’ No- 
vember constitution authorized banks and insurance 
companies to operate only if their shareholders were 
Brazilians, and called for the progressive nationaliza- 
tion of mines and power resources. On April 29 a 
Vargas decree ruled that the petroleum industry 
was a public utility, excluding from it all foreign in- 
terests. The President has also moved to check Ger- 
man and Italian influence, partly in an attempt to as- 
sure the United States that Brazil still conserves its 
traditionally friendly attitude. In March he ordered 
suppression of Nazi activities in the country, political 
as well as cultural. Later the two southern states of 
Santa Catharina and Rio Grande do Sul—where a 
large part of Brazil’s German population lives—took 
over private schools run by Germans and Italians. 
When Berlin’s semi-official Diplomatisch-Politische 
Korrespondenz on March 21 criticized the Vargas 
régime for these steps, claiming ‘‘minority rights’ 


Page Two 


—_—_—. 
Le 


for Germans living in the country, Brazilian nation. 
alism backfired in strong anti-Nazi resentment. Now 
the Integralists’ open clash with Vargas indicates 
that his régime—while oppressively dictatorial—ig 
not “fascist” in any accepted sense of the word. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


BUYING OFF THE DICTATORS 

Prime Minister Chamberlain's hope that the 
Anglo-Italian deal would weaken the Rome-Berlin 
axis must have been somewhat dimmed by the speech 
which Mussolini delivered in Genoa on May 14. |] 
Duce explained at length to the Italian people, 
shocked by Germany's absorption of Austria, that 
Italy's acceptance of Anschluss had been dictated not 
by fear but by ‘our conscience, our sense of honor, 
our loyal friendship for Germany.” Italy, he de. 
clared, will remain faithful to the Rome-Berlin axis, 
which establishes “collaboration between two revolu- 
tions.”” The Stresa front—which Britain and France 
may have hoped to reconstruct against Germany—is 
“dead and buried, and so far as we are concerned 
will never be brought to life again.” Toward the 
Anglo-Italian deal, which he described as an agree. 
ment ‘‘between two empires,” Mussolini was distinct- 
ly cold, merely saying: ‘it may be thought that this 
agreement will be lasting.” 

I] Duce expressed strong doubts regarding the con- 
clusion of pending Italo-French negotiations, for the 
reason, among others, that in the Spanish civil war 
France and Italy “are on opposite sides of the barti- 
cades.” He reaffirmed the desire of both Italy and 
Germany for peace, but referred in threatening tones 
to speeches ‘“‘on the other side of the ocean’’ which 
“give us food for thought’’—a reference to Secretary 
of War Woodring, who on May 5 had declared that 
the democracies might some day be forced to fight 
the dictatorships. The democratic countries, said 
Mussolini, may not be actually preparing for ‘‘a wat 
of doctrine.” If they are, “the totalitarian states will 
immediately form a bloc and will march together 
to the end.” 

Mussolini's warning, in turn, gives food for 
thought to Britain and France, which had hoped to 
buy off Italy by recognizing its Ethiopian conquest. 
Despite Viscount Halifax’s efforts to steamroller 4 
resolution to that effect through the League Council, 
four countries—Bolivia, China, New Zealand and 
the Soviet Union—blocked the unanimity necessary 
for such action. Haile Selassie, ill and discouraged, 
was permitted to make his last appearance in the 
Geneva forum, but his moving plea for justice and 
collective security was rebuffed by Viscount Halifax's 
argument that peace, in this case, could be achieved 
only by a compromise with the aggressor. This com 
promise, in watered-down form, was effected on May 


(Continued on Page 4) 


MA 
advisi 
mitte¢ 
justifi 
Nye tf 
lift th 
Any « 
tratior 
few n 
ter tO 
body 
consic 

Bel 
full i 
howe’ 
the ba 
abroa 
this 1 
emba: 
guard 
Depa: 
pathic 
cision 
by th 
Neut: 
grour 


intere 
subse 
in the 
Gene 
same 
that 

at th 
color 


Bu 
partn 
zeal 
Nye 
too f 
in Ac 

At 
no ef 
level. 
ment 
been 
the ] 
sibili 


plain 


————= 


- Nation. 
nt. Now 
ndicates 
rial—is 
rd. 
MSON 


hat the 
1e-Berlin 
€ speech 
ry 14. J] 

people, 
ria, that 
ated not 
£ honor, 
he de 
rlin axis, 
> revolu- 
d France 
nany—is 
oncerned 
vard the 
in agree. 
_ distinct 
that this 


- the con- 
;, for the 
civil wat 
he batti- 
taly and 
ing tones 
n” which 
Secretary 
ared that 
| to fight 
‘ies, said 
or ‘a Wat 
tates will 

together 


food for 
hoped to 
conquest. 
mroller 4 
> Council, 
land and 
necessafy 
couraged, 
ce in the 
istice and 
Halifax's 
» achieved 
This com 
-d on May 


W. ashington News Letter 


, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


May 17.—Mr. Hull's letter to Senator Pittman, 
advising the chairman of the Foreign Relations Com- 
mittee that the Secretary of State ‘would not feel 
justified” in recommending affirmative action on the 
Nye resolution, has finally crushed the movement to 
lift the Spanish embargo at this session of Congress. 
Any doubt as to the decisive effect of this Adminis- 
tration pronouncement was removed on May 13, a 
few moments after Senator Pittman had read the let- 
ter to the Foreign Relations Committee, when that 


body voted 17 to 1 to postpone indefinitely further 
consideration of the resolution. 


Behind the Spanish Embargo. To appraise its 
full import in terms of American foreign policy, 
however, Mr. Hull's statement must be read against 
the background of other developments both here and 
abroad during the past few weeks. As indicated in 
this Letter last week, the organizers of the Spanish 
embargo campaign caught the Administration off- 
guard by launching a flank attack on a group of State 
Department officials whose alleged “‘pro-fascist” sym- 
pathies were said to be reflected in vital policy de- 
dsions. The licensing of arms shipments to Germany 
by the Munitions Control Board set up under the 
Neutrality Act was laid to the machinations of this 


group. The President’s statement of “sympathetic 
interest’’ in the London-Rome accord (which was 


subsequently used to advantage by Mr. Chamberlain 
in the House of Commons and by Lord Halifax at 
Geneva) was also ascribed to the activities of this 
same coterie of professional diplomats. And the fact 
that Secretary Hull was absent from Washington 
at the time of the President's statement lent added 
color to the “inside” dispatches of certain columnists. 

But when Mr. Hull returned to his desk at the De- 
partment, it quickly became apparent that in their 
zeal to lift the Spanish embargo, advocates of the 
Nye resolution had not only carried their campaign 
too far but had failed to recognize a definite shift 
in Administration policy. 

At his daily press conferences, the Secretary made 
no effort to conceal his resentment at the criticism 
leveled against his subordinates in the State Depart- 
ment. He warmly denied the reports that he had not 
been consulted about the President’s statement on 
the London-Rome accord, and he assumed respon- 
ibility for all major policy decisions without com- 
plaint. But whatever his own personal views, Mr. 


Hull, like the President, had been compelled to adjust 
his course to meet new situations. The shift had 
dated from the reorientation of British policy follow- 
ing the resignation of Anthony Eden; it had been re- 
flected here in many minor actions and utterances in- 
dicating a new caution and a drawing in of diplo- 
matic lines; it needed only the letter to Senator Pitt- 
man to give it final confirmation. 


Back to Neutrality. To some observers, it seems 
the irony of fate that a campaign organized for the 
most part by liberals who sought concerted action 
against fascist aggression should be the instrument 
forcing the Administration to uphold the principles 
of the Neutrality Act which it had denounced in the 
President’s “‘quarantine’’ speech at Chicago. The final 
paragraph of Mr. Hull’s letter held out the hope of 
future revision of the neutrality legislation—possibly 
at the next session of Congress—but, with that ex- 
ception, the State Department based its case against 
lifting the Spanish embargo on the wisdom of pur- 
suing “‘a course calculated to prevent out becoming 
involved in war situations.” As Mr. Hull pointed 
out, “the fundamental reason for the enactment of 
the Joint Resolution of January 8, 1937, was to im- 
plement this policy by legislation.” 


The reasons for not changing this policy were 
stated cogently enough: 

‘In the form in which it is presented, the proposed legis- 
lation, if enacted, would lift the embargo, which is now 
being applied against both parties to the conflict in Spain, 
in respect to shipments of arms to one party while leaving 
in effect the embargo in respect to shipments to the other 
party. Even if the legislation applied to both parties, its 
enactment would still subject us to unnecessary risks we 
have so far avoided. . . . The original danger still exists. 
In view of the continued danger of international conflict 
arising from the circumstances of the struggle, any pro- 
posal which at this juncture contemplates a reversal of our 
policy of strict non-interference which we have thus far 
so scrupulously followed, and under the operation of 
which we have kept out of involvements, would offer a 
real possibility of complications. . . . 

“Our first solicitude should be the peace and welfare of 
this country, and the real test of the advisability of making 
any changes in the statutes now in effect should be whether 
such changes would further tend to m/e us from becoming 
involved directly or indirectly in a dangerous European 
situation.” 

This statement does not mean that at the next 
session of Congress the Administration may not re- 
vive the attempt to amend the neutrality legislation. 
But it is accepted by most Washington observers as 
a plain indication that the reversal in British policy 
has forced a similar reversal here. For the immediate 


eae 


: a 
oe RS 


future, at any rate, the parallel lines of Anglo-Amer- 
ican policy will not lead in the direction of concerted 
action to uphold “orderly processes” or to combat 
a ion. Perhaps it was a coincidence that the 
Administration’s final word on Spain was delivered 
to the Foreign Relations Committee on the same day 
that Lord Halifax was gaining consent at Geneva 
to proceed with the recognition of Ethiopia and to 
prolong the fiction of non-intervention in Spain. In 
any case, the only comfort afforded those who look 
toward a return to the Chicago speech was Secretary 
Ickes’ refusal to grant helium to Germany, and Mr. 
Hull’s announcement that our policy with respect to 
territorial changes brought about by force remains 
“absolutely unchanged.” W. T. STONE 


BUYING OFF THE DICTATORS 
(Continued from Page 2) 
12 when the Council’s Latvian president, Wilhelm 
Munters, announced that “the great majority of 
members feel, despite regrets, that it is for individual 
members to decide as they choose”’ on the question of 
recognition. 

Acting once more under Britain’s direction, the 
Council, by a vote of four against two—with nine 
abstentions—rejected on May 13 a Loyalist resolu- 
tion asking League members to carry out their pledge 
of October 1937 to “consider ending the non-inter- 
vention policy” if complete withdrawal of non-Span- 
ish combatants from Spain could not be obtained “in 
the near future.” Only in the case of China, which 
had asked League members to implement their pre- 
vious promise of assistance, did Britain and France 
privately hold out hope of aid with credits and 
munitions. 

The compromise sponsored by Britain at Geneva 
in the hope of placating Italy was paralleled by Brit- 
ish efforts to reconcile German and Czechoslovak 
claims regarding the Sudeten Germans. On May 12 
Konrad Henlein, Fihrer of the Sudeten region, made 
a surprise visit to London, where he interviewed not 
only government officials but British opponents of 
concessions to Germany, notably Winston Churchill 


Page Four 


— 


and Sir Robert Vansittart. This visit coincided with ae. 
tion in Berlin by the British Ambassador, Sir Neville 
Henderson, who expressed the hope that the Sudetep 
question would be settled without resort to force, 
Backed by France—which in return for the Anglo. 
French defensive alliance is expected to use its influ. 
ence for appeasement in Eastern Europe—Britain jg 
urging Prague to make all concessions “compatible 
with the security of the state.” While Prague is ready, 
in its nationalities statute, to make material conces. 
sions to the Sudeten Germans, it is reluctant to aban. 
don its pact of mutual assistance with the Soviet 
Union unless it has watertight guarantees of military 
aid from Britain. These guarantees Britain has hith- 
erto declined to give. It is true that Mr. Chamberlain 
has succeeded in transferring the center of diplo- 
matic maneuvers from Berlin and Rome to London, 
But is Britain leading Europe, or is it being led by 
the belief of its governing circles that Germany, once 
satisfied at the expense of Austria and Czechoslo- 
vakia, will prove a bulwark against communism? It 
can hardly be a coincidence that Henlein’s visit to 
Britain was arranged by his “old friend,” Baron 
Mount Temple, president of the British Anti-Social. 
ist Union. 


The real question in Europe is not whether 
concessions should be made to Germany and Italy. 
One can agree with Viscount Halifax that in inter 
national affairs, as in the trivial matters of daily 
life, there will always be need for concessions, for 
a compromise between the ideal and the prac 
ticable. The question is whether the concessions 
urged by the Chamberlain government out of 
fear of German attack—and so far always at other 
people’s expense—are to be accompanied by guaran- 
tees that, once Germany’s legitimate claims have been 
satisfied, Britain will stand firm against further 
threats of force by Germany. If these guarantees are 
not forthcoming, Britain, like Herr von Papen and 
the German industrialists, may soon find itself pris 
oner of the Nazi dictatorship it had hoped to control 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Why Meddle in the Orient? by Boake Carter and Thomas 
H. Healy. New York, Dodge Publishing Co., 1938. 
$1.75 


America’s popular radio commentator presents the case 
for isolation. The style is streamlined “journalese,” al- 
though the content is based on numerous documentary 
sources. Sweeping assertions of a questionable nature, 
such as “the tremendous improvement in the internal 
order in Manchuria since Japan gained control,” weaken 


the force of the argument. Throughout the book interna- 
tional cooperation to restrain aggression is equated with 
war. 


China Fights for Her Life, by H. R. Ekins and Theon 
Wright. New York, Whittlesey House, 1938. $2.75 
A popular version of China’s politics and international 
relations which skims events since the Boxer Uprising of 
1900. It is readable and interesting, but marred by num 
erous errors of fact. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 30, May 20, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasire Busi, President; Vera MicHELEs Dgan, Editor. 


National 
Entered as second-class matte? 


December 2, 1921, at the Post Office atc New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


FC 


id 


BRAL 
. Ol 


Th 
certe 
the I 


Franc 


