








dus- 
ling 
duc. | 
$45| 
llite | 
rity | 
V1et 
‘ates 
it is 
the 
\OW- 
t of 
hips 
the 
ssia. 


least 
est: 
hich 
and 
de. 
The 
the 
; de- 
1 in- 
arge 
d in 
nove 
ably 
orge 
tates 
May 
Jazi- 
1 for 
give 
TieS. 


1G 


el 


ational 
Lest, 
York, 





Ur. Willian y Entered as 2nd class matter 


bishop 
Univers ++, ao ’ De 
vy ~ Nichtcay Libra 
~ aa awd = r 
Ann Arbor hes Y 
ae @2.Ch, e 
0 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vo. XXI, No. 35 


JUNE 19, 1942 





RUSSIAN PACTS SET STAGE FOR POST-WAR COLLABORATION 


WASHINGTON, JUNE 15.—The understandings 
between Britain and Russia and between the United 
States and Russia, announced on June 11, repre- 
sent a far-reaching step on the road toward winning 
both the war and the peace to follow. With the 
completion of these understandings, the discussion 
of post-war reconstruction, hitherto regarded as a 
purely academic pursuit, is placed squarely where 
it belongs—in the realm of practical politics. The 
main features of the Anglo-Soviet and U.S.-Soviet 
agreements, concerned solely with Europe, may be 
summarized as follows: 


ANGLO-SOVIET ALLIANCE. The twenty-year 
treaty signed on May 26 in London by British For- 
eign Secretary Eden and Soviet Foreign Commissar 
Molotov is a full-fledged alliance having two major 
objectives: common prosecution of the war until 
total victory is achieved; and collaboration of the 
two countries ‘with one another as well as with 
the other United Nations at the peace settlement 
and during the ensuing period of reconstruction” 
on the basis of the Atlantic Charter. While this alli- 
ance can be criticized on the ground that it merely 
attempts to establish a preponderance of power on 
the continent against Germany, it does create a 
nucleus around which the shattered political frame- 
work of Europe might be rebuilt. 

Collaboration in War. To promote the prosecu- 
tion of the war, the two countries undertake ‘‘to 
afford one another military and other assistance and 
support of all kinds” against Germany and its asso- 
ciates in Europe. Britain, like the United States, has 
been sending war material to Russia since the au- 
tumn of 1941. In addition, Mr. Eden told the House 
of Commons on June 11, “a full understanding was 
teached between the two parties with regard to the 
urgent tasks of creating a second front in Europe in 
1942. Discussions also took place on the question of 
further improving the supplies of airplanes, tanks 


and other war material to be sent from Great Britain 
to the Soviet Union.’ The two countries, moreover, 
agree not to enter into any negotiations with the 
Nazi government, “or any other government in 
Germany that does not clearly renounce all aggres- 
sive intentions.” 

Collaboration in Peace. The two countries also 
proclaim their desire to unite with “other like- 
minded states in adopting proposals for common 
action to preserve peace and resist aggression in the 
post-war period.” Pending adoption of such pro- 

sals, Britain and Russia declare that, after termina- 
tion of hostilities, they will “take all measures in 
their power to render impossible the repetition of 
aggression and violation of peace” by Germany and 
its associates, and will give each other “all military 
and other support and assistance” in case of German 
attack on either of them. This pledge of mutual 
assistance is to remain in force until it has been su- 
perseded by proposals for common action to preserve 
peace. In default of the adoption of such proposals, 
the pledge shall remain in force for twenty years, : 
and thereafter until terminated by either party. 

Principles of Post-War Reconstruction. Looking 
ahead to post-war reconstruction, Britain and Russia 
agree “to work together in close and friendly col- 
laboration after re-establishment of peace for the 
organization of security and economic prosperity in 
Europe.” In performing this task, “they will take 
into account the interests of the United Nations in 
these objects’’ and will act in accordance with the 
two principles, set forth in the Atlantic Charter, “of 
not seeking territorial aggrandizement for them- 
selves and of non-interference in the affairs of other 
nations.” They also undertake to render each other 
“all possible economic assistance after the war,” and 
not to conclude any alliance or take part in any 
coalition directed against the other. 


No Territorial Commitments. The reference in 

















the Anglo-Soviet treaty to the principles of the At- 
lantic Charter represents a statesmanlike compromise 
between the views of Russia, on the one hand, 
Britain and the United States on the other. Russia's 
demand for recognition, during the war, of its claims 
to territorial adjustments at the expense of the Baltic 
states, Finland and Rumania, presented by Stalin to 
Eden last autumn, had created a difficult problem. 
for Britain and the United States.* While the British, 
hard-pressed on many fronts and sorely in need of 
Russia's aid, had thought that it might prove politi- 
cally necessary to acquiesce in Moscow’s demands, 
President Roosevelt was adamant in adhering to 
the principles of the Atlantic Charter. The possibil- 
ity of a clash on this issue was averted during the 
London negotiations in which Mr. Winant, Ameri- 
can Ambassador to Britain, fresh from consultations 
with President Roosevelt, participated. As a result, 
the territorial issue was not specifically treated in 
London, and was not even raised during the Wash- 
ington negotiations, which were concerned primar- 
ily with the military problems of opening a second 
front in Europe and speeding deliveries of war ma- 
terial to the Soviet Union. 


U.S. AID TO RUSSIA. While the United States, 
by June 1, had fulfilled its 1941 commitments of 
war material for Russia, it has now taken two steps 
to expand such aid in the future. First, the United 
States, on June 11, concluded a master lend-lease 
agreement with Russia, patterned on agreements 
previously signed with Great Britain and the Re- 
public of China, and ten other countries. An 
important point in this agreement (as in other 
similar compacts) is that, in the final determina- 
tion of benefits to be provided to the United 
States by the U.S.S.R. “ful! cognizance shall be 
taken of all property, services, information, facili- 
ties or other benefits or considerations” that the 
U.S.S.R. may furnish. Under this heading could be 
included any information the Soviet government may 
find it possible to give regarding its own military 
Operations and war material, as well as regarding 
certain of its industrial processes, such as the pro- 





*Vera Micheles Dean, “‘U.S. Weighs Its Policy Toward Finland,” Foreign 
Policy Bulletin, June 12, 1942. 


PACIFIC BATTLES ALTER NAVAL BALANCE 


As details were published last week on the great 
naval actions of Midway Island and the Coral Sea, 
it became apparent that Japanese fleet attacks to the 
south and east had been completely repulsed, while 
Japan’s gains were confined to the occupation of a 
foothold at the western tip of the Aleutian Island 
chain. Information on the scope and significance of 
this landing operation is exceedingly meager, but 
United States naval officers have minimized its im- 
portance. The ‘way for the Japanese maneuver in 


—=— >> _pap>SSSS=—= Page Two — 








duction of rubber from dandelions. Another impo, 
tant point is that the U.S.-Soviet lend-lease agree. 
ment, like that with Britain and other countries 
looks to the expansion of international trade afte; 
the war and its emancipation from pre-war restric. 
tions, thus clearing the way to far-reaching economic 
collaboration on the part of Russia with the United 
States and other United Nations, despite existing} 
ideological differences. 








=—— 


have 

groun 
depot 
dimet 
force: 
bomb 


W. 


Japat 


undis 


The second step which will affect deliveries of wa;| wort 


material to Russia is the joint victory production 
program, announced on June 7, which had beep 
elaborated in the course of negotiations in Wash. 
ington between Donald Nelson, chairman of the 
War Production Board, and Oliver Lyttelton, Brit 


ready 
in th 
the i 
news 


Mid 


ish Minister of Production. Under this program.) occu 


Britain is to concentrate on output of war material 
requiring detailed, craftsmanlike operations for 
which its industry is peculiarly well adapted, such as 
fighter planes and naval vessels, while the United 
States will devote its efforts primarily to the manu- 
facture of war material requiring mass-production 
such as long-range bombers and cargo ships. This 
division of labor in war production opens up inter. 
esting vistas for similar cooperation in time of peace 

Perhaps the most important lesson of the many 
sided negotiations in London and Washington is 
that only in an atmosphere of mutual trust and re. 
sponsibility is it possible to expect major adjust 
ments of national interests for the common welfare. 
This atmosphere was created, in the case of Russia, 
by Britain's acceptance of a twenty-year alliance in 
war and peace, and by the sympathetic response of 
both Britain and the United States to Russia's de- 
mand for a second front in Europe and increased 
deliveries of war material. If this feeling of security| 
engendered by willingness to accept international 
responsibilities can be maintained after the war, it! 
might be possible, with time, to reduce the impor 
tance of territorial boundaries and whittle down 
claims advanced in the name of national sovereignty. 
It is also becoming increasingly apparent that any- 
thing the United States can do to promote such 4 
feeling of security is a matter not of sentiment, but} 
of hard-headed self-interest. VERA MICHELES DEAN 





the Aleutians was presumably cleared by the light 
air attacks on our advanced naval-air base at Dutch 
Harbor, on June 3. This—coupled with the extreme; 
ly bad weather characteristic of the whole region— | 
may have prevented immediate discovery of the, 
small Japanese forces which had reached the shores 
of the almost uninhabited Aleutian outposts. A land- 
ing has been made at Attu, 800 miles west of Dutch 
Harbor, and ships have been observed at Kiska, in 
the Rat group, 200 miles nearer Alaska. Both islands 





ably 


Ame 
plan 
to Ol 
tians 
Japa 
they 
statu 
the 
Kod 
Anc 
the 
wes 
this 
B 
not 
tow 
Att 
tack 
stat 
sucl 
out 
on 
fro: 
strc 
Un 
Par 
fro 
wa 
ma 
ass 
are 


—. 








ree. 
Ties, 
after 
tric. 
Mic 


—— 








ited 
ting 


Wat | 
‘tion 


‘ash- 
the 
Brit. 
tam, 
erial 
for 


ited 
anu- 
tion 
This 
nter- 
pace 
any: 
Nis 
1 re. 
just 
fare. 
issia, 
e in 
e of 
; de. 
ased 
urity 


onal 





ir, it} 
\por- | 
lown 
gnty. | 
any- 
ch a 
. but 


EAN 


light 
utch 
eme- ; 
on— 

the 
ores 
and- 
hutch 
a, in 
ands 














—— 





have rocky bays and inlets, and Attu may have level 
ground suitable for a landing field; but docks, 
depots and other installations for a base of sizeable 
dimensions are lacking. Japan’s supporting naval 
forces have been pounded by Army and Navy 
bombers. 

WAR IN THE NORTH PACIFIC. Although 
Japan's purpose in moving toward the north remains 
undisclosed, a number of possible objectives are 
worthy of consideration. Tokyo propaganda has al- 
ready magnified the rather small-scale “victory” 


in the Aleutians, perhaps in order to counterbalance — 


the impression produced on the Japanese public by 
news of the loss of two large aircraft carriers off 
Midway Island. It seems unlikely, however, that the 
occupation of Attu and Kiska will of itself measur- 
ably assist in the invasion of Alaska or the North 
American west coast—should such be the Japanese 
plan. While the short, great circle route from Japan 
to our northwestern states passes close to the Aleu- 
tians, considerable distances must be covered by the 
Japanese within the fortified American zone before 
they can approach this country. Dutch Harbor, 2,345 
statute miles from San Francisco, must be reduced; 
the resistance of the Alaskan naval air stations at 
Kodiak and Sitka and the army aviation bases at 
Anchorage and Fairbanks must be overcome; and 
the whole range of our air and sea power on the 
west coast must be pierced if an invasion attempt by 
this route is to succeed. 

By the same token, the United States is apparently 
not yet prepared to move in the opposite direction, 
toward Japan's home territory, and the landing on 
Attu may be designed to help forestall such an at- 
tack. From our outpost at Dutch Harbor it is 2,835 
statute miles to Tokyo. It is difficult to imagine how 
such an American thrust could be carried out with- 
out the use of an intermediate base at Petropavlovsk, 
on the Russian Kamchatka peninsula, 1,400 miles 
from Dutch Harbor. Provided that this site were 
strongly garrisoned, it might be possible for the 
United States forces to strike at the Japanese base of 
Paramushiro on the Kurile Islands, a scant 244 miles 
from Petropavlovsk, and then to work southwest- 
ward down the Kuriles to the main islands of Japan. 

Thus the key to control of the northern Pacific 
may be in Kamchatka; and it is a not unreasonable 
assumption that Japan’s operations in the Aleutians 
are designed to screen a subsequent Japanese cam- 


Page Three = 





How important are our territorial possessions in 
this war? How well have we carried out our re- 
sponsibilities toward their peoples in the past? 
What remains to be done? 


Overseas America 
HEADLINE BOOK — JUST OUT! 





25c. 











———=—= 





paign against the eastern Siberian centers of Rus- 
sian strength in the Far East. For Japan, which has 
every cause to fear that American bombers may 
some day appear in Petropavlovsk or Vladivostok, 
probably has sufficient land forces and shipping 
available to launch an attack in Siberia this summer, 
while Soviet forces are still locked in a death grip 
with the Nazis in Europe. 

Any delay, however, would undoubtedly redound 
to the advantage of the Allies. The measures now 
being taken by the United States to build up its ma- 
jor installations in Alaska—which date back only 
to 1939—are military secrets, but they are evidently 
being pushed on a large scale. Communications with 
the United States have been improved by a chain of 
landing fields which permit fighter planes to be fer- 
ried over Canada to the territory; and work is pro- 
ceeding with great speed on the new Alaskan high- 
way now being constructed under the supervision of 
United States Army engineers. It would not be sur- 
prising if one consequence of the rapprochement 
between the United States and the Soviet Union were 
a detailed survey of possible air transport routes 
from Nome, Alaska, across the Bering Strait to 
Siberian territory. The military implications of these 
developments are plain. 

SHIFT IN NAVAL RATIOS. Japanese strategists 
must also consider the changing naval balance in the 
Pacific as a result of the losses suffered in the Coral 
Sea and Midway engagements. It is believed that, 
of the eleven aircraft carriers Japan may have had 
in service on December 7, 1941, the six largest and 
newest units have been destroyed or seriously dam- 
aged; while United States naval authorities have 
admitted the sinking of only one—the Lexington— 
and damage to one other, out of a total of seven 
known to be in commission. Thus, Japan’s original 
superiority in the modern navy’s most powerful cate- 
gory of ships has presumably been whittled away. 
As a result, its large-scale maritime operations are 
increasingly limited to the range of its shore-based 
aircraft, while this country’s fleet movements may 
be correspondingly extended. The problem which 
now confronts American naval strategists is to ac- 
quire positions from which American land planes 
may operate in conjunction with aircraft carriers 
and other naval vessels to penetrate the successive 
rings of Japan’s defenses, so that American armed 
forces may engage the enemy on his own territory. 
The distances, the difficulties of supply, and the 
initial losses suffered by this country are so great 
that several years may elapse before the game of 
geographical chess in the Pacific is concluded. But 
if the record of naval triumphs can be sustained, 
the superior productive capacity and man power of 
the United States should ultimately lead to victory. 

Davip H. PopPER 














Page Four 








| 


THE PLIGHT OF THE BALTIC COUNTRIES 


One of the most promising clauses of the Anglo- 
Soviet treaty of May 26, 1942 is Article V, in which 
Britain and Russia recognize the ‘two principles of 
not seeking territorial aggrandizement for them- 
selves and of non-interference with the affairs of 
other states.” Acceptance of this clause represents 
a real concession on the part of the Soviet Union. 
Until the conclusion of the treaty, it was considered 
highly improbable that Moscow would agree to 
apply these principles where they might run counter 
to the establishment of strategically needed frontiers. 
Mr. Eden, moreover, assured the House of Commons 
on June 11 that there are no secret engagements or 
commitments of any kind whatsoever accompanying 


the treaty. 


Practical application of the above principles may 
create a number of problems when the conquered 
countries are liberated from Nazi rule. For example, 
each of the three Baltic republics is now represented 
in different United Nations capitals by opposed 
“governments in exile’: in Washington and London 
principally by diplomatic officers selected under the 
private capitalistic régimes in existence before 
Russia occupied these states in 1940; and in Moscow 
by representatives of the socialist governments set 
up in the Baltic states after the Russian occupation. 
The older diplomats residing in the Western coun- 
tries do not consider the elections held under the 
Soviet régime as valid. This problem will have to be 
solved in some way or other in the future, but it 
should not be permitted to become a real obstacle 
to the realization of the Allied peace aims. In fact, 
it would be desirable that the people of the Baltic 
states, after their liberation from German rule, 
and preferably under some kind of international 
supervision, be permitted to express their preference 
for one or another political status. Such a plebiscite 
would not exclude the possibility of a Russian pro- 
tectorate over the Baltic states or of Russian military 
bases on their territory. 


BALTIC PEOPLES UNDER HITLER. Mean- 
while, Lithuanians, Latvians and Estonians, seem- 
ingly forgotten by the rest of the world, are suffering 
under Nazi domination. In spite of repeated Nazi 
declarations about the liberation of their countries 
from the “Red terror,” their plight is now infinitely 
more tragic than ever before. Their homesteads have 
been taken over by the conquerors, and their coun- 
tries have been incorporated, together with parts of 


Poland and the Soviet Union, into the still unde. 
fined new German territory called Ostland. Like the 
Poles in the Government-General, the peoples of the 
Baltic States are now completely under the command 
of the Nazis. All national organizations have 
suppressed, and stockpiles of raw materials haye 
been confiscated and shipped to Germany or to the 
Russian front. Indifferent to the ancient civilizations 
of these countries — the Lithuanian and Latviag 
languages are directly derived from the Sanskrit — 
the Nazis have declared that most of the Baltic 
peoples will eventually be “resettled” farther East. 
German colonizers have been granted the privilege 
of extraterritorial jurisdiction, with separate courts 
for Germans and natives. 


The hope formerly held by a fraction of the native 
population that the occupation of their countries by 
Germany would restore private ownership of land, 
which was suppressed under the Soviet régime, has 
collapsed. After the occupation, the Germans de. 
clared that private property having been abolished 
before they came, no private rights existed; and 
established the German Reich as the successor to the 
Soviet régime, thus recognizing the expropriation 
they had once violently criticized in their anti-Russian 
propaganda. Under this principle, the former owners 
of farms, houses, etc. who have been allowed to 
remain on their own property must now pay rent to 
the German authorities. As in Poland, the Nazis 
have peremptorily declared that the farms will never 
be restored to their former owners, but will be given 
to German officials and war veterans. Under the cir- 
cumstances, even the small groups of Lithuanian, 


Latvian and Estonian patriots who believed that the | 


German occupation would be the lesser evil have 
changed their minds, and all factions now ardently 


hope for a military defeat of the Nazis. This defeat, | 


in fact, offers the only hope for restoration of politi- 
cal and cultural independence of their countries with- 
in the framework of an economically integrated 


New Europe. ERNEST S. HEDIGER 





F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: RUSSIA’S HOUR OF CRISIS 
Speaker: David H. Popper 
Date: Sunday, June 21 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 


Please consult your local newspaper for station 














FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 35, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


June 19, . 1942. 


Secretary; Vera Micheres Dean, Editor; Davin H. Popper, Associate Editor. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


ie 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; WirtiamM P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Last, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 


Incorporated. National 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





VoL 











