





ates 


ials 
hen 
lus 
ady 
ain, 
Out 


ates 
orld 
ility 
{on- 
sub- 

for 
sub- 
75y 
ding 
ra: 
1 & 
\der- 
€ fe- 
ent; 
$45, 
e, to 
had 
nge- 
$38,- 
ile a 
steel 
r the 
nited 
akia, 
rway 








JAN 5 1946 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


Tin? ws ° 
VA.Versity of Uichigzan 


tere AYOOK, Wichisan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 

















An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 11 DECEMBER 28, 1945 


ALLIES SEEK FORMULA TO END INDONESIAN IMPASSE 


— in Java goes on week after week than 700,000 every year and already approaching 
while the Indonesian uprising against the Dutch 49,000,000. The island needs a careful program of 





appears to have reached an impasse in which neither industrial development designed to avoid the evils 
-| side will make concessions satisfactory to the other. of overurbanization; more work must be done to 
Leaders of the Netherlands government were sched- improve the agricultural output; and education must 
uled to go to London on December 26 to talk persuade reluctant natives to emigrate to less popu- 
with British officials, but it was reported unoffi- lated parts of the Indies. With its very low standard 
dally that the Dutch planned to clarify details of living, its 25 languages and 250 dialects, its 
rather than to modify their present stand. Indi- overwhelmingly illiterate peasantry and consequent 
cations of an eventual end to the fighting are unreadiness for democratic government, Indonesia 
not, however, entirely absent, despite the spread has not only been exploited by Dutch capitalists but 
of violence to the neighboring island of Sumatra. also by a large group of Chinese middlemen. The 
By December 7 slogans on Batavia street cars, which economic framework holding these elements to- 
used to proclaim that the Indonesians would rather gether is very complex, however, and it is possible 
live in hell” than be restored to Dutch rule, for the that merely to remove Dutch rule would result in 
first time were calling for peace and denouncing the confusion that would harm native welfare and in- 
extremist youth movement for being too hot-blooded. crease world insecurity by laying Indonesia open to 
Evidence of further division within Indonesian potentially ambitious neighbors. 
tanks came on December 15 when the British an- The chief difference between the conduct of In- 
nounced that Arosdji, the chief of the Indonesian donesians and most colonial peoples today is due 


People’s Peace Army (TKR), had recommended to the unexpectedly abrupt end of the war which 
military action against extremist Nationalist fouces. found Indonesia with no Dutch or Allied troops 


Four days later the United States, in its first mild present, while many thousands of surrendering Jap- 
but definite statement of policy on the Indonesian anese whose modern weapons of war could be seized 
affair, publicly expressed its earnest hopes for an were at hand. Nearly 200,000 Dutch and Eurasians 
tarly renewal of negotiations between Dutch and who had been held in Japanese concentration camps 
Indonesian leaders to end the fighting. Perhaps it were also available as hostages for Indonesian na- 
was this conjunction of circumstances which led the tionalists to hold. Dr. Soekarno and his followers 
British to postpone the application of the “strong” promptly proclaimed an Indonesian Republic and 
policy in Java which, according to some reports, was succeeded in establishing its authority over a fairly 
decided upon at the Singapore conference of De- wide area. 
cember 6. DUTCH BLUNDERS. The Dutch government in 
COMPLEXITY OF THE INDONESIAN PROB- this crisis contented itself with little more than a 
LEM. Meanwhile, the rice crop that should be har- reiteration of Queen Wilhelmina’s vague 1942 
vested in the spring is not being fully planted and promise of Dominion status for Indonesia. Dutch 
food is already short, a very dangerous situation in the leaders evidently underestimated Soekarno’s strength. 
land of Java which is not much larger than New At least they confused the issue by stating that he 
York State, but has a population increasing by more was nothing but a Japanese puppet with whom 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 














they were honor-bound not to deal. While it is 
true that Soekarno worked with the Japanese 
and even went so far as to burn President Roose- 
velt in effigy shortly before the war ended, he is 
no Laval—for the record shows that he was thrice 
imprisoned by the Dutch prior to the war because 
of his crusade for Indonesian freedom. In any case, 
the Indonesians scored a tactical success over the 
Dutch by replacing Soekarno with the reputedly 
more moderate Sutan Sjahrir. Dutch policy also re- 
vealed a number of contradictions. On one occasion 
acting Governor-General Van Mook was reported 
to have been authorized to negotiate with Soekarno, 
only to have his efforts repudiated shortly afterward 
by his own government. Had the Dutch made more 
precise and generous concessions at the beginning of 
the uprising, it is possible an agreement might have 
been reached, or at least the Indonesian position 
would have been weakened. The ensuing bloodshed, 
however, has only made the Indonesians more ob- 
durate. Even if the Dutch succeed in their present 
wish to bring in 28,000 troops within the coming 
months to maintain the order that the British hope 
meanwhile to restore, they may face a lasting heri- 
tage of Indonesian bitterness. 

BRITISH DILEMMA. It was General Marshall, 
on behalf of General MacArthur, who persuaded 
the Combined Chiefs of Staff to turn responsibility 
for Indonesia over to Admiral Mountbatten’s British 
forces, leaving General MacArthur free to concen- 
trate on the invasion of Japan. When the war ended 
it was therefore British rather than American sol- 
diers who had the twofold responsibility of carrying 
out the V-J surrender terms by disarming the 70,000 
(one estimate says 150,000) Japanese troops in the 
islands, and assuring the safety of many Dutch and 
Eurasian prisoners who had been interned by the 


SCANDINAVIAN COUNTRIES DISCUSS REMEDIES FOR COMMON PROBLEMS f 
leftist groups gained little, if any, ground. The pre — 


STOCKHOLM.—As soon as the collapse of Ger- 
many last May brought about the liberation of Den- 
mark and Norway, the Scandinavian countries re- 
sumed their pre-war discussions for closer coopera- 
tion in the political, economic and social fields. Dur- 
ing the past few months, meetings have taken place 
in Stockholm, Copenhagen and Oslo to strengthen 
the many ties which before the war linked these 
countries into the so-called Scandinavian bloc. 

POLITICAL TRUCE. With the possible exception 
of Finland—where the hard terms of the Finno- 
Russian armistice have created a difficult political 
situation—the countries of the Scandinavian group 
are among the most stable in Europe. The general 
elections held in Norway on October 8 and in Den- 
mark on October 30—the first since the war's end— 
show that the Scandinavians wish to keep their time- 
tested systems of democratic government. Extreme 


Page Two 











ey 
——, 


Japanese. The Earl of Halifax, British Ambassado, 
to the United States, declaréd on December 14 tha 
there were still 30,000 armed Japanese in Java, while 
70,000 women and children in Batavia alone wer 
in grave danger from Indonesian extremists. “We 
have been given a job,” he said, “‘and it is surely oy 
duty to see it through.” This emphasis on British 
responsibility is, however, but one side of the story, 
The British face a serious dilemma. While they are 
definitely conscious of world criticism and would 
therefore like to end the Indonesian muddle, they 
at the same time feel the need for solidarity ig 
Dutch, French and British colonial policy. 

CAUTIOUS POLICY OF THE UNITED 
STATES. The State Department's statement of De. 
cember 19, urging peace for Indonesia, was prompt. 
ed partly by attacks on the United States government 
for its failure to intervene on behalf of the Indo 
nesians. Yet it is understandable that this country 
should move with discretion in so complex a situa. 
tion. Not only native welfare, but Allied solidarity 
and world security are at stake. The Dutch colonial 
problem is so closely bound up with similar problems 
of the French and British that an attack on the Dutch 
is likely to endanger our friendly relations with 
Britain, which already fears that there are too many 
Americans who would ':xe to break up the British 
Empire. 

On the other hand, the right of the Indonesians to 
a voice in their own affairs cannot be denied, and 
American idealism should lead the campaign for 
steady progress toward self-government for all de 
pendent peoples. American policy avoids antagoniz- 
ing the Dutch and British, but at the same time sug- 
gests our sympathy with native aspirations, thereby 
putting pressure on the Dutch to make liberal con- 


cessions. VERNON McKay 





portion of Communist votes, for instance, was rela- 
tively small—and in direct relation to the general 
material condition of the people. In Norway, widely 
ransacked and impoverished during nearly five years 
of German occupation, the percentage is near 20; 
in Denmark, occupied but not extensively depleted— 
Hitler's idea having been to use it as a “model pro 
tectorate” in order to persuade other countries not 
to resist German demands—it is 9; and in Sweden, 
untouched by the war and as prosperous as ever, it 
is about 6 per cent. 

Because of its neutrality in World War II, Swe 
den occupies with respect to the United Nations Or 
ganization a different position from that of Norway 
and Denmark, which are already members of UNO. 
It would seem probable that in the near future am 
invitation will be extended to Sweden and to other 























= — Page Three 
dor} “peace-loving’”’ neutrals to join the United Nations craft. Denmark suffered least of all countries occu- 


that —and share the military and other obligations set by pied by Germany. Athough it has a claim of some 
hile} the San Francisco Charter for member states. Swedish 11,000,000 Danish crowns (around $2,000,000) 


vere ublic opinion appears divided over this issue. The against Germany for unpaid deliveries and war dam- 
We present United Nations Organization is criticized ages, its financial situation is sound. The public debt 
Our# by some Swedes because of the preponderance it rose from 1.5 billion to 3 billion crowns during the 
tish B gives to the great powers. war, but Denmark had relatively few war expenses 
ory.§ ECONOMIC RECOVERY. Sweden’s economy compared to other European countries. 


suffered little from the war. Compared to the rest 
wuld f of today’s Europe, Sweden is a real paradise of 
hey plenty, where practically everything—from Amer- 
’ if jan cigarettes to German knicknacks—can be ob- 
__ Ftained freely and at prices only moderately above 
ED those of pre-war years. Its industrial production as 
De}; whole has now risen to the highest level it had 
npt- | reached since the beginning of the Skagerrak block- 
ent | ade in April 1940, and Sweden even had to ration the 
do- | export of certain domestic goods, such as forestry 
tty | products, for which the demand abroad widely ex- 
tua- | ceeded the possibilities of production and shipping. 
rity | Although its national debt increased from 2,700,000 
nial f gowns to 11,400,000 crowns during the war years, 
ems } due mostly to rearmament expenses, Sweden’s finan- 
itch dal: situation is sound. This favorable outlook per- 
vith | mits the country to lend a helping hand in the recon- 
any } suction of the war-stricken Northern countries by 
tish | way of credits and relief, the amount of which is 
estimated to total by now over 3,000,000,000 


SOCIAL COOPERATION. Conscious of the fact 
that social peace in the post-war period can be at- 
tained only if sufficient employment is available to 
all, the countries of the Scandinavian bloc are trying 
to create a common reservoir of labor forces, trained 
or otherwise, on which they can draw in case of 
need. In some countries, as in Sweden, skilled work- 
ers are scarce, while in others they are relatively 
numerous, especially in Denmark, whose economy 
was always based on large-scale export. 

In this respect an important—although little-pub- 
licized—step forward was the adoption, during a 
recent meeting of the Social Ministers of the Scandi- 
navian nations in Copenhagen, of a draft agreement 
for a joint labor market. This, and other similar 
steps which will undoubtedly follow in the near 
future, should bring the Scandinavian countries near- 
er to the close economic and political federation ad- 
vocated by so many of their most prominent leaders. 











$ tO | Swedish crowns (about $600,000,000). ERNEST S. HEDIGER 
and 
f Norw ay and Finland suffered most from the War. (Ernest S. Hediger, formerly a member of the FPA Research De- 
a One of Norway S greatest economic assets, its mer- partment, has been spending several months in Ewrene ~— 
e- i ‘ among other assignments, he attended the Internatio or 
¢ | antile and fishing fleets, was to a large extent de- Organization Conference in Paris.) 
niz- | stroyed, and the country was extensively depleted of 
ug: f its capital goods and commodity stocks during the NOTICE TO MEMBERS 
eby § German occupation. Many years will be needed to We are glad to announce that HEADLINE SERIES 
‘On F reach pre-war levels. Substantial orders for ships No. 54, Europe’s Homeless Millions, will be sent to 
Y have now been given to Swedish yards, while the members in late January. We regret the delay in 
ig ammmcrous smaller Norwegian firms are booked up publication of this issue, due to production difficul- 
a Mor several years for the construction of smaller ties. No. 55, Restless India, will follow in February. 
—_ THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 
of ° 
Can Representative Government Do the Job? by Thomas Lower Deck, by Lieut. John Davies, R.N.V.R. New York, 
lely oe New York, Reynal and Hitchcock, 1945. Macmillan, 1945. $2.00 
ars $2.00 This simple, vividly told story of the hazardous work of 
20; - strengthen cooperation between the various branches a British destroyer’s gun crew in convoying to Malta dur- 
ad ui our government, Mr. Finletter, former Special Assistant ing its siege makes thrilling reading. 
the Secretary of State, proposes three governmental 
)r0- reforms : a sharp reduction in the number of Congressional The Arab Island, by Freya Stark. New York, Knopf, 1945. 
not | *mmittees; the creation of a legislative-executive com- - $3.50 
len mittee, made up of Cabinet ‘members and the above com- A lively account of the successful attempt of the British 
1, | mittee heads; and the adoption of a constitutional amend- to hold the Arab world on the side of the Allies during 
+ it | Ment providing for the possibility of dissolution of Con- World War II. The author, who knows the Middle East 
_ and new elections in case the Executive and Congress well, sides with the Arabs on the controversial Zionist 
y € in deadlock. issue and favors the creation of an Arab federation. 
Or- eon POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 11, Ducumpzr 28, 1945. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
way anda eg oe ay — pre tor) N. bAtagae bv McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micuetes Dean, Editor, Entered as 
Class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post York, N. Y., c ‘hree Dollars ‘ P 
10. Sieh bas chasgh of ohdaae ap vaaaae aman or under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
an 


re F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Bs Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











Washington News Letter 




















U.S. COMMITMENTS CALL FOR FOREIGN POLICY COORDINATION 


The communiqué issued from Moscow by the Big 
Three on December 24, announcing that a peace 
conference of the 21 nations “which took an active 
part in the war against enemy states in Europe with 
substantial military contingents” will take place not 
later than May 1, 1946, and the progress made by 
the United Nations Organization, which is sched- 
uled to start functioning in London on January 10, 
place greater responsibility than ever on the United 
States for harmonizing its foreign policy with that 
of the other United Nations and for establishing ma- 
chinery at home to assure consistent and efficient 
cooperation abroad. 


STATE-WAR-NAVY COORDINATING COM- 
MITTEE. The foundation for a system coordinat- 
ing the executive agencies, however, already exists 
in the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee 
(known as Swink), which came into existence in 
December 1944. It worked out United States policy 
for the control of Japan and participated in the draft- 
ing of directives for the control of Germany and 
our policy toward Austria. This Committee has re- 
duced, but not eliminated, friction and rivalry over 
foreign affairs between the State Department and the 
military agencies. The existence of Swink was kept 
confidential as a military secret until the end of the 
war. It has its own secretariat, drawn from the per- 
sonnel of the three departments concerned. It does 
its basic work through six subcommittees: European 
Affairs, the Far East, Latin America, Near and Mid- 
dle East, Technical Information, Security Control 
and Rearmament. Its leadership is drawn from the 
level of assistant secretaries, with James Clement 
Dunn, Assistant Secretary of State in charge of Euro- 
pean, Near Eastern, African and Far Eastern Affairs, 
as chairman. The primacy of the State Department 
in the conduct of foreign affairs is acknowledged by 
the fact that, when Dunn is absent, a State Depart- 
ment official outranked by the War and Navy De- 
partment representatives acts as chairman. He is H. 
Freeman Matthews, director of the Office of Euro- 
pean Affairs. 


Suggestions for more elaborate cooperation be- 
tween those three departments are frequently ad- 
vanced in Washington. Last summer the Budget 
Bureau proposed to Secretary of State James F. 
Byrnes that he take steps to end conflicts between 
his department and the military. Secretary of the 
Navy James Forrestal on December 12, 1945 pro- 


posed creation of a National Security Council that 
would bring together the Secretaries of the three de. 
partments for decision on highest policy in interna. 
tional relations. World War II encouraged tenden- 
cies both toward independent action by different goy- 
ernment agencies in foreign affairs and toward set. 
ting up systems of coordination that would reconcile 








I 


191: 


differences among agencies. The outstanding ar-| 7,3 
rangement for coordination was the establishment, | —— 


shortly after the attack on Pearl Harbor, of the Joint | 
Chiefs of Staff Committee, where representatives of | 





the Army and Navy could arrive at common deci-| JN h 
sions on policy relating to high strategy. That com. | + the 
mittee would cease to exist if Congress acted | ber 1 


favorably on the recommendation President Truman tense 


made on December 19 that the War and Navy De. | by 


th 


partments be merged. or co 
COOPERATION WITH CONGRESS. Coordina- ipo 


tion of the executive agencies in the making of for- 

eign policy will be of little value, however, unless a 

system is evolved for the close cooperation of Con- 
gress and the executive. The appointment by Pres- 
ident Truman on December 19 of Senators Tom Con- | 
nally, Democrat of Texas, and Arthur Vandenberg, 

Republican of Michigan, among the United States | 
delegates to the UNO, contributed toward this 
cooperation, but neither President Truman nor 
Secretary of State Byrnes has carried forward the | 
intimate system of congressional collaboration 
worked out by Secretary of State Hull. In January 
1943 the State Department opened a “‘seminar”’ for 
discussion with selected Senators from both pat- 
ties about problems in foreign policy, and through- 
out 1944 Mr. Hull conferred regularly with members 


st 





out, i 
Lo 
have 

resun 


ond 


and 


CC 


as Ex 
that 

peace 
at th 
isters 
Affai 
char 
cedu: 


ing ( 


of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the | #4 


House Foreign Affairs Committee concerning the a 
an 


State 
these 
conf 
well 
invit 


ed b 





Administration’s plans for the establishment of ma- 
chinery for international cooperation. Truman and 
Secretary of State Byrnes are both former members 
of the Senate, and they have frequently relied on 
their innate sense of what Congress wants in devising 
their policies instead of soliciting directly the views 
of key members of Congress. This tendency has 
brought about the collapse of the Hull system, which | ’ 
deserves to be revived. By his regular conferences | * 
with members of Congress, Hull bridged not only 


but also the gap between the Democratic and Repub 


lican parties. ame Bosal 





ey 
y 
Fore 


ctiv 


fal 
later 


the gap between executive and legislative branches this 


Wf 


