; 


d 

a 
16-18 
Tease 
ough 
m 25 
n the 
‘iving 
quate 
| fuel 
ators, 
1 the 
d the 
ading 
dos to 


argely 


: 
™ 1 ee 


i, the 
00 it- 
ularly 
Trini- 
aploys 
g low 


g Mt 
vernor 
failed 
t local 
wages, 
health 
.ediate 
“ial as 
inistra- 
EEN 


>millan, 


s book 
most 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVII, No. 37 JuLy 8, 1938 


—_ 





FOURTH LEADERSHIP INSTITUTE ON 
INTERNATIONAL PROBLEMS 


Mortimer Schiff Reservation, Mendham, New Jersey 


Under expert guidance, young people may come to a 
clearer understanding of international affairs in preparation 
for leadership of peace groups in church, school or com- 
munity. A beautiful lake offers opportunity for sports and 
recreation. Young people—16 to 21—are cordially invited. 

Sponsored by the F.P.A. and the New Jersey Joint 
Council on International Relations. 


August 26-September 2 Total expense $25 


JUL 138 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 


earponisl SOny 2, 1921, at the Post 
ab cine” Office at New York, 
OBner mat. N. Y., under the act 


wri: al of March 3, 1879. 














General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 











DYNAMIC GERMANY C 


——_—_—————— 


ONFRONTS EUROPE 





by RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 
Mr. Buell has just returned from a two months’ European 
visit. Most of his time was spent in Poland and Central 
Europe. 


O the visitor in Central Europe one factor dom- 

inates everything else—the dynamic force of the 
new Germany. The Nazi revolution has many brutal 
features but it has generated within Germany an 
energy not displayed by any other country in Europe. 
Unemployment has been wiped out and skilled labor 
is working fifty to sixty hours a week. The govern- 
ment is directing prodigious investments into public 
works and rearmament, while keeping the people 
entertained with cheap vacations, sports, parades and 
spectacular “‘successes’’ in foreign policy. Although 
the Nazis claim they have abolished depressions, 
some observers wonder whether the régime can op- 
erate very long at its present tempo without breaking 
down. Depreciation of plant is excessive and a de- 
terioration in the quality of goods has become ob- 
vious. During the first four months of 1938 German 


nt “fexports fell off, adding to the difficulty of purchas- 


ympe 
ioes nol 
towar 
military 
Orient 
>», New 


ing the stocks of raw material which the army needs 
before it can seriously contemplate a general war. 
For the moment, nevertheless, Germany is a dynamo 
of activity. 





nstitute 
rd Wat 
retofort 

of th 
ific, Mr 
anadiat 
1y prob 


izens 


The whole of Europe fears that this energy will be 
used in a movement of expansion at the expense of 
other peoples. Following the annexation of Austria, 
King Carol abandoned his pro-German orientation, 
and informed Germany, during the recent Czech 
ttisis, that Rumania could not be indifferent to the 
fate of Czechoslovakia. The new Imredy govern- 
ment in Hungary, also frightened by Amschluss, is 


———|tndeavoring to check the growth of a Hungarian 


Nationa 
\N, Editor. 


Nazi movement. There is no doubt but that the 
Rome-Berlin axis has been weakened as the result of 
Anschluss. Finally, British rearmament, the Czech 





mobilization, and the warning of Britain and France 
on May 20 that they would both fight if Berlin re- 
sorted to force during the minority negotiations in 
Czechoslovakia, have temporarily called a halt to 
further German expansion. 


A series of important factors, however, continues 
to operate in favor of Germany: 


1. The Spanish civil war. Paradoxically enough, the con- 
tinuance of war in Spain helps the German position in 
Central Europe, for it diverts the energies of France and 
Britain and prevents the Anglo-Italian agreement from 
coming into effect. 

2. The economic dependence and political disunity of 
Central Europe. Germany constitutes the chief market for 
every southeastern European and Balkan country except 
Albania. Under a closed economy, such as that of Ger- 
many, trade domination is likely to be followed by political 
influence. If the states of this area would present a united 
political front to Germany, they might hope to maintain 
their independence, but so far this unity has not developed. 
Despite the growth of the German danger, the relations 
between Hungary and the Little Entente show no signs 
of improvement; while until recently at least the govern- 
ment press in Poland has openly attacked Czechoslovakia. 
If Germany can keep these states divided, the prospect in- 
creases of dominating them one by one. 

3. Weaknesses of the democracies. In France the eco- 
nomic situation has shown little fundamental improvement, 
and some even expect a new devaluation in the fall. Al- 
though the situation is much better in England, long term 
factors such as the increase in the public debt caused by 
rearmament, as well as the contraction of its a market, 
are beginning to cause apprehension. Despite the optimism 
generated by the new Wall Street boom, the problem of 
removing the fundamental maladjustments in the Ameri- 
can economic system remains. 

4. The uncertainties of British policy. The Nazis ho 
that Britain, which clearly holds the balance of power, will 
urge the Czech government to give the Sudeten Germans a 
form of autonomy so complete that these Germans will 
vote themselves out of Czechoslovakia into the Reich. While 
the Czech government is willing to give its German popu 
lation larger privileges than any other minority in Euro 
enjoys, it will not consent to a form of autonomy which will 





MER Wiuaga ee vg 


*'- 
a 


Sol tL celal 


gee pees Alisa! 


re eT eee ee ONL een, 


Se 


vant 


4 
| 
a! 
| 

| 


eee 

















mean the eventual disruption of the ancient kingdom of 
Bohemia, for it believes such disruption would reduce 
Czechoslovakia as a whole to a German satellite. If the 
present negotiations on this issue break down, the Germans 
undoubtedly hope that the Chamberlain government will 
wash its hands of Central Europe as it virtually has of Spain. 


Under such circumstances peace remains precari- 
ous, with but three possible courses open to the 
world. The first is war, the danger of which increases 
with the growing burden of the arms race. While the 
chances are still against war in the near future, the 
second course is equally gloomy—that is, a prolonged 
period of political tension marked by constantly in- 
creasing arms expenditures. To support such a bur- 
den, the great democracies may eventually have to 
abandon their comparatively free economies in favor 
of some form of totalitarianism. The third course is 
for a negotiated settlement, which is still possible 
if the great democracies, while continuing to 
strengthen their military power, make concrete offers 
to overpopulated countries in respect to raw ma- 
terials, tariff discrimination, the internationalizing of 
colonial areas, the reduction of armaments, and 
other matters. Just as during the World War the 
Allies allowed the immediate task of winning mili- 
tary victory to override a consideration of peace 
terms, so the governments now opposing the Rome- 
Berlin axis are forgetting about the necessity of 
world economic recovery and political reorganiza- 
tion. Secretary Hull is performing a great service in 
reiterating the importance of these principles, and if 
the American government follows up his speeches 
with concrete proposals, the forces still working in 
favor of peace will be strengthened. 


TURKEY SCORES IN ALEXANDRETTA 

The signature on July 3 of a Franco-Turkish pact 
of friendship along with a joint declaration on the 
Sanjak of Alexandretta—a coastal area in north- 
western Syria—have for the time being disposed of 
a diplomatic dispute whose repercussions might have 
been widespread in European politics. As a result of 
these agreements, Turkish troops marched into the 
Sanjak on July 5 to share control with France, the 
mandatory power. 

Franco-Turkish animosity over the district, valu- 
able because of its strategically situated harbor, be- 
came serious in 1936, when France prepared to termi- 
nate its mandate over Syria in 1939. Because of the 
large Turkish element in the Sanjak’s population, 
Turkey demanded special treatment for the area, 
and eventually assented to the establishment of an 
autonomous government under League of Nations 


Page Two 





———— 
a 





supervision. The French had apparently led Angora } 


to believe that the Turkish minority of 40 per cent 
in the Sanjak would receive an absolute majority in 
its governing assembly; but preparations for the elec. 
tion disclosed the existence of a dominating anti- 
Turk bloc of Arabs, Alawites, Armenians, Kurds and 
other ethnic groups. Disorders during the electoral 
campaign were quelled by the enforcement of mar- 
tial law, and Turkish dissatisfaction at the prospect 
of minority status became highly vocal. With the 
reluctant acquiescence of the French, Turkey forced 
the League commission supervising the election to 
beat a humiliating retreat from the territory. The 
Turks will now, presumably, obtain their majority 
in the Sanjak’s assembly and may possibly annex the 
area outright during a period of internationa! crisis 

France, hitherto a champion of League of Nations 
procedures, has assented to this questionable 
ment only because of the guid pro quo it has won 
from Angora. The two countries have now agreed 
that neither will aid any nation attacking the other, 
and have probably reached an understanding per- 
mitting British, French and Soviet vessels to utilize 
the Dardanelles in case of a general conflict. Turkey 
has thus been drawn into close relations with the 
Status quo powers, which hope to limit the German 
drive to the southeast by conciliating the Turks. But, 
having digested the Sanjak, Angora may demand fut- 
ther concessions—perhaps in the Mosul oil fields— 
in return for continued fidelity. The Arab world, 
which will fiercely resist the penetration of Turkish 
influence, may now lend a more attentive ear to 
fascist propaganda impugning the good faith of 
Britain and France. It is possible, therefore, that the 
Alexandretta settlement will raise more difficulties 
than it removes—a clear illustration of the obvious 
truth that security cannot be permanently obtained 


' 
Sette. 





by methods which do not show due regard for prin 

ciples of fair dealing. Davin H. Popper 

Survey of International Affairs, 1926, by Arnold J. Toym 
bee assisted by V. M. Boulter. New York, Oxford, 1938. 
$14.00 

Documents on International Affairs, 1936, edited by 


Stephen Heald in conjunction with John W. Wheeler- 

Bennett. New York, Oxford, 1938. $14.00 

These publications, issued under the auspices of the 
(British) Royal Institute of International Affairs, are the 
latest annual editions of a series which has become a 
classic for students of international affairs. The Survey 
for 1936 traces in great detail the collapse of the collective 
system of international relations constructed on the foun- 
dation of the League of Nations, and the consequent ten- 
dency to minimize foreign commitments and seek refuge 
in unilateral rearmament. The excellent economic and 
regional studies of former years are carried down to the 
end of 1936. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 37, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Jury 8, 


1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
RAYMOND Lesiig Bue, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DgaNn, Editor. 


National 


Entered as second-class matter December 2.1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 





F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





An 


SPE 


up | 
cup 
of | 
Rail 
the 
ing 
reg. 
Hat 
new 


occ 
har 


