ee 
tions, hoy. 
nade to a 
hen he sai 
ill be foun 
1 the othe 


fared badly 
tine nation. 
aid contip, 
inst forme 
rat country, 
‘Spearhead’ 
nies, public 
sure Of the 
On agains 
ong whom 
nderground 
ircle of the 
his gover. 
armaments 
itine army, 


three shor 
: Argentine 
Onservative 
‘rnment has 
- entire po 
structure of 
reorganiza 
of the Cen. 
ver the uni- 
r of Labor, 
status of a 


history, is 


nercial rep 
rr a not too 
rapproche. 
ise the op. 
enable Ar- 
al councils. 
n order in 
sue of how 
ng extraor- 
per the ex 
nt that pre: 
destructive 
yids a man- 


na to cafty | 


confronted 
ching dec 
y. 
HOLMES 


ated. National 
as second-class 
least one month 


PURIGUIC AL Kiuw’ 
@BMBRAL Linvar' 
Way. OF Mic’ 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Librar Sep SSIS Aig ca 
- ary P | 0 ISa¢ 


Valversity or Nichigan 
> \the 
Son Arbor, Nt chtean 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 47 


SEPTEMBER 6, 1946 


— the General Assembly, scheduled to meet 
on September 23, approves the Security Coun- 
cil’s recommendation to admit Afghanistan, Iceland 
and Sweden, the United Nations will total 54 mem- 
bers, 8 less than the League of Nations had at its 
peak. Were it not for the current diplomatic struggle 
between Russia and the West, five other applicants 
for admission to the United Nations would probably 
have been approved by the Security Council during 
its membership discussions in its new headquarters 
at Lake Success on August 28-29. 

Siam, facing a French veto because of its pro- 
longed territorial dispute with France over the Indo- 
Chinese border, had withdrawn its application before 
the Security Council discussions began. The remain- 
ing eight bids for membership, in the order of their 
presentation, were those of Albania, the Mongolian 
Peoples’ Republic, Afghanistan, Transjordan, Eire, 
Portugal, Iceland and Sweden. To be recommended 
for membership by the Council, each applicant need- 
ed seven votes, including those of the Big Five. Since 
the Council’s rules of procedure require that mem- 
bership applications be approved twenty-five days 
before the meeting of the Assembly, the eleven 
Council members had to hold two long sessions, one 
of nearly seven hours on August 28, and another of 
more than eleven hours on August 29. 


NEW USE OF THE VETO. When these ex- 
| hausting meetings ended, Afghanistan, Iceland and 

Sweden had been approved with ten votes and no 
opposition. Ireland received nine votes, but was de- 
feated by a Russian veto, as were Transjordan and 
Portugal which were given eight votes (Poland joined 
the Soviet Union in voting against the latter two). 
Of the other two rejected candidates, Mongolia ob- 
tained only six votes and Albania five. Since neither 
| of these two Soviet protégés had the necessary seven 


BIG THREE BICKERING MARKS UN MEMBERSHIP CONTROVERSY 


votes, the United States and Britain, which had 
joined the Netherlands in voting against them, were 
in a position to argue that technically they had not 
used the veto. Australia abstained from voting on all 
eight applications, arguing that the procedure of 
submitting membership applications to the Security 
Council before they go to the Assembly is wrong. 
Australia intends to raise this issue before the As- 
sembly. France, Brazil and Mexico approved all 
eight candidates, while China abstained on the Al- 
banian vote. China’s approval of Mongolia was an 
interesting reversal of its earlier opposition to Mon- 
golia’s admission at this time. 

The membership debate opened on a striking 
note when Herschel V. Johnson, the United States 
delegate, introduced a resolution to admit all eight 
candidates without discussion. When this proposal 
was sharply attacked by Mr. Gromyko, Mr. Johnson 
withdrew it, serving notice however that he would 
thereafter vote against admission for Albania and 
Mongolia. The French delegate, Mr. Parodi, in keep- 
ing with France’s characteristic réle as a mediator 
in such disputes, suggested the admission of the 
three states on which there was general agreement, 
while postponing the decision on the other five till 
next year. But this resolution too, facing Soviet re- 
jection, was withdrawn. An Egyptian proposal to 
vote on the candidates in their alphabetical order in 
English was also turned down. Since such a step 
would have brought the non-controversial Afghan- 
istan candidacy up first, thus sparing the United 
States and Britain from starting out by rejecting the 
Albanian application, Mr. Gromyko pointedly in- 
quired why the candidates should not be voted on 
according to the way their names appeared in Span- 
ish or Chinese. 


PROCEDURAL SNARLS. Procedural snarls on 


| Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


| 


a EES 


EEE CLE 


7 


PAN 22 ere 


nthe oe) 


we 
SPS nat wera 


a ee - 


7 


ee  n 


t 
4 
{ 


+ 
§ 
| 
ul 
b 7 
¥ 
t 
I 
4\ 
) 
i 
4 
i+ 
i 


pe 
~—S 


SLE POE MME eS 


the following day continued to delay a final vote 
despite the fact that the results were a foregone con- 
clusion. The membership committee of the Security 
Council had already reached the same deadlock after 
three weeks of discussion. Holding fourteen meet- 
ings between August 1 and August 21, this com- 
mittee, on which each Council member was repre- 
sented, finally decided to leave the problem to the 
Council itself. 


The Soviet attitude was as much of a puzzle in the 
committee as it was in the Council. Not until the 
fourteenth and last meeting did Russia voice its ap- 
proval on Iceland and Sweden. It was only over 
Soviet protest that the committee adopted resolu- 
tions to accept statements and ask questions about 
candidates’ fitness for membership. In the Security 
Council, Mr. Gromyko aroused considerable annoy- 
ance by refusing to elaborate his reasons for oppos- 
ing the applications of Transjordan, Eire and Portu- 
gal; he merely reiterated that the Soviet Union did 
not maintain diplomatic relations with those coun- 
tries. On the other hand, the opponents of Russia's 


GREAT POWER RIVALRY MOUNTS IN GRECO-ALBANIAN DISPUTE 


In Greece, ancient crossroads between the East 
and West, intense diplomatic rivalry between Russia 
and the western powers was renewed shortly before 
the plebiscite of September 1, when about 72 per cent 
of the ballots cast favored the recall of King George 
to the throne. If Greece is only a position, like 
Trieste or Iran, in the shifting lines of the Big Three 
political battle, it has become the object of strained 
attention in three widely separated parts of the 
world: at the Paris Conference, where the issue of 
Albania’s admission in a consultative capacity was 
closely linked with the uneasy situation prevailing 
on the Greek-Albanian border; at Lake Success, 
where the Security Council on September 4 placed on 
its agenda the Ukrainian charge that Greece was 
seeking, with British support, to provoke war in the 
Balkans; and in the Aegean waters visited by an 
American naval force shortly after the referendum 
in a move interpreted as United States support of 
the status quo in Greece. Of all these external at- 
tempts to influence the decision in Greece, the diplo- 
matic offensive mounted by Russia and its satellites 
against the only Balkan state upon the peninsula 
remaining outside the Soviet orbit was the most 
energetic. 

GREEK BOUNDARIES UNDER REVIEW. Al- 
though the bitter dispute over Southern Albania, 
which the Greeks call northern Epirus, has been 
interpreted as reflecting on a smaller scale the great 
power struggle for control of the Adriatic Sea, ac- 
tually the issue has been endemic in Greco-Albanian 
relations since the creation of the Albanian state 
shortly before World War I. Cession of southern Al- 
bania-northern Epirus, an area comprising one-fourth 


Page Two 


——.| __— 
candidates were inconsistent in questioning the jp. gover! 
dependence of Albania and Mongolia while accep} jtaly ! 
ing that of Transjordan. If lack of “independence’| They 
excluded states from membership, the positions of | assum 
Egypt, India, the Philppines, Syria and Lebanon, and} count: 
the Byelo-Russian and Ukrainian Republics would suppo 
also be questionable. According to the United Ng} of so 
tions Charter an applicant need only be a peace! woul 
loving state, and be willing and able to fulfill its} Yugo 
obligations as a member. Greec 
While the United States resolution to admit all}! sT 
eight applicants at once may be criticized as a bar} the 
gaining device that violates the principle of weigh.| any s 
ing each application on its merits, it at least faced} that \ 
a difficult situation in a positive and practical way,| count 
Rejection of the five applicants is an indication of} stretc 
the stumbling blocks on the road toward univers} migh 
membership in the United Nations. Mutual suspi-} to th 
cions about the creation of rival blocs are leading} balan 
the great powers to reject compromises that would , 
be relatively easy to achieve in a more favorable | IS 
political atmosphere. VERNON McKay | On 
| that 
; : ' from 
of the entire territory of Albania and including the} gum 
coast opposite the British-occupied base of Corfu, } othe; 
is demanded by Greece on strategic, historical and | Jorst 
ethnographic grounds. On the latter point the Greek | grat, 
and Albanian population figures—apparently based \ fron 
on ancient and unreliable statistics in both cases— | jhe 
are widely divergent. The “ethnic frontier’’ demand: | pan, 
ed by Premier Tsaldaris on August 3 at the Paris} dire, 
Conference would place under the protection of the | o¢ 4 
Greek flag the Eastern orthodox, Greek-speaking) tania 
people of the disputed region who allegedly const- | j.4 
tute the majority of the population and are now! pyc 
being “Albanized” by force, according to the Greek | jhe 
claim. If, moreover, the boundary were advanced | jj) 
some distance to the north, from a point west of | ya. 
Monastir (in Yugoslav territory) to the Adriatic | p,», 
coast north of Corfu, Greece would possess a natur | gion 
ally defensible frontier with Albania. The Athens | jj , 
government refers to Albania’s declaration of war | 
on Greece, when the latter was invaded by Italy in} 
1940, as evidence of the hostile intentions of its | TO 
northern neighbor, with which it considers itself to | the 
be in a continuing state of war. tror 
From the Albanian standpoint, on the other hand, | *t 
northern Epirus is overwhelmingly Albanian in char- | Wil 
acter—cradle both of the nationalist movement be | %t 
fore the Balkan wars and of the resistance against | be 1 
the Axis. To maintain that the 120,000 to 125,000 | cipl 
Eastern Orthodox Christians who inhabit the area | Ital 
are Greeks is, in the Albanian view, no more logical | Pay 
than to ague that all Roman Catholics are Italian. | the 
Nor do Albanians consider it reasonable to judge | os 
ir 


their attitude toward Greece by the conduct of the | 
Italian-trained Albanian army and that of the puppet | 


— 
ng the ip. 
ile ac 
pendence” 
ositions of 
anon, and 
lics would 
Jnited Na 
e a 

» fulfill its 


admit all 
lasa bar. 
of weigh. 
least faced 
ctical way, 
lication of 
1 universal 
tual Suspi- 
re leading 
hat would 
favorable 


McKay 


JTE 
luding the 
of Corfu, 
Orical and 
the Greek 
ntly based 
th cases— 
” demand. 
the Paris 


Le 


government installed in Tirana by Italy, after 
Italy had occupied the country on Good Friday 1939. 
They cite the fact that in 1941 Albanian Partisans 
assumed at great cost the task of liberating their 
country, in the course of which they gave material 
support to the invading Greek columns. The cession 
of southern Albania-northern Epirus, it is claimed, 
would force a truncated Albania to federate with 
Yugoslavia, and create additional problems for 
Greece. 

STRATEGIC INTERESTS INVOLVED. Under 
the conditions prevailing today, it is unlikely that 
any solution to this border problem can be obtained 
that will do justice to the claims of the two small 
countries immediately concerned. The strategic 
stretch of Albanian coast, possession of which 
might neutralize the value of Trieste as an outlet 
to the Mediterranean, hangs in the international 
balance. Whenever a powerful state has arisen in 


On September 2 the Conference of Paris learned 
that the British had filed a claim for reparations 
from Italy totalling $11,520,000,000. This fantastic 
sum is almost double the amount demanded by the 
other United Nations ($5,700,000,000). It was un- 
derstood, however, that the British claim was a 
strategic move for the purpose of forcing the Italian 
Economic Commission of the Conference to apply 
the principle of capacity to pay in disposing of de- 
mands on Italy. London, moreover, was giving in- 
direct support to a determined effort on the part 


ion of the 
k- “speaking | 
dly consti- 
| are now | 
the Greek 
advanced 
it west of 
e Adriatic 
SS a natur- 
he Athens 
on of war 
oy Italy in 
ons of its 
's itself to 


of the Australian delegation to have all reparation 
issues reviewed by a permanent allied commission 
and decided on the basis of ability to pay. On Au- 
gust 28 and 30 the Australians sought to amend 


| the clause in the Italian treaty giving Russia $100 


million in reparations; but each time their proposal 
was voted down, since the United States, Britain and 
France are committed to support the treaty provi- 
sions relating to Russia as agreed upon by the Coun- 
cil of Foreign Ministers. 


REPARATIONS MEASURED BY CAPACITY 
TO PAY. Apart from its administrative features, 
the Australian recommendation does not differ much 
from the position taken all along by Secretary of 


ther hand, 
an in char- 
rement be- 
ce against 
oO 125,000 


t the area | 


ore logical 
re Italian. 
+ to judge 
uct of the 
he puppet 


State Byrnes in the Council meetings. Particularly 
with respect to Soviet claims on Italy, the United 
States has contended that the amount exacted should 
be related to capacity to pay. By applying this prin- 
ciple Mr. Byrnes finally succeeded in limiting the 
Italian reparation to Russia to $100 million, with 
payments arranged in such a manner as to lessen 
the burden on the economy of Italy. He had cited 
| the fact that the United States had already advanced 
directly or indirectly $900 million “to enable the 
Italian nation to live.’’ Obviously, he said, Italy was 


Page Three 


ee 
em 


Italy it has attempted to expand into the Balkans by 
using Albania as a bridgehead; and, similarly, when 
a dominant power has been created in the Balkan 
peninsula it has tended to gain control of the Al- 
banian littoral and, thus, of the Adriatic. Considera- 
tions of this nature led British Foreign Secretary 
Anthony Eden in 1942, while commending Albanian 
guerrillas for their underground activities, to reserve 
the question of the frontier with Greece for review 
at the peace settlement. At the same time, Russia 
has promoted Albania’s claim, not only for mem- 
bership in the United Nations but for representa- 
tion in a “consultative capacity” at the Paris Con- 
ference as well. Friction between Greece and its 
northern neighbors will undoubtedly be intensified 
by the results of the plebiscite. As in the past, how- 
ever, Balkan developments will faithfully mirror 
relations among the great powers themselves. 


OLIVE HOLMES 


ISSUE OF ABILITY TO PAY RAISED IN PARIS REPARATIONS DEBATE 


in no position to pay large reparations. As to the 
claims of other United Nations, the Foreign Min- 
isters left this to the conference for consideration 
and recommendations. 


Although the United States has stressed ability to 
pay in fixing reparation claims, it has voiced dis- 
approval of the other features of the Australian pro- 
posal. Speaking for the United States delegation 
before the conference’s Economic Commission on 
the Balkans and Finland on August 28, when the 
Rumanian treaty was being considered, Dr. Willard 
L. Thorp stated that the Australian plan was not 
acceptable because it would delay final determina- 
tion of the amount of reparations; moreover, in 
stipulating that payment be made in free foreign 
exchange, the scheme was not practical, given the 
present disordered state of world trade. As to Rus- 


RESIGNATION OF MISS LEET 


The Board of Directors of the Foreign Policy Association 
announces with regret that Miss Dorothy F. Leet resigned 
as Secretary of the Association on August 31, 1946, to 
accept a position in another field of foreign relations. 


Miss Leet has served the Association as General Secre- 
tary for over eight years, and in addition to administrative 
functions, has been especially interested in the Annual 
Forum and in the development of Branches of the Associa- 
tion, which have increased from seventeen to thirty-two. 


Following her graduation from Barnard College, Miss 
Leet became a member of the administrative staff of that 
institution. She spent fourteen years in France as the 
Director of Reid Hall in Paris, and was decorated by the 
French government with the Legion of Honor “for further- 
ing and strengthening intellectual relations between France 
and the United States and thereby increasing international 
understanding.” 

An announcement will be made in the near future in 
regard to new staff members. 


sian claims on Rumania, he contended that it had 
not been shown that these were too burdensome. 
On that subject, however, his argument lacked force, 
since the Australian thesis was that without com- 
plete data on what the Soviet forces had taken in 
Rumania to date for occupation costs, booty, and 
restitution, no adequate assessment could be made 
of the treaty figure for reparations. In a strongly 
worded speech Mr. Molotov supplied a partial an- 
swer when he stated that Russia had so far col- 
lected $86 million as reparations from Rumania. 
The Rumanian phase of the reparations question 
was not thereby disposed of, for on August 29 Brit- 
ish and South African members of the Economic 
Commission raised the issue anew by citing the 
practice of Russia in taking as reparations the out- 
put of oil wells owned by British and other allied 
interests, and paying prices much below the world 
level. An amendment to require payment at a “fair 
prtice’’ was supported by the United States. 


ISSUE OF HUNGARIAN REPARATIONS. The 
divergence between Russia and the Western powers 
on the economic clauses of the treaties will undoubt- 
edly be most sharply revealed when the delegates 
take up the Hungarian treaty; for although the 
draft treaty allows Russia $300 million in repara- 
tions ($100 million of which will go to Yugoslavia 
and Czechoslovakia), the United States has reserved 
the right to reopen this question when it comes be- 
fore the conference. Economic conditions in Hun- 
gary have deteriorated rapidly since the end of the 
war. This situation prompted the United States as 
early as December 1945 to propose that the Big 
Three, in accordance with the Crimea Declaration, 
jointly undertake a program of economic assistance 
for Hungary. The proposal was rejected by the So- 
viet Union. Subsequently, the United States on 
March 2, 1946 and again on July 23, addressed notes 
to Moscow citing the plight of Hungary, and at- 
tributing it to the burden of reparations, requisitions 
and occupation costs being exacted by Russia. In 
reply, Moscow categorically rejected the charges as 
being wholly unfounded. The Washington proposal 
for concerted Big Three action to promote Hun- 
garian economic rehabilitation was likewise turned 
down by the Soviet Union on the ground that such 
a program would violate the sovereignty of the Hun- 
garian government. 

The contention that Russia has throttled economic 
recovery of the Danubian states has been made fre- 
quently; but only with respect to Hungary has the 
United States given any official support to the 


Page Four 


— 
ee 


charges, no doubt because in that country economic 
disorganization has no parallel elsewhere except ig 
Germany. Hungary, however, occupies a central 
position in southeastern Europe, and its people haye 
registered a surprisingly large vote against the Com, 
munist ticket. These factors may also have infly. 
enced Washington to make an issue of Russian pol. 
icy in Hungary. Moreover, since Russian economic 
arrangements there closely parallel those in Bulgaria 
Rumania, and the Soviet zone of Austria, the United 
States is in effect questioning the Moscow program 
in the entire Danubian region. When the Peace Cop. 
ference takes up the reparations clause of the Hun. 
garian treaty, the question of capacity to pay will be 
debated anew; but Moscow has so far given no ip. 
dication that it will modify its insistence that Hup 
gary be left to its own devices. The Hungarian gov. 
ernment has recently adopted a new currency unit 
as a result of which it should be able to effect some 
improvement in its economy. 


HAROLD H. HUTCHESON 


RESULT OF SPECIAL MEETING OF AUGUST 27th 

At the special meeting of members of the Foreign Polig 
Association held on August 27th the amendment to the 
Constitution increasing the dues of Regular Members from 
$5 to $6 was adopted. Members in good standing om 
August 27th have the privilege of renewing their member. 
ship for one year at the old rate, if they so desire. 


The War: Fifth Year, by Edgar McInnis. New York, Ox 
ford University Press, 1945. $2.50 
This extremely useful series comprising chronology, 
text, maps and documentary appendix continues through 


September 30, 1944. 


The Germans in History, by Prince Hubertus zu Loewen 
stein. New York, Columbia University Press, 1945. $5.00 | 
A Catholic and a long-time anti-Nazi, Prince Loewen 

stein has written an erudite interpretation of his vier) 

that the story of the Germans represents a struggle be 
tween opposite forces. 


World War: Its Cause and Cure, by Lionel Curtis, Nev 
York, Oxford University Press, 1945. $3.25 
A distinguished British administrator suggests, some 
what unrealistically, a union in one government of Britain 
and the Dominions, which would ask European democr 
cies and ultimately the United States to join. 


The Ciano Diaries, by Count Galeazzo Ciano. New York, 
Doubleday, 1946. $4.00 


Fascinating revelation of the pretentious, shoddy strue 
ture of Fascism by one well-qualified to know its inne 
workings as Mussolini’s son-in-law and Foreign Minister. 


The Story of the Second World War, edited by Henry 


Steele Commager. Boston, Little, Brown, 1945. $3.00 | 


An interesting mélange of articles, war correspondents 
stories, and official statements, held together by the editor's 
narrative, giving a vivid, episodic picture. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 47, Seprempsr 6, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; HELEN M. Daccett, Executive Secretary; VERA MICHELE 
DEAN, Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Four Dollars a Yeat. 
Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


National 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Six Dollars a Year 


as 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


191 


VoL. - 


—_—-- 


Wil 
= 

b 
man | 
preci: 
ward 
vious 
been 
speec 
only 
to th 
must 


strug 


that 


| tiona 


sible’ 
sible 


Mos 
mob: 
had 

Russ 
with 
conc 
itsel: 
weig 
Paci 
gart 
effec 
rest : 
cow 


