


rds 





and | 


to 


are | 


luc. 
1ese 


bal. | 





| 


‘hat | 


ing. 
lan, 
dy, | 


‘ant 

Or- 
nit- 
Eu- 
‘ing 
3C0- 
em- 
en- 
Key, 
tes, 
The 


le a | 


to- 
Dr0- 
. be 
The 


10S€ 


on 


ery | 


and 
, of 


for 


the 
age 
and 


rly, 


| 
| 


b| 


Vou. XXV, 


The | MUTUAL 


] 


yy 








sit: | 


ECO- 


the | 


tional 
EAN 











— 1946 


Entered as 2a dds mht 


. ~ : 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 














An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
No. 87 JUNE 28, 1946 





ISCUSSIONS in the Security Council about 
Spain, in the Atomic Energy Commission about 
methods of preventing the use of the atomic bomb, 
and in Paris about the wide range of unsettled Euro- 
pean problems sometimes assume the appearance of 
shadow-boxing, because the main issue at stake is 


‘ consistently avoided—and that is the distrust with 


which the Western powers and Russia view one an- 
other. This distrust, justified as it may seem on both 
sides, colors every controversy, no matter how in- 
significant, that arises among the Big Three. 


IDEOLOGY YIELDS TO NATIONAL INTER- 
ESTS. In the case of Spain, for example, it may be 
assumed that the Labor government of Britain has 
no more sympathy than the Kremlin for General 
Franco's régime. But its lack of enthusiasm for Franco 
is outweighed by Britain's traditional concern about 
its strategic position at the western entrance to the 
Mediterranean, and by its fear that UN intervention 
in Spain to overthrow Franco would open the way 
to Russian domination of that country. The United 
States, which also professes no sympathy for Franco, 
shares the British view about the strategic impor- 
tance of Spain, especially now that it, too, has a 
stake in the security of the Mediterranean. Russia has 
asserted that Spanish fascism is an immediate menace 
to world peace—an assertion denied by the Security 
Council’s subcommittee on Spain; and ideological 
opposition to Franco was undoubtedly an important 
factor in Russia’s intervention in the Spanish civil 
war of 1936. But Moscow has not permitted the 
Fascist character of the Perén government to pre- 
vent recognition of that régime and inauguration of 
trade relations with Argentina, traditionally critical 
of the United States. Argentina, for its part, having 
lost Germany as a diplomatic counterweight to 
American influence in the Western Hemisphere, 


DISTRUST BLOCKS BIG-THREE AGREEMENT ON MAJOR ISSUES 


hopes to find a substitute in Russia, although the 
Perén government fears the growth of communism 
at home. It is not Russia, however, but Britain, with 
its reviving export trade, which is regarded by Amer- 
ican businessmen in Argentina as a challenge to 
United States trade. 

Considerations of strategy and economic advan- 
tage, rather than of ideology, are thus paramount in 
shaping the policies of all the great powers, as they 
have been throughout history. The report of the 
Security Council subcommittee on Spain, which rec- 
ommended that the question of Spain be submitted 
to the General Assembly in September may well be, 
as claimed by its supporters, the best possible com- 
promise—although it was opposed by Britain as go- 
ing too far, and by Russia as not going far enough; 
but it does not touch on the substance of the issues 
that separate the Western powers and Russia. 


CAN U.S. AND U.S.S.R. ATOMIC PLANS BE 
RECONCILED? Again, in the Atomic Energy Com- 
mission, Mr. Baruch for the United States and Mr. 
Gromyko for Russia both have expressed genuine 
fear about the dangers of the atomic bomb, and gen- 
uine desire to control this destructive weapon. They 
differ, however, in their approach to these tasks. 
Mr. Baruch proposes a stage-by-stage disclosure of 
the “know-how” of atomic bomb production, to be 
undertaken only after establishment of a satisfactory 
international Atomic Development Authority, ac- 
companied by powers of international inspection 
and arrangements for severe punishment of viola- 
tions. Mr. Gromyko, whose proposals, it is reported, 
were drafted in advance of the Baruch statement, 
suggests immediate outlawing of the production 
and use of the bomb through an international treaty 
to be elaborated by a committee of the Atomic En- 
ergy Commission, while another committee would 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 




















simultaneously provide for free exchange of scien- 
tific information about atomic energy. Mr. Gromy- 
ko’s program envisages national sanctions against 
violators of the treaty, although it does not exclude 
eventual international sanctions; makes no provision 
for international inspection; and opposes relinquish- 
ment of the veto, which is a cardinal point of Mr. 
Baruch’s program. Russia takes the view that, under 
the Baruch proposals, destruction of the store of 
atomic bombs accumulated by the United States 
(which, according to Moscow, constitutes a mono 
oly) may be postponed indefinitely; while the United 
States, and some other countries, believe that out- 
lawry of the bomb by treaty, without provision for 
inspection and international punishment of viola- 
tions free from great power veto will prove wholly 
inadequate. 

COMPROMISE AT PARIS? Meanwhile, in 
Paris, Secretary of State Byrnes called on June 22 for 
a showdown on his proposal that, if the Council of 
Foreign Ministers did not succeed in drafting peace 
treaties for Italy and the Axis satellites at this ses- 
sion, the task of peacemaking be turned over in un- 
finished form on July 15 to a conference of the 21 
nations that participated in the European war. This 
procedure Mr. Molotov has hitherto opposed. Some 
agreement has been achieved at the Paris session— 


Page Two 














— 
revealed by reports that the Italian governmeg| part a 
fearing the effects of an unfavorable treaty on publi! ;eforn 


opinion, prefers continuance of the armistice to x This | 


ceptance of sacrifices in the colonies and in the re} pethc 
gion of Trieste. While atomic scientists assure y} FIR 
that strategic and economic advantages of the pre} ajizat: 
atomic age will offer no defense against atom! post « 
warfare, statesmen of all three powers, perhap can h 
counting on outlawing of the bomb, continue j| 9 in 
argue about outlets to the seas, trade opportunitig Emp! 
bases and borders. agenc 
It is encouraging, in this atmosphere of stale the f 
mate, to find that the United States has taken steps) pow 
to dispel existing distrust of its motives not only o9| for ¢ 
the use of atomic bombs but also on rule over Japan! of th 
The American proposal for a 25-year program of} A ur 
Allied supervision over Japan, announced on June 
21, is a statesmanlike move. It has far greater sig 
nificance than the similar proposal for Germany} jam 
for whereas in Germany four-power Allied contr 
had been in existence from the outset and the Byrne 
plan seemed to foreshadow curtailment rather than 
strengthening of the role of the United States in| to Je 
Europe, the plan for Japan, whose final defeat was 
encompassed primarily by American forces, offes| 
Britain, Russia and China an opportunity to partic-| hus 
pate in its administration, and should remove th 




















ric 

notably postponement of the final disposition of suspicions they may have nurtured about this coun. he 
Italy’s African colonies, and decision to with- try’s desire to dominate Japan. By displaying a spirit pros 
draw British and American troops from Italy and of conciliation and a desire to allay the anxieties of plet 
Russian troops from Bulgaria ninety days after other nations, the United States will gain far more ploy 
the conclusion of peace treaties with the respective influence than if it should merely seek to solidify its} go¢ 
countries. The mistrust felt by all nations about the own national interests through unilateral action. | ain 
present alignment in Europe, however, is strikingly VERA MICHELES DEAN | digs 
BRITAIN REGISTERS ECONOMIC GAINS UNDER LABOR PARTY but 


Fully conscious of its election mandate of last 
July, the British Labor party has energetically 
pushed its domestic program to convert Britain into 
a Socialist commonwealth. The first year’s record 
is impressive both because of the bulk of legislation 
dealing with a comprehensive system of social se- 
curity, and the bills enacted to bring the Bank of 
England and the coal industry under public control. 
Other nationalization measures raise a number of 
vexing questions. But by the time the Labor party 
met for its annual conference at Bournemouth on 
June 10-12, Labor’s leaders were able to review a 
year’s work which had begun to show measurable 
returns in expanding production and increasing ex- 
ports—both key tests for Britain today. 

TEMPER OF BRITISH SOCIALISM. For the 
most part, Labor's methods and even its policies 
have already assumed a British character. This is 
explainable by three reasons, which reveal the tem- 
per of the government in Whitehall. First, it is im- 
portant to realize that the British people are in 
many ways still living under wartime conditions. 


Continued lack of housing and food reflect the a 
havoc of war and world-wide shortages that would) “— 
be present regardless of the party in office. Regula; “* 
tions necessary to meet these civilian privations,| at 
therefore, do not appear extraordinary to the pub . 
lic, in the sense that they would have been used by a 
whatever administration was in power. Any gov| ” 
ernment would also have to channel all available| P° 
manpower and materials into export industries, aj} 
though this tends to prolong civilian austerity. | 
The second reason why Labor's policies do not 
appear entirely new is because urgent postwar de 
mands are being met without sacrificing historic 
British political liberties. At their recent Bourne 
mouth Conference leading Laborites repeatedly em 
phasized this point. Action taken by the delegates 
to bar Communist affiliation with the Labor party; - 
can also be read in the light of this devotion t0| . 
democratic principles, for the Communists were s¢ | 
verely criticized on the ground that they hoped to| & 
enter Labor's ranks only to dispense with constitu 
tional practices. Third, Labor’s program has been, « 











bli 
0 a 
le fe. 
ce uw 


“pre 
‘Omi 
hap 
1€ ty 
ities 


stale. 


Steps 
Ly on 
pan. 
n of 


yrnes 


Sin 





Was 
fers 
ric. | 
the 


spirit 
es of 
more 








a — 
— 





a fulfillment of plans for social and economic 
reform laid down by the Churchill coalition régime. 
This again gives continuity to Britain’s traditional 
method of government by evolution. 

FIRST-YEAR RECORD. Aside from the nation- 
alization projects, Parliament has already acted on a 
host of other measures whose long-term significance 
can hardly be overestimated. Steps have been taken 
to implement the coalition White Paper on Full 
Employment by setting up planning and statistical 
agencies which will constitute a “general staff” for 
the future economy. A national insurance plan is 
now on the statute books, providing social security 
for the entire population. It is an extended version 
of the Beveridge scheme and the coalition proposals. 
A universal national health service has also been 
inaugurated. Having passed bills to control invest- 
ment and provide certain agricultural reforms, Par- 
jiament has also considered two budgets; lowered 

ernment interest rates, thus giving the state 
greater control over credit; and retained price regu- 
lations and many other wartime restrictions in order 
to lessen the danger of an immediate postwar boom 
or slump. 

Reconversion may be said to have run smoothly 
thus far in Britain, albeit at a budgetary cost, for 
price controls have been maintained through sub- 
sidies. After many difficulties the extensive housing 
program is underway, demobilization will be com- 
pleted by the end of the year, and since January em- 
ployment is up, although not spectacularly. The 


| stock markets have remained fairly steady, and with 


minor exceptions there have been no serious labor 


_ disputes since the end of the war. Wages have risen, 


| but the Bournemouth delegates were told plainly 


} not 
r de 
toric 
irne- 
em: | 
zates 
party | 
n to 
e Se 
d to | 
stitu- | 
nin 





by government spokesmen that the much desired 
40-hour week must be postponed. Civilian goods 
are still strictly rationed and will continue so until 
export increases are fully supplied. Since the first of 


| this year, however, exports have jumped to new 


levels, approximating those of 1938 in some cases. 
In so far, therefore, as the test of the government’s 
policies may be said to hinge on increasing export 


Page Three 





JUST PUBLISHED— 
ATOMIC ENERGY IN INTERNATIONAL 
POLITICS by Harold C. Urey 
25 cents 


June 15 issue of ForEIGN Poticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















production, the many controls which the state has 
maintained appear to have been justified. The Board 
of Trade has urged definite export goals for many 
industries; and there is more hope now than im- 
mediately after the war that Britain’s over-all ob- 
jective of lifting its exports by 50 to 75 per cent 
above prewar levels will be attained within the next 
few years. 


LABOR AND INDUSTRY. In addition to na- 
tionalization of coal and the Bank of England, state 
ownership and control of national industries and 
services are now envisaged for civil aviation, cable 
and wireless, railroads, and iron and steel. Other 
industries are to remain in private hands, although 
agreements among management, labor and govern- 
ment are to be used to direct their operations. Of 
all proposed joint arrangements those for cotton are 
the most important, because the textile industry is 
still Britain's chief hope in the export field. If the 
plans for reorganizing the cotton industry and na- 
tionalization of coal, railroads, and iron and steel 
are successfully carried through, Britain’s basic in- 
dustries will have been socialized. But the “if” in 
this case, goes to the heart of Britain’s postwar in- 
dustrial problems. 

While the milder scheme for supervising cotton 
has been attacked in Britain, it is the plans for iron 
and steel that have aroused the most bitter dissent 
from Conservatives in Parliament, and the London 
Economist sees in this venture proof that the Labor 
party is more concerned with doctrine than with 
planning. Back of the debate between state owner- 
ship and private enterprise, however, remains the 
necessity for wholesale reorganization in certain in- 
dustries, reallocation of others to different areas, 
and extensive modernization in coal, textiles and 
steel. In a period when “to export or die” is far 
more than a slogan for Britain, manufactures must 
achieve a competitive status comparable to that pre- 
vailing in other advanced industrial nations. It re- 
mains to be seen, however, whether—even if the 
state can re-equip all necessary plants with new ma- 
chines—it can overcome manpower shortages that 
exist in such industries as coal mining. The Labor 
government believes that British industry can achieve 
a higher industrial efficiency through nationaliza- 
tion, and the rest of the world eagerly awaits the 
verdict of experience, for Britain’s course will de- 
termine in practice whether socialism and democracy 
are compatible. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


(The second of two articles on Britain.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 37, JuNE 28, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Screet, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Boss McCoy, President Emeritus; Dororuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES DEAN, 
Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office atc New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


is 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





SSS 






ona) pee = 
~  e v7 x. 


~* el’ Ae 
Son eeeews nebw se tees 
* 905 Fe 


ee ee a 





Washington News Letter 

















U.S. STILL HOPES TO AVERT COMMUNIST-KUOMINTANG BREAK-UP 


Despite grave disappointments, General George 
C. Marshall, President Truman’s special envoy in 
China, remains hopeful that the Chinese will estab- 
lish a coalition government uniting the hostile par- 
ties of the Communists and the Kuomintang, whose 
armies have been at war in Manchuria. The Kuo- 
mintang is the party which now controls the na- 
tional government of China. 


UNITY STILL THE AIM. The failure of the 
two parties to reach an understanding before their 
15-day Manchurian truce ended on June 22 has 
not caused the United States to alter the policy 
followed by this country since last December 15, 
when it assumed the role of moderator between the 
opposing factions. For Marshall has rejected sugges- 
tions made in China that the United States try to 
unify the country by supporting only the Kuomin- 
tang and suppressing the Communists. On the con- 
trary General Marshall has agreed that, if Congress 
authorizes the action, the United States should train 
and give minimum quantities of equipment to the 
Communist armies, Under Secretary of State Dean 
Acheson told the House Foreign Affairs Committee 
on June 19. 


At the same time the United States has rejected 
unofficial suggestions from Britain that we allow 
China to divide into two parts by encouraging the 
Kuomintang to solidify its position in that portion 
of the country where its leadership is unquestioned 
and by acquiescing in the creation of an independent 
Communist régime in the north. “A China dis- 
organized and divided . . . is an undermining in- 
fluence to world stability and peace,” Truman said 
on December 15. 


Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, the dominant fig- 
ure of the national government, cannot unify China 
by overthrowing the Communists without greater 
military assistance, in terms of men, guns and logis- 
tic arrangements than he now receives from the 
United States. Chiang failed last September and 
October to suppress the Communists in northern 
China by force of arms, which he hoped would 
enable him to extend the authority of his govern- 
ment over that region. The United States now gives 
limited military aid to Chiang. Although this aid is 
ineffectual, it has led the Communists to criticize us. 
But neither do all officials under Chiang approve our 
policy. The most reactionary and militaristic of those 


officials continue to advocate suppression of com. 
munism by arms, preferably American arms. 

Their influence was largely responsible for the 
decision of the Kuomintang Executive Conference, 
which met on March 1 to avoid action on the unity 


program which the Chinese Political Consultation | 


Conference had adopted on January 10. Removal by 
Russia of industrial machinery from Manchuria, 
about which Secretary of State Byrnes questioned the 
Russian government in February, strengthened the 
reactionaries. While no evidence is available that 
Russia has directly assisted the Chinese Communists, 
many people readily associate Russian army men and 
Chinese Communists. By removing industrial equip. 
ment the Russians lost friends not only in southern 
China but also in Manchuria. 


Chiang Kai-shek, however, has failed to take the 
best advantage he could of Manchurian reaction 
against the Russians. Instead of acknowledging the 
historic regionalism of Manchuria — whose inhabi- 
tants cultivate a sense of separatism even while 
they regard themselves as dwelling in part of China 
— Chiang attempted to assert his authority over 
Manchuria by the use of soldiers recruited in prov- 
inces far from that region. This action contributed 
to the outbreak of civil war in Manchuria after Gen- 
eral Marshall, confident that the way to unity had 
been prepared, left China in March for a stay of 38 
days in the United States. Fewer than half the 


soldiers Chiang has been fighting are Communists. | 


Most of them are dissident Manchurians. 


MILITARY UNITY FIRST. Marshall thinks that 
progress toward political unity can be made through 
military unity, and the legislation concerning which 
Acheson testified before the Foreign Affairs Com- 
mittee on June 19 would enable the United States 
to bring together and train a Chinese coalition army 
of 50 government and 10 Communist divisions. 
While representatives of the government and of the 
Communists agreed on February 25 that their forces 
should be integrated, Marshall may find that politi- 


cal unity must precede or come simultaneously with _ 


military unity. One instrument of persuasion at the 
disposal of the United States is its lending power. 
China needs American dollars, and the present in- 
tention of the Administration is not to lend a large 
sum to China until it is politically unified. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


f 


| 


VoL. 


| 


polit 
got 
Com 
pect 
tend 
| mon 
the 

Poli 
Jam 
ruat 
deci 
Mat 
truc 
Eve 
fact 
hav 
the 
fort 








tor 
clu 
mu 
anc 
sire 
| eff 
» kin 
far 
fac 


ou 
Sal 


co 
na 
ar 


