owever, 
Britain 
saturn to 


ve been 
titution, 
of par. 
stitution 
erial re- 
ted the 
islation. 
ished by 
e Minis. 
‘tion led 
> the or- 
when no 
ionalists 
isha and 
lisorders 
Minister 
by Brit- 


the pro- 
intransi- 
2, when 
ate over 
thdrawal 
he price 
wal. The 
ntage of 
Egyptian 
mportant 
ir forces 

If war 
ly, Egyp- 
-onverted 


ould now 
1 instead 
hould aid 
a treaty 
n the two 
pendence 
ply, con- 
pendence 
vith Brit- 
e Nessim 
inst Italy 
| destroy 
tion. 


‘ALLUM 


York, Holt, 


y’s political 
raracter of 


of Fascism. 


red. Nations 
Dean, Editor 
a Year. 


5 phe TRE te 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Entered as second- 
class matter Degember 


VoL. XV, No. 6 


DECEMBER 6, 1935 


Subscribe for a friend! 


affairs and incidentally solve your Christmas problem. 


Regular Membership $5 
Headline Books, in boards $2 


The gift of a year's membership or sub- 
scription to F.P.A. publications will stimulate interest in foreign 
A Christmas 
card announcing your gift will be mailed from National Headquarters. 


Foreign Policy Bulletin $1 
Foreign Policy Reports $3 


fo 2, 1921, at the Post 
wy Office at New York, 
- 1g 94° N. Y., under the act 
rc — 44 
of March 3, 1879. 
) 
- L ~ ision, 
fol aa) 


DIFFICULTIES OF PEACE 


By RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


Mr. Buell has just returned from a four months’ visit in Europe. 


; NYONE traveling across Europe cannot fail 
I A to be impressed by the seriousness of the eco- 
nomic and political situation. No general war, 
S however, is expected for the next few years, 
largely because Germany is not yet prepared 
either with armaments or alliances. It is possible 
} that Mussolini might resort to war as a result of 
"the oil embargo, but since Italy would have to 
fight France and Britain combined it is hardly 
probable that Jl Duce would choose this form of 
suicide. Meanwhile, the League of Nations has 
shown surprising vitality during the past few 
months. The action of more than 50 states in 
designating Italy as an aggressor and in applying 
economic sanctions constitutes an historic event. 
For the first time since the depression govern- 
ments have sacrificed immediate economic inter- 
ests for the sake of what they regard as an ulti- 
mate good. They have done so in the belief that 
only the establishment of the principle of collec- 
tive security will prevent the outbreak of a more 
general war and facilitate economic recovery. 
The view that League action against Italy is due 
purely to British imperialism is superficial. True, 
national interests are at stake in this as in every 
other international controversy. But the 50 states 
at Geneva did not accept the heavy sacrifices in- 
volved in economic sanctions solely to advance 
British imperialist interests. They accepted these 
»>urdens because of the belief that their own safety 
Slay in a strengthened League. Similarly, in Brit- 
ain, the demand for sanctions has come, not from 
traditional imperialists who could make a deal 
with Italy tomorrow but from the liberals and 
iborites, most of whom are strongly anti-imperi- 
list. These people deeply believe, as the Peace 
ballot indicated, that a real League is the only 
alternative to future war. 
In addition to the pinch of economic sanctions, 


Italy has apparently begun to suffer reverses in 
Ethiopia. The establishment of a military cen- 
sorship by General Badoglio is a confession that 
the northeast campaign is not going well; while 
in the Ogaden, the Italians have been obliged to 
surrender a number of posts and today seem but 
little further advanced than at the start of their 
campaign. Unless a decision is reached before 
the rains begin a few months hence, Italy’s war 
may lead to a stalemate. 

As a result of sanctions and the military situa- 
tion, Mussolini has apparently grown desperate. 
Following a report on November 25 that the 
League had decided indefinitely to postpone dis- 
cussion of the oil embargo, Mussolini intimated 
that such an embargo would be regarded as a 
hostile act. Mysterious troop movements took 
place and there were even reports that Italy would 
bomb the British fleet in the Mediterranean. The 
acute tension produced in London by these rumors 
was eased when M. Laval, immediately after ob- 
taining a vote of confidence from the French 
chamber which reassembled on November 28, sol- 
emnly informed the Italian Ambassador, Vittorio 
Cerruti, that any act of war against Britain would 
be an act of war against France and the whole 
League. At the same time it was announced that 
the League coordination committee would discuss 
the oil embargo on December 12—an embargo 
which Rumania and the Soviet Union had already 
approved in principle. 

While answering Mussolini in his own language, 
the French and British governments have once 
more attempted to find a diplomatic solution of 
the problem. They may be correct in seeking to 
negotiate a peace settlement instead of demanding 
an unconditional surrender. But a negotiated peace 
means that concessions must be made to Italy. 
Mussolini had already rejected the offer advanced 
by Haile Selassie before the outbreak of war to cede 
the Ogaden in return for an Ethiopian port in Brit- 
ish or French Somaliland. Apparently Mussolini 


———— 


ve! § C8 & gent & 


sere 


demands not only a strip of territory linking up 
Eritrea and Italian Somaliland, but the Tigre 
valley, which constitutes the heart of the old Am- 
haric Empire. Obviously France and Britain 
cannot accept a proposal providing for the dis- 
memberment of Ethiopia without disavowing the 
League. The ultimate solution of the Italian and 
German problems lies in the reallocation of raw 
materials and the revival of world trade. But the 
immediate task is that of satisfying Italian pres- 
tige without damaging the independence of Ethi- 
opia. Should France and Britain widen the nego- 
tiations so as to reallocate their colonial mandates 
to Italy as well as Germany, the present situation 
would be radically changed. 

In Europe the policy of the Roosevelt adminis- 
tration toward the Italo-Ethiopian dispute has 
commanded general admiration. In order to fol- 
low an “independent” course, the United States 
imposed its arms embargo before the League 
acted; it also voiced moral disapproval of oil ex- 
ports, even though the League hesitated on this 
point. Whatever the intent of the American pol- 
icy, its effect has been to stiffen League action. 
Having no responsibility for passing on the merits 
of the dispute, and removed 3,000 miles from 
Mussolini’s wrath, the United States has not had 
to weigh the international consequences of its 
acts so closely as France or Britain. 

Few Europeans believe, however, that recent 
American policy foreshadows any reversal in the 
attitude of the United States toward League mem- 
bership. The League’s recent action has undoubt- 
edly aroused the admiration of many thousands of 
Americans. But no fundamental change in Ameri- 
can policy can be expected until this country is 
convinced that the great powers represented in 
the League are ready, not only to apply sanctions 
against an aggressor state, but also to take con- 
structive steps to meet the economic needs of the 
“have not” countries. 


REVOLT IN BRAZIL 


On November 24 a widespread army revolt con- 
fronted the Vargas government with its most 
dangerous challenge since the Sio Paulo uprising 
of 1932. The movement first centered in the 
northern states of Pernambuco and Rio Grande 
do Norte. The authorities crushed it there after 
three days of fighting, only to face a military out- 
break in Rio de Janeiro on November 27. The 
bulk of the army, however, remained loyal to the 
government and an energetic attack brought the 
surrender of the rebels before the day was out. 

The causes of the revolt are not entirely clear. 
It is difficult to determine the extent to which 
regional jealousy, so often a factor in Brazilian 


Page Two — 


—— 


unrest, affected this movement. Probably of mor. 
fundamental importance was the extensive dis. 
satisfaction created by the failure of the Vargas 
administration to carry out many social and eco. 
nomic reforms pledged in its original platform, 
some of which were incorporated in the 1934 cop. 
stitution. President Getulio Vargas, in a state. 
ment of November 28, charged the Communist; 
with responsibility for the revolt. Impartial ob. 
servers concede that the movement had Com. 
munist backing, but indicate that it was dominated 
by Socialist and nationalist ideas. Aside from 
demand for the expropriation of foreign com. 
panies “to liberate Brazil from the imperialism 
of foreign capital,” its program was moderate in 
tone, calling for an 8-hour day, equal pay for men 
and women doing equal work, a weekly rest day, 
annual vacations with pay, hygienic working con- 
ditions, shop committees to safeguard enforce. 
ment of social legislation, unemployment insur. 
ance and old-age pensions. 

The government’s triumph over the insurgents 
is reported to have markedly strengthened its 
position. But unless repression is followed by 
constructive action, the rule of President Vargas 
may again be challenged. In addition to hostility 
from the left, the government must cope with an 
aggressive Fascist movement—the green-shirted 
Integralists—which claims from 500,000 to 700, 
000 supporters, including numerous army and 
navy officers. Recently the Brazilian Congress 
joined labor and the church in opposing the In- 
tegralists, whom they described as “sworn ene 
mies of democracy,” asking the government to 
dissolve the movement. 

Economic relations between the Brazilian gov- 
ernment and the United States have recently im- 
proved; on November 30 the Brazilian Congress 
ratified a thawing agreement to free $23,000,000 
in blocked commercial credits, and on December ? 
President Roosevelt proclaimed a_ reciprocity 


treaty. CHARLES A. THOMSON 
Inflation Ahead! by W. M. Kiplinger and Frederick Shel. 
ton. New York, Simon & Schuster, 1935. $1.00 
Some hints on how the investor and business man should 
prepare for the coming inflation. 
Peace Yearbook 1935. London, National Peace Council 
1935. 1/6 
A survey of the peace movement during the past year 
Facing Two Ways, by Baroness Shidzue Ishimoto. New 
York, Farrar and Rinehart, 1935. $3.50 
An autobiography of a leading figure in the struggle 
for women’s rights in Japan, with intimate details of 
Japanese family life and customs. 
Policies and Opinions at Paris, 1919, by George B. Noble. 
New York, Macmillan, 1935. $3.50 
Interesting review of the clash of old and new diploms 
cies in making the peace settlement. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 6, Decempgr 6, 1935. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationa 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND Lgstig Bugit, President; Ester G. Ocpan, Secretary; Vera MICHELES Dean, Edito' 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


i | 


