> 





Zens 28 ici 


BoP 


nt | 


ain 


ind 


ire: 
it in 
ade. 
n of 
But 
1 te. 








| for § 
yeder | 
tion. | 
duc: | 
st 1, 
t cut 
ntial 
gress 
per 


aken. 





Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XX, No. 36 JUNE 27, 1941 


HITLER RESUMES CRUSADE ON COMMUNISM 





— invasion of Russia in the early NAZISM PROCLAIMED BULWARK 
hours of June 22 opened a new phase of the AGAINST COMMUNISM. These statements revive 
wat which is bound to have profound repercussions the main theme of Hitler’s pre-1939 denunciations 
throughout the world. This invasion came as a shock of Russia—the accusation that Bolshevism threat- 
both to those in Western countries who, in harmony ens European civilization, and the assertion that 
with the Communist party “line,” had been de- Germany offers a bulwark against this threat. On 
nouncing Britain’s “imperialist” war against the a far larger scale than he has yet attempted, Hitler 
Reich, and those who had too hastily interpreted the is thus again seeking to drive a wedge between 
Soviet-German pacts of 1939 as a sign of “all-out” groups within each nation—the very thing of which 


collaboration between Germany and the U.S.S.R. von Ribbentrop accuses the Russian Communists. 
NAZI CHARGES AGAINST MOSCOW. If the What is not yet always understood in the Western 


statements issued by Hitler and von Ribbentrop on world is that the Nazis themselves have taken a 
the day of invasion are correct—and they are sub- leaf out of the book of Lenin, who during the first 
stantiated, in most details, by facts available from World War urged his followers to “transform the 
other sources—the German Fuehrer signed the non- imperialist war into a civil war.” Where the Rus- 
aggression pact “with a heavy heart,” and with an sian Communists were only partially successful, due 
equally heavy heart accepted Russia’s subsequent oc- both to native inefficiency and to the repugnance of 


cupation of the Baltic states, southeastern Finland, 
Bessarabia and Moldavia, as well as Soviet diplo- 
matic maneuvers in the Balkans—all in the hope of 


most Western peoples for the pattern of life devel- 
oped in the Soviet Union, the Nazis have proved 
far more effective, by the simple device of promising 


temporarily appeasing Stalin, and meanwhile crush- to protect private property and religion—only to 
ing Britain in the West. What apparently disturbed whittle down both of those institutions through eco- 
the Nazis most, judging by von Ribbentrop’s state- nomic restrictions and racial discrimination. 

ment, was that the Soviet government, far from Although the Nazis have now turned back to 
abiding by its pledge to abstain from interference in Hitler's original concept of seeking: “living space” 
Germany's internal affairs, apparently out-fifth-col- for the Germans in the east, they have not for a 
umned Nazi fifth columnists by spreading Com- moment abandoned their intention of destroying the 
munist propaganda not only in the Reich, but in all British Empire. If Hitler should win his objectives 
occupied countries, and allegedly committed acts of in Russia, Britain and the countries now aiding Brit- 
sabotage, notably in the case of 16 German ships. All ain would be confronted with far more deadly 
these anti-German moves, according to the Nazi lead- danger than they face today, since Germany would 
ets, were made by the Soviet government in collabora- then have acquired a position from which no block- 
tion with Britain and the United States for the pur- ade could probably dislodge it. This was clearly 
pose of prolonging the war and throttling Germany. recognized by Prime Minister Churchill in his broad- 
Hitler, therefore, decided to oppose the Soviet “‘men- cast of June 22, in which he rejected all thought of 
ace’—not only to defend Germany, “but to save peace with Germany, and said that nothing will turn 
the entire civilized world from the dangers of bol- Britain from its ‘‘single irrevocable purpose” of de- 
shevism and clear the way for true social progress stroying Hitler “and every vestige of the Nazi 


in Europe.” régime.” In a speech to the House of Commons on 














June 23 British Foreign Secretary Eden declared that 
Britain would help Russia fight Germany to the 
finish. What is most significant, he stated, appar- 
ently with the consent of both Moscow and the Po- 
lish Government-in-Exile, that Britain’s pledge to 
restore Poland remained unaffected. 

SOVIET ASSETS AND LIABILITIES. Only time 
can answer the question whether Russia can meet 
the supreme test imposed by the German invasion. 
So far as military training and industrial resources 
are concerned, the Soviet Union must be regarded 
as inferior to Germany —although the Russians 
were ahead of the Germans in experimenting with 
modern devices like parachutists and transport of 
troops by air. The major weaknesses of the Soviet 
Union are its transportation system, which has 
proved unequal to the strains of peacetime activi- 
ties and, if disrupted by German bombings, might 
in turn throw industrial production out of gear; the 
stubborn opposition of the newly occupied terri- 
tories—Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and southeastern 
Finland—which might welcome liberation from So- 
viet rule, even if it comes at the hands of the Ger- 
mans; and the possibility that civilian morale in 
general, already lowered by frequent purges and 
continuous economic difficulties, might be under- 
mined by initial German victories as well as by 
German appeals to the aspirations of various na- 
tional groups within the U.S.S.R. Among these 
groups the most important are the Ukrainians, who 
have long hoped for unification of their people, 
historically divided between Russia, Poland, Hun- 
gary and Rumania; some of their leaders are re- 
ported to be aiding the Nazis. Hitler may also be 
expected to appeal to the religious sentiments of 
those who have resisted the “godless” propaganda 
of the Soviet government, and to the anti-Soviet feel- 
ings of White Russians—although Alexander Keren- 


Page Two 








—— 


sky, former Premier in the provisional governmen 
of 1917, appealed on Juné 22 for unity of all Rus 
sians against Hitler. 

The most important asset of the Soviet Union jp 
its struggle against Germany will not be the decep. 
tralization of its industries, many of which haye 
been erected in the Urals and Siberia, beyond Ge. 
man bombing range, nor its great expanse of te. 
ritory, which can be overcome to some extent 
use of German motorized equipment. Moscow’ 
greatest asset is the bitter hostility aroused by the 
Nazis in all occupied countries—a hostility that did 
not exist in 1939, and that may now prove a dap. 
gerous boomerang for Hitler; and the latent belief 
among many workers, peasants and intellectuals 
especially in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, that 
Communism remains irrevocably opposed to Fascism 
and, in the long run, will destroy it in Europe. This 


belief had been seriously shaken by the Soviet-Ger | 


man non-aggression pact of 1939. But it is signif. 
cant that active resistance to the Nazis in occupied 
countries often comes not from industrial or pro 
fessional groups, some of whom hope to benefit 
by “collaboration” with Germany, but from in 
dustrial workers and what is known as “the man 
in the street.” It is to this resistance that Foreign 
Commissar Molotov, in his broadcast of June 2), 
shrewdly appealed when, in contrast to Prime Min 
ister Churchill, he drew a sharp distinction between 
“the clique of bloodthirsty Fascist rulers’ on the 
one hand, and German workers, peasants and intel 
lectuals on the other. These are the people who are 
ready to support Britain against Germany, but who 
might conceivably support Russia instead, if Britain 
and the United States fail, at this crucial turning 
point, to provide them with a vision of the world 
order the Western powers hope to establish as a 


alternative to Nazism. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


GERMANY SEEKS SECURITY IN EAST FOR ATTACK ON BRITAIN 


In ordering the invasion of the Soviet Union, with 
all its attendant risks, Hitler was apparently actu- 
ated by two imperative motives. The first was to 
eliminate the danger, once and for all, that Russia 
might strike Germany in the rear just as the war 
against Britain was entering its decisive phase. The 
second was to assure Germany ample resources to 





For Moscow’s opinion of Hitler’s “new order” 
in Europe, read: 


RUSSIA AND THE “NEW ORDER” 
IN EUROPE by V. M. Dean 
25¢ 


Vol. XVI, No. 19, of Foreign Policy Reports 











defy Britain and the United States in a long wat. 


statements issued by both the Fuehrer and von Rib 
bentrop. In August 1939 the Nazis submerged thet 
traditional hostility to Bolshevism and concluded: 
non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union only be 
cause the Army insisted that Germany could no 
fight a war on two fronts. The Nazis made the bes 
of this situation, but apparently remained skeptic 
regarding the permanent character of the Russ 
German arrangement. As signs of Russian hos 
tility multiplied, German Army leaders also los 
faith in the agreement with Moscow and began tt 
realize that the Russian threat might prevent. thet 
from conquering the British Isles. According ® 
Hitler, the Army advised him that such large Get 














= 


man fe 
ders 4, 
war if 
could | 
Und 
to reat 
order 
Soviet 


by while 


The E 
feelers 


new 7 
founc 
Axis 
Brita: 
mans 
mate: 
sabot 
endle 
deme 
De 
powe 
posit 
quer 
and 
parti 
from 
rope 
face 
imp! 


| for 
The first of these motives appears clearly in the) 


one- 
Ir 
peat 
furr 
um 
defi 
dras 
con: 
fuel 
littl 


FOR] 
Head 


Enter 


@ 











— | Page Three 


ll 











nent} man forces were needed to protect Germany's bor- 
Rus.| ders against Russia “that radical conclusion of the jie F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
: ; : ject: THE U.S. AND THE SOVIET- 

war in the west, particularly as regards aircraft, _— GERMAN WAR 

N in could no longer be vouchsafed. Speaker: William T. Stone 
er these conditions Germany could either Date: June 29 

“CEN ome a : dare th Britai ty Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 
haye| to reach a peace settlement or truce with Britain in Station: NBC, blue network 
Ger.| order to obtain a free hand for action against the 











- ter-| Soviet Union, or attempt to hold the western front rous metals as copper, lead, and even zinc, is in- 
t by| while delivering a smashing blow against Russia. adequate. Germany has had to rely on Russia for 
ows| The Berlin government probably did put out peace sufficient quantities of manganese, which is an es- 
' the feelers to Britain, perhaps through Rudolph Hess sential purifying and alloying agent in steel-making. 
: did as an intermediary, but British leaders were categori- Moreover, the European continent produces no tin 
dan- cal in their resolve to continue fighting to the bitter and only small amounts of steel-alloying metals 
lief end. The Army then reached the conclusion that a such as nickel, tungsten, molybdenum, vanadium, 
uals two-front war was inevitable. This time it was etc., which are vital in the manufacture of machine 
that willing to take the risk because elimination of the tools, ordnance and ammunition. Germany had pro- 
cism land front in Western Europe and the Balkans vided for these deficiencies to an amazing extent 
This, enabled Germany to concentrate most of its forces by accumulating stock piles before the war, by care- 
Ger. | in the east. 


ful rationing and conservation, and by developing 
gnif.| THE NEED FOR MORE LEBENSRAUM. The substitutes. Yet its capacity in this respect is limited. 
ipied | second motive was most clearly expressed by Virginio After conquering Western Europe, it could not fully 
pro-| Gayda, the Fascist spokesman, who declared that the utilize the additional manufacturing facilities thus 
nefit| new war was designed to secure a broader economic acquired simply because not enough raw materials 
| in.| foundation for the reorganization of Europe under were available. While the United States was plac- 
man| Axis auspices and to prevent the United States and ing more and more of its rich resources at the dis- 
reign| Britain from starving out the continent. The Ger- posal of Britain, Nazi Germany saw little prospect 


» 22, mans admitted that the Russians had delivered raw of increasing its own economic strength sufficiently 
Min-| materials and foodstuffs, but accused Moscow of to offset this assistance. 


ween| sabotaging full economic cooperation by permitting 
the} endless delays and making impossible or difficult ACCESS TO RUSSIA'S WEALTH. Although the 
‘tet| demands for counter-deliveries. Nazis had succeeded in imposing a counterblockade 
» are} Despite a series of military victories, the Axis oa rs ea Pee a had coo =a the 
who} powers have been unable to improve their economic =< heref — © vod eg ag - ses 
‘itain} position. Virtually all the countries they have con- prs ae St en > bt Tecgmettrs met 
ning-| quered or controlled are deficient in raw materials ae ee a SCO ee 
8 tional raw materials and foodstuffs. Neither Africa, 


vorld| and foodstuffs. The Western European nations in ; 
s an| particular have always depended heavily on imports nor the Near and Middle East cams much natural 
wealth. The U.S.S.R., however, is a rich reservoir 


Se eet. Although the food sitenien & ms of grain and minerals. In control of the Ukraine, 


ee Py 20 means desperate, me German people the Caucasus and the Urals, the Nazis would no 
face the prospect of a deterioration, rather than an longer be at the mercy of the Kremlin for deliveries 


improvement in supplies. During the month of June, : . 
for example, German meat rations had been cut by of oil, manganese, phhceplntes, g/shs ieee 


1 the! one-fifth products. Almost five years ago, on September 12, 
1936, Adolf Hitler frankly declared: “If the Urals, 
with their immeasurable treasure of raw materials; 
Siberia, with its rich forests, and the Ukraine with 
its limitless grain fields, were to lie in Germany, this 


In the long run, the supply of raw materials ap- 
pear even more critical. The European continent can 
furnish enough iron ore, coal, aluminum, magnesi- 
um and nitrates for the Nazi war machine, but it is 


| m0} deficient in almost everything else. In spite of the — undet Nations! Socialist leadership woul 
De drastic carta; swim in plenty.” The Nazi legions have now set 
| drastic curtailment in all absolutely non-essential . : 
stical ' ‘ out to prove this contention. Their success or failure 
7 consumption, Europe produces barely enough motor desensiiem tuaraek E th 
‘a fuel and insufficient lubricants. It has no cotton and ee ee 
ia little wool. The supply of such important non-fer- JOHN C. DEWILDE 
0 





in Mf FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 36, JUNE 27, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 

ther Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicuHeres Dean, Editor. 
f Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 

8 <B> 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 

Ger F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 


‘ 
yo 











\ 





7 








WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

JUNE 23.—As Washington recovered from the 
initial surprise of Hitler's offensive against the So- 
viet Union, Administration leaders faced the task 
of charting American policy in a situation which had 
changed profoundly almost overnight. Foremost 
among the new and perplexing problems thrust upon 
the government were three major questions: 

1. Should the United States follow the lead of Prime 
Minister Winston Churchill, who pledged Great Britain 
to give all possible aid to Russia and every nation which 
resists Nazi aggression? If so, should the Administra- 
tion extend material assistance to Russia under the pro- 
visions of the Lease-Lend Act? 

2. Should the United States intensify its aid to Brit- 
ain, throwing its full weight into the balance in the 
West while Hitler is occupied in the East, or should it 
hold aloof and await developments before undertaking 
new commitments ? 

3. As a result of the German-Russian conflict, what 
policy should the United States adopt in the Far East? 
Can we hope to detach the Axis partner in Asia by con- 
ciliating Tokyo, or must we take a firm stand in the 
Pacific as well as the Atlantic ? 

FUNDAMENTAL OBJECTIVES. If Washing- 
ton’s first answer to these questions seemed any 
less certain than London's emphatic response to the 
German drive in the East, it was not because the 
President and his advisers were in doubt about the 
fundamental objectives of American policy. The ob- 
jectives are clear. They have been laid down by the 
Executive branch of the government in President 
Roosevelt’s broadcast of May 27, and underlined 
more sharply in the special message to Congress on 
June 20, in which the President accused the German 
government of seeking to intimidate the United 
States and drive its commerce from the seas as part 
of the Nazi scheme for world conquest. Implicit in 
these official statements, as in every diplomatic and 
military move of the government during the past 
three weeks, was the basic assumption that Nazi 
Germany represents the chief threat to the security 
of the United States and the Western Hemisphere. 


Neither this assumption nor the broad objectives 
which stem from it have been altered by the sensa- 
tional turn of events. On the contrary, the Nazi of- 
fensive has strengthened the conviction that Hitler 
is the real enemy whose defeat is essential. Thus, in 
measuring the effect of Hitler’s colossal gamble, 
Washington officials see the military campaign in 
Russia as an unexpected opportunity for Britain to 
strike with telling effect in the West. The diversion 


may be long or short—according to the strength 
the Soviet Army—but at this moment it undoubte, 
exposes Germany to the threat of a two-front y 
and to that extent fortifies Britain’s position. 

The attitude of the Washington government yas 
set forth on June 23 by Sumner Welles, Acting 
Secretary of State, in a statement which again de 
fined the paramount issue in terms essentially simila; 
to those used by Prime Minister Churchill the day 
before. Speaking for the President, Mr. Welles cop. 
demned both Communism and Nazism as “‘intoler. 
able” to the people of the United States, but de. 
clared that the issue for this country at this time 
“is whether the plan for universal conquest” is to 
be successfully halted and defeated. Mr. Welles 
disclosed no immediate moves, but within the larger 
framework of the Administration’s fundamental ob. 
jectives his statement provided a fairly complete an. 
swer to the three specific questions. 

If Hitler is the chief danger, then all other con 
siderations must be subordinated to the primary ob 
jective. And if the primary objective of American 
policy is to enable Britain to take advantage of Ger. 
many’s occupation in the East, then it is no longer 
possible for the United States to hold aloof and 
await developments. To do nothing in this greatest 
crisis of the war would underwrite Hitler's gamble 
and prove his contention that the democracies are 
incapable of understanding their own peril. Strategic 
considerations alone dictate that the United States 
intensify its aid to Britain as the first and most im 















} 


















= 
Vou. XX 


ish 

re} 
operatic 
cult to | 
on the ¢ 
Italian 
Russia 
muniqu 
adopte 
“specta 
whelm: 
up the 
against 
tered i 
while | 
the pr 
ceeded 
ining t 
engagt 





portant move, with the transfer of heavy bombers 
and naval support in the Atlantic at the top of the 
priority list. 

From this premise, it follows that the question of 
Lend-Lease aid to Russia must be secondary. This 
does not, however, prevent the extension of material 
assistance to the Soviet Union as long as it resists 
Germany. It would be possible to issue a general 
license for the release of frozen Soviet funds in the 
United States, and to permit machine tool shipments 
which have been held up in recent months. 

Japan presents a more difficult problem, but one 
which is not insoluble. Outright appeasement would 
be unlikely to change Japan’s designs in Southeast 
ern Asia, but Tokyo is obviously concerned by the 
actions of its partner in Europe and will tread cat 
tiously pending further developments. In this situ 
tion, it is the course of wisdom for the United States 
to avoid provoking Japan while keeping it in sus 
pense. W. T. STONE 


ment : 
ithe W 
| long-r 
muniq 
cal st 
Russia 


1. 

) becorr 
lary a 
feap | 
vide ; 
tially 
prisin 
direct 
Mosc 
woul 
whict 
libere 
land, 
mani 





