aT 
sami 
ACT 
can Tariff 
IP Opposi- 
s Act. The 
1e Admin. 
- reduction 
al set on 
rdell Hull, 
Roosevelt 
Match 26, 
nmediately 
S program 
ight up to 
Robert L, 
is Commit. 
served to 
merce bat- 
es possible 
educed for 
it has ex 
reductions 


RAM. The 
the Tariff 
srobably be 
ion is con- 
despite the 
Ways and 
ril 16. The 
ire to enact 
ize the pro- 
ntention of 
Pacific war 
yf European 


riff issue to 
nited States 
yn, Director 
n, told the 
pril 25 that 
ast $6,000; 
roods every 
ased expott 
y to provide 
e Stettinius 
ts extension 
nent’s peace 
Woods pro 
+ the House 


 BOLLES 


INDS 


1943 


JUN 2 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Y RQOR 
VOrsity of ron: eee AL LIBRARY 
“.chican GENERAL 
NtyY. OF M™ 
~~“ Bhd Ps 
Yan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


VoL. XXIV, No. 32 


May 25, 1945 


EUROPEAN PEACE ISSUES DEMAND EARLY MEETING OF BIG THREE 


eo the forty-nine nations are drawing up 
a charter at San Francisco for a world se- 
curity organization, the Big Three, on whose con- 
tinued unity the effectiveness of this organization 
depends, are at odds on almost all immediate po- 
litical problems in Europe. That Russia, Britain and 
the United States should find cooperation more difh- 
cult following the defeat of the common enemy is 
not surprising, but the apparent seriousness of the 
growing rift among those who have just won the 
war is as unexpected as it is disconcerting. During the 
war, observers frequently and complacently predicted 
that no peace conference similar to that held in Paris 
during the winter of 1918-19 would conclude World 
War II. But at Yalta it was agreed that such a peace 
conference should be held at the end of the war lest 
piecemeal and unilateral settlements in Europe en- 
danger the all-important harmony among the Big 
Three. And now it seems that this meeting—to which 
anew Big Three parley, such as Prime Minister 
Churchill and President Truman have suggested, is a 
necessary preliminary—must be held soon. For if a 
peace conference does not take place in the near 
future, the map of Europe may be largely redrawn 
by unilateral actions rather than agreements among 
the victors, and irreparable harm will almost cer- 
tainly be done to the mutual confidence the great 
powers built up during the war. 

EUROPE DIVIDED. From the growing list of 
European areas in which disagreements between Rus- 
sia and the Western Allies have become acute, it is 
clear that the subject of controversy among the Big 
Three is no longer whether Europe shall be divided 
into a Russian zone and a Western sphere, with a 
partitioned Germany in between. An effort to prevent 
such a division of the continent was made at the 
Crimea Conference last February, when President 
Roosevelt succeeded in securing the adoption of a 


plan for tripartite instead of unilateral intesvention 
by the great powers in liberated or former Axis 
satellite nations. But in the three months since Yalta 
this formula has not once been implemented. In- 
stead, Russia has been maintaining eastern Europe 
as a closed preserve by excluding British and Amer- 
ican officials and correspondents from areas occupied 
by the Red Army, and by ignoring protests or in- 
quiries from Washington and London concerning 
Moscow’s policy in the area. Britain, for its part, has 
continued to control affairs in Greece and encour- 
aged the royalists, with whom London apparently 
believes it can make satisfactory strategic arrange- 
ments in the eastern Mediterranean. With the divi- 
sion of the continent an already existing fact, it ap- 
pears that the current issue between Russia and the 
Western Allies is where and how the boundary be- 
tween the two European zones will be drawn. 

“From Stettin to Trieste’’ has become a popularly 
accepted dividing line between the Russian sphere 
and western Europe. But events of the past few 
weeks indicate that this demarcation may not be ac- 
ceptable to the British and United States govern- 
ments, particularly if it is established by unilateral 
Russian action. On April 30 the State Department 
and the Foreign Office declared that they did not 
recognize the provisional government of Austtia, 
which the Soviet Union had announced the previous 
day. Since the new cabinet in Vienna is a coalition 
of all three democratic Austrian parties, it is obvi- 
ously not the composition of the government that has 
prevented the Western powers from recognizing the 
régime. Instead, it is the manner in which Russia 
established the government of a country to be oc- 
cupied by British, United States and French farces, 
as well as the Red Army, that is responsible for 
Anglo-American objections and the resulting prob- 
lems of military government in Austria. 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


_—_———— 
Seca 


The efforts of Marshal Tito, whose government 
has a pact with Russia, to establish military and 
political control over the Austrian city of Klagenfurt 
and the province of Carinthia, as well as Trieste and 
Venezia Giulia are also creating numerous difficulties 
for the United States and British occupation forces. 
In Trieste these problems are particularly acute, for 
AMG officers have been unable to establish head- 
quarters in the city because of the presence of Par- 
tisan troops—estimated on May 20 to number 
70,000. One result of this situation is that Trieste is 
not receiving its usual bread supply, for the flour 
mills west of the city are under Allied rather than 
Yugoslav control, and hunger will soon be added to 
the explosive factors already created by the presence 
of rival armed forces. 

RUSSIAN BLOC SOLIDIFYING. But it is chief- 
ly because Marshal Tito’s actions are regarded in 
Washington and London as an apparent indication 
of Russia's intentions to tighten up its eastern Euro- 
pean bloc before the continent is stabilized on the 
basis of agreements among the Big Three that acting 
Secretary of State Grew and Marshal Alexander have 
sent carefully considered protests to Belgrade. For it 
appears that, with Trieste in Tito’s hands, the Rus- 
sian group of states would have direct access to the 
most important Adriatic port and thus possess its 
own trade outlet. And Austrian Carinthia may be of 
equal importance in strengthening the bonds among 
the eastern European states, for this region may form 
part of a new corridor between Yugoslavia and 
Czechoslovakia, two of the leading Slavic states 
linked to Russia by bilateral treaties. 

That the new Russian-sponsored confederation in 
eastern Europe may provide a better framework for 
solution of the problems of this region of overpopu- 
lated rural areas and few industrial opportunities 
than did the Versailles system of independent states 


Page Two 


does not seem to be seriously disputed by Britain o; 
the United States. Neither are the Western Allies 
challenging Russian statements that this bloc is being 
formed as protection against a resurgent Germany, 
although Pravda declared on May 13 that “Russia jg 
sure that the victory puts an end to the German 
menace for many generations to come.” Nevertheless, 
the United States and Britain are anxious to leap 
how far west Russia intends to extend its security 
zone and what methods it will use in consolidating 
that area. 

Since British parliamentary elections are scheduled 
for July, it has been suggested that Prime Minister 
Churchill summed up his foreign policy in his victory 
declaration speech of May 13 in terms that particu. 
larly emphasize Britain's traditional opposition to 
control of Europe by any single continental power, 
But Churchill’s statement of policy can hardly be 
dismissed as campaign propaganda. For if the pres. 
ent British cabinet were defining its foreign policy 
with an eye on the polls, it would presumably make 
every effort to avoid criticizing Russia, even by im. 
plication, since it is on the Left that the Conserva. 
tives need to court votes. A more plausible, and more 
disturbing interpretation of the stand Britain is 
taking, with the support of the United States, on 
such problems as those of Austria and Trieste, is that 
all three major victors are attempting to delimit stra. 
tegic zones on the continent as a possible alternative 
and parallel to the world security organization being 
formed at San Francisco. Because of the obvious dan. 
gers in this contest for positions in Europe, it is im- 
perative that the struggle be halted before further 
damage is done to the inter-Allied harmony on which 
success of the new League depends. The speedy con- 
vening of a Big Three meeting would be an impor- 
tant step in this direction. 

WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


NATIONAL vs. COLLECTIVE SECURITY KEY ISSUE AT SAN FRANCISCO 


SAN FRANCIscO.—As the San Francisco Confer- 
ence enters its fourth week it becomes increasingly 
apparent that the abrupt termination of the war in 
Europe has greatly increased the problems faced by 
the conferees. At the same time it has made the crea- 
tion of machinery to deal with these problems more 
urgent than ever. Great as has been the effort to con- 
centrate on machinery-building and to avoid discus- 
sion of specific political and economic issues, these 
issues—Russia’s intentions in Europe and Asia, the 
treatment of Germany, the disposition to be made of 
territories taken from enemy states, the future of 
colonies—have dominated the thoughts of all dele- 
gates both in committee meetings, closed to the press, 
and in private conversations. 

TWO SETS OF NEGOTIATIONS. This Confer- 
ence has laid bare the quivering, aching nerves of 


nations that have carried the burden of the war, and 
now face with anxiety the burdens of peacemaking. 
The constant appraisal of future prospects in Europe 
and Asia that goes on behind closed doors is in 4 
sense beneficial, for it lends reality to discussions 
about procedures and technical details which would 
otherwise seem troublingly abstract. But it also 
means that each country, in reaching decisions about 
this or that provision of the Charter, makes mental 
calculations as to the way in which it may be applied 
at coming peace conferences. Thus actually two sets 
of negotiations are proceeding side by side—the pub 
licized work of the UNCIO’s commissions and com 
mittees, and the relatively unpublicized efforts of the 
various nations to adopt positions most favorable to 
their interests in the troubled days ahead. 

These parallel negotiations are most clearly seen 


— 
in the h 
had not 
Oaks, a 
the age 
security 
ship. In 
hauntec 
may nc 
gressio! 


ures as 


power 
the inte 
by expe 
A co 
was re 
gional | 
defens« 
occurs 
“neces: 
This as 
fic refe 
serting 
States | 
must t: 
ments. 
TRI 
trustee 
eve of 
delega 
sider i 
waged 
concer 
Unitec 
non-st: 
delega 
cile th 
anese 
of ter 
of Br 
coloni 
phasiz 
tants | 
The 


i 


{The 
route 
Confe 
credit 
Assoc 


—— 
SS 


Britain of 
ern Allies 
Oc is being 

Germany, 

“Russia jg 
e German 
vertheless, 
1s to learn 
its security 
nsolidating 


- scheduled 
ie Minister 
his victory 
at particu. 
position to 
ital power, 
hardly be 
if the pres. 
eign policy 
vably make 
ven by im 
» Conserva- 
», and more 
Britain is 
States, on 
este, is that 
lelimit stra- 
alternative 
ation being 
bvious dan- 
e, it is im- 
ore further 
ty on which 
speedy con- 
2 an impor 


. HADSEL 


CISCO 


he war, and 
-acemaking. 
's in Europe 
yors is in a 
discussions 
thich would 
But it also 
isions about 
akes mental 
y be applied 
ly two sets 
le—the pub 
ns and com: 
fforts of the 
favorable to 
2 
clearly seen 


— 
— 


in the heated debates aroused by two questions which 
had not been sufficiently considered at Dumbarton 
Oaks, and therefore made a belated appearance on 
the agenda: the relationship of regional to collective 
security, and arrangements for international trustee- 
ship. In both instances it is clear that all nations are 
haunted by the fear that international organization 
may not afford them adequate security against ag- 
gression, and are loath to give up such security meas- 


ures as they have already adopted, or such assets of 


power as they already possess until the efficacy of 
the international organization has been demonstrated 
by experience. 

A compromise formula on regional arrangements 
was reached on May 20, which assures every re- 
gional group an opportunity to take measures of self- 
defense if an attack against one of its members 
occurs before the Security Council has taken the 
“necessary’’ measures to deal with the aggressor. 
This agreement has the advantage of avoiding speci- 
fic references to the Act of Chapultepec, and of as- 
serting the thesis, vigorously supported by the United 
States delegation, that the international organization 
must take precedence over regional security arrange- 
ments. 

TRUSTEESHIP AND STRATEGIC BASES. The 
trusteeship issue, which was only raised on the 
eve of the Conference, with the result that many 
delegations had not been adequately prepared to con- 
sider it, has also revealed the struggle that is being 
waged between national and international security 
concepts. The proposal originally made by the 
United States for a distinction between strategic and 
non-strategic areas has not seemed practical to many 
delegations. And an attempt has been made to recon- 
cile the views of this country—which, with the Jap- 
anese islands in mind, stressed the strategic aspects 
of territories taken from enemy states—with those 
of Britain, which declared that its policy toward 
colonies had always been that of a trustee, and em- 
phasized its concern for the welfare of the inhabi- 
tants of dependent areas. 

The working paper submitted by Commander 


Page Three 


Stassen on May 16 represented a compromise be- 
tween the various views expressed on the subject. 
The most important points in this paper are that 
nations which receive territories taken from enemy 
states at future peace conferences will apparently be 
free to decide whether they will place these terri- 
tories under the international system of trusteeship; 
that it will be the duty of the state administering the 
trust territory “to insure that the territory shall play 
its part in the maintenance of international peace 
and security”—thus permitting its fortification and 
use as a strategic base, which was not the case under 
the League of Nations mandates system and that 
the United Nations concerned should develop “self- 
government in forms appropriate to the varying cir- 
cumstances of each territory’ —without mention of 
eventual independence. (The British have contended 
that independence, urged by Russia and China, does 
not necessarily insure either self-government or 
security, and on May 17 announced the grant of self- 
government to Burma as an example of the policies 
they plan to follow in the colonies regained from 
Japan.) Should the proposals drafted by Commander 
Stassen be adopted, the trusteeship system may prove 
less adequate than the League mandates system 
which made it obligatory for the victors in World 
War I to place the mandates assigned to them under 
the aegis of the League of Nations. 


In weighing the achievements of the Conference, 
it must be constantly borne in mind that the emphasis 
here is not on ideal solutions which might not prove 
feasible in practice, but on hard-headed, practical 
measures to achieve security. Much as the small coun- 
tries would prefer an international organization in 
which they could play a more decisive part, many of 
them have come to the conclusion that their best hope 
of security depends on continued cooperation be- 
tween the United States, Britain and Russia. That is 
why, for the time being, they are less concerned with 
what happens at San Francisco than with the out- 
come of the proposed Big Three meeting. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


MIDDLE WEST FOCUSES ATTENTION ON RELATIONS WITH RUSSIA 


By BLAIR BOLLES 


(The following article was written by Mr. Bolles en 
route to San Francisco, to attend the United Nations 
Conference on International Organization as an ac- 
credited press representative of the Foreign Policy 
Association. } 

DENVER.—The Middle Westerner today asks only 
one question about foreign affairs—what are Russia’s 
intentions? In a five-day trip the question has been 
asked again and again, in St. Louis, Minneapolis, St. 
Paul, Omaha and Denver. It comes from the con- 
ductor on the trains, from the casual eating com- 


panion in the diner, from the businessman and law- 
yer, the working man and the girl behind the cigar 
counter. 

HOPE FOR GOOD RELATIONS. The question 
is put earnestly, not captiously. The war has so modi- 
fied isolationism in the Mississippi and Missouri Val- 
leys that only a few Congressmen last fall dared 
campaign on platforms urging American withdrawal 
from world affairs. Most of the men and women in 
the central part of the United States, furthermore, 
are trying to steel themselves against disillusion in 
foreign affairs. Newspapers like the St. Louis Post- 


Dispatch, St. Paul Pioneer Press and Minneapolis 
Star-Journal have succeeded in their constant effort 
to stress, first, the need for a continuing United States 
role as a politically active world power and, second, 
the slowness and irregularity which must mark the 
progress of the United States or any other state to- 
ward its goals in foreign relations. The St. Paul Dis- 
patch scored a point against disillusion in an editorial 
on May 14 by urging that we “learn to disagree” 
with Russia. 


In the Middle West bewilderment has replaced 
isolationism and disillusion. The same editorial writ- 
er who, in print, tells his readers that the future of 
peace depends on the nature of relations between the 
United States and the Soviet Union, discloses private- 
ly his own inability to understand why the Russians 
failed to compose the differences with this country 
and Britain over the nature of the Polish govern- 
ment, why the 16 Poles from the underground were 
arrested, why the Soviets acted alone in encouraging 
the establishment of a government in Austria. The 
compromises which Russia has accepted at the 
United Nations Conference in San Francisco fail to 
erase the puzzled concern over these issues. 


This concern about the Soviet Union reflects the 
vitality of the idealism inherent in the American ap- 
proach to international relations, for at no point has 
Russian policy in Europe touched directly our vital 
interest. It reflects, at the same time, a lack of under- 
standing of conditions before the war in most of the 
southeastern European countries where Soviet influ- 
ence today is most apparent. The idealists wish that 
in Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Rumania the popula- 
tions themselves might make a sovereign choice of 
their governments through independent ballot. It is 
forgotten that before the war dictatorial political 
influences controlled those three countries in the in- 
terest of minor fractions of the whole populations, 
and that most of the men and women in those coun- 


For an example of the unsettled state of colonial 
questions and a survey of the United States attitude 
toward one section of the Far East, READ— 


FRANCE AND THE FUTURE OF 
INDO-CHINA 
by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25¢ 


May 15 issue of ForzIGN Pouicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscriptions $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


Page Four 


ee 


tries lack the experience necessary for the conduct of 
political democracy as we know it. However firm. 
handed the régimes in those countries may be today, 
they employ a revolutionary tactic that is part of an 
effort to establish a political system beneficial to the 
masses rather than the privileged. 

DANGER OF INADEQUATE INFORMA. 
TION. Yet the Russians will continue to arouse sus. 
picious bewilderment in this part of the United 
States so long as they bar Allied newspapermen from 
the areas of greatest Soviet influence. A lawyer in $¢, 
Paul wondered if this news policy reflected a sense 
of doubt in the Russian official mind about Russia's 
own strength, but the average observer rather tends 
to see something sinister in the restrictions on access 
to information. The United States government may 
have fed the growing doubt about the sincerity of 
Russia's intentions to cooperate fully and freely with 
other states after the war by its blunt reaction to the 
arrest of the 16 Poles and to the creation of the Aus. 
trian government. It is seldom suggested that the 
Poles might in fact be dangerously unfriendly to 
Russia or that the political situation in Austria might 
have required the immediate creation of a govern 
ment. The great interest in the Middle West in the 
Russian question is born of real hope for a lasting, 
cooperative peace. Yet while public opinion earnestly 
examines the development of broader Russian poli- 
cies, attention is also riveted on Germany. Whether 
the United States, Britain and Russia can successfully 
cooperate in the difficult task of occupying that de- 
feated country remains as the crucial test of Allied 
unity, so necessary for cooperation in the years ahead, 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Bases Overseas, by George Weller. New York, Harcourt, 
Brace, 1944. $3.50 


The Chicago Daily News foreign correspondent outlines 
the history of our foreign policy and charts its future by 
centering attention on the necessity of American acquisi- 
tion of bases abroad. The argument is forceful, but little 
attention is given to the possibility of either internation- 
alizing bases or organizing world security within the 
framework of a United Nations organization. 


Full Employment in a Free Society, by William H. Bev- 
eridge. New York, W. W. Norton, 1945. $3.75 


The author of the famed Beveridge Report on the Social 
Services in Britain expounds the economic principles of 
full employment in the present volume. Following closely 
the Keynesian analysis of the cause of unemployment, his 
proposals make possible the retention of private enterprise 
while offering no block to the socialization of industry 
where necessary. The three-fold aim of Beveridge’s plan 
is to maintain total capital expenditure, control the loca- 
tion of industry, and secure the organized mobility of labor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 32, May 25, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Prank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lagt, Secretary; Vera MicHeres Dean, Editor. Entered 4 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


ps 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


1918 


I 


Vou. X 


En Ro 
that tl 
intern< 
it becc 
uable 
tunity 
of the 
war, t 
terms 
ward] 
cedure 
existir 
abeyat 
the lo 
ment « 
who | 
Charte 
But it 
know 
keep ¢ 
ing m 

U.S 
The 1 
ence | 
tween 
evitab 


encou 


report 
flicts 
in de 
ment 
wide 
and F 
far th 
tries | 
coope 
has a 
whict 


