by 1946 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


rf + 
° > 
VOAavers +. af te ‘ 
we Siey ope ; . 
209 ean 
“ee8 
ae 


re A 1% 
* > Ba fe AW? 
7 ran 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorpotated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Avueust 2, 1946 


ECONOMIC QUESTIONS PARAMOUNT AT PEACE CONFERENCE 


PRRNIOBICAL Row > 

— GBABRAL LIBRA) 
d sou UNIV. oF Mich 
Truman} —1946 

the condi. 

pears that 

at country 

essentially 

recipient 

meet bal. 

ficult peri 

— indus 

d off; z. 

st inCrease 

1. Accord. 

ommerce 

road ma} 

ding some} Vou. XXV, No. 42 

vestments} 

bt will be 

O foreign 

intergoy. _ general peace conference of twenty-one na- 
id service tions, participants in the war against the Axis 
effect this} in Europe, opened in Paris on July 29 in an atmos- 
lars; this} phere heavy with mounting tension between Russia 
2 in due | and the Western powers. In a fundamental sense, as 
om them) Dr. Herbert V. Evatt, Australia’s fighting Foreign 
ates and, | Minister, pointed out in a broadcast of July 15, the 
or Wash.| peace settlement drafted by the Big Four and now 
n in tarig| Submitted for review to seventeen smaller nations, 
nic polig had already been determined by the wartime com- 
ts to im | mitments of the great powers and by post-war de- 
financing velopments on the continent. Since Germany and 
Ye repaid Austria are not on the Paris agenda, discussion per- 
> clear—| force will have to be limited to the problems of 
ign trade Italy and Eastern Europe. If we look at these prob- 
to cover| lems with a minimum of wishful thinking, what are 
ts cease | the main trends we discern? 
of capital RUSSIA’S ECONOMIC STAKE IN EASTERN 
flow de | EUROPE. From the point of view of the Paris con- 
weakness | ferees, the most important clauses of the draft 
too soon { treaties with Finland, Rumania, Hungary and Bul- 
no assut-| garia, largely modeled on the armistice agreements 
ican cap| of 1944, are not those dealing with territorial 
structure | changes, which have already been consummated, but 
creditor those concerning reparations. Under the armistice 
| stability | agreements, each of the first three of these countries 
ill ensue, pledged itself to pay $300,000,000 in reparations 
with ac | to Russia (in the case of Hungary also to Czechoslo- 
controls | vakia and Yugoslavia) over a period of years, Bul- 
political | garia being excepted, presumably because of the 

readiness of its government to collaborate with Mos- 

HESON cow. Since the conclusion of the armistices Russia has 
plicy.) been collecting reparations from the Axis satellites, 
—— mostly in the form of their existing assets and the 
a Ge | current production of their fields and factories. In 
lars a Year. | 


addition, Russian armies of occupation have been 
living ‘‘off the land” in Rumania, Hungary and Bul- 


garia, thus markedly reducing the amount of food 
available to the people of these countries. 

The United States has long been disturbed by the 
effect these reparation and occupation burdens 
would have on the economies of the Axis satellites, 
and finally expressed both its dissatisfaction and its 
fears in a blunt note addressed to the Soviet gov- 
ernment on July 23 by General W. Bedell Smith, 
American Ambassador to Moscow. In this note Gen- 
eral Smith estimated that Russia is taking half of 
Hungary’s industrial production (in the case of 
some items as much as 80 or 90 per cent) ; declared 
that this situation is directly responsible for the dan- 
gerous inflation suffered by Hungary; refuted the 
Russian claim that the United States had weakened 
the country’s economy by retaining some of its assets 
abroad; and stated that, on the contrary, the United 
States is on the point of returning $32,000,000 in 
gold which a wartime Hungarian government had 
sent to Austria for safekeeeping. Moreover, General 
Smith added that the Soviet government had rejected 
American proposals for cooperation by the Big 
Three in the rehabilitation of Hungary and in 
restoration of traffic on the Danube. The problems 
of freedom of trade in Eastern Europe, and freedom 
of navigation on the Danube, on which the Coun- 
cil of Foreign Ministers found it impossible to agree, 
are bound to be among the important unsettled 
points to be discussed at the Paris conference. 


RUSSIA’S NEED FOR GOODS. It would be 
easier to deal with these problems if it could be as- 
sumed that Russia’s principal objective in Eastern Eu- 
rope and the Balkans is to disrupt the economies of 
the Axis satellites in order to pave the way for their 
communization and possibly their eventual integra- 
tion into the U.S.S.R. As a matter of fact, however, 
Russia actually needs all the food, consumers’ goods 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


on git r . 


wae & ee 


oe See. 


er oe 


; 
4 
4 
t: 
4 
i 
et 


and industrial machinery it can obtain to fill the 
needs of its own population. It is willing to pay for 
imports when necessary, as indicated by its trade 
negotiations with Denmark and Sweden. From the 
point of view of the United States, it is unfair for 
Russia to obtain goods from the Axis satellites with- 
out compensation, as it is doing through the collec- 
tion of reparations. It must be borne in mind, how- 
ever, that the United States, whose industrial produc- 
tion was vastly expanded as a result of the war, and 
which suffered no loss of industrial equipment or 
raw materials, does not need reparations, and in any 
case would probably not want to import most of the 
manufactured goods produced in that area. 


At the same time, the Russians themselves are be- 
ginning to realize that their methods of collecting 
reparations cannot, over the long run, win them the 
sympathy of the peoples of occupied countries. They 
will thus be confronted with the problem of either 
withdrawing their occupation forces and moderat- 
ing their economic demands, or else of increasing 
military pressure on their neighbors. What is more 
serious for Russia, mere draining of the resources of 
these countries, without some attempt at their replen- 
ishment and development, will eventually amount 
to killing the goose that laid the golden egg. While 
collection of reparations may tide Russia over the 
arduous first year of readjustment at home, ulti- 
mately there is bound to come a condition of dimin- 
ishing returns in obtaining manufactured goods that 
Russia will urgently need for years to come. 

The resentment felt in occupied countries against 
Russia, however, should not be exaggerated. Many 
of the economic and social changes effected in the 
wake of Russian occupation had been advocated 
long before 1939 by political groups, by no means 
all Communists, who are now in power. If Russia 
can find some way of offering these countries a 
steady market for goods they may not find it pos- 
sible to sell to the United States, it may eventually 
earn the support of large sections of their popula- 
tions. This, for example, seems to be the result of the 


Page Two 


provision in the Italian draft peace treaty concernig) 
the payment by Italy of $100,000,000 worth of rep, 
rations to the U.S.S.R., part of which is to come oy 
of current production, with Russia supplying ¢ 
raw materials. Reports from Italy indicate that th 
Italians, profoundly disillusioned by the failure , 
Britain and the United States to support their coy 
try in the peace negotiations, and to bolster it as; 
potential bulwark against further Russian advancg 
in the Balkans and the Adriatic, are beginning 
wonder whether they should not have sought th 
backing of Russia. 


RESTORATION vs. DESIRE FOR 
CHANGE. Underlying the economic tug of war be 
tween Russia and the Western powers is the unre 
solved conflict all over Europe between those wh 
favor restoration of pre-1939 values and institution; 
and those who had hoped that the war would bring 
about far-reaching changes within and between n 
tions. It is clearly in the interest of Russia to see the 
disappearance, or at least the incapacitation for ac 
tion, of all elements on the continent who are hostile 
to the Soviet system. This creates the danger that 
the process of pursuing so-called Fascists may con 
tinue indefinitely on the pattern of Saturn eternally 
eating his children, with consequent perpetuation 
of civil strife. At the same time it is also clear that 
the war not only sharpened nationalism in every coun. 
try to the point of neurosis, but also failed to bring 
about the inner purification that some had hoped 
for, and that would have proved an important coun. 
terweight to the influence of Communist thought 
The men and women who fought heroically in te 
sistance movements or languished in concentration 
camps for their opposition to native and German, 
Nazism, return to their homelands to find, very fre-| 
quently, those who had weathered the storm with 
relative safety restored to positions of power. Even 
if Russia did not exist, and Karl Marx had never set 
pen to paper, the disillusionment generated by these 
harsh realities might well lead to unrest and te 


SUPPORT OF CHINESE LIBERALS WOULD STRENGTHEN U.S. POSITION 


SHANGHAI—United States policy in China cannot 
be understood or appraised without considering the 
extent to which it is affected by the state of Amer- 
ican-Russian relations. Since Japan’s surrender near- 
ly a year ago relations between the United States 
and Russia in general have been tense both in China 
and the world at large. Moscow’s policy in Man- 
churia has produced an unfavorable impression in 
the United States, while America’s powerful influ- 
ence over the Central Chinese government has 
aroused suspicion in Russia. Each country fears that 
the other wants to control China and to use it in 
future military operations. 


bellion. VERA MICHELES DEAN | 


So far, however, the political initiative in China| 
has been taken by the United States. An American, | 
not a Russian, general came to China to mediate 
American, mot Russian, military equipment ha‘, 
poured into China; Washington, not Moscow, is the| 
capital toward which the Central Chinese govern 
ment looks for economic and political support. This 
means not only that the United States has had af 
extraordinary opportunity to extend its power if 
China, but that it has assumed extraordinary risks. 
At the same time, it should be pointed out that the 
Central government is recognized by Russia, 4 | 


— 


even SY 
munists 
Nankir 
CHA 
politica 
inevital 
lations 
mistak: 
basis 0 
did so 
merely 
a posi 
on its 
tions < 
make 
ern nz 
of the 
anti-R 
ficatio 
in ha 
Russi: 
synon 
civil | 
sired 
Th 
we Cz 
diate 
takes 
peop 
the | 
there 
son | 
forei 
quat 
peor 
enco 
the 1 
Ame 
lead 
cert: 
fron 
S 
of | 


J 


well as by the United States, and that any aid or! 


CONCErnip 
th of rep, 
» come oy 
lying ty 
e that th 
failure Of 
heir Coun: 
ter it as, 
1 advancy 
inning ty 
Ought th 


E FO, 
of war be 
the unre. 
hose who 
stitutions 
yuld bring| 
tween ng! 
to see the 
on for ac 
are hostile 
inger that 


may con 


| eternally’ 
rpetuation 
clear that 
very coun- 
1 to bring 
ad hoped! 
fant coun- 
thought. 
ly in te. 
centration 
| German 
very fre. 
orm with 
wer. Even 
never set 
1 by these 
t and re} 


DEAN 


TION 

in China 
American, 
mediate; 
nent has 
yw, is the 
2 govern | 
ort. This 
s had an 
power if 
ary risks. | 
+ that the | 
ussia, as 

ry aid of | 


—_— 
—_—_ 


even sympathy extended by Russia to Chinese Com- 
munists opposing that government is regarded in 
Nanking as an unfriendly act. 


CHAMPIONS OF STATUS QUO? In using its 

litical initiative in China the United States, while 
inevitably aware of the problems posed by its re- 
Jations with the U.S.S.R., could make no greater 
mistake than to act solely, or even largely, on the 
basis of these relations as they exist at present. If it 
did so, it would be following a negative policy of 
merely opposing another power. What is needed is 
a positive policy of judging the Chinese situation 
on its own intrinsic merits and supporting, in ac- 
tions as well as words, the groups that are likely to 
make this country the more prosperous, more mod- 
ern nation it needs to be for its own sake and that 
of the world. In China, as in many countries, deeply 
anti-Russian sentiment and hostility toward modi- 
fication of the internal status quo frequently go hand 
in hand. Consequently, alignment with the anti- 
Russian elements in China would be virtually 
synonymous with opposition to agrarian reforms, 
civil liberties and enlightened economic policies, de- 
sired by a large section of the nation. 

The strength of the United States is so great that 
we can make mistakes and not pay for them imme- 
diately, but it would be dangerous to think that mis- 
takes carry no price. In the long run the Chinese 
people will be alienated from any one who supports 
the less enlightened elements in their country. It is 
therefore important to grasp without delay the les- 
son that many of us have not yet learned: that in 
foreign relations financial aid is a wholly inade- 
quate substitute for political understanding of the 
peoples with whom we are dealing. The more we 
encourage democracy in China and actively oppose 
the militaristic pro-civil war elements, the more will 
American influence grow. But to back unpopular 
leaders for reasons of international policy is the most 
certain method of turning the Chinese people away 
from the United States. 


SEEKING A COMMON GROUND. As a matter 
of fact, a policy of increasing American prestige 


Page Three 


Just Published— 


ISSUES BEFORE PARIS PEACE CON.- 
FERENCE by Vera Micheles Dean 


25 cents 


August 1 issue of FOREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month 
Subscription $5; to FPA members, $3 


through encouragement of progressive Chinese 
groups would have a beneficial effect on American- 
Russian relations. It cannot be assumed that the 
United States and the Soviet Union will define 
“progressive groups” in precisely the same fashion, 
but an understanding that militaristic elements on 
either side favoring policies that lead to civil war 
are not included in this phrase would help to create 
a common ground for cooperation. At present our 
actions encourage militaristic leaders in the Central 
government, although our stated policy is quite 
properly one of conditional support of that govern- 
ment premised on the achievement of democratic 
unity and a coalition government. 

The United States does not want a Communist 
government in power in China, but if there is to be 
any true coalition régime, the Chinese Communists, 
who have taken the lead in agrarian and many other 
reforms, will inevitably play an important role. Yet 
it would be extremely shortsighted to see the Chi- 
nese situation only in terms of two extremes—the 
Kuomintang right wing and the Communists—and 
to overlook the great mass of Chinese people, as 
well as many leaders, who stand in between. In the 

ranks of the government, the Kuomintang, the lib- 
eral Democratic League, and the non-partisans there 
are large numbers of men and women who, because 
of their democratic political philosophy, love of 
country, and the instinct of self-preservation, are 
deeply opposed to civil war. They desire, in vary- 
ing degrees, to see an all-party Chinese government 
follow the path of reform. 

Persons in this group who serve in the govern- 
ment or the Kuomintang do not hold controlling 
positions, but they would be stronger if American 
actions did not encourage their opponents. The 
United States is unquestionably right in wishing to 
preserve the form of the Central government as the 
framework for a new Chinese unity, but it would 
be an error to identify this structure with the gov- 
ernmental leaders who happen to prevail at any par- 
ticular time, just as it would be a mistake to regard 
the United States government as the peculiar prop- 
erty of any specific leaders or political party. It is 
clear, however, that with every passing day our 
policy of large-scale material support of the powers- 
that-be in China is driving the middle group either 
to the right or to the left and making the alternatives 
in this country sharper than before. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(The third in a series of three articles, based on impressions gath- 
ered by Mr. Rosinger in the course of travel in various parts of 


China.) 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 42, AuGust 2, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELEs DEAN, 
Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


EE | 21 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


PARTITION NO SOLUTION OF PALESTINE PROBLEM 


The proposal of the Anglo-American Cabinet 
Committee that the United States and the United 
Kingdom undertake to partition Palestine into Jew- 
ish, Arab and central federal states poses a difficult 
political problem for President Truman. It also 
raises again the possibility of further delay in rescu- 
ing even a small number of central Europe's Jewry. 
Moreover, because of objections already voiced by 
both Zionists and Arabs to partition of Palestine, 
the new plan will further embitter the troubled 
Middle Eastern area. 

PROBLEM OF THE 100,000. The proposal in 
the form the Committee submitted it to the United 
States government on July 25 would probably reduce 
to a minimum the disturbing anti-Semitic outbursts 
of the Arabs and the violent anti-Britishism of the 
Zionist Terrorists. For it would limit forever the 
Jewish immigration to Palestine by limiting the 
space that Jews can occupy, thereby ending both Jew- 
ish hopes that violence might win them concessions, 
and Arab fears of Jewish domination. But it would 
force the postponement, perhaps forever, of the 
emigration from Europe of Jews in the displaced 
persons’ camps. It would also jeopardize the pros- 
pects of the 100,000 Jews whom President Truman 
last September requested British Prime Minister 
Attlee to admit at once into Palestine, and to whom, 
according to the Anglo-American Committee of In- 
quiry on April 20, certificates of immigration should 
be issued “immediately.” 

The President made his proposal to Attlee for 
the immigration of 100,000 more because of his 
concern for Europe than for the Middle East. Yet 
the Cabinet Committee proposals would authorize 
the migration of the 100,000 only after it is decided 
that the partition and the other suggested consti- 
tutional arrangements will be put into effect. This 
postponement not only links the immigration to 
constitutional reform, whereas Truman had advo- 
cated it as a separate step, but endangers the possi- 
bility that this immigration will ever take place. 
Should the constitutional arrangements proposed by 
the partition plan go into effect, future Arab sup- 
port in the federal government for further Jewish 
immigration would be most unlikely. 

For those reasons, it is possible that Truman will 
on the Cabinet Committee proposals only on 
condition that the migration of the 100,000 is au- 
thorized at once. The obstacles in the way of such 
a recommendation are that Henry F. Grady, the rep- 
resentative of Secretary of State James F. Byrnes on 
the Committee, has strongly advocated American 


acceptance of the proposals in their present form, 
and that President Truman has not in the past in. 
dicated he would provide the military support 
which Prime Minister Attlee has asked the United 
States to give to Britain if the 100,000 migrate. Ye 
another obstacle is the fact that the Office of Near 
Eastern and African Affairs in the State Department, 
which deals with Palestine, has in the past been out 
of sympathy with the proposal for the migration of 
100,000, which Truman submitted to Attlee with. 
out the knowledge of that Office. At present, the 
British permit the migration of 1,500 Jews a month 
into Palestine. 


PLAN OF BRITISH ORIGIN. Secretary of State 
Byrnes discussed the London proposals with Prime 
Minister Attlee in Paris last weekend. Truman will 
receive Mr. Byrnes’ recommendations and, after 
study of their political implications in Europe, the | 
Middle East and the United States, will either ac. | 
cept them or, as at present seems likely, propose 
their modification. The suggestion for partition came 
from the British members of the Cabinet Commit. | 
tee, although the British government ten years ago | 
turned down another partition proposed by the Peel 
Commission. The new proposals have their origin in 
the statement which British Foreign Secretary Ernest | 
Bevin made last November 13, to the effect that | 
Palestine in time will become a self-governing Pal- | 
estinian, not Jewish, state. The mandate under | 
which Britain administers the government affairs of , 
Palestine calls on the mandatory to “secure the es- | 
tablishment of the Jewish national home’’ and also 
to protect the “civil and religious rights’’—but not 
the political rights—“‘of all the inhabitants of 
Palestine.” 

There is little hope that Britain’s new plan will 
“solve” the Palestine problem. For by now most ob- 
servers are keenly aware that there may be no final, | 
all-embracing solution which can be regarded 4s | 
realistic in terms of Middle Eastern politics. The | 
Cabinet Committee's plans must now be submitted | 
to both Jewish and Arab representatives, but it is 
doubtful whether joint discussions will follow. The 
new turn of events in the mandate, like those in 
Egypt, demonstrate Britain’s determination to devis¢ | 
some more permanent arrangement. Perhaps unde 
the circumstances Jews and Arabs will be ready to 
adopt a modified partition scheme. On the other 
hand, the whole issue may yet be submitted to the , 
United Nations, either by the Arabs or some other 
member nation. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


| 
ol 


ate. Yet 
of Near 
irtment, 
een Out 
ation of 
se with. 
ent, the 
a month 


of State 
h Prime 
nan will 
d, after | 
ope, the | 
ither ac: | 
propose 
ion came 
Commit: 
ears ago 
the Peel 
Origin in | 
ry Ernest | 
fect that 
ung Pal- | 
e under | 
affairs of , 
e the es. | 
and also 
—but not 
tants of 


plan will | 
most ob- 
no final, | 
arded as 
tics. The 
submitted 
but it 1s 
low. The 
those in | 
to devise 
aps under | 
- ready to 
the other 
ed to the : 
yme other 


BOLLES 


| 
| 
7 


’ 


A Special Meeting of the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


will be held at the office of the Association, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y., uaa 
on Tuesday, August 27, 1946, at 4:30 P.M. 
W. W. LANCASTER, Chairman of the Boay 
— 
PURPOSE OF SPECIAL MEETING F 
At a meeting on July 17, 1946, the Board of Directors, considering that salaries, paper and printing costs, rents, and — 


practically all other expenses of the Association have very greatly increased since 1919; that membership dues have not 
been increased since that time; that additional income is needed from Regular and Associate Memberships, none of which 
re it is estimated, pays at present for its proportionate cost to the Association; that these increases in income 
are deemed necessary to ey the Association to expand, as well as continue, its usefulness for the objectives expressed in 
the Constitution; adopted the following Resolutions: 


(1) “RESOLVED that the Board of Directors of the Foreign Policy Association recommends to the members of the Asso. Vou. X3 
ciation that Article VII of the Constitution, paragraph numbered 4, now reading ‘Regular Members, those persons who pay 
the regular annual dues of $5’, be amended to read: ‘Regular Members, those persons who pay the regular annual dues of SM 
$6’; and that a special meeting of the Association be, and hereby is, called to be held at the office of the Association, 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y., on Tuesday, August 27, 1946, at 4:30 o'clock in the afternoon, for the purpose LT 
of voting on the adoption of said amendment; and that notice of such special meeting, specifying its purpose and set- A 


ting forth the proposed amendment, shall be sent to the members of the Association through the official publication of d . 
the Association, at least two weeks before the proposed amendment is to be voted upon. The purpose of the special meet. | @° *™ 
ing is to vote on the proposed amendment. | conferé 
| gates al 

The following Resolutions are listed only for your further information. | preced 


(2) “RESOLVED further by the Board, acting under authority granted to it in Article VII of the Constitution, that if | with tl 
and when the amendment referred to in Paragraph I above is adopted, the dues of the Associate Members be increased | and th 
from $3 to $4.” determ 


(3) “RESOLVED further that all Regular and Associate Members in good standing on the day on which the amendment | cipal 4 
referred to in Paragraph I above is adopted (if adopted) shall have the privilege of one year’s renewal at their present the Ni 
rates, respectively.” ing igt 


(4) “RESOLVED further that increases in dues mentioned in the above Resolutions shall be effective September 1, 1946,” 
r 

Please note that proxies cannot be used unless | vice 0} 

1. received at National Headquarters not later than Friday, August 23, 1946 | in effc 

2. the proxy returned is signed by the member | the 4 
- sma 

Only members of the Association who are citizens of the United States have voting privileges. wr 


Please cut along this line and sign and return the proxy to the office of the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, Ukrai 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Russic 

matic 
EE EEE ILS. A, EO 4 impor 


| BIC 

It is urgently requested that you sign and return this | _ 
| the s 
Minis 
office 
Augu 
Is of 
I nominate HERBERT L. May and CAROLYN MARTIN, or either of them, as my proxy to vote for me on the question of | subm 
the adoption of the proposed amendment to Article VII of the Constitution at the special meeting of the Foreign Policy | States 
Association on August 27, 1946. and ¢ 
| by th 

that ; 

tells vitinvcvoscninsubbeoccnvevesevvenseseste EE Se ee | —as 


proxy if you do not intend being present at this meeting. 


PROXY 


a te rs 


