ber 29 
m the 
ule on 
a tem- 
recom- 
“quest; 
> defies 


ber 29, 
ly un 
which 
1 addi. 
to take 
e Bank 
se will 
‘ime of 
{SON 


non-vio- 
2 and te 
ons and 
apter on 


Under. 
$5.00 
‘tates ti 
in, 1987, 


interest 
. Hick 
ppomat 
5 pages 
lable, it 
ch, mon 
chapter} 





ud F 
, Lea 
nivers 


ratisti 
eague 
ible thi 
ch wo 


rman é 
, Haver, 


n to th 
Carnegi 
ations 
discussé 
summary 
; and th 
osts 
techni 
1g 


_ Natios 
class matt} 





| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


‘99 


Entered as second- 
FER OOM class matter December 
dEn IPRARY 2, 1921, at the Post 


a a 





Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














Vou. XVII, No. 14 


JANUARY 28, 1938 





—_—_ 


EUROPE IN CRISIS, by Vera Micheles Dean 


“Europe in Crisis is an excellent, brief but compre- 
hensive and lucid survey of the problems by which 
humanity is faced today. The two concluding paragraphs 
are wise, moderate and to the point.” 


—Hans Kohn 


25 cents a copy 


General Library 
TT Se » 2 > . 
vaiversity of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











FASCIST DICTATORS COURT DANUBIAN COUNTRIES 





5 haw rapid strides made by the anti-democratic 
and anti-Semitic régime of the Rumanian Premier, 
Octavian Goga, has precipitated a new shift in the 
diplomatic alignments of the Danubian region. 
Striking while the iron was hot, the Goga Cabinet 
promulgated a series of measures intended to bar 
Jews from trade, industry and the professions, and to 
expel all Jews, except those who can prove that 
they resided in Rumania before 1919—leaving the 
solution of the resulting refugee problem to the 
League of Nations, whose right to invoke Rumania’s 
minority treaties on behalf of the Jews was mean- 
while denied. In this task M. Goga unexpectedly 
enlisted the support of Zelea Codreanu’s Iron Guard, 
which had previously questioned the fervor of the 
Premier's anti-Semitism. The Premier also obtained 
the full support of King Carol II, who on January 18 
dissolved the Parliament elected a month earlier be- 
fore it had even assembled, and announced new elec- 
tions for March, under an electoral procedure which, 
in a country largely illiterate, cannot fail to play 
into the hands of the government. While all oppo- 
sition parties—from the National Democrats of ex- 
Premier Tatarescu to the National Peasants of Dr. 
Maniu — have protested against these unconstitu- 
tional moves, the opposition is seriously split by 
ideological differences. 


The Rumanian situation had prompt repercussions 
on the conference of the Rome protocol powers— 
Austria, Hungary and Italy—held in Budapest on 


an J@Nuary 10-12. Italy, which once came bearing gifts 


of trade concessions and support of Hungarian re- 
Visionism, arrived in the guise of an empty-handed 
petitioner. During the past year Mussolini has ef- 
fected a strategic retreat from Central Europe, con- 
centrating his activities in the Mediterranean, and 
has bestowed favors once granted to Austria and 
Hungary on his new friends, Rumania and Yugo- 


slavia, whose foodstuffs, raw materials and strategic 
position on the Mediterranean and Black Sea seem 
more valuable to Italy. Count Ciano, Italian Foreign 
Minister, sought to persuade Hungary that it should 
abandon its grievances regarding Rumanian treat- 
ment of the Hungarian minority, thus facilitating 
Rumania’s entrance into the fascist fold. He also 
hoped to obtain Austro-Hungarian endorsement of 
three policies favored by Italy—withdrawal from 
the League, de jure recognition of General Franco, 
and participation in the anti-communist front 
formed by Germany, Italy and Japan. 

Italy’s former pensioners, however, adopted an un- 
expectedly firm tone in their dealings with Count 
Ciano. Chancellor Schuschnigg— who has not for- 
gotten the cavalier treatment accorded to him by 
Mussolini at their Venice conference in 1937—be- 
lieves that Italy, no longer a bulwark against Ger- 
man penetration in Austria, is a dangerous stumbling- 
block to Hapsburg restoration, which he regards as 
a possible alternative to Anschluss. While the Hun- 
garian Premier, M. Daranyi, favors a pro-Italian 
orientation, he fears that Mussolini, in his eagerness 
to win Goga’s favor, may sell Hungary’s revisionist 
aspirations for a mess of Rumanian pottage. The 
emergence of Goga, whose policy is not only anti- 
Semitic but anti-foreign, has not reassured Hungary, 
which may look for help to Czechoslovakia, where 
Premier Hodza has shown a statesmanlike desire to 
improve the lot of the Hungarian minority. 


Under the circumstances Austria and Hungary, 
while paying lip-service to the desirability of coop- 
eration with Germany and Italy in the Danubian 
area, and agreeing to recognize the Franco régime, 
refused to undertake additional commitments. In 
spite of their well-known hostility to communism, 
they declined to join the anti-communist pact for 
fear of alienating the democratic régimes of France, 








——oo————— Page Two 


Britain and Czechoslovakia, to which they may yet 
turn for support. While continuing to criticize the 
League, they refused to follow Italy's example by 
withdrawing from Geneva. Both feel that Italy is 
using them for its own purposes, ready to throw 
them to the Nazi wolves should a crisis in the Medi- 
terranean force it to liquidate its interests in Central 
Europe. 

In the midst of these readjustments, which may 
fundamentally alter the diplomatic complexion of 
the Danubian region, the most difficult position is 
that of Czechoslovakia, which finds its two part- 
ners—Yugoslavia and Rumania—rapidly drifting to- 
ward Germany. This has caused Premier Hodza to 
7 his efforts for a commercial union of the 
Danubian countries—which appeals to Austria— 
and a moderate policy of reconciliation with the 
Hurgerian minority in Czechoslovakia—which ap- 
peals to Hungary. M. Micescu, Foreign Minister in 
the Goga Cabinet, visited Prague and Belgrade on 
January 10-13—just when the Rome protocol pow- 
ers were meeting in Budapest—in an effort to assure 
Rumania’s allies that, for the time being at least, no 
change was contemplated in foreign policy. His re- 
assurances were apparently less convincing to 
Premier Hodza than to Premier Stoyadinovitch of 
Yugoslavia, who on January 17 paid a week's visit 
to Germany, where he conferred with Hitler regard- 
ing measures of ‘cooperation calculated to serve the 
peace of Europe’”—and inspected German airports 
and arms factories. That Berlin—far more than 
Rome—is the centre of diplomatic moves for expan- 
sion of the Rome-Berlin axis is indicated by the fact 
that Polish Foreign Minister Beck, who has no love lost 
for the League or Czechoslovakia, also visited Hitler, 
and postponed his departure from Berlin to confer 
with Stoyadinovitch. At no time has there been any 
secret about Germany's desire—which antedates 
Hitler—to blaze a trail to the East by way of the 
Balkans. WWhat is not yet clear is whether Italy, by 
its efforts to bring Austria, Hungary, Yugoslavia and 
Rumania under the same diplomatic roof—thus iso- 
lating Czechoslovakia—is working with Germany or 
against it. Europe’s two Caesars may yet come to 
blows over division of the rich spoils of the Balkan 
countries, whose favors both are assiduously courting. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BRITAIN AND EIRE SEEK AN AGREEMENT 


The “Irish problem,” which successive British 
governments since the days of Queen Elizabeth have 
attempted to solve, has once more engaged the at- 
tention of statesmen in London. Following the inau- 
guration on December 29 of a new constitution for 
the Irish Free State, which is now to be known as 
Eire, Premier Eamon de Valera and several of 
his Cabinet colleagues held a three-day confer- 

















ence last week with leaders of the British goy. 
ernment. Although no final agreement was reached 
on the major issues—partition, land annuities, trade 
and defense—the general discussion was sufficiently 
successful to permit more detailed negotiations t 
take place within the next five or six weeks. 

Irish independence was the object of both the cop. 
stitution and de Valera’s subsequent journey ty 
London. Omitting reference to King and Empire, 
the new constitution establishes a virtually autono. 
mous republic, headed by a President, elected fo; 
seven years, and a Prime Minister, or Taoiseach. The 
House of Representatives is elected by proportional 
representation, while the Senate is partly nominated 
by the Prime Minister and partly elected from occu. 
pational groups. Other notable features include the 
prohibition of divorce; use of the referendum, com. 
pulsory for amendments and permissive for legisla. 
tion; and judicial veto powers for the Supreme Court, 

The question of partition, shrouded in century. 
old religious hatreds, was temporarily shelved by 
the conference, although de Valera made the “rein. 
tegration of the national territory” an effective bar- 
gaining point. The six counties of Northern Ireland, 
predominantly Protestant, were retained as part of 
the United Kingdom in 1921, when the twenty-six 
Catholic counties achieved Dominion status as the 
Irish Free State. Through frequent resort to emer- 
gency decrees, the Ulster Prime Minister, Viscount 
Craigavon, has maintained a semi-dictatorship in 
Northern Ireland for seventeen years—the oldest 
administration in post-war Europe. The Dublin gov. 
ernment charges that the rights of the Catholic 
minority constituting one-third of the Ulster popula 
tion have been curtailed through gerrymandering, 
economic and political discrimination, and violent 
repression. To de Valera’s demands for annexation, 
Craigavon and the Protestants reply that 2 
based on oppression would lead to constan 
tion. By dissolving Parliament on Janua: and 
announcing a general election on February 9, 
Viscount Craigavon hopes to consolidate the serps 
population against the annexation proposals and to} 
divert the resentments against his government which 
have accumulated since the last election in 1933. 
Although the British government insists that national 


ULL 








union depends on free acceptance by Ulster, it 
will probably seek to ameliorate the position of the| 
Catholic minority there, in order to appease de Valera | 
and forestall a possible appeal to the League of 
Nations. 

The present spirit of compromise affords an ex: 
cellent opportunity for settlement of outstanding 
economic and military issues. Both Ireland and 
England have suffered from the trade war which 
began in 1932, when de Valera introduced high 


(Continued on Page 4) 








PS Oo 


fn po = * OO 








© bar- 
eland, 
art of 
\ty-Six 
is the 
emer: 
;count 
ip in 
oldest 
1 gov- 
tholic 
opula: 
ering, 
iolent 
cation, 
union 
€ volu 
uty 9, 
Ulster 
and to 
which 
1933. 
ational 
ter, it 
of the 
Valera 
rue of 


an eX: 
anding 
d and 
which 
1 high 





Washington News Letter 














a 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JAN. 25—Germany anxious for trade treaty with 
U.S. It is no secret here that the German govern- 
ment anticipates with considerable anxiety the con- 
clusion of trade agreements by the United States 
with Czechoslovakia and Britain. With the single 
exception of Australia, Germany is the only country 
which, owing to its discrimination against American 
commerce, has been deprived by the State Depart- 
ment of the benefits of tariff concessions accorded 
under the trade reciprocity program. While the duty 
reductions granted to other countries have up to the 
present affected adversely only about $10,000,000 
of Germany's exports to the United States, the two 
pending agreements with major industrial powers 
will undoubtedly cut more heavily into the volume 
of German-American trade. Germany is the second 
or third largest source of supply for many of the 
import items on which Britain and Czechoslovakia 
are expected to obtain concessions. 


During the last two years the German government 
has made several informal overtures looking toward 
the conclusion of at least a provisional most-favored- 
nation agreement, but officials of the Embassy have 
been discouraged by the negative attitude of the 
State Department. According to the prevailing 
opinion in the Department, no compromise is pos- 
sible between the divergent commercial policies pur- 
sued by the United States and Germany. The com- 
prehensive system whereby the Reich controls the 

lume and direction of its foreign trade is held to 
be inspired primarily by the desire to become as self- 
sufficient as possible and to canalize the exchange of 
goods along bilateral channels. The Hull program, 
on the other hand, seeks to free trade from govern- 
mental restrictions and all artificial shackles on the 
direction of its flow. American officials are skeptical 
about Germany's willingness to follow in practice 
the principle of equality of treatment embodied in 
the most-favored-nation clause. 


While the Germans claim that their limited supply 
of foreign exchange and gold makes immediate 
abandonment of the existing restrictions on foreign 
commerce impossible, they profess a desire to work 
gradually toward the ideal of freer trade. In its de- 
sire to secure equal treatment in the American mar- 
ket, the German government is willing to enter into 
an agreement similar to the provisional arrangement 
concluded on December 16, 1937 between the United 





States and Italy. In this accord detailed provisions 
were included to make the most-favored-nation 
clause applicable to new types of foreign trade regu- 
lations such as quotas, foreign exchange allotments, 
import monopolies and the like. Germany is prob- 
ably also prepared to follow the current practice of 
the Soviet Union in undertaking to purchase every 
year a fixed minimum quantity of American goods. 

Even if the economic difficulties could be over- 
come, formidable political obstacles would still stand 
in the way of a German-American agreement. State 
Department circles fear that the powerful opposi- 
tion which would probably be aroused throughout 
the country by the negotiation of an agreement bene- 
ficial to Nazi Germany might jeopardize the whole 
trade agreement program. This antipathy to any 
commercial dealings with the Nazi régime is un- 
doubtedly shared by certain officials. These are 
convinced that under present circumstances any 
trade arrangement would simply strengthen Ger- 
many’s foreign exchange position and enable it to 
increase its economic and military armament in 
preparation for aggressive warfare. This considera- 
tion did not prevent the negotiation of a temporary 
accord with Italy. A political factor, however, has 
been introduced into the negotiation of a permanent 
Italo-American commercial agreement by our in- 
sistence that it take the form of a treaty, as dis- 
tinguished from an executive agreement which need 
not be submitted to the Senate. The conclusion of 
such a treaty has been delayed by the refusal of the 
American government to accept the Italian conten- 
tion that an accord of this type would have to be 
signed in the name of Victor Emmanuel as both King 
of Italy and Emperor of Ethiopia 

Other American officials, however, consider it 
dangerous to link our trade program in any way 
with political considerations. Neither France nor 
Britain, for example, allow their political differences 
to stand in the way of maintaining ordinary com- 
mercial relations with Germany. It is considered 
doubtful that the conclusion of a trade arrangement 
would really affect the Reich’s determination to go 
to war or to preserve peace. Moreover, to make com- 
mercial agreements dependent on the acceptance of 
political conditions may be regarded as incompatible 
with the fundamental objective of the Hull pro- 
gram, which is to ease international tension through 
economic appeasement. Protagonists of this view 
also hold that a German-American agreement would 
be mutually beneficial. They point out that Ameri- 








——— = 
ome 








can agriculture has already suffered severely from 
the drastic reduction of German purchases in the 
United States which cut our exports from $410,- 
449,000 in 1929 to $100,584,789 in 1936. While 
trade with Germany revived about 20 per cent last 
year under the new compensation procedure devised 
at the beginning of 1937, it remains far below the 


1929 level. JouN C. DEWILDE 


Congress weighs foreign issues. The central issue 
of the impending Congressional debate on the con- 
struction program which the President is expected 
to submit is not whether the United States should 
strengthen its defense, but how the Administration 
proposes to use these new armaments. Last week, 
for almost the first time since the President’s Chicago 
speech, Congress began to have misgivings as to the 
direction of the Administration’s foreign policy. 
“Secretary Hull’s letter to Vice President Garner, 
affirming our paramount interest in defending “or- 
derly processes” in international relationships, merely 
pap pointed questions in Congressional circles, 

ut the sending of three American cruisers to Singa- 
pore aroused open apprehensions. These apprehen- 
sions were heightened during the week by privately 
circulated reports that the manoeuvres at Singapore 
are intended to lay the basis for possible joint naval 
action between the United States and Britain in the 
Far East. Whether or not these reports are true, the 





Page Four ——. 





es 


reaction in Congress was to strengthen the hand of 
those forces which supported neutrality legislation 
and the Ludlow amendment, and to increase the 
caution of the Administration in pushing its arma- 


ment program. WILLiaM T. STONE 





BRITAIN AND EIRE SEEK AN AGREEMENT 
(Continued from Page 2) 
tariffs to promote self-sufficiency and cancelled pay. 
ment on land annuities amounting to £5,000,000, 
The British sought compensation through special 
duties on Irish farm imports, with the result that 
Anglo-Irish trade has been severely curtailed. The 
inability of the Irish to accomplish a prosperous 
autarkie and Britain’s desire to protect its western 
flank in the event of a European war have favored 
the cause of mutual tariff reduction. The British 
government may accept termination of the land an. 
nuities, provided the Irish agree to spend the 
equivalent amount on air and land defenses, pur- 
chasing their materials from England. If the Dublin 
government can guarantee adequate coastal de. 
fenses, chiefly through an air force, Britain will 
probably relinquish its naval bases at Berehaven, 
Cobh and Loughswilly. The desire for prosperity and 
security is compelling the reconciliation of two coun- 
tries until recently divided by ancient animosities. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Red Star over China, by Edgar Snow. New York, Ran- 
dom House, 1938. $3.00 


This book is a rare phenomenon: a first-rate historical 
source which is also an extraordinary chronicle of heroism 
and adventure. Mr. Snow, the first foreigner to visit the 
Chinese Soviet areas in the remote Northwest and return 
with a mass of important data, is a sincere believer in the 
efficacy of the political organism he describes. His account 
of the Communist réle in the Sian affair, the formation 
of the united anti-Japanese front, and the vista of possible 
social reform under a Chinese Soviet government will help 
to revive the flagging spirits of progressive liberals every- 
where. 


Two Wars and More to Come, by Herbert L. Matthews. 
New York, Carrick & Evans, 1938. $2.50 


Italy’s program of expansion, according to the well- 
known correspondent of the New York Times, definitely 
links the conquest of Ethiopia and the struggle in Spain. 
In addition to graphic reporting of the African campaign, 
the book presents the most complete and detailed account 
yet published of the fighting on the Loyalist side. 


Life in a Haitian Valley, by Melville J. Herskovitz. New 
York, Knopf, 1937. $4.00 


Here is a book, which debunks much of the false sen- 
sationalism written about Haiti. A leading anthropolo- 


gist presents an illuminating picture of the peasant com- 
munity, together with a careful analysis of the respective 
contributions to modern Haitian culture from African 
and European sources. A detailed description of “voodoo” 
rites is especially valuable. 


Report of the Committee on the Maintenance of American 
Neutrality, National Economic and Social Planning As- 
sociation. Washington, D.C., Plan Age, November-De- 
cember, 1937. 

This thoughtful report by a group of liberals having 
isolationist tendencies proposes a series of drastic controls 
over economic and financial life on the outbreak of a gen- 
eral war. It believes that exports should be limited to 
normal peace time quotas by a licensing system and that 
the government should impound foreign investments. A 
government agency should amass stock piles of vital raw 
material imports, while the government should also impose 
price controls. The report admits that these and other 
measures involve “the establishment of more government 


authority over the mechanics of private enterprise than} 


ever before attempted in time of peace,” but not more than 
would be established in the event of war. What the re- 
port fails to discuss is whether a better alternative is not 
to be found in a policy of cooperating with other like 
minded powers to avert the outbreak of war. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 14, JaANuaRy 28, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 





National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lgstig BUELL, President; VERA MicHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered as second-class mattet 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











