



10d. 


ry— 
t, or 
ning 


two 
ce— 
ities 
in a 
that 
from 
tions 
rould 
once 
ance 
rould 
sink 
a de. 
is of 
f the 
ectly 
1 the 
y in- 
Ppan- 
ween 
the 
sep- 
ates. 
A, it 
ough 
1 the 
rals” 
-may 
tion. 
than 
-oun- 
dy?” 
ture, 


. 
4 
rT is rir: Sa eens a 


: 
; 
' 


op a oe RR ool ae ia aoa 


a (ibs dbanatiia debian Aaletreatcs!« wbats- aa 


pre- 


3man 
ation 
non- 
» but 


AN 


National 


kdstor 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as second- 
, YW class matter December 
> 2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
: N. Y., under che act 
Ne of March 3, 1879. 














VoL. Xv, No. 22 


MARCH 27, 1936 





WHY HAS MUSSOLINI NATIONALIZED INDUSTRY? 
WILL FASCISM MEAN THE END OF CAPITALISM? 


Read 
ITALY IN THE WORLD CRISIS 
THE ITALIAN CORPORATIVE SYSTEM 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


Foreign Policy Reports 


25c. each 











A NEW WORLD PEACE CONFERENCE? 





URING the past week the League powers and 

Germany have taken a step toward a nego- 
tiated peace. The first obstacle was surmounted 
when Germany was admitted to the League Coun- 
cil in London on March 19, after being assured 
that its representative could participate on a basis 
of equality. On the same day the League Council 
passed a resolution finding that Germany had 
violated the Versailles Treaty and the Locarno 
pact by sending troops into the Rhineland. On 
March 20 Belgium, France, Britain and Italy — 
the four Locarno powers — issued a declaration 
which condemned the abrogation of Locarno by 
Germany; stated that the obligations and guar- 
antees of that agreement continued in force; and 
announced that the general staffs of the four 
countries would arrange the technical details nec- 
essary to fulfill these obligations should the oc- 
casion arise. In addition, they invited Germany 
to lay before the Permanent Court of Interna- 
tional Justice the question whether the Franco- 
Soviet pact is compatible with Locarno. 


A second part of the four-power declaration 
dealt with a provisional arrangement for the 
Rhineland pending adjustment of the situation. 
Germany was asked to suspend the dispatch of 
further troops and war materials to the Rhine- 
land, and not to proceed with any fortifications. 
In return, France and Belgium would undertake 
not to send additional troops to the German fron- 
tier. An international force representing the 
four powers would occupy a restricted zone in 
the Rhineland and an international commission 
would supervise the fulfillment of the provisional 
arrangement. 


The Locarno powers also declared that should 
Germany accept such an arrangement, they would 
examine Hitler’s proposals for revision of the 
status of the Rhineland and conclusion of new 
non-aggression and mutual assistance agree- 
ments among the Locarno signatories. As far as 


the four powers were concerned, they would un- 
dertake cou:crete military commitments to defend 
each other against attack, and would press for 
the permanent prohibition or limitation of forti- 
fications in the Rhineland. : 


Finally, the Locarno powers declared them- 
selves ready to ask the League Council to call an 
international conference which would deal with 
the following matters: 

1. The organization of a “precise” and “effective” 
system of collective security under Article XVI of the 
Covenant. 

2. An agreement for the 
armaments. 

3. The extension of economic relations and organiza- 
tion of commerce between nations—a proposal obviously 
including raw materials. 

4. The consideration of the non-aggression pacts 
proposed by Germany with regard to Central and 
Eastern Europe. 

In proposing the permanent prohibition of forts 
in the Rhineland and the general strengthening of 
collective security under Article XVI, the Lo- 
carno powers show they are aware that the prob- 
lem of security concerns not only Western but 
Eastern Europe. The four powers, moreover, 
agreed to refer a draft resolution to the League 
Council under Article XI of the Covenant which 
would authorize a League committee to study the 
question of sanctions to be taken against uni- 
lateral action by Germany. 

On March 20 the British and Italian govern- 
ments also addressed letters to Paris and Brussels 
to the effect that should the effort at conciliation 
fail, they would take all practical measures to 
insure the security of Belgium and France against 
unprovoked aggression and would establish or 
continue contact between their general staffs for 
this purpose. 

Ethiopia to be Sacrificed? 


In accepting these proposals the Sarraut cab- 
inet abandoned its original refusal to negotiate 
with Germany until after the evacuation of Hit- 


effective limitation of 

















































mre 


we 
me oa Sice 


swig Te 


< 




















ler’s troops from the Rhineland; and the Baldwin 
cabinet for the first time officially agreed to gen- 
eral staff conversations regarding the Western 
frontier. On March 18 the Italian representa- 
tive, Signor Grandi, informed the Council that 
while his government recognized that the Locarno 
obligations were “clear and definite,” Italy could 
not apply sanctions against Germany so long as 
sanctions remained in force against Rome. M. 
Flandin told the French Chamber on March 20 
that he was seeking to bring about the “simul- 
taneous suspension of hostilities in Ethiopia and 
of sanctions against Italy.”” It is not improbable 
that, before approving the present proposal for 
a coalition against Germany, Italy will demand 
compensation in Africa. 


In refusing to accept violation of the Rhine- 
land as calmly as they did Germany’s re-arma- 
ment last March, and in threatening certain sanc- 
tions if Germany unconditionally rejects their 
proposals, the League powers have given Hitler 
a severe jolt. While Hitler will not accept the 
proposal to establish an international force in 
the Rhineland, he is expected to advance counter- 
proposals. Whether a compromise finally emerges 
depends on Britain’s success in inducing both 
France and Germany to make further concessions. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


THE NEW CABINET IN JAPAN 


The personnel of the new Cabinet formed by 
Koki Hirota on March 9, nearly two weeks after 
the military uprising in Tokyo, was substantially 
modified by strong army pressure. Hirota’s first 
choices for Cabinet posts, including Shigeru Yo- 
shida as Foreign Minister, suggested that the 
“moderates” were once more in the saddle. Their 
advantageous position, however, was undercut by 
the drastic “purge” rapidly carried through by 
the high army command. Four of the seven rank- 
ing generals on the Supreme War Council — 
Hayashi, Araki, Mazaki and Abe — were retired 
from active service on March 7. The three re- 
maining members, exclusive of the Princes on 
the Council, were automatically removed by ap- 
pointment to executive posts: Terauchi to the War 
Ministry, Uyeda to the position of proconsul in 
“Manchoukuo,” succeeding Minami; and General 
Nishi to the Inspectorate General of Military Ed- 
ucation, replacing the murdered Watanabe. A 
number of other high officers were later removed 
from their posts, and further changes are ex- 
pected among regimental officers in the annual 
army transfers, soon to be announced. Despite 
the retirement — not necessarily permanent — of 


Page Two 








Araki and Mazaki, foremost leaders of the ex. 
tremists, their outstanding adherents — Major. 
Generals Itagaki and Doihara — still remain in 
active service. 


As a result of this “voluntary purge,” the army 
command gained a vantage ground from which 
it could demand equal concessions by the mod. 
erates. General Terauchi’s refusal to assume the 
War Ministry wrecked the Cabinet line-up first 
proposed by Hirota. After three days of nego- 
tiation, the army finally gave its approval to a 
thoroughly revised list of Cabinet appointments. 
Three of the earlier nominees were dropped 
Premier Hirota temporarily assumed the Foreign 
Affairs portfolio, until a Foreign Minister ac- 


ceptable to the army could be found. The army f 
also refused to allow Kawasaki—a Minseito man Ff 
—to occupy the Home Ministry, which was finally f 


awarded to Ushio—a non-party bureaucrat. 


Despite the Minseito’s election victory, it holds ‘ 


but two minor posts in the new Cabinet, as does 
also the Seiyukai—the defeated party. The resig- 
nation of Baron Ikki as president of the Privy 
Council and the appointment to this post of Baron 
Hiranuma, head of the Kokuhonsha —the most 
influential Fascist organization in Japan—also 
marks a decided advance by the extremists. In 
the Imperial Household Ministry, however, the 
moderates have retained control through the ap- 
pointment of Yuasa as Lord Privy Seal and Mat- 


sudaira as Minister of the Imperial Household. f 


The statements of policy emanating from the 
new Cabinet make it clear that the political situa- 
tion has reverted to the 1931-1932 era, when the 
army was aggressively pushing its views. The 
army’s pressure will be countered mainly by 
Premier Hirota and the new Finance Minister, 
Eiichi Baba, who shares the fiscal views held by 
Takahashi. Pledges given to the army regarding 
increased funds for “defense” and “farm relief,” 
however, are at least partially responsible for 
serious apprehension in Japanese business circles 
—reflected in stock losses aggregating 400 million 
yen on March 9, when the Tokyo Stock Exchange 
reopened after a twelve-day suspension. Taka- 
hashi had steadily rejected the army’s demand 
for increased taxation, preferring to cover mount- 
ing expenditures by bond issues, but it is now 
feared that tax increases bearing directly on in- 
dustry will become necessary. This issue, as well 
as questions relating to foreign policy, will have 
to be thrashed out in the Cabinet, which con- 
tinues to be a battleground for the bitter conflicts 
of policy within Japan’s ruling circles. 


T. A. BISSON 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 22, Marcu 27, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association 
RAYMOND Legsitg Bugit, President ; 


, Incorporated. National 
EstHER G. OGpEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Edéster. 


at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


cal 4 ala ab en So ea ES 


pits 








tiumabaiie 


sat 


POE EPROM fol pt SGPC ION 


fh atpeadP ceed 8 





tinier ALONE lh at A Sat 








An 


