SEP 23 1937 


__}| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN = 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff ge — oante 
a pe Subscription, One Dollar a Year os 
n . . 
wit FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated y meee 
ate in- 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
10dern 
force | Vou. XVI, No. 46 SEPTEMBER 10, 1937 
ighout |} —— 
, is of THE NEW DEAL IN FRANCE Dr. William W. Bishop 
by air- by John C. deWilde  thidieai nc | 
An analysis of the French attempt to reconcile capitalism Hiversity of Michigan Libr 
on the and democracy with dynamic social reforms. The French 
vanton New Deal has enacted a program of economic and social Ann Arbor, Mich. 
scien- legislation unparalleled in the history of modern France; at 
the same time it has created considerable political, economic 
resent and financial tension. Will the Popular Front continue to 
draw rule France? 
my in September 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 
ricken, 
lise 
n, both “PIRACY” FORCES ACTION IN MEDITERRANEAN 
rs who 
dissect HE Soviet note of September 6, charging that the sinking on September 1 of the tanker Wood- 
eclared Italy was responsible for the torpedoing of ford, flying the British flag. 
often, } two Soviet freighters in the Eastern Mediter- While these uncrovcked ettnces, sf ee 
7 be: meen and demanding reparation and punish- occurring sieiiinemariaihe at widely separated 
m. da] Rent for the euity parties, threatens to upset Points of the Mediterranean, have not permit 
: set Off ence, invitations for which had been issued on the identification of the assailants, suspicion has cen- 
e itt , ‘ : tered on Italy, which has one of the largest sub- 
h i | Same day. The summoning of this conference— marine fleets in the world. The most recent avail- 
ta the to be held on September 10 at Nyon, in the neigh- able information credits the Spanish Insurgents 
e - borhood of Geneva, where the League Council will with five, and the Loyalists with four submarines. 
sues 0 : ion— i bs me y - , 
rrapple prey ae P poseentn 3 pole ie Even admitting that General Franco’s vessels have 
ns til esiens from Gibraltar to the Dardanelles sufficient mobility to deliver the numerous attacks 
ntellect . reported from the Mediterranean, experts point 
merely Repeated attacks by unidentified submarines on out that the “phantom” submarines are using eXx- 
es. It} neutral merchant ships suspected of carrying car- pensive torpedoes, probably unobtainable in Spain, 
ions, tof goes to Valencia had already caused Turkey to and enjoy the use of naval bases other than those 
things} notify European powers on August 26 that its controlled by the Insurgents. Moreover, sub- 
> The} Warships would sink any submarine in Turkish marine attacks seem to have increased since the 
e geeks} Waters which refused to disclose its identity when fall of Santander, which was hailed in Rome as an 
curative} Challenged. On the same day Britain had warned Italian victory and served as the occasion for an 
but one} General Franco that further attacks on British exchange of enthusiastic telegrams by I] Duce and 
.e social} Vessels would not be tolerated, and had instructed General Franco. It is also recalled that, in his 
io more} its warships to retaliate against any attack by Palermo speech of August 20, Mussolini, while 
-he dar-| Submarine, warship or airplane. Rumanian crews reiterating the desire for French and British col- 
in the| had refused to run the gauntlet of “phantom” sub- laboration, asserted that he would continue to as- 
+ which! Marines, and the Soviet press had called for drastic sist Franco and would not tolerate Bolshevism “or 
for life} Teprisals. The Mediterranean had returned tothe anything like it” in the Mediterranean. 
ige-long voy of lusty buccaneering, when international Early reports from London indicate that the 
-- be- em was a5 non-existent as it appears to be today. Nyon conference — which at Britain’s insistence 
s of dis-} Alarmed by acts of “piracy” which menace its is to include Germany as well as all Mediter- 
communications with North Africa, France, on ranean and Black Sea powers, with the notable 
DEAN | August 31, had urged Britain to call a conference exception of the Valencia government, whose 
of Mediterranean powers, including the Valencia presence might have embarrassed Hitler and Mus- 
Western | government, whose existence is threatened by the solini—would not attempt to inquire into the iden- 
edition). submarines’ attempt to sink or damage all cargoes tity of the “phantom” submarines, but merely lay 
destined for the Loyalists. Britain’s acceptance down the rules of future conduct in the Mediter- 
of the French proposal—at first received with ranean. In the light of these reports the question 
National} lukewarm interest in London—was hastened by a arises whether Britain, which on the plea of un- 
san, Editon} SUDMarine attack on the British destroyer Havock, preparedness has already accepted Italy’s conquest 
Year, which is thought to have sunk its assailant, and of Ethiopia and tolerates its violations of the non- 


FO 


‘ Page Two — 
¥ intervention accord in Spain, may not use the Nyon Kwangchowwan are exempted from surveillance, An in 
WM conference to whitewash Mussolini. Neville But the critical question involved in the conduct 
4 Chamberlain’s overtures to Italy, far from inspir- of the blockade—the reaction of foreign powers 
hi ing Mussolini with pacific sentiments, have only if Japan should molest their vessels engaged in the 
{aah strengthened his conviction that Britain, preoccu- carriage of war supplies to China—still remains 
it pied by rearmament preparations and Far East- unanswered. aieniigs 
ast | ern developments, will not go beyond pro- Neutrals participating in trade with China wij} Vou > 
4 i tests in the Mediterranean. Like Hitler, whom he receive short shrift from Tokyo if the Japanege 
aie plans to visit on September 24, Mussolini, is will- reply to Britain’s note protesting the attack on its 
AP ing to have peace—but peace on his own terms. Ambassador to China is any criterion. The Jap. 
4 ; These terms, as revealed by his Palermo speech, in- anese response, delivered in London on Septem- 
i clude victory for General Franco and recognition ber 6, expresses regret for the incident but states 
. of Italy’s Ethiopian Empire by the League powers. Japan’s investigation has not yet produced eyj- o 
oe The new Mediterranean crisis brings home some dence that the shooting was done by Japanese avi. co 
it lessons worth pondering at a moment when Amer- ators. The tenor of the note clearly indicates that th 
ican public opinion is deeply divided over the Tokyo believes it has little to fear from British Foreig: 
course best calculated to prevent extension of the displeasure. ‘ : aul 
Far Eastern conflict. Many observers, adopting China’s immediate assumption of responsibility 7 
the line of argument popularized by Hitler and for the bombing of the American liner President 
Mussolini, have contended that war can and Hoover near the mouth of the a ak Au- 
should be localized and that only neutrality or gust 30, stands in sharp contrast to the dilatory H 
non-intervention by the non-warring powers can tactics of the Japanese. While China's action was N 
avert a general conflict, fear of which has prac- intended as a move to influence world opinion, it Medit 
bY tically paralyzed the Western democracies. The does not appear to presage greater consideration the et 
he» experience of Ethiopia and Spain demonstrates for the rights of non-combatant s in the fighting of the 
iy that war can, in fact, be temporarily localized. It zone. Neither Tokyo nor Nanking has responded tical 
hi also demonstrates that the countries which most favorably to the request of the United States, Brit- ~ vam 
ae loudly demand localization and non-intervention ish and French consuls general, made on Septem-} - 
tas profit by the withdrawal of neutral powers to in- ber 4, that both sides withdraw their troops from instes 
i i tervene to their hearts’ content, and by so doing = 2748 around Shanghai in which fighting is = Lond 
ha enlarge the area of potential conflict to the point | heavy toll of the lives and property of non-} 3:14 
af where the democracies, with their backs to the combatants. — neavily involved in Euros” © 
Is wall, are confronted with the necessity of consid- With Britain heavily involved in Pe, repre 
ering the very measures of coercion which, if strong policy initiated by the United States ap- Brita 
adopted in time, might have checked the original  P€as to offer the only hope for checking Japanese} _) 
outbreak. What the democracies are apt to forget incursions against neutral rights or restraining Th 
is that faint words have ne’er won dictators who Japan’s aggression in China. Anonymous official of an 
listen to no argument but that of force. sources in Washington have stated that American sams 
Vera MICHELES DEAN policy remains receptive to joint action demon- Brita 
strating that neither Japan nor any other ag- Shen 
JAPAN AIMS AT CRUSHING VICTORY gressor can attain its objectives without some wen 
The unexpected strength of China’s opposition resistance from law-abiding nations. President gene! 
to the Japanese attack at Shanghai has impelled Roosevelt, however, seems unwilling to follow this) ¢.... 
| Japan to throw all its forces into a conflict which course, which might conceivably involve the} is po: 
i now extends over the whole Chinese seaboard and United States in hostilities against Japan. After) (» 4), 
( far inland. The Imperial Diet, after an unprece- vetoing the dispatch of additional American war-) 1+, 
if dented exhortation personally delivered by the ships to China, he announced on September 5 that surge 
Fe: Emperor on September 5, enthusiastically ap- all Americans remaining in that country after tate 
f | proved Foreign Minister Hirota’s statement that they had had a reasonable opportunity to leave home 
’ { the object of the war was to break Chinese re- would do so at their own risk. Davin H. POPPER | corte 
iS 4) sistance once for all. Over two billion yen was Mass-Consumption, by Frederick Purdy. New York, The | rane: 
“ge | voted for prosecution of the campaign. At the Talisman Press, 1936. $2.50 i of th 
hy same time, Japanese naval commanders have en- _ Advances a new scheme whereby consumers will directly} heen 
16} larged the scope of their blockade to include the indicate to producers what they need. _ | carri 
4 entire 2100-mile stretch of Chinese coastline from a _ A oa Chamber} Medi 
e/ the Manchoukuo border to Pakhoi, near the Indo- aay > & pr i taos that faith in democracy re Gree 
*| China frontier. Tsingtao, Hongkong, Macao and newed would do well to read this indictment of collectivism. 4 os 
a riti 
, yt FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 46, SepTeMBER 10, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National} QUIT¢ 
al Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lusime Burtt, President; Estuer G. Ocprn, Secretary; Vera Micuetes Dean, Editor.) to eo 
Fit i, Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year patr 
al F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


