—=—=_ 


has threat. 
S$ probable 
1 Spending 
‘ugoslavia 
arian Pap. 
ondon lag 
1 Britain's 
ees. 

d the fric. 
re the cur 
in “peace 
ritain’s de 
LS Negotia- 
ue to pro 
erning the 
1greement, 
is Of these 
e comple. 
prove the 
providing 
and giving 


ide a Brit. 
hance for 
use of in- 
ig the Su 
g political 
apo, have 
ity Social- 
conspiring 
land, and 
ent build 
‘idier was 
‘ontier vil- 
een Polish 
r Rebben- 
skirmishes 
icts. Over 
patrolling 
‘rests, and 
»peared to 
to declare 
g Danzig, 
ld be pre- 
rovide af 
ner, when 
rlo-French 
akia. The 
dor to the 
decisions 
a minot 


GREEN 


ed. National 


DEAN, Editor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XVIII, No. 41 


———— 


Avucust 4, 1939 


IN QUEST OF EMPIRE 
by Walter Consuelo Langsam 


A terse and timely summary of the colonial question by 
a leading American historian. Illustrated with 14 maps 
and charts by Emil Herlin. 


“There is more information packed in this 90-page 
pamphlet than ... in certain books . . . on the subject.” 
—American Observer 


Headline Books, No. 19 2° stem 


AUG 1 


1090 
Ts Je oi 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


PERIODICAL ROUM 
GENBRAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF MICH 


General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


U.S. DENOUNCES TRADE 


TREATY WITH JAPAN 


B* substituting positive action for the long series 
of futile protest notes to Japan, Secretary Hull's 
denunciation of the Japanese-American commercial 
treaty of 1911 may well mark an important turning- 
point in the Far Eastern crisis. As this treaty pro- 
vided for reciprocal most-favored-nation treatment in 
matters of commerce and navigation, it constituted a 
technical barrier to the institution of trade reprisals 
against Japan. Official Japanese reactions clearly in- 
dicate the gravity attached to the American move by 
Tokyo, which has consistently discounted the possi- 
bility of substantial efforts to curb the sale of United 
States war materials to Japan. 


PROSPECTS FOR FURTHER ACTION. No new 
moves appear imminent, since the State Department 
apparently intends to await termination of the treaty 
on January 26, 1940 before deciding its future course. 
On the other hand, denunciation of the treaty will 
necessarily exert an immediate effect on the Far 
Eastern situation. It places Japan, in its relations with 
the United States, on six months’ probation. Within 
this period Japan must decide whether it can safely 
continue to ride roughshod over American rights and 
interests in China. Statements by Mr. Hull and Mr. 
Morgenthau have already indicated that, unless Jap- 
anese policy is altered, definite American reprisals 
will be in order. Executive acts might include sus- 
pension of Treasury purchases of Japanese gold or 
imposition of countervailing duties on Japanese 
goods; behind these lies possible authorization by 
the next Congress of an embargo on Japan’s pur- 
chases of war materials in the American market. 

Despite assertions to the contrary in Tokyo, the 
State Department's action undoubtedly commands 
general support in the United States. Popular senti- 
ment, as reflected in a Gallup poll taken in July, 
would evidently favor immediate imposition of eco- 
homic penalties against Japan. In Congress a number 


of isolationist Senators who opposed the Adminis- 
tration’s effort to revise the Neutrality Act have ap- 
plauded Secretary Hull’s denunciation of the Jap- 
anese-American commercial treaty. A resolution 
placed before the Senate Foreign Relations Commit- 
tee by Senator Vandenberg, indeed, had proposed 
such a move and obviously encouraged the State De- 
partment to act at this time. Senator Borah himself 
has suggested that an embargo on arms shipments to 
Japan should be imposed at once, although he did 
not specify whether his definition of “arms” includes 
such commodities as scrap iron and petroleum or cov- 
ers merely finished munitions—a vital distinction. 


EFFECTS ON ANGLO-JAPANESE NEGOTIA- 
TIONS. The State Department's action will obvious- 
ly serve to strengthen Britain’s hand in the delicate 
Anglo-Japanese negotiations now being conducted 
at Tokyo. While the American move has the inci- 
dental effect of “showing up” the partial British 
surrender to Japan’s demands, it may eventually tip 
the scales against complete surrender in the Far 
East. The customary results of an “appeasement” 
policy are already manifest in China, where the Jap- 
anese army is now proceeding to force the wholesale 
evacuation of British nationals from the northern 
provinces. Under threat of physical attack, British 
nationals have already been forced to evacuate Kai- 
feng and Taiyuan; similar pressure is currently being 
exerted against British residents in Tsinan, Taku 
Tsangchow, and other North China cities. 

Application of such measures hardly tends to facil- 
itate the negotiations at Tokyo, where the practical 
significance of the Craigie-Arita “formula” is being 
hammered out. The essential point at issue is the 


scope of the Japanese demands. In view of the Amer- 
ican stand, the Chamberlain government might have 
difficulty in carrying the British public along with it 
on much more than some modus vivendi for policing 


—_K_—_—_—_]_[_|_"_"_"_"_"""""_———]];]]]=, Page Twe 


the foreign Concessions. British support for the Jap- 
anese-sponsored currency in China, which would in- 
volve eventual elimination of the Western trader, has 
not yet been granted. If this demand is strongly 
pressed by Japan, Britain may decide that the time 
to call a halt to concessions has come. In such case, 
the logical step would be denunciation of the Anglo- 
Japanese commercial treaty, thus again aligning Brit- 
ish and American policies in the Far East. 

Japan’s hopes for a decisive military victory in 
China have been dimmed by the United States action 
in denouncing the trade treaty. Chinese morale has 
received a fillip that will stiffen determination to re- 
sist the Japanese invasion even more strongly during 
the next six months. At the end of that period, if not 
before, Japan must face the definite possibility of 
being cut off from access to its American arsenal. 
Such a result would go far toward defeating Japan's 
effort to subjugate the Chinese people. 


T. A. Bisson 
PARTY STRIFE IN FRANCO SPAIN 


Despite its weakness and disorganization after two 
and one-half years of civil war, Spain has remained— 
since General Franco’s victory last February—an im- 
portant pawn in the diplomacy of the Great Powers. 
Germany and Italy anticipate a paramount share in 
the economic reconstruction of the country, as well as 
Spanish assistance or benevolent neutrality in event 
of war. Great Britain and France hope to employ 
their greater capital resources in regaining Spanish 
good will and counteracting axis influence in the 
western Mediterranean. Spain’s reaction to these 
overtures, whether in peace or war, depends to a con- 
siderable extent upon the outcome of party strife— 
inevitable after a long revolution—within the Franco 
government. 

Thus far, General Franco has sought to hold a 
balance between the two main groups supporting his 
rule: the Falangists, blue-shirted fascists who advo- 
cate a corporative state and close collaboration with 
Italy; and the Monarchists—composed of landown- 
ers, nobility, and many army and Church leaders— 
who are themselves divided by the claims of former 
King Alfonso XIII, his son Prince Juan, and Prince 
Carlos of Hapsburg. General Franco has recently de- 
posed several outstanding monarchists, including 
General Queipo de Llano, Military Governor of 
Seville, and General Juan Yagiie, Commander of the 
Moroccan army corps, but has met their demands by 
refraining thus far from a step rumored to be im- 
minent—appointment of his pro-Italian brother-in- 
law, Serrano Sufier, as Premier with almost unlimited 


powers. Although renewed strife among these cop, a 
flicting cliques is reported, it is likely that Gener} 0", 
Franco will continue to reconcile them by compro, be 
mise measures. ‘s 
THE PROBLEM OF RECONSTRUCTION , i 
Little progress has apparently been made in the vital VoL. 
tasks of reconstruction, although a large portion of 
the army has already been demobilized. Military lay} RA‘ 


prevails in the large cities, transportation and com. 
munication are still severely hampered, and both 
domestic and foreign trade remain at low levels. The 
cost of living, especially of food, is reported to have 
risen rapidly during recent months, partly as a result 
of severe increases in taxation. On July 30, in an ef. 
fort to speed up reconstruction, the Franco govem. 
ment decreed that all men between 18 and 50 mug 
henceforth work fifteen days each year for the state 
without pay. Meanwhile, the trial and execution of 
Loyalist leaders and supporters have continued, al. 
though reports vary as to the numbers involved. Pro. 
fessor Julian Besteiro, 69-year-old Socialist president 
of the Cortes in 1931, was sentenced on July 10 t 
thirty years’ imprisonment. 

Rehabilitation of the national currency, greatly in- 
flated by the paper money of both factions, has been | 
aided by the decree of a Paris court, which on July 26 
ordered the return of $39,730,000 in gold stored in 
French banks. As a result of this action, General 
Franco has agreed to take back at least 50,000 of the 
300,000 Republican refugees now living in concentra. 
tion camps along the French frontier. An American 
court, on the other hand, dismissed the plea of the 
Franco government for the recovery of $6,450,000 in 
silver coins which the Republican government had sold 
in the United States. Additional Loyalist money, total- 
ing $47,700,000 in gold, has been shipped to Mexico 
City, where a bank will be established to finance the 
settlement of Spanish refugees. This project was 
launched in Paris, where—during a meeting of the 
Republican cabinet—Indalecio Prieto, Socialist lead: 
er, defeated the proposals of former Premier Negrin 
that the fund should be conserved for a counter-revo 
lution and succeeded in ousting Dr. Negrin from 


office. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


. 


The Menacing Sun, by Mona Gardner. New York, Har 
court, Brace & Co., 1939. $2.50 


A first-hand picture of the little-known countries of | 
southeastern Asia which lie in the path of Japan’s south | 
ward expansion. The author’s travel experiences in French 
Indo-China, Malaya, the Dutch East Indies and India are | 
combined with excellent political and economic analyses | 
and sympathetic studies of the conditions of the people. | 
Its graphic treatment and fascinating style give it all the 
charm of a novel. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 41, Aucust 4, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micuseres Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


as 


National 


