Policy 
ht wel- 
coming 
highly 
Ss na. 
- inter. 
Great 
PPER 


ND 


e Irish 
tution, 
endent 
of the 
ctorate 
Fianna 
sweep- 
e Party 
* depu- 
treann, 
> forty- 
Villiam 
ts. De 
n 1938, 
933, to 


ristian- 
mon de 
> politi- 
to men- 
* moral 
cluding 
remain 
} sector 
ves the 
e rein- 
1 juris- 
rritory 
ment is 
organ- 
British 
is thus 
3, while 
bership 


rnal re- } 


> effect 
parlia- 
Repre- 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Vou. XVI, No. 39 


JULY 23, 1937 


CROSS-CURRENTS IN DANUBIAN EUROPE 
by Helen Fisher 


This report analyzes the present political and diplomatic 
situation in Southeastern Europe, pointing out that the future 
peace of Europe and the world depends in large part upon 
the outcome of the struggle now going on between the forces 
working for Danubian cooperation and the renewed Fascist 
Drang nach Osten. 


July 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


JAPAN AND CHINA 


CLASH IN HOPE! 


SO-CALLED “last warning” by the Japanese 

Army and a strong statement by Chiang 
Kai-shek refusing to consider any settlement det- 
rimental to Chinese sovereignty or territorial in- 
tegrity—both issued on July 19—have clearly re- 
vealed the impasse which now exists in North 
China. These declarations mark the culmination 
of negotiations conducted at Peiping, Tientsin and 
Nanking since July 7 when Japanese troops en- 
gaging in night maneuvers near Lukouchaio, 
about 18 miles west of Peiping, clashed with 
units of the Chinese Twenty-ninth Army sta- 
tioned in the area. The initial disturbances have 
been followed by a confusing series of ultimata 
and truces, their conclusion punctuated by new 
“incidents.” Local armistices were reported on 
July 9, 12, 18 and 19. Apparently the Chinese 
officials of the Hopei-Chahar political council, in 
whose territory the scene of conflict is laid, have 
been temporizing until they could ascertain the 
degree of support forthcoming from Nanking. 
The Japanese, too, are believed to have prolonged 
the negotiations in order to concentrate troops in 
the Peiping-Tientsin district. 

Desirous of a local settlement by provincial 
Officials more amenable to their control, the 
Japanese have demanded: (1) withdrawal of 
the Twenty-ninth Army from its present lines 
west of Peiping; (2) punishment of the Chinese 
responsible for the conflict; (3) adequate control 
of all anti-Japanese activities in North China; 
and (4) the enforcement of measures against 
communism. Should these terms be carried out 
by Sung Cheh-yuan, chairman of the Hopei- 
Chahar political council, China would suffer still 
another blow to its integrity at the hands of the 
advancing Japanese. Even tacit assent by the 
Chinese central government to such an agree- 
ment reached on the spot would involve the most 
serious consequences. It would mean transforma- 
tion of the Hopei-Chahar régime from a semi- 


autonomous unit serving as a buffer between 
China and Japanese-dominated territory to a pup- 
pet government under Tokyo’s control. 

It is probable that informed Chinese political 
leaders do not desire the outbreak of a Sino- 
Japanese war at present because the country is 
still poorly prepared for hostilities. Neverthe- 
less, the Chinese government can scarcely afford 
to yield to Japan unless a diplomatic retreat can 
be staged by such slow and devious steps that the 
country at large is not cognizant of them. Mass 
opinion in China is aroused as it has seldom been 
before. Enjoying a precarious but undeniable 
unity since the Sian coup of December 1936, the 
country has nursed its nascent nationalism on op- 
position to Japanese incursions in the North. The 
Nanking government has responded to the 
heightened temper of the nation and has dis- 
played a firmness toward Tokyo which is prob- 
ably a basic cause of the present crisis. In re- 
cent months Nanking has increasingly asserted 
its influence over North China officials. China 
has begun to interfere with Japanese-protected 
smuggling through East Hopei, which enables 
business men to avoid payment of Chinese tariffs 
and severely affects Chinese government revenue. 
Nanking has dared to order the suspension of 
the new Tientsin-Tokyo airline, established by 
Japan without Chinese consent. In northern 
Chahar a small-scale rebellion of Manchoukuoan 
and Mongolian troops against Japanese control 
has taken place. Anti-Japanese incidents are oc- 
curring with increasing frequency and are not 
settled by abject submission to Japan’s demands. 

To these “pinpricks,” which must have tried 
the patience of Japanese Army leaders, there 
must be added a further factor impelling the 
Army to strike now in China—the pending con- 
clusion of negotiations between Nanking and the 
Chinese Communists for united resistance to 
Japan. In return for an undertaking by Chiang 


ee 


Kai-shek to adopt an anti-Japanese policy and 
partially democratize his régime, the Com- 
munists are willing to modify their social pro- 
gram and place their armies under the general 
direction of Nanking. Conclusion of a compre- 
hensive agreement of this type would be of great 
importance, not only because it would further raise 
Chinese morale but because it would secure the 
active cooperation against the Japanese of 90,000 
soldiers seasoned in the inland guerrilla warfare 
to which China would necessarily resort in case 
of a conflict. 

This accumulation of factors adverse to its 
policy of expansion in North China has already 
caused the Japanese government, faced with eco- 
nomic stringency at home, to modify its tone in 
dealing with Nanking. In negotiations with the 
Chinese begun at Nanking July 3, Shigeru 
Kawagoe, the Japanese ambassador, was reported 
to have been prepared to propose the general 
relinquishment of Japanese political control in 
North China, provided only that Nanking would 
recognize Manchoukuo and undertake “economic 
cooperation” with Japan. This is a far cry from 
the establishment of an “autonomous” régime in 
the five provinces of North China desired by the 
Japanese military. While Kawagoe’s proposals 
may have represented merely a transitory mild- 
ness during Japan’s negotiations with Britain rel- 
ative to an agreement on China, Nanking’s ap- 
parent refusal to consider his terms is indicative 
of the changed attitude of the country. 

In its legal aspect the situation in Hopei is a 
clear illustration of illegitimate Japanese aggres- 
sion. Although the Japanese are entitled under 
the Boxer protocol of 1901 to station forces in the 
Peiping legation quarter and at certain points 
along the Peiping-Tientsin railroad, they have 
sent their troops outside the specified areas and 
obstructed rather than maintained communica- 
tions to the sea—the purpose for which the proto- 
col was designed. Nevertheless, there is virtually 
no prospect of international action to curb the ad- 
vance of the Japanese forces. Statements by Sec- 
retary of State Hull on July 16 and Foreign Min- 
ister Anthony Eden three days later merely 
expressed pious hopes. The international situa- 
tion has now deteriorated so far that nations will 
effectively combat aggression only when it 
threatens their most vital national interests. 


DAvip H. PoPpPER 


NEW NAVAL TREATIES SIGNED 
With the signature,on July 17,of supplementary 
treaties between Great Britain and Germany and 
the Soviet Union, all the major naval powers ex- 
cept Italy and Japan have now subscribed to the 


Page Two 


naval limitation treaty of March 25, 1936 which 
was designed to replace-the Washington and 
London agreements of 1922 and 1930. The 
United States ratified the new treaty in May 
1936 and France in June 1937. With the British 
ratification, expected within a few days, the 
treaty will finally come into force. Italy, which 
refused to sign the treaty because of politica] 
difficulties during the Ethiopian affair, is stijj 
free to adhere at any time. Japan, however, has 
closed the door to future adherence. 


The London Naval Treaty of 1936 binds its 
signatories to exchange full advance information 
on naval building, and limits the maximum ton. 
nage and gun caliber of their ships. Although 
no general quantitative limits are set, the treaty 
provides for a “building holiday” on large cruis. 
ers, designed to prevent such experiments as the 
German “pocket battleships,” which might upset 
the balance of naval power. Numerous safe. 
guarding clauses make it easy to escape from 
these provisions if non-treaty powers fail to ob- 
serve them. 

With two important exceptions, the supple 
mentary treaties are in general identical with 
the principal document. Because of Japan’s non- 
adherence to the treaty, the Soviet Union has 
received the right to keep the details of its Far 
Eastern navy secret provided the ships of this 
fleet are never transferred to the Baltic or Black 
Sea. In principle, all Soviet ships will remain 
within the treaty’s qualitative limits, but if Japan 
should exceed these limits the U.S.S.R. may match 
the Japanese building after notifying the Brit- 
ish government. In addition, the Soviet Union is 
permitted to build seven heavy cruisers within 
the “holiday” category; Britain has therefore 
released Germany from a secret agreement made 
in conjunction with the Anglo-German naval 
treaty of June 18, 1935, by which Germany agreed 
not to build more than three of the five heavy 
cruisers to which it was entitled under that treaty. 
In return Germany is said to have undertaken, 
in building the German fleet up to the maximum 


limit of 35 per cent of the British strength, not) 


to include in its calculation the obsolescent ton- 
nage in the British navy. 


The section of the 1936 treaty provisionally 


stipulating a 14-inch limit for battleship guns 
has already lapsed. Japan has twice explicitly 


refused to be bound by any such qualitative maxi-; 


ma as long as no quantitative limitation is at 
tained. Consequently, the United States an- 
nounced on July 10 that its two new 35,000-ton 
battleships would be armed with 16-inch guns. 


HELEN FISHER 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 39, Juty 23, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND LgsLIE BUELL, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


FO! 


An int 


irrita! 
Spain. 
ventio 
becaus 
drawr 
follow 
pervis 
two g 
embat 
that : 
in the 


Un: 
lock, » 
mitte 
up a: 
ish g 
whick 
the | 
serve 
obser 
ports 
by tl 
Secor 
bellig 
ists. 
be al 
serve 
tion | 
other 
by tl 
forei 
Spai1 
comn 
right 
Non- 
that 
such 
tioni 


