FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


PRRRIODIC «| aay Entered as second- 
GRR AL class matcer December 
ay ppm pl 2, 1921, at the Post 


Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


MAR 20 1946 


Vou. XIX, No. 20 MarcH 8, 1940 


— 


For an analysis of Russia’s dramatic return to Europe’s diplo- 
matic scene as a result of the Soviet-German pact, READ: 


RUSSIA’S ROLE IN THE EUROPEAN 
CONFLICT by Vera Micheles Dean 


25¢ 


March 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


ITALY PROTESTS BRITISH COAL BAN 


§ the Allied blockade control on March 5 de- 
tained two Italian coal ships, the long dispute 
oer belligerent measures and neutral rights ap- 
poached a climax. Ronald Cross, British Minister 


.| of Economic Blockade, announced that the German 


al on these Italian vessels—and on eight others 
which left Rotterdam for home ports—would be 
liable to seizure as prize cargo. Diplomatic circles 
attributed the departure of the vessels, despite British 
opposition, to the Italian government’s desire to 
make a test case of Allied efforts to embargo all 


-| German exports. 


After the Italian government, in mid-February, 
had refused to conclude a coal-for-arms trade 
agreement with Britain, the British announced on 
March 1 that Italy could no longer import Ger- 
man coal by way of Rotterdam. Italy, almost com- 
pletely dependent on foreign coal, can obtain only 
a small percentage of its needs by overland rail 
toutes, and has continued to import German fuel 
via the Netherlands in spite of the British order-in- 
council of November 27, which embargoed all Ger- 
man exports. Until now, the British government, 


hoping to conclude a barter agreement with Italy, 


-| had acquiesced in this trade. Under the arrangement 


ejected by Italy, Britain would have received Italian 
airplane engines and munitions in return for Welsh 
coal. On March 3 the Italian government protested 
vigorously against the new British regulation, which 
it said may “disturb and compromise the economic 


and political relations between Italy and Great 


| Britain, which were established by the accord of 
:| April 16, 1938.” 


In its note the Italian government, while claiming 
to defend Italy’s interests as a non-belligerent, re- 


| Stated Germany’s contentions against the British 


blockade. The prestige of both Italy and Britain was 
affected by publication of the note and both govern- 
Ments may find it difficult to back down. At the same 


time, the Colonial Office disclosed that Britain had 
completed the concentration of troops along the 
Kenya-Ethiopian border, guarding the frontiers be- 
tween British and Italian colonies in East Africa. 
This controversy, whatever its outcome, may force 
Italy to make a decision between the Allies and Ger- 
many, with which it has military and political accords. 

FINNS IN RETREAT. The approaching crisis in 
the Western war did not relieve tension for the small 
northern states concerned with the Soviet Union's 
war in Finland. The present Soviet offensive on the 
Karelian Isthmus began on February 3, after Soviet 
forces had repeatedly been repelled all along the 
900-mile Finnish frontier. The drive was apparently 
launched at this time in order to crack the Finnish 
lines before the Finns receive substantial foreign rein- 
forcements, and before spring thaws make progress 
difficult in the boggy lakeland. In December and 
January the proverbial Russian handicap—inefficient 
supply lines — had impeded the Soviet invasion of 
northern Finland. This difficulty was overcome on 
the Isthmus, fed by two main railroads and three 
highways from Leningrad. Although better able to 
defend a shorter front against attack, the Finnish 
army in this narrow sector could not take advantage 
of its greater mobility. 

The fall of Viborg need not mean a final victory 
for the U.S.S.R. The main defenses of the Manner- 
heim Line have been pierced west of Lake Muolaa, 
and the western anchor of the defense system—the 
important fortress at Koivisto—is in Soviet hands. 
But the Finns still hold the eastern terminus of their 
main defenses at Taipale on Lake Ladoga, and the 
Vuoksi-Suvanto Lake system is still intact. Moreover, 
Finnish and foreign volunteer workers have recently 
strengthened secondary defenses behind Viborg, 
where the Finns plan to continue their formidable 
resistance. Throughout the war Finnish strategy has 
been to retreat, spread out, and then attack from the 


ee 


flanks. After a costly advance through 30 miles of 
fortified territory, the Soviet troops are now in a po- 
sition extremely vulnerable to counter-attack. 
Whether or not the Finns will actually take the of- 
fensive, as they have done time and again north of 
Lake Ladoga, will depend on their morale and de- 
gree of fatigue after the Soviet drive. Man power is 
becoming a decisive factor. 

SCANDINAVIA BETWEEN TWO WARS. All 
of the Scandinavian countries realize that the Finns 
cannot continue indefinitely without fresh troops and 
additional equipment. Although the movement for 
voluntary assistance to Finland is growing in Sweden, 
Norway and Denmark, the northern governments 
are still firmly opposed to official aid, which might 
involve them in war. Realizing, however, that even 
official neutrality is no guarantee of their safety, they 
hope for a quick end of war in Europe. On March 3 
it was reported that the Swedish and Norwegian 
governments were seeking to obtain a compromise 
settlement between the U.S.S.R. and Finland, in keep- 
ing with their joint declaration at Copenhagen on 
February 25.* 


BRITAIN RESTRICTS PALESTINE LAND SALES 


Ending the pause to which the outbreak of war 
had brought Britain’s plans for the future of Pal- 
estine, the British government on February 28 sud- 
denly promulgated regulations severely restricting 
Zionist land purchases from Arabs in much the 
greater portion of the mandated territory. Under the 
new rules, Jews are free to buy land only in munici- 
pal areas and in a strip of Mediterranean coastal 
plain some 50 miles in length. In a second zone in- 
cluding the fertile valleys of Esdraelon and Jezreel, 
and other territory, land may not be transferred to 
any one but Palestine Arabs except to improve irri- 
gation facilities; to enable the division into lots of 
land held jointly by Jews and Arabs; and to encour- 
age plans for special joint Jewish-Arab land devel- 
opment schemes approved by the British High Com- 
missioner. Sales to Zionists are prohibited in the hill 
country and in certain portions of the Gaza and 
Beersheba subdistricts where, according to the 
British, “the land available already is insufficient 
for the support of the existing population.” These 
regulations are designed to implement the policy laid 
down in the British White Paper of May 17, 1939, 
which envisaged the establishment in ten years of an 
independent Palestinian state allied with Britain and 
inhabited by a two-thirds Arab majority.* 


LAND CONTROL A CRUCIAL ISSUE. In the 
clash of Arab and Zionist national aims, land owner- 
ship is one of the key factors. Jewish land purchases, 


***Britain Outlines Palestine ‘Independence’ Plan,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, 
May 26, 1939. 


Page Two — 


es 
————— 


On February 29 the three Scandinavian gover. 
ments acted on another of their Copenhagen de 
cisions when they sent each of the Western bellige. 
ents uniform protests against indiscriminate warfare 
on neutral shipping. The answers of Berlin ang 
London on March 1 left little scope for neutral free. 
dom to trade. In Berlin the D.N.B., official Germay 
news agency, warned that acceptance of the British 
contraband control system was not in conformity 
with either the neutrality or the sovereignty of nop. 
belligerent states. And in London the Ministry of 
Economic Warfare asserted that it is the duty of 
neutral to submit to this “exercise of belligeren 
rights.” Since the Scandinavian states cannot live on 
their own resources and must trade abroad, they haye 
to submit to British blockade control measures, and 
suffer the consequences from the German navy. As 
yet no arrangement has been contrived to save the 
small neutrals from losses that, up to this time, equal 
those of the belligerents. 

A. RANDLE ELLIoTT 


*Cf. ‘Scandinavians Unite to Preserve Neutrality,’” Foreign P 


licy Bulletin, 
March 1, 1940. 


often made at high prices, have slowly but steadily 
continued during the last 20 years, until today 
roughly 375,000 acres are in Jewish hands. While 
this is but a small proportion of the total Palestine 
land area of 6,752,000 acres, it must be remembered 
that over half the country, including the large 
southern district, is unsuited for cultivation. Most of| 
the Jewish holdings are concentrated in the more| 
productive areas. Many were unutilized prior to thei 
acquisition by the Jews. | 

Under Article 6 of the Palestine mandate, the) 
British government, “while ensuring that the rights 
and position of other sections of the population art | 
not prejudiced,” must encourage close settlement by | 
Jews on the land. Hitherto Jewish settlement in in| 
dustry and agriculture has improved rather than | 
injured the economic status of the Arab population | 
Successive British investigators, however, have ex-| 
pressed concern over the congestion existing among | 
Arabs in the hill areas. In 1937 the Peel Commission 
recommended that Jewish land purchases be limited | 
to the plains, where—through irrigation and inten- 
sive cultivation—the soil may be developed to sup | 
port a relatively large population. This is the pro | 
cedure envisaged in the new British regulations, | 
although in some respects they seem unduly severe 
toward the Zionists. | 

Since both Zionists and Arab Nationalists art 
desperately striving to influence British policy, the 
February 28 announcement aroused wrath among 
the former and rejoicing among the latter. In Pal 


——— 


estine a 
spread d 
of string 
British | 
censure : 
of war. | 
declares, 
served tl 
with its 
the Brit: 
to put i 
of the L 
in one O: 
jand res 
ment wi 
stipulati 
ligious 1 
tive of f 

Whil 
better A 
land di 
its lates 
tine. Or 
their ft 
which | 


A SP! 


will be 
the reg 
propose 


membe: 


Article ] 


The | 
twent 
bers. 
of th 
Comr 
main 
been 
and 
said « 


The ] 
the n 
into 

of of 
are e 
Allt 
of tl 
can ; 
The 
€x-0! 
the 

IX, 

The 
its n 


—_—— 


FOREIG 
Headqua 
Entered | 


> 


LOTT 


| Bulletin, 


teadily 
today 
While 
lestine 
nbered 
Large 
fost of 
» more 
o their 


te, the 
- rights 
ion are 
rent by 
- in it 
r than} 
lation. 
ve ex 
among 
nission 
limited 
inten: | 
tO sup 
1e pro 
lations, 
severe 


sts are 
cy, the 
among 
in Pal 


— 
w~—~—~— 


etine a one-day Zionist general strike and wide- 

read demonstrations were met by the imposition 
of stringent curfews in Jewish areas. In London the 
British Labor party introduced its first motion of 
censure against the government since the outbreak 
of wat. In June 1939, the Parliamentary opposition 
declares, the Permanent Mandates Commission ob- 
served that the White Paper was not in accordance 
with its interpretation of the Palestine mandate; 
the British government had nevertheless proceeded 
to put it into effect without obtaining the sanction 
of the League Council. The Zionists point out that, 
in one of the most tragic hours in Jewish history, the 
land restrictions confine them to a pale of settle- 
ment within their national home and contravene the 
stipulation of the mandate that the civil and re- 
ligious rights of all Palestine’s inhabitants, irrespec- 
tive of race and religion, shall be respected. 

While the British government contends that 
better Arab-Zionist relations are impossible until the 
land dispute is settled, the immediate result of 
its latest step may be to increase disorder in Pales- 
tine. On the outbreak of war the Zionists pledged 
their full support to Britain, and Arab violence, 
which had been decreasing in extent, ceased almost 


Page Three 


a) 


entirely. Relations between Jews and Arabs began 
to improve, not because either group had modified 
its political pretensions but because of the effect of 
the war on Palestine’s economic life. For the first 
time, Jewish and Arab citrus growers joined forces 
in seeking assistance from the British administra- 
tion. Because of lack of suitable shipping facilities 
and the disorganization of their overseas markets, 
the growers fear that they may be unable to dispose 
of half of their crop this spring. 

It would be unfortunate if it should prove that 
Britain had injected an irritant into the encouraging 
situation revealed by these developments. The Brit- 
ish government may have thought it expedient to 
make a friendly gesture to the Arab nationalists in 
return for support in a possible Near Eastern military 
campaign. In view of Britain’s war aims, however, 
it might have been wiser to shelve the Palestine dis- 
pute as far as possible until the end of the conflict. 
Britain would not then be open to the reproach— 
already heard in some quarters—that it has enhanced 
the difficulties of the Jews and disregarded the 
League of Nations while fighting for the freedom 
of peoples and the observance of orderly interna- 


tional processes. Davi H. PopPpsr 


A SPECIAL MEETING OF THE FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


will be held at the Hotel Astor, New York, on Saturday, March 30, 1940, at 3:30 P.M., immediately after 
the regular luncheon meeting. This meeting is called by the Board of Directors to consider and act upon 
proposed amendments to the Constitution of the Association, which are now submitted by the Board to the 


membership and which are as follows: 


Article IV, Section 2, to be changed to read: 


The Board of Directors shall consist of not less than 
twenty-two (22) nor more than thirty-one (31) mem- 
bers. The Chairman, the Vice-Chairman, the President 
of the Association, and the Chairman of the Finance 
Committee respectively shall each ex-officio be and re- 
main directors during the term for which he shall have 
been elected to office and until his successor is elected 
and qualified, or until he shall otherwise cease to hold 
said office. 


The Board of Directors shall from time to time determine 
the number of other directors and these shall be divided 
into three classes as nearly equal as possible, the term 
of office of each class to be three years or until successors 
are elected and qualified. 


All members of the Board of Directors shall be members 
of the Association who are so circumstanced that they 
can attend the meetings of the Board regularly. 

The members of the Board of Directors other than the 
ex-officio members, shall be elected by the members of 
the Association as provided for hereinafter, in Article 
IX, Section 5, of this Constitution. 


The Board of Directors may fill vacancies occurring in 
its membership (whether by death, resignation, increase 


in number of directors, or otherwise than by expiration 
of term) by the election of members to serve until the 
next Annual Meeting, or until their successors are elected. 
Nine members shall constitute a quorum of the Board 
of Directors. 


The Board may determine the conditions under which 
directors shall be eligible for re-election. 


Article VI to be changed to read: 


A National Council shall be elected annually by the 
Board of Directors of the Association and shall serve as 
an advisory body to said Board. All chairmen of local 
branches and of Special Committees of the Association, 
and all members of the Board of Directors shall be ex- 
officio members of the National Council during their 
term of office, together with such ex-directors as shall 
thereunto be elected. 


By Order of the Board of Directors, 
RALPH S. Rounps, Chairman. 


These changes have been carefully considered by 
the Board of Directors. The office will be glad to 
explain the reasons for them if members wish to 
make inquiries before the meeting. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 20, Marcu 8, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


<> 181 


1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DororHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHE.es Dean, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Incorporated. National 


ee ee a 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Mar. 4.—Whatever else may be accomplished 
by Mr. Welles’ European journey, it has already 
demonstrated the grim intensity of the diplomatic 
struggle being waged behind the scenes. Despite his 
own unbroken silence, Mr. Welles has succeeded in 
loosing an avalanche of officially inspired press com- 
ment that underscores the anxiety and tension with 
which the belligerents face the future. 


BERLIN PYROTECHNICS. In Berlin Mr. Welles’ 
visit was used by Nazi authorities to spread the 
“publicly known German view” in the foreign press, 
obviously for the benefit of the Allies. Answering 
British and French reports of a German “peace of- 
fensive,” official quarters strove to create a frighten- 
ing picture of Germany's determination to continue 
the war until the power of British “plutocracy’’ is 
broken, and to keep alive the threat of a decisive 
military offensive this Spring. Hitler’s statement of 
war aims, according to the version given to foreign 
correspondents, repeated the familiar demands for 
Lebensraum in Eastern Europe, return of German 
colonies, a form of “freedom of the seas” which 
would prevent Britain from imposing a long-distance 
blockade, and limitation of armaments. 

Washington officials are not particularly surprised 
by these pyrotechnics, which merely tend to confirm 
what is already public knowledge. They are inclined 
to place greater weight on the fact that Mr. Welles 
was given unusual opportunities to meet most of the 
leaders of the régime and to probe the German men- 
tality at this stage of the war. This knowledge will 
be useful to the American government, regardless of 
what may have been said behind closed doors, and 
whether or not Hitler really sought to lessen the 
wide gap between the German and Allied war aims. 
It will be useful even though Mr. Welles returns 
without any other immediate tangible results. Be- 
fore the Under-Secretary left Washington, there was 
already a feeling in some quarters that a “test of 
strength” would have to precede the launching of a 
serious peace effort. Should such a test come, and 
should it fail to break the military stalemate, the 
value of this exploratory journey may be more ap- 
parent than it is today. In any case, Washington is 
reserving final judgment until Mr. Welles has com- 
pleted his tour and made his report. 


FINNISH LOAN PASSES. Meanwhile, despite 
rumors of a possible “compromise” settlement of the 


Soviet-Finnish war, Congress has enabled the Ad. 
ministration to grant additional loans to Finland and 
extend new credits to Norway and Sweden. Follow. 
ing passage of the Export-Import Bank bill on Feb. 
ruary 29, Jesse H. Jones, Federal Loan Administra. 
tor, announced that the Bank would lend $20,000. 
000 to Finland, $15,000,000 to Sweden and $10- 
000,000 to Norway. 

Under the terms of the Bank bill as finally ap. 
proved by Congress, the proceeds of these loans may 
be expended only for purchases in the United States 
and no part of the money may be used for arms, 
ammunition or implements of war, except commer 
cial aircraft. There is nothing in the bill, however, 
to prevent Finland from purchasing foodstuffs and 
other commodities in this country and trading them 
to Britain or France for war materials. 

Rumors of possible mediation between Finland 
and Russia have increased during the past week, and 
have been linked in some quarters to an apparent 
change in the Soviet attitude toward the United 
States. Evidence of the Soviet shift was seen, among 
other things, in the formal luncheon given for Am- 
bassador Laurence A. Steinhardt in Moscow on Feb- 
ruaty 28 by Foreign Commissar Vyacheslav M. 
Molotov. 

State Department officials decline to acknowledge 
any connection between this luncheon and reports 
of possible mediation in the Finnish war. On the 
surface, they find no tangible evidence that the So- 
viet government is prepared to renew its original 
offer to Finland or to consider a settlement with the 
present Finnish government. On the other hand, 
they see several reasons why Russia may hesitate to 
extend the war into Scandinavia and might—under 
certain circumstances—welcome a negotiated settle- 
ment after restoring the prestige of the Red Army. 
Moreover, Washington officials are aware of the con- 
cern of the Soviet government over the present state 
of its relations with this country. During the past 
few weeks, Moscow has gone out of its way to 
settle a number of minor problems which have arisen 
between the two governments, and in other ways 
has shown its desire to establish more cordial Soviet- 
American relations. 

W. T. STONE 


The British Common People, 1746-1938, by G. D. H. Cole 
and R. W. Postgate. New York, Knopf, 1939. $4.00 
A useful social history of Great Britain, well illustrated 
with statistics and written from an unusual point of view. 


except ii 
or, with 
by peace 
Near E: 
on the j 
the Sov 
“break ¢ 
possibly 
settleme 

MOS 
the pas 
ligerent 
the test 
Europe. 
on Maz 
Premiet 
under s 
Sweden 
the ma: 
Moscov 
were t 
Hitler’ s 
Axel V 
tion in 
and, af 


| happen 


teachec 
dent of 
Berlin 
for Ro 
Ambas 
den) v 
by Pre 
conver: 
leadins 


