


tic. 


Lins 


ited 


ced. 
dis- 
>> 
rted 
rese 
eS a 
ited 
1efi- 
that 
orts. 
1 to 
ans- 
use 
each 
ven 
-e of 
the 


ures 


id it 


ince. | 


1 of 
uing 
r if 
$04 
itua- 
ntic, 
ty of 
But 
tlan- 
1s on 
itain. 
NE 





Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XX, No. 3 


NovEMBER 8, 1940 





AXIS UNFOLDS ITS MEDITERRANEAN STRATEGY 


ITH an official British announcement, on No- 

vember 3, that British troops had landed on 
Greek territory, the war in Greece moved from its 
preliminary phases into a stage in which the strategy 
of the participants became somewhat more clearly 
defined. The Italian air force ranged widely over 
the Greek peninsula, bombing a number of cities 
and communications centers, while the Royal Air 
Force replied with a spectacular raid against Naples 
from undisclosed bases. On land, mountain troops 
clashed in the rugged hills on the Greco-Albanian 
border in weather which made the use of Italian 
light tanks and trucks extremely difficult. 


ITALY’S PLAN OF ATTACK. During the first 
week of war, the Italian attack developed in two 
directions. One thrust was pointed southward, paral- 
lel to the coast line of the Ionian Sea, apparently 
in order to isolate Corfu, Cephalonia and other 
strategic islands opposite the foot of the Italian 
boot. Assuming that this goal can be achieved, 
Italian forces might then turn eastward along 
the Gulfs of Patras and Corinth to Athens, thereby 
sepatating the Peloponnesian peninsula from the 
remainder of the country. The second Italian drive 


‘moved directly to the east near the Greco-Yugo- 


slav frontier, where road and rail connections lead 
ftom the town of Florina to the port of Salonika, 
one of the greatest commercial outlets of the Balkans. 

Italian progress toward these objectives has thus 
far been slow, and the ‘lightly fortified positions of 
the “Metaxas line”: inside Greek territory have not 
yet been broken. In the coastal drive, the Fascist 
forces were reported to be working toward the town 
of Yanina, some 30 miles inside the Greek frontier: 
but the column bousid for Florina was outflanked 
by Greek. Evzones, who filtered into Albania and 
threatened to cut its communications. From reports 
Originating in the battle areas it is clear that rela- 
tively few troops are involved in the operations thus 


far undertaken. This may be due to difficulties of 
supply; to hasty commencement of an ill-prepared 
campaign about which it has been rumored that 
Mussolini and Hitler disagreed; or to Italy’s desire 
to divert British troops from the Egyptian front to 
Greece. Alternatively, the Italians may be withhold- 
ing their full strength while Axis diplomats and 
the press attempt to force replacement of the 
Metaxas government by a compliant régime like 
that of Rumania, which would permit Fascist troops 
to occupy strategic centers in Greece without further 
use of force. Despite political fissures in the structure 
of the Greek dictatorship, there is as yet no sign of 
internal dissension. 


THE BRITISH DILEMMA. For the British, the 
Italian campaign poses a difficult dilemma. Outnum- 
bered in Egypt, they have yielded only arid border 
territory to the Fascist troops advancing from Libya 
toward Alexandria. If the British now employ large 
forces in Greece, they will necessarily be cofmpelled 
to relax their naval pressure on the Italian sea com- 
munications with Libya (which is generally believed 
to be an important factor in restraining the Italians), 
and to weaken the strength of their air and motor- 
ized resistance in Egypt. On the other hand, if Greece 
is permitted to fall to Mussolini, Fascist air and 
naval bases will command the approaches to the 
Dardanelles and, reinforcing the Dodecanese out- 
posts, strengthen the Italian position in the entire 
Eastern Mediterranean. It seems probable, therefore, 
that the few British troops sent to Greek territory 
will be used only for the protection of naval bases 
occupied by the Eastern Mediterranean fleet, notably 
on the island of Crete. From such bases the British 
may ultimately be able to intensify their sea and air 
attacks on Italian communications, and perhaps even 
come to grips with the Italian fleet. The crucial ques- 
tion in the Eastern Mediterranean is whether the 
British forces now in that area can hold out until it 














becomes safe to dispatch more aid from the home- 
land, and until the slowly mobilized resources of the 
Empire can be brought into play. 

The campaign against Greece, which bolsters the 
left wing of the Italian advance on Suez, may also 
serve as the right wing of a concerted Axis drive to 
complete the conquest of the Balkans. Once Italy 
occupies Salonika, the encirclement of Yugoslavia 
will be virtually accomplished and the possibility of 
effective resistance by that nation ended. Bulgaria, 
which is now being subjected to infiltration of Ger- 
man technicians and tourists, seems practically in- 
capable of independent action. Should Greece fall, 
Bulgarian nationalists would doubtless receive titular 
control of a corridor to the Aegean. 


The threat from Bulgaria has played its part in 
restraining the Turks who, despite their alliance with 
Britain, have adopted a policy of non-intervention. 
This policy was reaffirmed by the Turkish President, 
Ismet Inonu, in a speech to the Turkish National 
Assembly on November 1. While recognizing the 
bonds of the British alliance as ‘‘solid and unbreak- 
able,”” M. Inonu expressed the hope that his country 
would remain non-belligerent and hinted that the re- 
newed intimacy of Russo-Turkish relations was re- 
sponsible for Turkey’s attitude. If Turkey were 
closely linked with the Soviet Union, it might pos- 
sibly preserve its territorial integrity during a new 
division of spheres of influence in the Balkans which, 
it was widely rumored, was being discussed with 
Moscow by Germany and Italy. 


BRITAIN MENACED BY NEW SUBMARINE CAMPAIGN 


The aerial combat between Britain and Germany 
and the spread of hostilities to the Mediterranean 
have tended to obscure the fact that British shipping 
losses have risen to the highest level of the war. If 
the present rate of sinkings continues this winter, 
Great Britain may be as seriously endangered by the 
submarine blockade as in April 1917. The loss of 
ships and cargoes is supplemented, moreover, by 
Germany's incessant bombing of such vital ports as 
London, Liverpool and Southampton, as well as in- 
land warehouses and railways. Although the British 
government claims to have sufficient food stocks for 
any emergency this winter, its war effort depends 





For an analysis of German aims in Europe, 


READ: 


EUROPE UNDER NAZI RULE 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


October 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 4 








Page Two 











———— 
LL 


PEACE TALKS WITH FRANCE DELAYED. Op 
the Western front, reported German preparations 
for a new peace offensive were somewhat hampered 
by a setback in the negotiations for a definitive settle. 
ment between France and the Axis powers. Accord. 
ing to dispatches from Rome, the Pétain government 
was reluctant to sign a treaty handing over African 
colonial possessions to Germany and Italy, especially 
since it was feared that wavering colonial officials 
might put their territories under the protection of 
the British fleet rather than cede them to former 
enemy troops. In the Western Hemisphere, the ac. 
tivity of United States destroyers and patrol planes 
in the neighborhood of Martinique presaged the pos. 
sible seizure of French colonies by American naval | 





forces if a treaty of peace were signed. 
Within France itself, moreover, Marshal Pétain | 
was reported to be adamant in insisting on “honor. | 
able neutrality” rather than outright collaboration | 
with the Reich, which is advocated by Vice Premier 
and Foreign Minister Pierre Laval. Consequently, 
Hitler and Mussolini are believed to have approved 
a modus vivendi under which certain quantities of 
food, coal and other supplies will be allocated to 
France and the number of German troops in the 
country reduced. A temporary agreement on these 
points would alleviate the hunger and suffering which 
confront France this winter, and leave the door open 
for a future attempt by the Laval wing of the French 
government to swing the country behind the Axis 


program for Europe. Davip H. Popper 


on a regular flow of armaments and raw materials 
from North America. 


During two recent weeks British and neutral mer- 
chant marine losses, as indicated in the table below, 
have approached those of the worst World War 
period, when sinkings averaged 198,700 tons weekly. 
In the week of October 15-21, the total losses — 
198,030 tons — actually equalled the April 1917) 
average, while sinkings from September 17 to 23 
amounted to 159,288 tons. During both weeks, al- 
though allied and neutral countries suffered less se 
verely, British losses, 146,528 and 131,857 tons 
respectively, were well over Britain’s weekly average 
of 121,700 tons in April 1917. The average weekly 
sinkings for the past seven weeks have been as fol- 
lows: British, 64,153 tons; allied and neutral, 25,527 
tons; total, 89,680 tons. These figures show a marked 
increase over the average weekly losses of the first} 
year of the war: British, 29,600 tons; allied and 
neutral, 23,695 tons; total, 53,295 tons. Since the 
outbreak of war, despite the immediate introduction 
of the convoy system, over 3,400,000 tons of British, 
allied and neutral shipping have been destroyed, 











—_ 


accor 
news 
Octok 
7,000 


(from | 
Week 
Endin: 
Sept. 9 
Sept. 1 
Sept. 2 
Sept. 3! 
Oct. 7 
Oct. 14 
Oct. 21 
Weekl 

Avet 


} Total i 


ist ¥ 

of V 
Week; 

Avert 

Aver 

Apri 

BR 
Britis 
fons ' 
its lo 
fers f 
probl 
fewer 
tectio 
the as 
Japan 
Whil 
subm: 
has a 
and | 
from 
fabric 
fully. 
ingto: 
build 


The I 
dus 
An 

facts 

busing 
concis 


Diplo 
Yor 


Del 
diplor 
durin 


_— 


FORE! 
Headqr 


Entered 


=> 





ich 
xis 


tals 


ner- 


W ar 





—_—_—_ 
—_— 





according to British official statements. The German 
news agency, Dienst aus Deutschland, claimed on 
October 3, however, that the Reich has sunk over 
7,000,000 tons of British shipping alone. 


RECENT SHIPPING LOSSES IN TONS 
(from British Admiralty reports as published in the American press) 








Week hae Allied and 
Ending British Neutral Total 
Sept. 9 28,200 26,347 54,547 
Sept. 16 29,246 19,954 49,200 
Sept. 23 131,857 27,431 159,288 
Sept. 30 55,927 16,400 72,337 
Oct. 7 24,943 6,151 31,094 
Oct. 14 32,370 30,895 63,265 
Oct. 21 146,528 51,502 198,030 
Weekly 

Average 64,153 25,527 89,680 
Total in 

Ist Year 

of War 1,539,196 1,232,137 2,771,333 
Weekly 

Average 29,600 23,695 53,295 
Weekly 

Average 

April 1917 121,700 76,900 198,700 


BRITAIN’S DISADVANTAGES. Although the 
British Empire entered the war with some 21,000,000 
tons of shipping and thus far has more than offset 
its losses by new construction, captures and trans- 
fers from foreign flags, it faces a number of serious 
problems unknown in the World War. Britain has 
fewer naval vessels, especially destroyers, for pro- 
tection of its commerce than in 1914-18, and lacks 
the assistance of its World War allies—France, Italy, 
Japan, Russia and (in 1917-18) the United States. 
While Germany entered the war in 1939 with fewer 
submarines and raiders than in the World War, it 
has apparently accelerated its output of submarines 
and has also secured bases from Norway to France 
from which even very small submarines, with parts 
fabricated by mass production, can operate success- 
fully. According to a United Press report from Wash- 
ington, Germany now has 120 submarines and is 
building 180 more. Germany's airplanes have not 





The Economic Almanac for 1940. New York, National In- 
dustrial Conference Board, 1940. $5.00 
An invaluable reference book, containing a wealth of 
facts and figures bearing on economic legislation, general 
business conditions and recent economic developments. A 
concise commentary explains most of the data. 


Diplomat of Destiny, by Sir George Franckenstein. New 
York, Alliance Book Corporation, 1940. $3.00 
Delightfully written autobiography of the man whose 
| diplomatic life was ended by the German seizure of Austria 
during his Ambassadorship to Great Britain. 





Page Three 








been as effective in commerce destruction as its sub- 
marines, but they have served successfully in locating 
ships and convoys, and in bombing poorly defended 
vessels like trawlers or relatively large targets like the 
42,000-ton Empress of Britain, whica was $ set afire 
by a plane on October 28. 


To meet its present and future losses Britain 
is moving to speed up construction and purchase of 
new vessels. British shipyards, which constructed a 
record total of 2,056,000 tons in 1920 and reached 
921,000 tons in 1937 and 1,030,000 tons in 1938, 
are probably maintaining a high rate of production 
despite air raids, although no statistics are available. 
Great Britain, moreover, controls a considerable pro- 
portion of Norwegian, Danish, Dutch, Belgian, 
Polish and French shipping—totaling over 10,000,- 
000 tons. Much of the Greek merchant marine, re- 
ported to have totaled 334 ships of 1,500,000 tons on 
January 1, 1940, will come under British control. 
Britain has also purchased 101 American ships, in- 
cluding nineteen laid-up vessels sold by the Mari- 
time Commission for $4,640,000 on October 11. 
The Maritime Commission is reported to have ap- 
proved the transfer to the United Kingdom and 
Canada of over 175,000 tons of shipping in the past 
six months. The British Ministry of Shipping an- 
nounced on October 31 that it had allocated an initial 
$50,000,000 for purchasing additional ships and plac- 
ing orders in American shipyards. It hopes to finance 
large-scale production of a standardized 10,000-ton 
freighter, despite the fact that American yards are 
already working at full capacity, with approximately 
1,500,000 tons of merchant shipping under construc- 
tion or contract. While Great Britain, as in the 
World War, is seriously menaced by Germany’s sub- 
marine campaign, it probably does not face defeat so 
long as it can control the seas, blockade its enemies, 
and retain access to overseas sources of supplies and 


ships. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


| THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Britain’s Economic Strategy, by E. V. 
Jonathan Cape, 1939. 12s. 6d. 
A comprehensive and very useful survey of British eco- 
nomic developments during the past two decades, includ- 
ing the rearmament program of 1937-39. 


Francis. London, 


The Long Watch in England, by Eugene and Arline 
Lohrke. New York, Henry Holt, 1940. $2.00 


A beautifully written but somewhat superficial interpre- 
tation of British confusion and decadence, by two Amer- 
icans living in a Sussex village. It merely expands the 
author’s Night Over England, published in 19389. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 3, NovemBER 8, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2 


S11 


1940. 





Published weekly 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; 
, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. :., 


by the Foreign Policy Association, 
DorotHy F. Leger, Secretary; 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. National 
Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. 
Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 4.—The President's recommendation on Oc- 
tober 30 that the National Defense Advisory Com- 
mission should sympathetically consider British re- 
quests to place orders for 12,000 more planes has 
again focused attention on means of expanding our 
assistance to Britain. In recent weeks British spokes- 
men, particularly Sir Walter Layton, have repeatedly 
pointed out that the loss of French and Belgian in- 
dustrial capacity and the risk of serious damage by 
air raids compel Britain to rely increasingly on the 
United States for essential war supplies. 


SUPPLIES FOR BRITAIN. The British do not 
minimize the aid received up to the present. In addi- 
tion to the 50 over-age destroyers exchanged for air 
and naval bases, they have acquired from the Ameri- 
can government about 240 Army and Navy planes, 
and some 600,000 rifles, 80,000 machine guns, 800 
75mm-guns and 1,300,000 rounds of ammunition 
from surplus World War stocks. This matériel ar- 
rived at a critical time, after the British expeditionary 
force had abandoned virtually all its equipment on 
the fields of Flanders. 

American mines and factories have made an even 
more substantial contribution to Britain’s rearma- 
ment. The British Purchasing Commission has placed 
orders, and taken over French orders, for an amount 
totaling between $1,250,000,000 and $1,500,000,000. 
During the first nine months of the current year our 
exports to the United Kingdom rose 88 per cent 
above the value in the corresponding period of 1939. 
Shipments have been rapidly accelerated since the 
collapse of France in June. During July and August 
they were almost three times higher than in the 
preceding year. Exports to Canada for the first three- 
quarters of 1940 also increased by 55 per cent. Fig- 
ures recently released by the Department of Com- 
merce showed that 44 per cent of all our exports 
during the first year of the war went to the British 
Empire. By August and September of this year the 
proportion going to British countries had risen to 
65 and 66 per cent respectively. 

These statistics are all the more significant because 
our exports to the British Empire today consist al- 
most wholly of war essentials. They include aircraft 
and parts, machine tools and other machinery, oil 
and gasoline, iron and steel, aluminum, copper and 
other metals, firearms, explosives and ammunition. 
In the first nine months of the year, 1,203 American 
planes were shipped to Britain, Canada and Austra- 


lia. Iron and steel exports to the United Kingdom 
alone amounted to over 2,000,000 tons. Maching 
tool shipments to Britain have also continued to rise 
sharply—from $7,954,726 in July to $15,070,249 ig 
September 1940. These supplies, of course, are not 
being given away. The British are paying for them, 
both by the shipment of goods and by the liquida. 
tion of their assets in this country. 

MORE ASSISTANCE NEEDED. Despite these 
contributions, British authorities see an urgent need 
for still greater assistance. Additional aid could be 
extended either by releasing more of our own war 
material or by accelerating American production for 
British needs. The British are reported to be nego. 
tiating for at least some of the Army’s long-range 
bombers or “flying fortresses,’” and would undoubt. 
edly welcome an offer of additional over-age destroy. 
ers, which would be particularly useful in combating 
the submarine menace. 

The British are most anxious, however, to have 
the United States enlarge its productive capacity of 
war material, or to allocate a larger proportion of it 
to Britain. The manufacture of more planes is their 
first consideration. The present schedule calls for the 
production by July 1942 of 35,800 planes, of which 
14,300 have been provisionally assigned to Britain, 
Output, however, has lagged behind schedule. While 
the United States shipped 333 planes to British coun 
tries during August, exports in September are re 
ported to have dropped to 250 or less. For October, 
shipments were probably not much greater. Difficul: 
ties encountered in the production of combat planes 
have apparently accounted for this decline. The com 
mittee on plane standardization appointed by the 
President on October 14 is expected to eliminate 
differences in British and American specifications 
which have hitherto retarded output. The mobilize 
tion of the automobile industry to manufacture ait 
plane parts is also designed to stimulate production 
Experts doubt, however, that the industry can absot 
orders for 12,000 additional British planes unles 
such orders are definitely given priority at the e 
pense of American requirements. 

In the last analysis, the scope of our assistance 0 
Britain depends on America’s capacity to produce 
As long as we adhere to “‘business as usual,”’ we shal 
be unable to satisfy with sufficient rapidity our ow 
and British demands for war material. Sooner o 
later, the government may be compelled to intro 
duce a thoroughgoing system of priorities, covering 
not only direct British and American orders, but also 
indirect orders to subcontractors. JOHN C. DEWILD 











