






































Ann Arbor, Nich. = 
ok 
| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
a, 
re 
‘0- 
a An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
mE FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
in @2 Bast 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
yin | Vou. XXIII, No. 43 AucusT 11, 1944 
nst 
TURKEY BREAKS WITH AXiS IN WAKE OF ALLIED VICTORIES 
a ay/ ITH powerful American armored spearheads Allies for invading France from the west might in 
9 pushing toward Paris and the Red Army ad- the future be applied in reverse. Now that the great 
nal | Vancing on Warsaw, the news from the two major engineering problems involved in the cross-channel 
re | European battlefronts is so spectacularly good that invasion have been solved, the British Isles have be- 
an | it has produced numerous predictions that August come almost as much a part of the mainland as 
n’s} May well be the decisive month in winning Allied though the land bridge of a previous geological age 
ty victory. This optimistic outlook is further encouraged still existed, and Britain can never again attempt— 
"| by signs that the revolt inside Germany is still sim- as it did after 1919—to turn its back on Europe. The 
uly | meting, for on August 4 Hitler was obliged to order United States, on the other hand, will emerge from 
an. | 4 “ruthless purge’ of the Wehrmacht by a special the war physically unscathed, and it will still require 
rat | ‘court of honor” named by the Fuehrer himself. As an act of intelligent imagination for Americans to 
ion | @ result of these undeniably heartening portents, too realize the extent to which their safety and economic 
na- | Many Americans have been prone to forget that the well-being depend on events across the Atlantic. 
ted | final efforts in so great a struggle require the same Whether this realization of our interdependence 
co, | hard work as earlier and more uncertain stages of exists will soon be indicated by the amount of under- 
y's the conflict. On August 4 War Mobilization Director standing Congress, the Administration and the Amer- 
er | Byrnes felt it necessary to put into force new man- ican public show of the Allies’ need to liquidate lend- 
ver | power controls to halt the rush toward peace-time lease in such a way as to insure an orderly transition 
at | Jobs that was endangering military production. to peace-time economies. 
nch The British public, by contrast, is so much less TURKEY LOOKS TOWARD THE PEACE. On 
has | sanguine about the length of the duration that Prime the diplomatic as well as the military front there is 
pet- | Minister Churchill found it possible on August 2 to reason for Allied optimism. After numerous false 
to} give Parliament an optimistic report on the progress alarms during the past five years, the Turkish govern- 
of the war without fearing his words of confidence ment on August 2 suspended diplomatic and eco- 
yan- | would immediately cause a slump in vital war work. nomic relations with Germany, but stopped short of a 
ent | The chief reason for the more serious spirit prevail- declaration of war. From the point of view of the 
vith | ing in Britain is undoubtedly the constant reminder, Allies, Turkey’s action is not, however, as tardy as 
in- | furnished by the devastating robot bombs, of the might at first appear. Until a year ago Britain and 
fely | need for continued and concentrated efforts against the United States urged the Turks not to forsake 
ber- | the enemy. But another reason, which may be signifi- their neutrality lest Turkey's involvement in the war 
| of ¢ cant in future Anglo-American relations, is the dif- result in extending German lines into the strategic- 
n in | ferent position of the two Allies in reference to ally important Middle East and constitute a drain on 
who | Europe. In his speech Churchill suggested Britain’s Allied supplies at a time when they were severely 
rds, | New proximity to the continent when he described limited. Meanwhile, however, the Soviet Union was 
out ' the “ducks” which so marvellously facilitated the eager for Turkey's participation as a means of threat- 
cing | Allied landings in France. Although the Prime Min- ening the flank of the German forces on the Black 
x to) ister did not point out the broad significance of this Sea littoral. This difference in Anglo-American and 
LES | New craft, his British audience probably needed no Russian policies toward the Turks was ironed out 
; feminder that the techniques worked out by the at Teheran in November 1943, when plans were 






G Entered as 2nd class matter 
*seral Library 7 


Unty AUG 11 1944” 


Srsit f we 
‘J Of Nichigan 






























































made for welding the United Nations forces more 
closely together. Accordingly, Britain and the United 
States began putting pressure on Ankara last winter 
to secure the use of airfields from which to attack 
Rumanian oil centers and to stop the export of vital 
raw materials, notably chrome, to the Reich. 

As long as the Turks felt the Germans might re- 
taliate for any aid extended to the Allies, they re- 
fused all British and American requests, pointing out 
that their army was largely unmechanized and lacked 
air power. This spring, however, when Allied mil- 
itary successes on the eastern and Italian fronts re- 
duced the threat of Nazi attack, the Turks agreed to 
suspend exports of chrome to Germany and to pre- 
vent passage of partly dismantled German warships 
through the Dardanelles. Now that the Germans 
are clearly and rapidly losing the war in France, as 
well as in the east and south, the Turks have con- 
cluded that it is safe to take another step to assure 
friendship with the winning Allies. To the Turks 
such risk of Nazi retaliation as they are still running 
is considered worthwhile because they have received 
from the Allies—who hope Turkey’s action will en- 
courage Bulgaria and Rumania to get out of the 
war—promises of a market equivalent to that lost in 
Germany and shipments of Allied war equipment. 

Above all, however, Turkey hopes that its break 
with Germany will help secure it a voice at the peace 
conference. When the new European settlement is 
made, the Turks will be vitally interested not only in 
the Bulgar frontiers and the balance of power in the 
Balkans but in the important question of the Dar- 
danelles. Since Russia has again appeared as a lead- 
ing world power, it may be expected to be more 
interested in the straits than at any time in the past 
twenty-five years. At the end of World War I Soviet 
leaders renounced the claims to the Dardanelles 
their Tsarist predecessors had staked in a war-time 
secret treaty with the Allies and thus prepared the 


FILIPINOS FACE SERIOUS 


‘Whether the Philippines are invaded at an early 
date, or temporarily by-passed while our heaviest 
blows are aimed farther north, final ejection of the 
Japanese from the islands will create important po- 
litical problems for our government and that of the 
Philippine Commonwealth, now headed by Sergio 
Osmefia, who became President on the death of 
Manuel Quezon on August 1, 1944. 

INSIDE THE PHILIPPINES. The present condi- 
tion of the Philippines, as indicated by trustworthy 
teports, may be summarized as follows: 

(1) The Japanese have no hold whatever on large 
areas in the Visayas and Mindanao, where their gar- 
risons are small (except in Davao) and are confined 
. to the ports. Most of their forces are massed in 
Luzon. In the southern islands, guerrilla bands led 


Page Two 





—— 
eS 





way for the establishment of international control, 


which lasted until Turkey secured the League's per. 


mission in 1936 to exercise virtually sole control. Ip 
the future, however, it is possible that Russia may 
revive its historic request for unrestricted entry tc the 
Mediterranean via the straits, and the Turks undoubt. 
edly believe their chances for maintaining control of 
this important passageway will be strengthened by 
their current overtures to the Allies. 

SPOTLIGHT ON THE MIDDLE EAST. Turkey, 
at the eastern end of the Mediterranean, focuses at 
tention on the Middle East, which may all too easily 
revert to its pre-1914 position as “the area of dis. 
cord” —in Sumner Welles’ apt phrase. Although war- 
time changes in the Allies’ relationships in the Near 
East are largely unnoticed by our popular press, 
transformations of long-range significance are Occut- 
ing. In 1939 the Middle East, as a whole, was pre- 
dominantly a British preserve and the chief prob. 
lems, therefore, were those existing between the 
British and the native Arabs. The war, however, has 
greatly changed this situation, for the influence of the 
United States has grown enormously thanks to lend 
lease and the establishment of military bases. Al 
though most of these American activities will end 
with the war, the United States will have important 
interests in the oil of the region and will probably 
continue to desire rights to air bases. Meanwhile the 
U.S.S.R. has opened new trade routes across the area 
to secure Allied supplies, and it may be expected that 
the Russians will have permanent interests in Persian 
oil. In the future, therefore, the Middle East will be 
a crucial testing ground of inter-Allied unity. In 
adjusting the overlapping claims of the Big Three in 
this area the international oil agreement just nego- 
tiated between Britain and the United States should 
offer a model solution and substitute for unworkable 
spheres of influence. 

WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


POST-LIBERATION PROBLEMS 


by both Filipinos and Americans are active, and in 


some provinces free civil governments are function 
ing. The Moros are well supplied with firearms ob- 
tained from Philippine Army units before their sut- 
render. By “scraping the bottom of the barrel,” the 
Japanese were able to muster only 2,000 troops for 4 
recent punitive expedition in the south, the results 
of which were negligible. The former Philippine 
constabulary probably has less than 10,000 effectives 
(the Japanese say 40,000), and is so little trusted 
that each man is issued only one clip of ammunition 
at a time by Japanese supply officers. 

(2) Japan’s “printing press’ pesos have deteti- 
orated until they are worth only half as much as the 
“typewriter” pesos issued by the guerrillas, and the 
puppet government has been forced to raise wages 


’ 


es n 
branc 
cocot 
of 0} 
grow 





tical 
cultu 
(4 
have 
boat: 
drive 
from 
engi 








—= 


trol, 
per 
. Ip 
may 


ubt- 
| of 
by 


key, 
5 at- 
aSily 
dis- 
war- 
Near 
ress, 
‘cur. 
pre- 
rob- 

the 
has 
- the 
end- 
Al- 
end 
tant 
ably 
the 
area 
that 
sian 


y 








—_— 

Tiepeatedly to keep pace with inflation prices. 
} (3) Food is scarce in Manila and the “cash-crop” 
vinces. In normal times the islands produced 





J bout four-fifths of their starch-food requirements, 
the! 


md imported rice from Saigon. The Japanese 
wrecked the distribution system by ill-advised regula- 


}tions, and have cut off the importation of rice. In 


many areas, thus, there is considerable malnutrition. 
Most of the sugar output has been used by the Jap- 
anese for the manufacture of alcohol. Filipino farm- 
eis now grow patches of cane and produce a crude 
‘brand of sugar for their own use. The copra and 
gconut oil industry is also stagnant, a small amount 
of oil being used for fuel and soap. Attempts to 
grow cotton, perhaps forced by the Army on a skep- 
tical Department of Agriculture, have failed and the 
{culture is being abandoned. 

(4) Transportation is at a minimum. Steamships 
have been replaced on the inter-island runs by sail- 
boats and motor-barges. The only fleet of gasoline- 
driven trucks in the islands is used to haul copper 
from mines in North Luzon. Charcoal and oil-fueled 
engines are used on other motored vehicles, even by 
the Japanese Army. 

(5) Malaria has been widely spread by Filipino 
troops who contracted the disease on Bataan. Dur- 
ing confinement in Camp O'Donnell (Tarlac Prov- 
ince) these troops were given indoctrination courses 
in the blessings of Japanese rule and then paroled 
to their homes. They have thus acted as carriers of 
malaria, and quinine has not been available to com- 
bat it. On the other hand, the Japanese have con- 
tinued vaccination in the towns, and the smallpox 
fate is low. Neither has there been an epidemic of 
bubonic plague, as the Philippines have virtually no 
communication with any country except Japan. Some 
cholera is reported, though not on a large scale. 

(6) Captured American officers of the rank of 
colonel and higher have been sent to Formosa or 
Japan. Lower ranks have had severe experiences in 
Philippine prison camps. Civilians at the Santo 





lin gpomas camp have been better treated. Nearly all 


Americans formerly permitted to live outside the 
camp have been moved into it—voluntarily in some 
‘cases as they could not obtain sufficient food outside 
except at black market prices. There is some malnu- 
trition among older civilians, but children and young 
people have usually been able to cope with the diet. 
About 800 American and European men have been 
moved from Manila to Los Bafios. 


COLLABORATIONISTS AND GUERRILLAS. 
American re-occupation of the Philippines will pre- 








Page Three 





—=—=— 
sumably require a transition period of military bes 
ernment before the Commonwealth is restored to 
authority. The Commonwealth is not equipped to - 
deal with immediate problems of reconstruction, and 
it would seem that American assistance and super- 
vision would be essential for some time. * 

Politically, difficult problems will be presented by 
the Filipino “collaborationists” and the guerrilla gov- 
ernments. Of 1,000 leading Filipino officials, about 
one-fourth are reported as accepting appointments 
by the puppet government. Under Philippine law, 
they will not be able to plead “duress” as an excuse. 
Nearly all the collaborationists, however, are impor- 
tant figures in the Nationalist party, of which the 
late President Quezon and President Osmefia were 
the leaders. (General Aguinaldo, also a collabora- 
tionist, is not considered a significant factor by either 
Japanese or Filipinos, if only because of his advanced 
age.) The guerrilla governments are understandably 
bitter toward the collaborationists, and some are re- 
ported as none too friendly to the government-in- 
exile. Most of them have announced their determina- 
tion to play a controlling part in the restored Com- 
monwealth government, and to deal summarily with 
the collaborationists. 

President Osmefia is probably as well fitted by 
experience and temperament to deal with this situa- 
tion and with the American government as any Fili- 
pino. While former President Quezon was an out- 
standing example of the Spanish-Malay, Mr. Osmefia 
typifies some of the best traits of the Filipino of 
Chinese ancestry. He is not lacking in balanced judg- 
ment, a sense of fairness and a talent for conciliation. 
More cautious and patient than Mr. Quezon, he has 
a reputation for keeping his engagements, and al- 
though far less aggressive, he has shown firmness 
when the occasion demanded. Nor can it be forgot- 
ten that his wife is still a prisoner in Manila, and that 
two of his three sons were shot by the Japanese. He 
may find it both necessary and expedient to purge 
his party of collaborationists and to welcome many 
of the guerrilla leaders to a large share in the Com- 
monwealth government. A prompt and peaceful solu- 
tion of these problems will hasten the complete in- 
dependence which has been pledged to the Filipinos, 
and which their heroism has so richly earned. 





WALTER WILGUS 





Hitler’s Generals, by W. E, Hart. Garden City, Doubleday, 
Doran and Company, 1944. $2.75 


A Reichswehr officer under the German Republic gives a 
personal view of the war leaders. 





One month for change of address on membership publications. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 43, AuGust 11, 1944, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Heaciquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vena MicHe.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., umder the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


National 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ci 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





Washington News Letter 








stbben, 








As a result of the Finnish Parliament's action on 
August 1, calling Field Marshal Carl Gustav Man- 
nerheim to the Presidency, his attitude toward the 
prospect of European peace takes on special signifi- 
cance. He is known to be unfriendly to Soviet Russia, 
but probably would not sacrifice Finland to that dis- 
like. Yet he is celebrated for his unfriendliness to- 
ward Germany. There is a story that in his pre-war 
travels to the French Riviera, Mannerheim would 
make the journey by sea rather than take the railroad 
which crossed German territory. Even during the 
military crisis in Finland provoked by the Soviet cap- 
ture of Viipuri and their offensive against Karelia on 
June 10, he is reported to have declined an invitation 
from the German government to visit Berlin. 


GERMANS OPPOSE FINNISH PEACE. If Man- 
nerheim should now sue for peace with Russia, this 
would discourage such wavering satellites as Ru- 
mania and Bulgaria from continuing in the war, and 
would perhaps intensify dissension inside Germany. 
Peace anywhere within the European Fortress would 
strangle the slight hopes of leading Nazis for per- 
sonal survival. Although these hopes are entirely de- 
pendent on protracting the war as long as possible, 
German radio reports described the elevation of 
Mannerheim with satisfaction. One broadcast said 
that Mannerheim now has the same powers in Fin- 
land as Hitler has in Germany. 


In fact, the selection of Mannerheim for the Pres- 
idency ends a period of intense pro-Germanism in 
the Finnish government, even though the German 
Minister in Helsinki, Wilpert von Blucher, and Ger- 
man military leaders in Finland may create difficul- 
ties for Mannerheim should he seek peace. The Par- 
liamentary action climaxed a growing restlessness, 
due to Finland’s exhaustion after long fighting and a 
deepening realization that what President Roosevelt 
on March 16 termed the “hateful partnership” with 
Germany could only lead to “national suicide,” as 
the British Broadcasting Company had warned on 
March 15. 


The internal struggle between Finnish groups 
strangely fascinated by the prospect of sinking side 
by side with Germany and groups anxious for peace 
became marked after the Soviet government’s an- 
nouncement on April 23 that negotiations to end the 
war with Finland had collapsed. Three leaders of the 


FOR VICTORY ° 





MANNERHEIM MAY MODIFY FINN’S PRO-GERMAN POLICY 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


government identified themselves completely with 
German policy—President Risto Ryti, Prime Minister 
Edwin Linkomies and Foreign Minister Henrik Ram. 
say. On June 28 a DNB broadcast declared that Nazj 
Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop had com. 
pleted a visit to Finland during which the two gov. 
ernments had reached a “complete concert of opin. 
ions.”” The United States on June 30 broke off diplo. 





matic relations with Finland, but that only steeled 
the government's determination to merge its fortunes 
with Hitler’s. Linkomies on July 2 broadcast against 
a separate peace, and on August 1 it was disclosed 
that Ryti had writtten to Adolf Hitler pledging Fin 
land not to seek a separate peace. 


Despite the dictatorial hold which the Ryti-Lin 
komies government exercised over public opinion, 
dissatisfaction with their policy became so plain that 
Ryti resigned on August 1. Overshadowing the stub 
born decisions of his cabinet were the more telling 
facts of Russian advances into the heart of Poland 
and toward East Prussia, the Red Army’s arrival on 
the southern shore of the Gulf of Riga, and the pro- 
gress of American and British armies in France and 
Italy. On August 4 Mannerheim took the oath of 
office, and Linkomies and his cabinet resigned. The 
new President hid his intentions behind such cryptic 
statements as “the difficulties which we must conquer 
in order to secure the future are great.” However, 
the sentence gains meaning from his warning on 
March 19 that the Finnish Army could not hold back 
a Russian offensive. The new government's problem 
is to extract itself from the German grasp, and Man 
nerheim is not hampered by Ryti’s pledge against a 
separate peace. 


EARLY PEACE THE WISE COURSE. Finland's 
only wise course is to realize that its hopes of profit 
from alliance with Germany are dead, and to under- 
stand that all countries must now endeavor to fit 
themselves for participation in the new world organ 
ization to be established in place of the New World 
Order which was to have followed Hitlet’s conquests. 
Every day that Finland continues to help Germany 
will increase the price it will have to pay for its pol- 
icy. The United Press has carried a report that the 
Soviet government is giving Finland until August 
12 to seek peace. 


BLAIR BOLLES 












