vr. William W. Bis} 


ar 
Waa 


“versity of wi 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


sia. Ih} —— 
mb thy Vou XXI, No. 24 APRIL 8, 1942 
to Cape 
Kenya WILL INDIA ACCEPT CRIPPS PROPOSAL? 
a ITH the Japanese at the gates of India, the on the Pacific War Council which was formed in 
ll, bal British government on March 29 revealed Washington on March 30. 
'S SOMME details of the proposal which Sir Stafford Cripps has From the British point of view the proposal rep- 
presented to Indian leaders. It offers India, at the resents a long step forward. Before Sir Stafford en- 
lly MM close of the war, full Dominion status, with the tered the War Cabinet, the British government re- 
tion right of secession. Although earlier British state- fused to make an unequivocal declaration that it 
| Sensi ments promised India Dominion status without would grant India full self-government at a definite 
art setting a definite date, the present proposal is spe- date. Its declarations promising Dominion status 
trategid cific. It recommends that, immediately upon the were so hedged with qualifications that Indians 
occuél cessation of hostilities, the lower houses of the newly doubted the sincerity of British intentions. In the 
orton chosen Provincial legislatures elect a constitution- past the British government has insisted that it could 
the a making body on the basis of proportional represen- not take any action until the leading political parties 
a tation. Indian States, governed by native princes, in India first came to some agreement. It has now 
1 by th will have the opportunity to appoint representatives assumed the initiative, and responsibility for future 
DIGER § to this body in the same proportion to their total developments at this critical time rests with India. 
population as the Provinces of British India. The The proposal goes far to meet the demands of 
Zork, Go British government agrees in advance to accept and the Moslem League. The League,.which claims to 
implement whatever constitution is framed by the represent the 80 million Moslems in India, has de- 
‘illiam If Indians, subject to two reservations. First, any Prov- manded the creation of a separate state, Pakistan, 


ince of British India may refuse to accept the new 
constitution and retain either its existing status or 
form a new union with other dissident provinces’ 
Second, the British government will negotiate a 
treaty with the constitution-making body which will 
cover all matters arising out of the complete trans- 
fer of power from British to Indian hands. The 
treaty will provide for the protection of religious 
and racial minorities, but it will not impose any 
festriction on the power of the Indian Union to 
decide in the future “its relationship to other mem- 
ber States of the British Commonwealth.” 


According to the proposal brought by Sir Stafford 
Cripps, the British government will retain control 
of India’s defense for the duration of the war. Re- 
sponsibility for organizing the military and moral 
fesources of India will rest with the Government of 
India in cooperation with the Indian people. Sir 
Stafford suggests that a representative Indian should 
be appointed to serve in the British War Cabinet and 


with sections in the northwest and northeast, where 
the Moslem population forms a majority. It has in- 
sisted that this state should be independent of the 
rest of India, but a Dominion in the British Com- 
monwealth. Other prominent Moslems, such as Sir 
Sikander Hyat Khan, Prime Minister of the Punjab, 
oppose the Pakistan scheme and favor an All-India 
federation. The British proposal, designed to re- 
assure the Moslems that if they do not like the new 
constitution they may remain outside of the Indian 
Union, may result in the “Balkanization” of India. 
However, it is probable that a majority, if not all, 
of the Moslem Provinces would prefer to remain a 
part of a united India, provided that cultural and re- 
ligious rights are safeguarded. 

The Indian National Congress, largest and best 
organized party in India, has no doubt been disap- 
pointed by the proposals. It has demanded acknowl- 
edgment of Indian independence, not Dominion 
status, to be effected at a fixed date, and a post-war 


se 


constitution for a united India to be drafted by a 
Constituent Assembly. As a provisional measure, it 
has stated that it would cooperate in the formation 
of a National Indian Government responsible to 
the elected members of the existing Central Legisla- 
ture, but not to the British government. The British 
proposal falls far short of these demands, but con- 
cedes India’s right to determine its own international 
status in the post-war world. 

The Congress party thus faces a serious dilemma. 
If it accepts the proposals, it will be forced to with- 


NAZIS SEEK TO ISOLATE RUSSIA IN NORTH 


When Lord Beaverbrook, on his arrival from 
Britain at Miami Beach on March 29, declared that 
“if the Russian armies were scattered beyond the 
Urals, all our hopes would be scattered too,’ and 
urged that all possible supplies should be sent to 
this “most critical battlefront in the history of civ- 
ilization,” he expressed the views of those in the 
United Nations who believe that the European 
theatre of war may prove decisive in 1942. Few are 
so omniscient as to predict in advance whether the 
Nazis, come spring, will strike first at Sweden, in 
the hope of cutting the Allied supply line to Russia, 
or toward the Near East, in the hope of obtaining 
oil. But it is obvious to all that the only country 
capable of inflicting a military defeat on Germany 
this year is Russia. 


The Russians themselves have no illusions regard- 
ing the difficulties they may face when the Germans 
gather their forces for a fresh thrust at the Soviet 
Union. According to reports from Moscow, the 
German High Command has transferred 38 divi- 
sions, or possibly 500,000 men, to various sectors 
of the Soviet front from all parts of Europe since 
January 1, and has brought large air reinforcements, 
some apparently from Africa. With these new forces, 
the Germans have launched local counterattacks at 
several points, after weeks of what Berlin admitted 
to have been defensive operations. Effective as 
Russia’s resistance has been, especially since the 
start of its counteroffensive in early December, the 
Russians have not yet recaptured the principal cen- 
ters occupied by the Germans, nor have they recov- 
ered the Ukraine and the Donetz Basin, which con- 
tain some of Russia’s principal industrial raw ma- 
terials and factories. 


RUSSIA’S TWO-FOLD PLEA. Under these 
circumstances, the Russians continue to make a two- 
fold plea: they demand the opening of a second 
front in Western Europe, without waiting “until 
the last button is sewn on the uniform of the last 
soldier” ; and they demand an increase in Allied sup- 
plies to Russia. The first demand, vigorously voiced 


Page Two 


——> 


draw some of the fundamental objections it hg 
previously made. If it rejects the proposals, it rug 
the risk of alienating public support among th 
United Nations. It is reported from New Delhi thy 
a majority of the members of the Executive Com 
mittee of the Congress party consider the Britis) 
offer inadequate in its present form. Since the Mos 
lem League is expected to accept the Cripps plan 
the big question-mark remains the attitude of th 
Congress party. 
MARGARET LA Foy 


by Stalin in his speech of February 23 on the ann} 
versary of the Red Army, and since then reiterated by 
Ambassador Litvinov in New York on March 1¢ 
and by Ambassador Maisky in London on March 25 
has been only partially answered by the stepping-w 
of British air raids on armament factories in Ger 
many and German-occupied territory, In analyzing 
this demand, it should be borne in mind that, if the 
United Nations were to undertake an invasion of 
the European continent, they might be even leg 
able than they are today to deliver war supplies to 
Russia on a large scale. It must also be pointed out 
that Russia, being a land power, does not give 
sufficient weight to the fact that the British have 


kept a second front open ever since the outbreak 
of war—a second front on the high seas. If it had 
not been for the British Navy (which only after 
Pearl Harbor began to receive “‘shooting’’ aid from 
United States naval units in the Atlantic), it would 
be extremely difficult for the United Nations to 
maintain supply routes open to far-flung fronts 
among them the Russian front. 


WAR AID TO RUSSIA. Moreover, the Russians 
themselves admit that Britain, to a far greater de 
gree than the United States, has fulfilled its prom 
ises of war aid to the Soviet Union. This is. due 
partly to the greater proximity of the British Isles 
to Russia's White Sea ports, and partly to Britain’ 
expectation that it will be able to replenish the sup 
plies it sends Russia by imports from the United 
States. It is this country, not Britain, which has 9 
far failed to carry out the promises of aid it made 


— 


Jast aut 
US.S.R 
here of 
the Ru: 
in some 
should 
East. P 
this sc 
high g 
of Wa 
ment C 
howeve 
such hi 
increas: 
recent 
show t 
import: 

UN. 
strides 
in imy 
United 
other, 
tion be 
the fee 
are no 
tions— 
and pa 
since | 
the Fa 
of Ru: 
defeat 


The 
post-w 
with tl 
in the: 
this v 
createc 
autum 


For useful “signposts” indicating the way anti-Naz 
Europeans are thinking about the future, read: 
EUROPEAN AGREEMENTS FOR POST-WAR 
RECONSTRUCTION by Vera M. Dean 


25¢ 


March 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 


REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


— 


the g 
ceivec 
for th 
and 
butyl 
ber. \ 
indus: 
a pri 


Russians 
ater de 
'S prom 
; is due 
ish Isles 
Britains 
the sup 
- United 


1 has $0 
it made 


i _— Page Three == 


jast autumn, when an American mission visited the 
US.S.R. Our failure has not been due to shortages 
here of the war materials most urgently needed by 
the Russians. It has been due, in part, to the feeling 
insome Washington quarters that available supplies 
should be rushed to other fronts, notably the Far 
East. President Roosevelt indicated his concern on 
this score on March 26, when he directed several 
high government officials, including the Secretaries 
of War and Navy, to remove all barriers to ship- 
ment of supplies to Russia. The chief bottleneck, 
however, has been and remains shipping. Even with 
such handicaps, the United States is beginning to 
increase the flow of shipments to the U.S.S.R., and 
recent German air and naval activities in the north 
show that the Nazis are fully aware of the growing 
importance of the Allied life-line to Murmansk. 


UNANSWERED QUESTIONS. While great 
strides have been made during the past few months 
in improving relations between Britain and the 
United States, on the one hand, and Russia, on the 
other, two obstacles still block unreserved collabora- 
tion between the three powers. The first of these is 
the feeling on the part of Soviet leaders that they 
are not receiving all-out aid from the Western na- 
tions—although some of them realize that Britain, 
and particularly the United States, have been forced 
since Pearl Harbor to divert men and material to 
the Far East. The other is the unresolved problem 
of Russia's future role in Europe, in case it does 
defeat Germany. 


The Russians feel that speculation about the 
post-war period should not be allowed to interfere 
with the tireless prosecution of the war effort which, 
in their opinion, might bring a decision in Europe 
this very year. At the same time, the impression 
created by Mr. Eden’s negotiations with Stalin last 
autumn—that Russia would demand strategically 


CARTEL AGREEMENTS HAMPER U.S. WAR EFFORT 


The charges against the Standard Oil Company 
of New Jersey, made by Assistant Attorney General 
Thurman Arnold on March 26 while testifying be- 
fore the Truman Committee of the Senate, empha- 
size again the difficulties experienced by private 
enterprises in a peaceful democracy which try to 
do “business with Hitler.” Standard Oil is accused 
of having entered into a cartel arrangement whereby 
the giant German trust, I. G. Farbenindustrie, re- 
ceived technical information on American processes 
for the production of aviation gasoline, lubricating oil, 
and other petroleum products, including Standard’s 
butyl patents for the manufacture of artificial rub- 
ber. Whatever case may be made for an American 
industry entering into such a cartel agreement with 
4 private industry in another capitalist democracy, 


defendable frontiers in Europe, including control 
of the Baltic states, Finland, and possibly eastern 
Poland—has not been dispelled, and remains a 
source of growing concern to Britain and the United 
States, which in the Atlantic Charter pledged them-. 
selves to restore the independence of European coun- 
tries. This divergence in views, which has been kept 
under cover for fear of creating a rift between the 
United Nations, would benefit by a public airing. 
It must be recognized that the countries of Eastern 
Europe and the Balkans, before 1939, enjoyed in- 
dependence in name only as long as they remained 
subject to pressure from their two powerful neigh- 
bors—Germany and Russia. It is entirely under- 
standable that they do not want to be controlled by 
either one of these great powers, if some alternative 
can be found; but neither can Germany or Russia 
be expected to tolerate a situation in which small, 
and unfortunately vulnerable, countries are either 
used, or allow themselves to be used, as bases for 
attack by one of these great powers against the other. 

The only hope for the small countries or Eastern 
Europe and the Balkans lies in some form of re- 
gional or European federation which would have to 
be sufficiently strong to protect them against politi- 
cal and economic encroachments from all quarters. 
Those people in Britain and the United States who 
prematurely worry about a Russian victory (which 
is by no means a foregone conclusion), on the 
ground that Russia would expand territorially and 
seek to extend the Soviet system beyond its borders, 
must learn one thing. The only way to avoid what 
they fear is for the United Nations to offer a con- 
structive program for reorganization of Europe 
which could enlist the cooperation of the Soviet 
Union, and at the same time reassure the small coun- 
tries from the Baltic to the Aegean, which have 
served as one of Europe’s historic battlegrounds. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


it does not apply where totalitarian régimes are 
concerned. For in the Nazi state such an arrange- 
ment served the purpose of war, and not business. 

This is the latest case in which an American com- 
pany has, presumably without deliberate intent, 
weakened our industrial potential by dealing with 
German cartels. There was, for example, the case of 
magnesium production. Since magnesium is lighter 
than aluminum, it is valuable for the construction 
of aircraft. While Nazi Germany was expanding 
magnesium production, notably in Austria, it at- 
tempted to prevent a similar development in the 
United States by encouraging the I. G. Farbenindus- 
trie trust, which also handles magnesium, to enter 
into a patent agreement with the Aluminum Com- 
pany of America. The Germans calculated that 


Alcoa, with its enormous investment in aluminum, 
would do what it could to restrict the manufacture 
of the lighter metal. An earlier agreement between 
Alcoa and the I. G. Farbenindustrie, signed in 1931, 
was used by the Nazis to prevent for a time the pro- 
duction of American magnesium on a large scale. 
This contract provided that in no event could pro- 
duction of magnesium in America exceed 4,000 tons 
without the consent of the German firm. In the 
following years, Germany expanded its magnesium 
output at top speed until it reached 100 million tons 
in 1941, while efforts toward the creation of a 
large American magnesium industry were effectively 
blocked until 1939. 

Similar German-American agreements, relating to 
optical goods, tungsten-carbide, beryllium, pharma- 
ceutical products, and the like, have tended to in- 
crease Germany's war and economic potential and 
to lower that of the United States. The American 
corporations involved, operating within an economic 
system characterized by freedom of enterprise, were 
motivated principally by the profit motive, which 
in our economy, as organized before the war, was 
considered entirely legitimate. It was to their finan- 
cial advantage to make such patent agreements, al- 
though the net effect was at times detrimental to the 
United States’ industrial potential in time of war. 
The German corporations, on the other hand, were 
agents of the Nazi régime, and their activities were 
directed by that régime in accordance with its con- 
ception of Germany's military needs. 

These American corporations were not alone in 
the mistaken idea that business could be conducted 
with totalitarian countries on a basis of equality. The 
United States continued to sell strategic materials, 
such as scrap iron, oil, and rare metals, to its po- 


Page Four 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: RUSSIA’S SPRING PROSPECTS 
Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 

Date: Sunday, April 5 

Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 


For station, please consult your local newspaper 


tential enemies even when relations with them be 
came strained. Almost until Pearl Harbor there was 
an impression that the United States could avoid 
war by continuing “business as usual” so far as 
possible. 

PATENT REFORMS. It now appears that a com. 
prehensive reform of private international patent 
arrangements is under way. The findings of the 
Truman Committee have attracted the attention of 
the American public to activities of cartels and other 
groups which may hamper the war effort. Jealously 
held patents and processes for the manufacture of 
critical materials have already been put at the dis. 
posal of American firms. In December 1941 the 
government reached an agreement under which all 
parties agreed to pool patents on the buna process 
of making synthetic rubber. The Standard Oil Com. 
pany which, before the recent revelations by Mr 
Arnold, had not included patents of the butyl process 
in the common pool, may be obliged to do so under 
a decree entered in the Federal Court of Newark on 
March 25. This decree releases for the duration of 
the war and six months thereafter scores of patents 
controlled hitherto by the German I. G. Farben 
industrie trust and its American license holders 
Measures like these will undoubtedly expedite the 
all-out war program. 

ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


The F.D.A. Bookshelf 


Flight to Arras, by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry. New York, 
Reynal and Hitchcock, 1942. $2.75 
An introspective, often lyrical account of the author’s 
reflections on duty and defeat, as they occurred to him on 


a hazardous reconnaissance flight during the Battle of 
France. 


Total Victory: Preparation for a Total Peace, by Stephen 
King-Hall. New York, Harcourt, Brace, 1942. $2.00 
Stimulating in that it urges full use of psychological as 

well as material factors to create a more lasting peace. 


The Political Economy of War, by A. C. Pigou. New York, 
Macmillan, 1941. $1.50 
A new and revised edition of a book first published in 
1921 which provides a lucid analysis of wartime economic 
problems. 


Mr. Churchill, by Philip Guedalla. New York, Reynal and 
Hitchcock, 1942. $3.00 
A delightfully written, although not profound, account 
of the British Prime Minister’s colorful career. 


China Rediscovers Her West, edited by Yi-Fang Wu and 
Frank W. Price. New York, Friendship Press, 1940. 
$1.00 


A symposium which treats many aspects—government, 
social, educational, religious—of the changes which China 
has undergone as its center of gravity shifted to the west 
ern provinces of the interior. 


Versailles Twenty Years After, by Paul Birdsall. New 
York, Reynal and Hitchcock, 1941. $3.00 
Interesting analysis of the good and bad points of the 
Versailles settlement, by an American historian who thinks 
President Wilson’s ideas offer a good start for the future 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 24, Aprit 3, 1942. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nation#l 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Wittiam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lam, 
Secretary; Vera Micueces Daan, Editor; Davin H. Poppmn, Associate Editor, Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Ae 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


countri¢ 
part as 
theatre 
cated t 
Premie! 
shal Pé 
ment ai 
Hitler. 
ment, 1 
lence o 
sion 0! 
relucta: 
terms | 


influen 


eral de 
democ 
Londo 
referer 
directe 


