— 


ex- 
ivi- 
had 
ons 
nge 
nk- 
The 
ex- 
ex- 
der 
on- 
ont, 
ain 


er- 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVI, No. 18 FEBRUARY 26, 1937 

















THE RISING TIDE OF ARMAMENT 
by William T. Stone and Helen Fisher 


Military expenditure today is more than three times 
as high as in 1913—and still increasing. Germany, 
Japan, Italy, and other countries are straining their fi- 
nancial resources to meet mounting armament budgets. 
How long can this trend continue without disastrous 
consequences? 


February 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 


Dr. William w. Bishop 


¥ University of Michigan Library 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 








il 





EUROPE RALLIES AGAINST AGGRESSION 





HE announcement made in the House of 

Commons on February 11 by Neville Cham- 
berlain, Chancellor of the Exchequer, that Brit- 
ain’s rearmament program would necessitate the 
expenditure of £1,500,000,000 over a period of 
five years, followed by the publication on Febru- 
ary 16 of a White Paper outlining armament 
projects for the financial year 1937-1938, revealed 
the full extent of the government’s anxiety re- 
garding the danger of war in Europe and the 
Far East, and gave clear warning to potential 
aggressors that Britain intends to meet with force 
any attempt to infringe its interests by resort to 
war. Of the total sum which the government 
expects to spend on rearmament, £400,000,000 
will have to be raised by the use of budget sur- 
pluses when available and by a series of loans to 
be floated during the next five years. 


The 1937-1938 armament program, to be begun 


on April 1, contemplates the following develop- 
ments: 


.? Navy._ Britain is to build 3 battleships, probably of 


35,000 tons each; 7 cruisers, 2 of which will probably 
be of 9,000 tons and 5 of 5,000 tons each; and 2 air- 
craft carriers, probably of 18,000 tons each. In addi- 
tion, the government proposes large increases in naval 
personnel and extensions of dockyards and storage 
facilities for ammunition, fuel and other reserves. Ob- 
servers believe Britain plans to maintain a fleet in 
European waters equal to the combined strengths of the 
German and Italian fleets, and to create a new fleet 
for service in the Pacific. 


Army. Two new army tank battalions will be formed 
and two of four projected new infantry battalions will 
be raised immediately. “Immense” reserves of am- 
munition will continue to be accumulated. The Terri- 
torial Army, corresponding to the National Guard in 
the United States, will be trained in the future with 
the same weapons as the regular army, and will be re- 
sponsible for anti-aircraft defense. Mechanization of 
the army from top to bottom will be rushed. 

Air Force. More than 75 new training stations and 
military airdromes will be built in the United Kingdom 
and the Empire. The air force personnel will be in- 
creased, and the production of new planes pushed at 


top speed. While official figures have not been Teyealed, 

it is unofficially estimated that the government’s pro- 

gram may involve the construction of 10,000 new 
machines. 

Britain’s huge rearmament program — which 
on the whole has the support of all shades of public 
opinion — is justified by the government on’ the 
ground that the rapid rearmament of such poten- 
tial aggressors as Germany, Italy and Japan, and 
the failure of the collective system in the Man- 
churian and Ethiopian crisés; make it-imperative 
for Britain to acquire armaments which will en- 
able it to fulfill its European and Imperial obliga- 
tions with regard to security. On*February 18 
Prime Minister Baldwin told the’ House of Com- 
mons that Britain remains firmly attached to-the 
principles of the League, but that only by strength- 
ening national security can it hope to deter aggres- 
sion, check the “forces of disorder,” and safeguard 
democracy. At the same time he declared that a 
Western security pact between the former Lo- 
carno powers offers the most hopeful prospect 
of peace—a statement interpreted to mean_ thai 
Britain might bow to Germany’s demand for 
exclusion of Eastern Europe from security nego- 
tiations. 

By simultaneously announcing its rearmament 
plans and making another bid for a new Locarno, 
Britain has recovered the diplomatic initiative it 
lost to the Fascist dictatorships during the past 
three years, and has placed the responsibility for 
the next move on Chancellor Hitler. A similar 
stiffening may be detected in the work of the 
London non-intervention committee which, after 
a long period of inertia, completed arrangements 
last week for strict control of men and war ma- 
terials destined for Spain. The twenty-seven 
countries represented on the committee—includ- 
ing Germany, Italy, Portugal and the Soviet Union 
—agreed to impose a ban on foreign volunteers, 
which went into effect on February 21, and to 
establish a system of international control — 




















largely manned by British personnel — along 
Spain’s land and sea frontiers beginning March 6. 
While the willingness of the Fascist powers to par- 
ticipate in these new arrangements may be due 
to the fact they have already supplied Gen- 
eral Franco with all the men and war materials 
they can spare, genuine non-intervention may, 
even at this eleventh hour, prove of aid to the Loy- 
alists, who in spite of recent reverses still appear 
to enjoy greater popular support than the Rebels. 


Not only has Fascist support so far failed to 
assure Franco’s victory, but German diplomacy 
in other parts of Europe has recently met a series 
of setbacks which indicate that the Nazi tide may 
be receding. In Austria Chancellor Schuschnigg, 
addressing the Fatherland Front on February 14, 
reiterated his determination to keep the country 
independent and minimized the danger of com- 
munism. He also denounced the attempt of Aus- 
trian Nazis to form “cultural associations,” and 
indicated he might support the re-establishment of 
monarchy if and when he saw fit—apparently as 
an alternative to the danger of Nazi rule. 


An anti-Fascist trend was also revealed in 
Rumania. On February 15 Premier Tatarescu, 
suspected of pro-German sympathies, was taken 
to task by both Parliament and King Carol re- 
garding a demonstration of the Fascist Iron 
Guard, in which the diplomatic representatives 
of Germany and Poland — whose recall was de- 
manded — were found to have participated. 
Equally significant is a move by Finland, hitherto 
regarded as an adherent of Hitler’s anti-Com- 
munist front, for rapprochement with the Soviet 
Union. The visit to Moscow of the Finnish For- 
eign Minister, Rudolf Holsti, which resulted in 
the conclusion of a “good neighbor” treaty on 
February 10; the election on February 15 of the 
Agrarian candidate, Kyosti Kallio, as President 
of Finland, succeeding the conservative and pro- 
German Svinhufvud; and the journey of the So- 
viet Chief of Staff, Marshal Yegorov, to Latvia, 
Lithuania and Estonia—all indicate that the Bal- 
tic countries, despite their hostility to commu- 
nism, have no desire to suffer the fate of Spain 
by becoming the battleground for a struggle 
between Germany and the Soviet Union, and that 
Moscow is anxious to obtain, if not their coopera- 
tion, at least their neutrality in case of a German 
thrust to the East. 


These recent shifts in European alignments, 
taken in conjunction with Britain’s large-scale 
rearmament, should give pause to Nazi leaders 
who might seek in war a solution of Germany’s 
economic difficulties. That the countries which 


Page Two 








desire peace must be prepared to meet force wit 
force if they are to deter aggression by Fascig 
dictatorships was amply demonstrated by th 
Manchurian and Ethiopian crises. The real ques 
tion today is whether Britain, once it has rearmeg 
intends to use its arms in the cause of collectiy 
security, checking aggression wherever it ma 
occur on the continent, or will limit its obligation, 
to Western Europe, giving Germany a free han¢ 


in the East. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


NEW CHURCH ELECTIONS IN GERMANY 

The Church conflict in Germany entered a ney 
phase on February 15 when Chancellor Hitler 
directed that a national synod be elected to fra 
a new constitution for the Evangelical Church 
Two days before, the Reich Church Committee 
appointed by Reich Minister Hans Kerr] in Octo 
ber 1935 had resigned in a body. It had not onl 
failed to restore unity within the Protestan 
Church, but had clashed repeatedly with govern 
ment authorities over the continued toleration o 
anti-Christian propaganda and the interference 
of the secret police in Church affairs. 














It is not yet clear whether the announcemen 
of elections, which will be held on April 4 or 11 
marks a more conciliatory policy toward th 
Church Opposition and renunciation of the gov: 
ernment’s attempts to dictate in Church affairs 
The Fuehrer’s decree promises that the Church 
“shall give itself a new constitution and with it ¢ 
new order in complete liberty and according t 
the Church people’s own determination.” The 
Confessional forces headed by Pastor Niemille 
fear that the Opposition will not be allowed co 
plete freedom to campaign for its candidates and 
that the rank and file of Nazi Protestants will be 
permitted to vote even though they are not activé 
Church members. The Confessional movement 
still has bitter memories of the 1933 elections 
when a large Nazi electorate swept into power ¢ 
German Christian majority which promptly pro 
voked a serious schism in the Church. 


That the fears of the Protestant Opposition aré 
not without foundation was illustrated by the con: 
fessional school elections held on January 28. I 
violation of the Concordat and in spite of vigorou 
protests of Catholic bishops, National Socialist 
party organizations were mobilized to bring pres 
sure on parents not to register their children fot 
denominational schools. As a result the registr 
tion of children for the “unified” state schools i 
creased to almost 96 per cent in Munich, th 
Catholic stronghold, and to 91.3 per cent i 
Nuremberg. JOHN C. DEWILDE 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 18, Fesruary 26, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationd 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasim Burtt, President; EstHer G. Ocpgn, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Eéitor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











