








uble 
i the 
riteh 


+ 


sey 


| the 
javia 


eake. 


one 


h it 


ssial 
er t 


Jationsl 
» York 








Oo 


ies APR 2@ 1942 


Entered as 2nd class matter 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 






An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 








You. XXI, No. 26 


Aprit 17, 1942 





lei the fall of Bataan on April 9, India’s 
rejection of the proposal brought to New 
Delhi, by Sir Stafford Cripps, and Laval’s return to 
the Pétain Cabinet on April 14, the war has entered a 
the vast encircling movement against Russia and 
the British Empire which has long been predicted 
by observers familiar with Nazi strategy—a move- 
ment designed to effect a junction in the Near or 
Middle East between German forces driving east- 
ward through the Mediterranean and Japanese forces 
driving westward through the Indian Ocean. 

The tenacity displayed by the Germans in main- 
taining their positions in the Crimea, possible 
springboard for an attack on the Caucasus; the in- 
tensity of German air raids on Malta, accompanied 
by lighter raids on Alexandria; reports of vast Ger- 
man military concentrations in Bulgaria, Greece and 
Crete—all point to preparation for the anticipated 
Nazi offensive in the Mediterranean and the Near 
Fast. It is entirely conceivable that the central sector 
of the Soviet-German front, where fighting has been 
most active during the past winter, might be left 
telatively quiescent by the Germans while Hitler 
proceeds with an all-out offensive in southern Russia. 

DECISIVE ACTION IN EUROPE? These new 
developments confront the United Nations with 
the necessity for immediate and crucial decisions. 
The unity achieved by American public opinion 
after Pearl Harbor was due, first of all, to the fact 
that the United States had been attacked, but 
tspecially to the fact that it had been attacked in 
the Pacific, where many Americans believe that this 
country has a paramount interest. A number of fac- 
tors combine to create this belief: long-standing 
ympathy, notably in missionary circles, for the 
Chinese people; the desire to recover access to 
Strategic materials like rubber and tin, now con- 
trolled by Japan; natural concern for the defenses 
of Hawaii, and of this country’s Pacific Coast. Yet 





LAVAL’S RETURN HERALDS NAZI SPRING DRIVE 






























it is becoming increasingly clear that, of the two d 
main theatres of war in which the United States is 
engaged, Europe may be of more pressing impor- . 
tance. Not that Germany is anywhere near the point i 
of exhaustion. To believe this would be to cherish | 
a most dangerous illusion. But the problem which 
faces the United Nations is how to use a still lim- 
ited supply of men and material most effectively 
right now, without waiting for war material to be 
assembled by 1943. The decision as to which of 
many fronts should receive priority is of necessity 
painful and fraught with danger, since no man or 
group of men can claim omniscience in this mael- 
strom of war and revolution. 

UNITED NATIONS STILL ON DEFENSIVE. 
The visit to London of General Marshall, Chief of { 
Staff of the United States Army, and Mr. Hopkins, 
chairman of the British-American Munitions Assign- 
ment Board, indicates that Washington is fully aware 
of the importance of the European front, and of the 
immediate necessity to replenish Russia’s depleted 
reserves of war material through the two available 
routes of supply—Russia’s White Sea ports in the 
north and Iran in the south. No one in the United 
States would advocate reduction of American aid to 
Australia, China and India, all of which are ex- 
posed to Japanese attack. But at the same time the 
view is gaining ground that Britain must be used as 
a base for any invasion of Europe, and that mean- 
while Russia’s resistance is the principal bulwark 
against an all-out Nazi assault on Britain. 

The average citizen is disturbed to learn, from 
negotiations in Washington, London, Moscow, 
Chungking and Canberra, that the United Nations 
have apparently not yet reached an agreement as to 
the course they should follow—and this at a moment 
when the Axis powers are carrying out a carefully 
planned program of encirclement. This is an in- 
evitable result of fighting a defensive war, since the 





; 
i 
44 
| 
a} 





eee Page Two 


defenders cannot always foresee just where and 
when they may be called upon to resist attack. The 
recent demand in Britain and the United States for 
an offensive shows a realization of the issues at stake 
—but an offensive can be launched only when the 
necessary weapons are available. Of these the most 
important in the present phase of the war are ships, 
tanks, fighter-planes, and long-range bombers. It is 
therefore encouraging to learn from Speaker Ray- 
burn’s statement of April 9 that our production of 
airplanes has reached 3,300 a month (although by 
no means all of them are combat planes). 

LAVAL’S RETURN TO VICHY. The very fact 
that Russia, in the east, and Britain and the United 
States, in the west, are straining every effort to meet 
the German onslaught this spring may have caused 
Hitler to take matters into his own hands in Vichy 
France. The return to power of M. Laval, France's 
No. 1 “collaborationist,”” and the suspension of the 
Riom trials, which contrary to the wishes of both 
Marshal Pétain and Hitler had turned out to be a 
vindication of Popular Front leaders, can only be 
viewed as a final move by the Nazis to harness 


INDIA REJECTS CRIPPS PLAN: PREPARES FOR DEFENSE 


Rejection of the British plan for a post-war Indian 
union enjoying Dominion status, announced on 
April 11, leaves the Indian subcontinent facing an 
imminent Japanese invasion without the full coop- 
eration of all parties in the difficult task of defense. 
To American observers, far from the scene of action 
and often not fully aware of the passionate convic- 
tions involved, it seems almost inconceivable that 
the Indian leaders could have refused their adher- 
ence when enemy bombs had already fallen on their 
soil. Their thinking influenced by a long and bitter 
struggle, the Indians have not, however, been able 
to accept the British plan as the practical compromise 
it appears to be. The Indian reactions are colored 
by distrust and skepticism. They reflect resentment 
at being placed in the unenviable position of having 
to make a last-minute yes-or-no choice under the 
pressure of events. At the same time, the tendency 
of the habitual opposition to demand nothing less 
than complete satisfaction is visible in the statements 
explaining the reasons for the Indians’ position. 


THE INDIAN OBJECTIONS. Thus the All- 
India Congress party, with which Sir Stafford Cripps, 
the British emissary, carried on most of his negotia- 
tions, declared that only full independence “could 
light the flame which would illuminate millions of 
hearts” in the struggle against Japan. According to 
the Congress, the Cripps proposals, by reserving 
wartime control of defense to Britain and providing 
only vaguely for Indian participation in government 
during the conflict, reduced Indian responsibility to 











France, with its available resources of labor apj 
naval power, to the needs of the German war m 
chine. It is also a move by French advocates of gg 
laboration with Hitler to dissociate France from thy 
United States, whose Ambassador, Admiral Leahy 
is accused of having influenced Vichy’s recent polig 
In a note of April 12 answering Vichy’s prote 
against establishment of a United States Consulat, 
General at Brazzaville in French Equatorial Afrig 
the Washington government made a bid for the sy 
port of all Frenchmen. This note stated that th 
policy of the United States is to aid Frenchmen 4 
maintain or regain control of their own territoy, 
and to deal with either the de Gaulle governmey 
or with Vichy, whichever has particular control of; 
given territory. So long as there was any hope ¢ 
keeping Vichy out of the Nazi orbit, the State Dy 
partment was justified in employing every effort i 
that direction. Now that Marshal Pétain has 
cepted the policy of all-out collaboration with Hit 
ler’'s “new order,” the United States may find tha 
its policy calls for recognition of General de Gaulk 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


a farce and postponed self-determination to an us 
certain future. Moreover, Congress regarded th 
arrangement which would have permitted the pr 
dominantly Moslem provinces of British India 4 
remain outside the new Dominion as destructive ¢ 
Indian unity. Since the Moslem League, on tk 





contrary, holds that the right of non-accession § 
largely illusory under the procedure suggested fy 
Sir Stafford Cripps, it may be concluded that @ 
least in this instance the British had worked out: 
fair compromise. 


In a farewell broadcast to the Indian people, Si 
Stafford revealed some impatience with the “crit 
cal and unconstructive attitude’’ he had encounterel 
while attempting to reach an accord under cont 
tions of emergency. From the British point of viey, 
he stated, it was at this time wholly impracticabl 
to put defense of the subcontinent into Indian hand 
or to turn political control over to a national got 
ernment of Indians, who would necessarily hol 





Will Japan’s conquests in Asia solve her raw ma- | 
terials problem, or will the scorched-earth policy | 
and guerrilla warfare prevent this solution? Read: | 


Japan as an Economic Power 


by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25c 


April 1 issue of ForREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 











Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


—— 











irresf 
The 
mean 
much 
Brita 
dian 
colur 
thou; 
the i 
tiona 
has | 
posit 
out 
numl 


Witl 
ence 
the : 
cond 
is ur 
—a 

as m 
On 1 
ing | 
posit 
score 
Indi 
In v 
Japa 
sea 
in t 
erty 


a su 
be it 


on | 









SPRSERATFSE S 


a 


of y 


_—$———— 





ut 4 


Se 
Crit 
tered 
ond: 
view, 
cable 
and 


gor 
hold 


xo 
icy 


ad: 





























irresponsible power since no legislature yet exists. 
The failure of the Cripps negotiations does not 
mean that the mission itself has not accomplished 
much that is good. By convincing many Indians that 
Britain seriously intends to foster the cause of In- 
dian freedom, it has undoubtedly hampered the fifth- 
column preparations being made by Japan — al- 
though to what degree is still uncertain in view of 
the intensity of anti-British feeling among the na- 
tionalists. It should be noted that the Congress party 
has long been anti-fascist and, in token of its op- 
position to Japanese aggression in China, carried 
out an effective boycott of Japanese textiles for a 


number of years. 


SCORCHED EARTH OR NON-VIOLENCE? 
Within the party, however, there is an open differ- 
ence of opinion regarding the methods by which 
the struggle for India’s national security is to be 
conducted. On the one hand, Mohandas K. Gandhi 
is urging non-violent resistance and non-cooperation 
—a policy which is unlikely to cause the Japanese 
as much difficulty as it did the more humane British. 
On the other hand, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, rank- 
ing Congress party leader, has called for active op- 
position to the invaders, even to the extent of 
scorched-earth tactics, but wants it carried out by 
Indians without participation in Britain’s war effort. 
In view of the great areas exposed to attack by the 
Japanese, who will probably enjoy supremacy at 
sea and in the air, widespread popular participation 
in the defense effort through destruction of prop- 
erty and guerrilla warfare is probably necessary for 
a successful campaign. But such participation must 
be integrated with the activities of the armed forces. 

Most of the burden, therefore, will inevitably fall 
on the armed forces of India. By volunteer enlist- 


Page Three 














ments Indian military personnel has now been built 
up to over 1,000,000—about one-third of whom, 
however, are serving on other battlefronts of the 
British Empire. Recruiting is said to be proceeding 
at the rate of 50,000 per month, with lack of equip- 
ment the great barrier to more rapid expansion. 
India’s munitions industry has proved an important 
source of supply for Britain's Asiatic forces, but is 
deficient in the production of engines and bodies 
for military vehicles and airplanes. To some extent, 
American resources are filling the gap: a squadron 
of flying fortress bombers has already been reported 


in action from Indian bases. 


Yet the lines of supply to India are so long and 
so precarious that fully adequate reinforcements 
from Britain and the United States are not to be ex- 
pected in the near future. General Sir Archibald 
Wavell, who exercises supreme command, is there- 
fore confronted with a formidable task. He must 
recast the military organization and face it to the 
east, where it must meet an amphibious attack by 
an enemy possessing superiority in armament. The 
strategy which is called for includes a mobile de- 
fense, able to engage landing parties at any point 
along the Indian coasts before they have fully con- 
solidated their positions. This will undoubtedly be 
supplemented by withdrawal tactics designed to 
force the aggressor to spread his forces thinly across 
the great territory he seeks to conquer. By such 
methods both the Russians and the Chinese have 
taken advantage of distance—a great asset in the 
struggle against mechanized total war. It remains 
to be seen whether conditions in India are such as to 
permit the success of similar strategy. 


Davip H. Popper 


BELGIAN AND FREE FRENCH COLONIES AID ALLIES 


Losses by the United Nations of sources of raw 
materials and strategic positions in the Far East in- 
directly increase the significance of the African ter- 
titories held by the Free French and Belgian gov- 
ernments. The followers of General de Gaulle have 
been in “effective control” of French Equatorial 
Africa and the French mandated territory of the 
Cameroons for at least 18 months. Therefore the 
State Department’s recognition of Free French ad- 
ministrative control over those areas on April 4 
should be read as an acknowledgement not of any 
political change in that part of the world, but of the 
growing importance of Central Africa in Allied 
global strategy. Washington has recognized the 
Congo and the mandated territory of Ruanda- 
Urundi, lying south and east of the Free French 
areas, as subject to the Belgian government-in-exile 
ever since it moved to London in May 1940. 

Interruption of normal lines of communication 


between the Western powers and the Near Eastern 
front led to the establishment in mid-1940 of an air 
route from British and French ports on the western 
coast of Africa across the equatorial region to the 
Sudan and Egypt. More recently this route has been 
used to send planes to Russia and the Indian front. 
Strategically the French colonies have been valu- 
able as a center of Allied strength on the desert 
flanks of Italian Libya and Vichy’s West African 
possessions. Both the French and the Belgian terri- 
tories have furnished contingents of native troops 
for the campaigns in North and East Africa. 
MINERAL RESOURCES. As the mineral re- 
sources and the climatic conditions of Central 
Africa resemble those of Southeast Asia, the French 
and Belgian colonies may help in some degree to 
redress the losses suffered by the Allies at the hands 
of the Japanese. In pre-war years, the rich Katanga 
region in the southern Congo exported increasing 





: So eR aE a 


eS —- 


a 








quantities of essential minerals. In 1938 the Congo 
produced 124,000 tons of copper and 10,200 tons of 
tin—both of which are in great demand in the 
United States and Great Britain. The Congo in the 
same year, accounted for 1,500 tons, or a third of 
the world’s output of cobalt, and was the major 
source of American supplies. Cobalt is used in mak- 
ing cutting tools, dies, and valve steels, and as a 
catalyst in chemical processes. Radium is also mined 
in appreciable quantities. The Congo produced 
7,205,000 carats of diamonds in 1938 (60 per cent 
of the world output), largely of the industrial type 
utilized in drilling and shaping such hard substances 
as high-grade steels. Intensive efforts have been 
made in recent months to increase the output of min- 
erals, and copper production is now reported to have 
reached an annual rate of over 173,000 tons. 

Smal! quantities of agricultural products, particu- 
larly wood, cotton and peanuts, are grown in the 
French and Belgian territories. In 1938 combined 
exports of palm and palm kernel oil amounted to 
148,000 tons, or 18 per cent of world shipments. 
Since the Allied nations are now cut off from the 
main sources of vegetable oils in the Pacific islands, 
African production will help to close the gap. 
Through the operation of commercial agreements 
between the United Kingdom and the Belgian and 
Free French governments, and the inclusion of the 
African territories in the sterling area, most of the 
colonies’ exports have been flowing to British terri- 
tories. At the same time, however, these territories 
are developing close trade relations with the United 
States. Belgian Congo exports to this country have 
taken a phenomenal jump—from $1,114,578 for 
the first nine months of 1939 to $25,333,057 for the 
same period in 1941. 

EXPANSION DIFFICULT. Following the fall 
of Malaya and the Netherlands Indies, projects for 
the growing of rubber, quinine and vegetable fibers 
in Central Africa were discussed. While conditions 
of soil and climate required for these crops are pres- 
ent, any appreciable expansion or diversification 
of agricultural production will prove difficult to 
achieve. Beside the handicaps of inadequate trans- 
portation facilities and insufficient machinery which 
most of the Allied countries are facing, African ad- 
ministrators must grapple with the problem of labor 
shortage. Belgian and Free French Africa, with an 
area two-thirds the size of the United States, have 
a population of under 20 million, who must be pro- 
tected from the ravages of disease and actively en- 


Page Four 

















F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: WAR TESTS PAN-AMERICANISM 
Speaker: John I. B. McCulloch 

Date: Sunday, April 19 

Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 





For station, please consult your.local newspaper 











couraged to work in mines and plantations, or op | 
-~ 


their farms. 

While the Allied powers are desperately in need 
of raw materials, responsible Belgian and Free 
French officials must also consider the welfare of 
the natives and encourage only those projects which 
are consonant with the well-being of the inhabi. 
tants. French Equatorial Africa under the Third 
Republic had the doubtful distinction of being 
one of the most backward parts of the empire. 
De Gaulle’s intention of improving the status of 
the natives is indicated by his appointment of a 
West Indian Negro, M. Eboué, as governor-general 
of the colony. In both French and Belgian terti- 
tories, the pre-war policy of encouraging produc- 
tion of materials which were complementary to the 
industries of the mother country has been revised 
under the pressure of war, and diversification is 
now urged. If progressive economic changes can be 
made simultaneously with political reforms, the Al- 
lied governments will have a powerful weapon to 
use in the campaign for the support and loyalty of 
Africa’s 160,000,000 people. 

Louis E. FRECHTLING 





British Strategy: Military and Economic, by Admiral Sir | 


Herbert Richmond. New York, Macmillan, 1941. $1.25 

A leading British naval historian traces the main lines 
of strategy in the nine major wars which Britain has 
fought in its long history, and then draws some contem- 
porary lessons. 


Norway: Neutral and Invaded, by Halvdan Koht. New 
York, Macmillan, 1941. $2.50 
The former Norwegian Foreign Minister has set down a 
scholarly and readable “inside story” of Germany’s con- 
quest and efforts to rule in Norway. 


Dependent Areas in the Post-War World, by Arthur N. 
Holeombe. Boston, World Peace Foundation, 1941. 
Paper, 25 cents; cloth, 50 cents. 

No. 4 in the “America Looks Ahead” series. Professor 
Holcombe has skillfully compressed into a hundred pages 
the essence of the colonial problem, one of the difficult 
questions which must be solved in the next peace. 


Looking for Trouble, by Virginia Cowles. New York, Har- 
per & Brothers, 1941. $3.00 
These memoirs of a woman reporter who had a roving 
commission in Europe are packed with excitement and 
written with discernment and brilliance. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 26, Aprit 17, 1942. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Sereet, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Wirttam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lgst, 
Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor; Davo H. Poppgr, Associate Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


ou 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








— 
VOL. . 
aii 


N | 
of 
ernm 
Fren 
pres¢ 
follo 
prest 
destr 
Fran 


in H 


hear 
feat, 
Gert 
sive 
inte: 
him 
eign 





it h 
Fret 
fo a 
Fra 
Fret 
Fol 
rep 
on 
tins 
nor 
aitr 
anc 
ing 
of 
der 
cor 
liv 
me 








Cot 








