



































— 
——— 


ple, 
ble 
act. 


‘ive 


em. 


fer. 


ave 
tion 
ver, 
the 
the 
ob- 
n it 
wry 
half 


ould 


ther | 


con- 
e to 
d to 
pur- 

the 


for- 


gra- 
lany 
Linst 
ems 

will 


LL 


nklin 
York, 


ation. 


Aenri 
York, 


talin, 
hevik 
tzsky, 
yy his 


Jational 
Editor. 


Act RRA 


WD Ag Joanie 


* 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


, Stl 
An interpretation of current international events by the members of the es 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as socond- 
class matter December 

a 9 2, 1921, ac che Post 
Fas | Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


~ 














Vor. XV, No. 13 


JANUARY 24, 1936 





GENEVA SPECIAL STUDIES 


The Foreign Policy Association has taken over the agency 
in the United States for GENEVA and the GENEVA 
SPECIAL STUDIES, published by the Geneva Research 
Center. 

Subscription Rates 


GENEVA, a monthly review of world affairs. $2 a year 
GENEVA SPECIAL STUDIES—8.-10 issues $3 a year 


Combination Offer $4 a year 


eriodical Division, 


‘Library of Congres¢, 


ia 














eee 


MARKING TIME 


IN EUROPE 





HE stalemate reached in European politics 

following the collapse of the Hoare-Laval 
deal threatens to be prolonged by the death of 
King George V and the expected downfall of 
M. Laval, confronted by the imminent defection 
of six Radical Socialist Ministers, notably M. 
Herriot. Under the circumstances, it seems prob- 
able that the League Council, which opened on 
January 20, will postpone decision regarding an 
oil embargo against Italy, and at the same time 
decline to make new peace proposals. Britain is 
apparently effecting a strategic retreat from the 
advanced—and solitary—position it had reached 
at Geneva in September, when it mobilized vir- 
tually its entire fleet in the Mediterranean, al- 
though the League at that time contemplated no 
military and possibly no drastic economic sanc- 
tions. This was indicated by Mr. Eden on 
January 16, when he declared that Britain would 
move forward in such a way “as to make sure the 
other nations at Geneva are with us in deed in 
addition to words.” Mr. Eden’s point of view 
does not seem to differ essentially from that of 
Sir Samuel Hoare, who argued that an oil em- 
bargo could not be imposed unless League states 
other than Britain adopted measures of military 
precaution against possible Italian retaliation. 

That such precautions may have been taken 
since Sir Samuel’s resignation is shown by re- 
peated consultations between the British and 
French general staffs, and by the announcement 
on January 8 that part of the British fleet would 
take a “spring cruise” in Spanish waters begin- 
ning January 17, while French warships would 
maneuver off the coast of North Africa. It is not 
clear, however, whether this naval shift is in- 
tended to meet sudden attack by Italy or to remove 


} the danger of such attack, for at the same time 


some of the British ships which had particularly 
aroused Italian opinion were recalled to their 
home ports. 

The belief appears to be spreading that the slow 


progress of Italian forces in Ethiopia, further 
hampered by the early fall of “little rains,” and 
Italy’s increasing financial and economic difficul- 
ties may soon bring the conflict to a close without 
the necessity of applying an oil embargo and pos- 
sibly precipitating a war which could only re- 
dound to the benefit of Germany. For fear of 
German aggression continues to dominate all 
diplomatic calculations. This fear has been 
increased by the fiasco of Britain’s attempt to 
discuss an arms limitation agreement with the 
Hitler government; by Germany’s agitation 
against League control of Danzig; its criticism 
of Anglo-French military and naval consultations 
which, according to the Nazis, contravene the 
Locarno treaties; its threat to terminate demili- 
tarization of the Rhineland; its demand for re- 
turn of the colonies; and its hostility to the 
Franco-Soviet pact of mutual assistance, which 
still awaits ratification by the French parliament. 
Europe thus finds itself in a vicious circle. Fear- 
ing German aggression, France and Britain hesi- 
tate to broaden the conflict by drastic action 
against Italy; yet failure to take such action 
serves to encourage Nazi territorial ambitions. 
The vacillations of the two great League powers 
are already causing important shifts in European 
alignments. Austria— which had previously 
counted on Mussolini for protection against Nazi 
aggression—now realizes that its refusal to apply 
sanctions against Italy has alienated France and 
Britain, yet does not trust the efficacy of the col- 
lective system. As an alternative, it is now seek- 
ing the approval of the Little Entente, especially 
Czechoslovakia—hitherto opposed to Hapsburg 
restoration—for the return of Archduke Otto. 
On January 19 Prince von Starhemberg, Austrian 
Vice-Chancellor, indicated that the time might 
come when the Hapsburgs would again rule 
Austria to the advantage of Europe. The ground 
for such a move has apparently been prepared by 
Chancellor Schuschnigg of Austria, who on Janu- 





= | 
7? | 
t i 






Li Be 


: gail 























ary 17 visited Prague, ostensibly to deliver a lec- 
ture, and discussed the Central European situa- 
tion with the new Czechoslovak President, Dr. 
Benes. 


A similar conviction that, in case of aggression, 
every state will have to rely on its own ingenuity 
and strong right arm rather than on the collective 
system is revealed in the Soviet Union, disillu- 
sioned by France’s coolness toward the Franco- 
Soviet pact. On January 15 Marshal Tukhachev- 
sky, Assistant Commissar for Defense, told the 
Central Executive Committee of the U.S.S.R. that 
the Soviet army, previously estimated at 950,000, 
had been increased to 1,300,000, and was equipped 
to meet military dangers both in the East and in 
the West. The Soviet press pointed out that the 
U:S.S.R., “in its struggle for peace and security,” 
cannot have faith in anything but its own power, 
especially in view of the hesitation shown by 
states formerly considered “the champions of col- 
lective security and the League of Nations.” 

Yet the Soviet government, which on doctrinal 
Communist grounds should be particularly 
aroused by a Fascist imperialist war waged 
against a backward people, seems no more eager 
than France or Britain to take the initiative in 
applying drastic sanctions against Italy, which 
it continues to supply with coal, oil, wheat and 
lumber. If the reality of collective security falls 
short of the ideal, this is due to the reluctance of 
all states—not France and Britain alone—to rec- 
ognize that in the last resort League sanctions 
may involve the use of force. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


NAVAL LIMITATION ENDS 


Sharply reversing its previous “no concessions, 
no rupture” stand, the Tokyo Cabinet on Janu- 
ary 14 instructed its delegation at the London 
naval conference to press Japan’s demand for 
parity. This demand was rejected by the United 
States and Great Britain on January 15, follow- 
ing which the Japanese delegation formally with- 
drew from the conference. As a result, the treaty 
limitations on naval armament which have been 
effective since the Washington Conference of 
1922 will expire on December 31, 1936. 


The sudden reversal of Tokyo’s position over 
the week-end of January 13 was explained solely 
on grounds of “prestige,” held to be of special 
importance in connection with Japan’s present 
dealings with China. In its final statement on 
January 15 the Japanese delegation summarized 
the case for parity. “Real disarmament,” it was 
asserted, required the abolition or drastic reduc- 


Page Two — 








tion of “offensive” arms, thereby assuring a state 
of “non-menace and non-aggression.” To reach 
this goal, it was said, a “common upper limit” 
fixed “‘as low as possible” was necessary. Answer- 
ing for the United States, Norman H. Davis 
pointed out that contracting powers with large 
navies would have “to scrap or sink many ships 
to reach this common upper limit,” while powers 
with smaller navies could “build up to the com- 
mon level.” “Equality of security,” he continued, 
did not mean “equality of naval armament” but 
“superiority of defense” in home waters—a con- F 
dition vitally affected by the factor of “ge > 
ography.” For these reasons, the “principle of F 
a common upper limit would not serve as a basis 
for negotiation and agreement.” Similar argu- 
ments were advanced by the British delegation, 
which also rejected the Japanese plan as a “basis F 
of reduction and limitation.” — 


Following the Japanese withdrawal, the four 
remaining powers continued to discuss proposals 
for an advance exchange of information on build- 
ing programs as a substitute for treaty limita- 
tion. Preliminary discussions on qualitative 
limitation apparently found Great Britain ac- 
cepting the American thesis of the need for capital 
ships of large tonnage and heavy armament. 
With Japan, Germany and the Soviet Union out-f) va 
side the conference, such agreements as may be 
reached will probably have to be qualified by an >) m: 
“escape” clause to guard against the building 
programs of the non-signatories. an 


Under these circumstances, whatever hope ex- 
isted of avoiding a general naval race has virtu- Ff) “" 
ally disappeared. The United States is already °° 
engaged in the largest peace-time building pro-f—)“” 
gram in its history. The Navy Department’s 
estimated expenditure for 1936 totals $563,641, 
000, as compared with Japan’s expenditure of} 
$158,137,000. Although this disparity is largely } 
caused by United States efforts to “catch up” tof 
treaty limits, Congressional circles are already 
considering adoption of a battleship replacement 
program to begin next year. The possibility of 
fortifying American insular possessions in the 
Pacific, including Guam and the Philippines, has 
also been raised. It may well be asked whether 
these naval preparations are required to preserve 
American “neutrality” or whether they are de- 
signed to defend American interests in Asia. Inf 
the latter case, it becomes even more imperative> 
that the problem of Japanese aggression in China 
be handled by collective action, including Greatf> 
Britain and the Soviet Union as well as thef)” 
United States. 
















T. A. BISSON 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV. No. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


13, JaNuaRy 24, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationa 
; RAYMOND Lesite Bugit, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 






