


Entered as 2nd class matter 








Aucust 8, 1941 


Lbers» 
Qgor ary 
NOM SBRARY University .» » 
}) a. OF mice ‘7 Of Kichigag 
4 Arbor. 3 
. ch. 
. 
~ 
4 FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
at : 
hi 
it = 
m An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
af FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
i. 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
n- 
| You. XX, No. 42 





ge continuing lack of a decision in the Soviet- 
..) > German war and the postponement of a show- 
¢- down in the Pacific make it possible to weigh some 
je | of the paramount factors affecting the position 
rk | of the United States. Whether Prime Minister 
,j. | Churchill’s statement of July 29, that the United 
he | States is on “the very verge of war,” is fact or wishful 
wy.) thinking, there can be little doubt that the United 
an. | States has been impelled by the spread of hostilities 
16| to prepare its military, economic and diplomatic de- 
tee | fenses on a scale hardly imagined in September 
ty | 1939. Some citizens now urge a declaration of war 
ej | of actions which would make a declaration in- 
or | evitable; others, charging the Administration with 
on) ‘Watmongering,’” advocate complete abstention from 
ing | the conflicts abroad and mediation for an Anglo- 
yo | German peace. The Administration, however, con- 
ne-| tinues to chart a course between these extremes by 
de | measures that remain “short of war’’—a course pos- 
se. | ible because the Axis is unwilling to force the 
re ) United States into active hostilities. 

es,| THE ROOSEVELT POLICY. The hesitation of 
be-| President Roosevelt to move further in the direction 
re-| of war, despite pressure from members of his Cab- 
res.| inet and many leaders of public opinion, probably 
sec: | derives from at least five different motives—apart 
ion / fom the normal desire of any Chief Executive to 
and | avoid if possible the destruction of life and prop- 
ase | erty that accompanies war. In the first place, the 
reat} Administration undoubtedly realizes that it would 
my.| be disastrous to take a divided country into war, how- 
sing| ver compelling the reasons might be. The present 
ram{ controversy over the extension of service for na- 
of} tional guardsmen and trainees indicates sharp divi- 
tax} Sions of opinion which exist in Congress and the 
ani} Country. The experience of Britain and France in the 
that} past few years suggests that no democracy fights 
ices| lfectively unless it feels that its immediate safety 
N | Sat stake—a feeling that is by no means universal 











re JAPANESE MOVES RAISE NEW ISSUES FOR U. S. 


in the United States. In the second place, the two- 
ocean Navy is still far in the future and the Army 
is seriously deficient in team training and materiel. 
While American ships and planes could take action 
against the Axis, the large-scale, highly mechanized 
expeditionary forces that might be necessary for de- 
fending the Western Hemisphere and taking the 
offensive are now completely lacking. 

Probably even more important in the calculations 
of the White House and State Department are cer- 
tain basic considerations. Despite widespread charges 
that Mr. Roosevelt and his advisers are “interven- 
tionist’” and ‘‘Anglophile’”’ in attitude, the American 
government — like all others—has by no means 
abandoned the element of self-interest which tradi- 
tionally dictates its policies. Except for the Hull 
trade program, the New Deal in its earliest days was 
decidedly “nationalistic” in approach, as evidenced 
by President Roosevelt's attitude toward the London 
Economic Conference of 1933. Although some of- 
ficials reportedly feel that the President has been 
too generous and uncritical in his dealings with the 
British, it is significant that in the largest single “‘aid- 
to-Britain’” transaction Mr. Roosevelt acquired eight 
valuable naval bases. Throughout this whole pro- 
gram, including the Lend-Lease Act, runs the inher- 
ently nationalistic policy of the balance of power. 
Like Britain in previous centuries, the United States 
is seeking to defend its strategic interests by throw- 
ing its economic and diplomatic weight on one side 
of a conflict. There is, in fact, a striking similarity 
between Britain’s balance of power policy and Mr. 
Roosevelt's broadcast of May 27—with the English 
Channel being replaced by the Atlantic Ocean. 

A fourth factor in the Administration’s policy is 
its creation simultaneously of two distinct lines of 
defense to prevent the “encirclement” of North 
America — the outer line in the British Isles and 
China, the inner in the Western Hemisphere. By the 





mee ae? 


BIE Bie a 


a 





the Ms Cees ot 














former, the Administration seeks to keep the war 
as far away as possible and to insure the victory of 
friendly powers; by the latter, it is preparing for a 
possible triumph of Germany in Europe and Japan 
in Asia. It is quite probable, fifthly, that President 
Roosevelt still believes this dual purpose can be 
achieved by measures short of war, or at least short 
of expeditionary forces. While some political ob- 
servers charge Mr. Roosevelt (and Mr. Willkie as 
well) with deliberately misleading the public, others 
believe that the President—being both an optimist 
and an improviser—steadfastly seeks the defeat of 
the Axis by “non-belligerent” means, and plays 
down incidents that might provoke hostilities. 

THE FAR EAST. Throughout the past two years 
the policy of the United States vis-a-vis Europe has 
been conditioned by a desire to avoid hostilities in 
the Far East. Even at the present moment, when the 
European conflict is reaching a critical stage that 
may spell eventual defeat for Hitler, the United 
States is not completely free to act. Many strategists 
argue that, if the United States is ever to intervene, 
it should do so now, with Germany fighting a two- 
front war. Great Britain, while unable to launch a 
major land offensive on the Continent, is continu- 
ing its aerial bombardment of Western Germany 
and may be planning attempts to open up a front in 
Scandinavia or northwestern Russia. British offen- 
Sives against the Axis in the Mediterranean or else- 
where are not beyond the realm of probability, since 
Prime Minister Churchill has been a leading advo- 
cate of a two-front campaign against Germany since 
the earliest days of the World War. The United 
States, however, could not participate in any major 
offensives, even if it wanted to, without first safe- 
guarding its position in the Pacific. 

While the Administration has taken almost every 
possible diplomatic and economic measure to warn 
Japan against further expansion southward, it has 


DNITED STATES USES OIL AS INSTRUMENT OF POLICY 


That the United States intends to use petroleum 
exports as an instrument of foreign policy was 
clearly indicated by the Executive Order of August 1 
which placed sweeping restrictions on shipments of 
oil. In effect, the order embargoed the export of 


Page Two 





The first of two studies on wartime changes in Britain 
analyzes Britain’s experience in the control of its national 
economy—industry, labor, food and finance—and points 
out several lessons for the United States. Read: 


BRITAIN’S WARTIME ECONOMY, 1940-41 
by James Frederick Green 


25¢ 


August 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 

















—:1 


not yet taken the necessary naval action, such » 
the sending of warships to Singapore, Hongkong ) 
and Netherlands Indies ports. The Ethiopian wa, 
proved conclusively, however, that half-hearted eo, 
nomic sanctions alone are not decisive, and op) 
antagonize the intended victim. Effective naval 4. 
tion would be difficult not only because it might 
provoke new controversy throughout the country by 
also because it would require the return of 
units from the Atlantic. Until it is clear that pro. 
longation of the Soviet-German campaign will pos. 
pone an attempted invasion of Britain, it may } 
dangerous to reduce the Atlantic fleet to its earlie; 
status. It is easier, nevertheless, for the United State; 
to restrain Japan now than at any time in recent 
years, in view of the strengthening of American 
British and Dutch bases throughout the southwey. 
ern Pacific. Not only do the constant air patrols of 
these powers reduce the possible effectiveness of 
surprise attack by Japan, but the gradual increase in 
submarines and airplanes, as well as land forces 
throughout the area greatly adds to the risks cop. 
fronting Japan in any large-scale operation. 


The United States could place further obstacles 
in Japan’s path by sending war material to Vladi- 
vostok for strengthening the Soviet Armies in {i 
beria. That some such action may be under consid. 
eration was suggested on August 2 by an exchange 
of notes between Acting Secretary of State Welle 
and the Soviet Ambassador, Constantine A. Ouman- 
sky. The American government pledged all practi 
cable economic aid to the U.S.S.R. and agreed to 
give ‘favorable consideration” to the use of Ameri 
can shipping facilities. The fulfillment of this agree 
ment and reliance upon Vladivostok as a trans 
shipment point may force the long avoided show 
down in Japanese-American relations. 








JAMES FREDERICK GREEN | 


gasoline and lubricating oil for aircraft to Japan, 
Vichy France, Spain, and other countries not “en | 
gaged in resisting aggression.” It also placed exports | 
of other categories of petroleum—crude oil, auto 
mobile gasoline, fuel oil for ships, etc.—on a ration: | 
ing system based on “normal” or pre-war levels 
The order will provide the newly created Economi| 
Defense Board with a powerful weapon for us) 
against the Axis. | 


The United States is particularly well placed t 
control the disposition of oil—the raw material 0 
which modern warfare and modern economic sj 
tems depend so heavily. American wells produce 6 
per cent of the world’s supply of crude oil, ant 
American companies, together with British ai 








000,06 
Frencl 
loss 0 
been 
for di 
of pet 
the w 
Britai 
tanke: 
intim: 
tanke 
but B 
opera 
wat f 
To 
Com 
tanke 
Carib 
da, a 
Britis 
By tt 
trans: 
has 
petro 
whicl 


} and | 


tanke 
alon; 
this { 
supp 
cann 
avail 
finar 
mon’ 
of g 


} ably 


J: 


FORE! 


Headg 
Entere 











=) Page Three 


| Dutch firms, control 17 per cent more in Latin 











i, ) America and the East Indies. Since transportation is F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
a { a major factor in oil supply, the American tanker Subject: U.S. TAKES DIPLOMATIC OFFENSIVE 
1 fleet of 365 vessels, second only to the British and = een vente. seen 


Date: Sunday, August 10 
Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 
Station: NBC, blue network 


ly Allied fleet in size, gives added control over the 
«.| world movements of petroleum. 


ht} AID TO BRITAIN. America’s advantageous po- 


ut} sition with respect to petroleum is being employed _ tive use of trade in oil has been demonstrated by the 
ny} in a positive fashion through the supply of oil to restrictions on American exports which have accom- 
f-| the anti-Axis powers. While the Allies possess im- panied successive notes to Tokyo criticizing Japan's 
st-| portant oil fields in the Near and Far East, these are aggressive moves in Asia. The United States has 
be} far from the theater of war in Europe, and the prob- been the principal supplier of petroleum to the Jap- 
it} Jem of transportation has become increasingly diffi- anese, exporting 24,600,000 barrels worth $59,000,- 
tes) cult. As of June 1940, London controlled about 6,- 000 in 1940. This represents about 65 per cent of 
ent} 900,000 tons of British, Norwegian, Dutch and Japan’s consumption. The trend in the value of 
an,} French tankers. Subsequently, however, the rate of petroleum exports to the Japanese empire has been 











est} Joss of tank ships in the Atlantic appears to have upward as the table shows: 
of} peen exceedingly high—certainly higher than that 1937 $45,403,000 
fa} for dry cargo vessels. The supply of large quantities 1938 $53,530,000 
iN { of petroleum to cover the requirements of the R.A.F., 1939 $49,381,000 
ces,} the world’s largest navy, and the growing army in 1940 $58,678,000 
On-} Britain and the Near East became endangered by a 1941 (First quarter) $12,181,000 

tanker scarcity in the spring of this year. It has been Statistics on Japanese oil purchases since March are 
le} intimated in American trade circles that British 
cles now Official secrets, but private sources estimate them 
q.\ tankers are being employed on unessential voyages, 
adi 4 at $5,000,000 monthly. 
gi.{ but British spokesmen assert that the ships are being Oe ty i 4 
si} operated as economically as the exigencies of the The restrictions recently imposed on exports to 
oh ie permit. Japan are not decisive. Tokyo can still purchase crude 
ngt =m - oil and refined products other than aviation fuel and 
marmare Delp the British meet their needs, the Maritime lubricating oil in this country, if the State Depart- 
lan Commission has already or will shortly divert 70 ment grants the requisite licenses. By processing in 
cti:| tankers to carry oil between Gulf of Mexico and Japanese refineries, the crude oil can be made into 
| to| Caribbean ports and harbors in New England, Cana- P : 


airplane fuel. Apparently the Administration has 
eschewed a total embargo on oil, fearing that it 
would result in a Japanese thrust at the Netherlands 
Indies, where 60,000,000 barrels of oil are produced 
annually, more than enough to meet Japan’s needs. 


yeti:{ da, and possibly Iceland, whence tankers under the 
fee} British flag will finish the route to the British Isles. 
ans | By the end of this year, the Commission expects to 
ow-| transfer 80 or more vessels to this service. The shift 
| has already produced a marked dislocation of 
\ petroleum supplies along the Atlantic seaboard, Louls E. FRECHTLING 








‘| which consumes oil originating in mid-Continental 
| and Caribbean fields and transported principally by The American Impact on Great Britain, 1898-1914: A 
_ tanker to the main refining and distributing centers rare ¥ the ag bron pi oo eae aa 
pat,| along the coast. The tankers normally engaged in eiphin, Carney 5 See eee 
3 ; : - This exhaustive survey of the influence of American 
en} this trade have been reduced a fourth, cutting the oil life and thought—in business, politics, literature, educa- 
ort supply proportionately. Transportation of oil by rail tion, religion and many other fields—on Great Britain is an 
wt} cannot close the gap as there are not sufficient cars op contribution to the study of Anglo-American 
; . 2 ‘ . : lations. 
ton} available, while the construction of new pipe-lines on . ’ ; 
vel} financed by the Government will take at least eight The Reconstruction of World Trade, by J. B. Condliffe. 


New York, Norton, 1940. $3.75 


The author, who was an economic analyst for the League 
of Nations during the critical depression years, gives a 


om} months. In the meantime, restrictions on the sale 
ust} of gasoline already enforced in the East will prob- 


} ably develop into a rationing system. brilliant account of the progressive disintegration of the 
d 4 : international economic order and makes some tentative 
a 0) JAPAN S IMPORTS THREATENED. The nega- proposals looking toward post-war economic reconstruction. 


| £7? 





sys FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 42, AuGust 8, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
e 63 Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vara MIcHELES DeEaNn, Editor. 
pe Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 

f EBw 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
an F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








ter 


OS BNI sen Ga ln ties: Pio 


Washington News Letter 

















Cee 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 

National Press Building 

AucG. 4.—President Roosevelt's creation of an 
Economic Defense Board on July 31, and the sub- 
mission of a price-control bill to Congress the fol- 
lowing day, were significant moves in the series of 
Administration steps to put the economy of the 
United States on a wartime basis. While the board 
is directly concerned with international economic 
activities, Congressional enactment of the long- 
debated price measure would help stabilize defense 
costs and purchasing power on the domestic front. 


ECONOMIC DEFENSE BOARD. Many Wash- 
ington observers have compared the Economic De- 
fense Board with Britain’s Ministry of Economic 
Warfare, although the Executive Order of July 31 
vested only advisory, planning and veto authority in 
the board, rather than any power to take positive 
action comparable with that of the British agency. 
The order clearly leaves the President with all power 
to act through existing agencies. The new board is 
noteworthy chiefly as an exploratory step toward 
the establishment of a government authority with 
delegated and positive powers to direct economic 
warfare. It is also a much-needed central agency 
to supervise work and plans of the many offices, 
committees and departments now dealing with: 
exports and imports; acquisition and disposition 
of strategic foreign materials; transactions in for- 
eign exchange and foreign-owned or controlled 
property; international investments and extensions 
of credit; and international shipments of goods. 
Headed by Vice President Wallace and composed of 
seven Cabinet members in addition to the Vice 
President, the board will constitute a most useful 


' medium for coordinating international defense meas- 


ures and national diplomacy with military needs. 
Five specific functions of the defense board are 
outlined in the July 31 order: 


1. Advise the President regarding action on measures 
which are deemed vital to effective defense. 

2. Coordinate the policies and actions of the different 
departments and agencies now working on economic de- 
fense. 

3. Develop integrated defense plans and “‘use all ap- 
propriate means to assure that such plans and programs 
are carried into effect by such departments and agencies.” 

4. Investigate ‘‘the relationship of economic defense 
measures to post-war economic reconstruction,” and ad- 
vise the President on steps to be taken “to protect the 
trade position of the United States and to expedite the 
establishment of sound, peacetime international economic 
relationships.” 





5. Review proposed and existing legislation dealj 
with economic defense and, with the President's 
pe recommend whatever additional legislation may 


necessary. 
While the many values of a board charged with 


these tasks are recognized, it is difficult to see how 
eight very busy men can find time to implement ig 
detail — along the five lines indicated — the broad 
policies and objectives which “the President may 
from time to time determine.”’ The real importance 
of the new board, therefore, will probably depend 
on the selection of thoroughly qualified alternates 
to devote full time to their tasks in preparation for 
the eventual creation of a “ministry of economic 
warfare” with the power to act. 

PRICE CONTROL. The price-control bill, intro. 
duced in Congress by Administration forces on Av- 
gust 1, is designed to avert inflation by authorizing 
the President to establish commodity price ceilings 
at the levels prevailing on July 29, and rental price 
ceilings in defense areas whenever necessary “to 
further the national defense and security.” The need 
for legislation along this line has become increas. 
ingly apparent in the light of accelerated price rises 
during the past two years. Since August 1939, the 
cost of living has advanced 5.5 per cent, wholesale 
prices of industrial raw materials 43.6 per cent, and 
domestic farm products 49.5 per cent. Despite te- 
sulting maladjustments in the national economy and 
serious reductions in living standards imposed on 
many classes of the population by these rises, the 
adoption of any comprehensive plan for price control 
has been hampered by groups reaping larger profits 
through increased spending. The present bill sig- 
nificantly forbids placing a price ceiling on any 
agricultural commodity “below 110 per cent of 
the parity price [based on the farmer's purchasing 
power during the years 1909-14]... or the 
market price prevailing for such commodity of 
July 29, 1941.” This concession to the farm bloc 
in Congress virtually assures further price rises on 
agricultural goods. Apparently as a concession to 
labor and utility blocs, moreover, wages and public 
utility rates are not included in the provisions of the 
bill, and additional increases in these categories maj 
be anticipated. While these concessions may have 
been necessary to obtain passage of the bill, they 
only postpone issues which eventually must be faced. 
As the British have discovered in their wartime ef 
forts to avoid inflation, regulation—to be effective— 
must apply to every element in the price structufé. 

A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 














—_—_— 
Vol. -& 


—_—_ 


for 
Ja 
militar 
agreen 
has co: 
bility ¢ 
was su 
ing wi 
ing the 
than e 
Minist 
em pr 
Cabin 
Austra 
is to b 
cide. 
our de 
solved 
side w 
The 
lined 
Ameri 
strong 
of gr 
carries 
forcin 
bilizat 
Amba 
first-h 
teleph 
officia 
apply 
Japan 
JAI 
Cupat. 
this 1 
move 
lande 
and ¢ 





