LY 


oint- 

Mr. 
died 
1 for 
rsity. 
dlicy, 
1cen- 
dent 


tional 
red 2 
c beast 








. Le 
University ° 


»ho¥ i: 


ti 


BeChizgn NOV 2 ISS 


Ann 


Arbor. MEGifceg «Same 


General Library 


Wichigan 


PERIODICAL. KOU 
GENERAL Lineay: 
ahi zan OMY. OF iow 








7. 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 2 


Ocropmr 26, 1945 





SOLE CONTROL OF ATOM BOMB FAILS TO BOLSTER U.S. DIPLOMACY 


W ITH more than two score fighting ships of the 
Pacific fleet anchored in New York harbor for 
the celebration of Navy Day on October 27, thou- 
sands of New Yorkers have been drawn to the water- 
front to see the famous veterans of the victory over 
Japan. There is a festive air about the usually drab 
piers along the Hudson as crowds of visitors wait 
their turn to board the Enter prise—the huge carrier 
that participated in the entire Pacific campaign and 
was “sunk” no less than six times by the Japanese 
radio—or inspect the Missouri—on whose decks the 
Japanese surrender was signed. Yet this glorious 
homecoming of the fleet fails to give one a sense 
of security; the proud combat record of the great 
steel armada offers no assurance of the future effec- 
tiveness of American sea power. While viewing these 
giant naval units, one is uneasily aware that they 
may be mere anachronisms in the new age of atomic 
weapons and of little avail in protecting the United 
States from future attacks. 

FULBRIGHT PLAN FOR THE ATOM. As Sen- 
ator J. William Fulbright declared, in an address 
before the Foreign Policy Association in New York 
on October 20, the discovery of atomic power may 
have weakened rather than strengthened the posi- 
tion of the United States in relation to other nations. 
For once other countries acquire the secrets of atomic 
warfare, and no scientist doubts that they will suc- 
ceed in doing so before long, the United States 
would be particularly vulnerable to a single surprise 
attack because of its highly concentrated population 
and industry. By comparison, a nation like the Soviet 
Union—with its vast spaces and dispersed industrial 
plant—would be better able to survive such an at- 
tack and to strike back. Under these conditions Sen- 
ator Fulbright urged the United States to adopt a 
plan for using its present control of atomic power 
to secure the establishment of a system of interna- 


tional inspection, designed to detect and report at- 
tempts to manufacture atomic bombs. 

Particular urgency attaches to Senator Fulbright's 
proposal because thus far the United States has made 
no effort to prevent an armaments race for atomic 
weapons, against which responsible scientists insist 
there is no possible protection. The Administration- 
sponsored bill, introduced in Congress by Senator 
Edwin C. Johnson and Representative Andrew J. 
May, is concerned exclusively with the establishment 
of a Presidential commission to control scientific re- 
search and the American manufacture of articles 
based on the use of atomic energy. 

Perhaps one reason the international aspects of 
the problem have not yet been dealt with is that 
many Americans are of the opinion that control of 
the atomic bomb by the United States and Britain 
gives the Western Allies a marked advantage—al- 
though admittedly a temporary one—in negotiating 
the post-war peace settlement with Russia. This as- 
sumption seems belied, however, by the tension that 
exists betweea-the Soviet Union and the Western 
powers in nearly every part of Europe—to name only 
one important area of the world in which the in- 
terests of the Big Three come into close contact. The 
Russians are well aware that the United States would 
not now use the atomic bomb against any one unless 
it was attacked first. However, the addition of the 
atomic bomb to our arsenal has admittedly resulted 
in giving Moscow a new reason for strengthening its 
control over eastern Europe. 

AUSTRIAN QUESTION REMAINS. In Austria, 
which has been an area of tension between Russia 
and the Western powers since last April—when the 
Moscow radio announced the formation of the Ren- 
ner cabinet in the Russian-occupied zone—Allied re- 
lations remain confused. All four powers occupying 
Austria seemed to have unified their policies when, 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 














=—————— 


on October 20, they announced that the authority of 
the Renner cabinet would be extended to the country 
as a whole, subject to the supervision of the Allied 
* Control Council in Vienna. This show of Allied har- 
mony was apparently broken on the following day, 
however, when Russia declared its desire to establish 
diplomatic relations with the Renner government, 
while the United States and Britain insisted that 
formal recognition should not be extended to Austria 
until free elections had been held. 

DEBATE ON GERMANY CONTINUES. Some 
signs of inter-Allied disagreement also persist in con- 
nection with the difficult problem of Germany. Al- 
though all the victors agree that Germany should be 
demilitarized and denazified, and that democratic 
political life should be encouraged so that the Reich 
will no longer be a threat to peace, important dif- 
ferences have arisen among the Allies over the inter- 
pretation of these goals. 

At present one of the main issues relates to the 
kind of economy Germany should be permitted to 
have. According to the Potsdam agreement, the Ger- 
man people are to be allowed to maintain average 
living standards not exceeding those of other Euro- 
pean countries (excluding the United Kingdom and 
the U.S.S.R.). The Russians, who are chiefly inter- 
ested in collecting the largest possible amount of 
reparations from Germany in order to rebuild their 
own shattered cities, adhere to a strict interpretation 
of this economic formula. Moreover, this strong Rus- 
sian stand in favor of depriving Germany of its 
heavy industries and economic strength reflects the 
old fear on the part of the Soviet Union that Britain 
and the United States may attempt to rebuild Ger- 
many as a bulwark against Russia. Among the Brit- 
ish, on the other hand, Germany's economic collapse 
is viewed with great alarm, because of its possible ad- 
verse effect on the nations of western Europe, and 
Britain tends to argue that the German living stand- 





Page Two 








a 
——— 


ard should be at least as high as that of the rest of 
the continent. 

Under these conditions, the point of view adopted 
by the United States in connection with the Reich's 
future economy is of key importance and will 
probably be a determining factor in allaying or jn. 
creasing Russia’s suspicions of the intentions of the 
Western Allies toward Germany. The original Amer. 
ican position on Germany is known to have been the 
so-called “Morgenthau Plan,” which went even fur. 
ther than the economic scheme subsequently adopted 
by the Big Three at Potsdam in that it proposed the 
elimination of all German heavy industry. Doubts 
were raised, however, as to the attitude of the United 
States toward Germany's economic revival, when it 
was revealed early this month that a group of Amer. 
ican economic advisers had reported to the Allied 
Control Commission in Berlin that the Potsdam eco. 
nomic plan was too drastic to permit the maintenance 
of a subsistence standard of living in Germany. 


During the past two weeks American military 
government officials have labelled this report unoff- 
cial, and Secretary of State Byrnes has released the 
text of the original directive to General Eisenhower 
regarding the government of Germany, which speci- 
fically opposed the rehabilitation of the German 
economy. It is to be hoped, therefore, that the United 
States has succeeded in reducing suspicions which have 
complicated Allied collaboration in Germany. There 
is, of course, still room for argument as to the rela- 
tive importance of reparations and the maintenance 
of a subsistence standard of living for Germany— 
which is obviously essential if the Allies are to fulfil 
their plan for reconstructing democratic life among 
the Germans. But these arguments will be susceptible 
to reasonable compromises if the issues do not be- 
come befogged by charges and countercharges among 
the Allies as to their motives in Germany. 

WINIFRED N. HADsEL 


LABOR EXPRESSES SPIRIT OF RESURGENT BRITAIN 


LONDON, OcTOBER 19.—The intrinsic quality of 
England in this unseasonably sunny autumn of 1945 
is serenity. People in the streets of London and Edin- 
burg, of Glasgow and Manchester, are visibly weary 
but, because in the most gruelling moments of their 
six-year ordeal they never pretended that war was 
anything but a messy business and studiedly avoided 
heroics, they are to an extraordinary degree free 
from both the stupor and the self-intoxication in- 
duced in other peoples by the cessation of hostilities. 
They can again, without any effort at acting a part, 
pass from grisly memories of fire-fighting and rescue 
of air-raid victims to contemplation of Saxon or 
Norman architecture, or discussion of pre-Raphaelite 
painting. 

This freedom from pose is so ingrained that one 


realizes with a start why Labor’s victory should 
have been deduced from the very temper of the Eng- 
lish people. The dramatic, exhibitionist aspects of 
men like Churchill and Montgomery, stimulating as 
they might have been in time of war, are alien and, 
in fact, suspect to most Englishmen. It is the Attlees 
and the Bevins, who seem homespun and intrinsically 
honest, to whom the people spontaneously turn with 
confidence—not because they are Labor but because 
they represent qualities that are familiar and te 
spected. 

The English have emerged from the war with few 
tangible assets. Their factories and shops are empty 
of peacetime goods. Their thrice-mended but mirac- 
ulously neat clothes are shabby, and they themselves 
are stripped of many illusions we still indulge in. 





= 


But tl 
our tu 
blend 
throu; 
resou! 
ment, 
stretcl 
makit 
neede 
essen 
effort 
Isles. 
to su 
on tk 
for tl 
W. 
ity is 
natio 
that | 
and t 
houst 
each 
gene 
certa 
can 
each 
pract 
of o 
sour 
retut 
tiona 
surg 
pans 
Tl 
peor 
to in 
zens 
The' 
forc 
wint 
reve 
the 
cour 
and 
lack 
tory 
end. 
and 
In J 
erat 
War 
FOR! 
Head 


secon 
one f 


< 








vill 


the 
ler 


the 


ted 
the 
bts 
ted 
d it 
\er- 


ied 


nce 


ary 
fhi- 
the 
ver 
aCl- 
an 
ted 
ive 
ere 


ice 


wad 
lfil 
ng 
ble 
be- 


ng 


ild 


1g- 


as 
nd, 
ees 
lly 
ith 
use 


ew 
pty 
ac- 
ves 














es 





————— 


But they have acquired the asset—beyond value in 
our turbulent world—of serenity: a serenity that is a 
blend of humility and dignity. They have learned, 
through bitter experience, the limitations of their 
resources Of food, raw materials, industrial equip- 
ment, finances and manpower. They have had to 
stretch these limited resources to the breaking-point, 
making use of every patch of land to raise urgently 
needed food, substituting ingenuity for possession of 
essential materials, making use of the talents and 
efforts of every man, woman and child in the British 
Isles. They know that their future is bleak, and that 
to survive they will have to call on their wits and 
on their willingness to sacrifice individual comfort 
for the nation’s good. 


WAR FORGED NEW UNITY. But their humil- 
ity is tinged with pride. They are proud that, as a 
nation, they passed unfalteringly all the tests of war, 
that every one proved equal to the ordeal—the King 
and the charwoman, the soldier and the scientist, the 
housewife and the schoolboy. They feel proud of 
each other in a way that makes this already homo- 
geneous people more close-knit than ever. They are 
certain that, having weathered the war together, they 
can weather the peace. Come what may, they trust 
each other; and this sentiment, in a period when 
practically every nation is riven by internal conflicts 
of one kind or another, is not only an incalculable 
source of national strength, but also gives England’s 
return to peace the character of a remarkable na- 
tional resurgence. Most remarkable of all, it is a re- 
surgence directed not at territorial or economic ex- 
pansion but at restoration of human values. 

The war has aroused the conscience of the English 
people. They are aroused not only about the need 
to improve the living conditions of their fellow citi- 
zens by whatever measures may prove necessary. 
They are also aroused about the sufferings they per- 
force inflicted on their enemies in the process of 
winning the war. Far from expressing feelings of 
fevenge toward Germany and Japan, they deprecate 
the tendency to punish the rank and file in the Axis 
countries for the misdeeds of their military leaders 
and show a striking spirit of tolerance and pity. This 
lack of vindictiveness, too, played a role in the vic- 
tory of Labor. Many Englishmen resented, toward the 
end, the blood-and-thunder statements of Churchill 
and the vengeful propaganda of Brendan Bracken. 
In Attlee and Bevin they saw the qualities of mod- 
eration and every-day morality too long obscured by 
wat. As one Midlands banker put it: “The English 


Page Three 





TTS 
———— 





were in a condition when they might have turned 
to religion. Instead they turned to Labor.” 

A FORCE FOR THE FUTURE. In spite of the 
havoc of bombing and all the strains and privations 
of war England, as in the days of Blake, is still “a 
green and pleasant land” in which men and women 
are busy building “a new Jerusalem.” The war has 
not destroyed all the things that used to trouble other 
peoples about the English before 1939. There are 
still signs of social snobbery, and one can find plenty 
of evidence to support past criticism of England as 
a nation of shopkeepers, who must shop abroad for 
essential imports and pay for them with exports; and 
devotees of the Empire, where Britain seeks eco- 
nomic and strategic safeguards of its security, poten- 
tially threatened on one side by Russia and on the 
other by the United States. 

But out of the rubble of material destruction 
emerge the lineaments of another England, the Eng- 
land that believes in the right of men to achieve and 
maintain freedom in a society of their own choosing, 
whose ideals have nourished free men everywhere, 
and in diverse times and far-flung places have in- 
spired the fight for liberty of American colonists and 
Arab tribes, of Mazzini and Nehru. This England, 
materially impoverished but spiritually enriched, may 
in defiance of its opponents’ direst predictions leave 
a more profound imprint on the second half of our 
century than either Russia or the United States. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





Jane’s Fighting Ships, 1943-44, edited by Francis E. 
McMurtrie. New York, Macmillan, 1945. $19.00 

Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft, 1948-44, compiled and 
edited by Leonard Bridgman. New York, Macmillan, 
1945. $19.00 


Despite war’s disruptions, these marvelously detailed 
records of naval and air developments appear regularly, to 
serve as the source of accurate information not readily 
obtainable elsewhere. 


Foreign Policy Begins at Home, by James P. Warburg. 
New York, Harcourt, Brace, 1944. $2.50 


The author believes that economy may be “planned” by 
the state in the interests of society, but not “managed” by 
the state. His book shows the inseparability of domestic 
and foreign policy. 


Cartels, by Wendell Berge. Washington, Public Affairs 

Press, 1944, $3.25 

The chief of the Antitrust Division of the Department 
of Justice presents in this book the case against interna- 
tional cartels. The general problem of monopoly is sur- 
veyed and illustrated by the operation of patent cartels 
and cartels in such fields as medicine, optical instruments, 
vitamins and others. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 2, OcrosEr 26, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FranK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; VeRA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


oe month for change of address on membership publications. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ss 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


en 


eternal 


oes 


_ 


Pai. 
{ 
i 








Washington News Letter 














SENATE TILTS WITH TRUMAN ON ARGENTINE POLICY 


The Senate Foreign Relations Committee's grow- 
ing influence in the fashioning of foreign policy con- 
fronts President Truman with a difficult administra- 
tive problem. The United States cannot take a strong 
position in world affairs if policies enunciated by the 
State Department are subsequently weakened by dis- 
plays of formal Senatorial disapproval. The problem 
has become increasingly grave since the Committee's 
intervention in our dealings with Argentina. 


The differences between the State Department and 
Senate over Argentina originated on October 1, 
when Acting Secretary of State Acheson proposed 
to the Brazilian government and the Pan American 
Union that the Inter-American Conference, sched- 
uled to meet in Rio de Janeiro on October 20, be 
postponed. Acheson took the step because the Ad- 
ministration did not want to be associated with 
Argentina in a multilateral security treaty for the 
American Republics. On October 2 Senator Tom 
Connally, Chairman of the Foreign Relations Com- 
mittee, expressed his objection to Acheson’s unilat- 
eral action. 


To drive home its point, the Committee com- 
plained on October 8 to Secretary Byrnes, when he 
reported to its members on the London Council of 
Foreign Ministers, and tried in vain to obtain a state- 
ment from him recognizing its right to be consulted 
on major decisions of policy. On October 10 the Com- 
mittee ostentatiously deferred consideration of Tru- 
man’s nomination of Spruille Braden as Assistant 
Secretary of State in charge of Latin American af- 
fairs. Braden is regarded as the principal author of 
the United States’ current policy of sternness toward 
Argentina. But Braden was finally approved by 
the Senate on October 22. The Senators apparently 
considered their intrusion into an area usually left 
to the President and his advisers justified as a result 
of the appointment last spring of two of them to the 
United States delegation to the Inter-American Con- 
ference at Mexico City. At that conference, Senators 
Connally and Warren R. Austin played an important 
part in the negotiations for the Act of Chapultepec, 
which itself stressed the principle of inter-American 
consultation that the Senators thought Acheson 
ignored in his move to postpone the Rio meeting. 


TURN-ABOUT IN BUENOS AIRES. Since the 
attitude of the Foreign Relations Committee stemmed 
from a desire for greater influence in policy-making, 
the Committee has not changed its view respecting 
United States policy toward Argentina as a result 


of the turbulent events of the past two weeks jg 
Buenos Aires. The long-smoldering opposition to 
the government flared up on October 9, when mil. 
itary elements of uncertain political loyalties forced 
Vice President Juan Perén to resign. Attempts were 
subsequently made to find an interim government 
satisfactory both to the democratic groups, who 
wanted power handed over to the Supreme Court 
preparatory to elections, and to the military, who ip. 
sisted on the retention of President Edelmiro Farrell, 
As negotiations faltered, Colonel Péron came out 
of custody, rallied his support among the poorer 
working classes in Buenos Aires and the provinces 
and, with the aid of the Federal Police, forced the 
appointment on October 17 of a cabinet completely 
identified with his program of attaining the Presi 
dency by fair or foul means. 

Confronted with the spectacle of a strong-arm 
government more securely entrenched in Argentina 
than ever, Washington still gives no evidence of de 
veloping a different policy toward that country. Cer. 
tain elements in the State Department, which con. 
sistently have opposed a vigorous policy toward 
Argentina, express fear that other American govern. 
ments will look on the policy as interventionist and 
therefore potentially a menace to themselves. The 
Administration no longer expects to find outside the 
Western Hemisphere supporters for stern dealing 
with Argentina. Britain is determined not to jeopar- 
dize its trading position in that country. 


UNITED FRONT DESIRABLE. By dividing con 
trol of foreign relations between the Executive and 
Legislative branches, the Constitution promotes tiv: 
alry between Senate and President in this area. The 
Executive branch in turn invites rivalry from the 
Senate when its various departments fail to agree on 
policy, as the State Department and the Army, ip 
the person of General MacArthur, obviously dis 
agreed at one time over Japanese affairs. The posi 
tion of the United States in world affairs would be 
greatly strengthened if the existing rivalry between 
the President and the Senate could be lessened by the 
establishment of a permanent Executive-Legislative 
council on foreign affairs. By reaching fundamental 
agreement in advance of action, such a committee 
could prevent the embarrassing criticism of Executive 
conduct on the part of the Foreign Relations Com 
mittee which now tends to weaken the effect a 
home, and especially abroad, of United States pro 


nouncements on policy. BLAIR BOLLES 








I 


| 


. 


= 


li 


OL. 


Br 


striki 
whicl 
being 
them 
mant 
cedet 
the 
powe 
ende 
Gerr 
econ 
struc 
cann 
able 
war 
has 
and 
pow 
cont 
othe 
fore 
und 
com 
stan 


Anc 
for 

coo! 
trea 
mat 
cre: 
and 
chit 
tio 
tr 


ery 


