Americai 
, warships 


till doubt, 
kings will 
erman ait 
xe propor. 
ships and 
es to their 
r force to 
mized the 
inter may 
= Atlantic, 
ailable to 
irrent rate 
American 
of ocean: 
ill remain 
r, but are 
1 the first 
)00 dead 
he second 
3,646,000 
ir present 
42 to add 


trengthen- 


yn against 


elieved to 
rality Act, 
ring in di- 
sritish and 
effectively 
ely relieve 
gue, how- 
al reasset- 
f freedom 
hant fleet 
supplying 
: WILDE 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Vo. XX, No. 48 


SEPTEMBER 19, 1941 


—_—_—_ 


jn rising tide of unrest in German-occupied Eu- 
rope has reached a new high point. During the 
past few months, the spirit of revolt in the conquered 
countries has been manifest in repeated acts of vio- 
‘lence against Nazi occupation authorities and fre- 
| quent sabotage of war industries, communication 
lines and transportation facilities. With the intensi- 
feation of this defiant resistance to German rule, 
especially in the last three weeks, Nazi measures of 
retaliation have become increasingly severe. Germany 
apparently hopes to suppress the anti-Nazi movement 
| in Scandinavia, the Low Countries, Frar“e and East- 
em Europe before Britain and the Allies can cap- 
italize on its recent growth. 

MARTIAL LAW IN NORWAY. Germany's im- 
position of martial law in the districts around Oslo, 
from September 10 to 16, climaxed a lengthy strug- 
\ gle between the Nazis and the Norwegian trade 
| unions. As long ago as May 15, 43 Norwegian asso- 
cations representing almost every activity in the coun- 
tty jointly sent Reichskommissar Josef Terboven a 
sxathing indictment of German government in Nor- 
way. Several leaders of these associations, led by the 
| National Federation of Labor and a number of pro- 
| fessional groups, were imprisoned in June, and all 
were warned not to encourage further anti-Nazi ac- 
tivities. Individual acts of resistance to German dom- 
ination continued to increase, however, and strikes in 
Qslo's iron and shipbuilding industries were ended 
only when Nazi authorities declared a state of 
| “civilian emergency” in the area around the Nor- 
wegian capital on September 10 In the next four days 
the Germans court-martialed 27 Norwegians, 5 of 
whom were given death sentences, and arrested about 
2000. The victims included not only labor leaders, 
but many others who had openly opposed the Nazi 
regime. In order to avoid a general strike, the Ger- 
mans replaced all trade union leaders with “trusted 
men” of Major Vidkun Quisling’s pro-Nazi Nasjonal 


GROWING UNREST IN OCCUPIED EUROPE 


Samling. Quisling’s official party organ, Fritt Volk, 
announced that martial law might later be extended 
to all of Norway if opposition to German control 
continued. 

RESISTANCE IN OTHER COUNTRIES. An- 
tagonism to German rule has been similarly demon- 
strated in the Netherlands and Belgium, although 
the underground army in the Low Countries so far 
has revealed its existence in individual rather than 
mass action. Netherlanders, by failing to observe 
Nazi blackout regulations, have guided R.A.F. fliers 
in their nightly attacks on Germany; they have also 
sabotaged Dutch food supplies destined for the Reich. 
In mid-August Belgian labor conscripts, working on 
a Nazi airdrome near Brussels, staged a daring coup 
in which they seized several hundred German rifles, 
half a dozen machine guns, many rounds of ammuni- 
tion, and scores of hand grenades. 

Despite the Nazi wave of terror in occupied France, 
sabotage and acts of violence indicate the existence 
of a widespread spirit of revolt. In Yugoslavia un- 
conquered bands of native troops remain active in the 
mountain districts, where persistent guerrilla attacks 
have harassed German and Italian garrisons and lines 
of communication. On September 14 four bombs ex- 
ploded in the central telephone exchange of Zagreb, 
Croatia, disrupting the entire telephone system, and 
injuring a German army officer and at least 13 others. 
At approximately the same time, several Yugoslav 
patriots fired on six Croat sentries in another part of 
the city. In Czechoslovakia and Poland, where Nazi 
oppression has been most severe, recent sabotage has 
been reported to be a serious handicap to the German 
forces of occupation. Even in Rumania and Hungary, 
now allied with Germany, local officials on September 
13 issued stern warnings against further operations 
by saboteurs. 

POLITICAL WARFARE. While the conquered 


nations have always resented and to some extent re- 


2 oe seem 3 tS 


2 ta SB hae uae” £18 8ee 26S ast 


Leo 


Aes @ Ser s 22 .SIaS RS Geis 2S se * 


sisted Nazi rule, many of the current acts of 
revolt are a logical aftermath of Germany's war 
on Soviet Russia. This is particularly true of 
anti-Nazi activities in the industrial outskirts of 


Paris, where Communism has enjoyed a wide 


following, and in Eastern Europe, where many 
people are traditionally friendly toward Russia.. Soviet 
policy, up to June 22, was based on the thesis that the 
war was an “imperialist” conflict in which the U.S.S.R. 
had no interest, and from which Communists in all 
countries should remain aloof. Germany’s attack on 
Russia, however, changed this attitude. Soviet propa- 
ganda broadcasts proclaimed the war a Nazi scheme 
for world domination, and urged Communists in the 
conquered countries to help frustrate German plans 
by active resistance and sabotage. 


This Russian appeal differed sharply from previous 
British methods. Between the capitulation of France 
in June 1940 and the outbreak of Soviet-German hos- 
tilities this summer, British policy encouraged the sub- 
ject peoples to maintain their national spirit through 
passive resistance, but to avoid a direct challenge to 
Nazi domination. The British, supported by refugee 
governments and councils from most of the van- 
quished nations, foresaw an advantage in building up 
opposition to German rule on all fronts, and eventu- 
ally calling on these opposition forces to rise when 
their combined strength might be most effective. In 
this connection, British spokesmen have pointed out 
that the Reich must depend on foreigners for a large 
part of the labor required to maintain its emergency 
régime. Faced with the unpleasant choice of aiding 
their conquerors or being deprived of vital food, 
clothing and other necessities. hundreds of thousands 
of non-Germanic peoples have been plowing the 
fields and making munitions of war to keep German 
soldiers fighting. If these subject peoples should sud- 
denly lay down their tools, operation of the whole 
Nazi system would be seriously impaired. 


The current unrest in occupied Europe indicates a 
growing conviction that Germany may yet lose the 
war. The Soviet Union’s sustained defense against 
German invasion has forced the Nazis to withdraw 


READ— 
LABOR PROBLEMS 
by John C. deWilde 


The fifth in a series on the Defense Economy of the 
United States, which examines at length the strike situa- 
tion and the record of the Mediation Board. 


September 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports . . . 25c 


Page Two 


——— 


troops from their garrisons in the occupied regions 
and has provided tangible evidence that the Reid 


is not invincible. Each indication of German weakneg 


may be expected to increase the spirit of revolt, Jus 
as the Nazis have gained new adherents to their cayy 
in foreign countries with their successive military yic 
tories, Soviet resistance in the East and British ji, 
raids on Germany in the West are now winning actiy 
support for the Allies among the conquered people; 
who find their only hope for restored independence jy 
an eventual Allied victory. Any relaxation of th 
Allied war effort, however, would lead them towar 
despair and hopeless submission to German rule. [f 
the anti-Nazi movement is not to suffer a collapse un. 
der the force of German repression, the Allies muy 
correlate their political warfare with a steady and 
determined military offensive. 
A. RANDLE ELLiorr 


NEW STAFF MEMBERS 
The Association announces with pleasure the ap 


pointment of Mrs. Anne Hartwell Johnstone as Edy 
cation Secretary in the Department of Popular Edy. 
cation, to replace Mrs. Stewart. Mrs. Johnstone ha 
served for the last seven years as Program Secretary 
for the National League of Women Voters in the 
field of foreign policy, and has traveled extensively 


in Europe and the Orient. 

We are glad to announce also that Miss Priscill: 
Duxbury has taken over the work of Student Secre 
tary. Miss Duxbury has had special experience with 
student groups interested in international affairs. 


The Diplomatic Relations of the United States with Haiti 


1776-1891, by Rayford W. Logan. Chapel Hill, Univer 
sity of North Carolina, 1941. $5.00 \ 


An intensive monograph on Haitian-American mrs | 


during the first 115 years of United States independent 
This work should be read in connection with L. L. Monte 
gue’s recent and more general study on Haiti and th 
United States, 1714-19388. 


In China Now, by Winifred Galbraith. New York, Willian 
Morrow, 1941. $2.50 
Life in China, especially since the war, seen throug! | 
the individual triumphs and tragedies of a score of pers0lt} 
of all types and classes. Fresh and original, with litera 
grace and emotional sincerity. 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule* | 

Subject: SOUTH AMERICA CHECKS NAZIS | 
Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 

Date: Sunday, September 21 
Time: 2:15 p.m. E.D.S.T. 
Station: NBC, blue network 

* Beginning September 28, FPA broadcasts will be heard | 
from 12 to 12:15 p.m., E.S.T. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 48, SEPTEMBER 19, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. aia 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Screet, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Ediw 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


p's 


Germa 
groun< 
activit! 


| attack 


sador ° 
ileges, 
The R 
bloc o! 
yond t 
the go 
non gt 
resolut 
it is sti 
mann’ 
ment ' 
final f 


The 
being ' 
ican re 
lem re 
ber R: 


' heads 


video 
Anton 
by tw 
Urugu 

Ina 
countr 
to whz 
able o; 
policy 
Actins 
four « 
Prensc 
in an 


For mor 


cop) 


—= 


| regions 
he Reid 
weakness 


volt. Just 
eit Cause 
litary vic 
sritish air 
ing active 
| peoples 
ndence in 
n of the | 
mM toward 
n rule, ff 
lapse un. 
lies mus 
eady and 


LLIOTT 


e the ap 
e as Edy. 
ular Edy. | 
stone has 


Secretary 
rs in the 
xtensively 


; Pris 
ent Secte-/ 
ence with 
iffairs. 


with Haiti, 
ll, Univer. 


} 
diplomacy 
ependenc. 
L. Monts 
‘i and th 


k, Willian 


n through 


of persot 
th literary 


NAZIS 


| 


| 
| 
| 


be heard 


TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA 


The investigation of Nazi propaganda activities 
by an Argentine Congressional Committee has en- 
tered a decisive stage. The committee has thus far sub- 
mitted two reports, and a third is understood to be 
near completion. Its findings throw light on the thor- 
ough organization of German citizens in Argentina, 
the volume of propaganda received and distributed 
by the German Embassy in Buenos Aires, and the role 
played by such propaganda organs as the Transocean 
News Service and the stridently pro-Nazi, anti-Amer- 
ican El Pam pero. 


A resolution submitted by the committee and ap- 
proved by the Chamber of Deputies on September 15 
by a vote of 78 to 1 calls for the dissolution of 
German social and charitable organizations, on the 
ground that they serve as a front for illegal political 
activities. This resolution is notable for its outspoken 


| attack on the German Ambassador. It indicts Ambas- 


sador von Thermann for abusing his diplomatic priv- 
ileges, and overstepping the bounds of his position. 
The Radical party, which controls the largest single 
bloc of votes in the Chamber, is eager to go even he- 
yond this declaration. Radical leaders hope to force 
the government to declare the Nazi diplomat persona 
non grata and expel him from the country. Since the 
resolution has not yet been approved clause by clause, 
it is still possible that a demand for Baron von Ther- 
mann’s expulsion may be introduced as an amend- 
ment when the Deputies vote on the measure in its 
final form. 

The progress of the Argentine investigation is 
being watched with keen interest in other Latin Amer- 
can republics, many of which are faced with a prob- 
lem roughly similar to Argentina’s. Early in Septem- 
ber Radical Deputy Rail Damonte Taborda, who 
heads the investigating group, made a trip to Monte- 
video together with the committee’s secretary, Juan 
Antonio Solari. Subsequently the visit was returned 
by two Uruguayan judges who had taken part in 
Uruguay's 1940 trial of alleged Nazi conspirators. 


In addition to giving a cue to other Latin American 
countries, the results of the investigation will indicate 
to what extent popular sentiment in Argentina is cap- 
able of carrying the day against the cold and bloodless 
policy of ‘‘strict neutrality’’ persistently maintained by 
Acting President Ramon Castillo. Several weeks ago 
four of the leading dailies in Buenos Aires — La 
Prensa, La Nacién, El Mundo, and Critica — joined 
in an attack on Castillo’s concept of neutrality, and 


= By JOHN I. B. MCCULLOCH = 


urged a stronger and more effective anti-Nazi stand 
by the executive branch of the government. 


GERMAN AIRLINE SUSPENDS SERVICES. A 
further landmark in the campaign to rid Latin Amer- 
ica of German airlines was reached the first week 
in September when the Ecuadorean government 
ordered the Nazi-dominated Sedta company to 
suspend operations. Slowly throttled by a gasoline 
embargo, and forced in its later stages to use auto- 
motive fuel (dangerous at high altitudes), Sedta had 
been gradually curtailing its flights. For some months 
past, all Sedta services had been duplicated by the 
United States-owned Pan American-Grace line, so 
that the elimination of this German concern will cause 
no hiatus in local operations. 


This latest development eliminates 590 miles from 
the German routes flown on the West coast of South 
America, leaving the Nazis in control of only 70 miles 
of airlines in Chile. Pan American-Grace had previ- 
ously replaced 5,494 route miles of the Scadta system 
in Colombia, 1,210 miles of Lufthansa routes in Peru, 
and 4,109 miles controlled by Lloyd Aéreo Boliviano 
in Bolivia. 

The eclipse of Sedta leaves German planes still 
flying over Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina, and Chile. 
Brazil is the crux of the problem for, if Axis-dom- 
inated lines in that republic were eliminated, Nazi- 
controlled services in the other countries would be 
isolated and relatively innocuous. Recently the Con- 
dor line, which has extensive ramifications throughout 
Brazil and maintains flights to Santiago via Buenos 
Aires, was placed on the United States “blacklist.” 
The same fate overtook Lati, the Italian transatlantic 
line which operates on irregular schedule and over a 
variety of routes. Inclusion of these airlines on the 
“blacklist” makes it mandatory on U.S. companies to 
shut off all gasoline and other supplies. 


It would be undesirable to interrupt all air ser- 
vices in Brazil, since such an interruption would 
create serious obstacles for travel in South America. 
It is worth noting, however, that the local Pan 
American Airways subsidiary, Panair do Brasil 
(which recently extended its services to the Bolivian 
frontier) now has nine-tenths the mileage that Con- 
dor has. This estimate, to be sure, is based on miles 
actually flown, not route miles; but it indicates that 
American facilities are already capable of meeting 
the need for extensive air services in this hemisphere. 


For more extensive coverage on Latin American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS, 4 bi-weekly newsletter edited by Mr. McCulloch. For sample 
copy of this publication, write to the Washington Bureau, Foreign Policy Association, 1200 National Press Building, Washington, D.C. 


Washington News Letter 


ettiee, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
SEPT. 15.—As Congress reassembles this week after 
its brief recess, Washington is measuring the changed 
position of the United States in the light of the world 
reaction to President Roosevelt's decisive pronounce- 
ment of September 11. The first defiant replies from 
Berlin and Rome have been tempered by subsequent 
statements which suggest that the European Axis 
powers may hesitate to carry out their verbal threats 
—at least for the moment—and will await further 
American moves before precipitating a “shooting 
war.” But whatever the course adopted by the Axis, 
all sections of opinion in Washington recognize that 
the United States has moved from the twilight zone 
of non-belligerent action to the threshold of armed 
intervention. 


THE END OF PASSIVE DEFENSE. The decision 
announced by the President not only sweeps away the 
last pretense of American neutrality but also marks 
the transition from passive to active defense. Hence- 
forth, under the orders given by the Commander-in- 
Chief, the Naval and Air forces of the United States 
will protect British and Allied ships, as well as Amer- 
ican merchant vessels, in “the waters which we deem 
vital to our defense’ and will resist German and 
Italian raiders in these “defensive waters.” These 
orders, according to Secretary of the Navy Knox, 
have already been invoked in the Atlantic area “be- 
tween the American continent and the waters adja- 
cent to Iceland.” To most Washington correspondents 
and returning Congressmen, however, the words of 
the President and the explanation offered by Secretary 
Hull at his press conference on September 12 suggest 
that if Germany and Italy continue to attack Amer- 
ican ships or other vessels carrying supplies to Britain 
and Russia, then the raiders may expect to meet the 
fire of the United States Navy in whatever part of the 
world they choose for those attacks. To this interpre- 
tation they would add a second conclusion, namely 
that defensive operations by the American Navy are 
not conceived in terms of passive defense but in terms 
of active cooperation with British sea power in oppos- 
ing the European Axis powers. If these conclusions 
are justified, the Roosevelt declaration clearly asserts 
a doctrine of ‘‘freedom of the seas’’ which extends far 
beyond the position asserted by the United States 
in the past. 

In measuring the present position of the United 
States, it is important to remember that the support of 
Congress is still essential to the full implementation 


of national policy, even though traditional checks and 
balances are being swept away by the overwhelming 
pressure of events. While all vital decisions affect 
the disposition of the armed forces rest with the Pres. 
ident as Commander-in-Chief, Congressional support 
will be needed for the new lease-lend appropriation | 
and other measures which may be contemplated ty } 
give force to the present policy. The Neutrality Act— 
which still forbids American flag vessels to enter Brit 
ish ports—can be further modified by Executive de. 
cree, but this basic contradiction to the country’s pres. 
ent policy can be removed only by Congressional 
action. 


SHIFTING CONGRESSIONAL OPINION. 
While it would be foolish to deny the reluctance of 
Congress to face the prospect of a shooting war, it 
would be equally misleading to ignore the gradual 
change that is taking place in the thinking of the 
American people, and which is reflected in Congress 
as well. The change has come in part from the recog- 
nition of what a Nazi victory would mean to the 
security of the United States and the entire Westem 
Hemisphere, but it has not come primarily from fear 
of Hitler. The significant change has come with the 
growing realization that America is far stronger today 
than it was a year ago, and that the strength of Amer. 


ica, if used in time, may turn the balance against} . 


Hitler and frustrate a Nazi victory. 


A year ago—even six months ago—there seemed 
little prospect of turning the tide of Nazi conquest. 
The lag in our own defense program and Hitler's ap- ) 
parently dominant position on the continent of Europe | 
led many Americans to the gloomy conclusion that | 
our intervention would merely prolong the war indef 
nitely, without hope of any decisive outcome. But | 
today the prospect is. completely altered, not only by 
the increasing tempo of rearmament in the United ) 
States, but by the surprising resistance of the Russiaf | 
armies on the Eastern front. By holding the Naz | 


) 


) 


forces in the East, Russia has completely upset Hit 
ler’s calculations of final victory in 1941, and shaken | 
the legend of Nazi invincibility. With the realization 
that Hitler is rapidly losing the power to bring the / 
war to an end, hard-headed American opinion is be 
ginning to see the magnitude of the opportunity that 
is open to the United States and Britain. The eff | 
of this altered prospect is already reflected in growing 
support for aid to the Soviet Union. And to some ob | 
servers it seems to mark a decisive turning point in 
the attitude of Congress. W. T. STONE 


—— 
Vou. X. 


tl 
little o 
about 
tighten 
fall of 
ber 16 
progre 
the D 


It con 
dustric 
plant, 
the U. 
only 1 
Russia 
grad 
provis 
ward | 
CO. 
preser 
made 
which 
been 


, Kiev, 


portas 


| tries, 


from 

isolat 
Anotl 
appro 
the ce 
mans 


