crying a 
ailed in 
10n. 
Leahy’s 
> adviser 
eal com 
Staff and 
irmy and 
fighting 
view is 
he “very 
which ff 
otes real 


his new 
dence of 
to be 4 
t because 
1 of both 
naval op- 
ahy ret 
last yeat 
> succeed: 
adopting 


eighteen 
tunity of 
nch “V" 
it Anglo 
+ may be 
1e United 
imed alt 
damndest 
mpatient 


LLIOTT 


is Entered as 2nd class matter 
seneral Library 


Unive 4 
ut ars . £ 
4¥Orsity of 


. 
Mu 4a 7 P 
meV ii gan 


Au 
”? tag 
inn Arbor. Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXI, No. 42 


Aucust 7, 1942 


SECOND FRONT DISCUSSIONS REVEAL NEED FOR UNIFIED COMMAND 


a a desperate determination to prevent a German 
break-through to the oil of the Caucasus, the Rus- 


"| sians, over the weekend of August 1, began to slow 


down the Nazi advance in the south. Until then the 
Russian retreat, although executed in good order, 
appeared to imperil the one land front where the 
Germans have had to fight a major war, at a moment 
when a second front, so far as the general public 
could determine, was still in the stage of discussion. 


RUSSIA’S LACK OF WAR MATERIAL. While 
the rapidity of the German advance toward the Cau- 
casus may be due, in part, to the fanatic determina- 
tion of the Nazis to achieve victory at all costs, 
Russia's shortage of certain war materials, notably 
tanks, is also an important factor. The efforts of 
British and American industry and shipping have 
not sufficed to offset Germany's industrial produc- 
tion, plus the loss of Russia’s factories and raw 
materials in the Donetz Basin and the Ukraine. 
William L. Batt, Vice-Chairman of the War Produc- 
tion Board, thoroughly familiar with production 
of war material for Russia, declared on August 3 
that the Soviet Union will still be fighting next 
winter, but added: “In cold truth, it must be ad- 
mitted that, try as we might, we have been unable 
to supply Russia with an adequate amount of ma- 
tériel.”” Many reasons explain this situation: lack of 
Allied shipping; the length of supply routes to 
Russia; the necessity of servicing other, equally criti- 
cal and distant fronts; successful Nazi attacks on 
British and American convoys to Murmansk, and 
on Murmansk itself; and, at least in the early stage 
of Soviet-American military collaboration, a negative 
attitude toward Russia on the part of some officials, 
which brought personal interference by President 
Roosevelt. 

Whatever the reasons, the grim fact is that the 
situation has altered in many respects, both for Rus- 
sia and the Western powers, since the German in- 


vasion of the U.S.S.R. in 1941. At that time Britain, 
still recovering from the disaster of Dunkirk, was not 
in a position, single-handed, to undertake the o 

ing of a second front. In that phase of the Russo- 
German war the most effective way in which Britain 
and the United States could help Russia was by de- 
livering war materials as rapidly as possible. Today, 
if the Russians had to make a choice between de- 
liveries of war materials at the rate at which they 
have been coming during the past year, or the open- 
ing of a second front, there seems little doubt that 
they would choose the second front. During the past 
week Russia’s demand for military operations in 
Europe has been rapidly growing, and was probably 
expressed with utmost frankness by Soviet Ambassa- 
dor Maisky on July 30 at a closed meeting of the 
British House of Commons. 


SECOND FRONT RISKS CUT BOTH WAYS. 
While it is obvious that no layman can have at his 
disposal sufficient information to pass judgment on 
conflicting reports about a second front, certain fac- 
tors stand out. The British and American people are 
becoming daily more restive about the relative state 
of inactivity on all fronts—inactivity which still 
leaves the initiative in the hands of the Germans and 
Japanese. They may not fully realize the great sacri- 
fices in men and material that the opening of a sec- 
ond front, even under the best of circumstances, 
would entail. But they sense that sacrifices made 
today, no matter how burdensome, may save the 
United Nations from much greater sacrifices, and 
even possible defeat, later on—assuming, at worst, 
that Russia-loses its striking power, thus permitting 
the Nazis to concentrate their major strength against 
the British Isles. 

It has also become increasingly clear that mere talk 
of a second front, even if it be regarded as a way of 
confusing the Nazis by a war of nerves in reverse, 
could have the opposite effect of fraying the nerves 


point of undermining public confidence. This possi- 
bility was bluntly stated on July 27 by André Philip, 
member of the Chamber of Deputies from Lyons, 


who has recently arrived in Britain to join the forces 
of General de Gaulle. “Too much talk and too little 


action is the weakness of democracy,” warned M. 
Philip. At the same time, he said that ‘‘an unsuccess- 
ful invasion would result in a terrible slaughter by 
the Germans.” 


The United Nations have thus been placed in the 
terrible dilemma of either striking before they may 


feel they are ready and, in case of failure, jeopardiz- 
ing not only their own war effort, but also the lives 


of their supporters in conquered countries; or else 


passing up the opportunity for a second front, created 
by the diversion of German troops to the east, and 
thus disappointing both the Russians and those 
among the conquered peoples who had hoped for 
action this year. The argument, advanced by some 
Americans and Britishers, that mass air-raids on Ger- 
many and German-occupied territory may prove a 
substitute for the opening of a second land front, 
has been discounted by the Russians, who want relief 
on land, not merely in the air. The great Allied 
air armada which, British Air Marshal Harris warned 
the German people on July 28, would scourge them 
unless they revolt against Hitler would need, in Rus- 


Page Two 
of the etme peoples—and our own—to the 


—; 
cam 


sia’s view, to be supported by sufficient land forces to 
create a real diversion of German troops from the 
eastern front. 


For the launching of land operations in Westerg 
Europe the United Nations will need a more closely 
unified command, and much greater coordination of 
war production and shipping than has yet beep 
achieved in London and Washington. To be really 
successful, the unified command and the coordinat- 
ing staff should not be exclusively Anglo-American, 
They should also include representatives of other 
allied countries which have already made great sacti- 
fices in this war—notably Russia, China, Norway, 
Holland, and the Fighting French. And it should 
be in the interest of the Russians themselves to con- 
tribute to the pool of military intelligence needed 
for the opening of a second front all possible infor- 
mation regarding their own situation. Coordina- 
tion would also require subordination of per 
sonal—and national—ambitions and vanities to the 
need of winning the war; drastic curtailment of all 
activities not essential to the actual prosecution of the 
conflict which continue even in Britain, not to speak 
of the United States; and a determination that 
neither material sacrifices, nor political or economic 
prejudice of any kind, can be allowed to stand in the 


way of the war effort. Vera, MicHELEs DEAN 


FIRST INSIDE NEWS FROM JAPAN SINCE PEARL HARBOR 


The public received its first information about re- 
cent conditions in Japan near the end of July, with 
the arrival in Portuguese East Africa of two boat- 
loads of westerners, chiefly Americans, released by 
Tokyo under an exchange agreement with the United 
States. At the small town of Lourengo Marques news- 
papermen filed their stories, attempting to construct 
as broad a picture as possible from such bits of in- 
formation as they had picked up during internment, 
imprisonment or surveillance in Japan or its pos- 
sessions. They described the extreme hardships of 
the Japanese people—the difficulty of securing food, 
the rapid spread of tuberculosis and dietary ailments, 
the rise in taxes and living costs, and the necessity of 
standing in queues to purchase ordinary commodi- 
ties. In mid-June, they said, Japan’s shortages of rice 
and sugar were more acute than before Pearl Harbor, 


A Russo-Japanese clash in Siberia this summer can- 
not be excluded from the United Nations’ strategy. 
For a survey of the resources of the Soviet Far 
East, and possible U.S. supply routes by-air, read: 


The U.S.S.R. and Japan 
by Vera Micheles Dean 
JuLy 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 


REporRTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


despite the conquest of Burma and Java. In this con- 
nection they stressed Tokyo's stringent shipping 
situation, resulting in part from losses inflicted by 
Allied airplanes, surface craft, and submarines. 


BRUTAL TREATMENT OF SOME AMERI- 
CANS. Correspondents confirmed earlier items about 
the brutal treatment of some Americans and other 
foreigners. Newspapermen, teachers and mission- 
aries in a number of instances were charged with 
espionage, imprisoned, and subjected to various in- 
dignities. The efforts of a few Japanese to intervene 
were of little avail. One well-known correspondent 
was forced to sit with heels against hips in Japanese 
fashion until wounds opened on his legs. The pub- 
lisher of a Shanghai weekly magazine that had been 
openly anti-Japanese before the war lost part of both 
feet from beri beri and gangrene, contracted through 
inadequate food, exposure to cold, and lack of medi- 
cal care. An American missionary in Korea was given 
the ‘water cure’ and beaten on the soles of his feet 
and across his back with a rubber hose. The condi- 
tions of the British were even worse. Some captured 
British officers and men in Hong Kong were killed, 
and a number of British nationals in Japan com- 
mitted suicide in prison. It is apparent that, although 
the chief problem of many enemy foreigners was to 
adjust themselves to a Japanese standard of living, 4 


= 


conside 
yolved 


EVE 
most Si 
tics bef 
that in 
life of 
and tl 
Konoys 
war, tk 
as a p 
Premie 
States | 
tremist 
was pl 
militar 
ganiza 
round 
add an 
peace 
Army 
Grew 
at Pea 
that at 
ex-Arr 
withot 
Grew, 
in the 
Decen 
It v 
wheth 
portat 
rect c 
cutior 
gerate 
playes 
gers « 
stress 
and « 
peace 
bludg 
wish 
vince 
migh 
edly, 
other 
from 
Haw: 
sive | 
place 
part | 
It 


————t 


Orces to 
om the 


V estern 
closely 
ition of 
tt been 
© really 
ordinat. 
nerican, 
f other 
at sacti- 
Norway, 
should 
to con- 
needed 
e infor- 
ordina- 
of per. 
; to the 
t of all 
n of the 
© speak 
on that 
conomic 


d in the 


EAN 


his con- 
shipping 
icted by 
1€s. 

A MERI- 
ns about 
id other 
mission- 
ed with 
rious in- 
ntervene 
pondent 
Japanese 
‘he pub- 
iad been 
of both 
through 
of medi- 
as given 
his feet 
e condi- 
captured 
e killed, 
an com- 
ilthough 
s was to 
living, 4 


— 
— 


considerable amount of outright brutality was in- 
yolved in their treatment. 


EVENTS LEADING TO PEARL HARBOR. The 
most significant dispatches dealt with Japanese poli- 
tics before Pearl Harbor. One correspondent declared 
that in August 1941 two attempts were made on the 
life of Baron Hiranuma, minister without portfolio, 
and that the entire Cabinet, including Premier 
Konoye, was threatened. Had the Emperor opposed 
war, the terrorists planned to confine him at Kyoto 
as a powerless figurehead. Even General Tojo, the 
Premier who led Japan into war with the United 
States and Britain, was ‘‘swept off his feet by the ex- 
tremists.’’ The correspondent concluded that ‘Japan 
was plunged into the war because a virtual revolt of 
military extremists and Nazified ultranationalist or- 
ganizations had swept out civilian control.” To 
ound out the implications of this story, one must 
add another statement that President Roosevelt's final 
peace appeal to Hirohito was held up by Japanese 
Army advisers, making it impossible for Ambassador 
Grew to see the Emperor before the die had been cast 
at Pearl Harbor. Nor can one overlook the report 
that at Lourenco Marques, on his way back to Japan, 
ex-Ambassador Nomura sought informally (but 
without success) to arrange an interview with Mr. 
Grew, supposedly to “clear” himself of complicity 
in the events leading to the Japanese attack last 
December. 

It will not be possible for a long time to know 
whether all these statements are true, but it is im- 
portant at the moment not to draw from them incor- 
fect conclusions that may interfere with the prose- 
tution of the war. Before Pearl Harbor an exag- 
gerated emphasis on internal differences in Japan 
played an important part in blinding us to the dan- 
gets of attack. American correspondents constantly 
stressed the struggle between the so-called liberals 
and extremists, the conflict between the allegedly 
peaceful Navy and the bellicose Army, and the 
bludgeoning of the Emperor into actions he did not 
wish to take. In short, every effort was made to con- 
vince us that, if only we were conciliatory, Japan 
might yet turn out to be a peaceful nation. Undoubt- 
edly, some Japanese leaders were more cautious than 
others; but the outstanding fact during the ten years 
from the invasion of Manchuria to the attack at 
Hawaii was the increasing predominance of aggres- 
sive circles. The blackjacking of dissenters in high 
places was not an occasional aberration, but a normal 
part of the process of Japanese government. 

It is, therefore, an illusion to believe that the 


Page Three 


—— 
———— 


events leading to Pearl Harbor were accidental, or 
that full consideration of the President’s message by 
the Emperor could have made any significant differ- 
ence in the outcome. War with Japan resulted in- 
evitably from the ambitions of the militarists. The 
personal feelings of this or that official are funda- 
mentally of no importance. The first step toward 
lasting peace with Japan is to crush Japanese mili- 
tarism and destroy the governmental structure on 


which it rests. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


The Making of Tomorrow, by Raoul de Roussy de Sales. 
New York, Reynal & Hitchcock, 1942. $3.00 


The former correspondent of Paris-Soir in this country 
contemplates in mature and mellow fashion the role of the 
United States in a world being rapidly reshaped by the 
forces of nationalism and collectivism. 


Conditions of Peace, by Edward H. Carr. New York, Ox- 
ford University Press, 1942. $2.50 
Professor Carr, who teaches international politics in the 
University College of Wales, gives an unusually realistic 
analysis of Britain’s relation to a post-war world, pro- 
jected against a background study of mistakes committed 
during the “Long Armistice” between 1919 and 1939. 


Toward International Organization, by Howard Robinson 
and others. New York, Harper, 1942. $2.00 
A lecture series, somewhat uneven but stimulating, 
which examines the causes of war and sketches the broad 
outlines of the future organization of the world’s political, 
economic, social and cultural order. The contributors in- 
clude Max Lerner, Jacob Viner, and Quincy Wright. 


The Balance Sheet of the Future, by Ernest Bevin. New 
York, Robert McBride, 1941. $2.75 


Extracts from speeches of the British labor leader and 
War Cabinet Minister, so chosen as to show his approach 
to what must be done to gain the objective of a better 
post-war world. 


A Great Experiment, by Viscount Cecil (Lord Robert 
Cecil). New York, Oxford University Press, 1941. $3.50 


A history of the League of Nations, and an evaluation 
of its work, by one of its leading British advocates, who 
continues to believe in the League idea. 


Survey of International Affairs, 1938, Vol. I, by Arnold J. 
Toynbee, assisted by V. M. Boulter. New York, Oxford 
University Press, 1941. $9.00 : 

Continuing its widely-known series, the Royal Institute 
of International Affairs has issued the first of two volumes 
covering the last pre-war year. The principal topics in- 
clude the intensification of economic nationalism, the 
growing shadow of Germany in Europe, the closing chap- 
ters of the Spanish conflict, the course of the “China 
incident,” and the reactions produced in the Americas by 
Europe’s drift toward war. 


Strategy for Victory, by Hanson W. Baldwin. New York, 
Norton, 1942. $1.75 
A brief and sober survey, by the widely known military 
correspondent of The New York Times, of the manifold 
problems involved in fighting the war to a successful con- 
clusion, with trenchant suggestions as to the methods 
which may be used in their solution. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 42, Aucust 7, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leger, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEan, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Swiss 


Three Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News y etter 


AuG. 1.— The brutal attack on Waldo Frank, 
American writer and lecturer, in Buenos Aires on 
August 1 was the latest in a series of incidents which 
have marked the progressive deterioration of rela- 
tions between the United States and Argentina since 
the Rio de Janeiro conference in January. 

At that Pan-American gathering, Argentina and 
Chile disrupted the solidarity of the republics of the 
Western Hemisphere by refusing to break off diplo- 
matic relations with the Axis. But while the action 
of the Chilean government was motivated largely by 
fear of its inability to defend its highly vulnerable 
2,600-mile long Pacific coast line against Japanese 
reprisal attacks, the attitude of the Argentine dele- 
gation was inspired to a high degree by jealousy and 
suspicion of the United States. 

The hope expressed by Undersecretary of State 
Sumner Welles, on February 6, that Argentina and 
Chile would shortly follow the example of the other 
19 American republics in severing all ties with the 
Axis has not been fulfilled in the intervening months. 


RUIZ GUINAZU’S OUTBURST BEFORE COR- 
TES. Official irritation against this country found 
vent in an oratorical outburst by Enrique Ruiz 
Guinazu, the Argentine Foreign Minister, in a secret 
session of the Cortes in Buenos Aires on July 15. The 
Argentine Embassy in Mexico City has denied that 
Sefior Ruiz Guinazu used the language attributed to 
him. But even if the Foreign Minister did not employ 
such phrases as that “Yankee imperialism” was more 
to be feared in South America than Nazism or that 
the United States had rounded up the Latin Amer- 
ican republics like a “herd of beasts,” the evidence 
is overwhelming that his speech was extremely un- 
friendly to this country. 

Sefior Ruiz Guinazu’s chief grievance seems to be 
that the Argentine military mission which was in the 
United States last winter went back home in the 
middle of March empty-handed. The United States 
government, he complained, announced that Argen- 
tina could buy no armaments in this country unless 
it undertook to convoy shipping at least part way 
from its ports to North America. This stand he con- 
sidered to be a plot on the part of the United States 
government to involve his country in war with the 
Axis by provoking a series of maritime incidents be- 
tween Argentina and Germany. 

The reason why the United States refused to grant 
arms to the Buenos Aires government was clearly 
set forth in an authoritative statement issued in 
Washington on March 31. According to this state- 
ment, the high Argentine army and naval officers 


who came to this country asked for very large ag 
sistance both in respect of money value and in quam 
tity of goods, particularly for the mechanization of 
their army and the modernization of their navy, ad 
mittedly the best of any South American nation. The 
Argentine military mission returned to Buenos Aires 
empty-handed, this authority stated, because its goy. 
ernment was not contributing in an effective way to 
the defense of the Western Hemisphere. 


WASHINGTON’S REVISED POLICY TO. 
WARD LATIN AMERICA. The United States laid 
down the principle that it would give preference 
in the shipment of war materials to those South 
American countries which had placed themselves ig 
peril from the Axis by cooperating in the defense 
of the Americas. Unless and until Argentina was 
willing to cooperate, it was declared, the United 
States would not be able to send it war supplies that 
are now being shipped to other Latin American coun. 
tries. It was frankly admitted that this policy was a 
reversal of that pursued prior to the Rio conference, 
when the United States treated all South American 
states on a basis of equality. 

The new American policy was a blow to the Cas 
tillo government, which saw Argentina’s jealously 
guarded military supremacy in South America jeop 
ardized by the military supplies that the United States 
is now pouring into Brazil and other neighboring 
republics. The decision taken by Buenos Aires on 
July 7 to recognize the German blockade of the 
North American coast by refusing to allow Argen 
tine ships to enter United States Atlantic ports was 
undoubtedly inspired by pique at this development 

But, despite strained political ties, it must not be 
forgotten that Argentina is supplying the United 
States today with large quantities of vital strategic 
materials. This country has arranged to buy Arget 
tina’s entire output of tungsten, and is also getting 
most of its supplies of such valuable materials a 
mica and beryl. Argentina exports to this county 
hides to shoe United States soldiers, wool to clothe 
them, and canned beef to feed them. In return, the 
State Department's ban on the export of military 
supplies to Argentina does not apply to civilian goods 
which are being shipped there in large quantities 
Moreover, although Argentina is still harboring 
German diplomats and Nazi subversive agents on its 
soil, it should be remembered that by declaring the 
United States a non-belligerent after Pearl Harbor, 
it is permitting United States warships to go freely 
in and out of its ports and harbors—a privilege that 
is denied to the Axis. JOHN ELLIOTT 


[N t 
in 
the ar 
on Au 
mittee 
a turt 
tO Su 
of eve 
can n 
tions 
Lo« 
policy 
Cripp 
seque 
meeti 
ist act 
presei 
that, 
the ti 
till a: 
Cong 
Ur O} 
comb 
der tl 
they 
gopa! 
great 
heal . 
alizir 


