











‘FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 























2, 1921, at “the 
= Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
ded j FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
Be 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
list 
the} Vou. XVI, No. 25 ApriL 16, 1937 
tion} ~ 2 E 

r. William W. Bisho 
a DINNER AND ANNUAL MEETING Dr. Willian shop 
= oo. 2 

its At the F.P.A. dinner and annual meeting, His Excellency, % University of Michigan Libra 
tish M. Georges Bonnet, Ambassador of France to the United ue 
ress States, will speak on “‘Democracy in the Present-Day World,” Ann Arbor, Mich. 


ters Thursday evening, April 22, at the Hotel Astor, New York, at 
seven-thirty o’clock. Reservations should be made in advance. 


fer- 
rard === 
‘on- 
- TIDE TURNS IN SPANISH WAR 
long INCE the mid-March success of the Loyalists conspiracies reported near the end of March at 
Son- against General Franco’s Italian troops on Algeciras, Malaga, and at the Tetuan airdrome 
step§ the Guadalajara front, the government forces in Morocco. Mass executions were employed to i 
Thef have displayed a hitherto undemonstrated ability crush the unrest. At the same time the govern- 
tion§ to take the offensive. On April 9 General Miaja ment cause was plagued by political strife, which ( 
rin-— began a pincer movement along the western side was most marked in semi-independent Catalonia, ql 
with? of Madrid, designed to cut off the Rebel troops and led to the fall of the Tarradellas cabinet at 
nm tog in the University City salient. The first four Barcelona on March 26. The more moderate ele- 
the§ days of fighting were inconclusive. Greater gains ments—Socialists and bourgeois Republicans— 
| un-} came from a campaign in Cérdoba province, 150 have stressed the policy of winning the war before 
It} miles southwest of Madrid, initiated near the end attempting further social reforms. The growing 
»pre-§ of March. Here the Loyalists showed unsuspected strength of these groups stirred unrest among 
con-} skill in open-field manoeuvres, coordinating ef- the more radical Anarcho-Syndicalists and the 
men-§ fectively the operations of several advancing col- semi-Trotzkyite POUM. The latter were par- 
yrog-— umns. On March 25, after repulsing a week-long ticularly concerned over proposed reorganization 
pro-§ effort of the Rebels to capture Pozoblanco and of the forces of public order, which was expected 
with? open the way to the mercury mines at Almadén, to diminish the direct influence of the labor or- 
, dis-} the government troops drove southward in a ganizations in the armed forces. When a week’s 
inge-—§ movement which has almost reached Fuente- negotiations failed to solve the cabinet crisis 
sible} ovejuna, endangering Rebel control of valuable Companys, the Catalan President, took over the 
copper and coal mines. One important factor in Premiership on April 3, and formed a temporary 
d by§ Loyalist progress has been decisive mastery of ministry, representing the same groups—Left 
vhich§ the air, where Russian planes have figured prom- Republicans, Socialists and Anarcho-Syndicalists 
inces§ inently. The government navy has also dis- —as in the preceding cabinet. 
risla-§ played new activity, shelling Malaga, Rebel forts While effective establishment of the interna- 
hs, @§ in the Balearic Islands, and Ceuta—the Insurgent tional patrol of Spain’s land and maritime fron- 
ment} base in Spanish Morocco. tiers has been delayed, various incidents at sea 
n the Rebel gains in the north have served to coun- have accentuated European friction. The Insur- 
ve tof terbalance losses in the south. An offensive gent practice of stopping merchantmen on the 
d the} launched on April 1 in the mountainous Basque high seas has brought warnings from France and 
, dis-f country has made definite progress, capturing Britain, as well as from smaller powers. On 
But} Ochandiano and threatening Durango, sixteen April 6 the British destroyer Garland was twice 
qual-§ miles from Bilbao, the capital of the region. Pos- attacked by Rebel bombing planes while off 
gisla-— session of Bilbao would give Franco control of a Spain’s eastern coast. A prompt apology settled 
wide-§ leading industrial center, diminish the threat to this incident, but Franco’s blockade of Bilbao was 
his rear and facilitate conquest of Santander and the cause of renewed tension. Four British mer- 
PER the Asturias mining region. chantmen carrying food to this port were turned 
Meanwhile, dissension has appeared in the back by Insurgent warships on April 10. London 
Nationally CaMps of both factions. Friction between Franco’s at once ordered the 42,000-ton dreadnaught Hood 
, Editor§’ Spanish troops and foreign contingents in his to sail from Gibraltar, but a cabinet meeting on 
- forces was responsible seemingly for mutinous the following day led to virtual recognition of the 








































































Franco blockade. On April 12 Prime Minister 
Baldwin announced that, while interference with 
British shipping on the high seas would not be 
tolerated, vessels would be warned “for practical 
reasons” against going into the blockaded area. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


BELGIAN FASCISM IN RETREAT 


The cause of fascism was dealt a heavy blow 
on April 11 when the leader of the Belgian Rex- 
ist party, Léon Degrelle, was overwhelmingly de- 
feated in his campaign for election to the Cham- 
ber of Deputies from the Brussels district. This 
by-election had considerable significance as a test 
of strength: it had been deliberately precipitated 
by the resignation of a Rexist deputy and the 
liberal Premier, Paul van Zeeland, had accepted 
the challenge by personally entering the lists 
against Degrelle. In a handsome victory the 
Prime Minister polled 275,840 votes against 
69,242 for his opponent. Despite an alliance with 
the Flemish Nationalists, Degrelle obtained 4,479 
fewer votes than the total polled by the two par- 
ties combined in the elections of last May. 

The size of M. van Zeeland’s majority came as 
a surprise. Under the vigorous leadership of the 
youthful Degrelle, this Fascist party had in- 
creased with phenomenal rapidity and, following 
the elections of May 1936, had triumphantly en- 
tered Parliament with 21 deputies. If the move- 
ment now appears to be waning in strength, it is 
primarily because van Zeeland has taken much 
wind out of its sails. Through his middle-of-the- 
road economic policy the Prime Minister has 
brought Belgium far on the way to recovery. 
Since the beginning of his Premiership, a little 
more than two years ago, industrial production 
has risen 20 per cent, foreign trade 47 per cent, 
and unemployment has been cut by half. The 
budget is balanced and tax reductions are in pros- 
pect. In the field of foreign policy, van Zeeland 
has obviated much criticism by steering Belgium 
into a new course of neutrality long advocated by 
both the Rexists and the Flemish Nationalists. 
Finally, M. van Zeeland’s victory was sealed on 
the eve of the election by a statement of Car- 
dinal Van Roey in which the Primate of Belgium 
condemned the Rexist movement as dangerous to 
Church and State and counselled all Catholics, 
some of whom appeared hesitant, to vote for the 
Prime Minister. 

Supported in Parliament by a strong coalition 
of Liberals, Catholics and Socialists, van Zeeland 
can now carry on with enhanced prestige. Among 
his first tasks is to study, at the invitation of 


Page Two 





— 
mc 


France and Britain, the prospects of closer inter- 
national economic collaboration. While London 
and Paris continue at work on a new Western, 
and possibly even an Eastern Locarno, Brussels 
will examine plans for the removal of trade bar. 
riers. In his two-day visit to the Belgian capita] 
this week Dr. Schacht, the German Minister of 
Economics, is expected to discuss not only trade 
problems affecting the two countries, but the 
terms on which the Reich would be willing to 
participate in economic arrangements of larger 
scope. Van Zeeland is also conferring this week 
with economic experts of the so-called Oslo group, 
who are now meeting in Brussels after holding 
preliminary conferences in The Hague last month. 
The Oslo bloc, which includes the Scandinavian 
states as well as The Netherlands and Belgium, 
is working for constructive action to eliminate 
obstacles to world trade. The United States 
sympathizes with these efforts, and its represen- 
tative at the London Sugar Conference, Mr. Nor- 
man H. Davis, is exploring with British states- 
men the possibility of action in the economic 


realm. JOHN C. DEWILDE 








Guatemala, by Erna Fergusson. New York, Knopf, 1937. 
$3.00 
An engaging picture of Central America’s most colorful 
republic. 


Can China Survive? by Hallett Abend and Anthony J. 
Billingham. New York, Ives Washburn, 1936. $3.00 
Interesting but not very well organized impressions of 

two New York Times correspondents. 


World Economic Survey 1935/36. Geneva, League of Na- 
tions, 1936. Paper $1.50 Cloth $2.00 
This excellent and candid review reveals a widespread 
and substantial recovery, which rests, however, in many in- 
stances on an unsound basis. 


The Yellow Spot: The Extermination of the Jews in Ger- 
many. New York, Knight, 1936. $3.00 
Particulars of a dark chapter in Nazi policy, gleaned 
from the German press and official documents. 


Collective Security, by Arnold D. McNair. 
Cambridge University Press, 1936. 75 cents 
Despite recent setbacks Dr. McNair foresees the ulti- 

mate triumph of the principle of collective security. 


The ABC of the Federal Reserve System, by Edwin W. 
Kemmerer. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 
1936. $2.50 
In this new edition of his lucid analysis of our bank- 

ing machinery Dr. Kemmerer sharply criticizes recent 

legislation for putting too much control over money and 
credit in the hands of the government. 


Central Europe and the Western World, by Gerhard 
Schacher. New York, Holt, 1937. $2.75 
Scholarly analysis of the plight of Central Europe, with 
a plea for economic cooperation as the only possible basis 
of peaceful settlement. 


Cambridge, 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 25, Aprit 16, 1937. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasitg Bugit, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MICHELES Dean, Béitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


Nauonal 








a eonmow do @mp>rmerets@ 


oe ee ees ee 





