TE 


\ yo* 

> “ , 

pee at en 
\ ae 
ov OF 


Genera} bites Entered as 2nd class matter 
« rz ry 


Uniy 


a» 4 
wisity of 


APp Qe “: 


Ann Arbor, 


Michizan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vo. XX, No. 27 


—_—_— 


APRIL 25, 1941 


U.S. AND CANADA MERGE ARMAMENT PRODUCTION 


od concluding an economic agreement with Prime 
Minister William L. Mackenzie King at Hyde 
Park on April 20, President Roosevelt further ex- 
panded his dual program of aid to Britain and de- 
fense of the Western Hemisphere. According to their 
joint communiqué, issued after a seven-hour confer- 
ence, “it was agreed as a general principle that in 
mobilizing the resources of this continent each coun- 
try should provide the other with the defense articles 
that it is best able to produce, and above all, pro- 
duce quickly, and that production programs should 


/ be coordinated to this end.” The agreement pro- 


vides that the United States during the next twelve 
months will purchase between $200,000,000 and 
$300,000,000 worth of Canadian defense products 
—including “certain kinds of munitions, strategic 
materials, aluminum and ships, which are urgently 
tequired by the United States for its own purposes.” 
The agreement also permits Great Britain to obtain, 
under the Lend-Lease Act, American products to be 
used by Canada in the manufacture of equipment 
and munitions for British use. 


FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS. While the 
official statement was noticeably circumspect regard- 
ing financial arrangements between Canada and the 
United States, it stressed the fact that American pur- 
chases of Canadian products “will materially assist 
Canada in meeting part of the cost of Canadian de- 
fense purchases in the United States.” 


Because the Neutrality Act of 1939 forbade the 
extension of credits to belligerents, Canada is hard- 
pressed to find dollar exchange for its large im- 
port surplus from the United States, which amounted 
to over $290,000,000 in 1940. In normal times, the 
Dominion—having a triangular trade with Britain 
and America—utilized its favorable balance of trade 
with the United Kingdom to pay for its excess of 
imports from the United States and cover its debt 


service there. Great Britain, however, is now financ- 
ing its increasingly large imports from Canada by 
promoting the repatriation of British-held Canadian 
securities. A decline in the proceeds from the Ameri- 
can tourist trade since the outbreak of war further 
reduces Canada’s ability to purchase in the United 
States. To conserve its supply of U.S. dollars, Canada 
early in the war restricted the travel of its citizens 
across the border and, on December 2, 1940, pro- 
hibited or severely curtailed the importation of many 
nonessential articles from non-sterling countries. 
The new economic arrangement, therefore, will 
greatly alleviate the immediate strain on Canada’s 
financial structure and probably reduce the need for 
drawing too heavily upon its gold reserves and liquid 
assets in the United States. 


The agreement is thus a significant and logical 
development in Canadian-American relations, for 
it supplements, in the economic field, the work of 
the Permanent Joint Defense Board, established by 
President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Mackenzie 
King at Ogdensburg last August 18. Such collabora- 
tion is long overdue, since there are serious differ- 
ences in the specifications of British and American 
armaments and considerable duplication in Canadian 
and American production. The coordination of out- 
put in North America will prove useful not only in 
supplying Great Britain, but also—in event of a 
British defeat—for creating a second line of defense 
in the Western Hemisphere. 


THE ST. LAWRENCE WATERWAY. While 
many difficult problems in the sphere of economic 
cooperation confront Canada and the United States, 
perhaps the most complex is the long-standing con- 
troversy over the St. Lawrence Waterway. On 
March 21 President Roosevelt sent to Congress an 
executive agreement, signed in Ottawa two days 
previously, providing for construction of a power 


and navigation project estimated to cost $266,170,- 
000. Although similar in content to the treaty which 
the Senate rejected in 1934, the agreement does not 
need approval by a two-thirds vote but merely re- 
quires appropriations by an ordinary majority. Mr. 
Roosevelt called the project a “vital necessity” for 
defense, arguing that it would provide electric power 
Js iors to over 2,000,000 horsepower—for ex- 
panding industries on both sides of the St. Lawrence 
and an outlet for seagoing vessels to be constructed 
along the Great Lakes. 

Proponents of the bill claim that, if the present 
Waterway were expanded, the Great Lakes ship- 
yards—which in 1919 built 199 ships, totaling 495.- 
559 tons—could construct large merchant vessels and 
warships. At present the Great Lakes yards are build- 
ing only small craft, including submarines that have 


AXIS CAMPAIGN THREATENS BRITAIN IN MEDITERRANEAN 


With British and Greek forces retreating steadily 
before the relentless drive of Nazi Germany’s mech- 
anized columns, it now seems only a matter of time 
before Britain loses virtually its last foothold on the 
European continent. The attempt to hold the Greek 
front, which at best was only a desperate gamble, 
became impossible following the unexpectedly rapid 
collapse of the Yugoslav armies. After a series of 
German thrusts had cut Yugoslavia into a number 
of isolated segments, all organized resistance ceased 
on April 18, and thousands of Nazi troops were re- 
leased for the campaign against the hard-pressed 
Allied forces in Greece. Although the Germans are 
apparently suffering heavy losses, their success ap- 
pears assured by overwhelming superiority in man 
power, tanks and planes. It only remains to be seen 
whether they can prevent at least a partial evacua- 
tion of the British from Greece. 


The Nazi military successes have not been won 


without cost. The Balkan campaign has inevitably 


dislocated production and communications to some 
extent. Moreover, Germany’s immediate gains will 
not be great. While the conquest of Greece will 
give the Germans an advance outpost in the east- 
ern Mediterranean, the Greek mainland is still some 
600 miles from the key British naval base at Alex- 
andria. At the same time, the Nazis have further 
extended the area of military occupation, thus im- 


Page Two 


We may have to participate in naval warfare with 
the ships we now possess. What IS the present 
status of the U.S. Navy? Read: 
AMERICA’S NAVAL PREPAREDNESS 
by David H. Popper 


25¢ 


April 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


es 
— 


to be sent down the Illinois waterway and Missis. 
sippi river for completion. On March 24, the Ad. 
ministration revealed that Canada and the United 
States had agreed to reinterpret the Rush-Bagot 
Agreement of 1817 in order to permit the construe 
tion of warships on the Great Lakes. Some Op. 
ponents point out that the St. Lawrence projec 
which calls for deepening the channel from 14 to 27 
feet, will not be completed until 1948, too late fo, 
the present emergency. The project is also strongly 
opposed by railway and utility spokesmen, the coal 
industry, the ports of New York, Boston and Mon. 
treal, and other economic groups in the United 
States, although many of its foes in Canada, includ. 
ag Premier Mitchell F. Hepburn of Ontario, haye 
accepted it as necessary for electric power. 
JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


mobilizing more of their troops. It may be no easy 
task to curb the activities of guerrilla bands in Yugo. 
slavia and elsewhere, and to keep in check the rival 
nationalist aspirations of the Balkan peoples. In 
Rumania, for example, dissatisfaction with Axis 
domination appears to be growing rapidly, with 


nationalist elements demanding the return of ter- 
ritories which, in September 1940, were surrendered 
to Hungary and Bulgaria at the demand of Ger- 
many. 

AXIS MOVES ON WIDE FRONT. Neverthe. 
less, the Greek campaign assumes much more im- 
portance when considered merely as part of a com- 


—— 


Jraqi a 
Axis 0 
Gailani 


quering 
at Ales 
the Bri 
become 
to Naz 
disappe 
dom of 
to use 

essentiz 
and th 
must re 


| the Da 


Egypt, 
of cot 
southw 
For 
the Ge 
and at 


} more t 


reinfor 


| where 
| few se 


prehensive Axis drive to oust Britain from the en- | 


tire Mediterranean and Near East. This drive, both 
diplomatic and military, may be vigorously prose: 
cuted on several fronts at once: (1) in Turkey and 
the Near East; (2) against Egypt and the Suez 
Canal; and (3) through Spain against Gibraltar. 
Now that Turkey’s position has been greatly weak- 
ened by the Allied defeats in Greece, German diplo- 
matic guns are once more trained upon Ankara. The 
Turks, who have considerably moderated their de 
fiant attitude toward the Axis in recent weeks, may 
be unable to reject the proffer of a nonaggression 
pact which the Nazis are expected to make as the 


first move in a campaign to bring Turkey into the | 
Nazi orbit. The British, however, have taken steps | 


to counter German plans to penetrate the Near East 
along the historic Berlin-to-Bagdad route. On April 
19 they landed troops at Basra, the Persian Gulf 
port of Iraq. Previously, on April 4, a coup d'état 
at the Iraqi capital had overthrown the goveri- 
ment of Premier Taha al-Hashimi and his pro-Brit 
ish Foreign Minister, Nuri as-Said, and installed 4 
new régime under Rashid Ali Bey Gailani who, 
despite his professions of allegiance to the Angle 


| 


more t 
will de 
additic 
across 
the Lit 
the Br 
with. \ 
terrane 
ply wh 
bombe 
for it 
British 
stantly 
Italy a 
Mez 
to Brit 
eratior 
ment t 
labora 


turn o 
_, 
FOREIG} 
Headquar 
Encered 


BS 


NO easy 
1 Yugo- 
he rival 
ples. In 
th Axis 
y, with 
of ter- 
endered 
of Ger- 


everthe- 
ore im 
' @ COM: 
the en- 
ve, both 
y prose: 
‘key and 
he Suez 
raltar. 
ly weak- 
in diplo- 
ara. The 
their de- 
eks, may 
reression 
e as the 
into the 
en steps 
lear East 
Yn April 
an Gulf 
ip d'état 
goveri- 
ro-Brit: 
stalled 4 
uni who, 
e Anglo 


—— 
— 


ragi alliance of 1930, is reputed to favor a pro- 
Axis orientation. Britain, obviously distrustful of 
Gailani’s government, sent in troops to safeguard 
the Iraqi oil fields on which its Mediterranean fleet 
depends for fuel, and to destroy the oil wells in the 
event that Nazi victories in the eastern Mediter- 
ranean open the Near East to the Axis. 

THE WAR IN NORTH AFRICA. The most im- 

rtant front in the Mediterranean area is still that 
in North Africa. Should Axis forces succeed in con- 
queting Egypt, together with the British naval base 
at Alexandria and the Suez Canal, the position of 
the British fleet in the eastern Mediterranean would 
become untenable. Any prospect of further resistance 
to Nazi penetration of the Near East would then 
disappear. Germany and Italy would acquire free- 
dom of access to the Black Sea, thus enabling them 
touse the maritime route for the transportation of 
essential supplies, including oil, from the Balkans 
and the Soviet Union. At present the Axis powers 
must rely on the limited transportation facilities of 
the Danube and the Balkan railways. Finally, from 
Egypt, which itself would afford a welcome source 
of cotton, Axis forces might be able to advance 
southward into East Africa. 

For the moment the British appear to be holding 
the German and Italian columns at Tobruk in Libya, 
and at Solum on the Egyptian border, which is still 
more than 300 miles from Alexandria. Although 
reinforcements are being rushed from East Africa, 
where Italian resistance has collapsed in all but a 
few sectors, it is not expected that these will add 
more than 60,000 men to the British strength. Much 
will depend on the rate at which the Axis can bring 
additional troops and supplies to North Africa 
actoss the central Mediterranean. The shelling of 
the Libyan port of Tripoli on April 21 indicates that 
the British navy is still a powerful force to reckon 
with. Yet the difficulties under which Britain’s Medi- 
terranean fleet is operating will undoubtedly multi- 
ply when the Nazis acquire new bases for their dive- 
bombers in Greece. Its task is already tremendous, 
for it must function not only as an adjunct to the 
British land forces in and near Egypt, but must con- 
tantly seek to interrupt communications between 
ltaly and Tripoli about 1,000 miles to the west. 

Meanwhile, the German government, according 
to British reports, is successfully enlisting the coop- 
tation of France in transporting troops and equip- 
ment to North Africa. In return for additional ‘‘col- 
laboration,’’ which would be carried out with the re- 
turn of Pierre Laval to some position in the French 


Page Three 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: AFTER GREECE—WHAT? 
Speaker: J. C. deWilde 

Date: Sunday, April 27 

Time: 2:15 p.m., Eastern Daylight Saving Time 


Station: NBC, blue network 


government, the Germans are said to be offering 
comparatively liberal peace terms to France. Under 
these conditions France would be permitted to keep 
a small part of Alsace-Lorraine and all of its Em- 
pire with the exception of the former German col- 
onies, while the Reich would release about 500,000 
French prisoners of war and reduce the occupation 
charges. Such an offer, if substantiated, might be a 
strong inducement to the Pétain government which 
may already be convinced that a German victory is 
inevitable. If the Germans can transport their troops 
and equipment across the Mediterranean and 
through Tunis with French help, their campaign in 
North Africa will be greatly facilitated. Even now 
they are requisitioning many French merchant ves- 
sels for use as transports and supply ships. At the 
same time German troops in France are reported 
preparing for a drive through Spain to Gibraltar. 
Although the tide appears to be turning against 
the British in the Mediterranean, we know too little 
of the many factors which bear on the struggle to 
predict its ultimate outcome. Even the loss of the 
Mediterranean, however, would not necessarily mean 
the defeat of Britain. The British Isles would still 
remain a beleaguered fortress off the coast of a hos- 
tile continent. And if the United States cooperates 
with Britain in keeping open the lines of supply, 
continued prosecution of the war will still be possible. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


SPECIAL OFFER TO F.P.A. MEMBERS 

In the May 15 issue of ForEIGN Poicy REPORTS, 
“Plans for Post-War Reconstruction,” Vera Micheles Dean 
analyzes plans which have been discussed in Britain, the 
United States and Germany, as well as practical measures 
already undertaken to implement these plans. In addition, 
Mrs. Dean discusses the réle of the great powers in case 
of: a German victory; a stalemate; a British victory with 
the aid of the United States. 

Because we feel that F.P.A. members who do not sub- 
scribe regularly to ForEIGN Po.icy Reports will be 
particularly interested in ‘‘Plans for Post-War Reconstruc- 
tion,” we shall be glad to send a copy free to those members 
who write for it. (Regular subscribers will receive their 
copies as usual.) 


This offer of a free copy is open only until May 8. After 
that date, the Report may be ordered at the regular price 
of 25 cents a copy. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 27, AprRiL 25, 1941. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Br 81 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


1 


By 
t 

i, 
al 


OE GOs: 


Fe SS ee 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Apr. 21.—At a time when Washington is faced 
with the most critical decisions since the fall of 
France, it may seem out of place to devote this 
News LETTER to the administrative problems of one 
of the smaller agencies of the federal government. 
When this particular agency happens to be the State 
Department and its Foreign Service, however, the 
adequacy of its personnel and equipment becomes a 
matter of national concern. 


NEEDS OF THE STATE DEPARTMENT. No 
one can question the loyalty and devotion of the 
professional officers who form the career service 
built up since Congress passed the Rogers Act in 
1925. They have carried a staggering load without 
complaint. But few who are familiar with our For- 
eign Office today can truly say that it is adequate for 
the tremendous task imposed by the world crisis. 

This task has increased many times since the out- 
break of war in 1939, and involves a volume of work 
far greater than anything ever dreamed of in normal 
times. On top of routine diplomatic and consular 
duties, our Foreign Service posts have been called 
upon to do emergency work for almost every de- 
pariment of the government. These emergency de- 
mands must be met by a service which is also expected 
to provide accurate reporting of political and eco- 
nomic trends on which national policy must be 
framed in the face of unprecedented conditions. 
Similar emergency demands have been thrust on the 
small staff of permanent State Department officials 
who are expected to sift and evaluate the steady 
stream of dispatches, and on the higher officers who 
formulate policy. The result is a Foreign Office ma- 
chine which is overtaxed and creaking badly at a 
time when it should be functioning at maximum 
efficiency. 

The effect is seen in many ways. Responsible of- 
ficials who should be free from routine are tied 
down to the most wasteful drudgery. For example, 
many ranking Foreign Service officers, including even 
some heads of missions, are compelled to type their 
own dispatches, decode messages and perform other 
clerical functions. Frequently, three or four officers 
are required to share the services of a single stenog- 
rapher. In fact, one of our legations in South Amer- 
ica had no stenographer at all for several months 
last year, and the Minister spent much of his time 
writing his reports in longhand. These are not merely 


isolated cases, but the common experience of many 
Foreign Service posts. 

Other equally serious handicaps to efficiency ar 
the lack of qualified research assistants, both in the 
State Department and in the Foreign Service; the 
shortage of trained economists in the political dj. 


visions of the Department; and the absence of any | 


career service for the permanent staff in Washington 
comparable to the career Foreign Service. 


While these shortcomings are largely mechanical, | 


they reflect a condition which extends to the top and 
obviously affects the efficient functioning of the 
whole machine. Other government agencies, particu. 
larly those engaged in the national defense program, 
have tapped the best brains in the universities, in 
business and labor to fill key positions. The State 
Department, although it has taken in some new 
blood, is still relatively untouched, and its staff far 
too ingrown. It is jealous of its prerogatives and 
suspicious of other agencies, such as the Treasury, 
the defense boards, etc., which frequently encroach 
on its preserve. This tendency to short-circuit the 
State Department on matters involving our foreign 
relations has become more apparent in recent months, 
Overlapping may be inevitable in time of crisis, but 


ee 


without completely adequate machinery of its own, | 


the State Department is not in the best position to 
prevent the resulting confusion. 


These conditions are due in part to lack of funds. 
For years the State Department has struggled along 
under totally inadequate appropriations. During the 
depression, appropriations for the Department and 
the Foreign Service ranged between 12 and 16 mil 
lion dollars—the smallest allotment for any regular 
government department except Labor. Not until the 
outbreak of war in 1939 did the State Department 
restore its pre-depression budget. In 1940 it received 
only 20.8 million dollars as compared with 19 mil 
lion dollars in 1932. This year’s budget is approx! 
mately 22 million dollars, but the estimates for 194 
actually call for a reduction to 21.7 million dollars 


The responsibility for this situation cannot be laid 
entirely on Congress, which has usually granted the 
requests made by the Department. In approaching 
Congress, however, the administrative officers of the 
State Department have been unnecessarily timid 
and for the most part have merely tried to patch 
up an old machine when they really need a new 
model. If the needs are stated emphatically enough, 
Congress will provide the funds. W.T. STONE 


——— 


Vou. XX 


S th 
Fc 
press p 
Britain 
against 
27, Prit 
the def« 
as well 
Imperia 
taken tl 
howeve 
had cre 
try. Th 
West; 
relief,” 
that An 
patrol t 
UNIT’ 
Mr. Ct 
stateme 
) the y 
confron 
States. 
most fr 
posed a 
the Un 
sumed 
War,” Vv 
Now tl 
Balkans 
ipeeche 


| age, bu 


techniq 
Greek ; 
other e: 
May m« 
gtavity 
estimate 
on the 


