= 
Mr. 
the 
Ous 


ips, 
im- 
ing 
ca0, 
lian 
Jap. 
here 
t he 


itua- 

and 
Troin 
ugh 
Jele. 
r1um 
Sen. 
ig in 
from 























FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN an te eal 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff - '\S OQ] class matter December 
ms 2, 1921, at the Post 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year Office at New York, 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated e ey oe ST Mod a 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. UM. OF Mich 
You. XVII, No. 39 JULY 22, 1938 
PROBLEMS OF GERMAN-AMERICAN RELATIONS General Library 


by Paul B. Taylor 


In this study Mr. Taylor discusses the many per- 
plexing problems troubling German-American relations 
and shows how relatively minor issues, magnified by the 
general American antagonism to Nazi ideology, find 
their place in today’s headlines. 


July 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents a copy 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Wich. 











EVIAN CONGRESS LAUNCHES NEW REFUGEE AID 





pe FIER ten days of discussion, on July 15, the 
“Intergovernmental Meeting on Political Refu- 


hich gees” at Evian adjourned until August 3, when it 


“om- 
into 
china 


will meet in London. Despite a tendency to avoid 
concrete commitments, the conference has several 
important achievements to its credit. It has agreed 


7 the |” establish a new, permanent intergovernmental 
n the | Ommuttee at London, with an American as its direc- 


Sup 
gests 


tor, to facilitate the resettlement of refugees. It has 
permitted a thorough exchange of information re- 


spect garding prospects for immigration into the thirty- 


£ the|"*° refugee-receiving countries represented, and may 


re of 


have contributed to the inauguration of an era of 


more liberal immigrati icies. “wel 
c the gration policies. Perhaps most im 


in are 
ations 


portant, it has provided a bulwark against despair 
for 800,000 to 1,000,000 Austro-Germans trapped 
in a hostile dictatorial régime; and, though to a 


a the |much smaller degree, it holds out the hope of even- 
prob- tual assistance to potential migrants and political 


fol 


rae Laty 


ila 


refugees from Poland, Hungary, Rumania, Italy, 
Spain, the U.S.S.R. and the Near East. 


s| Since the delegates were united in agreement on 


an the}the desirability of assisting these unfortunates, the 
opium |sessions of the conference were largely devoted to a 
‘or the |defense, country by country, of existing immigration 


ons 0 
RILL 


f|policies—which fully disclosed the difficulty of cre- 
ating new migration opportunities in a period of 
economic stress. Recalling that the invitation to the 


Affairs, conference proposed action under “existing laws and 


F York, 


practices,’ Myron C. Taylor, the American chairman, 


lomatie Pointed out that the United States might now ab- 
» of the sorb 27,370 immigrants each year under the com- 


1 back- 
seness. 


bined German and Austrian quotas, as compared 


with 20,000 Germans in the fiscal year 1938 and 
National 113,000 in 1937. The British were vaguely non- 


\, Editor. 


committal regarding possibilities for settlement in 
the British colonies, offering merely “small-scale 
settlement of Jewish refugees” on the land in Kenya. 





The French claimed that their country, with over 
200,000 refugees, has reached the saturation point. 

The representatives of relatively undeveloped over- 
seas territories were not much more encouraging 
than the British and the French. Australia’s dele- 
gate defended its reluctance to admit any consider- 
able number of German Jewish refugees on the 
ground that it had no racial problem now and did 
not wish to create one; Canada was sympathetic but 
stressed the unemployment and economic uncertainty 
with which it now has to contend. Several Latin 
American nations expressed willingness to absorb 
limited numbers of agricultural workers but, with 
the exception of the Dominican Republic, refused 
to countenance the admission of professional work- 
ers and intellectuals. 

Conflicts which arose in determining the com- 
petence of the London committee were temporarily 
eased without undue difficulty. The United States’ 
attempt to empower the new organization to deal 
with all refugees was strenuously opposed by Britain 
and France for reasons of general policy, and a re- 
sultant compromise limited the committee’s work for 
the present to refugees from Grossdeutschland, with 
a loophole for future expansion. The problem of 
avoiding duplication of the refugee work of the 
League, which is now being unified in a single 
League office, was left unsettled. Besides enlisting 
the energies of the United States and Brazil, a non- 
League body should be able to negotiate advantage- 
ously with Germany to permit emigrants to salvage 
some of their property when they are callously 
dumped upon an inhospitable world—a procedure 
which will greatly facilitate resettlement. 

Although Zionists at Evian urged the confer- 
ence to seek to open the doors of Palestine to 
50,000 Jewish immigrants each year, the critical 
political and economic situation in that territory 





tweet 


Te ee et 


Ole ONT AMEE Teg ATE 


oe tt PBI 








nt RAR Rpt te 


Fe aeaees 


ye 














precluded all possibility of such a step. The current 
recrudescence of disorders in the Holy Land is, in 
essence, the result of opposition to large-scale Jewish 
immigration and is motivated by two factors. The 
first is the presence of a British technical commis- 
sion, which is attempting to formulate the details of 
a partition plan evolved as a result of disturbances 
in 1936. The Arabs have greeted this body with a 
boycott of its sessions and increased terrorist activi- 
ties throughout the country. The second factor is 
the partial collapse of the admirable self-restraint 
with which the Palestine Jewish community has 
previously borne Arab attacks. For this catastrophe 
the Jewish Revisionists, an extreme nationalist mi- 
nority group disowned by the Zionist Organization, 
bear primary responsibility. The execution on June 
29 of one of their members, Solomon ben Yosef, for 
participating in a fruitless ambush of an Arab bus, 
was the signal for new and destructive measures of 
retaliation attributed to them. Arab provocateurs 
were not slow to exploit the situation. Between 
July 5 and 18 at least seventy-six Arabs and thirty- 
five Jews were killed and hundreds were injured, 
despite the efforts of strongly reinforced British 
police and soldiery. 


These events emphasize the necessity for settling 
refugees where their political aspirations will blend 
rather than clash with those of prior inhabitants. 
From this viewpoint, the achievements of the con- 
ference constitute a hopeful augury. The extent of 
the actual aid to be provided, however, remains to 
be determined at London. Some observers feel that 
it will not prove impossible to come to an agreement 
with Germany providing for the emigration of 
50,000 to 100,000 refugees annually, these migrants 
to be permitted to assist in financing their resettle- 
ment with a portion of their own property. Valuable 
as this contribution for the relief of human misery 
will be, it will constitute no more than a first step. 
As long as there are political dictatorships intolerant 
of ali criticism or relying on pseudo-scientific racial 
concepts, there will always be new refugees. 


Davi H. Popper 


PROGRESS TOWARD CHACO PEACE 


Acceptance by both Bolivia and Paraguay on July 
17 of the Chaco peace terms revives the hope of 
liquidating the most serious threat to friendly 
relations in the Western Hemisphere, and brightens 
prospects for success of the Pan-American Confer- 
ence at Lima next December. The treaty designates 
the Presidents of the six neutral American nations 


Page Two 








ES 


—— 


represented at the Chaco Peace Conference—Argen. 
tina, Brazil, Chile, Peru, the United States and Ur. 
guay—as arbiters, with authority to fix a definite 
boundary between Bolivia and Paraguay, thereby 
ending the territorial dispute from 1932 to 1935. 


The proposed treaty is reported to call for a fron. 
tier which runs westward from a point on the River 
Otuquis or Negro, a short distance north of its con. 
fluence with the Paraguay at Bahia Negra, to 
Meridian 61 degrees 55 minutes west. From here 
southward to the Pilcomayo River the arbiters will 
fix a line within an intermediate zone thirty to eighty 
miles wide. While Paraguay will thus retain largely 
unimpaired its wartime conquests of practically the 
entire Chaco, Bolivia keeps control of the oil fields 
to the west of the disputed area, and also satisfies 
its long-time ambition for an outlet to the Aclantk 
Ocean through the Paraguay and Parana Rivers, 
Free transit through Paraguayan territory is guaran- 
teed to Bolivian exports and imports. At Puerto 
Casado, Paraguay’s second most important port, Bo- 
livia may set up customs agencies and construct 
warehouses, making this city virtually a free port. 


A careful time-table is laid down to avoid in 
definite delay. Within twenty days of its signature, 
the treaty is to be ratified. This action will be taken 
by a constitutional convention in Bolivia, and in 
Paraguay—owing to the provisional character of the 
present Paiva régime—by a plebiscite, the validity of 
which could not easily be impugned by succeeding 
governments. Within sixty days of the date of final 
ratification, the arbitral award is to be announced. 


Settlement of the Chaco controversy—should no 
last minute hitch baffle the negotiators—will further 
strengthen inter-American solidarity. The significance 
of such a triumph for New World diplomacy has 
been heightened by two events which weaken the 
ties linking the American nations with Europe. One 
was the announcement by Venezuela on july 12 of 
its withdrawal from the League of Nations, raising 
to nine the number of Latin American states which 
have taken this step. On the same day Germany, fol- 
lowing restrictions imposed on Nazi political and 
cultural activities in Brazil, and in retaliation against 
Brazil’s decision to stop purchase of German cleat- 
ing marks, announced complete suspension of put- 
chases from that republic. The move will hit Brazil 
far harder than Germany, and is apparently designed 
to force from President Vargas both political and 
economic concessions. 

CHARLES A. THOMSON 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 39, Jury 22, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonpD Lgsiig Buewt, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MICHELES Dean, Eéitor, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 





a" 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





An 


¢ 
= 








