







nited 
) the 
192] 


| the 


ston, 


ry to 
\bout 
hem. 








Ann Arbor, Mich 


Dr. Wil): 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


yy 16 1942 


sam YW. Bishop 


@ 
end 
ce 


y of Michigan Library 


5 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 30 


May 15, 1942 





—_ 


CHURCHILL SPEECH REFLECTS GROWING ALLIED CONFIDENCE 


RIME Minister Winston Churchill's report to his 

people on the second anniversary of his acces- 
sion to office, broadcast to the world on May 10, 
finds the United Nations in a frame of mind more 
optimistic than any they have enjoyed since the 
spring of 1940. Confining himself principally to 
conditions in Europe, Mr. Churchill reflected to the 
full a sense of increased confidence in the strength 
and prospects of the Allies. In sharp contrast to 
many of his earlier utterances, the British Prime 
Minister's address had as its keynote the theme that 
Britain was moving “through many reverses and 
defeats to complete and final victory.” 

BEHIND CHURCHILL’S SPEECH. It is prob- 
able that the speech was delivered with a variety of 
purposes in view. At home, it has to some degree 
counteracted an undertone of dissatisfaction with 
Mr. Churchill as a political leader and administra- 
tor, as distinct from a national chieftain in moments 
of emergency. In recent months, several independent 
candidates in parliamentary by-elections, defying the 
truce in effect since the outbreak of the war, have 
campaigned with marked success against the National 
Government's coalition choices. While most of the 
independents have affirmed their personal support 
for the Prime Minister, many have severely criti- 
cized his insistence in retaining in high posts office- 
holders who, it is charged, are of mediocre calibre 
but who have close connections with the dominant 
political machine. Other candidates have demanded 
an additional tightening of Britain’s production ef- 
fort, as well as more severe controls and restrictions 
on the home front to wipe out inequalities harmful 
to the nation’s morale. Mr. Churchill has in effect 
tesponded to such criticism by demonstrating that 
the tide of war has turned as a result of the govern- 
ment's present policies. 

But the address was directed to a foreign audience 
as well. For the Russians it contained warm praise 





and encouragement; for the German régime, a bitter, 
contemptuous and sometimes threatening tone. 
The Prime Minister’s grim picture of the prospects 
for the Reich was obviously designed to weaken 
German faith in the Nazi leaders. The German 
people, he noted, had to face another Russian cam- 
paign and another Russian winter. They had to look 
forward to an expanding air offensive by the R.A.F. 
and the United States Army Air Corps. If the Ger- 
man Army used poison gas against the Soviet forces 
—thus ending the tacit, self-imposed abstention from 
gas warfare in Europe—Britain was prepared to re- 
taliate on the largest possible scale by dropping gas 
bombs on military objectives in the Reich. 
DANGER OF OVERCONFIDENCE. While the 
difficulties of the Axis in Europe have been in evi- 
dence this spring, it would be unfortunate if the 
people of the United Nations should disregard the 
enormous hazards which still lie ahead. Despite 
unrest in all the conquered territories, there is every 
indication that the Nazis are using terrorism and 
the threat of starvation to force more workers, both 
industrial and agricultural, into production for Ger- 
many’s benefit than ever before—thereby releasing 
new contingents of Germans for service in the 
armed forces. During the long pause since cessa- 
tion of the German advance in Russia last Decem- 
ber, the Nazi strategy of stabilizing the Russian 
front by holding a number of strongly fortified cities 
has permitted accumulation of a new reserve of war 
material within the Reich. Although western Ger- 
many has suffered severely from R.A.F. raids, the 
eastern areas to which many war industries have 
been moved—not to speak of the Czechoslovakian 
industrial base—have thus far escaped with rela- 
tively slight damage. Taken as a whole, these fac- 
tors foreshadow a new offensive in the East which’ 
may enjoy a considerable measure of success. A large- 
scale German attack on the southern Russian front, 








S=__=_==_=_=======_==ES ee Tu v 


reported on May 12th, may mark the onset of the 
new campaign. 

The outcome of a great battle in Russia might 
be affected by the direct invasion of the continent of 
Europe vehemently demanded by a large section of 
the British public. As it did in the case of Mada- 
gascar, the attack on which took three months to 
prepare, the British government is maintaining strict 
silence on its future course. At the same time, it is 
applying Hitler's own war of nerves technique 
against the Nazis. On May 8 both Sir Archibald 
Sinclair, Secretary for Air, and Foreign Secretary 
Anthony Eden indicated that the air raids against 
Germany were a prelude to an eventual landing in 
force on the continent—but no responsible source 
has discussed the timing of such a move. To be fully 
effective, it should obviously come not later than 
the climax of a Nazi campaign in the East, so that 
Hitler, for the first time, might be compelled to 
split his first-line troops into two contingents, each 
battling desperately for survival. 

The dangers still confronting the Allies were ef- 
fectively outlined by Vice President Henry Wallace 
in an address at New York on May 8, warning that 
the enemy would make his supreme effort in the 
summer and fall of 1942, before his production was 
completely outstripped by that of the Allies. After 
a strikingly liberal survey of the political and social 
objectives of the United Nations, the Vice Presi- 
dent predicted a German-Japanese move against 
the Americas, in which the Nazis would shuttle 


U.S. BARS LAVAL’S “COLLABORATION” POLICY FROM NEW WORLD 


The United States’ demand that Admiral Georges 
Robert, Vichy High Commissioner of French Carib- 
bean possessions, provide satisfactory assurances 
against their use by Axis forces has precipitated a 
solution of the problems raised by the existence of 
Vichy-controlled territory not far from the Panama 
Canal. This demand was made on May 9, when 
Rear Admiral John H. Hoover, spokesman for the 
Navy, and Mr. Samuel Reber of the State Depart- 
ment interviewed the High Commissioner to work 
out effective guarantees against the use of French 
Caribbean possessions by the Axis ‘‘arising out of the 





For a survey of India’s complex and delicate 
problems, which bear directly on its war effort 
and on post-war reconstruction, READ: 


India’s Role in the World Conflict 


by MARGARET LA FOY 


25¢ 


May 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 


REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











their transport planes across from Dakar to sy 
port uprisings of German minorities and fifth 
columns in Latin America, while the Japanese x 
tacked Alaska or our northwest coast. Whether 
not this is an accurate forecast, it is clear that Allie 
leaders recognize the enormous importance of dj 
viding the enemy forces, while avoiding as far 
possible a similar division of our own, in prepara. 
tion for the ultimate all-out offensive. 


This objective has been furthered by the success. 
ful repulse on May 4-9 of the Japanese nayg| 
task force which was attempting to engage or isolate 
the American and Australian units under General 
MacArthur’s command. It has been aided by the 
overextension of the Japanese troops which rushed 
northward through Burma into China, only to be 
temporarily cut off by the tenacious Chinese. Vic 
tories on this scale, although not in themselves de. 
cisive, give the Allies time in which to prepare for 
the shocks to come. 


Assuming that a Nazi offensive is forthcoming ip 
Russia, the general situation may soon be somewhat 
similar to that of March 1918, when German troops 
in France launched a smashing offensive which 
brought them within an ace of victory—only to fall 
back in exhaustion and defeat before Allied counter. 
blows until the end. If Germany is approaching this 
condition in Europe, a decision there and, afterwards, 
in Asia may not be so distant as is sometimes believed 


Davip H. Popper 


collaboration policy of M. Laval.” Previously, as an 
nounced on December 18, 1941, the United States 
had concluded an arrangement designed to neutral: 
ize the islands. As long as Marshal Henri Philippe 
Pétain remained in control of Vichy France, the State 
Department apparently regarded his assurances ip 
this connection as sufficient, despite disagreement ia 
some quarters in this country. 

Now that the Marshal has been forced by the 
Nazis to place Pierre Laval in control as Chief of 
Government, the security provided by this agree 
ment is believed by the United States government 
to be illusory. What is equally important, the United 
Nations could not allow the French aircraft carriet 
Béarn, the cruisers Emile Bertin and Jeanne d’ Att, 
and the 100 American-made fighter planes sold to 
France before its defeat to be delivered to the Axis 
on orders from Laval—even though these ships 
and planes may have deteriorated. Many tankers 
anchored at Fort de France might be put into 
use. The new agreement sought by the United 
States would permit France to retain sovereignty 
over Martinique as well as the near-by island of 
Guadeloupe and the colony of French Guiana. At 





the sa 
try to 
these 
ment 
js rec 
Carib 
these 


can 
porta 
arran 
sider 
follo 
subse 
State 
Shou 
diffic 
Fren 
surre 
a las 
State 
even 
other 
prop 
and 
It is 
prop 
unde 
sessi 
unde 
unde 
wou 
at tl 
sulti 
latel 
Con 


Am 
won 
Lav; 
in f 
said 
issu 
ther 
Nat 
too 


poi 
Cris 
stey 
Syr 
FOR 


Secre 

















li 


t a 
ara. 


CESS. 
aval 
late 
eral 


shed 
> be 
Vic 
de 
» for 


ig in 
what 
OOPS 
hich 

fall 
nter- 

this 
ards, 
ved. 


ER 


5 al. 
tates 
itral- 
pe 
State 
Ss if 
nt if 


the 
f of 
gree: 
ment 
nited 
rie! 
’ Art, 
id to 
Axis 
ships 
ikers 
into 
nited 
ignty 
d of 
1. At 











the same time, it would presumably allow this coun- 
try to station protecting forces or at least observers in 
these areas. The unusual aspect of the new arrange- 
ment is the fact that Admiral Robert, and not Vichy, 
js recognized as “the ultimate authority of French 
Caribbean possessions,” thus entirely cutting off 
these colonies from control by_Laval. 

ADMIRAL ROBERT’S DILEMMA. The Ameri- 
can action forces Admiral Robert to make an im- 
portant decision. If he refuses to accept the proposed 
arrangement, the United Nations are likely to con- 
sider this refusal a clear sign that he intends to 
follow instructions he may receive from Laval. Such 
subservience could not be tolerated by the United 
States and would necessitate further moves by it. 
Should matters reach a deadlock, it would not be 
dificult to overcome Robert’s resistance, since the 
French Caribbean islands could be compelled to 
surrender if their food shipments were cut off. As 
a last resort, the overwhelmingly superior United 
States forces stationed on neighboring islands might 
even undertake occupation of the territories. On the 
other hand, if Admiral Robert accepts the American 
proposals, he will probably be disavowed by Laval 
and lose his position as Vichy High Commissioner. 
It is understood, however, that the United States 
proposals provide that he would be left in charge 
under Allied protection. Moreover, the French pos- 
sessions in the Caribbean would remain technically 
under French sovereignty, and would not be placed 
under Free French administration. Such a solution 
would save Admiral Robert’s personal prestige, and 
at the same time avoid possible complications re- 
sulting from internal political conflicts which have 
lately developed in and around the Free French 
Committee. 


Whether or not Admiral Robert accepts the 
American proposals, the United States will have 
won a diplomatic and strategic victory. Unless M. 
Laval wishes to use the occasion for a complete break 
in relations with the United States—a step he has 
said he would never initiate—Vichy can do little but 
issue a verbal protest. During the first half of May, 
therefore, at Madagascar and Martinique, the United 
Nations will have taken the initiative before it was 
too late and successfully acted to obtain control of 
points of vital importance in their war effort. 


THE DWINDLING FRENCH EMPIRE. The 
crisis over the French possessions marks another 
step in the disintegration of the French Empire. 
Syria was occupied by British and Free French forces 


—— Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: MILITARY VERSUS POLITICAL 
STRATEGY 


Speaker: Bruce Bliven, Editor, The New Republic; 
Member, FPA Board of Directors 
Date: Sunday, May 17 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 
For station, please consult your local newspaper 











in May 1941, and subsequently declared independ- 
ent. The small possessions in India have been taken 
over by the Free French. Indo-China is under total 
Japanese control. French Somaliland, while still 
nominally under Vichy France, is closely watched 
by the British. Equatorial Africa is in the hands 
of the de Gaulle forces. Madagascar and its all- 
important naval base of Diego Suarez were taken 
over last week by a British expeditionary force after a 
two-day resistance. The entry of the Royal Navy into 
the harbor of Diego Suarez on May 7 has thus elim- 
inated the danger of possible Axis bases on the 
United Nations supply line to the Near East. 
Réunion and other small French islands in the 
Indian Ocean are undefended and cut off from 
Vichy. New Caledonia, northeast of the Australian 
mainland, has been occupied by American troops 
and placed under United States protection for the 
duration of the war, and the rest of French Oceanic 
possessions are in the hands of the Free French— 
as are St. Pierre and Miquelon. Thus only two areas 
of the once mighty French Empire will remain under 
Vichy control: North and West Africa. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 





America and World Mastery, by John MacCormac. New 
York, Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1942. $2.75 


A stimulating discussion of the role the United States 
might play in rebuilding the world with the cooperation 
of the British Empire. Mr. MacCormac, Canadian-born 
and author of Canada: America’s Problem, is a member 
of the Washington Bureau of The New York Times. 


The Voice of Fighting Russia, edited by Lucien Zacharoff. 
New York, Alliance Book Corporation, 1942. $3.00 


A collection of material, most of it from the pen of 
Soviet war correspondents, which, in spite of hasty writ- 
ing, gives a vivid picture of the war in Russia both on the 
battlefront and behind the lines. 


Is Tomorrow Hitler’s? by H. R. Knickerbocker. New York, 
Reynal and Hitchcock, 1941. $2.50 
The veteran foreign correspondent answers 200 of the 
most pertinent questions concerning the warring powers 
in Europe and America’s relationship to the conflict. The 
answers are sometimes factual, sometimes only personal 
opinions, but almost always illuminating. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 30, May 15, 1942. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 





Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Editor; Davin H. Poppsr, Associate Editor. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Wirtiam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lert, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 


B's Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 

















Washington News Letter 

















May 15.—While the organization of the nation’s 
fighting services and of the war production system 
is considered in most circles to be satisfactory, some 
major difficul. es are evident in the administration 
of two other as of the war effort—economic and 
political warfare. Recent Allied successes in Europe 
and the Far East have brought a measure of re- 
strained optimism here, but it is apparent that vic- 
tory will not be assured unless all branches of the 
government operate with maximum effectiveness. 

ECONOMIC WARFARE AT ISSUE. A major 
element in economic warfare is the procurement in 
foreign countries of raw materials needed by our 
war industries. Related to this is a second objective 
—the purchase of strategic commodities in exposed 
neutral countries to prevent them reaching the Axis 
powers. At least three agencies in Washington have 
exercised authority in this field. The Board of Eco- 
nomic Warfare, holding that the present emergency 
demands energetic action, tends to be aggressive in 
its steps to procure strategic and critical materials 
by purciiase or by more direct means, such as Ameri- 
can control of rubber production in Latin America. 
Its operations have at times brought it into conflict 
with the State Department which, charged with the 
responsibility of conducting foreign relations, looks 
with disfavor on the intrusion of another agency in 
this field. An Executive Order of April 14 appeared 
at first sight to clarify the matter by giving the 
BEW unqualified authority in foreign procurement 
activities, but in a subsequent oral statement the 
President indicated that the State Department will 
still handle negotiations with foreign states, although 
the BEW may initiate proposals for commercial 
agreements, send agents abroad, and supervise plan- 
tations and mines if necessary. 

The Executive Order also entrusts the BEW with 
the disposition of the funds allocated to the Recon- 
struction Finance Corporation for the procurement 
of strategic materials. Difficulty had been experi- 
enced by both the BEW and State Department in 
persuading the RFC and its subsidiaries to conclude 
contracts for the purchase of rubber, tin, etc., when 
the purchases did not appear to be financially 
profitable. 

POLITICAL WARFARE. For several weeks the 
capital has expected a Presidential order reorganiz- 
ing and regrouping at least three governmental 
agencies in the field of information. The Office of 
the Coordinator of Information, Col. W. J. Dono- 
van, summarizes and analyzes current material ob- 


tained at home and abroad for the benefit of 
ernment officials and the fighting services. Its 
eign section advises, and coordinates the work ¢ 
private short-wave stations broadcasting to forej 
and enemy countries. News for the home front j 
provided by a multiplicity of press bureaus in the 
various government departments. The Office of 
Facts and Figures was established to coordinate the 
material issued by these bureaus, to keep a finger on 
the public pulse, and to give over-all directives to 
press relations officers. A third body, the Office of 
Government Reports, was founded before the war 
to maintain liaison between the various government 
agencies, between the government and the people 
and between the Federal and state governments 
There is inevitably much overlapping between these 
organizations, and it is generally agreed that some 
plan of consolidation is desirable. 


Before the American government's informational 
agencies can become really effective and surpass the 
Axis powers in waging political warfare, major lines 
of policy must be clearly drawn. This is more than 
a matter of administrative organization and involve 
decisions made in the highest circles of the Ameri 
can and other United Nations governments. Should 
the government itself engage in active propagandi 
on behalf of the war effort with paid newspaper ad 
vertisements and sponsored radio programs? Or do 
the newspapers and radio stations adequately im 
press upon the nation the critical situation we face! 
In foreign broadcasts, should American short-wave 
stations give a more definite pro-Allied “‘slant” to 
the news than they are now doing? Would our for 
eign broadcasts be more effective if the stations 
were operated by public rather than private agen 
cies? Above all, leaders of the United Nations 
must soon decide whether a statement of peact 
aims more explicit than the Atlantic Charter might 
not be an important political weapon in the next 
stages of the war. In the last conflict, widespreat 
distribution of Wilson’s “Fourteen Points’’ definitely 
hastened Germany's end, but only after the Kaiser’ 
armies had been defeated in the field. Heretofore 
Allied leaders have delayed outlining a peace settle 
ment because of the controversies which might aris 
within the ranks over the terms of the settlement 
Yet some form of basic agreement cannot be post 
poned indefinitely, and the time may soon be upot 
us when genuine promises of a better world afte 
the war will be used to weaken the grip of tht 


totalitarian régimes. Louts E. FRECHTLING 











the 


a pc 
on ] 
obse 
“Vict 
Naz 
teria 
tries 


and 

wee 
fron 
man 
on | 
ties 

750. 
leaf 
mar 
casu 
1,1¢ 
WOL 


hav 
twe 
ishe 
Hu 
ing 
dra: 
acct 
the 


nea 
aux 


of 
alre 
Wai 





