



A 


— 





e to 


esult 
r of 


inge- 
ited 
tina, 
mer. 
who 
1 of 
blics 
rols, 
ore: 


OVa- 
is a 

the 
gton 
com- 
ptly 


the | 


“ting 
first 
cOn- 
tates 
“ican 
“ican 
“ions 
‘arty 
ould 
$ Of 
Jele- 
- the 
‘ents | 
the 











the 
rma: | 
> of | 
mic | 
the 
and 
ime- 
sen- 
tant 
the | 


IE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


NCAEOR@@M@E POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


PIER AL LIBRARWest 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
HAIY. OF MICH 





Vou. XVIII, No. 51 OcTOBER 138, 1939 


a 





OUT OCTOBER 15th 


EUROPE’S ECONOMIC WAR POTENTIAL 
by John C. deWilde, with the aid of 
James Frederick Green and Howard J. Trueblood 


25¢ 











OCT anal 

16 193¢ Praga 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 


University of Michigan 
inn Arbor, Mich. 








HITLER LAYS DOWN HIS TERMS 





— the past week military operations on the 
Western front were kept at a minimum while 
both sides maneuvered on the diplomatic field, where 
Hitler’s long-anticipated “peace offensive’ formed 
the centre of interest. Whatever the merits of the 
peace proposals which the Fuehrer tentatively ad- 
vanced before the Reichstag on October 3, they have 
compelled the Allies to take stock of their position 
and define more clearly the conditions on which they 
would consent to lay down their arms. With Poland 
conquered, the belligerents now face the uncertainties 
of a long war in the West. Neither side will brave 
the risks of such a conflict with enthusiasm, but each 
insists on a ‘‘peace with honor.” It remains to be seen 
whether some form of neutral mediation—by Italy, 
the United States or the northern European neutrals 
—can bring about such a settlement. 


THE REICHST'AG SPEECH. The terms outlined 
in vague form by Hitler are unlikely to provide a 
suitable basis for discussion. They were mentioned 
only toward the end of a long speech proudly review- 
ing Germany’s military accomplishments in Poland 
and elaborately justifying the successive acts by which 
the Nazis had torn up the Treaty of Versailles. In 
essence these conditions of peace can be summarized 
under four headings: 


1. Germany and the Soviet Union would together 
work out a settlement in Eastern Europe. Each would 
establish a new order in its sphere of interest in Poland. 
In its own sphere the Reich might establish a Polish 
state, but only one which would do justice to “historical, 
ethnographic and economic facts.” An attempt would 
uso be made “‘to reach a solution and settlement of the 
Jewish problem.” In eastern and southeastern Europe 
as a whole the German and Soviet governments had 
agreed to support each other in resettling minority na- 
tionalities in order “to remove at least part of the ma- 
terial for European conflict.” When Hitler declared that 
this task would take 50 to 100 years to perform, he was 
hardly exaggerating. The minority peoples in Eastern 





and Central Europe number about 11 million, even 
after excluding those in Greater Germany and the Soviet 
Union. To remove these minorities, many of which have 
been settled for centuries in their present places of resi- 
dence, would require an enormous expenditure of time 
and money, and entail much individual suffering. The 
job would presumably be carried out by Russia and 
Germany without giving the countries and peoples af- 
fected any right of appeal to the Western European 
powers. Hitler announced his determination to begin 
almost immediately with the repatriation of the 3,000,- 
000 Germans scattered through Eastern Europe. His 
emissaries have already approached the governments of 
the Baltic states where 100,000 Germans reside. The 
return of these Germans would presumably give the 
Third Reich a valuable reserve of military and economic 
man power. 


2. Hostilities would cease, and after ‘‘the most thor- 
ough preparation” a conference would be called to dis- 
cuss outstanding political and economic questions. To 
reassure the Allies, Hitler declared that Germany saw 
no reason for any further revision of the Versailles 
Treaty “apart from the demand for adequate colonial 
possessions justly due to the Reich, namely, in the first 
instance, for the return of German colonies.” At the 
same time he disclaimed all desire for conflict or terri- 
torial disputes with Germany’s neighbors in Europe. 
These statements failed to inspire confidence in Paris 
and London, which still remembered vividly similar 
assurances given by the Fuehrer in September 1938. 


3. The conference would elaborate plans ‘for a real 
revival of international economic life, coupled with an 
extension of trade and commerce.”” Hitler did not out- 
line in any detail the methods to be followed to achieve 
this objective, but intimated that it would require the 
organization of production and marketing in other states 
along totalitarian economic lines. 


4. The powers would also discuss “the establishment 
of an unconditionally guaranteed peace” giving every 
nation a ‘‘sense of security.”” While declaring his readi- 
ness to sanction “the European status,” Hitler is appar- 
ently unwilling to make any concessions with respect to 
the restoration of Czechoslovakia or the fait accompli 
created by Russia and Germany in Poland. He is pre- 
pared, however, to reduce armaments “‘to a reasonable 
























\ 
| 
i 
i 










| Emenee 
—_——— 








and economically tolerable level’ and conclude agree- 
ments providing “a comprehensive definition of the 
legitimate and illegitimate use of armaments.’ 


NEGATIVE RECEPTION IN LONDON AND 
PARIS. Despite the “war of destruction” threatened 
by Hitler if his peace overtures are not accepted, the 
Allies have given his proposals a cool reception. Pre- 
mier Daladier immediately announced before the 
Senate Foreign Affairs Committee that France would 
continue the war until victory and a ‘régime of real 
justice and lasting peace”’ is assured; and the British 
government lost no time in expressing its distrust of 
the Fuehrer’s promises. The Allies evidently believe 
time to be on their side. While Germany has won the 
military victories up to the present, the future may 
tell a different story as France and Britain slowly 
bring their vast economic and military power to bear 
on the struggle. They see, too, that the European bal- 
ance of power is changing to Germany's disadvan- 
tage. The Soviet Union has seized the opportunity af- 
forded by the Reich’s preoccupation in the West to 
establish military protectorates over the Baltic states 
and to resume its pre-1914 advance in the Balkans 


Page Two 








——— 


which Nazi Germany had hitherto regarded as jg, 
exclusive preserve. Italy is also believed to be turnj 

away from its close ties with Germany. If Hitler ep. 
tertained any hopes that I/ Duce would join him jy 
imposing peace terms on the Allies, he has beep 
cruelly disappointed. The visit which Count Ciang 
paid to Berlin on October 2 was remarkably brief 
and the communiqué issued at its conclusion exceed. 
ingly perfunctory. The Fuehrer’s speech for the firy 
time was devoid of glowing references to his Axis 
partner. Italy seems alarmed at the prospect of being 
excluded from the Balkans by the Germans and Re 
sians. Under the circumstances I/ Duce is determined 
not to jeopardize his own chances for a larger place 


in the sun by committing himself unreservedly to 
Germany. 





Nevertheless, Hitler has gained one advantage | 


through his peace initiative. He has compelled the 
Allies to outline their war aims more precisely. In 
one respect he put the issue quite clearly. There must 
be no second Versailles if all the mistakes of the past 
twenty years are not to be repeated. 
| 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


SOVIET STEAMROLLER PUSHES WEST 


While Hitler marked time, waiting for the Allies’ 
reply to his Reichstag peace terms, the Soviet Union 
relentlessly carried out its plans for domination of 
the eastern Baltic. The Soviet-Estonian pact of Sep- 
tember 28, which gives the U.S.S.R. the right to es- 
tablish air and naval bases on the islands of Dagoe 
and Oesel and at Baltic Port, and to maintain troops 
at these bases (whose number is apparently to be 
40,000 as compared with the Estonian standing army 
of 12,000), was ratified by Estonia on October 4. On 
the following day the Soviet Union concluded a sim- 
ilar pact with Latvia, by which it obtained the right 
to maintain air and naval bases at the ports of Libau 
and Windau, and a coastal artillery base between 
Ventspils and Pitraga, as well as land and sea armed 
forces of “‘strictly limited strength.’’ (Latvia's stand- 
ing army is about 23,000.) Both these pacts provide 
that their realization does not affect the sovereignty 
or political and economic systems of the contracting 
parties—a condition which Estonia and Latvia will 
find it difficult to enforce once their territory is 
occupied by Soviet troops. In both cases it was an- 
nounced in Moscow that arrangements had been made 
to increase Soviet trade with Estonia and Latvia, which 
had supplied the Russian empire with dairy products 
and textiles before 1918, but had since then diverted 
their principal exports to Britain and Germany. 


On October 5 it was also reported that the Soviet 
government had made demands on Lithuania, includ- 
ing the right to establish two air bases, to enjoy free 
passage on the railway line from Libau to the Soviet 


Ukraine, and to transport timber on the River| 
Niemen. In return for these concessions, the Soviet | 
government was reported ready to permit the Lith- | 
uanian population of twenty villages north of Vilna, | 
in Russian-held Poland, to decide by plebiscite 
whether they choose to become part of Lithuania or 
the U.S.S.R. It appeared unwilling, however, to cede | 
Vilna (seized by Poland in 1923), as Lithuania had | 
first expected. 


U.S.S.R. SUMMONS FINLAND. Having eal 
consolidated its gains in the Baltic—from w hich Ger: | 
many has retreated even to the extent of repatriating | 
German minorities in Latvia and Estonia, some of 
which have been settled there since the thirteenth cen: | 
tury—the Soviet government on October 7 turned to | 
Finland, which the Russian Empire had acquired | 
from Sweden in 1809. Finland, having gained its in | 
dependence in 1917, has since then worked in close 
association with Sweden, Norway and Denmark, and | 
regards itself as part of the Scandinavian rather than | 
the Baltic group of states. Its relations with the So 
viet Union have often been strained during the past | 
twenty years by anti-Communist sentiment in Fin- | 
land; by Finnish grievances regarding Soviet treat: | 
ment of eastern Karelia, a section of the U.S.S.R. it 
habited largely by Finns; and most recently by the | 
Soviet refusal to permit joint Swedish- Finnish remil- | 
itarization of the Aland Islands. These islands, which 
command the entrance to the Gulf of Bothnia, have | 
been under Finnish sovereignty since 1921. Soviet 
claims on Finland alarmed not only Helsingfors, but 


: 
; 


FS 
tl 
WV 
a 


H 
E 


Qa 


5 its 


Bate 


‘ang 
rief 


first 


eing 
Rus. 
ined 
lace 


y to 
tage 


. In 
nust 
past 


Ger- 
ating 
e of 

cen- 
-d to 
uired 
'S in- 
close 











and | 


than | 


2 So- 
past 


Fin- 


‘reat: | 


R. in- 
y the 
emil- 
thich 
have 
oviet 


, but 


pen 





— 
—— 


also Stockholm, where it was feared that the Soviet 
government would now hold the whip hand in the 
eastern Baltic. For the Scandinavian countries, whose 
export trade is being throttled by Germany's counter- 
blockade against Britain, the most disillusioning 
aspect of the war is that Hitler, their self-proclaimed 
defender against communism, has now accepted So- 
viet domination of this region. 


BALKANS STRUGGLE FOR NEUTRALITY. 
Similar anxieties preoccupied the Balkan countries, 
confronted by simultaneous demands from Germany, 
Russia, Italy and the Allies. While waiting for clari- 
fication of Europe’s tangled diplomatic situation, the 
Balkan states sought safety in improvement of their 
mutual relations, with the eventual object of forming 
aneutral bloc which might withstand pressure on the 
part of the great powers. Turkey, whose Foreign 
Minister, M. Saracoglu, has been in Moscow since 
September 25, sent a military mission to Britain on 
October 3; and on October 5 the head of the mission, 
General Orbay, initialed the British-Turkish mutual 
aid pact which had been hanging fire since last May. 
Fulfillment of this pact, however, will depend on 
Britain's ability to furnish Turkey with military and 
economic assistance at a moment when Britain itself 
needs all the armaments it can produce. While both 
London and Ankara contend that this treaty is not 
incompatible with any other obligations the Turkish 
government may wish to undertake, it would appear 
to conflict with Russia’s reported demand that Tur- 
key close the Dardanelles to British and French war- 
ships which might seek to aid Rumania, also a recipi- 
ent of Allied pledges, against German—or Soviet— 
aggression. 

Meanwhile, Hungary and Rumania, which had 
been at swords’ points on the eve of Poland’s parti- 
tion, announced partial demobilization on October 7 
as a gesture of good will; and Rumania promised on 
October 4 to improve the lot of its large Hungarian 
and Ukrainian minorities. In similar vein Bulgaria, 
which had been demanding the return of Dobrudja, 
awarded to Rumania at the close of the World War, 
has shown marked restraint on this subject—appar- 
ently under the influence of Yugoslavia, which is 
seconding Turkey's efforts to protect the Balkan re- 
ion from involvement in the European war. Nor 
have Rumania and Yugoslavia yielded to Germany's 
demands for increased deliveries of foodstuffs and 
raw materials. The German-Rumanian trade agree- 
ment, renewed on September 28, failed to increase 
the volume of Rumania’s oil exports to the Reich, 
which continue to constitute one-third of its export- 
able oil surplus, or approximately two million tons 





Page Three 








annually; and Yugoslavia has shown reluctance to 
expand its exports to Germany, on the ground that 
the Reich has failed to deliver manufactured goods, 
especially armaments, promised under its barter deal 
with Belgrade. It would almost seem that the reap- 
pearance of Russia in the Balkans has given the Bal- 
kan countries courage to resist Nazi demands. 


If Germany's attempt to conquer territory which it 
either controlled in 1914 or in which it could claim 
“blood-brothers” caused the Allies to wage war on 
Hitler, then Russia’s even more successful attempt to 
reconquer territory it held before 1914 would seem 
to call for similar action on their part. Yet, hitherto, 
Britain and France have tried to distinguish between 
Nazi and Soviet conquests on the ground that they 
are fighting against ‘“Hitlerism.” The Soviet conten- 
tion, expressed in Izvestia on October 9, that war 
against Hitlerism would mean a return to the Dark 
Ages, makes it incumbent for the Allies to decide 
whether their anti-Hitler war also necessitates a 
struggle against communism, or whether they are 
prepared to accept Russia’s conquests as a valuable 
counterweight to German expansion. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





Statement of the Ownership, Management, Circulation, Etce., 
Required by the Acts of Congress of August 24, 1912 and 
March 3, 1933, of 
Foreign Policy Bulletin 

Published weekly at New York, N. Y. for October 1, 1939. 

State of New York, County of New York, ss. 

Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State and county aforesaid, 
personally appeared Vera Micheles Dean, who, having been duly sworn ac- 
cording to law, deposes and says that she is the Editor of the FOREIGN 
POLICY BULLETIN, and that the following is, to the best of her knowledge 
and belief, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the afore- 
said publication for the date shown in the above caption, required by the 
Act of August 24, 1912, as amended by the Act of March 3, 1933, em- 
bodied in Section 537, Postal Laws and Regulations, printed on the re- 
verse of this form, to wit: 

1. That the names and addresses of the publisher, 
tor, and business managers are 

Publishers—Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 8 West 40th Street, 
Nev York, N. , A 

Editor—Vera Micheles Dean, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 

Managing Editor—None. 

Business Managers—None. 

2. That the owner is: 

Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, the principal officers of which 
are: Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorothy F. Leet, Secretary; both of 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y.; and William A. Eldridge, Treasurer, 
70 Broadway, New York, N. Y 


editor, managing edi- 


3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holders 
owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, 
or other securities, are: 

None. 

4. That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners, 

: 


stockholders and security holders, if any, contain not 


only the list of stock- 
holders and security holders as they 


appear upon the books of the company 
but also, in cases where the stockholder or security holder appears upon the 
I f the company as trustee or in any rer fiduciary relation, the name 
person or corporation for whom such tee is acting, is given; also 
1¢ said two paragraphs contain state ts embracing afhant’s fuli 
ge and belief as to the circumsta 1 conditions under which 
lders and security holders who do not 2 r upon the books of the 
y as trustees hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of 
a fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any other 












erson, association, or corporation has any ir est, direct or indirect, in the 
said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by her. 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated. 
By VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
S. 1 to and subscribed bef me this 27th day of September, 1939. 
Seal] CAROLYN E. MARTIN, Notary Public. 
J York County, New York. County Clerk’s No. 329. (My commission 
expires March 30, 1941.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 51, OcToBER 13, 1939. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


tered as second-class matter December 2 


Sp» 181 


Published weekly by 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotrHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dean, Edéifor. 
2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 


the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter \~::: 



























WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 9.—Efforts to induce President Roosevelt to 
accept the rdle of neutral mediator in Europe re- 
ceived no official encouragement from the White 
House or the State Department early this week. At 
Hyde Park on Sunday Mr. Roosevelt made the an- 
nouncement that he had nothing whatever to say 
about hints from Berlin that Germany would wel- 
come an armistice if proposed by the United States. 
In Washington on Monday Mr. Hull maintained 
complete silence as Department officials awaited the 
expected statements from London and Paris in 
answer to Hitler's Reichstag speech. 


MEDIATION SENTIMENT IN CONGRESS. 
This official reserve remained unbroken in the face of 
growing sentiment in Congress for American media- 
tion. On October 7 Senator Thomas, a leading Demo- 
cratic member of the Foreign Relations Committee 
and a supporter of the Administration program for 
arms embargo repeal, urged the President ‘‘to con- 
sider most seriously” Hitler's peace offer. “No mat- 
ter what happens,” he declared, “peace-making has 
to be indulged in” and the sooner the nations of the 
world begin, “the greater the chances for a negotiated 
peace tempered by the opinions of the neutral states.’ 
While the Senate deferred action on a motion by 
Senator Johnson of Colorado proposing suspension 
of the neutrality debate pending the outcome of the 
armistice movement, other voices were raised in favor 
of a peace settlement. These included Senators on 
both sides of the neutrality debate. 


. At the White House and the State Department, 
however, Washington observers find more reasons 
for hesitation than appear on the surface. It is ap- 
parent that Washington will make no move of any 
kind until it is certain of the reception in London and 
Paris. At this moment any offer of mediation would 
seem to place the responsibility for continuing the 
war on the Allies and would presumably serve Hit- 
ler's purpose of achieving a settlement on his own 
terms. These terms, as far as they were revealed in 
Hitler's Reichstag speech, would be hard to square 
with Secretary Hull’s announcement on October 2 
that the United States does not recognize the par- 
tition of Poland. 

Beneath the surface, however, there are indications 
that Washington may be playing a delaying game to 
give the Allies an opportunity to take full advantage 
of the present “‘peace lull.” If negotiations can be con- 
tinued for several weeks, it is pointed out, the advent 











of winter weather may defer the launching of major 
operations on the Western front. Moreover, it is sug. 
gested that further delay at this time may give Britain 
and France an opportunity to explore the effect of 
Russia’s new position in the Baltic and in Eastem 
Europe. It is these imponderables which lend strength 
to the belief in Washington that official silence today 
may not preclude some form of American mediation 
at a later stage. 


AMERICAN SHIPPING UNDER CASH-AND. 
CARRY. Meanwhile, as the neutrality debate pro. 
ceeds in the Senate, there are signs that the cash. 
and-carry program advocated by the Administra. 
tion may be modified as a result of criticism from [) 
American shipping interests and from other quarters | 
within the Administration itself. It is a curious fag} Gr 
that the effects of the Pittman bill on the American} dif 
Merchant Marine have scarcely been discussed on the} not 
Senate floor. Last week, however, Admiral Land} Da 
Chairman of the Maritime Commission, appeared at} Ge 
an informal meeting called by Senator Pittman to} ing 
consider the effects of the cash-and-carry proposal.} cat 
Admiral Land’s testimony has not been made public,} ma 
but even a cursory analysis of American maritime | 
trade reveals the probable effects of the proposed) ma 
legislation. | we 


& \e| 


\| 





a 
=- 
wr 


On June 30, 1939 there were 331 American vessels ba 
with a gross tonnage of 2,176,000 tons engaged in} P® 
carrying goods and passengers in international trade. | Re 
At the present time, shipping experts estimate that Be 
something like 250 vessels of 1,568,000 tons would | U 
be affected directly or indirectly by the mandatory} 
prohibitions of the Pittman bill. Most of the North 
Atlantic shipping would be cut off by the prohibition} P! 
against carrying ‘‘any articles or goods”’ to belligerent ta 
nations on American vessels, affecting approximately W 
95 ships with a gross tonnage of 580,000 tons. In) & 
addition 18 vessels, totaling 107,000 tons, would be} 8 
prevented from calling at belligerent ports in the} “ 
Mediterranean. More than 50 vessels, totaling | 
433,000 tons, would be forbidden to call at “belliger} © 
ent” ports in Australia, New Zealand, India and Brit | li 
ish and French possessions in Asia, while many othet t 
small freighters would be barred from South Africa} © 
and colonial possessions in Africa. Some of these} % 
ships might be added to the fleet of 150 American} 
vessels engaged in trade with Central and South b 
America, including the West Indies, but maritime} J 
authorities see little chance of any great increase in} " 
this trade. 





W. T. STONE t 


