



































N orc 14 3 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETI was ae 
=|} An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff class matter December 
_— 2, 1921, at the Post 
spon- Subscription, Two Dollars a Year PERIODICAL mie Office at New York, 
S, on FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated GENERAL «(40.3 ~ of Mach 3, 189% 
pay. 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. hice 
d for 
id te. } Vou. XVII, No. 7 DECEMBER 10, 1937 
vated |~ 7 
7 EY Christmas Gift Suggestions cccusiilidittmess 
been | Headline Books and World Affairs Pamphlets $2 a year Ueivaceiien af Miauee 
x 4-page Foreign Policy Bulletin- - - - - $2ayear pics . a 
hale Solve your Christmas gift problems with sub- Ann Arbor. Mich. 
od te scriptions to F.P.A. publications. A Christmas 
card bearing your name as donor will be mailed 
y Its to your friends. 
that | —— _—— 
= WILL HITLER ACCEPT HALF A LOAF? 
ngton a” 
scism | QENEATH the smooth phrases of the Franco- What it apparently proposes is the formation of a 
active British communiqué of November 30 may be _ colonial pool in West Africa, to which not only Brit- 
on | detected the main outlines of the new peace settle- ain and France, but Belgium and Portugal would 
ment which the two democracies propose to offer contribute—this new colony to be administered by 
Hitler. The keynote of this communiqué is that chartered companies in which German capital would 
European appeasement calls for a general settlement be heavily represented. 
stgate | —Not piecemeal bilateral arrangements such as those The Franco-British conversations also strengthened 
1987, | hitherto urged by Hitler. To this extent, the Franco- the position of M. Delbos, French Foreign Minister, 
British conversations seem to exclude the possibility on his round of visits to France’s allies in Eastern 
news- | —widely predicted on the eve of Lord Halifax's Europe—Poland, Rumania, Yugoslavia and Czecho- 
a visit to Berlin—that Britain might encourage a deal slovakia. These visits had apparently a three-fold 
f cole | by which Germany, in return for moderation of its purpose: to ascertain the extent to which France's 
press | colonial demands, would receive a free hand in Cen- allies, subjected to the temptation of joining the 
fore! tral and Eastern Europe. Rome-Berlin axis, remain true to their treaty obliga- 
The theory on which Britain and France now seem tions; to reassure them regarding Franco-British in- 
Foster | to be working is that some attempt should be made tentions to preserve peace in that region; and to ob- 
$3.00 to satisfy Germany's “legitimate grievances,” both tain from them, in return, additional guarantees of 
thesis} in Africa and in Europe; but that Germany, in re- the aid they might render the two Western democ- 
- turn, must undertake to keep the peace—or suffer the racies in case of war with Germany. — 
prac- | consequences. This certainly represents a more con- M. Delbos found that the countries of Eastern 
a, the} structive policy than the earlier insistence of the two Europe, disillusioned with collective security, are not 
on Western democracies on maintenance of the status so much pro-German or pro-French, as~priniatily 
necked | 7#0 at any price, including that of possible war. concerned with furtherance of their own national 
| pres | The settlement they propose calls for sacrifices not interests. Poland, whose authoritarian régime shares 
By only on the part of the small states of Eastern Hitler's fear of communism, is not prepared to sat- 
aterial | Europe, which gained most in 1919 from dismem- isfy Germany's most important “legitimate griev- 
stional berment of the Hohenzollern and Hapsburg em- ances’ with respect to Danzig and the Polish Cor- 
pires, but also on the part of Britain and France, ridor. On the contrary, it has already presented de- 
York, which would return some of Germany's pre-war col- mands for a share of African colonies which, in a 
onies, now administered as League mandates. It is sense, make it a competitor of the Reich in the 
evelt’s | 20t yet clear, however, to what extent Britain—less struggle for colonial spoils. At the same time, in 
wealth willing than France to make colonial concessions— spite of the desire of opposition parties for rap- 
utlines is ready to contribute to this settlement out of its prochement with France, the Polish government re- 
tates. : , eg ee ; 
| Own resources. As far as can be ascertained, the mains adamant in its objections to the Franco-Soviet 
Naa | British government is not ready to surrender the pact of mutual assistance. A somewhat similar con- 
s mater | Stfategically and economically valuable German ter- flict exists in Rumania, where the Tatarescu govern- 


ritories of Tanganyika and Southwest Africa—the 
latter a mandate of the Union of South Africa. 


ment, subservient to King Carol II, has displayed 
an ambiguous attitude toward the activities of the 

















Iron Guard, which presses for cooperation with Ger- 
many and Italy; while the liberal Peasant party of 
M. Maniu—who has just arranged for the return to 
Rumania of former Foreign Minister Titulescu, ar- 
dent advocate of collaboration with France and the 
U.S.S.R.—demands restoration of democracy and, in 
an effort to secure fair elections, has concluded an 
electoral deal with its worst enemy, the Iron Guard. 

Equally complicated is the situation in Yugoslavia, 
where the ruling classes, influenced by White Guard 
refugees, remain hostile to communism, and the dic- 
tatorial government of Premier Stoyadinovitch has 
followed a pro-Italian orientation. Yet the forma- 
tion in October of an Agrarian-Democratic coalition 
uniting the Serb and Croat opposition parties, which 
demand restoration of democracy, is expected to 
weaken Yugoslavia’s ties with Germany and Italy. 

In these Eastern European countries, where anti- 
communism and anti-semitism play into the hands 
of Nazi agitators, pro-French sentiment would un- 
doubtedly be strengthened if France could scrap its 
pact of mutual assistance with the Soviet Union, 
which in 1935 angered Germany and estranged Po- 
land. On this point France is less uncompromising 
than a year ago. The anti-Trotzkyist campaign in 
the U.S.S.R., with its revelations of military dis- 
loyalty and industrial inefficiency, discredited com- 
munism in France and created the impression that, 
in case of war, the Soviet Union might prove a 
liability rather than an asset. 

The main resistance to such a course in Eastern 
Europe might be expected from Czechoslovakia, also 
bound by a pact of mutual assistance to the Soviet 
Union. The Prague government, however, looks less 
to alliances than to its own military resources for de- 
fense against Germany. More important than the 
Soviet pact would be assurances that Germany will 
abandon its campaign on behalf of the Sudeten Ger- 
mans, whom Prague might conciliate by some mea- 
sure of autonomy; that Czechoslovakia’s partners 
in the Little Entente—Rumania and Yugoslavia— 
will give it unequivocal aid in case of German at- 
tack; and that Poland, which has supported the agi- 
tation of the Polish minority in Teschen, will not 
stab Czechoslovakia in the back. Such assurances, 
according to some observers, might be facilitated by 
abandonment of the French and Czechoslovak pacts 
with the U.S.S.R. 

Attractive as dissociation from the U.S.S.R. might 
seem to Paris and London, it must be recognized that 
under certain circumstances it would dovetail into 
Hitler's plans for isolation of the Soviet Union from 
Western Europe and for eventual German domina- 
tion of the East, to the exclusion of France, Britain 
and even Italy from that region. Nor is it certain 
that Hitler, having obtained concessions which might 
be regarded as legitimate, would not then press for 


Page Twe 











fulfillment of the far vaster program of German ey, 
pansion set forth in Mein Kampf. The best guar. 
antee against this eventuality would be a pledge by 
Britain and France to help the small states of Easter 
Europe not only in case of direct German attack— 
the least probable of the hypotheses—but of Ger. 
man intervention in their internal affairs. Such g 
pledge, especially when re-enforced by Britain's re. 
armament and its determination to reorganize and 
rejuvenate its army, would have to be reciprocated 
by the promise of the small states to moderate their 
own intransigence toward the revisionist demands 
of Germany and Hungary, and to do their share ip 
case of war with the Reich. The choice today, as 
when Hitler first came to power, is not between 
peace and war—but between a peace imposed by 
Germany, which would hardly be an improvement 
on the imposed settlement of Versailles, and a peace 
negotiated on terms acceptable not only to the great 
powers, but to the European community as a whole 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BRITAIN OVERHAULS ARMY 


Announcing a sweeping reorganization of the 
Army Council, Leslie Hore-Belisha, Britain’s dynamic 
Secretary of State for War, inaugurated a series of 
military reforms on December 2 which may alter the 
composition of the British army more radically than 
any step taken in several decades. After a grim be- 
hind-the-scenes struggle necessitating the interven- 
tion of the cabinet, Mr. Hore-Belisha secured the re- 
placement of a sufficient number of elderly officers 
to reduce the average age of the members of Brit- 
ain’s supreme military body from 63 to 52. The new 
Chief of the Imperial General Staff, General Vis- 
count Gort, was promoted over the heads of fifty 
generals who ranked above him in seniority. His 
colleagues have been selected with a view to the in- 
troduction of a more resilient and progressive attt- 
tude toward army problems. In an address deliv 
ered on December 4 the War Minister declai 
henceforth merit will replace length of service as the 


) esha 
| that 








determining factor in promotion. He also outlined 
a program of decentralization bringing new respon- 


sibilities in the direction of military policy to high 


officers holding home commands. 
These changes foreshadow further efforts to de- 


mocratize the tradition-ridden, essentially aristocratic | t 


structure of the army, which has apparently proved 
unequal to the stresses imposed by Britain's vast 
rearmament program. It is expected that higher sal- 
aries will be paid and a new recruiting system 


adopted to broaden the base from which officers, 


0: 


will be selected in the future. Faced by a shortage| % 


of 12,000 enlisted men in the ranks, Mr. Hore- 
Belisha will doubtless continue his efforts to im- 


(Continued on Page 4) 


n 
th 
SI 





1 ex 


= Washington News Letter fe 














ack— 

Ger} ' 

ach a WASHINGTON BUREAU same time, there is obviously less faith in neutrality 
sal National Press Building 


> and} Desc. 7—Congress and American foreign policy. 
ated| While issues of foreign policy have been thrust well 
their] into the background of the special session. of Con- 
nands gress—where they are likely to remain undisturbed 
are in} for the present—there is increasing evidence that 
ay, as} Congressional opinion is a major cause of concern 
tween} to those Administration advisers who are seeking a 
ed by passable road pointing in the general direction of 
ement} the President's Chicago speech. 
peace] The prevailing view in Administration circles is 
great} that the collapse of the Brussels conference can be 
vhole} attributed in large measure to the “isolationist” 
ian | temper of Congress, which allows treaty-breaking 
nations to discount the influence of the United States 
in world affairs. The vigorous expression of this 
f the} view in a leading editorial, entitled “America’s 
namic} Aloofness,” in the New York Times on December 1 
ies of} was read with satisfaction by State Department ofh- 
er the} cials who have been expressing much the same sen- 
y than} timents for several weeks. Particular emphasis is 
im be-} laid on the statement, as phrased in the Times edi- 
erven-| torial, that “treaty-breaking governments and dic- 
the fe-} tators have become convinced that for no cause short 
flicers} of actual invasion will the United States initiate or 
f Brit-| join any effective movement to assure world peace.” 
e new} The attitude of Congress, it is hinted here, has en- 
1 Vis-} abled more than one foreign Ambassador to inform 
f fifty} his home government that American public opinion 
. His} will not permit the Roosevelt Administration to em- 
the in-} bark on any positive policy—a point which has been 
e atti-} used with some effect to impress on Congress its re- 
deliv} sponsibility in matters of foreign policy. 
sd that} There is little if any evidence, however, that the 
as the} temper of Congress has changed materially in recent 
itlined| weeks. The central issue, as seen by Congress, is not 
espon-| whether the United States shall assume a position 
o high| of leadership in world affairs, but whether the Ex- 
| ecutive shall be given a free hand to commit the na- 
to de- | tion to economic and military sanctions, or to assume 
ocrati¢ | the war-making power. While there is much sym- 
proved | pathy for China, there is no strong desire to take 
's Vast positive action against aggressors. Informal surveys 
er sal-| of Congressional opinion seem to confirm earlier 
system | Newspaper polls showing something like a two-to- 
officers | One majority against joining with other nations in 
ortage | Sanctions of any kind. The belief that sanctions 
Hore-| Mean war is apparently stronger than it was during 
to im- the Ethiopian conflict in 1935, and there is greater 
Suspicion of the motives of foreign powers. At the 





legislation as a “safe and sure” formula for avoiding 
war, and sharp division with respect to application 
of the existing Neutrality Act to the Far Eastern 
conflict. The desire to curb the war-making powers 
of the Executive is shown by the introduction of half 
a dozen “war referendum” resolutions, seeking a 
constitutional amendment limiting the authority of 
Congress to declare war—except in case of invasiét 
—until after a nation-wide referendum. These reso- 
lutions, which will be analyzed in a future News 
Letter, are likely to come up for debate early in the 
regular session of Congress. Thus for some time to 
come American policy seems destined to remain sus- 
pended between the desire of the Executive to as- 
sume a positive rdle in defense of international cov- 
enants, and the unwillingness of Congress to assume 
the risks of forceful intervention in the game of 


power politics. WILLIAM T. STONE 


Rear guard action at Shanghai. Since the break- 
down of its efforts at mediation in the Far Eastern 
war, Washington has centered its attention on Jap- 
anese moves to extend control over the Interna- 
tional Settlement in Shanghai. The Japanese de- 
termination to take over Chinese government func- 
tions and to suppress “‘anti-Japanism” is necessarily 
undermining the position of Americans there as 
built up by treaties and their own business efforts. 
Against these encroachments, Washington, in con- 
cert with Britain and France, is carrying on a cau- 
tious but dogged rear guard action 


The strongest stand seems to have been taken 
against the Japanese assertion of control over the 
collection of the Chinese maritime customs. After 
the appointment of two Japanese as officials in the 
customs administration, Washington was informed 
that Japanese appraisers and examiners had been 
stationed at landing points in the International Set- 
tlement and the French Concession. At the same 
time, intimations were received that the Japanese 
were really seeking full control of the maritime cus- 
toms, but without confiscating that part of the re- 
ceipts which is pledged to the service of Chinese 
foreign debts. On November 27 the State Depart- 
ment expressed the concern with which the United 
States would view any attempt to destroy the in- 
tegrity of the Chinese customs. Two days later Am- 
bassador Grew delivered a note at Tokyo in which 
the United States claimed the right to be consulted 
regarding any proposed change, either in the ma- 

















chinery of collection or in the distribution of cus- 
toms receipts. Simultaneously Consul-General Gauss 
at Shanghai is negotiating with the Japanese on is- 
sues arising from their measures of control or super- 
vision over radio and cable services. Although the 
American government will doubtless continue its 
protests against infractions of its rights, there are 
no indications here that it is ready to take any 


stronger action. Pau. B. TAyYLor 





BRITAIN OVERHAULS ARMY 
(Continued from Page 2) 

prove the amenities of barracks life and thus en- 
courage recruiting which, significantly enough, is 
fully up to schedule in the navy and air force. If its 
morale can be reconstituted by these measures, the 
army will be in a far better position to execute at a 
rapid tempo the extensive mechanization and motor- 
ization scheme begun on April 1, 1937. Consider- 
able effort, moreover, is being devoted to reconstruc- 
tion of the Territorial Army—the home defense or- 
ganization analogous to the American National 
Guard—as the foundation for a more democratic 
citizen force. The basic problem of providing 
eligible man power is being attacked from another 
angle by the prosecution of a nation-wide campaign 
to encourage physical fitness 

In other fields, too, the British government is 
straining every nerve to wipe out what it regards as 
a deplorable lag behind other leading European 
powers in the realm of rearmament. On July 1, 1937 
Britain, with a fleet totaling only 1,216,398 tons, 


Page Four 





— 
——me 





had laid the keels or appropriated the funds for an 
additional 541,190 tons of ships. In the face of 
much friction and criticism the Royal Air Force is 
being rapidly expanded. The manufacture of air. 
planes and munitions, although hindered by lack of 
coordination, is unmistakably gaining momentum, 
Since Sir Thomas Inskip assumed office as Minister 
for Coordination of Defense twenty months ago, 
orders have been placed for £288,000,000 worth of 
armaments, while nineteen factories have been 
erected. The government's five “shadow”’ airplane 
plants, intended as a reserve for large-scale produc. 
tion in an emergency, will be ready for operation 
early in 1938. Extensive precautionary measures 
against air raids are about to be financed by the gov- 
ernment, and over 19,000,000 gas masks have al- 
ready been manufactured. A “shadow” food con- 
trol organization is being created to function im- 
mediately on the outbreak of hostilities. 

Students of history are tempted to compare these 
intensive preparations, and the coincident visit of 
Lord Halifax to Berchtesgaden, with the reorgani- 
zation of the British army completed in 1910 and the 
attempt by its progenitor, Lord Haldane, to reach 
an understanding with Germany two years later. 
The situations are by no means entirely comparable. 
It is true, nevertheless, that visible evidence of ac- 
celerated British rearmament is likely to be more 
effective as a tonic for dispirited anti-fascist forces in 
Central and Eastern Europe than any conversations 
held by peripatetic diplomats in the capitals of the 
Continent. Davip H. Popper 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Plot and Counter-Plot in Central Europe, by M. W. Fodor. 
‘New York, Houghton Mifflin, 1937. $3.50 


The Vienna correspondent of the Manchester Guardian 
draws on his rich and intimate knowledge of Central Eu- 
ropean politics in this penetrating analysis of the forces 
and personalities at work in a region where a free hand 
is demanded by Nazi Germany. He believes that if Austria 
and Czechoslovakia succeed in escaping the danger of 
German aggression, the small countries of the Danubian 
and Balkan area will eventually collaborate in an effort to 
avoid entanglement in the conflicts of the great powers. 


The Problem of Peaceful Change in the Pacific Area, by 
Henry F. Angus. New York, Oxford University Press, 
1937. $2.00 


A study of the work of the Institute of Pacific Relations 
and its bearing on the problem of peaceful change. The 
achievements of the Institute are fully described, but it 
is freely admitted that its present usefulness is limited in 
matters involving sovereign rights. 


Japan Over Asia, by William Henry Chamberlin. Boston, 
Little, Brown, 1937. $3.50 


The basic elements in the confused political and eco- 
nomic situation within Japan are brought into clear focus 
as they pass through the lens of a keen journalistic ii- 
tellect. Mr. Chamberlin depicts Japan’s imperialistic drive 
in Asia and its world-wide trade offensive, then traces the) 
interplay of forces in Japanese public life responsible for 
Tokyo’s policies. The discussion of Japan’s drift toward 
fascism and a regimented economy is concluded by a timely 





estimate of its power of endurance during a conflict and 
a lucid summary of its war aims in China. The author | 
deprecates the possibility of internal revolution in Japan} 
or of any immediate clash with the U.S.S.R. 


The Kaiser on Trial, by George Sylvester Viereck. New | 
York, Greystone Press, 1937. $3.50 


A well-written volume contending that the Kaiser was | 
more a victim of the disunity of Germany and a faulty 
world system than of his own character. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 7, Dsecempzr 10, 1937. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lesime Busi, President; Vera MicHeLtes Dean, Editor. 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. Nationd | 


Entered as second-class matte! 
Two Dollars a Year. 








FC 


— 
Vo! 


DE 





