— FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


ntil 
the 


mit- 
the 
ken 
rms 
July 
ited 
[on- 
nan 
und 

di- 
5er- 
und 
Iria, 
y as 
) its 
the 
the 
Nn to 
ony 
nese 
die 
-are- 
ially 
yned 
14; 
it be 


CCU 
nini- 
e of 
s of 
just 
30 
<OW, 
nese 
the 
yuth- 
the 
nese 
the 
tem- 
nder 
view 
ikia, 
tem- 
4 the 
zue's 
IN 


— 
ational 
Editor. 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVII, No. 49 


SEPTEMBER 30, 1938 





AMERICA LOOKS ABROAD 
by Frederick L. Schuman and George Soule 


How can the United States avoid being forced into a gen- 
eral war? What program will guarantee peace for America? 
Here is a critical examination of the central problems con- 
fronting American foreign policy today. The two authors 
represent different points of view. Each has sought to face 
realities. Both have submitted specific recommendations. 


World Affairs Pamphlets, No. 3 
(FPA membership covers this series.) 


25 cents a copy 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 




















GODESBERG TURNS TIDE AGAINST HITLER 





. pgedy Sportspalast speech of September 26, 
in which he said that Sudetenland was the last 
territorial demand he would make in Europe, but a 
demand from which he “never will recede,” indi- 
cated an attempt to retreat from the advanced po- 
sition he had assumed at Godesberg. It did nothing, 
however, to dispel the impression in Germany that 
Britain and France would force Czechoslovakia to 
acquiesce in the Godesberg terms which, according 
to the Germans, merely clarify the Anglo-French 
proposals of September 18, accepted by the Czechs 
under compulsion on September 21 as a basis for 
negotiation. These proposals had provided for ces- 
sion to Germany of solidly German districts in the 
Sudeten area, the figure most frequently mentioned 
being 70 per cent; delimitation of the frontier by an 
international commission; exchange of populations; 
and international guarantee of the new frontiers not 
only by Britain and France, but by Czechoslovakia’s 
neighbors—Germany, Hungary and Poland. 

The ‘‘final’” memorandum delivered by Hitler to 
Chamberlain at Godesberg on September 23 went 
far beyond these terms, and left no doubt that Ger- 
many'’s ultimate aim was destruction of the Czech 
state. Hitler presented to Mr. Chamberlain a map 
indicating two areas—that which was to be occupied 
by Germany on October 1, and that in which the 
Reich ‘agrees to permit” a plebiscite before Novem- 
ber 25 “at the latest.”’ The first area, which includes 
districts having a 50 per cent German population, 
was to be occupied by German troops “without tak- 
ing into account whether in a plebiscite it may prove 
to be in this or that part of an area with a Czech 
majority.” Similarly, Czech territory was to be “‘occu- 
pied” [ sic} by Czech troops even if it contained large 
German language islands—with this qualification 
that, in a plebiscite, the majority in these islands 
“will without doubt give expression to its German 





national feeling.” Czech police, soldiers and officials 
were to be evacuated from the area to be occupied by 
Germany, and the territory was to be handed over 
in its present condition, that is, with all its military 
and industrial constructions intact—including the 
Czech fortifications—as well as foodstuffs, goods, 
cattle and raw materials. Czech or anti-Nazi Ger- 
mans who wished to remain under Czech rule would 
thus have to leave their property behind and, since 
no provision is made in the memorandum for compen- 
sation by Germany, would return destitute to Prague. 
The new frontier indicated on the German map 
would pass within five miles of Pilsen, centre of the 
Skoda armament works, financed in large part by 
France since the war, and within twenty miles of 
Prague. Moreover, according to this map, plebiscites 
would have to be held in areas containing less than 
50 per cent German population, such as the impor- 
tant industrial centre of Brunn; the southwest corner 
of Bohemia, just south of Pilsen; and areas which, 
if allotted to Germany, would form two German 
corridors running north to south through Czecho- 
slovakia east of Prague, effectively cutting Czecho- 
slovakia into two parts—Moravia and Slovakia. If 
Prague accepted these terms, it would not only have 
to surrender its fortifications, without which its army 
would be helpless against German attack, but its 
principal resources of coal and iron, as well as many 
of its important industries. The rump state left by 
this arrangement would be completely at the military 
and economic mercy of the Third Reich. No provision 
is made in the Hitler memorandum for guarantees of 
Czechoslovakia’s new frontiers, which would be sub- 
ject to further demands by Poland and Hungary. 
While Prime Minister Chamberlain agreed to 
transmit this memorandum to Prague—with “‘a heavy 
heart,” according to the Voelkischer Beobachter, 
Nazi party organ—neither Britain nor France ex- 














erted any pressure on Prague to accept it. According 
to an official broadcast from Prague, Britain and 
France had informed the new military government 
of General Jan Syrovy on September 23 that they 
could not advise it to abstain from making necessary 
military preparations. The following day they told 
Prague that Mr. Chamberlain had failed to obtain 
any promise from Hitler not to attack Czechoslo- 
vakia. The Czech Cabinet then proceeded with im- 
mediate mobilization. 

Announcement of Hitler's Godesberg terms 
turned the tide in Europe against Germany. The 
French Cabinet, meeting on September 25, refused 
to urge further concessions on Czechoslovakia, and 
accelerated its mobilization. Following intensive 
conversations in London between French and British 
Ministers, Mr. Chamberlain sent a personal appeal 
to Hitler through his closest adviser, Sir Horace 
Wilson. The British government, which had hitherto 
been reluctant to cooperate with the U.S.S.R., con- 
sulted Soviet representatives in London and Geneva 
regarding the aid they were ready to give Prague. 
Foreign Commissar Litvinov reiterated in League 
meetings that the Soviet Union would aid Czecho- 
slovakia if France acted simultaneously, and warned 
Poland of Soviet action in case of Polish aggression 
against the Czechs. Rumania and Yugoslavia, which 
might become Germany's next objectives, assured 
Prague that they would support it in case of attack 
by Hungary. Premier Mussolini, who has played the 
role of Greek chorus during the past week, adopted 
a far less bellicose tone over the weekend, and ex- 
pressed the hope that the conflict, if it came, would 
be localized. Most important of all, however, the 
British Foreign Office, abandoning its traditional 
policy of making no commitments in Central Europe, 
announced on September 26 that, if Germany at- 
tacked Czechoslovakia, “the immediate result must 
be that France will be bound to come to her assistance 
and Great Britain and Russia will stand by France.” 


1938 Repeats Pattern of 1914 

The issue was thus once more joined in terms 
perilously similar to those of 1914. The Third Reich. 
like pre-war Germany and Austria-Hungary, is seek- 
ing by unacceptable ultimatums to break down the 
resistance of a Slav state which blocks its expansion 
to the East. This expansion was opposed in 1914 by 
the Western powers and Russia, at a time when Ger- 
many was ruled by a government far less repugnant 
to world opinion than that of the Nazis. In 1914 the 
peoples of the West saw the conflict in terms of 
democracy versus autocracy. Post-war disillusion in- 
spired suspicion of such slogans as ‘making the 
world safe for democracy.” If Europe goes to war 
today, it goes with its eyes open to the terrible im- 
plication of its decision, painfully aware that the 





Page Two 








ey 
——e 


issues at stake are neither simple nor susceptible of 
settlement by force. Thousands of Europeans realize 
that France, Britain and Russia oppose Germany not 
only because they detest Nazism, but because Ger. 
man hegemony over Eastern Europe and the Balkans 
must in the long run challenge their own positions 
as world powers. Yet underneath this realization 
there is the grim feeling that, if it comes to living 
under one form of imperialism or another, the form 
developed by France and Britain is infinitely prefer- 
able to that now projected by Germany. In this su- 
preme moment people are guided not by class or 
even national sentiments, but by an almost instinc. 
tive revulsion against the methods of Nazi leaders. 


Now that Europe has come right up to the cannon 
mouth, no one who has seen pictures of Shanghai or 
Barcelona can be under any illusion regarding the 
fate which awaits Europe in case of a general war. 
Nor can any one believe that war can solve the age- 
old conflict between Czech and German in a region 
where the two races are inextricably mixed. Yet the 
feeling persists that there can be worse things than 
war; that life under a system which millions of 
people throughout the world—irrespective of race, 
religion and economic status—regard as repugnant, 
would in itself be a form of death and destruction 
for those subjected to it. The grimmest thought of 
all is that this system is not merely a Nazi manifes- 
tation, which would disappear with the extinction 
of Hitler and his collaborators, but another phase of 
German militarism. The terms Hitler is seeking to 
impose on Eastern Europe—aside from his anti- 
Semitism—are similar to those the German General 
Staff tried to impose in 1918 on Rumania and Russia 
by the treaties of Bucharest and Brest-Litovsk. 


In these critical moments, when everything de- 
pends on unity in the Western states, it would be 
wasteful to indulge in recrimination, or attempt to 
determine the measure of responsibility borne by 
each country or political group for the present crisis. 
None are blameless. The intransigence of France 
(which events have unfortunately justified) made 
post-war concessions to a relatively liberal Germany 
impossible, and strengthened the non-revisionist po- 
sition of the Little Entente, regarded by the French 
as a buffer against future German expansion. The 
slowness of the British public to realize the full im- 
plications of Hitler’s program permitted Germany 
to come to the very edge of the abyss without suf- 
ficient warning of the consequences. Soviet advocacy 
of class warfare made collaboration with the West- 
ern democracies difficult even after the Soviet gov- 
ernment had joined popular fronts everywhere 
against fascism. The reluctance of the United States 
to play a part in world affairs commensurate with 
its economic and political importance threw the full 


burc 
witl 
wou 
outs 
met 


Eur 
had 
selv 


aga 


res] 
it k 
ner 
dis: 
pla 
gai 


Eu: 


nei 


mn? se 





— 
—— 


e of 
alize 
r not 
Ger. 
kans 
tions 
ation 
Ving 
form 
efer- 
S Su. 
S Or 
stinc- 
ders. 
nnon 
ai or 
y the 
war. 
age- 
*gion 
t the 
than 
is of 
race, 
nant, 
ction 
nt of 
rifes- 
ction 
se of 
1g to 
anti- 
neral 
uussia 


> de- 
id be 
pt to 
ie by 
crisis. 
rance 
made 
many 
st po- 
rench 

The 
ll im- 
many 
t suf- 
ocacy 
W est- 
gov- 
vhere 
States 
with 
e full 





—_ 








burden of resisting Germany on France and Britain, 
without giving them any clue as to what this country 
would do in case resistance led to a general war. The 
outspoken sympathy of Right parties for Fascist 
methods encouraged Hitler to believe that the 
Western powers would not intervene in Central 
Europe; while parties of the Left, which for years 
had preached disarmament and pacifism, found them- 
selves handicapped in their demand for firm action 
against Germany. 


In 1938, as in 1914, Germany cannot be held alone 
responsible for the danger of war. But neither can 
it be allowed to subject the world indefinitely to a 
nervous strain which might soon prove almost as 
disruptive of normal life as war. When Hitler over- 
played his hand at Godesberg, the Western powers 
gained an important advantage. This advantage must 
be used not merely to conciliate Hitler, but to assure 
Europe against the recurrence of periodic crises by 
which the Fuehrer apparently hopes to break the 
nerves of his opponents without resort to war. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 
SMALL POWERS PLAY WAITING GAME 


Waiting for the great powers to take up final 
positions in the crisis, the small states around Czecho- 
slovakia maneuvered cautiously during the past week 
as Britain and France seemed first to capitulate, and 
then strengthened their stand. The agreement to 
cede the Sudeten German areas to Germany started 
an avalanche of similar demands which seemed 
likely, unless checked at once, to end in obliterating 
Czechoslovakia altogether. Hitler’s and Mussolini's 
support of these claims showed a wish to make the 
dismemberment quick and complete. 


The Polish government promptly staked out its 
old claim to the part of Teschen which the Confer- 
ence of Ambassadors had awarded to Czechoslovakia 
in 1920. Although Poland had accepted the award, 
the boundary line had been drawn chiefly on the 
basis of economic and strategic considerations and 
included a small Polish majority area within Czecho- 
slovakia. After the Polish Ambassador had visited 
Hitler on September 20, Poland demanded from 
Czechoslovakia that its minority be given the same 
treatment as the German minority—annexation by 
Poland of areas containing more than 50 per cent 
Poles and liberal privileges for those left in the 
“new Czechoslovakia.” In addition, the Polish press 
put forward demands which included some solid 
Czech districts and revived the old wish for common 


Page Three 














frontiers with Hungary. A Polish Silesian Teschen 
Corps similar to the Sudeten Fretkorps was organ- 
ized, and military attack was threatened. Lord Hali- 
fax, however, was reported to oppose any annexa- 
tions by Poland at this time, and the Soviet Union 
threatened both to denounce its non-aggression pact 
and to move troops into the Polish Ukraine if Po- 
land invaded Czechoslovakia. On September 26 
President Benes sent a note to Warsaw, apparently 
refusing the Polish territorial demands but leaving 
the door open for negotiations. 

Czechoslovakia’s serious plight also caused Hun- 
gary not only to present claims similar to those of Ger- 
many, but to expect the restoration of much of its lost 
territory. Czechoslovakia’s two eastern provinces, 
Slovakia and Ruthenia, had been under Hungarian 
rule for nearly a thousand years, and about 750,000 
Magyar-speaking people still live along their south- 
ern borders. The Hungarian government demanded 
on September 22 that its minority receive treatment 
analogous to that given the Germans, and the 
Magyar press suggested that all of Slovakia and 
Ruthenia might return to Hungary. Although the 
Slovak autonomists might, in case of the crippling or 
dismemberment of Czechoslovakia, accept an au- 
tonomous status within a federated Hungary, they 
have come to the support of the Czech government 
during the crisis and now actually have two repre- 
sentatives in the Cabinet. After Hungary had appar- 
ently carried through a partial mobilization follow- 
ing that of Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Rumania 
notified Budapest on September 25 that, in case it 
attacked Czechoslovakia, they would come to the 
latter's defense. On September 26 the Czechs refused 
Hungary's demand for territorial cessions. 

None of these states of Eastern Europe seems likely 
to commit itself to one side or the other until the 
great powers have taken their positions. If Britain, 
France and the Soviet Union should finally allow 
Hitler to have his way with Czechoslovakia, all of 
them would be forced to come to terms with him. 
If, however, the democracies stand firm, even to the 
point of war, nearly all of the small countries are 
likely either to remain neutral or to join them. The 
decision of all will depend on the strength shown 
and the promises made by the two groups of poten- 
tial or actual belligerents. 

PAUL B. TAYLOR 





Mr. Buell will broadcast on the “Causes of War 
Tension” over the Columbia Broadcasting System on 
Sunday, October 2, at 1:45 p.m. Eastern Standard Time. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 49, SEPTEMBER 30, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOnpD Lgsiig BUELL, President; DorotHy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dgan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


GSp~ 181 


Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

SEPT. 26—.In the anxious days between Prime 
Minister Neville Chamberlain's first conference with 
Chancellor Hitler at Berchtesgaden and the fateful 
meeting at Godesberg, Washington maintained its 
policy of silence in the face of mounting tension 
which every responsible official recognized as the 
ultimate crisis. When President Roosevelt made his 
last-minute appeal to Chancellor Hitler and Presi- 
dent Benes in the early hours of Monday morning, 
he took the only diplomatic step which remained 
open to any Administration responsible to the Amer- 
ican people. For every other avenue of intervention 
had been closed, in the view of Washington officials, 
when the swift course of events carried the crisis 
beyond the orbit of American diplomacy. 

Up until the first week in September, the White 
House and the State Department had been pursu- 
ing a course designed to achieve a double purpose 
—on the one hand, to impress on Hitler the impor- 
tance of including the United States in his calcula- 
tions; on the other, to refrain from any commitment 
which might involve the country in another European 
war. This delicate position was tenable, if not very 
effective, as long as the great powers remained on 
speaking terms. But the moment Prime Minister 
Chamberlain took off on his first flight to Hitler, 
the diplomatic position of the United States was 
materially altered. It was no longer possible to make 
even veiled references to the uncertainty of the future 
attitude of the United States without implying a 
commitment which the President was without author- 
ity to undertake. Moreover, such veiled pronounce- 
ments had lost their effectiveness; if the showdown 
came, nothing but the most categorical statement 
that the democracies were prepared to fight in the 
event of unprovoked aggression could serve as a 
restraining force. 

When the results of Berchtesgaden became known, 
the atmosphere in Washington reflected the same 
let-down felt in the streets of Paris, London and 
Prague. No one here was inclined to censure Cham- 
berlain for what he had done; whatever the private 
feelings of State Department officials, few wanted 
to pass judgment on any desperate effort to gain 
time. Yet the official reaction to the Chamberlain 
concessions was very much like the reaction of 
American public opinion—a sense of outrage at the 
terms, coupled with a desire to remain aloof from 
the whole affair as long as possible. For the next 


few days officials studied editorial comments in the 
American press and statements by Congressional 
leaders just as closely as they scanned diplomatic 
reports from European capitals. Senator Borah’s 
warning that “it is not our affair’’ was seconded by 
many Senators and Congressmen who had never 
been regarded as confirmed isolationists. Other 
voices, like those of Senator Glass of Virginia and 
Senator King of Utah, served notice that not all 
Congressional opinion would favor peace at any 
price. But the Administration listened more atten- 
tively to Senator Pittman, chairman of the Foreign 
Relations Committee, who had been friendly to Sec- 
retary Hull’s program for amending the Neutrality 
Act in the direction of wider Executive discretion. 
Broadcasting from California, Senator Pittman said 
that in his opinion the Senate of the United States 
“will not vote for any treaty, resolution or measure 
that authorizes the entrance into any foreign war or 
any alliance or joint action with any foreign govern- 
ment or governments in behalf of any foreign war.” 
Whether this resurgence of isolation sentiment was 
superficial or deeprooted, high Administration of- 
ficials were proceeding in the belief that the Ameti- 
can people wanted to keep out of war. 


The sudden stiffening of resistance in Prague and 
the firmer attitude in London and Paris immediately 
following the Godesberg conference produced no 
outward change in Washington. But behind the cur- 
tain of silence, there was deep concern lest the 
breakdown of all negotiations lead to irrevocable 
action. Late Sunday night, the President took the 
only step open to him under the existing circum- 
stances. It was realized that the appeal might have 
little effect, but since the Administration believed 
Hitler had overplayed his hand, the logical move was 
to offer a final opportunity to reconsider. The plea 
“not to break off negotiations’ contained no binding 
commitment, but by citing the Kellogg Pact the Presi- 
dent apparently sought to lay the foundations for fu- 
ture action based on trade restrictions, or embargoes 
directed against states which have violated treaties to 
which the United States is a party. The replies from 
Great Britain, France and Czechoslovakia welcomed 
the President's suggestion and expressed willingness 
to continue negotiations. Hitler’s reply, received on 
September 27, asserted that ‘‘delay is impossible” and 
declared that the decision for peace or war lies with 


the Czechs. W. T. STONE 


FC 


A n 


}=) 


Octe 
Octe 
Octc 
Octe 
Oct« 
Octc 
Oct 
Octe 





