sturbance 
Press cor- 
e reports 
a protest 
ent.” The 
endencies 
eedom of 
antre Rios 
lfare and 
corporat 


esting be} P° 


l. Ernesto 
1 October 
idish lan 
sh as well 
n Spanish 
» Yiddish 
rebuke to 


) my own 
his hemis 
ature and 
2 most fe 


ressed Ar 
but to no 
‘osta Rica, 
Columbui 
»vernment 
-al Society 
-¢ in Chile 
sto signet 
yvernment 
announced 
Argentina 
2 of bust 
ding wilt 
BOLLES 


-1943 


= PGRIGUVICAL. Kos: 
oi @HNEBRAL LIBRAR’ 
1943 OHIY. OF MICK 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


\943 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIII, No. 3 


NOVEMBER 5, 1943 


PATTERN OF COOPERATION EMERGES FROM MOSCOW CONFERENCE 


Nov. 1—As the Bulletin goes to press, news of the 
agreements signed in Moscow has just been received. 
— may be the agreement on details 

reached at the Moscow conference, the meeting 
will prove to have been a milestone in modern his- 
tory if it results in the creation of machinery through 
which Britain, Russia and the United States can dis- 
ass and settle future divergences between them. It 
would be fantastic to expect that the three great 
wers, whose institutions and policies have been 
molded by widely different traditions, could reach, 
even under the pressure of war, a blanket consensus 
on all the critical issues of our times. Were such a 
gnsensus announced, in fact, its very impossibility 
would arouse justifiable skepticism. What we need 
today is not a valueless proclamation of eternal 
ftiendship but two tangible hedges against future 
conflict: the will to adjust such divergences as may 
arise, and the machinery through which prompt ac- 
tion can be taken to avert crises. 

COMMON INTERESTS. The will to make mu- 
tual adjustments is being increasingly strengthened 
as the three great powers realize more and more 
dearly that only through their concerted efforts can 
the defeat of the German Army—shaken by setbacks 
in Russia but by no means yet crushed—be consum- 
mated in the shortest possible time. And just as the 
thee great powers have a common interest in the 
defeat of Germany, so they have a common interest 
in the reconstruction of Europe which, in the absence 
of an accord between Britain, the United States and 
Russia, might fall prey to civil conflict that would 
fmplete the havoc wrought by war. Compared to 
these issues of war and post-war strategy specific 
problems of boundaries, important as they seem to 
individual countries or groups, are slight indeed. 

Not only is there a will to cooperate, but the ma- 
thinery for cooperation is already in the making. 
The Mediterranean Commission, first proposed by 


Russia, offers a pattern for handling regional prob- 
lems by small committees of experts representing 
specially interested nations and may prove of value 
in other areas of liberated Europe—provided region- 
al arrangements are always fitted into the larger 
framework of continental and world organization. 
Russia was represented at the Food Conference held 
in Hot Springs last May, and will be represented at 
the Council meeting of the United Nations Relief 
and Rehabilitation Administration which is to open 
in Atlantic City on November 10. These two con- 
ferences suggest another pattern of cooperation— 
this time of international gatherings dealing with 
specific issues, such as food and relief, which are of 
concern to all countries, large and small, and directly 
affect the lives of all people. 


NO RIGID FORMULA. These developments in 
international machinery, so gradual as to have been 
almost imperceptible, demonstrate better than vol- 
umes of written arguments that cooperation between 
nations need not be rigidly confined to any one single 
form of organization. A variety of flexible mechan- 
isms may be better adapted to the adjustment of the 
multiplicity of complex problems released, with ex- 
plosive force, by two world wars in the lifetime of 
one generation. This is what President Roosevelt 
apparently had in mind when he said at his press 
conference on October 30 that he is in favor of a 
Senate statement on foreign policy couched in the 
most general terms, since it is impossible, at this 
time, to draw up a detailed blueprint for the future. 

At the same time it is obvious that, unless piece- 
meal arrangements between various groups of na- 
tions on a wide range of matters are guided by a 
common objective and inspired by a common hope, 
they may prove, in the long run, so many jagged 
pieces of a puzzle that will never be fitted together 
into a coherent picture. The common objective is 
now, more and more clearly, an international organ- 


i 
i; 
ij : 
it 
| 
j 
it 
x 


— 


eal eG 


Sa ake inate SS a PO RR ae 


Pk bee 
m A 2 
h. 6 = 


PageTwo 


ization which would have not only military power to sweep aside the dead leaves of Europe's man) assun 
at its disposal to check future attempts at aggression, winters of discontent, and thus clear the ground fq} Ame 
but also sufficient moral and economic influence to a fresh flowering of the continent—or they may le} ful te 
correct maladjustments and frictions that lead to war. nature take its course, with the risk that the new} tenan 
The common hope, welling up from the hearts of seeds will not be strong enough to break, unaided} carrie 
peoples everywhere, is that the end of the war will through the sod. Recent developments in Italy, which} that | 
not be marked by widespread reaction, as was the indicate that the Allies are using their influence jj} mom: 
case after the Napoleonic wars, when the concert of forward the aims of the liberal forces that are emerg.f rope 


Europe used the power at its disposal to throttle ing into full daylight with the recession of fascism} once 
nascent revolutions, but by efforts to carry forward hold promise for the future of other European coup. : 


nul 

and enlarge the freedoms achieved by a few for- _ tries. The present ferment in Europe could result jg a 
tunately situated countries during the past century. a clash between Britain and the United States, on the ia sh 
True, internal reforms in the libérated countries can- one hand, and Russia on the other. Such a clash, hoy. Geld 
not be effected against the will of their peoples, de- ever, can be averted if the three great powers agree} ¢oalit 
sirable as they may seem. The important thing is among themselves that, while they will not seek ty} jhe | 
that such reforms as these peoples may want to effect oust the governments in exile until public opinion in} hin 
should not be blocked by the victors through fear of the conquered countries has had an opportunity ty} {5 9 
change or dissension among them. express itself, neither will they use their influence in, centr. 
EXAMPLE OF ITALY. To take up again the favor of restoring unwanted governments. On such} over, 
symbol of Ignazio Silone, we are now at a point agreement about future policy hinges the pacification} py, | 
where the seeds of new aspirations are germinating of Europe following the defeat of Germany. Born 
beneath the crust of Nazi rule. The Allies can help VERA MICHELES DEAN being 
GRANT OF SIBERIAN BASES MIGHT MEAN THEIR LOSS TO JAPAN logic 
Considerable interest was aroused last month when _—_ United Nations. President Roosevelt’s remarks at : a 
Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., of Massachusetts press conference on October 22 have presumably ow 
was said to have told a secret session of the Senate on contributed to this understanding of the situation jj °°” 
October 7 that one million American casualties could enabling the public to see the issues still more clearly a 
be averted if Siberian bases were available in the war The President pointed out that if Siberian base a 
against Japan. The general impression at the time were made available, we would have to send troops, he 
was that, if this was an accurate report of the Sena- men and planes to take advantage of them. But, if 0” 
tor’s remarks, he must have had in mind the im- the Japanese then launched an invasion of Siberia in} we c 
, mediate use of bases by the United States which an effort to forestall us, the U.S.S.R., although re} Unio 
would almost certainly precipitate war between the sisting, might find itself unready for war in that) nizec 
U.S.S.R. and Japan, an eventuality Moscow has theatre. The Russians, he remarked, might say to w} west 


sought to avert. On October 27, however, he stated that they have more important things to do, that they} to ex 
publicly that in addressing the closed meeting he had have knocked the Germans down a couple of times) But « 


also expressed the opinion that the United States and, if they do it three or four times more, maj} man) 
should not seek such bases until after the defeat of knock the Germans out for good. Implicit in thes} Unit 
Germany. statements was the suggestion that it is not desirable) it be 


, aahial to ask the Soviet Union to turn away from the front) the 
aa URIs sen cadets ey poche baer ate on which it is dealing such effective blows to the} best 
forced by current Soviet victories, that any diversion pooevry enemy .and thet, if Siberian beses “a Th 
of Russian energies from the German front to the Sees oF Eaebait, Crest woled be grave Cong 


‘ their being lost to Japanese troops. Tok 
Far Ea Vv Ok) 
ar East would not serve the best interests of the BARGAINING OVER S. The poe} * 


sibility of Soviet aid in the Far East is frequently] chur 

WHAT THE CHINESE THINK discussed not in terms of Siberian bases but rather of} of p 

ABOUT POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION an exchange of military pledges for the future be! In 

Internal Economic Development, by Dr. Ching-chao Wu tween the Soviet Union on the one hand and Britaia| tary 

China in World Economy, by Dr. Choh-ming Li and the United States on the other. The question i| >; 

Poa-Wer Foreign Policy, by Prof. ‘Yuen Chen asked: “Should we not bargain with the Russians{ “Jes 

25¢ agreeing to meet their demands for an early invasi0l} jogp, 

i il ie of Western Europe, if they will also agree either nov) Headg 

° ° ” second 

REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. or at a convenient moment to go to war with Japan? one m 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. Superficially this may appear to be a proper subjet 

for bargaining, but it is important to recognize tht) @ 


—— 


"s 
und fo, 
may le 
the ney 
unaided, 
y, Which 
uence to 
e emerg. 
fascism, 
an coun 
result in 
S, On the 
sh, how. 
TS agree 
- seek to 
inion in 
funity to 
uence in 
On such 
cification 


DEAN 
LN 


irks ata 
sume 
1ation by 
e clearly, 
ian bases 
d troops, 
1. But, if 
Siberia in 
ough te 
r in that} 
Say to us 
that they 
of time 
ore, may 
t in these 
desirable } 
the front 
vs to the 
uses welt 
danger of 


. The pos 
frequently 
- rather of 
future be 
nd Britain 
juestion 6 

Russians, 
y invasion 
sither now 
h Japan? 
yer subjed 
ognize tht 


— 
— 


assumption behind the question— that an Anglo- 
American invasion of Western Europe will be help- 
ful to the Russians, but is not essential to the main- 
tenance of our own vital interests. If the logic were 
cattied a step further, one would have to conclude 
that the defeat of Germany at the earliest possible 
moment—assuming that an invasion of Western Eu- 
rope is necessary to achieve this end—is not of direct 
concern to us and that the only area in which we are 
genuinely interested is the Far East. 


Not only is such a conclusion untenable, but analy- 
sis shows that in the military, economic and political 
field Germany is the decisive member of the Axis 
coalition.* Not until the war in Europe is over will 
the British and ourselves, in conjunction with the 
Chinese, be able to come fully to grips with Japan, 
for only then will it be possible to achieve the con- 
centration of naval, air and land power necessary to 
overcome the special geographical problems of the 
Far Eastern and Pacific theatres. Consequently, our 
European and Asiatic military obligations, far from 
being in conflict with each other, have a clear-cut 
logical relationship in which the defeat of Germany 
provides the foundation for victory in the Pacific. In 
this sense, the blows struck in the Ukraine are also 
blows at Japan; and if the Russians are asked what 
contribution they are making to the war in Asia, they 
can properly point to their major contribution toward 
the smashing of the Nazi war machine. 


OTHER AID POSSIBLE. This does not mean that 
we cannot expect any additional aid from the Soviet 
Union in the Far East, although it must be recog- 
nized that after the destruction of vast facilities in its 
western territory, the U.S.S.R. may not be inclined 
to expose its Siberian areas to the devastation of war. 
But even short of armed conflict the Russians may do 
many things to simplify the task of Britain, the 
United States and China in defeating Japan. Nor can 
it be forgotten that, although not fighting in Asia, 
the Russians are holding down in Manchuria the 
best troops of the Japanese Army—almost as numer- 
ous as the Japanese forces now engaged in China. 
This situation will become far more serious for 
Tokyo at a later date when, hard-pressed from many 
directions, it feels the need of reducing these Man- 
churian garrisons, but finds itself hampered by fear 
of possible Soviet moves. 

In the last analysis, however, our Far Eastern mili- 
tary relations with the Soviet Union depend on the 


*This question has been discussed in earlier Bulletin articles. See for example, 
Japan Is not Stronger than Germany,’’ January 22, 1943. 


Page Three 


speed with which we help to bring the European war 
to a conclusion, for the longer the conflict lasts in 
the West, the less aid will it be possible to hope for 
from the Russians in the East. Their future course 
in the Pacific conflict cannot be settled by an ulti- 
matum over Siberian bases or by an “either-or” 
coupling of an invasion of Western Europe and a 
Soviet-Japanese war. On the other hand, there is no 
doubt that the Soviet Union has just as much inter- 
est as Britain and the United States in the destruction 
of Japanese militarism and the establishment of last- 
ing peace in the Far East. But the manner in which 
it seeks to realize these objectives will be intimately 
related to its own strength after Germany's defeat, 
and the degree of political and military cooperation 
previously developed in the West. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


MR. WELLES’ SPEECH AT F.P.A. FORUM 


Because of the many requests for copies of the 
speech made by The Honorable Sumner Welles at 
the F.P.A. Anniversary Forum on October 16th, the 
speech has been printed for wide distribution. (Ten 
cents a copy, or quantity rates on request.) Please send 
your order to the F.P.A. office, 22 East 38th Street. 


Japan Fights For Asia, by John Goette. New York, Har- 
court, Brace, 1943. $2.50 


A journalist’s account of the war in the Far East with 
special emphasis on Japan’s activities in occupied China. 
Adds little to what we already know, but will prove an 
interesting survey for the general reader. 


The Far East and the United- States, by Knight Bigger- 
staff. Ithaca, N. Y., Cornell University Press, 1943. 
40 cents. 


A bulletin for high-school teachers who wish to include 
more material on relations with the Far East in American 
history courses. Summarizes in simple form the main as- 
pects of our historical interest in the Far East, American 
policy in that area, the war with Japan, and problems of 
post-war reorganization in Eastern Asia. Concludes with a 
series of study and discussion questions and recommended 
activities for pupils. 


The Toughest Fighting in the World, by George H. John- 
ston. New York, Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1943. $3.00 
An excellent description of the war in New Guinea by an 

Australian correspondent. Covers the period of a year fol- 

lowing the outbreak of fighting in January 1942. 


Mayling Soong Chiang, by Helen Hull. New York, Coward- 
McCann, 19438. 75 cents. 
A brief appreciation of Madame Chiang Kai-shek by one 

who knew her in her student days. 

The Story of Weapons and Tactics, by Tom Wintringham. 
Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1943. $2.25 


A penetrating, popular account of changes in warfare 
“from Troy to Stalingrad.” 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 3, NovemBEr 5, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lugt, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dgan, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ss 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


i 
, 
i 
t 
{ 
i | 
4 
. 


& 


Washington News y etter 


Nov. 1.—The war on Italian soil has been going 
forward long enough to provide the world with 
some understanding of the nature of Allied admin- 
istration of liberated European territory. In two re- 
spects Italy will be a pattern for other freed areas. 
The military authorities will continue to make the 
interim political decisions about the areas; and the 
AMG will govern in the combat zones of Yugoslavia 
or France or Greece or Belgium, just as it is govern- 
ing in the combat zone of Italy, where it is respon- 
sible to General Dwight D. Eisenhower, Commander- 
in-Chief. In Washington's opinion the AMG, which 
administers all of liberated Italy except Sardinia and 
three Apulian provinces, Brindisi, Bari and Taranto, 
has performed the job well. Officers in a number far 
beyond the needs of Italy are being trained at many 
institutions in the United States for military govern- 
ment. 


MODIFICATIONS PLANNED. However, it is 
expected that Allied civil authorities will provide the 
military in the future with explicit guides toward 
political decisions. The Military-Political Committee, 
which began life as the Mediterranean Commission, 
is destined to be the guiding instrument after the 
Moscow conference. Doubt about the existence of 
any United Nations foreign policy for the Mediter- 
ranean has been expressed in this country and in 
Great Britain. The Moscow conference gave the 
representatives of the United States, Britain and the 
Soviet Union their first opportunity to discuss, along 
with the many other matters on the agenda, the prob- 
lem of long-range policy in the Mediterranean. 

Confusions arising from the division of Italian 
territory between AMG and Prime Minister Badoglio 
have disturbed Allied leaders intimately concerned 
with Italy. Badoglio and his Cabinet govern in the 
three Apulian provinces, where King Victor Em- 
manuel is monarch, and the AMG has no authority 
over them. Badoglio’s government has- denounced 
fascism but failed to repeal Fascist laws in the three 
provinces. Police subject to Badoglio’s orders ar- 
rested the editors of a liberal newspaper by invok- 
ing regulations issued during the Mussolini régime. 
Count Carlo Sforza, former Italian Foreign Minister 
who returned to Italy after long exile in the United 
States, has demanded the punishment of Fascists still 
in office. His statement was published by the official 
government newspaper La Gazetta del Mezzogiorno. 


BADOGLIO PROMISES RESIGNATION. The 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY 


Allied Armistice Commission supervises the Badoglio 
government to insure compliance with the armistice 
signed by Italy on September 29, the full terms of 
which are being kept secret. The Commission has no 
authority to force the Badoglio government to release 
men jailed for violating Fascist laws, but by cajolery it 
gained release for the editors after ten days. On Oc. 
tober 29 the Bari radio, subject to Badoglio’s direc. 
tion, broadcast that freedom of the press had beep 
restored to the liberated areas as “one of the essential 
liberties of civilized people.” 


On October 20, one week after Italy declared war | 


on Germany as a co-belligerent, Badoglio promised 
in an interview that he would select representatives 
of the various Italian parties for membership in a 


truly constitutional government when his capital was | ; 


transferred to Rome, and that he would surrender 
his office as soon as a constitutional government was 
created. Badoglio and King Victor Emmanuel can. 
not establish themselves in Rome until the United 


States and British armies drive the Germans from | 


the Tiber’s banks and the AMG has completed its 
period of military administration. By that time, how- 
ever, many important changes may have taken place. 
This was suggested on October 31 by Count Sforza’s 
demand for the abdication of the King, and the 
statement of the well-known Italian historian, Signor 
Benedetto Croce, favoring the establishment of a 
regency under the Prince of Naples. 

United States’ policy in Italy has become an issue 
in American domestic politics. In a speech at Pater- 
son, New Jersey, on October 30 Wendell Willkie, 
who is generally accepted as a candidate for the 1944 
Republican Presidential nomination, accused the Ad 


ministration of appeasing the “forces of reaction and 
Fascism all over the earth.” Among those forces he | | 


included Victor Emmanuel. 

French opposition to the status of co-belligerenc 
for the Badoglio government, which for a while dis 
turbed United Nations relations, subsided when Gen- 
eral Eisenhower's representatives pointed out that 


the arrangement will speed the progress of Allied | 


armies toward the liberation of France. The peculiat 
problems raised by Badoglio and King Victor Em 
manuel, heads of a nation recently at war against 
the United Nations, are not expected to rise in other 
regions, unless the Allies should make the unexpected 
move of dealing with Marshal Pétain in France. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


accom 
Russi 
drawn 
pectat 
post-v 


suppo 
of the 


| quarte 


issues: 
| arise | 
Alt 
ferenc 
the F 
may | 
loba 
on th 


| gani; 


