





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 





Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 











f* 2, 1921, at the Post 
[9 1930) osice a New York 























ICA N. Y., under the act 
POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3, 1879. 
Ab mien West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 

’ You. XIX, No. 6 DECEMBER 1, 1939 General Library 

.. F.P.A. Christmas Gift Suggestions University of Michigan 

sb. Regular Membership .....ccccccocsovsccsnesnesansnesees $5* ee ? 

en. Associate Membership m $3 Ann Arbor, Mich. 

red Special Subscription to Headline Books 

ip. and World Affairs Pamphlets ............ $2 

*Members sending in 2 or more Regular Memberships may 

ith obtain them at a special gift price of $4.50 each. 

of = 

ee GERMANY STRIKES AT BRITAIN’S TRADE 

be AS Germany struck a heavy blow at British and Mr. Chamberlain, however, warned that, before 
bly neutral shipping during the twelfth week of these peace aims can be translated into action, “we 
ym. | the war, Mr. Chamberlain, in a broadcast on Novem- have got first to achieve our war aim and win the 
ize | bet 26, declared that Britain would continue the war.” Hitherto the Allies have waged a war solely 
ind | ttuggle until Germany had abandoned — with or of defense, husbanding both lives and material. They 
um | Without bloodshed—"that aggressive bullying men- realize that the Reich is still superior in the number, 
g it | tality which seeks continually to dominate other if not always the quality, of its airplanes, and in 
~ | peoples by force.” For the first time since the out- its capacity for plane production. They believe— 
up. break of war, he distinguished between the war aim and Mr. Chamberlain reiterated it—that time is on 
req. | of the Allies, which is “to defeat our enemy,” and their side; that, if a major engagement can be post- 
rds | their ultimate peace aims. poned until next spring, their position will be 
ent | BRITAIN’S PEACE AIMS. In discussing peace strengthened not only by the development of their 
ince | aims, he contended that it was neither necessary nor own plane production, but also by imports of war 
ned | possible “to specify at this stage the kind of ma- material from the United States. 

and | chinery which should be established’’ for the devel- Germany, too, has been delaying a major blow in 
and | opment of a new Europe, but defined ‘‘the broad the West. There is overwhelming evidence to show 
ship | principles’” of the post-war settlement. These prin- that Hitler, up to the last minute, hoped to avoid 
inal | ciples would include discussion of territorial arrange- war with France and Britain which, he knew, would 
isa | ments by all European states on terms of equality, subject German military and economic resources to 
tep- | “with the help of disinterested third parties if it a test dangerous not only for the country, but also 

were so desired”; development of a “full and con- for the Nazi régime. In contrast to its carefully 

lavy } stant flow of trade between the nations concerned,” worked out plans for a lightning conquest of Poland, 
cted } with consequent improvement in the standard of the Nazi government appears to be divided over the 
000 | living; the “unfettered right” for every European course it should pursue against France and Britain. 
) of | country to choose its own form of internal govern- Like the Allies, it does not want to waste men and 

10 | ment “so long as that government did not pursue an material in a hopeless land attack in the West while 
ates external policy injurious to its neighbors’; and the Soviet Union consolidates its territorial gains in 
fe- } gradual abolition of armaments ‘‘as a useless ex- the East, chiefly at Germany’s expense. But the Nazis, 
| by pense, except in so far as they were needed for the too, believe that time is on their side; that, if they 
at 4 | preservation of internal law and order.” The estab- can avoid a costly struggle with the Allies, they will 
the | lishment of “this Utopian Europe,” Mr. Chamber- conserve their stocks of raw materials and, mean- 
B UP | lain added, “could not be the work of weeks or even while, develop new sources of supply in the Balkans 
ress. | months.” And the most fundamental thing for its and the Soviet Union. The Nazis hope that they may 
€X | development would be not merely territorial changes yet drive a wedge between France and Britain, arouse 
) of } according to the ideas of the victors,” but “a new neutral resentment against the British, weaken British 
I be | spirit” in which the European nations “will approach — morale, and then, at relatively little cost, deliver a 
the | their difficulties with good-will and mutual toler- mortal blow against Britain by means of sea and air 
Rf ance.” warfare. 








) 
4 
) 
/ 








GERMANY’S USE OF MINES. While Germany 
has practically cut off Britain from the Scandinavian 
countries, its submarine campaign has been only 
partially successful, owing to Britain’s use of the 
convoy system. Between 60 and 70 per cent of 
Britain’s imports come from non-European coun- 
tries—the United States, the British Dominions, 
Latin America, and the Far East. To disrupt this com- 
merce, especially before American supplies have 
reached Britain in any large quantities, Germany 
would have to make the waters around Britain so 
dangerous as to discourage all neutral ships from 
transporting goods to Britain. This, apparently, is 
what Germany is attempting to do by sowing mines 
in what are generally regarded as commercial ship- 
ping lanes, without previous notification to neutral 
countries. These mines, as far as can be determined, 
are magnetic mines of a new type, which explode 
with unusual force when ships approach them. Some 
of these appear to have been sown not by mine- 
layers or submarines, but by airplanes flying at low 
altitudes. Naval experts believe that these mines— 
held responsible for the destruction in 12 days of 28 
ships, many of them neutral—are the new weapon 
announced by Hitler, against which, he said, there 
could be no effective counter-attack. Mr. Chamber- 
lain, however, declared on November 26 that the 
British already know the secret of the magnetic mine, 
adding: “we shall soon master it as we have already 
mastered the U-boat.’’ Meanwhile, the Thames estu- 
ary was temporarily closed on November 23; and 
since over 40 per cent of Britain’s imports pass 
through the port of London, this measure, if con- 
tinued, may cause serious dislocation of British and 
neutral shipping, which would have to be re-routed 
to ports on the west coast. 


BRITISH RETALIATION. The British have de- 


Page Two 








— 


nounced Germany’s use of magnetic mines as a yip 
lation of international law. The Hague Conventio, 
of 1907, which Germany said at the outbreak of w, 
that it would observe, forbids belligerents to lay yy 
anchored automatic contact mines, unless they ap 
so constructed as to become harmless within one hoy 
after the person who laid them ceases to contr) 
them. It also declares that mines must not be |,i; 
off the coasts and ports of the enemy country wit 
the sole object of interfering with commercial nay; 
gation, and that every precaution must be taken q 
protect peaceful shipping. The Germans, in reply 
claim that the entire coast of Britain is a war zone~ 
not a commercial shipping lane—and that they ay 
justified in laying mines throughout that entire are! 
without previous notification. In retaliation for Ge. 
many’s use of mines, the British issued an Order jy 
Council on November 27 providing for the seizur 
of all exports from Germany, even if carried in ne 
tral ships. This measure, too, is a violation of inte: 
national law. The Declaration of Paris of 1856, gen- 
erally accepted as governing this situation, provides) 
that belligerents must respect cargoes on neuth 
ships (except contraband), even if the cargos) 
originate in the enemy country. 

The neutral countries are now caught betwee 
the upper and the nether millstone. They ar 
horrified by the destruction that German mines hay 
inflicted on their shipping, but also alarmed bj 
Britain’s measure of retaliation, which gravely threat’ 
ens their overseas commerce, and has already brought! 
protests from the Low Countries, Italy and Japan| 
As both the Allies and Germany resort to more des 
perate measures in an effort to win a decisive victory, 
the prospect of achieving the kind of settlement M: 
Chamberlain described as “Utopian” grows unfor 


tunately more remote. VERA MICHELES DEAN | 





GERMANY’S CAMPAIGN IN SOUTHEASTERN EUROPE 


While Germany was desperately trying to impose 
a counter-blockade on Britain in the West, its cam- 
paign to mobilize every possible source of supply 
in the Southeast met with varied success. The Reich 
probably welcomed the growing rift between Ru- 
mania and Hungary, which forms the principal ob- 
stacle to the creation of a strong, neutral bloc in 
southeastern Europe capable of resisting German 
pressure. At the same time, it was defeated in its 
efforts to obtain larger quantities of raw materials 
from Rumania and Yugoslavia. While these coun- 
tries agreed to send more foodstuffs and fodder to 
Germany, they have been unwilling to sell valuable 
minerals which in the past have been largely reserved 
for countries able to supply cotton, wool and colonial 
products in exchange. 


HOPES OF BALKAN BLOC DIMMED. Since 


last summer Yugoslavia and Turkey have beei| 
independently working to overcome the internecini! 
strife which has marred the history of southeastet| 
Europe and constantly invited foreign intervention 
More recently these efforts have been strongly se 
onded by Italy, which is alarmed by Soviet encroach 
ments and hopes to take advantage of the war 
recapture and strengthen the influence it formetl 
enjoyed in the Balkans. The project for a unite 
front, however, has now apparently been doomed bj 
Hungary’s refusal to abandon its territorial demand) 
on Rumania. Hungary has never accepted the los 
of Transylvania and the adjoining districts of Crisati 
and Maramures to Rumania in 1919. Although Re 
manians constitute a clear-cut majority of the pope| 
lation of these territories, even according to th 


Hungarian census of 1910, Hungary has continue 





to d 
has 

pact 
that 
ing 
both 
Csa 
nea: 
try 

eith 


ing 
thre 
Uni 
ine’ 
me! 
ven 
Pre 
fen 
cos 
Rw 
can 
Ba! 
to 

U: 
eve 
thi 
su 
$i0 


to 
tin 


Th 


« 





Vio. 
Ntiog 
twat 





necine! 
aster) 
ntion 
y Set 
roach 
var t 
‘metl| 
unitet| 
1ed by, 
mandi} 
e los) 
risan 
h Re 
popt 
‘othe 


tinue 











—_ 
— 





to demand their return. Since August of this year it 
has steadfastly refused to conclude a non-aggression 
pact with Rumania and has insisted, without success, 
that Bucharest make a good-will gesture by accept- 
ing a pact to improve the lot of the minorities on 
both sides of the border. On November 21 Count 
Csaky, Hungarian Foreign Minister, precipitated a 
near break by a fiery speech declaring that his coun- 
try could not promise to maintain the status quo, 
either now or in the future. 

Rumania, for its part, has been adamant in refus- 
ing to consider any territorial revision. Pressed on 
three sides by Hungary, Bulgaria and the Soviet 
Union, it fears that concessions to one country will 
inevitably give the signal for its virtual dismember- 
ment. The new Rumanian cabinet, formed on No- 
vember 23 under the leadership of a pro-French 
Premier, George Tatarescu, seems determined to de- 
fend the territorial integrity of the country at all 
costs. Threatened with attack from three directions, 
Rumania is admittedly in a precarious position. It 
can expect little or no help from its partners in the 
Balkan Entente, and the Allies will hardly be able 
to render effective assistance, particularly if the 
U.S.S.R. joins in the attack. For the time being, how- 
ever, Germany may still attempt to preserve peace in 
this area, since war might easily disrupt its lines of 
supply and entail all the risks inherent in the exten- 
sion of military operations to a new and distant front. 

GERMAN TRADE DRIVE CHECKED? Ger- 
many's attitude may change, however, if its efforts 
to monopolize the trade of southeastern Europe con- 
tinue to meet with serious resistance. To carry on 


Page Three 








war in the West, Germany must obtain control of 
Rumania’s oil. Anglo-Dutch and French interests, 
however, control 62 per cent of that country’s petro- 
leum industry and, with the support of the Allied 
governments, have pressed Bucharest not to yield to . 
German demands. Rumania’s refusal to accord the 
Reich a larger share of its oil exports, as well as a 
more favorable exchange rate for the German mark, 
apparently precipitated the resignation on Novem- 
ber 23 of the cabinet headed by Constantine Arge- 
toianu. It is still doubtful that the new Rumanian 
government, will be able to resist continued German 
pressure, particularly now that the Reich can threaten 
to support Hungary's revisionist aspirations. 

In Yugoslavia the German trade drive has also hit 
a snag. After repeated demands, the Yugoslav gov- 
ernment agreed last October to consider larger de- 
liveries of metals, notably copper, lead and antimony, 
in return for German armaments. To this end it 
issued a decree on November 12 imposing complete 
state control over the production and exportation of 
all metals, including the output of French and 
British-controlled copper and lead mines. Prompt 
protests from Britain and France delayed the appli- 
cation of this measure, however; and the Reich has 
been further annoyed by Yugoslavia’s reluctance to 
speed up delivery schedules on all the products it 
had already undertaken to ship to Germany. This is 
another illustration of the constant difficulties Ger- 
many must meet in its campaign to minimize the 
enormous economic handicaps under which it has to 
prosecute the war. 

JOHN C. DEWILDE 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The Danube, by Emil Lengyel. New York, Random House, 
1939. $3.75 


This is the charmingly told story of one of Europe’s 
most important rivers and the regions it serves. Mr. 
Lengyel has woven history, legends, and his personal 


reminiscences and philosophy into a book that deserves 
to be widely read. 


Sea Power and Today’s War, by Fletcher Pratt. New 
York, Harrison-Hilton, 1939. $3.00 


Completed before the outbreak of war, this interesting 
study of modern naval strategy and naval strengths is 
packed with valuable background material. 


Politics of the Balkans, by Joseph S. Rouéek. New York, 
McGraw-Hill, 1939. $1.50 


A brief survey of constitutional and political develop- 
ments, useful as an introduction to the region. 


A Short History of International Affairs, 1920 to 1938, by 
G. M. Gathorne-Hardy. New York, Oxford University 
Press, 1938. $3.50 


A first-rate summary and survey, issued under the aus- 
pices of the Royal Institute of International Affairs. 


Step by Step: 1986-1939, by Winston Churchill. New York, 
Putnam, 1939. $4.00 


A collection of fortnightly articles on international af- 
fairs, from the Rhineland crisis to Hitler’s occupation of 
Czechoslovakia. Mr. Churchill, with keen insight and a 
clear style, argues effectively for the more vigorous 
diplomacy and defense policy that. the Chamberlain gov- 
ernment gradually adopted. 


The Way Forward: The American Trade Agreements Pro- 
gram, by Francis Bowes Sayre. New York, Macmillan, 
1939. $2.75 


Highly competent description and defense of the Hull 
trade program, which seeks improved living standards and 
more amicable international relations through increased 
international trade. 


The United States in World Affairs, 1938, by Whitney H. 
Shepardson in collaboration with William O. Scroggs. 
New York, Harper, 1939. $3.00 


This latest annual in a distinguished series on American 
foreign relations fully maintains the high standards of 
literary excellence and accuracy set by its predecessors, 
and contains valuable bibliographical and documentary 
material. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 6, DscemBER 1, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879, Two Dollars a Year. 


Bo 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 27.—Last week found the machinery of 
Pan-Americanism operating on three fronts: in 
Washington, where the Inter-American Economic 
Committee is in session; in Guatemala City, where 
the Pan-American Treasury Conference was held on 
November 14-21; and in Havana, the scene of the 
I.L.O.-sponsored Inter-American Labor Conference. 
While only one of these groups, the Inter-American 
Economic Committee, came into being as a direct 
result of the European war, the problems growing 
out of this conflict have provided the keynote for 
each of the conferences. Thus far, however, little of 
a tangible nature has been accomplished aside from 
discussing the formulation of policy. 

ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COOPERA- 
TION. While the fundamental objectives of mini- 
mizing the economic shock of the war on the West- 
ern Hemisphere and readjusting inter-American com- 
mercial relations on a permanently sound basis are 
generally recognized, no clear-cut method of ap- 
proach has yet been evolved. Both at Washington 
and at Guatemala City, currency and financial prob- 
lems have been in the foreground, and various pro- 
posals for their solution have been advanced. So far 
as specific steps are concerned, that which has re- 
ceived the most consideration is the proposed estab- 
lishment of an Inter-American clearing house, pre- 
sumably embodying features similar to those of the 
Federal Reserve System and the Bank for Interna- 
tional Settlements. An outline for such an institution 
presented by Assistant Secretary of State A. A. Berle 
to the financial sub-committee of the Inter-American 
Economic Committee was favorably received last 
week, and it is possible that definitive action will be 
taken along these lines in the near future. It was 
hoped that such a clearing-house, or Pan-American 
Central Bank, might aid trade expansion and en- 
courage the flow of investment funds to Latin 
America by stabilizing exchange rates. 

Perhaps the dominant feature of the Pan-American 
Treasury Conference was the stress laid on the de- 
sirability of encouraging United States investments 
in Latin America. If new Latin American products 
are to be developed for the United States market, 
financial resources are unquestionably needed. In 
addition, some countries in Latin America require 
temporary assistance to overcome exchange and mon- 
etary difficulties which are limiting imports of 
United States goods. But the question of financial 
aid — whether it comes from private or official 


sources — is complicated by many factors, not the 
least of which are the large total of defaulted Latin 
American bonds in the hands of United States in. 
vestors and the expropriation of foreign oil proper. 
ties by the Mexican Government. The course of 
inter-American economic cooperation hinges some. 
what on United States financial policy, on which 
Administration circles are apparently not agreed. 


TRADE AGREEMENTS PUSHED. When and 
if the trade agreements now being negotiated with 
Argentina, Chile and Uruguay come into effect, the 
United States will have such pacts in force with four- 
teen Latin American republics and four colonies 
which, in 1938, accounted for 75 per cent of total 
United States exports to that area. Foes of the Hull 
trade program, however, are waging a new battle, 
the heaviest fire being directed at the proposed te. 
duction of the 4 cent per pound tax on copper im- 
ports in the Chilean pact. In addition, the Inde- 
pendent Petroleum Association of America is at- 
tempting to keep the agreement with Venezuela— 
which embodies a reduction in the excise tax on 
petroleum imports from 22 cents to 11 cents per 
barrel—from coming into effect on December 1. 
Meanwhile, negotiations with Argentina are ren- 
dered difficult by the long-standing friction created 
by the United States’ exclusion of fresh meat on sani- 
tary grounds, as well as by Argentina’s special com- 
mercial arrangements with Britain. Last week's te- 
port that Argentina would confine purchases to 
Britain, while given a measure of plausibility by the 
Argentine “buy from those who buy from us”’ policy, 
was evidently exaggerated. It is, of course, possible 
that Britain could literally force Argentina to buy 
British goods by paying in blocked sterling for im- 
ports of grain, meat, wool, hides and other essen- 
tials. Yet “war prosperity” in Argentina would in- 
crease demand for such United States specialties as 
automobiles, agricultural machinery and electrical 
goods. 


In the fog which surrounds the whole question of 
the economic relations of the United States with 
Latin America during the war, which only the pro- 
gress of hostilities can gradually lift, one fact seems 
clear. Unless by some miracle normal communica- 
tions with the belligerents can be restored, inter- 
American trade is destined to increase. Whether the 
increase is of a sound, long-term nature, however, 
or a speculative boom, depends in part on smooth 
operation of the machinery for Pan-American 
cooperation. 


HowarbD J. TRUEBLOOD 


An inte 


—_—_—_— 
—_—_—_- 


—_—_— 


H. 
are 
out th 
Since 
in Mc 
heen | 
whorr 
ests O 
camp 
on N 
clarec 
force: 
draw: 
Th 
ber 7 
that, 
Sovie 
cuss 
troor 
joint 
tries. 
whic 
of “ 
ber 2 
land 
ister 
a CO} 
liver 
the 
vem 
to t 
publ 
men 
and 
Uni 
a SO 
shot 
C 











