‘ham 
rsity 


land, 
rica. 
rper, 
‘ork, 


vern- 


ational 
Editor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


4n interpretation of curs ent inter 
n, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


by the Re earch Ste i 


Vor. XV, No. 45 


SEPTEMBER 4, 


1936 


POST-WAR POLITICS IN GREECE 
by Nicholas S. Kaltchas 
This report deals with the events leading up to and 
immediately following the restoration of the monarchy 


in Greece, and touches briefly on the Metaxas dictator- 
ship after the General’s coup of August 5, 1936. 


September 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Entered as second- 
matter December 
7 21, at the Post 
cP OF Office at New York, 
™ Y., under the act 
March 3, 1879. 


eriodical Division, 
ibrary of Congress, 


ashington, D. C. 


TOWARD A FASCIST FRONT 


IN EUROPE? 


HE danger of international conflict arising 

out of the Spanish civil war has at least tem- 
porarily subsided now that practically all Euro- 
pean countries have at last accepted the French 
proposal to deny arms to both sides. The German 
arms embargo imposed on August 24 was followed 
four days later by Italian action. The Portuguese 
government, which has not concealed its sym- 
pathy for the rebels, yielded to Franco-British 
pressure and decreed an embargo on August 27. 
The Soviet Union was thus enabled to carry out 
its earlier pledge of cooperation. On August 
31 it was reported that eleven nations, including 
all the major European powers except Germany, 
had also agreed to set up a committee in London 
to apply a policy of non-intervention in Spain. 
The chief function of such a committee would be 
to exchange information regarding the efficacy of 
the arms embargoes. 

Although the apparently successful issue of the 
neutrality negotiations has minimized the threat 
of war, it has not arrested the growing cleavage 
of Europe into two antagonistic anti-Fascist and 
anti-Communist fronts. The decision of the So- 
viet government, announced on August 11, to 
lower the minimum age for service in the Soviet 
army from 21 to 19 years was followed by a bit- 
ter campaign in the German press. Using this 
measure as a pretext, Chancellor Hitler on August 
24 raised the term of compulsory military service 
from one to two years, thereby increasing the reg- 
ular army to approximately 850,000 men. 

Many indications point to the creation of a 
European bloc of authoritarian states. Admiral 
Nicholas Horthy, Regent of Hungary, is reported 
to have had this object in view in his recent con- 
versations with the Austrian and German chan- 
cellors. At the end of August Dr. Goebbels visited 
Venice where he conferred with the Italian Press 
Minister in order to establish closer collaboration 
on anti-Communist propaganda. Meanwhile, Ger- 


man influence has been growing apace in the Bal- 
kans. In the last few years Dr. Schacht has been 
markedly successful in increasing German trade 
relations with southeastern Europe, so that Ger- 
many now is the leading customer of almost all the 
Balkan states. A number of governmental 
changes in these countries has further bolstered 
the German position. The reorganization of the 
Bulgarian cabinet early in July brought into the 
government two lieutenants of M. Tsankov, who 
leads an aggressive Fascist movement in Bul- 
garia. In Greece General John Metaxas has sup- 
planted a democratic régime with a dictatorship. 
Finally, in Rumania, Premier George Tatarescu 
re-formed his cabinet on August 29, dropping as 
Foreign Minister the veteran Nicolas Titulescu 
who has been noted for his Francophile policy and 
his determined opposition to the anti-Semitic and 
Fascist Iron Guard. 

It must be admitted that the creation of a solid 
anti-Communist coalition in Central and Eastern 
Europe is still far from a reality. Poland does 
not want to be the tail to either the German or the 
Soviet kite, and the exchange of visits by the Pol- 
ish and French chiefs-of-staff has recently dem- 
onstrated that the Franco-Polish treaty of alli- 
ance is still in force. Italy has no desire to be 
subordinated to Germany in leadership of the anti- 
Communist bloc. In the Balkans it will prove 
difficult if not impossible to bridge the differences 
between “revisionist” and “status quo” countries. 
Moreover, neither the Rumanian nor the Bulgari- 
an government is Fascist as yet. Nevertheless, 
Germany has made considerable progress in rally- 
ing the anti-Soviet forces and will not relax its 
efforts toward that end. 


Germany’s determination to concentrate on an 
anti-Communist drive is evident from Hitler’s ap- 
parent decision to adopt a more conciliatory atti- 
tude toward the Church. In accordance with a 
decision announced on August 28, most of the 


Ss te 


immorality or currency-smuggling charges still 
pending against members of the Catholic clergy 
will be either dismissed or settled out of court. 
The German Catholic bishops have sent the Fiihrer 
a memorandum, appealing to him to make peace 
with the Church and recognize religion as the 
strongest bulwark against communism. In a 
pastoral letter read in all Catholic churches on 
August 30, the bishops again urged church and 
state to join forces in a common crusade against 
communism. 


A desire to prevent the division of Europe into 
two irreconcilable camps was probably in Presi- 
dent Roosevelt’s mind when he recently discussed 
with his confidants a tentative project to call a 
conference of state heads in case he should be re- 
elected. To this conference, the conception of 
which was revealed by Mr. Arthur Krock in the 
New York Times of August 26, Mr. Roosevelt ap- 
parently contemplated inviting Stalin, Hitler, 
Mussolini, King Edward, President Lebrun and 
others. While it is obviously fantastic to expect 
Hitler and Stalin to sit down at the same table, 
the President’s idea corresponds to a widespread 
conviction that the growing breach between Fas- 
cist and anti-Fascist countries must somehow be 
healed if peace is to be preserved. The conference 
of Locarno powers which is to take place this fall 
has the same objective. Hitherto the democratic 
countries, especially Britain and France, have 
made one concession after another in order to pre- 
vent a Fascist coalition of powers. The adoption 
of a concerted neutrality in the Spanish civil war 
is the latest, for in essence it represents renuncia- 
tion of an uncontested right to assist a recognized 
government with arms and munition in the sup- 
pression of insurrection. If the Fascist tide in 
Europe is to be arrested, greater firmness is neces- 
sary. Only united determination on the part of 
anti-Fascist countries to resist further encroach- 
ments can induce Germany and Italy to adopt a 
more conciliatory attitude. JoHN C. DEWILDE 


ANGLO-EGYPTIAN TREATY SIGNED 


The Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of Friendship and 
Alliance which was signed in London on August 
26 opens a new stage in the relations between 
Great Britain and its former protectorate. Since 
1922, when the British formally granted indepen- 
dence to Egypt, periodic negotiations tending to 
settle questions then reserved for future discus- 
sion have failed regularly. Recently, however, the 
Italian conquest of Ethiopia has brought home to 
the Egyptians their need of military protection 
against the double threat from Italian Libya on 
the one hand and Ethiopia on the other, and has 


Page Two 


emphasized to Britain the need of a strong mili- 
tary establishment, backed by a friendly Egypt, 
to maintain vital communications through the 
Suez Canal. Both sides have abandoned their 
former no-concessions attitude, and the negotia- 
tions which began on March 2 were successful. 


The new agreement differs little from the draft 
treaty of 1929-1930, which was rejected by Egypt 
because of disagreement over the status of Egyp- 
tian citizens in the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. The 
present settlement for the Sudan permits Egyp- 
tian troops to re-enter its garrison and allows 
more Egyptian officials to take part in its admin- 
istration. Other provisions of the treaty follow 
closely the 1930 draft. Defense of the Suez Cana! 
by Britain is assured by permitting the British to 
keep 10,000 troops and 400 air pilots in the 
Ismailia zone bordering the canal, in barracks to 
be constructed by the Egyptian government. Fur- 
thermore, the British will have the right to use 
Alexandria and Port Said for naval bases, and to 
move troops over Egyptian territory in case of 
war or threat of war. Strategic roads are to be 
built by Egypt for this purpose. The Egyptian 
army will continue to be instructed by a British 
military mission and to use British-type arms and 
munitions. In return, Britain agrees to withdraw 
all its troops from Cairo, where their presence 
has been a standing affront to Egyptian national- 
ist aspirations; and to support Egypt in calling a 
conference of the powers whose nationals still en- 
joy extraterritorial privileges in Egypt, with a 
view to eventually bringing foreigners in Egypt 
under Egyptian law, and abolishing the right 
of the capitulatory powers to veto taxation laws 
applying to their nationals. As final steps in assur- 
ing complete recognition of the independence 
which Egypt has nominally held since 1922, the 
British government agrees to replace its High 
Commissioner by an Ambassador, and promises 
to support Egyptian application for membership 
in the League of Nations. HELEN FISHER 


Hold Fast the Middle Way, by John Dickinson. Boston, 
Little, Brown, 1935. $1.75 
Perhaps the most able defense so far of the New Deal 

philosophy. 

The Jeffersonian Tradition in American Democracy, by 
Charles Maurice Wiltse. Chapel Hill, University of 
North Carolina Press, 1935. $3.00 
Exhaustive and illuminating analysis of Jefferson’s 

views. 

Dictatorship and Democracy, by Sir John A. R. Marriott. 
New York, Oxford University Press, 1935. $3.75 


An elementary survey of governments from the days of 
Ancient Greece to Nazi Germany. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 45, SEPTEMBER 4, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lastiz Bugit, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MicHEtes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


VoL 


