ae eee ee | MAR 11 1944 



































Entered as 2nd class matter 
_ 2 General Library 
- 7— 1944 VieVors.ty of Michizan 
a Aan Arbor, Michigan 
ase 
-|| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
em, 
and 
al. 
> of An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
ion, FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
an- 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
ting | You. XXIII, No. 21 Marcu 10, 1944 
S at 
tly] ALLIES BACK RUSSIAN EFFORTS TO MAKE PEACE WITH FINLAND 
ittee | a the Finnish government postpones accept- withdraw immediately after accomplishing this task. 
r on ance of the Russian armistice terms as announced In conclusion, Moscow reserves for later discussion 
‘tay, | by the Moscow radio on February 29, Finland’s hope the question of reparations, demobilization of the 
airs, | that it will be able to bargain for a better offer is be- Finnish army, and disposal of the Petsamo region. 
1 of | coming more and more illusory. Russian planes have The Russian terms appear reasonable not only 
sses | attacked Finnish cities and ports and the Red Army when considered in the context of Finland’s partici- 
nof | is now within 100 miles of Tallinn, an Estonian pation in the war against the U.S.S.R., but alongside 
naval base from which the Russians might be able the demands Moscow has made on the Polish gov- 
ness | to control the Gulf of Finland. Moreover, both Brit- ernment-in-exile. This relative leniency may spring 
fice | ain and the United States, to whom the Finns have in part from the fact that a lesser degree of animosity 
‘om- | long looked for intervention, are presenting a united has historically characterized Russo-Finnish relations 
irec- ) front with the U.S.S.R. In his latest speech Prime than has been true of the Russians and Poles. But the 
Af- | Minister Churchill endorsed Russia's view that it has chief reason must be sought in the Red Army’s view 
De- | the “right to reassurance against further attacks from of military strategy. Its experience in this war has 
Xela- | the West,” and early in February Secretary of State indicated that Poland is the natural battleground for 
tters | Hull reiterated his advice to the Finns to get out of a grand assault on the Soviet Union, while Finland 
s E.} the war at once. is valuable to an enemy only in blocking Russian 
> the RUSSIA’S TERMS. Judged by the fact that the supply lines and launching localized attacks. The 
‘icul- | Finns participated in the siege of Leningrad and al- strategic interpretation of the Moscow terms is borne 
ye as | lowed the Germans to use their northern port of out by the fact that in 1940 the Russians handed back 
: the | Petsamo in preying on Anglo-American supply routes Petsamo to the Finns while now, after the port has 
ffice. | to Murmansk, the proposed Russian armistice terms figured prominently in blocking the routes of Allied 
pay- | seem moderate indeed. No call for “unconditional supplies to Murmansk, Moscow reserves it as a sub- 
ublic | surrender’’ is made and no request for changes in the ject of later negotiations. 
nfor- | present Finnish government is included, although THE FINNS’ OBJECTIONS. Despite the mod- 
rove | the Russians indicate they would welcome a more erate character of the Russian demands and the enor- 
e in- | friendly cabinet in Helsinki. The proposals provide, mous military pressure being brought to bear on 
vcies. | first, that the Russo-Finnish border be left as estab- the Finns, the government in Helsinki continues to 
> the | lished in 1940, following the “winter war.” This raise numerous objections to Moscow’s stipulations. 
ative { means that the whole of the Karelian Isthmus—in- For one thing, the Finns dread being cut off from Ger- 
note | cluding Finland’s second largest city, Viborg, and its man supplies of food and fuel, and fear that their 
ypose | famous Mannerheim Line fortifications—as well as country will become a battleground for the German 
inted | the Finnish coast of Lake Ladoga would become part and Russian armies, as the Nazis may fight to defend 
to be | of the U.S.S.R. The Russians also demand that Fin- their access to vital Finnish supplies. Probably the 
utters | land break off relations with Germany and intern most important reason for the Finnish government's 
tions Nazi forces, estimated at seven divisions, in northern hesitation is its fear that once the Russians have oc- 
f the , Finland. If, however, the Finns need help in dispos- cupied Finland they will remain permanently. This 
2 ing of the Germans, they can call on the Red Army, distrust of the Soviet Union dates from the period 


on the explicit understanding that the Russians will 


when the Finns were included in the Tsarist Empire, 

















and has been the keystone of Finland’s foreign policy 
since the republic was established in 1917. In their 
struggle against both Russian domination and the in- 
fluence of the Bolsheviks, Finnish Nationalists—con- 
sisting for the most part of the nobility and mer- 
chants—obtained German aid. During the succeed- 
ing years, Finland looked at various times to the 
Scandinavian and Western nations or to Germany for 
support against the U.S.S.R. Now that the Soviet 
Union has emerged as the strongest military and 
political power in this area, Finnish foreign policy 
can no longer rest on its traditional basis but must 
seek a new orientation. Such a modification in policy 
might, perhaps, be made along the lines followed by 
President Benes of Czechoslovakia, who believes that 
the best interests of his country can be preserved only 
by close friendship with both the Soviet Union and 
the Western powers instead of by playing the latter 
against the U.S.S.R. 

STAKE OF ALL UNITED NATIONS. Although 
getting Finland out of the war is of primary con- 
cern to the Russians and Finns, this event would have 
significance for the other United Nations as well. Mil- 
itarily, removal of the German troops from Finland 
and a shortening of the eastern front would release 
Red Army units for service elsewhere—perhaps for 
a thrust against the Baltic states in a move that might 
serve as a corollary to Anglo-American attacks in 
Western Europe this spring. Politically, the results 
for the United Nations as a whole would also be 
far-reaching, since Finland’s conclusion of peace 


JAPAN TIGHTENS HOME FRONT AS OUTER DEFENSES CRUMBLE 


Japan’s rulers are leaving few stones unturned in 
their attempts to cope with present difficulties and 
to prepare for new war problems of still greater 
seriousness. Under measures announced in Tokyo on 
March 4, total mobilization of all high school and 
college students will take place; school and college 
buildings will be made available as military store- 
houses, hospitals or air raid shelters; women will be 
subject to labor mobilization; and important new air 
raid precautions will be initiated. Food consumption 
and luxury activities are to be curtailed, and all after- 
noon and evening papers discontinued. 

ADDED POWER FOR TOJO. These moves are 
designed to help tighten up the war apparatus. They 
are part of a series of significant internal develop- 
ments during the past month, including the replace- 
ment of three Cabinet Ministers (Agriculture and 
Commerce, Finance, and Transportation and Com- 
munications), the removal of the Army and Navy 
Chiefs of Staff, and the announcement of the largest 
budget in Japanese history, requiring sharp increases 
in taxes and war savings. The main objectives of cur- 
rent policy would seem to be to further centralize 
Japanese economic and political life; to prepare for 


Page Two 























———— 


might be expected to have repercussions in Bulgaria 
Rumania and Hungary, where losses on the eastey 
front and from Anglo-American air attacks are jp. 
creasing dissatisfaction with Axis domination. More 
over, Britain and the United States might expect tp 
cooperate with the U.S.S.R. in applying armistic 
terms to Finland on the basis of the precedent fo 
joint action established by the Mediterranean Com. 
mission and emphasized by President Roosevelt's ag. 
nouncement on March 3 that Russia would secure , 
third of the Italian navy. However, it must be recog. 
nized that American neutrality toward Finland may 
be a complicating factor in our participation in the 
ultimate Finnish settlement. 

The Soviet Union’s reference to reparations focuses 
attention on an important issue of the forthcoming 
peace that has thus far received little attention ig 
this country. That the U.S.S.R. expects enemy nations | 
to repair the damage and destruction wrought by 
their armies comes as no surprise, for last fall Pro. 
fessor Varga, a leading Russian economist, estimated 
that the Soviet Union would have a claim of $15 
billion against Germany alone. But it is in Moscow’ 
proposed armistice terms for Finland that reparations 
are for the first time applied to a nation other than 
Germany. Remembering the difficulties that arose 
from efforts to collect $32 billion from Germany 
after World War I, all the Allies will need to work 
out a united policy on reparations lest this question 
again lead to economic chaos. 

WINIFRED N. HADSsEL 





mass air raids on Japanese cities; to secure maximum 
labor power for essential production, especially of 
ships and planes; to eliminate all unnecessary eco 
nomic activity; and to impress on the general popw: ‘ 
lation the full gravity of Japan’s military position. 
One of the important by-products of the process has 
been a further development of the power of Premier 
Tojo who so far appears to have successfully “passed 
the buck” for all difficulties to his political and mil 
itary associates. | 
Especially significant is the change in propaganda | 
inside Japan. As is well known, the Japanese author 
ities—although frequently speaking of a “crisis” in 
general terms—for a long time sought to hide from| 
their people the blows that the United Nations were | 
inflicting in the Pacific. Now this policy is being} 
modified, and the people have been told a few of the 
details of military developments, notably in the com 
muniqué of February 21, admitting the loss of cruis 
ers, destroyers, transports and planes at Truk, and 
that of February 26, announcing the loss of 6,500 








Japanese on Kwajalein and Roi in the Marshalls. / 


Apparently the government has decided that the en | 
tire truth can no longer be kept from the country. 

















































aa ww) = 


— 
aria 
Stery 
fe ip. 
More. 


AStice 
it for 


ure 4 
evog. 
| may 
n the 


USES 
ming 
on in 
tions 
ht by 
- Pro 
nated 
$150 
cow's 
ations » 
than 
arose 
many 





work 
estion 


SEL 


imum 
lly of 
7 €C0- 
popu: 5 
1t10N. 
ss has 
emier 
assed 


1 mil- | 





ganda | 
athor- 
is” in 
from | 
| wert | 
being } 
of the 
COM: 
cruis 
, and 
6,500 
shalls. / 
he ef: 


untry. 





————e 
— 


There is also some reason to suspect that growing 
pular concern over the military situation may have 
helped to bring about the change. 

DISAGREEMENT IN TOKYO? However diffi- 
cult it may be to judge the temper of the Japanese 
people, signs are certainly not lacking of differences 
within Japan’s ruling circles. The Cabinet shake-up 
and the dismissal of the Chiefs of Staff are sugges- 
tive of deep disagreement over war policy. Japan’s 
leaders are presumably doing some hard thinking 
about how to anticipate future attacks and how to 
prolong hostilities in the hope that the United States 
will become war-weary and accept a negotiated peace. 
This is clearly a fruitful field for official disagree- 
ment, especially since many Tokyo officials must be 
wondering whether their own country will not suc- 
cumb to war-weariness first. 

Although, in comparison with the European war, 
the Pacific conflict is still in an early stage, the 
ground is already being knocked from under some 
of the alarmist conceptions circulated about Japan 
not so many months ago. No one, for example, any 
longer suggests that it will be necessary to fight for 
every inch of ground on the road to Tokyo, since it 
is indisputably clear that, with the overwhelming air 
and sea power made possible by American produc- 
tion, important island areas can be passed by in our 
forward push through Pacific waters. The United 
States fleet, instead of being restricted to a rather 
small ocean radius by the necessity of returning fre- 
quently to rear bases, can now carry its bases with it 
for considerable periods of time. The development of 
the “fleet train,” involving tankers, ammunition and 
supply ships, Ioating drydocks and other elements 
required for rcpairs and replenishment of fuel and 
materials, gives our fleet a phenomenal mobility. 

RE-VIEWING THE JAPANESE SOLDIER. Our 
conception of the Japanese soldier is also being 
changed by the course of events. His bravery, de- 





Page Three 





What is the Allied stake in Yugoslavia? What are 
the roots-of Yugoslavia’s internal conflict? What 
has Axis occupation meant? What are the Parti- 
sans’ goals? What is the position of the govern- 
ment-in-exile? What are the prospects for Balkan 
federation? 


THE STRUGGLE FOR YUGOSLAVIA 
by Winifred N. Hadsel 


25c 


March 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















aaeneel —— 





termination and formidable military qualities remain 
unquestioned, but he is very different from the super- 
man who, we were told, would never crack or sur- 
render. A London Times report of January 8 from 
the New Guinea front declares of the Japanese pri- 
vate: “He is extraordinarily dependent upon his offi- 
cers and very much at a loss when, as has happened 
more than once in this theatre, all his officers are 
killed. On such occasions he huddles together with 
his fellows and seems to be deprived of all power of 
action and decision.” And on Kwajalein veteran 
American infantrymen, with previous experience in 
the Aleutians, were said to have been convinced that 
most of the Japanese soldiers would have surrendered 
had it not been for the opposition of their officers 
and a few determined regulars. 

This testimony that enemy troops do not possess 
an indestructible morale offers a basis for a realistic, 
although not a complacent, view of the Far Eastern 
war. We still have a long way to go in Asia, but we 
are clearly going there at a faster pace than anyone 
could have anticipated two years ago. The progress 
that is being made, however, places new responsibil- 
ities on United Nations policy-makers, for it is be- 
coming increasingly necessary to pay attention to the 
political aspects of the war with Japan. As long as 
Japan seemed to many to be an unbreakable political 
unit, there was no strong compulsion to think of the 
Japanese people as an important element in future 
developments. Now a new phase of the war is ap- 
proaching when, under the impact of mass bombings, 
Japan’s common man may assume considerable politi- 
cal significance. Plainly, it is necessary for the United 
Nations to arrive, so far as events permit, at more 
concrete conclusions about future policy toward 
Japan. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 





Pius XII on World Problems, by James W. Naughton, S.J. 
New York, America Press, 1943. $2.00 
Useful analysis of the Pope’s pronouncements by subject 
with workable index. 


A Professor at Large, by Stephen Duggan. New York, 
Macmillan, 1943. $3.50 
The long-time head of the Institute of International 
Education writes interestingly of efforts to create among 
people of different countries a better understanding of 
each other and each other’s culture. 


Peace and Reconstruction: A Catholic Layman’s Approach, 
by Michael O’Shaughnessy. New York, Harper, 1948. 
$2.00 
Bases his hopes for social justice on the Papal Encycli- 

cals and on many years of practical business experience in 

the United States and abroad. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 21, Marco 10, 1944 Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dgan, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Se isi 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





oa 


— 
rr to 
Wee ca 


— 





oe Le De we, 





= ry 
a a ae 


Washington News Letter 





stbbes, 











Marcu 6.—On March 11, 1941 President Roose- 
velt signed ‘“‘an Act to Promote the Defense of the 
United States’ —the lend-lease law. On March 11, 
1943, after affirmative votes of 407 to 6 in the House 
and 82 to O in the Senate, lend-lease was extended 
for one year, to June 30, 1944. Now Congress is con- 
sidering a resolution authorizing the Act's extension 
for a second time, and hearings are being held be- 
fore the House Foreign Affairs Committee. Chairman 
Leo T. Crowley of the Foreign Economic Admin- 
istration, the agency administering the Act, told the 
committee on March 1 that lend-lease aid up to 
December 31, 1943 totaled slightly less than $20 bil- 
lion, or about 14 per cent of our defense and war 
expenditures since the Act went into force. 

WHAT LEND-LEASE SETTLEMENT? Con- 
gressional renewal of lend-lease is taken for granted. 
Chairman Bloom of the House Foreign Affairs Com- 
mittee expects the hearings to end this week or early 
next week, and the House will debate the bill soon 
afterwards. Some Republican members of the 
House have prepared amendments aimed at restrict- 
ing the President's authority to determine the benefits 
which the United States shall receive in return for 
distributing goods under lend-lease. Section 3, para- 
graph (b), of the Act states: ‘The terms and con- 
ditions upon which any such foreign government re- 
ceives any aid authorized . . . shall be those which 
the President deems satisfactory, and the benefit to 
the United States may be payment or repayment in 
kind or property, or any other direct or indirect bene- 
fit which the President deems satisfactory.” 

President Roosevelt in his Report to Congress on 
Lend-Lease Operations for the year ended March 11, 
1942 listed these four benefits: 1. Direct military as- 
sistance to American security which results from the 
fight our Allies are waging against the common 
enemy; 2. Reciprocal aid we receive from our Allies 
(which, according to Chairman Crowley of FEA, 
totaled $1,500,000,000 by September 30, 1943); 3. 
Possible return to us of goods sent out on lend-lease; 
4. Realization of the objectives set forth in Article 
VII of the Master Agreement, which envisions “mu- 
tually advantageous’’ economic collaboration among 
nations after the war. The House and Senate Com- 
mittee Reports on lend-lease extension, of February 
26 and March 10, 1943, respectively, accepted the 
President's catalogue of benefits; and the catalogue is 
safe from enlargement this year unless Congress 
enacts restrictive amendments proposed by critics of 


FOR VICTORY °* 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


the Administration. Representative Vorys, Republi. | 
can, of Ohio, is considering offering an amendmen 
to change the law’s title to “Mutual War Aid Act,” 
which is innocuous in itself but dangerous for the 
Administration in that, if it were accepted, pro. 
ponents of amendments modifying Section 3 (b) 
might find it easier to get consideration. | 

Even tentative contemplation by Congressmen of 
restrictive amendments shows a present concern for 
the nature of the governmental economic settle. 
ment that will follow the war. President Roose. 
velt announced on March 3 that Under Secretary of 
State Edward R. Stettinius, Jr., will take part in eco. 
nomic and political talks in London affecting the 
United States and Britain. Press reports said that dis. 
cussion of agreements that might be reached ynder 
Article VII of the Master Agreement was on Mr. 
Stettinius’ agenda. Congress will of course reserve 
the right to pass on proposals to implement Article } 
VII. “The form chosen for any particular proposal in 
this field will follow normal constitutional practice,” 
the House Foreign Affairs Committee declared in its 
1943 lend-lease report. The Committee also said that 
“payment in gold or in goods has in the past proved 
self-defeating and destructive, and would after this / 
war seriously interfere with the achievement of the 
conditions of world economic order on which the 
prosperity of this country largely depends.” 

AID TO BRITAIN AND RUSSIA. Britain and 
Russia have been the chief beneficiaries of lend-lease. 
Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson told the House 
Foreign Affairs Committee on March 3: “The > 
U.S.S.R. ... is to a substantial degree dependent upon 
the United States in maintaining her lines of com 
munication” by the transportation equipment pro- 
vided under lend-lease. Administrator Crowley said 
that the lend-lease shipments to Russia up to Decem- | 
ber 31, 1943 included 170,000 trucks; 33,000 jeeps; 
25,000 other military vehicles; 4,700 tanks and tank 
destroyers; 100,000 submachine guns; 1,350,000 tons 
of steel; 384,000 tons of aluminum, copper and other 
metals; $400,000,000 worth of industrial equipment; \ 
7,800 planes; 740,000 tons of aviation gasoline and 
other petroleum products; and 145,000 tons of pe / 
troleum refinery equipment. Shipments to Britain im- 
cluded 3,900 planes; $460,000,000 worth of aircraft 
engines and parts; aviation gasoline; 4,800,000 tons 
of steel; 460,000 tons of non-ferrous metals and 
other essential raw and fabricated materials. 

BLAIR BOLLES 




















19 


