are! 


ere Mr 
5 of the 
»ccupied 
on Sep. 
r all of 
on Sep. 
2 bon 


ak with 
ell arise 
as been 
he war, 
ing for 
ort and 
inted in 
S to Co- 
because 
ines Op- 


ippease- 
cording 
rcles in 
Dakar. 
or Gen- 
Pétain- 
denied 
ar. The 
Pen pre- 
akar by 


to our 


ot want 
e inter- 
ent has 
seorges 
guaran- 
an pos- 
tish got 
sought 
horities 
1 being 


f which 
as noti- 
-_lessen- 
Seneral 
nt over 


AOTT 


A 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
De 


I a ses snes e BI shica . tiwee 
Wea Ves Sa hy Oa mC UL Zan wiorary 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Polity Association’ 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


VoL. XXI, No. 50 


Ocroser 2, 1942 


CRISIS FORESEEN IN OCCUPIED EUROPE THIS WINTER 


ROWING unrest in France and the British raid 

on Oslo marked last week the increase of re- 
sistance in the German-occupied countries. This re- 
sistance is inspired not only by the suppression of 
civil liberties, the seizure of vital food supplies, and 
the drafting of men into the German armies, but 
also by recent German efforts to use laborers from 
the occupied areas in local Nazi-controlled industries 
and German factories. Approximately 4,000,000 for- 
eign laborers are now employed in Germany, and 
many more are to join them this winter. Various 
methods have been devised by the Germans and their 
puppet governments to supply German factories 
with manpower. Besides brute force, the Nazis have 
resorted to more subtle means, such as the creation 
of unemployment in the home country by closing 
down factories, special food rations for persons em- 
ployed in war factories, payment of seemingly high 
wages to “volunteers,” and subjection of those who 
do not volunteer to unfavorable working conditions 
at home. 

FRENCH LABOR SITUATION ACUTE. French 
opposition to the labor policy of the Germans and 
their French ‘‘collaborators’” is assuming growing 
proportions. Increased violence in the south of 
France was reported to represent a protest against 
the labor laws of the Vichy government. On Septem- 
ber 26 Premier Pierre Laval announced that 20,000 
French specialists were already in Germany and more 
would be sent within the next few months. Con- 
troversy over the labor situation, however, did not 
seem to be the cause of last weekend’s French Cab- 
inet crisis, in which Laval ousted Jacques Benoist- 
Mechin from his positions of Secretary of State and 
head of the Tri-Color Legion, which has been re- 
cruiting men for the German Army in Russia. 
Benoist-Mechin, who had been in the Cabinet since 
January 1941, and has been known as one of the most 
active collaborators in the Vichy régime, seems to 


have been dismissed because of his ambition to 
usurp Laval’s place in the government. Both of 
Benoist-Mechin’s former posts have been assumed 
by Laval. 

NEED FOR AID TO OCCUPIED AREAS. With 
the German labor-recruiting system in full swing 
and the advent of the fourth winter of the war threat- 
ening additional privations, the Allies must give 
definite encouragement to anti-Nazis in the occupied 
areas if they are to retain their aid in defeating the 
Axis. Otherwise desperate need for food and em- 
ployment may force increasing numbers of people 
in the conquered countries into cooperation with the 
Nazis, at least to the extent of working for the Ger- 
man war machine. The occupied countries, more- 
over, may need to be bolstered against a new propa- 
ganda attack from Germany. In an obvious effort to 
win European support, German Propaganda Minis- 
ter Goebbels wrote in Das Reich recently that “no- 
body in Germany has ever proclaimed as a war aim 
the utter destruction or economic liquidation of a 
conquered enemy. Germans never forget that Euro- 
pean nations after the war will have to live together 
in a newly arranged sphere of interest.” 

ALLIED POLICY OF ENCOURAGEMENT. 
That the Allies are acutely conscious of the crisis in 
the occupied countries is indicated by recent attempts 
to give special encouragement to the forces of re- 
sistance. The most spectacular of these was the 
R.A.F.’s daylight raid on Oslo on September 26; 
The raid was timed as a rude interruption of prep- 
arations for a meeting of the Nasjonal Samling; 
Premier Vidkun Quisling’s Nazi party. With care- 
ful precision the bombers aimed at the party’s meet- 
ing place and at the building which houses the 
archives of the Gestapo—the latter move being 
clearly intended to disrupt the German system of 
espionage in Norway. The attack’ on the Norwegian 
capital was reported by persons in London who are 


in contact with the homeland to have sent “a thrill 
of joy through the population.” Another effort to 
encourage resistance in the occupied countries was 
made by the Earl of Selborne, British Minister of 
Economic Warfare. Speaking for the government 
over the B.B.C. on September 26, he urged the 
peoples under the control of the Axis to slow down 
transportation by “millions” of minor delays. This 
request seemed to mark a reversal in Allied policy, 
for in the past spontaneous actions have been 
definitely discouraged because of the great losses of 
life that they entailed. 

Continued bombing of the continent by Allied 


aircraft is also an attempt to give fresh hope of 


victory to the conquered peoples. France, the Neth- 
erlands, the Balkans, and Germany are being sys- 
tematically attacked by air, and British spokesmen 
pointed out that the longer nights of the fall and 
winter would enable them to increase their already 
large-scale attacks. In a further attempt to raise the 
morale of occupied Europe, renewed promises of 
food, medicines, fuel, and clothing immediately 
after the war ends are being made by various Allied 
leaders. This is undoubtedly a reference to the 
work that is being done by the British committee 


Page Two 


——e 
——— 


headed by Sir Frederick Leith-Ross, which has been 
working since last January on plans for the repro. 
visioning of Europe as soon as the war is over, 
Hopes that this day of relief is not far off have not 
been specifically encouraged, but British broadcasts 
advertising the imminence of a new offensive by the 
United Nations have been continued, the French be. 
ing told they would be advised in time to give their 
full assistance. 


OCCUPIED “FRONT” AND SECOND FRONT. 
Although the Allies are giving the occupied countries 
various forms of encouragement to continue and inten- 
sify their resistance, the most effective means of accom- 
plishing this end would be the establishment of a 
successful front on the continent. A definite military 
success would be concrete proof to the long-suffering 
peoples of Europe that the Allies are winning, and 
that all possible sacrifices in behalf of their victory 
are worth while. The realization that, in the last 
analysis, only this kind of action is going to enlist 
the all-out cooperation of the occupied areas spurs 
the Allies to prepare for the opening of a second 
front as soon as that is militarily possible. 


WINIFRED NELSON 


NEW SUPPLIES FOR CHINA VIA INDIA AND RUSSIA 


A brief Chungking report that two substitute 
routes for the closed Burma Road are in “full readi- 
ness” suggests that, although the fighting in East 
Central China filled last summer's headlines, events 
of considerable significance occurred elsewhere. The 
meager supplies transported by plane from India 
into China's’ southwest are, it is said, to be aug- 
mented and even exceeded by a flow of American 
goods by way of Iran and the Caspian Sea, or India 
and Afghanistan, to Soviet railways, which will car- 
ry them to the Northwest Highway for a trip of 
more than 2,000 miles to China. Since these are very 
long routes, involving the rail, sea and road services 
of several countries, China’s supply problem will re- 
main a serious one, even if certain short cuts are de- 
veloped. Yet the new links, especially via northwest 
India, have the great merit of lying beyond the pres- 
ent effective range of Axis bombers. On the other 
hand, their full use requires at least expansion of the 


As a guidepost for public discussion, read these 
official pronouncements— 
U.S. DECLARATIONS ON POST-WAR 
RECONSTRUCTION 


with an introduction by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


September 15 issue of ForEIGN Poticy REPORTS 
Reports are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


already overcrowded Indian railway system (this 
was recommended by the American technical mis- 
sion to India last spring) and, above all, develop: 
ment of the Chinese northwest itself, particularly 
the Soviet-Chinese highway. 

PLANS DISCUSSED IN EARLY SUMMER. 
This is probably the most important single reason 
for the unusual activity of high Chinese officials, 
economic experts and military men in the north- 
west ever since last July. On July 16 it was an- 
nounced in Washington, at a time when grave con- 
cern was being expressed about the danger to China, 
that Lauchlin Currie, President Roosevelt's Admin- 
istrative Assistant on Far Eastern matters, had ar- 
rived in the Chinese capital. On the next day 
Chungking reported that its Minister of Economic 
Affairs had inspected the Northwest Highway and 
that supplies were flowing in by that route. Only a 
few days later the Pacific War Council in Washing- 
ton discussed the Chinese position. Emerging from 
this meeting, New Zealand Minister Nash declared 
that the question of supplies for China had been 
settled: “We know how to get the stuff in, how 
much and when, and we're going to get it in.” Far 
from being mere coincidences, all these events ap- 
pear to have been part of a general picture, whose 
outlines only now begin to be perceived. 

At the same time, Chungking took steps toward 
the further economic development and _ political 
subordination of the northwest, consisting of the 


spaces 
of irri 
cultura 
of the 
author 
constr 
provin 
able s 
the Cl 
confer 
messa; 
that tl 
resour 
after t 
on Sey 
a mor 
PO. 
On th 
opmet 
had a 
affairs 
vast a 
lion 
two a 
estim: 
peop! 
nomi 
to Cl 
appez 
Chun 
been 
cerns 
milit 
Bord. 
Shen: 
indic: 
tion | 
and t 
withi 
relax 
war 
ent, | 
of di 
Or 
the 1 
its \ 
econ 


FORE! 
Headq 
second 


——— 


is been 
repro- 
$ Over, 
ive not 
adcasts 
by the 
ich be- 
e their 


ONT. 
untries 
| inten- 
accom- 
t of a 
ulitary 
ffering 
g, and 
victory 
1e last 
enlist 
) Spurs 
second 


SON 


(this 
iL mis- 
velop: 
cularly 


(MER. 
reason 
ficials, 
north- 
as an- 
fe con- 
China, 
\dmin- 
ad af- 
ct day 
NOMIC 
ry and 
Only a 
ishing- 
r from 
»clared 
1 been 
1. how 
. Far 
its ap- 
whose 


toward 
olitical 
of the 


a Page Three 


five provinces of Shensi, Kansu, Ninghsia, Sinkiang 
and Chinghai, which in varying degrees have been 
on the periphery of the centrally controlled areas. 
Economically this sparsely populated region of vast 
spaces is among the most backward in China, for lack 
of irrigation and trees long ago led to a serious agri- 
cultural decline in many sections. In the course 
of the war, moreover, the attention of the central 
authorities has so far been concentrated on the re- 
construction of the southwest, especially the capital 
rovince of Szechwan. It is therefore of consider- 
able significance that, in the first week of August, 
the Chinese Institute of Engineers held its annual 
conference in Lanchow, the capital of Kansu. A 
message from the Generalissimo told the engineers 
that their next great assignment was to develop the 
resources of the northwest. It was apparently shortly 
after this that Chiang himself visited the region, for 
on September 16 his return to Chungking following 
a month’s trip was announced. 


POLITICAL CONTROL OF NORTHWEST. 
On the next day the political aspect of these devel- 
opments was emphasized in the news that Chungking 
had appointed a special commissioner for foreign 
affairs to reside at Tihwa, capital of Sinkiang. That 
vast area of approximately three-quarters of a mil- 
lion square miles, with a population of less than 
two and a half millions (of whom 90 per cent are 
estimated to belong to the non-Chinese-speaking 
peoples of Central Asia), has long been closer eco- 
nomically and politically to the Soviet Union than 
to China. At the same time a slight improvement 
appears to have taken place in relations between 
Chungking and the Chinese Communists, which have 
been very strained for the past two years. This con- 
cerns the northwest because the main Communist 
military, political and economic base lies in the 
Border Area, consisting of a number of districts in 
Shensi, Kansu and Ninghsia. Fragmentary reports 
indicate that the Chinese press is paying less atten- 
tion to friction with the Communists than previously, 
and that the unofficial Central blockade against areas 
within which the Communists are active has been 
relaxed, at least to the extent of allowing foreign 
war relief funds through. There is no sign at pres- 
ent, however, that a more thoroughgoing settlement 
of differences is likely. 

One thing is clear—the increased importance of 
the northwest for transport purposes is bringing in 
its wake new steps toward the extension of the 
economic and political power of the Central govern- 


ment and the official party, the Kuomintang. The 
obstacles that stand in the way must not be mini- 
mized, in view of China’s economic weaknesses (for 
example, the lack of machinery and railroad-building 
equipment), but it would be equally short-sighted 
not to note that the semi-modernization which has 
already taken place in the southwest is now being 
extended to a new region. 
LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


NEW RESEARCH STAFF MEMBER 
The Association announces with pleasure the ap- 
pointment to the Research Department on Septem- 
ber 1 of Miss Winifred Nelson. Miss Nelson received 
her A.B. and M.A. at Nebraska University. 


ALL-DAY FORUM — OCTOBER 3rd 

Additional speakers at the FPA’s all-day Forum— 
“United Today for Tomorrow’’—on Saturday, Octo- 
ber 3, at The Waldorf-Astoria, will be Dr. Victor 
Hoo, former Chinese Minister Plenipotentiary to 
Switzerland; Dr. Luis Quintanilla, Minister Pleni- 
potentiary and Counselor of Embassy from Mexico; 
Joseph Clark Baldwin, New York member of the 
House of Representatives; Oscar S. Cox, Assistant 
Solicitor General, attached to the Office of Lend- 
Lease Administration; Arthur S. Flemming, of the 
War Manpower Commission; and Jack G. Scott, of 
the Office of Defense Transportation. As previously 
announced in the BULLETIN, Viscount Halifax, Sena- 
tor Warren R. Austin, and Mr. Elmer Davis have 
also accepted invitations to speak. 


They Were Expendable, by W. L. White. New York, Har- 

court Brace, 1942. $2.00 

An eloquent report, from the lips of four naval officers, 
of pitiful unpreparedness and unstinted heroism in the 
Battle for the Philippines. Should fill every American with 
a passionate desire to make good the expenditure of lives 
that a deeper understanding of world affairs and a greater 
readiness to sacrifice in time of peace might have rendered 
unnecessary. 


Oil, Blood and Sand, by Robert L. Baker. New York, Ap- 
pleton-Century, 1942. $2.50 
Especially valuable analysis of Axis moves in the Mid- 
dle East and what the United Nations have accomplished 
to keep the region’s invaluable oil out of Germany’s hands. 


The Japanese Enemy, by Hugh Byas. New York, Knopf, 
1942. $1.25 
A journalist, long resident in Tokyo, presents observa- 
tions on the Japanese mind, political system, and military 
strength—warning us not to underrate the enemy. 
The Disarmament Illusion, by Merze Tate. New York, Mac- 
millan, 1942. $4.00 
Valuable as a critical study of armament limitation pro- 
rosals up to 1907. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 50, Ocroner 2, 1942. 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


second-class matter December 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera Micuries Dean, Editor. Entered as 


», 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


National 


Three Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Te 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


is 
+ 4h 
; 


-° 
i 
it 
iV 
it 
a! 


oye Eee 
i 


oho 


1 
iH 


: I Washington News D ettet 


sibbes, 


Sept. 28.—The question of opening a second front 
this year—which Washington thought had been 
answered in the negative—was challengingly resur- 
rected by Wendell L. Willkie on September 26. 
President Roosevelt’s emissary declared in Moscow 
that “we. best can help our heroic Russian allies by 
establishing a second front,”’.and added that “we 
must not fail them because next summer may be too 
late.” This statement was. issued three days after 
Mr. Willkie had had a two-hour conference with 
Joseph Stalin, and presumably reflected the views of 
the Soviet Premier. : 

Coming from a man of Mr. Willkie’s eminence, 
who is not only the titular leader of the Republican 
party but also the personal representative of the 
President, such a plea is bound to strengthen public 
demand for the immediate opening of a second front. 
It certainly struck a responsive chord in Washington 
where, as in the rest of the country, there is great 
admiration for the heroic defenders of Stalingrad. 
Nevertheless, the prevailing view in responsible quar- 
ters in the capital appeared to be that a question of 
this character should be decided not on. grounds of 
sentiment, but of strict military expediency. 

NO MORAL OBLIGATION. Moscow press as- 
sertions that a moral commitment rests on the United 
States or Britain to undertake an invasion of the 
European continent are vigorously denied here. The 
official communiqué issued in London and Wash- 
ington on June 12, following the visit of Vyacheslav 
Molotov, Soviet Commissar for Foreign Affairs, to 
those capitals, that a “full understanding was reached 
in regard to the urgent tasks of creating a second 
front in 1942” was perhaps unfortunately worded, 
since it aroused unfounded expectations among the 
Russian people, as well as in Britain and the United 
States, that a major Anglo-American military effort 
would certainly be made in the West this year. It 
was then pointed out in Washington that this state- 
ment was not an unconditional pledge to open a 
second front under any and all circumstances. 

Early this summer it was reported that President 
Roosevelt favored an invasion of Europe, but that he 
was not in a position to overcome British objections 
since American troops were not present in sufficient 
numbers in Britain and Ireland to contribute anything 
like an equal share to the offensive. British opposi- 
tion to invasion at this time was doubtless reinforced 
by the outcome of the Dieppe raid. 

Many American and British military experts are 


frankly skeptical about the possibilities of a land 
invasion of Europe at present. To furnish much hel 
to the Russians, it is estimated that the attackin 
force would have to number some 500,000 men. It is 
doubted that the huge merchant fleet which would be 
required to transport and supply such a mass of men 
is available at a time when the United Nations’ need 
of shipping to send troops and munitions to all parts 
of the world is considered so great, and when the 
rate of ship sinkings is still high. 

MILITARY EXPEDIENCY THE TEST. On the 
other hand, it is recognized that an Anglo-American 
invasion of the continent, even if it should result in 
a bloody repulse, would be justified if it were the 
only means of keeping the Red Army in the field as 
an effective fighting force. Admittedly, there is much 
validity to the Russian argument that, if it is a tough 
task for the Anglo-Saxons to open a second front 
now, it would be a lot harder next year if the Soviet 
Union were to be forced out of the war. 

Some who favor a policy of realistic self-interest 
point out that the Soviet Union has not found it 
expedient to place air bases in Siberia at the disposal 
of American bombers for the purpose of straffing 
Japanese industrial centers—a course that would in- 
volve it in war with Japan. Mr. Willkie’s argyument, 
however, is that the opening of a second front is 
necessary not merely to help Russia, but to help 
Russia’s western Allies, and is thus a matter of self- 
interest and expediency for Britain and the United 
States. He contends that, despite the heroic efforts 
of the Russians at Stalingrad, the Red Army may be 
deprived of offensive power if the military situation 
deteriorates further. Hitler would then be free to 
divert his strength westward for an attack on the 
British Isles. Mr. Willkie’s challenge was promptly 
answered by Clement R. Attlee, British Deputy Prime 
Minister, in Ottawa on September 28, who said: 
“Our plans are carefully laid and do not need any 
public prodding.” By contrast, the London Times, 
often a mouthpiece of the government, in an editorial 
published on September 29, criticized the optimism 
of many Britishers regarding Russia, contended that 
time is running against the United Nations, and 
urged the opening of a second front without specify- 
ing its exact location. On the same day Mr. Churchill, 
in the House of Commons, emphatically disapproved 
of all speculation on the time and place of a second 
front. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


FOR VICTORY * BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


VOL. 


|= 


By 
u 
Ina! 
Stalir 
to fc 
front 
say a 
mate 
viet 
tive’ 
Unio 
the 1 
whic 
aid, 
on ti 
Rl 
men: 
rally 
sista: 
of tl 
the 
keen 
Mos 
stric 
mili 
agai 
sens 
and 
tiviz 
due 
host 


