


vhere 
com- 
nese, 
many 
‘ough 
uable 
's for 
; also 
many 
laced 


itted, 
‘ound 
pool 
30 to 
ission 
ns of 
SO as 
in ac- 
-moc- 
imple 
\mer- 
total- 
; fol- 
tons; 
astal, 
, 445 
‘fence 
ilized 


‘ gov- 


dged 
od by 
vould 
ywers 
rican 


NE 


at RIODICAL ROOF 
ENF! RAL Li 


in “Jt 


FOREIGN 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


MAY 15 194) 


x0) (Oban 310) 9B AUN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
You. XX, No. 30 May 16, 1941 
HITLER STRIVES TO UNITE EUROPE AGAINST U.S. AND BRITAIN 


— Rudolf Hess’ spectacular flight to Scot- 
land and the exchange of sharp air blows by 
Britain and Germany occupied the center of the in- 
emational stage, the Nazis speeded their efforts to 
consolidate the ‘‘new order’’ in Europe, in the hope 
of confronting the United States with a hostile bloc 
fom the Atlantic across Russia to the Pacific. Into 
sich a bloc the Nazis want to incorporate the few 
countries on the continent which, for a variety of 
reasons, have so far remained on the fringes of the 
“new order’’—unoccupied France, Spain, Turkey, and 
the Soviet Union. 


WILL FRANCE COLLABORATE WITH GER- 
MANY ? On May 7, following long and complicated 
negotiations in Paris between Vice Premier Admiral 
Darlan and the German occupying authorities, it was 
announced that the Reich had agreed to modify the 
amistice of June 17, 1940 in two respects. Communi- 
cation across the line of demarcation between occu- 
pied and unoccupied France is to be eased, and the 
ast of occupation is to be reduced from $8,000,000 
aday to $6,000,000. These concessions, which are de- 
«ribed by the Nazis as a first step, were accompanied 
by increasing German pressure on Marshal Pétain 
to cede strategic bases in French North Africa, 
and by reports of German “‘tourist’’ infiltration into 
French Morocco. Announcement of German con- 
tssions, moreover, coincided with a Vichy warning 
that any attempt by the United States—such as that 
suggested by Senator Pepper on May 6—to seize the 
French sea and air base of Dakar on the west coast 
f Africa would meet the same fate that befell the 
British and General de Gaulle, leader of ‘Free 
French” forces, when they attempted to land in Dakar 
last September. 

So far as can be determined from censored news. 
Marshal Pétain believes that the war will end with a 
Stalemate, and that in such an eventuality France 
might play an important rdle as intermediary between 





Germany, on the one hand, Britain and the United 
States on the other. By contrast, Admiral Darlan, who 
has been described as anti-British but not pro-Ger- 
man, believes in the probability of a total German vic- 
tory, and advocates close collaboration with Germany 
in the construction of a continental “new order.” As 
the possibility of American naval aid to Britain in- 
creased last week, French spokesmen in occupied 
France hinted that, if the United States entered the 
war, the conquered countries would unite under Ger- 
man leadership, since they would have no other 
means of preserving their existence. Collaboration 
for this purpose may have been discussed by Admiral 
Darlan in his interview with Hitler on May 12. 

Similar pressure was applied by Germany to Spain 
immediately on cessation of hostilities in the Balkans. 
On May 2 Foreign Minister Ramon Serrano Sufier de- 
nounced the “plutodemocracies” which, he claimed, 
had denied Spain “everything,” and pledged a for- 
eign policy in close association with “friendly pow- 
ers." This speech coincided with demands in the 
Spanish press for return of Gibraltar and French sur- 
render of part of Algeria. Immediately after Sufier’s 
denunciation of the “plutodemocracies” (which, in- 
cidentally, have been the principal source of food 
supply for Spain), General Franco effected a shake- 
up both of his cabinet and of provincial governments 
which was apparently intended to strengthen the con- 
trol of the military at the expense of Falange party 
politicians. The principal change was the appoint- 
ment of Colonel Valentin Galarza Morante of the 
army general staff, a close friend of General Franco, 
to the post of Minister of the Interior, held by Sufier 
before he became Foreign Minister, and since then 
occupied by one of his subordinates. 


“WAR OF NERVES” IN MOSCOW. At the 
other end of Europe, the Nazis are seeking to bring 
Turkey into the ‘new order’ through an economic 
treaty, and the return to Ankara on May 12 of Ger- 





ee er; 

















man Ambassador Franz von Papen, fresh from an 
interview with Hitler, may presage an accord between 
Germany and Turkey. Now that the Nazis occupy 
Greece, and have seized most of the important Greek 
islands close to Turkey, it becomes increasingly dan- 
gerous for the Turkish government to resist Nazi 
ressure unless it can obtain aid from Moscow. But 
in Moscow, as in Spain and France, a silent war of 
nerves is being waged. On May 6 it was announced 
that Joseph Stalin, hitherto Secretary-General of the 
Communist party, has assumed the post of Premier, 
succeeding Vyacheslav Molotov, who retains the 
post of Foreign Commissar. Since Molotov’s foreign 
policy was dictated by Stalin, this shift did not por- 
tend a new foreign “line” on the part of the Soviet 
government. It can be assumed, however, that in a 
world situation which is daily becoming more critical 
for the Soviet Union, as well as for other countries 
confronted with German threats, Stalin thought it 
advisable to formalize openly the powers of dictator 
that he has exercised since the death of Lenin in 1923. 
The Soviet Union is faced with the predicament 
that, if it does not collaborate with Germany, it may 
be subjected to German military pressure it is in no 
position to resist. The Pravda story of April 30 that 
12,000 German soldiers had landed in Finland—de- 
nied by Finnish and American sources — indicated 
Moscow's anxiety about reported Nazi plans for ulti- 
mate invasion of the U.S.S.R. Reliable sources claim 


Page Two 


that 60 German divisions are now massed on the | © 
viet border from the Baltic to the Black Sea. On Ma | 
8 the Soviet news agency, Tass, carefully denied thy| 








the U.S.S.R. has been massing troops and plang 
along its border with German-occupied Poland ap4 
Rumania, or that the Kremlin was negotiating with 
Iran for the use of air bases in that country, whid 
borders on Iraq. 

The Soviet Union, fearful of German attack, may 
once more reach an agreement with Germany, in the 
hope of staving off, for the time being, a Nazi thruy 
in the direction of the Ukraine or the Caucasian oj. 
fields. Under such an agreement, it is conceivable thy 
the Soviet Union (which on May 12 recognized th 
pro-Nazi government of Iraq, after withdrawing re. 
ognition from the Norwegian, Belgian and Yugo. 
slav governments) might be compensated fo, 
loss of influence in the Balkans and the Black Sq 
by a sphere of influence in Iran or even India. Sing 
the Soviet government has been consistently critica 
of Britain and the British Empire, even when it off 
cially opposed Germany, such a move would hold m 
element of surprise. A Soviet-German agreement re 
garding division of the spoils in the Near and Middle 
East, however, would not in any way preclude a sub 
sequent Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union, should 
that ultimately be regarded by Hitler as necessary fo 
fulfillment of his plans. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


UNCERTAINTY IN TOKYO? 


An extraordinary series of contradictions has 
marked the statements issued by official and un- 
official sources in Tokyo during recent weeks. While 
a considerable degree of uncertainty apparently 
exists in Japanese policy, it is difficult to believe that 
present circumstances will permit any basic shift in 
that policy, either as regards China or the south 
Pacific. 

ATTITUDES IN TOKYO. Since the end of April 
a number of conflicting articles and editorials 
from The Japan Times-Advertiser, English-language 
mouthpiece of the Foreign Office, have been widely 
quoted in the American press. On the one hand, this 
semi-official paper has lent its support to the pro- 
posal that Foreign Minister Matsuoka visit Washing- 
ton for peace talks with American officials, and has 
suggested that, since conquest of China does not ap- 





The wars in Europe, Africa and Asia are already 
shaping the future peace; the world of 1939 has 
vanished beyond recall; what is America’s place in 
the new world that is emerging? READ: 
TOWARD A NEW WORLD ORDER 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25¢ 


A NEW FOREIGN POLICY REPORT — OUT MAY 15 











pear feasible, the prospects of a settlement would k 
improved by a large-scale evacuation of occupied 
areas. On the other hand, it has outlined a world 
peace settlement of such drastic nature that it could 
only be predicated on a complete victory of the Japan 
Axis alliance. In the Pacific, for example, the pro 
posal suggests a reduction in the strength of the 
Hawaiian base, prohibition of American bases wes 
of Hawaii, ‘independence’ for the Netherlands ln 
dies and Indo-China, and the right of Japanese at 
visers to “rationalize” the economic policy of Paciit 
island areas—the whole arrangement to rest 0 
Anglo-American naval parity with the Japan-Axi 
bloc. This statement by the Times-Advertiser, how 
ever, might well be interpreted as an awkward essif 
in diplomatic bargaining, as the paper's general att: 
tude seems to reflect the Japanese conservatives’ hopt 
of reaching agreements both with China and ti 
United States. 


Despite the peace suggestions emanating fror 
some Tokyo circles, there is little evidence that t 
real exponents of Japanese foreign policy take the 
seriously. Mr. Kumataro Honda, Ambassador to 0 
Japanese-sponsored Nanking régime, was reporte 
on May 11 as declaring: “If there is any one wil 
over-eager for an early termination of the China 








Ent 


—| 


the § 

’n 

ed tha 
Planes 

nd and] 

1% with 
whic) 


k, may 
, 1M the 
i thrust 
ian oil. 
dle that 
zed the 


ing rec | 


Yu 

d a 
ck. Seg 
\. Since 
Critical 
“it off 
10ld no 
1ent re. 
Middle 
a sub 
should 
ary for 


)EAN 


nuld be 
cupied 
world 
t could 
Japan- 
1€ pio 
of the 
5 west 
nds In-! 
ese ad 
Pacific 
est on 
in-Axs 
* how 
d essa} 
‘al att 
s’ hope 
nd the 





 fr01 
hat 

€ thea 
to 
>porte 
e wit 
ina 









——— 
ea 





fit and the setting aside of Japan’s fundamental 
policy, hopes to conduct ‘direct negotiations’ with 
‘Chungking, he dreams a foolish’ dream.” Mr. Honda 
voices the authentic views of the Japanese military 
in China. The war news from the mainland gives 
jittle support to rumors that the Japanese forces of 
occupation are beginning to withdraw. Recent bom- 
bardments of Chungking and Kunming indicate that 
the season of air raids has again arrived, while a 
large-scale Japanese offensive is being conducted in 
the middle sections of the Yellow River valley. 

The regions of southeast Asia offer an even more 
crucial test of the actual objectives of Japanese policy. 
Here, too, the treaty agreements relating to Indo- 
China recently concluded at Tokyo show little evi- 
dence of retreat. Three agreements, signed on May 9 
and following in the main the terms of the March 11 
protocol, brought the Thai—Indo-China conflict to 
aformal close. The definitive treaty of peace between 
France and Thailand was underwritten by Japan, in 
return for which both signatories agreed in separate 
protocols with Tokyo not to enter arrangements with 
third powers directed against Japan. Even more sig- 
nificant were the two agreements for “economic col- 
laboration” between Japan and Indo-China signed 
at Tokyo on May 6 after four months of negotiation. 
Of these, the first is a general treaty of commerce and 
navigation, while the second is a trade agreement 
which reduces tariffs on Japanese products and gives 
Tokyo a virtual monopoly of Indo-China’s exports, 
notably rice, maize, rubber and minerals. The large 
excess Of Indo-Chinese exports which is foreseen 
cannot be transferred into foreign currencies, and 
will probably build up a considerable surplus of 
‘blocked yen.” Although neither treaty directly in- 
creases Japan’s military rights in the French colony, 
the economic stranglehold which the agreements give 
Japan leaves no leeway for an independent Indo- 
Chinese policy. 

THE JAPANESE-AMERICAN ISSUE. Although 
Tokyo is maintaining a firm front, there can be little 
doubt that a real conflict is occurring within Japan at 
the present time. During the past winter, the con- 
servative elements turned back the military-fascist 
drive for state control of industry, and finally placed 
Masatsune Ogura, a leading industrialist, in the Cab- 
inet to deal with the economic crisis. These elements 
have become much more outspoken, as indicated by 
Kokumin’s recent condemnation of the application of 
‘national socialist” ideas to Japan. They would now 
like to extend this come-back into the sphere of for- 
eign policy. Much was expected from the Soviet- 


Page Three 








Japanese pact, but after a month’s time little actual 
change has been registered in the situation, The 
United States has not been intimidated, nor has 
China’s resistance weakened. Neither Soviet nor Jap- 
anese troops have been withdrawn from the Man- 
churian frontier, and Soviet military supplies are still 
being sent to Chungking—a condition denounced by 
some Japanese groups as contrary to the existence of 
a neutrality pact. 

Under these circumstances, the conservatives have 
turned to the hope of an agreement with the United 
States. They would have had Foreign Minister Mat- 
suoka seek a settlement with Washington in person, 
if a visit could have been arranged. They fear that 
war between Germany and the United States is im- 
minent, and that such a conflict will force Japan to 
honor its obligation to aid Germany under the triple 
alliance. The bolder spirits in command of Japan’s 
foreign policy, however, point to the hard facts of the 
situation. After nearly four years of exhausting con- 
flict with China, can any peace agreement be con- 
cluded except on victorious terms? Yet a settlement 
in China is essential to an agreement with the United 
States, while this country would also insist that Japan 
forgo its ambitions in southeast Asia. Instead of sac- 
rificing the Axis alliance, the extremists argue, it is 
imperative to hold fast to it and trust that Germany's 
progress will eventually open up a path to complete 
Japanese victory in Asia. Weighing these alternatives, 
it is clear that the conservatives offer a case that is 
too weak to be generally accepted, despite the fact 
that its rejection may involve Japan in conflict with 
the United States. 

The lukewarmness displayed by Washington to- 
ward a Matsuoka visit is convincing evidence that the 
American authorities see little prospect of major Jap- 
anese concessions at this moment in the Far East. 
American aid to China is being increased, both 
through the dispatch of lease-lend materials and the 
formal establishment of machinery to handle the 
$50,000,000 fund to stabilize China’s currency. These 
measures, however, are being undertaken with con- 
siderable hesitation, notably in the case of the stabil- 
ization loan, which was originally authorized last 
November. Although scrap iron, steel and machinery 
shipments to Japan have sharply declined, large quan- 
tities of American oil are crossing the Pacific, and no 
curbs have been applied to imports from Japan. Such 
caution at this late date will almost certainly en- 
courage those elements in Tokyo which still hope that 
their objectives in Asia can be achieved with a mini- 


mum of risk. T. A. BISSON 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 30, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


May 16, 1941. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. 


Incorporated. National 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


B81 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


May 12.—With the war entering a crucial stage, 
Washington officials are taking stock of our own 
defense program. Published progress reports appear 
to bear out neither the high expectations of the op- 
timists, nor the worst fears of the pessimists. 

The optimists point to the acceleration in expendi- 
tures for national defense which are currently run- 
ning at about $1,000,000,000 a month as compared 
with $473,000,000 last December and $154,000,000 
a year ago. Production figures on some items of de- 
fense equipment are also encouraging. Light tanks 
(13 tons) are rolling off assembly lines at a monthly 
rate of over 100, which is expected to be doubled by 
the end of the year. Machine-gun production is well 
in advance of schedule: two new General Motors 
plants started operations last month, and two more 
are to be finished in June and July. By summer we 
shall also be producing as much powder for ammuni- 
tion as in 1918. 

The current output of the aircraft industry is par- 
tiularly encouraging in view of its disappointing 
performance earlier this year. About 60 per cent of 
the 1,427 planes delivered in April are believed to 
be combat types, and it is now expected that the in- 
dustry will surpass the goal of 18,000 aircraft for the 
entire year 1941. 

Critics, however, claim that this country has just 
begun to carry out the defense program. Out of total 
appropriations of almost $40,000,000,000 (includ- 
ing the Lease-Lend fund and pending appropriation 
bills), we have spent only $5,000,000,000 up to the 
present. Even the current rate of spending represents 
but one-seventh of our national income and is prob- 
ably only half the German outlay. While machine 
tool output compares favorably with that of previous 
years, it is still far from adequate in view of the re- 
quirements of the Lease-Lend program and the 
Army’s plans to spend $1,500,000,000 on another 
series of munitions plants sufficient to equip 4,000,- 
000 men. The published figures on plane production 
conceal the fact that the manufacture of heavy, four- 
motor bombers, urgently needed by Britain, is lag- 
ging badly, amounting, according to one source, to 
little more than 50 a month. The production of heavy 
ordnance is still disappointing. Of the five manufac- 
turers who have contracts for medium tanks (26 
tons), three have only just finished their first models. 
During the next four or five months, however, all of 
the 784 new defense plants launched during the past 





ten months at a total cost of over $2,000,000,099 
will come into production. 


The lag in the defense program is generally af 
tributed to four major defects: 


1. Lack of coordination and leadership. The OPM was 
originally expected to provide the unified direction needed 
for the defense effort. In actual practice its jurisdiction has 
been rather narrowly confined. Parts of the defense pro 
gram have been handled by a number of other agencies 
equal in rank to the OPM. Among them are the Defeng 
Housing Division; the National Mediation Board; the 
Transportation Division (sole remnant of the National De. 
fense Advisory Committee’s original organization) ; the 
Office of Price Administration and Civilian Supply; the 
Coordinator of Health, Welfare, Nutrition, Recreation and 
Related Activities; the Office for Coordination of Commer. 
cial and Cultural Relations between the American Re 
publics; and the newly created Division of Defense Aid 
Reports which will administer the Lease-Lend Act. In this 
complicated set-up conflicts in jurisdiction and_ policies 
which often arise, can be resolved only by-the President, 
who is already overworked. The Office of Emergency Man- 
agement, under which all defense agencies are grouped, 
can provide only administrative coordination. 


2. Inadequate Planning. Critics contend that the whole 
program is geared to a schedule which fails to appreciate 
the need for speed. Production requirements are said to 
have been repeatedly underestimated. Although the need 
for heavy bombers was long foreseen, the OPM late last 
year worked out a comparatively modest project under which 
the automobile manufacturers will begin, at the end of 
1941, to supplement the aircraft industry by turning out 
parts and sub-assemblies for about 200 two-motor and 
100 four-motor bombers a month. On May 5 President 
Roosevelt called on Secretary Stimson for a sharp increase 
in the production of heavy bombers. A long time will now 
be needed, however, to make additional facilities available 


3. Too much “business as usual.’ Interference with 


normal business is not considered sufficiently drastic in many ) 


quarters. The application of priorities, for example, has been 
too cautious. Despite a shortage of steel, no mandatoy 
priorities have been instituted for this vital defense product 
Similarly, the Maritime Commission has failed to invoke it 
power to requisition all American ships, although the ship 
ping shortage appears to justify such a measure. 

4. Failure to Appreciate Seriousness of Emergency. \s 
the opinion of many Washington officials, the country # 
large has not awakened sufficiently to the gravity of the im 
mediate emergency. Labor and management put wages and 
profits ahead of the imperative need for an uninterruptet 
and rapid expansion in defense production. Some observers 
believe that the vital “spark” will be lacking as long as We 
confine ourselves to measures “short of war.’’ Others, how 
ever, fear that full participation in war would only aggravate 
national dissension and disunity, and thus retard production 


Under these circumstances, Washington is hoping 
that the President will soon give the country a cleat 


lead. JoHN C. deWrLDE 








| 


VOL. 


| 


