I} 


1a- 


OS- 
ut 
lly 
ri. 
vat 

to 
nst 


ree 
ric- 
ces 
ins 
ide 
er: 
the 
oly, 


eat 
und 


-Vi- 


ad- 


itor 

on 
nts 
gin 
lent 
| be 
find 


very 


pre- 
the 
oon 
y of 
rest 
ons, 
sion 
1Sist 
y on 
for 
 £e- 
ople 
CO- 
ever 
VE 


ational 


Editor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVIII, No. 12 


JANUARY 13, 1939 





AMERICA LOOKS ABROAD 
by 
Frederick L. Schuman and George Soule 
What program will guarantee peace for America? Here is 
a critical examination of the central problems confronting 
American foreign policy today. The two authors represent 


different points of view; each has sought to face realities; 
and both have submitted specific recommendations. 


World Affairs Pamphlets, No. 3 
(FPA membership covers this series) 


25 cents a copy 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 




















i 


GOVERNMENT CRISES: CHINA vs. JAPAN 





AS the new year opened, the strain of prolonged 

Sino-Japanese hostilities was expressed in gov- 
ernmental difficulties and changes both at Tokyo 
and Chungking. The readjustments gave increased 
authority to those elements in both countries which 
are determined to push the war to a decisive con- 
clusion. 

In mid-December Wang Ching-wei, deputy leader 
of the Kuomintang, was reported to have left 
Chungking for Hanoi in French Indo-China. A 
cautious statement issued at the time by Generalis- 
simo Chiang Kai-shek failed to remove the impres- 
sion that something more than reasons of health 
motivated Wang Ching-wei’s trip. This impression 
was confirmed on December 30, when Wang Ching- 
wei sent a telegram from Hanoi to Chiang Kai-shek 
declaring that Premier Konoye’s terms* of Decem- 
ber 22 offered a “fair basis” for peace discussions. 
Wang's telegram supported Japan’s demand that 
China join the “anti-Comintern” bloc and accepted 
the continued occupation of North China, Inner 
Mongolia and Manchuria by Japanese troops, but 
on condition that such forces be withdrawn from 
the rest of China. The reply to this move was made 
at Chungking on January 1, when a special session 
of the Kuomintang’s standing committee expelled 
Wang from the party and dismissed him from all 
official positions for “deserting his post and -suing 
for peace in contradiction to national policy.” Re- 
ports from Chungking indicated that Wang Ching- 
wei had secretly attempted to gain the support of 
Szechuan and Yunnan military leaders for his peace 
program, and had communicated with General Wu 
Pei-fu — Japan's choice to head a unified puppet 
régime in China. 

These events have served to confirm Chiang Kai- 
shek’s policy of prolonged resistance, and have sub- 


*"U.S. Counters Jz 
mber 30, 1938 


apan’s ‘New Order’ in Asia,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletis 
I 


stantiated the belief of informed observers that the 
influence of the Chinese “peace faction” has stead- 
ily declined in recent months. If the facts had been 
otherwise, Wang Ching-wei would have stayed at 
Chungking and forced a reversal of policy. His 
flight is a confession of weakness and political 
bankruptcy. Although the scope of the “purge” now 
occurring at Chungking is probably exaggerated in 
the reports emanating from Hongkong, it should 
contribute toward eliminating the graft, inertia and 
inefficiency in the central government which have 
handicapped China’s military efforts. With the com- 
promisers driven from Kuomintang ranks, Chiang 
Kai-shek will have more authority to clean house, 
strengthen morale, and consolidate the national 
united front. 


At Tokyo a government crisis, which hinged 
mainly on the army’s demand for greater economic 
control, had simultaneously developed. The issue 
was actually settled on December 28, several days 
before the Cabinet change, when the National 
Mobilization Council approved six Imperial or- 
dinances invoking provisions of the National 
Mobilization Act which vested in the government 
control of dividends, profits, wages and hours, and 
permitted requisition of factories, land and com- 
modities. As the result of opposition to these meas- 
ures, principally from Finance Minister Ikeda, the 
government resigned on January 4. The new Cabinet, 
formed on January 5, was headed by Baron Hiranu- 
ma, who has been a candidate of Japan’s military- 
fascist elements for Premier since 1932. Aside from 
the Premiership, only one important change was 
made in the Cabinet—replacement of Finance Min- 
ister Ikeda by Sotaro Ishiwatari, previously Vice- 
Finance Minister. The new régime is generally re- 
garded, even by Japanese, as a “weaker edition” 
of the former Cabinet and unlikely to last long. 








— Page Two 





While it represents a formal victory for the military- 
fascist elements, the victory is of such a kind that 
it is apt to increase rather than lessen internal strife. 
The ability and experience of Finance Minister 
Ikeda were reassuring to Japanese business and 
finance, which felt that he would be able to restrict 
economic regimentation and curb reckless moves in 
the financial sphere. In September the army had re- 
duced the Foreign Office to a puppet; it has now 
done the same for the Finance Ministry. Through 
Ishiwatari, a bureaucrat under army influence, the 
military may be able to force application of the eco- 
nomic measures they desire, but the results will be 
disastrous if the confidence of the business com- 
munity is thereby seriously undermined. 

The year-end also witnessed the presentation of a 
second emphatic American note to Japan. Firmly 
rejecting the establishment of a ‘‘new order” in East 
Asia by unilateral Japanese action, the note—de- 
livered in Tokyo on December 31—reserved all 
American rights but offered to consider proposals 
by Japan provided they were taken up at a multi- 
lateral conference of all powers concerned. This 
note was given increased force by the President's 
appeal, in his message to Congress on January 4, 
for revision of legislation which supported an ag- 
gressor but denied aid to the victim. Several addi- 
tional factors have called attention to Japan's 
increasing difficulties. Trade figures through No- 
vember 1938 show a decline of $77,000,000 in 
United States’ imports from Japan, as compared 
with the first eleven months of 1937. From Tokyo 
come reports of a small favorable balance in Japan's 
merchandise trade for 1938, but at the expense of a 
decline of well over one billion yen in imports and 
of half a billion yen in exports. This trend, if con- 
tinued, will rapidly undermine Japan’s economic 
stability. On the war fronts in China, moreover, the 
military stalemate continues, with signs that the 
Japanese forces are even experiencing difficulty in 
maintaining their present positions. JT. A. Bisson 


BRITAIN BOLSTERS THE POUND 

The vigorous measures adopted by the British 
government for the defense of the pound have at 
least temporarily dissipated widespread fears con- 
cerning the future of sterling. Faced by a persistent 
drain of capital from London which drove the pound 
down to $4.62 and threatened to exhaust the re- 
serves of the Exchange Equalization Fund, the Bank 
of England on January 5 requested all banks to re- 
frain from speculative transactions in foreign ex- 
change and, in particular, from making advances 
on gold which would encourage further hoarding of 
that metal. The most important action was taken 
the following day, when the Bank sold the Equaliza- 
tion Fund £200,001,571 worth of gold bars with 








ee 


which to meet attacks on the pound. The transfer of 
this huge sum, which at current valuation amounts 
to about $1,650,000,000, is a convincing demonstra- 
tion of Britain’s determination to arrest the fall in 
exchange rates which, if left unchecked, might have 
produced a “run” on London followed by the insti- 
tution of foreign exchange control. The Chamber- 
lain government could not afford the risk of such a 
development, which would have impaired London's 
status as an international money market and involved 
a further decline in British prestige. 


The recent drop in sterling was a repetition of the 
phenomenon which occurred last September during 
the war crisis. Political, rather than economic, fac- 
tors furnished the primary motivation. After the 
Munich agreement the pound rallied slowly from a 
low of $4.60 to $4.76 early in November. The grow- 
ing conviction that Munich had really settled nothing 
and that Prime Minister Chamberlain’s policy of 
political appeasement was doomed to failure brought 
renewed pressure on the pound. At the same time 
the large-scale repatriation of French capital fol- 
lowing Finance Minister Reynaud’s recovery meas- 
ures in France produced a withdrawal of funds 
from London. The Exchange Equalization Fund 
seemed unable to take effective counter-measures. 
Its gold reserves, which had already been almost 
halved in the six-month period ending September 30, 
1938 and stood at that time at $759,000,000, are 
generally reputed to have fallen to $400,000,000 in 
the remaining months of the year. 


Barring very unfavorable political developments, 
the future of the pound now seems more reassuring. 
Economic factors are favorable to a recovery of ster- 
ling. During the last half of 1938 there was a steady 
improvement in the trade balance. Although figures 
for December are not yet available, the excess of 
imports over exports should be £40,000,000 below 
last year. The balance of international payments 
should also be slightly more favorable. Continued 
economic recovery abroad, combined with the ef- 
fects of the Anglo-American trade agreement, may 
well bring a further improvement in exports. The 
balance of payments of the sterling bloc as a whole, 
which necessarily affects the size of foreign balances 
in London, will probably improve also. Many of 
the countries in the sterling group are primarily 
exporters of raw materials and foodstuffs for which 
the market during the last year has been greatly 
restricted. The economic revival which began last 
fall should bring about a greater demand for their 
products, thus leading automatically to a replenish- 
ment of their sterling balances in London. In the 
last analysis, however, the course of the pound will 
be decisively influenced by Britain's political fortunes. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 











able 
line 
to ( 
of | 
Eur 
exa 
to | 





ti- 
er- 
a 
1's 


ed 


he 
ng 
uC- 
he 


| a 


ng 
of 
‘he 


y 


1. 


ill 





Wash ington News Letter 


—— 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
JAN. 9.—How rapidly the Administration will be 
able to advance the “‘positive” foreign policy out- 
lined by President Roosevelt in his annual message 
to Congress depends in large part on the attitude 
of the new Congress and the course of events in 
Europe and the Far East. That Congress intends to 
examine the national defense program in relation 
to other recommendations affecting foreign policy 
was evidenced by public and private comments heard 
on Capitol Hill at the end of the first week of the 
new session. 


At the same time, few impartial observers are 
prepared to say that Congressional opinion has not 
been profoundly influenced by the march of events 
during the past fifteen months. A year and a half 
ago, when Mr. Roosevelt talked vaguely of “quaran- 
tine” and concerted action in his famous Chicago 
speech, Congressional opinion recoiled and the Ad- 
ministration beat a hasty retreat. A newspaper poll 
at that time showed an overwhelming majority of 
both the Senate and the House opposed to any form 
of economic sanctions against aggressor nations. 
There is still much evidence of opposition to out- 
right embargoes. And yet last week when the Presi- 
dent returned to the same theme, with a program of 
action calling for a fundamental change in American 
foreign policy, there was little to indicate that the 
Administration would be compelled to retreat as it 
did in the autumn of 1937. 


“Measures Short of War.” The President's mes- 
sage demonstrated clearly that the Executive branch 
does not intend to retreat and that the President 
is prepared to launch a determined offensive. Long 
before the President delivered his message, the 
scaffolding for the new program had already been 
erected by the State Department, the Treasury, and 
the Export-Import Bank in the series of notes to 
Japan, the twenty-five million dollar credit to China, 
the resolutions of the Lima Conference and the curt 
tebuff to Germany's diplomatic protest against the 
speech of Secretary Ickes. 


This program can be continued, and possibly ex- 
tended, without additional legislation by Congress. 
The State Department, for example, is free to de- 
nounce the commercial treaty of 1911 with Japan 
without Congressional approval, and many believe 
that this step may soon be taken if Japan continues 
to discriminate against American rights in China. 





The loan policy initiated by the Export-Import Bank 
may be continued for some time, although the ex- 
isting powers of the bank must be renewed by Con- 
gress before June 30, 1939. Moreover, under the 
existing provisions of the Tariff Act and certain fiscal 
laws, the Executive enjoys wide powers (which have 
not yet been used) to retaliate by economic arid 
financial measures against any country which dis- 
criminates against American trade. 

But when President Roosevelt declared in his 
annual message that “there are many methods short 
of war, but stronger and more effective than mere 
words, of bringing home to aggressor governments 
the aggregate sentiments of our own seg ” 
was proposing a major change in foreign 
which, in the opinion of Congress, will call for wor 
lative action on at least two vital issues. One of these, 
of course, is national defense; the other is modifica- 
tion of the neutrality laws. 


National Defense and Neutrality. The national 
defense figures, presented by the President in his 
budget message on January 5, call for an increase 
of approximately $300,000,000 over and above the 
$1,100,000,000 appropriated for the current fiscal 
year. These estimates will be further increased in the 
detailed defense program to be submitted this week. 
If this program is to be confined to measures for 
strengthening the army and navy, including avia- 
tion, for purposes of continental defense, and if it 
excludes domestic “pump-priming” and does not 
appear to urge the creation of armed forces for of- 
fensive operations in Europe or Asia, there is little 
doubt that it will be approved without serious oppo- 
sition. Nevertheless, there is a tendency to subject the 
whole program to critical scrutiny, and there is some 
talk of creating a special committee of Congress with 
authority to consider national defense requirements 
in relation to foreign policy and existing budget com- 
mitments. 

The disposition of the Neutrality Act is far less 
certain. The State Department has been advised by 
Congressional leaders to proceed with caution and 
not to press for outright repeal or the power to em- 
bargo aggressor nations. In line with this advice, the 
State Department is not planning to present its own 
draft legislation and is leaving the whole question 
of neutrality revision in the hands of Senator Pitt- 
man, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee, and Representative McReynolds, Chair- 
man of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs. 





| 
i 
|) 








Mr. Pittman and the State Department have ap- 
cape reached full agreement on the strategy . 
followed. The first move will be to explore the 
possibility of securing Presidential discretion to im- 
economic and financial measures against states 
which have violated treaties to which the United 
States is a party, or which have directly discriminated 
against this country. Should this prove impossible, an 
effort will be made to amend Section 1 of the Act 
by eliminating the mandatory embargo on “arms, 
ammunition and implements of war’ and extending 
the cash-and-carry provisions of the present Act to 
include all war materials. This would place all war 
materials, including direct munitions, petroleum, 
scrap iron, etc., on the same footing. It would have 


—= Page Four —. 








es 


the practical effect of opening the American marke 
to all belligerents, subject to the requirement thar 
American exports be paid for in cash and carried ip 
foreign vessels, and would actually aid the two 
European democracies, Britain and France. In the 
Far East it would presumably aid Japan, but if the 
arms embargo were removed, it is argued that in. 
direct shipments could still reach China. 


In dealing with both defense and neutrality, and 
before reaching final conclusions, Congress is certain 
to examine the underlying assumption in the Presi. 
dent’s message that weapons of economic war cap 
be employed without the accompanying military 


action. 
W. T. STONE 








| 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Social and Economic History of Germany from William II 
to Hitler, by W. F. Bruck. New York, Oxford University 
Press, 1938. $4.50 


A former German professor views the last half-century 
of German economic history against a full background 
of economic and political theory. The account reveals in a 
striking way how the roots of much of the Third Reich’s 
economic planning had begun to flourish in the pre-war 
period. 


Government in Republican China, by Paul M. A. Line- 

barger. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1938. $1.50 

The problems of government in modern China are con- 
sidered by Mr. Linebarger in their broadest relation to 
Chinese political and cultural backgrounds. He interprets 
the clashing social and political philosophies of republican 
China in terms of an evolutionary development which is 
still proceeding in the midst of war. 


The Crucial Problem of Imperial Development. New 
York, Longmans, Green, 1938. $2.40 
Verbatim report of a conference on British Empire 
affairs, containing a rather diffuse collection of lectures 
and discussions. 


The Law of Treaties, by Arnold Duncan McNair. New 
York, Columbia University Press, 1938. $7.50 
A monumental study of British law and practice re- 
lating to treaties. 


Italy at the Peace Conference, by René Albrecht-Carrié. 
New York, Columbia University Press, 1938. $5.25 


A historical study of Italy’s participation in the Peace 
Conference of 1919 and of the disposal of the Italian 
claims. Contains a full collection of documents. 


Labor Relations in Republican Germany, by Nathan Reich. 

New York, Oxford University Press, 1938. 6/8. 

A careful study which has more than historical interest 
because the United States, like post-war republican Ger- 
many, faces the problem of dealing with modern labor 
relations within the framework of a traditional demo- 
cratic constitution. 


Iraq: A Study in Political Development, by Philip Willard | 
Ireland. New York, Macmillan, 1938. $3.75 
An exhaustive study of the origins and development of 
a relatively advanced Arab state. 


Conquest of the Past, by Prince Hubertus zu Loewenstein. 
Boston, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1938. $3.50 


The autobiography of the young South German noble 
who joined the Social Democratic party a few years before 
the National Socialist revolution. The diary extracts, deal- 
ing with his political activities from 1930 to 1933, are 
perhaps the most interesting part of the book. 





The Chinese People, by George H. Danton. Boston, Marshall 

Jones Co., 1938. $3.50 

In the difficult field of interpreting China’s folk-ways 
and the Chinese outlook on life, this study takes high rank. 
It constitutes a searching analysis of Chinese ethnology, 
language, customs and ethics, “emotive” life, esthetics, re- 
ligion, education and nationalism. The interpretation is 
scholarly and balanced, and illustrated by a wide range of 
concrete material drawn from the author’s experience " 





China. 


Japanese Terror in China, by H. J. Timperley. New York, 
Modern Age, 1938. 75 cents 
A compilation of letters, diaries and reports by foreign 
eyewitnesses, showing the horrors perpetrated by Japan’s 
soldiery on the Chinese civilian population. The dispas- 
sionate character of this first-hand documentary evidence } 
gives it added force. 





The Pageant of Japanese History, by Marion May Dilts. | 
New York, Longmans, Green, 1938. $3.00 
Except for the last two chapters, which deal inadequately | 
with Japan’s modern development, this volume is a most } 
rewarding study of the origins and evolution of the Jap- 
anese nation. It is rich in social and cultural materials, and } 
lavishly illustrated. 


Czechoslovakia, Keystone of Peace and Democracy, by Lt. 
Com. Edgar P. Young. London, Victor Gollancz, 1938. 
12s. 6d. 

A competent and strongly sympathetic book on Czecho- 
slovakia, containing a great deal of factual data. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 12, January 13, 1939. Published weekly by che Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasiim Bugit, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


<8 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 








Z \s\ 


Ja 


i. 


nd 
oO 


mh>> D EO 8B 


eS Om 5 


rr 


_ —_— —_—-_ pe Beem, an 2 Cra a5 





