APR 17 1046 


General Library  Eotered as 2nd class matter 


PRRWMCAL KUO - 
GM@MMRAL LIBRA’ 
Unty. oF mice 


University of Nichigan 





Ann Arbor, Michigan 























ROL 
‘|| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
Gen 

1 Dis 

) after 

= An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 

FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 

ROL) 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 

r Vou. XXV, No. 26 Apri. 12, 1946 
ili 
tiou| BRITAIN RESHAPES ALLIANCES TO HOLD POSITION IN MIDDLE EAST 
al leat temporarily disposed of the Iranian over the settlement achieved last week. At best the 
tained case on April 4, the Security Council met again Council’s action on Iran may set a procedural prece- 
hie) tis week to find Russia had notified the United Na- dent, insuring that the great powers can not prevent 

eh) tions on April 6 that it considered the Council's initial discussion of grievances brought before the 
at the! action on Iran “illegal” and wanted the question United Nations by small countries. For whatever 

\ thet! removed from the agenda. Meanwhile Dr. Oscar may be the course of subsequent developments, there 
Pre Lange, the Polish delegate, plans to bring the prob- is no doubt that the Security Council has already 
Frere lem of Spain before the Council. Thus Big Three emerged as a forum of world opinion, where both 

relations continue to focus on the Mediterranean small and large nations may be heard. By answering 
wii area, where Britain, as active as Russia, has recently the request for a report on the negotiations between 

1 COM} been reinforcing its ties with the Arab states, first Teheran and Moscow before the Council’s session 
f the by granting independent status on March 22 to the — on April 3, both disputants fulfilled their technical 
which] former League mandate of Transjordan, and second responsibilities under the United Nations Charter. 
of ‘the by preparing for revision of its ten-year treaty of Since the USSR has maintained communication with 

Briet} 1936 with Egypt. the United Nations during the course of the discus- 
ted to As the great powers sought to strengthen their sion of the Russo-Iranian dispute, it is now surpris- 
€ 4! strategic position in the Middle East, President Tru- ing that its request for removing the issue from the 

man, in his Army Day speech at Chicago on April Council’s agenda should be based on the alleged 

States 6, warned both Russia and Britain that their rivalry illegality of the decision of April 4. 
des on in the Arab world “might suddenly erupt into con- Under the agreements signed between the two 
uilitay| flict.” Secretary of State Byrnes had already demon- countries on April 4, Russian troops are to be with- 
. The} strated the concern of the United States about this drawn from Iran by May 6 as requested by the Se- 
nt of! tegion by vigorously steering the Council’s action curity Council; the status of Iran’s northern province 
uence} on Iran. On April 5 he also urged the Council of of Azerbaijan is to be dealt with solely by Teheran 
atomit} Foreign Ministers to meet again in Paris on April as a domestic issue; and a proposal for an oil con- 
ay not} 25 to make definite preparation for the conference cession for the USSR will be submitted to the next 
1othet.| scheduled in that city on May 1, when the draft Iranian Parliament to be elected on June 7. No basic 
forms| peace treaties for Italy, Finland, Bulgaria, Rumania substantive issue was decided in this case by the 
ill not} and Hungary are to be considered. To date the depu- Council, however, and while the curtain was mo- 
t. Ed} ties of the Foreign Ministers in London have been mentarily drawn aside on many confused Middle 
Bureal} unable to resolve differences about the important Eastern problems, Big Three differences over oil and 
aplan,} Adriatic port of Trieste and its environs, or the strategy in the Arab world remain unresolved. 

Asso} future disposal of Italy’s former African Empire and CHALLENGE TO BRITAIN. Mr. Byrnes took 
+ area) the Dodecanese islands. the lead in pressing the Iranian issue before the 
atomé) THE IRANIAN SETTLEMENT. Russia’s insis- Security Council, but no country views Russia's 
me 4&1 tence that the Iranian question be removed from the emergence as a great power in the Middle East and 
States Security Council’s agenda will temper any optimism the Mediterranean with greater anxiety than Britain. 
LLES Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 











es es 


~ ~~ 


! 
a 
3 





ae 
= 


Adee ere vances seosiepmeeeceminnnemienysmnasinnietonnian . 


ee ened 


EN RRR TS UE 


pon 


eg 























Its desire to align the Arab states in firmer friend- 
ship may be seen in the recent Franco-British agree- 
ment, which the Levant states joined during the 
middle of March, providing for troop evacuation 
from Syria and the Lebanon. The Anglo-Transjordan 
treaty is also evidence of Britain’s efforts to “mend 
its fences” in this area, although independence for 
Transjordan will doubtless cause both Jews and 
Arabs to seek speedy withdrawal of British author- 
ity in Palestine. But control over the Suez is crucial 
for Britain's imperial position, and thus the revision 
of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty assumes greater im- 
portance than any other recent British move in the 
Middle East. 

EGYPT'S KEY POSITION. The Foreign Office 
has recognized the major nature of the coming nego- 
tiations and has sent a strong delegation to Cairo, 
which Foreign. Secretary Bevin will join at a 
later stage. Serious anti-British riots during the 
early part of 1946 revealed the climate of opinion 
the British will find there and, since the future 
status of the Sudan is to be raised, it is noteworthy 
also that Egyptian nationalists have championed 
Sudan’s freedom from British administration and 


the incorporation of the upper regions of the Nile 
into Egypt. 


Page Two 





ee 
———eeee 


The Egyptian delegate at the Security Council 
strongly supported Iran’s charges against Russian 
troops on its soil, and on April 6 Dr. Hafez Afif 
Pasha, Egypt’s permanent representative on the 
Council, said in Cairo that while he was fully con. 
fident that negotiations of a new Anglo-Egyptian 
treaty would be successful, if necessary Egypt may 
submit its case to the United Nations. Under the 
present treaty Britain may maintain 10,000 land 
forces and 400 pilots in or near the canal zone, 
While the present treaty provides for permaneng 
of the historic Anglo-Egyptian military alliance, the 
question of troops is due for review at this time. 
Because of rising Egyptian nationalism, other pro- 
visions of the 1936 treaty having to do with the 
maintenance of internal stability in Egypt will also 
be challenged by the Cairo government on grounds 
that such terms are limitations of its sovereignty. 
Since Egypt is the chief leader of the Arab League 
the new agreement will demonstrate the Labor gov- 
ernment’s intentions in dealing with the Middle 
Eastern states, where the twin tasks of guarding 
strategic interests and fostering freedom and econom- 
ic development must be undertaken simultaneously. 





GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


VICTORY OF ROYALIST MINORITY SHARPENS CLEAVAGE IN GREECE 


The sharp political cleavage between Right and 
Left in Greece was irrefutably demonstrated on 
March 31, in the first national elections held in a 
decade. The Left boycotted the polls, charging that 
the voting was a fraud arranged to assure a con- 
servative victory. The pro-royalist Populists won a 
majority of the ballots cast by the slightly less than 
fifty per cent of the registered voters who took part 
in the elections, and a ten-member Rightist coali- 
tion cabinet was set up on April 4. The new Premier, 
Panayotis Poulitas, is President of the State Council 
—the Greek equivalent of the United States Supreme 
Court—and has had no previous political experience. 
He will probably remain in office only until the 
Populists have chosen one of their own leaders as 
head of the government. 

The royalists, greatly strengthened by the elec- 
tions, are expected to consolidate their position by 
two measures. First, Rightist leaders may address 
a formal request to London asking that British 
troops be maintained in Greece, thus bolstering 
Britain's position in this strategically important area 
of the Mediterranean and crystallizing the division 
of the Balkans into Russian and British zones of in- 
fluence. Secondly, they may seek to hold a plebiscite 
on the return of the king as soon as possible. 

WERE THE ELECTIONS A FRAUD? Since the 
elections resulted in widening the schism between 
the Right and Left, the question whether or not the 
voting was ‘rigged’ assumes considerable impor- 


tance. For the United States this question is a mat- 
ter of special concern because Americans, as well 
as British and French representatives, participated 
in the group of more than 1,200 international ob- 
servers who were charged with the task of assuring 
free elections. As preliminary reports indicate, hon- 
est elections faced many obstacles, some of which 
were more or less inevitable because of the violence 
which has characterized the struggle between Left 
and Right and between republicans and royalists. 

Before World War II Greece was under the dic- 
tatorship of General Metaxas, a pro-royalist fear- 
ful of Communism, and from 1941 until 1944 the 
country was occupied by the Nazis and suffered pri- 
vations exceeding those of other conquered nations. 
Shortly after liberation Greece became the battle- 
ground in a bloody civil war between the Leftist 
EAM resistance group and the returning govern- 
ment. Since the formal conclusion of hostilities, in 
January 1945, Rightist terror has prevailed in cer- 
tain areas controlled by official forces, and the pres- 
ence of British tanks, guns and armed troops has 
made it possible for the government to use strong: 
arm methods in establishing order. The British, con- 
sequently, must be regarded as at least partly re 
sponsible for the fact that thousands of sympa- 
thizers of the EAM were too terrified to come out 
of their hiding places in the mountains or to sac 
rifice the protective anonymity of a large city such 
as Athens, for the purpose of voting, even if EAM 





leade: 


and t 
ists a 
tains 

over, 

howe 
ist Vi 
demo 
whicl 


resen 
refus 
State 
more 
freed 
tions. 
by ci 
It see 
with 
war- 
from 


recer 








BB Il 


A fifi 

the 
CcOn- 
tian 
may 


land 
one, 
ency 

the 
ime, 
pro- 

the 
also 
inds 
nity. 
gue 
gov- 
ddle 
ding 
1OM- 
sly, 


mat- 
well 
ated 

ob- 
ring 
hon- 
hich 
ence 
Left 
lists, 


‘ear- 


the 
pri- 


ttle- 
ftist 
ern- 
;, in 
cer- 
>res- 
has 
ong- 
con- 
re 
npa- 
out 
sac- 


such 
AM 





— 





leaders had encouraged them to do so. 

On the other hand, responsibility for disorder 
and terror is by no means attributable to the royal- 
ists alone. In Macedonia, where the EAM still re- 
tains a stronghold, violence has also occurred. More- 
ger, the EAM’s decision to boycott the elections, 
however unfavorable the conditions were for a Left- 
ist victory, can hardly be said to have strengthened 
democratic processes in Greece. Nor can Russia, 
which has frequently indicated its approval of the 
BAM, be said to have aided the cause of more rep- 
resentative government in this liberated country by 
refusing to send observers to join those of the United 
Sates, Britain and France. It is hardly possible, 
moreover, to use the same yardstick in measuring the 
freedom of elections in Greece that is used in na- 
ions, such as our‘own, which have not been rent 
by civil war and shattered by economic catastrophe. 
Itseems necessary, instead, to compare the elections 
with those which have recently taken place in other 
war-torn countries of southeastern Europe. Viewed 
from this angle, the Greek elections appear to have 
been at least as fair, if not more so, than elections 
cently held under Russian auspices in Bulgaria. 


ROYALISTS A MINORITY. But even if the 
dections were as fair as possible under existing cir- 
cumstances, it does not necessarily follow that they 


Current clashes between Chinese Government 
and Communist forces in Manchuria indicate that 
several key issues affecting American-Soviet rela- 
tions in the Far East and the future of China may 
son reach the crisis stage. These issues may be 
ummarized in three questions: (1) Will China 
establish a democratic coalition government, in ac- 
wrdance with the agreements reached through Gen- 
eal Marshall's mediation in January? (2) What 
ombination of political forces will shape the fu- 
ture of Manchuria, with its forty-odd million people, 
strategic location, rich resources and valuable in- 
dustries? (3) Will Washington and Moscow find 
ome means of reducing their differences over 
China? Although the questions emphasize _politi- 
al problems, they will have to be answered in an 
atmosphere troubled by food shortages and famine, 
high prices, low production of consumers’ goods, 
and inadequate transportation. 


RIGHT WING FIGHTS COALITION. One of 
the major features of Chinese political life during 
he past two months has been the attempt of ex- 
tteme Right wing elements to alter and undermine 
the all-party agreements of January 31 for a Chi- 
Nese coalition government. The tactics of the Right- 
Sts have ranged from the encouragement of politi- 
al violence to verbal assaults on more moderate 





Page Three 


CLASHES IN MANCHURIA RAISE 





—_—— 








have solved the problems of finding a government 
that will be sufficiently representative of the Greek 
people to insure stability. Since approximately 
600,000 of the 950,000 ballots cast were received 
by the Populists—and it may be assumed that nearly 
every pro-royalist was among that fifty per cent of 
the electorate which went to the polls—the royalists 
constitute at the most only approximately one-third 
of the registered voters. This means that an attempt 
on the part of the Populists to restore the king may 
have to be backed by force. 

Under these conditions Britain might find that 
the group on which it has based its hopes for the 
safeguarding of British interests is capable of main- 
taining itself in power only by turning Greece into 
a police state. It may be assumed that the EAM will 
oppose this type of régime not only with verbal 
attacks but with appeals for foreign assistance. 
Arms might be forthcoming from friendly groups 
in Albania, Yugoslavia and Bulgaria, while politi- 
cal sympathy might be proferred by Moscow. Such 
a situation would be embarrassing to Britain in any 
part of the world where it has important strategic 
interests, but it would be particularly critical in this 
outpost in the Mediterranean, where Russia is chal- 
lenging other traditional British strongholds. 


WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


NEW THREAT OF CIVIL WAR 


officials for “corruption” and “inefficiency.” This 
Opposition movement expressed itself at the Kuo- 
mintang Central Executive Committee’s session of 
March 1-17 in bitter attacks on party leaders who 
had participated in the unity discussions with the 
Communists or the negotiations with the Russians. 


While pledging Kuomintang support to the unity 
pacts of January 31, the plenary session proposed 
fundamental changes in those agreements. The most 
important alteration relates to China’s future con- 
stitution. In January the parties agreed on measures 
to democratize the draft constitution issued by the 
government in 1936; but the Central Executive Com- 
mittee voted, in effect, to restore the original docu- 
ment. The agreement of February 25 on the reduc- 
tion and amalgamation of military forces was also 
discussed at the plenary session. Under this accord, 
which was signed by General Marshall and repre- 
sentatives of the government and the Communists, 
China is to have an army of 90 divisions—a figure 
which is to be further reduced to 60 divisions after 
eighteen months. Yet on March 22, less than a week 
after the close of the Kuomintang meeting, War 
Minister Chen Cheng declared that China should 
have a standing army of 150 divisions. 


SHOWDOWN IN MANCHURIA. These moves 
took place in an atmosphere of tension over Man- 


























churia. It is true that Russian troops had begun to 
withdraw from Mukden in the second week of 
March, and that on March 22 Moscow declared its 
forces would be out of Manchuria by the end of 
April—a pledge which the Chinese Foreign Office 
later accepted as satisfactory. But the issues raised 
by Russian occupation of Manchuria beyond the 
February 1 deadline, as well as by Russian removal 
of machinery from that region had already had 
serious repercussions in Chinese political life. 
Because the Chinese parties have been unable to 
agree on the control of Manchuria, a showdown may 
be imminent. The government points out that, under 
the January 10 military truce, it has the right to 
transport troops into or within Manchuria “for the 
purpose of restoring Chinese sovereignty.” It also 
holds that Communist troop movements in that area 
have occurred in violation of the agreement. The 
Communists, on the other hand, argue that the 
government has broken its promise to cease hostili- 
ties—a charge which the government, in turn, levels 
against the Communists—and that its troop move- 
ments in Manchuria are for purposes of civil war, 
not restoration of sovereignty. Basically the Com- 
munists want to extend to Manchuria the coalition 
agreement reached in January for the rest of China, 
while the government's position, as expressed by 
Chiang Kai-shek on April 1, is that it will not con- 
sider any demands concerning Manchuria until it has 
taken over control of the region from the Russians. 
BACK TO 1945? Manchuria today is torn by a 
struggle resembling that which brought China to 
the brink of all-out civil war last fall, and Wash- 
ington policy-makers are confronted with problems 
of intervention similar to those raised under Am- 
bassador Hurley. These policy issues were thought by 
some to have been settled last December 15, when 
President Truman suggested that our military and 
economic assistance to China would be conditional, 
i.e., would depend on China’s progress toward dem- 
ocratic unity. But the meaning of conditional sup- 
port has been raised sharply by the Chinese Com- 
munists, who have asked the United States to stop 
transporting Central Government troops to Man- 
churia. Again on April 4 General Chou En-lai, chief 
Communist representative in the discussions held 
by General Marshall, declared that foreign aid, 
especially financial assistance, should not be given 
to the Chinese government until it has been reor- 
ganized as a democratic coalition under the January 
agreements. Aid under current conditions, he said, 
would “facilitate a one-party dictatorship” by the 


Page Four 














Kuomintang. A Central government spokesmy 
however, declared on April 5 that if the Units 
States gave China a loan, he felt certain the “Con, 
munists would join the Government right away.” 
These issues will not soon be resolved, but 

focus attention on American policy. In his Amp 
Day address of April 6 President Truman declare 
that “the Chinese leaders are on the road to achiey 
political unity by peaceful and democratic processes’ 
Nevertheless, there is little ground for complaceng, 
Both internal conditions and the state of America, 
Russian relations in that country are charged with 
dynamite. Under the circumstances continued app 
cation of the policy statement of December 15 j 
necessary if the agreements reached under Gene 
Marshall’s guidance are to be carried out. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


RESIGNATION OF GENERAL McCOY 


The Board of Directors of the Foreign Policy Associs 
tion announces with regret that Major General Frani 
R. McCoy resigned as President on April 1, 1946, ow 
ing to the pressure of his duties as Chairman and Amen 
can member of the Far Eastern Commission. Gener 
McCoy has been elected President Emeritus of the As» 
ciation and will continue his membership on the Boar 
of Directors. 

Since General McCoy assumed the Presidency of tk 
Association in tember 1939, the membership ha 
more than doubled and the number of branches has in 
creased from seventeen to thirty-two. 

General McCoy’s distinguished career has include 
combat service in the Spanish-American War, the Phil 
ippine Insurrection and World War I. He was militay 
aide to President Theodore Roosevelt; Chief-of-Staff | 
the American Mission to Armenia in 1919; Directo 
General of the Red Cross and Commander of the Amer 
can Relief Commission to Japan in 1923; Chief of th 
American Electoral Mission to Nicaragua in 1927-2 
Chairman of the Bolivia-Paraguay Conciliation Com 
mission in 1929; and American member of the Lytto 
Commission to Manchuria in 1932. He is a Doctor d 
Laws (Princeton, Yale, Columbia) and holds the Dis 
tinguished Service Medal. 

Pending the election of a successor to General McCoy, 
the Board of Directors has appointed itself as chie 
executive in the interim and has designated its chairman 
Mr. William W. Lancaster to act as its spokesman for 
this purpose. Mr. Herbert L. May, a member of th 
Board, has consented at its request to act as liaison be 
tween the staff and Mr. Lancaster with the title d 
Director-in-Charge. 











The Case Against the Nazi War Criminals, by Robert 1 
Jackson. New York, Knopf, 1946. $2.00 
Justice Jackson’s book containing the basic document 

of the Nuremburg trials and an exposition of internation 

law and justice is the most readable and illuminating nor 
technical treatment of the subject that has appeared. 


— 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 26, Aprit 12, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicueLes Dis 
Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Yo 
Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


e's) 


Nations 





193 


