announce 
principle, 
approval 


raised by 
may take 
acted on 
A merican 
provision 
oO British 
step runs 
2ached at 
yrtly after 

Foreign 
ed in ff 
” and te 
g used a 
1 to pro 
ship ef 


ll, of the 
the threat 
nxious t0 
e anxious 
But some 
s country 
ummoned 
republic 
nterest of 
rvers thal 


STONE 


tu 
) 


Library Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vor. XX, No. 17 


—_—__ 


FEBRUARY 14, 1941 


NAZI MOVES IN BULGARIA FORCE BALKAN CRISIS 


— break in diplomatic relations between Britain 
and Rumania on February 10, following Prime 
Minister Churchill’s reference to intensified German 
activities in Bulgaria, presaged the spread of hostili- 
ties in the Balkans. German pressure on Bulgaria 
appeared to have hit a snag on February 4, when it 
was announced that the pro-Nazi Minister of Agri- 
culture, Bagrianoff, had tendered his resignation, 
and was on the point of withdrawing from politics. 
In his broadcast of February 9, however, Mr. 
Churchill stated that ‘‘a considerable German army 
and air force is being built up in Rumania and its 
forward tentacles have already penetrated Bulgaria 
with, we must suppose, the acquiescence of the Bul- 
gatian government.” Airfields in Bulgaria, he 
added, were already being occupied by German 
ground personnel ‘numbering thousands.” Mr. 
Churchill said that one of Britain’s difficulties was 
to convince some of the neutral countries in South- 
eastern Europe that the British ‘‘are going to win,” 
and reminded Bulgaria of the dismemberment it had 
suffered as a result of the first World War when, in 
spite of British warnings, it had joined Germany 
and Austria-Hungary against the Allies. Sofia of- 
fcially denied Mr. Churchill's charges, claiming that 
the only Germans in Bulgaria were a few officers 
and men who had long been training the Bulgarian 
amy. But the British, distrusting these assurances, 
apparently decided to take the initiative in the Bal- 
tans by withdrawing their diplomatic representa- 
tives from Bucharest. This diplomatic break is ex- 
pected to be followed by a declaration of war against 
Rumania, which might permit the British to bomb 
the Rumanian oil-fields. 

BRITAIN’S FEAR OF INVASION. Of the three 
Major contingencies anticipated by the British in 
their struggle with Germany—invasion of Britain, 
German intervention in the Mediterranean, and ex- 
tension of the conflict to the Balkans—the third 


might offer Britain the best opportunity to strike at 
a point where Germany is peculiarly vulnerable. The 
British have been steadily preparing for an invasion 
since Dunkirk. The danger of invasion, to which 
Sir John Dill, Chief of the Imperial General Staff, 
referred again on February 8, is not merely an argu- 
ment advanced to enlist American aid; it is an ever- 
present danger which the British feel they would 
be foolhardy to underestimate. To counter this Ger- 
man threat, the British have recently launched day- 
light air raids on the invasion ports, but these raids, 
as pointed out by military experts, can at best have 
only a limited effect, since the British do not yet 
command a sufficiently large air force to carry out 
an aerial Blitzkrieg of German-occupied territory. 
That is the principal reason why the British are eager 
to obtain from the United States an increasing num- 
ber of long-range bombers, which have the added 
advantage that they can be flown from Canada to 
Britain without being exposed to the hazards of sub- 
marine warfare. 

While girding themselves for invasion, the British 
have apparently moved in Africa more rapidly than 
either they or the Nazis had anticipated. So far, 
German intervention on behalf of Italy has been 
limited to the use of German dive-bombers, based 
on airfields in Sicily, against British naval units 
in the central and eastern Mediterranean. The 
most spectacular dive-bombing operation was that 
directed against Malta on January 19 when, accord- 
ing to Mr. Churchill, the British brought down 90 
out of 150 German Stukas which were seeking, 
among other objectives, to disable the aircraft-carrier 
Illustrious. The Mediterranean is still controlled by 
the British navy which was able, on February 9, to 
shell Genoa with little opposition from the Italians; 
and on land the Greeks, with British advice and 
assistance, continue to press the Italian forces, now 
in process of reorganization. 


Page Two —1} = 
It is in the third theatre of war, the Balkans, that materials of all kinds and ships in which to transport} alread 
the Germans might most effectively relieve Italy. these materials. Mr. Churchill's speech was, in 4} ition 
German airplanes based on Rumanian or Bulgarian sense, an answer to the statement made by Colong| entire 
airfields might strike at the Greek army from the _ Lindbergh who, in testifying before the Senate Fo,.| ,pilita 
rear. On the other hand, German use of Rumanian eign Affairs Committee on February 6, declared tha| tially 
or Bulgarian territory for war purposes would lay Britain, even with American aid, cannot win, and} set th 
these countries open to attack by the British; and it | consequently urged the United States to retain all is} home 
is hoped in London that German operations in Bul- _ production of airplanes and other war material fo} LA 
garia will bring Turkey into the war on Britain’s side. eventual defense “against the strongest powers of| seem¢ 
Qualified observers have expected for months that, Europe and Asia.” at Vi 
after consolidating their gains on the continent, the It is obviously impossible for any man, no matte;| sisted 
Nazis would attempt to strike at the British Em- how well informed, to determine in advance the oy.| of Pi 
pire simultaneously from several widely separated come of a complex conflict which may, in accordang| domi 
areas, in the hope of invading the British Isles and, with Nazi plans, proceed with the deadly accurag| the ¥ 
meanwhile, crippling British forces in Africa and of an iron-clad timetable or, as already indicatej} and, 
the Mediterranean, possibly with the assistance of by the course of Italian operations in Albania anj| head 
France and Spain. These operations, it was believed, Africa, may be fraught with accidents and deter trol. ¢ 
would coincide with renewed efforts to divert the mined by imponderables. All that can be said at this} declit 
; attention of the United States from the Atlantic to moment is that the British themselves believe the| ‘ater 
a the Pacific by some spectacular Japanese move in can win, and that there is little sentiment in Britaig| Laval 
x the direction of Southeast Asia, facilitated, perhaps, —least of all in Labor circles—in favor of a “nego| cause 
RS by a Soviet-Japanese non-aggression pact. The date tiated” peace with Germany which, according to the} sual 
t when these closely interlocked attacks are to be British, would under present circumstances be | the 
bi launched remains, of course, a Nazi secret; and peace imposed (not negotiated) by Germany. And} t 0 
alo equally secret are the exact geographic areas in among the imponderables, is the belief in a British} Sof 4 
: which they will be set off. Mr. Churchill, in recapitu- victory that, after an initial period of apathy an{| form 
3 lating on February 9 the achievements of the British despair, is gaining ground in occupied countries | Paris 
* since Dunkirk—when it was widely assumed that Contrary to the statement of the American Youth! @PPé 
Britain was about to collapse—pointed out the vari- | Congress on February 9, denouncing the war in Ey| who 
we ous contingencies that the British must bear in mind, rope as one primarily of exploitation in which one} un! 
and warned his people, above all, against overcon- empire is engaged with another in a struggle fo| Nazi 
Be: fidence, “the worst of martial crimes.” domination of the continent rather than for the lib| yet b 
At the same time, Mr. Churchill reiterated his be- eration and freedom of the continental peoples, there W 
lief in Britain’s ultimate victory—on the assumption are millions in Europe, irrespective of class or wealth} 4 40 
1 that the United States is ready to supply Britain with who believe there is a real difference between the| Sern 
: “all that is necessary for victory.” Britain, he re- kind of influence, unconstructive as it often proved, Prem 
peated, does not need men (explaining that the that Britain exercised on the continent before Av-| ened 
bits present war, unlike that of 1914-1918, is not a war gust 1939, and the outright domination exercised by el Ke 
of mass armies), but needs “most urgently’ war Germany. VERA MICHELES DEAN -. 
| BRITISH VICTORIES BOLSTER PETAIN’S POWER the c 
; While Hitler's deputy, Rudolf Hess, assured the executed pincers movement in which an armored de} * ™ 
po German people on February 9 that a supreme test of tachment pushed through desert wastes to cut off the ae 
bs arms with Britain was approaching, the British gov- enemy's flight, the British Army of the Nile took : 
e ernment hastened to exploit its military advantage the key base of Benghazi from the Italians on Feb ic 
i" in the Mediterranean to the utmost in the hope that ruary 6. As the battered remnants of Marshal Grazi MED 
¢ a decision might be reached in that theatre before ani’s forces fled to the south and west, advance Brit a. 
4 the invasion of England. Employing a brilliantly ish units acting as mechanized cavalry followed clow| °° ** 
. behind. By February 9 they had reached El Agheila, cat 
aS Have YOU read almost a third of the way from Benghazi to Tripoli oq 
A U.S. AID TO BRITAIN? Provided that the British can successfully maintait| |... 
4 Bane, viet we have sendy sagytie’ their attenuated supply lines by land and sea, ft} _ 
vel what else Britain needs; what more we can . , , 
Heil provide; and defines the risks involved. seems increasingly probable that they will not halt} rores 
ri 25 ¢ until they have established contact with the Frend| [és 
. | North African forces on the Tunisian border. With) ox, 
sen te Sane 3 Deegp. Petey Rages the capture of Benghazi and its airdromes, they havt| 


= |} = Page Three 


a 


transport} already enormously strengthened their defensive po- 
vas, in | sition in the eastern Mediterranean. Control of the 
y Colond! entire Libyan littoral, if followed by a transfer of 


Mr. William T. Stone will broadcast from Wash- 
ington on February 16. His subject will be “Congress 
and Aid to Britain.’’ FPA broadcasts are heard every 


nate Fo| military and air strength to Albania, would par- Sunday, from 2:15 to 2:30 p.m. E.S.T., over the blue 
lared tha tially envelop southern Italy and Sicily and might network of the National Broadcasting Company. 
win, ani} set the stage for still more effective attack on Italian Does your local station carry our program? 


ain all is} home territory or for military action in the Balkans. 
‘terial fo.} LAVAL COME-BACK FAILS. Britain’s victories 
owers of} seemed to play a definite part in the Cabinet crisis 
at Vichy, where Marshal Henri Philippe Pétain re- 
NO matte} sisted strong German demands for the reinstatement 
e the oy.| of Pierre Laval, dismissed on December 13, to a 
ccordang | dominant government post. After Vichy had reached 
 accurag| the verge of capitulation, Pétain suddenly stiffened 
indicate,| and, according to reports, refused to become a figure- 
sania ani} head while Laval assumed de facto dictatorial con- 
nd dete.| trol. On February 8 it was announced that Laval had 
1id at this} declined an appointment as Cabinet Minister. A day 
lieve they later Pierre-Etienne Flandin, who had succeeded 
in Britain} Laval as Foreign Minister in December, resigned be- 
a “ego | cause of German distrust, and Admiral Jean Darlan 
ing to the} assumed this post as well as the Navy Ministry and 
ces be ,| the office of Vice-Premier. Under a constitutional 
any. And,| act of February 10, designating him Pétain’s succes- 
a British| sor as Chief of State, Darlan acquires all of Laval’s 
vathy and} former powers. In his conduct of the negotiations in 
countries | Paris regarding Laval’s reinstatement, the Admiral 
an Youth) appears to have gained the confidence of the Nazis, 
var in Fy-| Who have not openly opposed the new régime. The na ; 
vhich one setncnshane ae by Pétain to in the had been scuttled or had escaped to Beitish pasts; 
: : that British forces had been invited to share the 
uggle for| Nazis to shelve Laval for the time being have not ‘cally | d facilities of Bi 4 oth 
st the lib | yet been revealed. strategically located facilities of Bizerta and other 


sles, ther} | While Darlan, unlike Laval, has not been regarded French overseas bases; and even = the piretic 9" 
>r wealth} 4 an unreserved advocate of cooperation with the — ow under General Weygand, not to speak o 
-ween the| Germans, he is believed to share the former Vice- the forces = Syri “a under General Dentz, had cast 
n proved, Premier's dislike for Britain—a sentiment strength- their lot with Britain. Vichy was playing its he 
“fore Av-| ened by British attacks on the French fleet at Mers- card in es cst a= with the Nazis when, on <a 
ercised by} ¢Kebir and Dakar last summer. Pétain and Darlan ary 7, it quoted General Weygand as flatly deny- 


ing that German troops would be permitted to use 
D may be expected to keep unoccupied France out of ' nth : 
BAN | the area of hostilities at any cost. Both believe that Bizerta against the British forces in North Africa. 


the country needs a long breathing spell for moral pe despite ore ee ait on and —_ ween, 
nored de} * Well as material recovery. In their view, moral GIVverZences, a entity 0 eomepe: interest “ — 
‘ut off the| "Overy involves the eradication of democratic and ing Britain an tee = V8 - — eo ritis 

Nile took| Mdividualist doctrines, to be replaced by an authori- een ok weeding. a “ ? s — > ~ 
Son Feb| Uatian nationalism. sistance makes more secure all British positions from 


PETAIN’S AUTHORITARIAN GOVERN. _ Gibraltar to Suez. Davin H. Popper 


on January 29 he organized a national committee of 
40 to act as a nucleus for an all-embracing national 
political organization. These measures were doubt- 
less inspired by Pétain’s desperate attempts to con- 
solidate the political basis of his régime in the face 
of Nazi demands. His efforts were answered by the 
formation, in Nazi-dominated Paris, of a “National 
Popular Assembly” sponsored by Marcel Déat, with 
German approval. This group, which includes a 
number of prominent French extremists of the Left 
and Right, urges complete collaboration with the in- 
vaders, in Europe and Africa, and advocates the 
radical political and social doctrines of fascism. 


It is obviously not the political strength of the 
Vichy government which has thus far restrained the 
Nazis from demanding fuller French collaboration 
in prosecution of the war. It is, rather, French con- 
trol of instruments of military power which might 
conceivably be placed in Britain's hands if Pétain 
were pushed too far. Should Hitler occupy the whole 
of France, he might discover that the French fleet 


val Grazi , 

ance Bait MENT. In recent weeks Pétain has taken a number 

wed clos of steps designed to cement his control of the new Turkey at the Straits, by James T. Shotwell and Francis 

Agheils tégime. By a constitutional act of January 27 he Deak. New York, Macmillan, 1940. $2.00 

> Tripoli made all high French officials directly responsible to A succinct, authoritative survey of the history of the 
-" — 1 him. He also named a consultative assembly of 188 rivalries centering on the Dardanelles, beginning with the 

maintain . : fall of Constantinople in 1453 and continuing to the present 

as a temporary advisory parliament. An war. 
d sae members temporary ad y parl t. And a 


a — 


not halt FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 17, Fesruary 14, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
1e French Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Franek Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dgan, Editor. 
With Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


h Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
they ave F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter |: 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
Fes. 10.—Passage of the lease-lend bill by a vote 
of 260 to 165 in the House on February 8 leaves no 
doubt that the Administration has ample strength 
in Congress to secure favorable legislative action on 
its program of aid to Britain. At the same time, the 
partisan vote by which the measure was approved, 
and the limitations imposed in the series of amend- 
ments, make it equally clear that complete unity 
has yet to be achieved with regard to the funda- 
mental objectives of American foreign policy. As 
the debate shifts to the Senate, therefore, it is im- 
portant to analyze the prevailing views expressed in 
the House and the reasons for continued opposition 
on the part of a determined and vocal minority. 
THE HOUSE VOTE ON H.R. 1776. Most Wash- 
ington observers who have ‘ollowed the course of 
the bill through the House are in general agreement 
on at least four broad conclusions to be drawn from 
the first stage of the debate. These are: 

1. That despite the partisan vote, there is vir- 
tual unanimity on the question of aid to Britain. 
Not more than a handful of critics challenged the 
basic principle that it is in the interest of the 
United States ‘to support Great Britain by all 
measures short of war, and no opposition leaders 
advocated reversal of our present policy. 

2. That despite rejection of opposition amend- 
ments forbidding American naval ships from en- 
tering war zones or the use of naval vessels for 
convoying such ships, the measure in its present 
form is not regarded as a “mandate” for direct 
military intervention. The debate demonstrated 
again that a majority in Congress does not regard 
this as “our war” and is still opposed to military 
involvement. This prevailing view was accepted 
by Administration spokesmen who repeatedly de- 
clared that the bill “does not change our status as 
a nonbelligerent” and is not “a device to get us 
in war without consent of Congress.” 

3. That despite the delegation of large powers 
to the President, Congress is still determined to 
safeguard its own authority. This was demon- 
strated in the two most important amendments 
written into the bill. 

The first of these amendments places a limit 
of $1,300,000,000 on the value of military and 
naval equipment now in existence or under ap- 
propriation (but not new orders) which can be 
transferred to other governments, thus keeping 


some financial control in the hands of nla a 
Under the original bill the President would ha 
been free to transfer unlimited quantities of mg 
terial to other nations without any direct appropri. 
ation for this purpose. 


The second important amendment provides that 
any powers granted in the bill may be rescinded 
by a concurrent resolution—that is by a majority 
vote of both houses rather than by the two-thirds 
majority needed to override a Presidential veto, 
While the constitutionality of this provision may 
be questioned, it seems reasonable to assume that 
if Congress has authority to delegate its powers 
it also has authority to define the terms of such 
delegation. 

4. That despite these and other limitations, the 
House measure has not achieved the degree of 
unity in Congress which had been hoped for and 
which is essential if its purpose is to be realized. 
Ample evidence of this is found in the continued 
Opposition of a minority which promises to be 
more vocal in the Senate than in the House. 


Whether complete unity can be achieved during 
the next few weeks is open to question. Neverthe. 
less, an approach toward substantial agreement 
might be made if the Administration were willing to 
accept somewhat more definite limitations. The sug- 
gestion advanced by Representative Wadsworth of 
New York to place a top limit on the amount author. 
ized under the bill might well remove the apprehen- 
sions of many members who sincerely believe that 
Congress should retain ultimate control of the pro 
gram. While rejected by the Foreign Affairs Com- 
mittee, the Wadsworth proposal, if put to a vote, 
would have commanded large support in the House. 

It is apparent, however, that the central issue now 
posed in the Senate is not merely the extent to which 
Congress should delegate authority to the President, 
but whether it is possible to secure full confidence 
in the Administration’s foreign policy. In the field 
of foreign policy the bill gives the President unde- 
fined powers which are almost as broad as those in 
the domestic field. For if the President has authority 
to determine the amount of aid to be furnished 
Britain, he automatically gains the power to inflw 
ence, if not to determine, the policies of the British 
government. There would be less hesitation in many 
minds if the Administration were able to clarify its 
objectives and to indicate how it would employ these 


broad powers. W. T. STONE 


——— 
You. X2 


HE 
and 
countri 
pressiOt 
in the 
its stru 
mum e 
many 
of the 
Franco 
Februa 
on Feb 
to the 
Spain, 
French 
So f 
anxiou 
starvat 
extent 
on Spa 
and G 
Nazi d 
Africa: 
both I 
ittespe 
maneu 
Darlar 
tend t 
aband 
ap 
M. La 
de rea 
order, 
mer J 
impor 
other 
Which 


