



FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


nsf 4” interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


oom 3. : 8 
1. a DICAL. MUN 
MEERAL LIBRAR 


ur Tt , «FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
See. 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 




















Vor. XVI, No. 50 


OCTOBER 8, 1937 





—__ 


THE NEUTRALITY ACT OF 1937 


General Library 























that by Raymond Leslie Buell 

the The Far Eastern situation has focused critical attention University of Michigan 

seek on the Neutrality Act of May 1, 1937. This report studies 

met the history and provisions of the United States neutrality Any Avhar, Ui eht oan 

So- legislation, and may throw light on a type of controversy 

the which might recur in the event of hostilities in other parts of 

ram the world. Includes complete text of the Neutrality Act. 

ie is} October 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 

xi == 

7 ROME STIFFENS STAND ON SPAIN 

te HE first visible result of Mussolini’s theatrical Foreign Minister and Valencia spokesman in Ge- 

§ visit to Hitler was a noticeable stiffening in Rome neva, had asked the commission to call the bluff of 
regarding the three-power conference on Spain pro- totalitarian régimes, and to grant the demands made 

E | posed by France and Britain while I/ Duce was on by Premier Negrin in the League Assembly on 
his way to Germany. The Franco-British proposal September 18. The resolution finally evolved by a 
was officially embodied in a note of October 2, which drafting committee expressed regret that not only 
is reported to have undergone considerable modi- had the non-intervention committee failed to secure 

Har-} fication following a call paid at the British Foreign the withdrawal of non-Spanish combatants from 

é Office on September 29 by Count Grandi, Italian Spain, but that today “‘there are veritable foreign 

4 by Ambassador in London. According to published army corps on Spanish soil, which represents foreign 


summaries, the note states that no improvement in 
in T.7 the European situation can be expected until the 
New} policy of non-intervention in Spain has been made 
tions} Teally effective by the withdrawal of foreign nation- 
1 the} als from Spanish territory. It points out the failure 
loss} of the London non-intervention committee to 
New} grapple with the difficulties created by the Spanish 
crisis, and declares that these difficulties can best 
be ironed out by “frank and cordial conversations” 
among the three powers. These conversations are 
to follow the line proposed by Britain last July, 
when it suggested that, once a ‘‘substantial. with- 
drawal” of foreign nationals had taken place, other 
problems, such as the granting of belligerent rights 
to the parties in the Spanish conflict might be use- 
fully discussed. In conclusion, the note states that, 

while France and Britain want to abide by their non- 
— intervention obligations, they will find it difficult to 


and} 40 so unless non-intervention is made effective. 
f the 


e in- 
2com- 
icelot 


York, 


emoc- 
struc- 


ames, 
1937. 


The Franco-British note is several degrees weaker 
New / ‘han the unexpectedly spirited resolution adopted on 
September 30 by the political commission of the 
League Assembly after four days of strenuous ef- 
forts to reach a compromise between the drastic 
demands of the Valencia government, backed by the 
Soviet Union and, to a lesser extent, France, and the 
; More tepid or downright hostile attitude of other 
powers. On September 27 Sefior del Vayo, former 


yvern- 


National 
Editor. 





intervention in Spanish affairs.’ This phrase is ob- 
viously directed not at the International Brigade on 
the Loyalist side, which is composed of individual 
volunteers from many countries, but at the troops 
sent by Italy which, according to Italian sources, 
number five divisions of 5,000 men each under the 
command of generals on the active list, together with 
men in auxiliary services, making a total of at least 
42,000. The League resolution expressed the hope 
that “the diplomatic action recently initiated by cer- 
tain powers’—Britain and France—will prove suc- 
cessful in securing “immediate and -omplete with- 
drawal” of non-Spanish combatants taking part in 
the struggle in Spain. If such a result cannot be 
attained “in the near future,” the League members 
which are parties to the non-intervention agreement 
“will consider ending the non-intervention policy.” 


On October 2 this resolution failed to obtain in 
the Assembly the unanimity necessary to make it 
technically binding on League members. Thirty- 
two delegations voted for, while Albania, Italy’s satel- 
lite, and Portugal, which has openly sympathized 
with General Franco, voted against. Fourteen dele- 
gations abstained from voting, including Austria, Hun- 
gary, Poland, the Irish Free State (whose President, 
Eamon de Valera, said that his country would stick 
to non-intervention no matter what happened), and 
most of the Latin-American countries, which have 






































SI ae ee 


SS 


ees 
ST == 


iene aS 


————— 


a 


= 





et 
Mi 
7 
v4 
: 
*) 
u 


Nee aterm ame. 








given asylum to Franco supporters in their Madrid 
legations. 

Does the moderate tone of the Franco-British note 
indicate a strategic retreat from the position assumed 
by the two democracies both at Nyon and during the 
debates of the League Assembly? Or is it merely in- 
tended to placate Mussolini and prevent him from 
making a final drive for Franco’s victory? So far, 
neither London nor Paris has been unduly disturbed 
by the Hitler-Mussolini colloquy. The two dictators 
were at great pains to stress their pacific intentions 
toward all peoples of “goodwill,” with the notable 
exception of the U.S.S.R., and Italian officials as- 
serted that the Rome-Berlin axis must be coordinated 
with that of London-Paris to form two axles of the 
same vehicle, whose destination apparently is to be 
an all-Fascist Europe. The peace terms offered by the 
dictators are inherent in Hitler's ideology, which 
aims at immobilization of France and Britain in 
Western Europe, and asserts that democracy is the 
breeding-ground of communism. 


Is it possible for Britain and France to reach an 
agreement with the Fascist dictatorships on terms 
which envisage the eventual destruction of de- 
mocracy in Europe? There are men in the British 
government who favor re-establishment of cordial 
relations with Germany and Italy, and would leave 
Eastern Europe to the tender mercies of the Third 
Reich. This view is not shared by those in Britain 
who fear that Hitler, having strengthened German 
economy with the raw materials of Eastern Europe, 
would then turn his arms against the Western de- 
mocracies. But if Britain can still indulge the luxury 
of a possible choice between two alternatives, France, 
by its geographical position, is committed to a two- 
ply policy, which on the one hand looks to collabora- 
tion with the powers bordering on the Atlantic— 
Britain and, more remotely, the United States—and 
on the other seeks to prevent German hegemony on 
the European continent. The problems which now 
divide the European powers do not defy solution by 
negotiations. The real question, however, is whether 
Hitler and Mussolini, as the price of general appease- 
ment, will demand that France jettison its allies in 
Eastern Europe, especially the Soviet Union. The 
task which confronts Franco-British diplomacy is to 
avoid splitting Europe into two camps, as proposed 
by the Fascist dictators, and at the same time find 
compromise solutions which can effectively prevent 
Germany and Italy from keeping Europe in constant 


turmoil. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


THE POWERS CONDEMN JAPAN 


While Japanese troops continued their bombard- 
ment on the Shanghai front and widespread areas 
in north China, the repercussions of the Far Eastern 
crisis were felt with increasing severity in Geneva, 





Page Two —. 





——— 


Washington, London and Moscow, where statesmen 
have been discussing the means available for checking 
Japan and protecting their national interests. Op 
September 28 a formal resolution by 52 nations ip 
the League Assembly condemned ‘‘the bombardment 
by Japanese aircraft of open towns in China,” thus 
reinforcing the separate protests of the great powers 
over the constant destruction of noncombatant life 
and property. Public resentment in the United States 
and Britain was heightened by reports of submarine 
attacks on Chinese fishing junks, resulting in the 
death of several hundred Chinese, and agitation be. 
gan for boycotts against Japanese goods. 

League of Nations activity centered in the Far 
Eastern Advisory Committee. The American Minis. 
ter to Switzerland, Leland Harrison, sat with its 22 
members while they prepared a draft resolution op 
aerial bombardment. The unanimous passage of this 
resolution by the Assembly, sitting for the first time 
in its new hall, was followed by the reading of a 
statement from Secretary Hull reiterating American 
disapproval of Japanese methods. The Advisory 
Committee was urged by the British delegate on 
October 4 to recommend a conference under the 
Nine-Power treaty of 1921, in order that the United 
States might take a more active part in future de. 
liberations. Additional action was considered by the 
League’s technical committee on aid to China, on 


which the United States was also represented. This 


committee favored immediate efforts to assist refu 
gees and combat epidemics through funds raised by 
member states. 

American and British opposition to the Japanese 
invasion was voiced through both official and up 
official channels. Secretary Hull’s note of Septem 
ber 22, protesting the death of noncombatants ai 
Nanking, was met by a coldly noncommital reply 
from Japan one week later. The repeated diplomatic 
protests of the British government were supple 
mented last week by a popular campaign in favor of 
boycotts, led by many of the prominent supportes 
of the 1935 peace poll, such as the League of Nations 
Union, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Liberd 
and Labor statesmen. American merchants reported 
some decline in the sales of Japanese silks and toys 
although the effect of a mass meeting in Madisot 
Square Garden and nation-wide discussions in tht 
press cannot yet be fully estimated. 

While the effect of these moral condemnations 01 
the Japanese military and naval staffs cannot be fore 
told, there seems to be some abatement in the aerid 
bombardment of undefended areas. Perhaps a moft 
serious deterrent is the possibility of material ail 
reaching China from the outside powers. Although 
reports from Tokyo that military supplies are bein 
sent across the Soviet border are difficult to verify, 


(Continued on Page 4) 


' 





| 











tem: 
ts at 
reply 
matit 
pple 
‘or of 
orters 
tions 
iberal 
orted 
toys, 
dison 
n the 


ns of 
fore 
aerial 
mogft 


il aid 


10ugh| 
being! 
eriff, 


Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 4—The State Department let down a thick 
curtain of diplomatic reserve to inquiries last week 
concerning the American reaction to the Japanese 
note on the Nanking bombings. The silence pre- 
vailing in the Department's high-ceilinged offices 
spoke eloquently, however, of the dissatisfaction felt 
by Secretary Hull and his associates. The Tokyo 
communication of September 29, brusque and curt 
in tone, failed to meet the position of the United 
States on two major points. Its reassertion of the 
determination to bomb the Chinese capital — al- 
though qualified by the declaration that such action 
would be limited to ‘‘military facilities and equip- 
ment’’—constituted a fundamental challenge to Sec- 
retary Hull’s thesis that mass air attacks on cities and 
towns inevitably endanger noncombatants, and hence 
are contrary to the principles of humanity and in- 
ternational law. Second, Japan stood pat on its re- 
fusal—earlier voiced in a note of August 31, whose 
receipt the Department had kept secret— to accept 
liability for injury to American lives and property. 


Left with scant grounds for satisfaction by the 
text of the note itself, officials derived a measure of 
compensatory encouragement from the apparent shift 
in Japan’s conduct of hostilities. Since the American 
protest of September 22 Nanking has not been sub- 
jected to general bombardment, and at other points 
Japanese airmen have shown improved ability to di- 
rect their attacks on military objectives. It is argued 
therefore that disapproval voiced by the United States 
and other nations has had its effect in Japan, despite 
the unwillingness of the Tokyo authorities to admit 
this fact. 


For the time being the State Department seems 
disposed to hold its present lines in the controversy, 
without attempting a diplomatic counter-attack. It 
is not believed that proposals to exert political or 
economic pressure on Japan are receiving serious 
consideration. Some hope may be entertained that 
Tokyo's new self-restraint, if continued, will avoid 
the necessity of raising again the question concern- 
ing safety of noncombatants against aerial bombard- 
ment. Moreover, discussion of responsibility for 
damages suffered may be postponed until the end 
of hostilities. 


Munitions shipments tightly controlled. Of- 
ficials profess the belief that the great bulk of public 
Opinion supports the Administration’s attempt to 








follow a middle-of-the-road policy toward the Far 
Eastern crisis. Relief is expressed that as yet no wave 
of ‘moral indignation,” such as is reported in Brit- 
ain, has arisen to hasten or complicate the playing 
of their hand. Few would welcome the development 
at this time of an economic boycott against Jap- 
anese goods. In contrast with the departure from 
Britain of planes and pilots for China, authorized 
by the British air ministry, the export of munitions 
from this country on board American vessels prac- 
tically ceased with the President’s declaration of 
September 14. Although only government-owned 
vessels were expressly forbidden to carry munitions, 
private lines also are now refusing such shipments. 
Experts ridicule the possibility that, in case the Neu- 
trality Act were invoked, China might evade its 
restrictions by organizing a dummy company, say in 
France, which would receive airplanes and then for- 
ward them to the Far East. No export license is 
granted until the Munitions Control Board is satis- 
fied that the ultimate destination stated is a bona 
fide one. Moreover, munitions manufacturers, it is 
reported, now keep the Board informed of any in- 
quiries concerning purchases which come to them 
from foreign sources. 


London more friendly to trade agreement. 
Despite the tortoise-like pace at which conversations 
on the British-American reciprocity treaty have so 
far proceeded, informed circles here express relative 
optimism at the final success of the negotiations. The 
favorable declaration of Anthony Eden in his recent 
radio speech from Geneva was welcomed in Wash- 
ington, although its significance was not over-esti- 
mated in official quarters. Experts believe, however, 
that definite progress has been made since the Runci- 
man visit of last winter. British leaders are pictured 
as at last willing to recognize that real concessions 
must be made to the United States. This change of 
front may not be unrelated to the hope apparently 
cherished in London that a commercial accord with 
the United States might carry with it closer political 
cooperation—a factor of major significance for Em- 
pire defense; and Empire defense, in the face of the 
present world situation, has become a vital interest 
of the Dominions as well as of Britain. : 

For the United States, a reciprocal treaty with Brit- 
ain has importance not only in itself—significant as 
would be a pact with the nation which is our best 
customer. Such an accord, to mention only one of 
many phases, would represent a political asset for the 





ome ft 


> Ae seer Po: 


- >. <A awe 
ee 


er 











Hull trade agreements program, whereas many of 
the other treaties have been attacked as political li- 
abilities. It would directly benefit the farmers and 
help to move agricultural surpluses. The immediate 
cost of the treaty would come out of the ets of 
business and industry, whose products would have 
to meet increased competition from imports of Brit- 
ish manufactured goods. But business and industry 
recognize more generally the importance of export 
markets; they are more friendly than the farmers to 
the trade agreements program; they would profit 
directly from improvement of the farmers’ economic 
position. While the very extent of commercial rela- 
tionships between the two nations will make nego- 
tiations protracted, some observers hope to see the 
treaty signed before spring. 





THE POWERS CONDEMN JAPAN 
(Continued from Page 2) 


there are many indications that the Russians are 
strengthening their defenses along the Amur river. 
The vigorous warning from the U.S.S.R. that attacks 
on its Nanking embassy would not be tolerated and 
the sudden departure for Moscow of its Ambassador 
to China, Dimitri Bogomolov, on September 28 sug- 
gested more active opposition to Japanese advance. 
The British government has approved the sale of an 
unspecified number of highpowered airplanes to 
China and, until the Neutrality Act is invoked, the 
American market remains open except for recent 
limitations on arms shipments. That Japan may be 
preparing for possible League sanctions was indi- 
cated last week by a rapid rise in the price of tin at 
Singapore, and reports that shipments of iron ores 
have increased since August. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


Page Four 





— 


The F.DP.A. Bookshelf 


The United States in World Affairs in 1986, by Whitney 
Shepardson in collaboration with William O. Scroggs, 
Published for the Council on Foreign Relations. New 
York, Harper, 1937. $3.00 
This latest volume of the indispensable series of the 

Council on Foreign Relations is written with the usua] 

accuracy and in unusually lively style. Its clear interpre. 

tations of events and its readability should make it usefy} 
to laymen as well as to specialists. 


The Profits of War, by Richard Lewinsohn. 
from the French by Geoffrey Sainsbury. 
Dutton, 1937. $3.00 


An interesting account of war profiteers since Caesar 
which does not, however, tackle very seriously the actual] 
problems connected with war profits at the present time, 





Translated 
New York, 


Nationality of a Merchant Vessel, by Robert Rienow, 
New York, Columbia, 1937. $2.75 
A study of the law governing the nationality of mer- 
chant ships. 


An Atlas of Current Affairs, third edition, revised, by 
J. F. Horrabin. New York, Alfred A. Knopf, 1937, 
$1.50 
A valuable little reference aid brought up to date. 


Alien Americans, by B. Schrieke. New York, Viking, 


1936. $2.50 

A careful and revealing sociological study of the posi- 
tion and problems mainly of Negroes, but also of Orien- 
tals, Mexicans and Indians in the United States, by an 
experienced Dutch Colonial administrator. This study was 
made under the auspices of the Julius Rosenwald Fund. 


Raw Materials in Peace and War, by Eugene Staley. New 
York, Council on Foreign Relations, 1937. $3.00 
The thesis of this book is that only an effective system of 
collective security and the establishment of supra-national 
control organizations can solve what is essentially a prob- 
lem of war preparedness. 


The Press and World Affairs, by Robert W. Desmond. 
New York, D. Appleton-Century, 1937. $4.00 
A description of the world’s news agencies, the work of 
the foreign correspondent, and newspapers in foreign 
lands. 





Statement of the Ownership, Management, Circulation, Etc., 
Required by the Acts of Congress of August 24, 1912 and 
March, 3, 1933, of 


Foreign Policy Bulletin 
Published weekly at New York, N. Y. for October 1, 1937. 
State of New York, County of New York, ss. 


Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State and county aforesaid, 
personally qoane Vera Micheles Dean, who, having been duly sworn ac- 
cording to law, deposes and says that she is the Editor of the FOREIGN 
POLI BULLETIN, and that the following is, to the best of her knowledge 
and belief, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the afore- 
said publication for the date shown in the above caption, required by the 
Act of August 24, 1912, as amended by the Act of March 3, 1933, em- 
bodied in Section 537, Postal Laws and Regulations, printed on the re- 
verse of this form, to wit: 

1. That the names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing edi- 
tor, and business managers are: 

Publishers—Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 8 West 40th Street, 
New York, N .Y. 

Editor—Vera Micheles Dean, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 

Managing Editor—None. 

Business Managers—None. 

2. That the owner is: 

Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, the principal officers of which 


are: Raymond Leslie Buell, President, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y,; 
and William Eldridge, Treasurer, 70 Broadway, New York, N. Y. 

3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holders 
owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, 
or other securities, are: 

None. 

4. That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners, 
stockholders and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stock- 
holders and security holders as they appear upon the books of the company, 
but also, in cases where the stockholder or security holder appears upon 
books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, the name 
of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting, is gs: also 
that the said two paragraphs contain statements embracing affant’s full 
knowledge and belief as to the circumstances and conditions under which 
stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of the 
company as trustees hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of 
a bona fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any other 
person, association, or corporation has any interest, direct or indirect, in the 
said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by her. 

FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated. 
By VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 

Sworn to and subscribed before me this 20th day of September, 1937. 
{Seal} CAROLYN E. MARTIN, Notary Public. 


New York County, New York, County Clerk’s No. 77. Reg. No. 9-M-270. 
(My commission expires March 30, 1939.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 50, Ocroper 8, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lustig BugLL, President; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





OE og 2 


| 


| 
| 





National 
Entered as second-class mattet , 








FC 


VOL. 
— 


\| 





