





PERIGBICAL Howe 





SEP 6 1946 
































SENBRAL 1) RY 
a “aie men Entered as 2nd class matter 
au General Lis ‘ary - 
% ~Ss¥ersity of Kichizan 
aig ‘nn Arbor, Michtean 
have 
ch is 
‘|| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
Di 
COn- 
ns,” 
The An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
dis. FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
that 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
this 
C0} Vou. XXV, No. 45 Auaust 23, 1946 
—tt 
1) CREATION OF INDIAN GOVERNMENT PROVOKES MOSLEM OPPOSITION 
Ngry HILE Moslem and Hindu rioters ran wild in from the outset on the British proposals for a tem- 
Calcutta and other Indian cities on August porary régime in which both parties would have 
IN | 16-19, killing over three thousand persons and had parity. Congress rejected a coalition on equal 
| injuring many more, the Congress party and the terms with the Moslems, fearing that the latter 
Viceroy, Viscount Wavell, attempted to form a pop- might thereby achieve their goal of Pakistan. The 
ular government capable of ruling India until it Moslems, for their part, would not accept any offer 
gains its full freedom. Jawaharlal Nehru, Presi- by which Congress was free to appoint non-League 
dent of the Congress, accepted the Viceroy’s invi- Moslems to the government. The two parties have 
tation to set up an all-Indian Executive Council on also differed on their interpretation of the powers 
yn || August 12. This decision broke the deadlock which and functions to be assigned to the constituent as- 
be |; had arisen over Britain’s offer to free India, first sembly recently elected to write the new constitu- 
announced by the Attlee Ministry on May 16, when tion. Instead, the League has asked that two con- 
it outlined the basis for a future Indian constitution. stitution-making bodies be established to devise the 
Both Congress and the Moslem League originally basic laws for the separate states it envisages. Con- 
| accepted the long-term proposals of the Labor Cab- gress hopes that the constituent assembly will be- 
g- || inet for India’s new government. On July 29, come fully sovereign at once, and speak and act from 
n- | however, the League revoked its earlier stand and the outset for India as a whole. 
‘ warned of direct action in protest against what it In designating Jawaharlal Nehru to establish a 
2s considered a breach of faith on the part of both representative government, British officials are 
in || Britain and the Hindu-dominated Congress party. about to hand over great authority to the Congress 
Violence first flared up on the day that Mohammed party and its President, who are, of course, prepared 
|| Ali Jinnah, President of the League, called for a and eager to accept this responsibility. The British 
| work stoppage to demonstrate Moslem rejection of Cabinet Mission, which was sent to New Delhi last 
+ the British scheme. Jinnah and other leading Mos- May, went far toward admitting that Congress was 
lems insist that a free India must be a divided India, fully representative of India. The Viceroy has now 
P with Hindustan for the Hindus and Pakistan for required of Nehru only that he include various 
- those areas whose population is predominantly Indian minorities in the new Executive Coundcil. 
Moslem. The Congress President, in turn, has notified 
| QUARREL OVER INTERIM REGIME. Before Viscount Wavell that the Council must be respon- 
making its overture to the Congress party to form sible to the Central Legislature in India, and that 
an interim government, Britain faced a difficult de- the Viceroy’s wide powers of veto over the acts of 
e cision — whether to maintain the present “care- that assembly must be given up. It is doubtful if 
—_t| taker’ régime or attempt to create some form of Wavell can consent in any formal way to this re- 
som! | @l-Indian Executive Council. The Viceroy’s action quest. He may, however, agree to be bound by 


evidences London’s intention to withdraw from In- 
dia, even at the risk of arousing the antagonism of 


Council decisions, except in extraordinary cases 
where it is necessary to employ the army to main- 
tain order. 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


| 
| 
| the Moslems. Congress and the League were split 





ba 
" 
as 
‘a 
ij 
She 
‘ A 
Lan 
- 
; * 
, al 
i 
a 
ey 
in 
i oF 
a 
ri 
, 
+e 
a 
‘a 
* 
oy 
Bt 
ass 
.* 
Fy 
st 
iF 
ft 
> 
ip 
ie 
re 
wa 
2 
bis 
is 
iy 
“e 
a 
i 
{ A 
i 
te 40 
Hey 
, 
i 
hy 
a 
s 
: 
} 


Ae Bet ae 


me 
bs A 2 Whig 2 





a 


gece 














FREEDOM OR CIVIL WAR? Although India 
stands on the threshold of independence, the Mos- 
lem-Hindu rift has widened. Civil war is not im- 
minent, but interparty strife may well delay India 
in taking over complete sovereignty from Britain. 
During the period from the middle of May to the 
current violent outbreaks, there was danger that a 
war of independence against Britain might still 
prove necessary. But this is no longer true. Any 
full-scale civil conflict in India can hardly de- 
velop so long as the Indian army is at hand and 
under control of the central government. Moreover, 
if Congress adherents follow the principles of non- 
violent resistance which Gandhi has championed, 
there is little likelihood of formal warfare. Only 
now has the Moslem League adopted direct action 
techniques. Within recent weeks prominent Mos- 
lems, for the first time, have given up British titles 
and other honors. The League is not as effectively 
organized as Congress, nor does it have as great 
discipline over its members. Neither group is armed, 
but riots and other disturbances may continue until 
India’s constitution is in full operation. 

Until Congress and the League can agree on some 
coalition régime, India will be governed by a Con- 
gress administration. The original British proposals 


Page Two 








aaaumaienenane 
Ee 











for India’s ‘future constitution, therefore, will 
interpreted more according to Congress wishy equal 
than would otherwise have been possible. The cop. point 
stituent assembly itself may now operate mainly} form 
as the Congress party desires. Doubtless the ney} pomi 
India will become a more strongly unified state, for} econ 
Congress has long fought for a united country. By ty; 9 
the British federation plan will be retained, and , 
great degree of provincial autonomy will also by 
sanctioned by the constituent assembly as Britaig 
first suggested. 


tion | 


artaf 
izatic 
is ne 

The Congress government is scheduled to take} was 
office this week, whether or not League Moslems} conf 
are represented. On August 18 Jinnah announced} pen 
to the press that the deadlock between the two par} uf 
ties was “absolute,” and charged that Congres| that 
wished to be installed in power over all Indiag| “for 
minorities with the help of British bayonets. By} Wu 
Indian leaders on both sides decry further blood.| and 
shed, and attempts are still being made to reach L 
agreement between the two parties. The League may| Wht 
decide that its best chance for a full hearing on the | ach 
Pakistan issue can be gained inside, rather than out-| 108! 
side, the interim government. od 
IV! 
GRANT S. MCCLELLAN | Mo 


BIG THREE VIE FOR ECONOMIC RIGHTS IN SMALL COUNTRIES the 


The speeches of the heads of the Big Four dele- 
gations at the Conference of Paris last week clearly 
revealed that in drafting the peace treaties for 
Italy and the three Danubian states, a basic con- 
sideration is the future not only of the economy 
of these former Axis satellites, but of the entire 
world trading system. Russian domination of the 
economy of the Balkans may, however, already be 
a fait accompli. 

MOLOTOV OBJECTS TO EQUAL TRADE 
RIGHTS. In a speech on August 13 assailing 
Premier de Gasperi’s plea for Italy, and two days 
later in a reply to addresses by Secretary of State 
Byrnes and the British delegate, A. V. Alexander, 
the Russian Foreign Minister stated in effect that 
the proposals of the Western powers spelled eco- 
nomic enslavement for Italy and the Balkan states. 
He held no brief for Italy’s territorial claims; but 
he expressed sympathy for the Italian people who 
must bear “‘colossal” occupation costs. If these pay- 
ments were reduced, he said, then the reparations 
due Russia would not be an intolerable burden. 
Mr. Molotov warned the Italian people that they 
were dangerously exposed to “foreign powers, dis- 
posing of great capital and vast means of pressure, 
who exercise their privileges to the detriment of the 
interests of the Italian Republic.” In other remarks, 
he mentioned “certain politicians claiming to be true 
friends of Italy,” and “countries that have become 
even richer in war.” 








tere 


In his second speech, the Soviet spokesman te | 
mis 


ferred again to the dangers he detected in the eco. | 
nomic program of the Western powers. Russia, he 
conceded, favored both reparations and compensa} | 
tion; but compensation for damage to property of | wh 
Allied nationals should not be fully exacted from | she 
the Danubian states, for that would impose too, im 
great a burden on them. Obliquely, he once more ' pa 
reminded his listeners of rich and powerful nations | th 
animated by sinister designs. He dismissed the doc | eis 
trine of equality of economic opportunity with the} du 
remark that it was “not Iceland but the United | ca 
States that suggests this principle,” which “is com | tr; 
venient only to countries capable of dominating the ' m,; 
weaker states through the power of their capital.’ B 
In short, as the Russians saw it, the fateful issue be | af 
fore the conference was whether Western capital- | th 
ism should be allowed to enslave the economies of | th 
small states. | di 
BYRNES’ REBUTTAL. Molotov’s attack on the 

principle of equality of economic opportunity placed | 
the Western powers on the defensive; for, as Mr. t 
Byrnes remarked, that principle was embodied in | ° 
the Atlantic Charter and reaffirmed in the United | “ 
Nations Declaration. It had been taken for granted | ¥ 
that, as members of the UN, Russia and nations 

in its orbit of influence subscribed to the doctrine | ° 
of the sovereign equality of nations; but did this | 
tenet embrace economic equality? The core of | 1 


Byrnes’ speech was that the answer to this ques r 
| 


| 

















AN 


n fe 
> €CO- 
a, he 
ensa- 
ty of 
from 
> too 
more 
tions 
» doc 
h the 
‘nited 
- COn- 
g the 
ital.” 
1e be- 
pital- 
ies of 


n the 
laced 


ctrine 











— 


tion must be in the affirmative. The principles of 
equality and most-favored-nation treatment, he 
pointed out, are two sides of the same coin. The 
former “permits each nation to carry on its eco- 
nomic relations with others along lines of its own 
economic welfare’’—to exercise economic sovereign- 
ty; while the second principle guarantees against 
discriminatory treatment, i.e., preferential trade 
arrangements, the net result of which is the organ- 
ization of the world economy by blocs. That there 
is no equality for smaller states in a trading bloc 
was indicated by Mr. Byrnes when he reminded the 
conference how Germany had practiced economic 
penetration and encirclement in the Danubian 
countries. Would any one suggest, he inquired, 
that the bloc be continued by merely substituting 
“for Germany some other country upon which they 
would be almost entirely dependent for supplies 
and for markets?” 

LOGIC VS. REALITY. If the economic ideals to 
which the United Nations is committed are to be 
achieved, then it must be conceded that Mr. Byrnes’ 
logic is unassailable. As he clearly demonstrated, 
the choice is a unified world economy or a world 
divided into economic blocs. The contention of Mr. 
Molotov, however, that world trade founded on 
the principle of equality can be inimical to the in- 
terests of small and weak nations cannot be dis- 
missed as a mere Communist dictum. Impartial ob- 


WASHINGTON. The Foreign Service Act of 1946, 





| 


| 





| REFORM MERITS PUBLIC SUPPORT. 


which President Truman signed on August 13, 
should make it possible for the United States to 
improve and expand the activities of its 303 em- 
bassies, legations and consulates in 68 countries 
throughout the world. In the opinion of the For- 
eign Service itself the Act is a good but long over- 
due bill, and represents the product of two years of 
careful self-examination by the organization. Con- 
trary to the expectations of the Service, Congress 
made only slight changes in its recommendations. 
Both the House, which passed the bill on July 20 
after a short debate, and the Senate, which rushed 
the measure through on July 29, readily agreed that 
the proposals were essential for the effective con- 
duct of American foreign relations. 


In 
theory the Foreign Service has the two-fold task 
of reporting on international affairs to Washington 
and representing the United States throughout the 
world. In fact, however, the reports of Foreign 
Service officers furnish only one of the many sources 
| of official information concerning developments 


1 this | broad and, in negotiations with foreign govern- 


e of 


a 


ments, the Service can be by-passed by the President, 
the Secretary of State and his assistants, or various 


| 


Page Three 





—_—_— 
en 





servers have often pointed out in the past that when 
a country incorporates the most-favored-nation 
clause in its commercial policy while at the same 
time maintaining a high protective tariff, there is no 
real equality of trade. Multilateral, nondiscrimina- 
tory trade is truly just and equitable for all only 
when trade restraints are at a minimum. Examining 
the commercial policy of the United States during 
the interwar period, it is clear that although this 
country did not practice trade discrimination (the 
insular possessions are an exception), its tariff pol- 
icy was highly protectionist. As a result, equality of 
opportunity to sell in the American market was of 
little practical value. With a constantly favorable 
trade balance, gold flowed in steadily and—even 
though we exported much capital—critics abroad 
accused us of monopolizing the wealth of the world. 
These critics were not by any means always Com- 
munists. Among them were many conservative 
British industrialists who insisted that Britain must 
rely on an empire trading bloc. It is not enough 
merely to remove discriminatory practices to achieve 
freedom of trade. If a study of the interwar period 
proves anything, it is that unless trade barriers are 
markedly reduced, economic blocs will develop. 
This fact is recognized in the American proposals 
for an International Trade Organization. 


Haro_p H. HUTCHESON 


U.S. STREAMLINES MACHINERY OF DIPLOMACY 


government departments. Nevertheless, American 
foreign policy is more strongly influenced by its en- 
voys and career diplomats than is generally realized, 
and the efforts of the Service to reform itself should, 
therefore, be of widespread interest. 

Among the most glaring defects of the Foreign 
Service has been the fact that independent wealth 
has been a prerequisite for the more important diplo- 
matic posts. With the salaries of American Ambas- 
sadors fixed, by a law of 1855, at $17,500 and that 
of Ministers at $10,000, with various allowances 
in addition, it has rarely been possible for men 
without private means to represent the United States 
in the key posts of London, Moscow, Rome, Buenos 
Aires, or even the less expensive capitals. Under the 
new legislation the salaries of Ambassadors and 
Ministers will range from $15,000 to $25,000, plus 
“representation” allowances of $5,000 to $25,000, 
and miscellaneous allowances already authorized by 
law. According to this scale, the American Ambas- 
sador to the Court of St. James, for example, will 
receive approximately $60,000, more than half of 
it tax-free. Basic salaries of career men in the diplo- 
matic service have also been scaled upward, with a 
view to making it at least somewhat more possible 
for men of ability who lack private incomes to be- 
come Foreign Service officers. Whereas young off- 





Teo 


£ 
} 
5 
p 
‘| 
AG 
re 
my 
i) 
“4 
at 
oe 
“ty 


- 
} 
¢ 
: 


ee ears 
erent sapere 


Siang! 


pa Sep FA cc gees: 
ee eee 














cers of the lowest grade formerly received $3,271 
a year and their highest ranking superiors were paid 
$10,000, members of the Service will henceforth 
receive annual salaries ranging from $3,300 to 
$13,500. 

Another serious shortcoming of the Service has 
been its system of promotion. The new law es- 
tablishes larger selection boards, which will be 
composed of three men from the State Department 
and four from the Foreign Service, and provides 
that their members shall seek the widest possible 
basis of evaluation in considering the promotion of 
each officer. Then, in an effort to assure the removal 
of less able members from the Service, the Navy's 
system of “promotion up or selection out” will be 
applied. Under this rule officers who fail to win 
promotion within a prescribed period of years will 
be automatically retired. 

Although the written and oral examinations 
whereby the Foreign Service recruits its officers have 
frequently been attacked as academic and ineffec- 
tive, the organization has not seen fit to change this 
phase of its administration. At the same time the 
Service adheres to its belief in the principle whereby 
the majority of its members must enter at the lowest 
levels and work their way up through the grades. 
Nevertheless, the authors of the reform bill have 
recognized the necessity of permanently modifying 
the apprenticeship system of training in order to 
secure men with outstanding ability along specialized 
lines, and to this end they have established the For- 
eign Service Reserve. These Reserve officers will 
hold temporary appointments at the end of which 
they may be eligible to enter the career service at 
ranks commensurate with their experience, age and 
ability. 

“RE-AMERICANIZATION” PROGRAM. Prob- 
ably the most important new idea in the reform bill 
is embodied in the plan for the ‘‘re-Americaniza- 
tion” of Foreign Service officers. One of the princi- 
pal criticisms which has been leveled at the Service 
has been that its members tend to lose touch with 
developments within the United States and hence 
give an erroneous impression of America abroad. In 
the past the Service has seldom been able to pay 
an officer's fare back to the United States every 
three years, and in many cases the period was 
much longer. The new bill provides compulsory home 
leave after two years of service abroad, and declares 
that at least three of an officer's first fifteen years 
of service shall be spent on assignments in the 
United States. It further contemplates that officers 


Page Four 











will be brought home for advanced in-service trai. 
ing concerning the countries to which they are tp 
be assigned. However, instead of attempting to 
establish an equivalent of West Point or Annapolis 
as a training center, the Service will send its mem. 
bers to various universities to take advantage of 


specialized training programs and to improve “ : 


officer's first-hand knowledge of areas of the Uni 
States with which they were not formerly acquainted, 


Whether these major changes in legislation goy. 
erning the Foreign Service will be sufficient to cop. 
rect in the near future many of the organization's 
outstanding weaknesses is doubtful, largely becaus 
it will require a period of years for the Service to 
reap the results of the new promotion system and 
in-training program. Nevertheless, the fact that the 
Service has attempted its first thorough reorganiza 
tion since 1924 at a time when it is planning a 
increase in membership from 850 to 1,280 holds 
promise of improvement in the technical efficieng 


of American diplomacy. W/inrFrEp N. HADSsEL 














SEP O 
19 




















FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 45, AuGusr 23, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Deas, | 
Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Yea. 
Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
> '81 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





me! 
Au, 
To Members: the 
YOU CAN STILL SAVE 25% a 
on 24 issues of the semi-monthly I 
: . arir 
Foreign Policy Reports * 
Although, beginning next month, the subscription || fo , 
price for members will be $4 yearly, you may subscribe |} «. 
until September 1 to 
at the old rate for members of this 
ally 
odin only $3 | Ru. 
Forthcoming issues of the FOREIGN Poticy Re- || ;, 
PORTS (research reports, 12 to 20 pages each) in- |, th 
clude China in Ferment, by Lawrence K. Rosinger, aed 
who returns Sept. 1st from the Far East. Other early |; MV 
Reports will deal with the role of the armed services |} agr 
in U.S. foreign policy, the Ruhr, the problem of an |} ent 
International Secretariat, and the Arab League. net 
Please use the coupon below and mail it together || p,, 
with your check. ‘ 
ver 
A ee ll ern 
FOREIGN PoLicy ASSOCIATION 
22 East 38th St., New York 16, N. Y. “4 
Please send me the ForEIGN Poticy Reports for one yeat al 
(24 issues). $3 are enclosed ($4 if coupon is mailed after dot 
September 1, 1946). no 
Name | 
Cri 
Ee LA A SOE RE 
af 
I lash tlliainipieniinniteteitinticcimmcncnigai Zone a 
=| ™ 
Nation | 
tat 
to 
Ru 


| 
| 


