


RFRre REFS Lek Ad 


- 


R 


Bk a 


the 
an 
ove 
ent 


yest 
‘Or- 
500 


the 
to 








A CREA Abe ROSH 
fey xP RAL LIGKAR® 
Nie. nv athe ol 





FEB 6 1946 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 16 


Fuprvary 1, 1946 





GREAT-POWER INTERVENTIONS MAKE UNO REGULATION IMPERATIVE 


- neabemaperyabte questions concerning both the 
nature of intervention and the effectiveness of 
the UNO machinery have been raised at the first 
UNO session. The note presented on January 19 to 
the UNO by Iran, charging Russia with interference 
in its internal affairs and asking the Security Council 
to investigate the dispute and recommend appropri- 
ate terms of settlement, was followed on January 21 
by notes from Russia and the Ukrainian Republic 
charging Britain with interference in Greece and 
Indonesia, respectively. All three notes invoked para- 
graph 1 of Article 35 of the UNO Charter, which 
provides that any member of the United Nations 
may bring to the attention of the Security Council or 
of the General Assembly “any dispute, or any situa- 
tion which might lead to international friction or 
give rise to a dispute, in order to determine whether 
the continuance of the dispute or situation is likely 
to endanger the maintenance of international peace 
and security.” 

IRAN DISPUTE AN OLD ISSUE. The dispute 
brought to the attention of the UNO by Iran is 
ostensibly between Iran and Russia over the sup- 
port given by Moscow to the so-called autonomous 
movement in the Iranian province of Azerbaijan oc- 
cupied by Russian troops under the Anglo-Russian- 
Iranian accord of 1942. In reality it represents a 
deep-seated conflict between Britain and Russia con- 
cerning spheres of influence in that strategic and oil- 
tich country—a conflict which dates back to the 
middle of the nineteenth century. It will be recalled 
that the Big Three agreed in 1942 to joint occupa- 
tion of Iran by Allied forces—Russians in the north 
and Britishers in the south—to safeguard the coun- 
try from the Axis and to protect the supply line 
through the Persian Gulf and across Iranian territory 
over which the United States delivered war materials 


to Russia. On December 1, 1943, at the Teheran 
Conference, the Big Three guaranteed the indepen- 
dence of Iran, and agreed that Allied troops should 
be withdrawn six months after termination of the 
war which, according to the Iranians, should have 
been six months after V-E Day, or December 1945. 
The British expressed willingness to withdraw at that 
time, but the Russians made it known that they 
would not leave until March 2, 1946 (six months 
after V-J Day)—and that is the date now set for the 
withdrawal of Russian and British troops from Iran, 
American military personnel having already left the 
country. 

Two days after presentation of the Iranian note 
Premier Hakimi of Iran resigned, being succeeded 
by Ahmad Gavam Saltaneh, wealthy landowner 
with properties in the disputed area of Azerbaijan, 
who has held important government offices in the 
past, and is reported to be well-disposed toward all 
three great powers interested in the country. His 
appointment led to rumors that Iran might with- 
draw its appeal to the UNO, and resume direct nego- 
tiations with Russia which, according to that note, 
had previously ended in failure. But the British gov- 
ernment, which on January 22 had announced that it 
would welcome investigation of Russian and Ukrain- 
ian charges concerning its activities in Greece and 
Indonesia, indicated on January 27 that it would 
oppose wtihdrawal of the Iranian appeal and that, 
if Iran resumed negotiations with Russia, it would 
insist on presentation of a report to the Security 
Council about the progress and results of these nego- 
tiations. . 

Meanwhile, opinion in Greece on Russia’s note 
seemed to be divided. President Sophoulis declared 
that British military forces (whose presence is justi- 
fied by London on the ground that they are needed 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 




















to preserve order and assure free national elections, 
to be held on March 31) are in that country with 
the full consent of the Greek government; but For- 
eign Minister Sophianopoulos, head of the Greek 
delegation to the UNO, was reported to differ from 
this view, and chose to return to Athens rather 
than dispute Russia’s charge. The Dutch objected 
to the Ukrainian note on Indonesia, where British 
troops were dispatched by order of the Allied com- 
mand in the Pacific following Japan’s surrender; 
while “Premier” Sjahrir representing Indonesian Na- 
tionalists said the British could leave at once if they 
transferred the task of disarming and evacuating the 
Japanese to the Nationalists. 


COOPERATION FOSTERS INTERVENTION. 
What we are witnessing all over the world is the by 
no means novel intervention of one or other of the 
great powers in the affairs of those countries which 
are Closest to them geographically or are of special 
concern to them for strategic, political or economic 
reasons. Intervention takes a variety of forms—dip- 
lomatic suasion, support of a given ideology against 
another (by the United States in Argentina, by Rus- 
sia in Rumania and Bulgaria), economic aid con- 
ditioned on fulfillment of political or financial re- 
quirements (in the case of United States aid to 
China and Greece), or presence of military forces 
(in Iran, in Russian-occupied countries of East- 
ern Europe and the Balkans, in British-occupied 
Greece). Wherever it occurs, intervention is invari- 
ably justified by the existence of extraordinary cir- 
cumstances, and is believed by the intervening coun- 
try—for the most part genuinely—to be in the ulti- 
mate interest of the nation on whose territory it 
occurs. 


To contend that no country should ever intervene 
in the “internal” affairs of another is to disregard 
the harsh realities of international life. The line 
between “internal” affairs and their external results 
is growing increasingly tenuous, as we have seen, 
to give only two examples, from our experience with 
Germany and, most recently, Argentina. By the time 
Germany invaded Poland it was generally admitted 
that the Nazi system had become a menace to other 





Recent FPA Publications: 


IRAN: Test of Relations between Great 
and Small Nations 
by C. P. Grant 
GREECE: The War and Aftermath 
by L. S. Stavrianos 


25c¢ each 


FoREIGN Po.icy Reports are published on the 1st and 15th 
of each month. 


Subscription, $5; to FPA members, $3. 











Page Two 





eT 
— 





countries. Yet during the preceding six years when 
that system was consolidating itself in full view of 
the world, it was argued by many that “internal” 
developments in Germany could not legitimately be 
made a reason for outside intervention. Similarly, 
while it is more and more evident that the activities 
of the ‘colonels’ government’’ in Argentina threaten 
the security of the Western Hemisphere, many people 
in the United States strongly feel that, as long as that 
government has committed no overt act of war, in. 
tervention by Washington in what are described as 
Argentina’s internal affairs would be unjustified, and 
ultimately harmful to our relations with Latin 
America. 


UNO MACHINERY SHOULD BE USED. Soon- 
er or later we must face the fact that, the more we 
expand the sphere of international cooperation, the 
more what happens in any country is of direct con- 
cern to every other country in the world. Hitherto, 
however, nations have not defined the acts or forms 
of conduct which the international community will 
not tolerate on the part of any of its members, and 
which would justify intervention. Such definition 
would of itself require admission, on the part of all 
nations, that national sovereignty can no longer 
be maintained in a rigid form. The transition 
period during which nations reassess the concept of 
sovereignty is bound to be painful and confusing. 
The wholesale intervention now going on in all 
quarters of the globe has at least the advantage of 
forcing all powers to face an issue too often becloud- 
ed in the past by confused thinking. So far as the 
United States is concerned, the question whether we 
should intervene or not is further confused by the 
ardor with which liberal groups who once opposed 
American intervention in Haiti and Nicaragua (and 
still oppose it in China) now urge it in Spain and 
Argentina. And, conversely, American conservatives 
who opposed intervention in Spain frequently urge 
it in Rumania, Bulgaria and Poland. 


If the objection to current interventions by Russia 
or Britain is their unilateral character, then the next 
step is to consider the possibility of international in- 
tervention. This concept is familiar, although more 
in theory than in practice, to the twenty-one nations 
of the Western Hemisphere; and there is every rea- 
son for its application by the UNO. Far from de 
ploring, as some Americans are doing, the fact that 
the UNO, at this early stage of its existence, has 
been confronted with issues of the utmost serious 
ness, we should welcome this development. For it 
should be obvious, first, that these issues cannot be 
kept on ice until an undefined date when some one 
will declare the UNO open for other than procedural 
business; and, second, that if these issues are fe 
moved, even for a relatively brief period, from the 
jurisdiction of the UNO, and left to traditional dip- 





q — 


jomatic | 
geated 

gength 
gcising 
(oo easy 


Can | 
france < 
basic he 
ychieve | 
the Com 
Popular 
the Fret 
new CO 
Gouin | 
adequat 
threater 
Knov 
ident G 
man wl 
France. 
town la 
and his 
wartim: 
Léon E 
membe 
Algiers 
Nation 
LEF 
The co 
which 
porary 
ene, 
sister” 
single 
tober 
govern 
ngnes 
that h 
three | 
maint 
only a 
with t 
his pr 
de Ga 
to sta 
media 
On 
thes. jc 
large 
Comr 
Frenc 
food, 
allott 
count 


threa 








— 
= 


> DoS w& 


oT ee 


5p A. 


mo il 








jpmatic practices, we shall be weakening the newly 
seated international organization instead of 
grengthening it. The UNO will wax strong by ex- 
gcising its functions, not by evading them. It is only 
0 easy to let the UNO become stunted through an 


Can Felix Gouin, elected interim President of 
france on January 23, succeed in maintaining the 
sic harmony that General de Gaulle failed to 
xhieve among the “Big Three” of French politics— 
he Communists, Socialists and the more conservative 
Popular Republicans (MRP)? This is the question 
the French are anxiously asking themselves as the 
nw coalition government formed by President 
Gouin plans drastic measures designed to provide 
adequate food rations and check the inflation that 
threatens the country. 

Known as a mediator rather than as a leader, Pres- 
ident Gouin is a conscientious rather than a colorful 
man who has been called “the Calvin Coolidge of 
france.” He has spent much of his life as a small- 
town lawyer and worker in the local Socialist party, 
ind his national reputation rests primarily on his 
wartime record as one of the lawyers who defended 
Léon Blum at the Riom war-guilt trials and as a 
member of de Gaulle’s provisional government in 
Algiers. Since November he has presided over the 
National Constituent Assembly. 


LEFT WINS VICTORY OVER DE GAULLE. 
The conflict between de Gaulle and the Assembly, 
which resulted on January 20 in at least tem- 
porary withdrawal of the General from the political 
«ene, was basically a struggle between “the first re- 
ister” and the Communists, who emerged as the 
ingle largest party in the national elections of Oc- 
tober 21. Although de Gaulle formed a tripartite 
government last November and declared his will- 
ingness to work with the Communists, he indicated 
that he would not permit them to hold any of the 
thtee principal posts in his cabinet. He succeeded in 
maintaining this position of ascendancy, however, 
only as long as he was able to count on the Socialists, 
with the aid of the MRP, to support him in carrying 
his proposals through the Assembly. Until January 
de Gaulle believed that the Socialists would continue 
to stand by him on crucial issues, or at least act as 
mediators between the Communists and the MRP. 

On New Year's Day, however, the two Leftist par- 
tis joined in opposing de Gaulle’s demands for a 
large military budget. In doing so, the Socialists and 
Communists were championing a popular cause, for 
French civilians have been gazing longingly at the 
food, clothing, gasoline and other supplies liberally 
illotted to the army at a time when the rest of the 
®untry is hungry and cold. Yet when de Gaulle 
thteatened to resign if France were shorn of the 





Page Three 








excessive diet of procedural matters. The sooner it 
starts working on real issues of international affairs, 
the more hope there can be of its ultimate effective- 
ness in settling them by peaceful means. 

VeRA MICHELES DEAN 


GRAVE ECONOMIC ISSUES HARASS NEW FRENCH CABINET 


military power he considers essential for its prestige 
abroad, the Socialists backed down and arranged a 
compromise between the Communists and the Gen- 
eral on army appropriations. This compromise was 
to expire in February, and de Gaulle feared the 
Socialists would then again join the Communists in 
requesting military reductions. 


The second issue on which the Socialists agreed 
with the Communists was the role of the president 
in the Fourth Republic, whose constitution is now 
being drafted by the Constituent Assembly. The Gen- 
eral believed that the traditional form of French 
government—in which parties and blocs predomi- 
nated and a strong executive was mistrusted—should 
be replaced by a government in which the president 
enjoyed powers similar to those of the American 
chief executive. He hoped the Socialists as well as 
the MRP would support his view in opposition to 
that of the Communists, who advocated a strong 
legislature. During January, however, Socialist mem- 
bers of the Assembly’s committee charged with draft- 
ing the new constitution joined the Communists in 
proposing that the legislative branch of the govern- 
ment be supreme. De Gaulle, concluding that the 
place of honor reserved for him as President of the 
proposed Fourth Republic was to be that of a mere 
figurehead, decided to reject it in advance. 


WAS COMPROMISE IMPOSSIBLE? The valid- 
ity of de Gaulle’s belief that the Socialists had de- 
serted him and formed an entente with the Com- 
munists, thus upsetting the balance among France's 
three major parties, is open to question. The Social- 
ists have traditionally opposed strong executives. 
They have also opposed a large standing army, not 
only because of their conviction that money and man- 
power expended on the military could be more con- 
structively spent on production of civilian goods, but 
because of fear that the army might be used in a 
Rightist coup against the Left. The mere fact, there- 
fore, that the Socialists made common cause with 
the Communists on these two issues does not neces- 
sarily mean that they see eye-to-eye with the ex- 
treme Left on other outstanding questions, such as 
foreign policy and methods of carrying out major 
economic and social reforms. A political leader more 
capable of compromise than de Gaulle might have 
found it possible to accept Leftist victories on certain 
points, and then awaited a shift in political forces 
that would favor him on other issues. 














idee PIT Thal i Se 


ee Cece ey 


1 gen MR Ot Gig AE TA a 


ere oor 


ee 


et ao BE selne me  - 42 











Whether or not de Gaulle’s resignation was pre- 
cipitate, as even some of his strongest supporters in 
France are contending, there is little doubt that it 
has widened the chasm between the extreme Left 
and the more conservative elements in France. More- 
over, de Gaulle’s withdrawal has left the country 
without strong leadership—however much that lead- 
ership was contested by certain groups in the As- 
sembly—at a moment when France faces problems 
which only a government capable of rallying wide- 
spread public support can handle. In an effort to 
curb inflation, President Gouin has suggested a series 
of deflationary measures similar to those proposed by 
Mendés-France, de Gaulle’s former Minister of Na- 
tional Economy, who resigned a year ago when his 
stern financial proposals failed to win official en- 
dorsement. But the ability of the Gouin government 
to carry through a program calling for additional 
taxation, wage ceilings, and reduction of government 
subsidies used to prevent unemployment, at a time 
when bread is rationed and other daily necessities 
are almost non-existent, is far from assured. 


U.S. AID ESSENTIAL. To some extent, the suc- 
cess or failure of the Gouin government’s efforts to 
curb inflation will depend on the effectiveness of the 
“shock treatment,” consisting of a series of official 
statements revealing new facts about the perilous 


THE F.P.A. 


New Crops for the New World, edited by Charles Morrow 
Wilson. New York, Macmillan, 1945. $3.50 


A symposium by experts who write interestingly of new 
foods, fibers, and other types of crops developed to com- 
pensate for many products cut off by war in the Pacific. 


Home to India, by Santha Rama Rau. New York, Harper, 
1945. $2.50 
Thin in bulk, but far from thin in content, this is a de- 
lightful picture of the country and people, written with 
informed understanding. 


The Gravediggers of France: Gamelin, Daladier, Reynaud, 
Pétain, and Laval, by Pertinax (André Géraud). New 
York, Doubleday, 1944. $6.00 


By all standards, this is one of the most important 
books on the recent history of France. As one who knew 
all the outstanding French military and political leaders 
of the inter-war years, this world-famous journalist shows 
where and how disunity undermined the nation’s powers 
of resistance and prepared the way for the Vichy régime 
and collaboration with the Nazis. 


The Philippine Islands, by W. Cameron Forbes. Cambridge, 
Mass., Harvard University Press, 1945. $5.00 


Abridged to one volume and brought up to date by new 
material, this is a convenient edition of Governor-General 
Forbes’ earlier, standard two-volume work of 1928. Sergio 
Osmejia, President of the Philippine Commonwealth, con- 
tributes a foreword. 


Page Four 


BOOKSHELF 








state of the national economy, which the cabinet ; 
now giving the French people in an effort to pai 
public support for sweeping deflationary proposak 
In striking contrast to de Gaulle’s statement in }j 
letter of resignation that “the nation is no longer; 
a state of alarm,” the Gouin cabinet is bluntly & 
claring that the inflationary policies pursued by th 
General, whose main interest was in foreign affaig 
rather than domestic matters, have led France to th 
brink of financial disaster. 


Any serious efforts to halt inflation will also hay 
to secure Communist support if they are to be ef. 
fective. But since the workers would be among tly 
first to suffer from the deflation now being propose 
by the Socialists, the Communists may be unwilling 
to endorse the proposals, particularly in view of th 
new elections scheduled to be held in May, whe 
the Assembly has completed the constitution. Aboy 
all, France’s success in carrying out stiff financig 
measures designed to put its economic affairs ip 
order depends on the United States. By increasing 
shipments of food, raw materials and machinery, the 
United States could do much to tide the French oye 
their present economic crisis, which might otherwis: 
lead to the establishment of some form of author 
itarian government. 


WINIFRED N. Hapsei 


Universal Military Training, by Col. Edward A. Fite 
patrick, AUS. New York, Whittlesey House, McGray 
Hill, 1945. $3.00 


Although backing the War Department’s plan for train 
ing during peace, the author also gives the opponents’ side, 


thereby providing useful background for this much-dis 
cussed problem. 


Nusantara—A History of the East Indian Archipelago, by 
Bernard H. M. Viekke. Cambridge, Harvard University 
Press, 1944. $5.00 





Full of interesting facts about economic, social and po 
litical developments, Dr. Vlekke’s readable and scholarly 
book surveys Indonesian history down to the Japanese 
conquest of 1942. 


Soviet Far Eastern Policy, 1931-1945, by Harriet L. Moore. 
Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1945. $2.50 


An excellent survey of a crucial sector of international 
relations, supplemented by valuable documentary appet- 
dices. In addition to using English-language materials, the 
author has made extensive use of Russian sources. 


Netherlands India—A Study of Plural Economy, by J. 8. 
Furnivall. New York, Macmillan, 1944. $4.00 


A valuable book because the British author, with ad 
mirable impartiality, analyzes Dutch problems in the light 
of his own experience in Burma. The economic analysis 
is presented with enough historical background to give 
a well-rounded picture. 





FORBIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 16, Fasruary 1, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nations 
Headquarters, 22 Bast 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vara MicneLes Dean, Editer, Bavered & 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at leas 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


81 


Prodaced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








19 





cry 


Vou. x 


| 


Ou 
dragc 
today 
eral « 
warlc 
tang 
arms 


truce 
come 
Cons 
react 
tives 
the | 





