






ND. 
at it 
nited 
eace, 
lling 
€ re- 
’ the 
with- 
uture 
it by 
t the 
f the 
verse 
igned 
arned 
Jnited 


eficial 
ations 
of the 
re the 
e for- 
epart: 
cutive 
on the 


PBRiVviiaw KUUM 
GENERAL LIS<ARY 
wRIV. OF MICH. 


FOREIGN 


APR 2 1943 


ral Library Entered as 2nd class matter 


Awe 


POLICY BULLETIN | 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Siaff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





You. XXII, No. 24 


———— 


ApriL 2, 1943 





Y taking the world for his canvas, rather than 
Europe—as Mr. Churchill had done five days 
eatlier—Anthony Eden in his address before the 
Maryland General Assembly on March 26 was able 
to dispel certain doubts with respect to Britain’s at- 
titude toward China and to paint a clearer over-all 
picture of British foreign policy than that of the 
Prime Minister. Indeed, if this address is taken in 
conjunction with Mr. Churchill’s, with earlier 
oficial and unofficial statements in Britain, and with 
feports emanating from Washington regarding dis- 
cussions between Mr. Eden, President Roosevelt, 
Mr. Hull and Mr. Welles, it is possible to discern 
several basic principles which are likely to guide 
British policy in the post-war world. 

Whether these principles can be realized will de- 
pend, of course, on the fortunes of war and the 
policies adopted by the other United Nations, particu- 
larly the United States and the Soviet Union. It will 
depend, too, on the ability of British statesmen 
and the British people to share the heavy burden 
of world leadership at a time when the island king- 
dom’s relative power is declining. But that the Brit- 





rough 
t that, 
in the 
ecured 
Treaty 
e Sen- 
‘oreign 
iced a 
rote in 
If this 
States 
s, and 
verted. 
IOTT 


DS 





ish are preparing to face the task, and intend to 
be ready to shoulder the burden, can hardly be 
questioned. 

SOME BASIC POLICIES. 1. As a result of the 
change in their position among world powers, the 
British may be expected to show a keener interest 
than any other great nation in encouraging and per- 
petuating the ‘‘mixing-up” process which has been 
taking place in the affairs of the United Nations 
during the war. They appear fully prepared to par- 
ticipate in international action designed to rid the 
world of both fear and want—the former by some 
kind of international police force, the latter by 
international economic machinery. As Mr. Churchill 
suggested on March 21, the framework within which 
these objectives might be realized would consist of 








EDEN HELPS CLARIFY PRINCIPLES OF BRITISH FOREIGN POLICY 


regional councils for Europe and Asia, and doubt- 
less the British would not be averse to a council for 
the Western Hemisphere and to the linking of all 
three into a broad world organization. 

2. Recognizing the necessary limits to this in- 
tegration and the fact that for many years at least 
the great powers will retain a large measure of in- 
dividuality and sovereignty, the British consider it 
essential to put their relations with the United States, 
the Soviet Union and China on a sound basis. Britain 
thinks of the future neither in Anglo-American nor 
Anglo-Russian terms. Mr. Churchill's activities since 
he became Prime Minister in 1940, as well as Mr. 
Eden’s present visit, point to the importance Britain 
attaches to Anglo-American understanding, while 
the Anglo-Soviet treaty of alliance is evidence of an 
entirely new policy toward Russia. Relinquishment 
of extraterritorial rights in China and the assurances 
given to that country publicly—and reputedly in 
private—by Mr. Eden attest to British interest in the 
improvement of Chinese-British relations. 

3. The British accept the impact of changing condi- 
tions on their geographic position, and see them- 
selves now more than ever as a European power, 
with new and heavy responsibilities, and an obligation 
to work out lasting relationships with the peoples of 
Europe. In this task, they view the participation cf 


both Russia and the United States as essential, but, 


look also to the revival of a strong France and the 
development of federations among the small Euro- 
pean states. As for Germany, the Reich is to be elim- 
inated as a military power, while the German people 
are to be given an opportunity to rebuild their eco- 
nomic life and participate in the affairs of a Europe 
more unified than it was in 1939. 

4. The British recognize that’ twentieth-century 
conditions call for a new type of association between 


the advanced and the less advanced peoples of the. 


world, and that they as the greatest colonial power 























have a special responsibility in working out that 
relationship. They see the task not in terms of sur- 
render of any colonial territory held in 1939 or in 
the establishment of an international colonial ad- 
ministration, but in an improved British administra- 
tion, concentrating on economic as well as political 
progress—and possibly in conjunction with interna- 
tional cooperation involving a colonial charter for 
all dependent areas and some form of general joint 
supervision. Britain seeks no extension of its 
boundaries or increase of its possessions, as Mr. 
Eden made clear. It contemplates the future of the 
colonies, as well as India, within the Commonwealth, 
rather than in complete severance of connections 
with the British Crown. 


5. Acknowledging the relative decline of their 
economic power in the world, the British regard 
with greater approval than ever before interna- 
tional agreements on trade and monetary policies to 
prevent economic warfare in which both they and 
the rest of the world would suffer. While there is 
some support in Britain for the renewal, and even 
extension, of bilateral trading as a solution for the 


== Page Two 








es 
— 


British export problem, the government is com. 
mitted along with the United States and a growing 
number of the United Nations to the pursuit of q 
policy of economic collaboration designed to promote 
the freer exchange of goods. 

BRITISH INSULARITY DESTROYED. In con. 
clusion it may be said that British insularity, which 
in its way was as profound as American isolation in 
the inter-war years, has suffered a blow from which 
it is not likely to recover. Mr. Eden described the 
two fundamental aspects of this shift very clearly, 
“If there is one lesson we should have learned from 
the distresses of those years, it is surely this: that we 
cannot shut our windows and draw our curtains, 
and be careless of what is happening next door or 
on the other side of the street. No nation can close 
its frontiers and hope to live secure.’ Nor, he con. 
tinued, can we “have prosperity in one country and 
misery in its neighbor, peace in one hemisphere and 
war in the other.” Thus, Mr. Eden indicated, freedom 
from fear and from want must be guaranteed to all 
peoples, and Britain is now ready to support measures 


that would assure both. pyowarp P. WHIDDEN, JR 


ECONOMIC SECURITY BASIC IN POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION 


Changes in ways of life and work resulting from 
the machine age have created a condition of eco- 
nomic insecurity unparalleled in former times. The 
industrial revolution of the past century has caused 
periodic economic depressions which have disrupted 
the existence of millions of human beings by sud- 
denly depriving them of their means of livelihood. 
Ever since the beginning of these crises—and more 
particularly since the world-wide depression of the 
early thirties—many persons have gradually come 
to consider security of employment more important 
than high wages, or even political freedom. 

TREND TOWARD ECONOMIC SECURITY. 
Legislative measures, designed to offer at least some 
protection in case of loss of income, have been 
passed in various countries since the latter part of 
the nineteenth century. In Europe especially, com- 
pulsory insurance schemes were enacted which gave 





Have the reciprocal agreements aided U.S. trade? 
What effect has war had on the trade program? 
What is Congress prepared to do regarding re- 
newal of this Act and to help along post-war eco- 
nomic reconstruction? READ— 


RECIPROCAL TRADE PROGRAM AND 
POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION 


by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25¢ 


April 1 issue of ForziGN Poticy Reports 
Reports are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











material benefits to certain categories of workers or 
their dependents in case of sickness, childbirth, old 
age, death and, more recently, unemployment. Simi: 
lar measures were introduced in the United States 


by the Roosevelt Administration. As a rule, how- { 


ever, the benefits provided by such social legisla 
tion have been too limited in time and population- 
coverage to insure real freedom from want. 

In World War II the urge to define social wat 
aims has prompted Allied leaders to make general 
declarations of principle, the most explicit of which 
is the fifth point of the Atlantic Charter, urging 
implementation of “improved labor standards, eco- 
nomic adjustment, and social security” for all. In 
preparation for enforcement of these principles, 
various governments have sponsored the drafting of 
national social security programs. Outstanding 
among these are the “Beveridge Plan,” submitted 
to the British government by a Royal Commission 
on Social Insurance in December 1942, and the 
“Post-War Plan and Program” prepared by the 
National Resources Planning Board and transmitted 
by President Roosevelt to Congress on March 10, 
1943. 

BLUEPRINTS OF ECONOMIC SECURITY. 
Both the Beveridge and the American plan seek the 
same general result—elimination of economic inse 
curity in the future. Each, however, attacks the prob- 
lem from a different angle. 

The Beveridge plan is a complete, national com 
pulsory insurance scheme, purporting to cover all 
classes, in all cases, “from the cradle to the grave. 











-_-~ nar ee © 





—— 


com- 
wing 
of a 
mote 


con- 
vhich 
on in 
vhich 
1 the 
carly, 
from 
at we 
tains, 
Of or 
close 
» Con 
y and 
e and 
edom 
to all 
asures 


N, JR. 


ers Of 
n, old 

Simi- 
States 

how- 
egisla- 
|ation- 


il war 
eneral 
which 
urging 
S, @CO- 
all. In 
ciples, 
‘ing of 
anding 
mitted 
nission 
id the 
by the 
smitted 
‘ch 10, 


FRITY. 
eek the 
ic imse 
e prob- 
al com- 


ver all 
grave. 

















NN 
—_ 





It fixes in monetary terms the insurance benefits 
which every person, or his or her dependents, will 
receive in case of sickness, unemployment, child- 
birth, old age or death. It is a positive, actuarial 
plan, with dues and benefits clearly defined. As such, 
it will satisfy those who ask for concrete, measurable 
proposals. But it has a vulnerable flank, for it rests 
on the assumption that employment will be normal 
in peactime. Should the post-war period witness 
mass unemployment, its operation would be seri- 
ously endangered. While the Beveridge plan does not 
deal with the means for creating sufficient em- 
ployment after the war, this side of the problem 
was discussed in general terms by Prime Minister 
Churchill in his speech of March 21, and: evidently 
will be worked out more specifically in a later stage. 

The American plan for social security attacks the 
problem from precisely the opposite angle. It is not 
primarily a measure for wider social insurance, al- 
though it proposes to extend the present social se- 
cutity system to groups now excluded. It does not, 
therefore, attempt to specify benefits in dollars and 
cents, or to compile tables indicating how the costs 
of social security will be distributed. Instead, it is 
essentially a program tending to guarantee work 
and decent living conditions to every one in the 
future. As such, it deals mainly with problems of 
demobilization, post-war employment, public works, 
post-war rehabilitation, and the expansion of indus- 
try and agriculture. It paves the way for solution 
of the basic economic problem of our time: how to 
assure steady employment and decent living condi- 
tions for all after the war. It assumes that if this 


THE F.P.A. 


Political Handbook of the World, 19438, edited by Walter 
H. Mallory. New York, Harper, for the Council on For- 
eign Relations, 1943. $2.50 
The sixteenth issue of this invaluable annual brings up 

to date developments in governments of Axis-controlled 

countries, describes both the Giraud Administration in 

North Africa and the Fighting French government in 

London, and lists the cabinets of the governments-in-exile 

and those of the belligerent countries. 


Nazi Conquest of Danzig, by Hans L. Leonhardt. Chicago, 
University of Chicago Press, 1942. $3.50 
A well documented, though somewhat legalistic account 
of the gradual “nazification” of the Free State of Danzig 
from 1933 to 1939, and the way the League of Nations 
Council side-stepped the protection of the democratic con- 
stitution of Danzig against Nazi encroachments. 


Greenland, by Vilhjalmur Stefansson. New York, Double- 
day Doran, 1942. $3.50 
A leading Arctic scholar’s story of the world’s largest 
island, which dominates the middle of the North Atlantic 
and harbors Allied ships and planes. 


Page Three 














fundamental difficulty is solved, the introduction 
of a general system of social insurance will be an 
easy matter. If, on the other hand, it is not over- 


come, even the best-planned insurance scheme will — 


be condemned to failure, for a sane economy must 
be based on the production and consumption of 
goods and services, and cannot survive on the dis- 
tribution of subsidies. 

For the time being, the Beveridge plan and the 
American plan are still in the form of proposals 
drafted by experts and submitted to competent 
bodies for action. A long time may pass before they 
are fully acted upon. But it is only by their implemen- 
tation, in one form or another, that we will approach 
lasting economic prosperity and social peace. In the 
meantime, their authors have mapped a road through 
the jungle of economic instability which separates 
man from one of his oldest goals—freedom from 
want. It is now up to the democracies to decide if, 
when, and how they want to build that road. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


(This is the last in a series of four articles on post-war 
economic reconstruction.) 





FPA TO BROADCAST ON APRIL 3 


On Saturday, April 3, the Foreign Policy Associa- 
tion will broadcast its fourth round-table discussion 
over the Blue Network from 1:15 to 1:45 p.m. The 
subject will be renewal of the reciprocal trade trea- 
ties; and the speakers will include Vera Micheles 
Dean, Howard P. Whidden, Jr., of the Associa- 
tion’s research staff, and Dr. J. B. Condliffe. James 
G. McDonald will act as chairman. 


BOOKSHELF 


How Japan Plans to Win, by Kinoaki Matsuo, translated 
from the Japanese by Kilsoo K. Haan. Boston, Little, 
Brown, 1942. $2.50 
Translation of The Three-Power Alliance and a U.S.- 

Japanese War, published in Japan in October 1940. Inter- 


esting chiefly as an instance of the psychology of Japanese 
militarists. 


Guam and Its People, by Laura Thompson. New York, 
Institute of Pacific Relations, 1941. $2.50 


A social anthropologist presents an absorbing analysis 
of the problems of education in a colonial area. Essentially 
the story of life and change in Guam before Pearl Harbor, 
under the impact of foreign influence. 


Men Behind the War, by Johannes Steel. New York, Sheri- 
dan House, 1942. $3.50. 


Sketches by a well-known radio commentator and cor- 
respondent of the public and private lives of more than 
70 European and Asiatic leaders who have influenced the 
history of our time. Special emphasis on the way Hitler 
has affected their careers. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 24, Aprit 2, 1943. 


Published weekly by. the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micugius Dean, Editer. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Bp 81 


EE: 


ss i 








Washington News Letter 

















Mar. 29.—Winston Churchill’s failure, in his 
broadcast of March 21, to include France among the 
powers to be charged with maintaining peace in 
Europe after the war has caused some chagrin in 
French circles here. Since France fell while fighting 
in a common cause, the United States and Britain 
have a moral obligation not only to reestablish the 
territorial frontiers of France as they existed in 
1939, but also to restore France to its position as 
one of the great powers of Europe so far as it lies 
within their ability. It was Prime Minister Stanley 
Baldwin who, in 1934, proclaimed that Britain’s 
frontier was on the Rhine, and President Roosevelt 
is credited with having made a similar remark to a 
group of Congressmen in the spring of 1939 re- 
garding America’s frontiers. But, despite this lip 
service to what is now generally admitted to be a 
truism, neither Anglo-Saxon power was in a posi- 
tion to adequately defend its own outer bastion when 
the Nazi assault on France occurred in 1940. 


“SENTINEL OF LIBERTY.” Not only a sense 
of fair play, but expediency demands that France 
should be enabled to fill again its historic role, 
which Woodrow Wilson once defined as that of 
“the Sentinel of Liberty on the Rhine.” Any attempt 
to treat France as a negligible factor in the post-war 
settlement would almost inevitably result in a Treaty 
of Rapallo between that country and Germany, with 
the nationalist elements in both countries conspiring 
to upset the status quo. 


France, however, cannot resume its position as 
the first continental power of Western Europe merely 
by the good wishes of the United States and Britain. 
The first condition of its revival is restoration of 
national unity. Internal dissension was one of the 
primary causes of France's collapse, and this is to- 
day—fully as much as Nazi occupation of its terri- 
tory—a main barrier to its recovery. 


It is this fact that lends such importance to the 
negotiations that General Georges Catroux, de 
Gaulle’s representative, is now conducting in North 
Africa with General Henri Honoré Giraud, head of 
the French Administration, for a merger between 
his forces and those of the Fighting French. For if 
Frenchmen engaged in the common task of fighting 
Germany cannot agree, it is difficult to see how 
French national unity is going to be restored within 
the lifetime of the present generation. It is particu- 
larly important that such an accord should be reached 


FOR VICTORY ° 


before the Allies undertake the invasion of Euro 
so that such an attack would have the whole-hearted 
cooperation of the French people. | 


Since the Casablanca meeting in January, much 
has been accomplished by General Giraud to make 
possible such an agreement. On March 17 he te. 
pealed all Vichy decrees issued since the Armistice, 
Nine days later, he severed ties with Vichy by re. 
moving from circulation stamps bearing Pétain’s 
picture and having all posters, pictures, and slogans 
of the Marshal taken down from the buildings in 
North Africa. Two of the chief pro-Vichy figures 
in the French Administration—General Jean Ber- 
geret, deputy civil commander-in-chief, and Jean 
Rigaud, former Cagoulard who was Secretary of 
Political Affairs—saw the signs of the times and 
quit. On March 17 General Giraud formally restored 
the laws of the Third Republic. In addition, many 

litical prisoners have been liberated and the ban 
on the de Gaullist movement lifted. 


SHOW NEED FOR UNITY. In the meantime, 
two recent incidents have sharply stressed the need 
for the unity of all anti-Axis Frenchmen. The first 
was the desertion to the Fighting French movement 
of sailors from the battleship Richelieu (now sta 
tioned in the New York navy yard undergoing re. 
pairs) on such a scale as to threaten immobilization 
of this 35,000-ton battleship. The other is the ques- 
tion of the status of French Guiana, which has se 
ceded from the rule of pro-Vichy Admiral Georges 
Robert, governor of Martinique, and to which both 
Generals de Gaulle and Giraud have assigned Pro- 
consuls. 


French unity will never be realized so long as 
Frenchmen continue to be dominated by a spirit of 
narrow partisanship. It is necessary, too, that French- 
men abandon that “‘pharisaical attitude’ recently 
condemned by Randolph Churchill, son of the Brit- 
ish Prime Minister, in a letter to a London news- 
paper—which, as he said, tends “to assume that 
any Frenchman who had occupied an official posi- 
tion under the Vichy Government must be a traitor 
or possessed of a Fascist mentality.” Unity can only 
be attained when Frenchmen are inspired by the slo- 
gan of Valmy, the underground newspaper pub- 
lished in metropolitan France: “only one enemy— 
the invader.” 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





a 


