sned 


t of 


COn- 


Taft. 


Darts 
ines 
y of 
pan 
arth- 


task 
ling. 
«the 
ttle. 
and 
rt of 
ria | 


paid 
1 the 
“for 


onal 
eral 
de- 
1 his 
and | 


iplo- 


ational 
Editor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVIII, No. 39 


—_—_— 


EUROPE’S DIPLOMATIC TUG OF WAR 
by Vera Micheles Dean 

How would Europe line up in case of war? 

This report summarizes the new European align- 


ments, and analyzes the official commitments on 
which they rest. 


July 15 issue of FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS .. . 25 cents 


JULY 21, 1939 





JUL 26 1939 _ 


second- 





class matter December 
GENERA\L, LIBRARY Office at New York, 
UNIV. OF MIGH. N. ¥., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 
University of Michigan 
Ann Mich. 


Arbor, 











BRITAIN PREPARES FOR A SHOWDOWN 





URING the ominous quiet that has prevailed in 
Europe for the past several weeks, statesmen 
and soldiers appear to be setting the stage for another 
September melodrama. The Rome-Berlin axis is tenta- 
tively advancing its demands, seeking allies, and 
testing the nerves of its opponents in almost exactly 
the same fashion as last year. After Albert Foerster, 
Danzig Nazi leader, had conferred with Herr Hitler 
at Berchtesgaden on July 13, forty German army 
trucks and 1,000 boys from the Hitler Youth organ- 
ization were reported to have entered the Free City. 
The British-Polish alliance was reinforced on July 17, 
when the Inspector General of British Overseas 
Forces, Major General Sir Edmund Ironside, arrived 
in Warsaw for staff conversations and frontier 
inspections. 

Meanwhile, the visit of the Italian Foreign Min- 
ister, Count Ciano, to Spain apparently did not result 
in an open military alliance, as General Franco de- 
clared in a press interview that Spain would be 
neutral in wartime unless its vital interests were 
affected, and would remain independent of Germany 
and Italy. No explanation was offered for the evacua- 
tion of the German-speaking population in the Prov- 
ince of Bolzano, where all foreigners have been 
ordered to leave immediately. The resistance of the 
Italianized Austrians, many of whose families have 
inhabited the South Tyrol for generations, was re- 
ported to have resulted in considerable bloodshed. 
There was likewise no confirmation for the many 
reports that Italy had leased the former Austrian port 
of Trieste to Germany for ten years, in order to 
strengthen the strategic position of the axis and facili- 
tate German commerce. 

BRITISH REARMAMENT. Great Britain has 
emphasized the reversal in policy that occurred 
since Germany's occupation of Prague on March 15. 
Following Prime Minister Chamberlain’s address of 


July 11, filling the gaps in the guarantee of Poland, 
the Government sent more than 100 bombing planes 
on a 1,200-mile return trip across France. On Bastile 
Day, July 14, British and French troops were re- 
viewed in Paris by the British War Minister, Mr. 
Leslie Hore-Belisha, and the Chief of the Imperial 
Staff, Lord Gort. The Government introduced a sup- 
plementary arms budget on July 13, raising the April 
estimates of £630 million to almost £730 million, or 
82 per cent more than last year, and bringing the ex- 
pected deficit for 1939-1940 to over £480 million. 

In contrast to last summer, when the British post- 
poned naval mobilization until the last minute and 
were admittedly unprepared to defend London, the 
Government expects to have almost a million men 
under arms during August and September. While 
announcing special army and air force maneuvers, 
the Government is calling up the Territorials and 
reserves during this critical period and summoning 
the first group of 30,000 conscripts for their six- 
months’ training. A test mobilization of the‘navy will 
take place in early August, when over 12,000 reserve 
officers and men and 60 vessels will be added to the 
Home Fleet for the summer review and North Sea 
maneuvers. Airplane production, now estimated at 
750 planes per month, is believed at present to be 
surpassing Germany's in both quantity and quality. 

Whether these elaborate diplomatic and military 
precautions will deter the axis powers from attempt- 
ing another peaceful conquest this summer depends 
on two factors—diplomatic and political—that re- 
main as yet uncertain. The Soviet-British alliance, 
without which Britain and France cannot hope to 
intimidate their opponents, is still conspicuous by its 
absence, despite months of negotiation. In addition 
to disagreement over such specific issues as guaran- 
tees for the Baltic states, the delay has resulted in 
part from Soviet distrust of British good faith. 





E 


Ee fe 


—— 








Despite a constant clamor in the press, Mr. Chamber- 
lain has refused to invite into his Cabinet any of the 
dissident Conservatives—Churchill, Eden and Duff- 
Cooper—who represent, at home and abroad, a policy 
of no unilateral concessions. The Prime Minister 
apparently hesitates to take this vital step, both be- 
cause he dislikes to close the door completely on 
Germany and to reorganize his government. The 
Cabinet is hardly large enough — particularly in 
an election year—for both Chamberlain and 
Churchill, or for Simon, Hoare and Eden. Although 
the present term of Parliament does not expire until 
November 1940, Mr. Chamberlain is expected to call 
a general election in October or November of this 
year, providing that his diplomatic and military 
policies have eliminated the possibility of war. 
Meanwhile, Lord Halifax is being widely mentioned 
as a desirable Prime Minister in a new coalition of 
younger and more active leaders. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 
NEUTRALITY STALEMATE 


President Roosevelt's message to Congress on 
July 14, transmitting a final plea for neutrality re- 
vision by Secretary Hull, has failed to break the 
stalemate accentuated last week by the 12 to 11 vote 
of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee deferring 
all consideration of neutrality legislation until the 
next session of Congress. Barring an overwhelming 
expression of public opinion in support of the Ad- 
ministration’s demand for repeal of the arms em- 


bargo, it is likely that Congress will adjourn without 
further action. 


The situation created by this impasse is embar- 
rassing to the Administration and possibly dangerous 
to the best interests of the United States. It is em- 
barrassing to the Administration because it repre- 
sents a direct blow to the Executive foreign policy 
pursued by the President and the State Department 
for the past six months. It is dangerous because it 
widens the gap between the legislative and executive 
branches of the government at a time when unity and 
consistency in foreign relations are sorely needed. 

Since the President’s opening message to Congress 
in January, the Executive foreign policy pursued by 
the Administration has rested on four basic convic- 
tions: (1) that there is a grave danger of general 
war in Europe; (2) that the vital interests of the 
United States will be jeopardized if war comes; (3) 
that the best, if not the only way, of keeping the 
United States out of such a war is to make its out- 
break less likely; and (4) that the surest method of 


Page Two —_ 








$$ 


prevention is to convince potential aggressors thy 
they cannot afford to ignore the economic and finap. 
cial influence of the United States, which may 
used against them. These convictions were reiterate 
by Secretary Hull in his statement last week. Afte 
citing points of agreement and disagreement op 
American foreign policy Mr. Hull declared that th 
arms embargo not only “plays into the hands of thos 
nations which have taken the lead in building up their 
fighting power,” but works “directly against the ip 
terests of peace loving nations.” 


Despite the fact that party politics have undouly. 
edly influenced the attitude of Congress, the reaction 
following Mr. Hull’s appeal demonstrated again | 
that Congress has never fully accepted the Executive] 
thesis that a balance of power policy is necessary tp 
defend the vital interests of the United States or js 
capable of preventing war in Europe. The first action 
of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, after its 
postponement of neutrality legislation, was to delay 
action on a resolution introduced by Senator Pitt 
man authorizing an embargo on war materials t 
Japan. The same majority which blocked repeal of 
the arms embargo succeeded in postponing considera. 
tion of the Pittman resolution by a move to request) 
Secretary Hull’s opinion on whether a prohibition 
on exports to Japan would violate the treaty of amity 
and commerce signed by the two nations in 1911. 


DANGERS OF IMPASSE. The danger of the 
present impasse, in the opinion of many impartial 
observers, is not only that it widens the breach be 
tween Congress and the Executive, but that it may 
even increase the likelihood of American involvement 
in war. By refusing to repeal the arms embargo, Con- 
gress has not shaken the convictions of the President 
or altered the objectives of the State Department, 
although it has made the position of the Executive 
more difficult. The Executive policy will continue, 
with or without Congressional support. But if war 
should break out and the arms embargo should then 
be repealed, the United States would be charged with 
unneutral action and exposed to reprisals which | 
might easily involve the country in hostilities. | 














While it may not be possible to secure action on 
neutrality legislation at this session, there are many 
compelling reasons for establishing a more effective | 
basis for cooperation between the legislative and 
executive branches of the government. Such a basis | 
might yet be found in a suggestion for a joint Con | 


gressional-Executive committee to report to the next | 
session of Congress. 
° W. T. STONE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 39, Juty 21, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotruy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHgtes Dean, Editor, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 





Ae 181 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








sin 





