






c, the 
, and 
these 
ously 


Asso- 


ing in 
ealth, 


| over 
2ment 
diree- 
r, the 
iment 


Har- } 


as & 
single 
nation 
cians. 
vey of 


a 


National 
’, Lust, 
w York, 





Entered as 2nd class matter 
De 


rT. 
pea ye 
1 babrary 


MAY 12 1942 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 29 


—_—_—- 


May 8, 1942 





ficially reported to the Vichy government’s Am- 


-| bassador at Washington by the State Department on 


May 4, indicates that the Allies will strain every 
nerve to forestall enemy moves in the Western In- 
dian Ocean. The methods used by the United Na- 
tions give evidence to adroit planning. The disem- 
barkation was carried out as a temporary war measure 
just after Japanese admirals had been ostentatiously 
entertained at Vichy. It was accomplished by British 
rather than Free French or American personnel, evi- 
dently to prevent unnecessary embarrassment of the 
already strained relations between Washington and 


‘| the government of Pierre Laval. At the same time, 


the State Department openly threatened to regard 
any resistance by Vichy as an attack on the United 
Nations as a whole. 

The Madagascar campaign does not minimize the 
importance of setbacks recently suffered on other 
fronts. Japan’s conquest of Burma has inflicted a 
double blow at China, by depriving it of access to the 
Burmese oil fields and closing the Burma Road, over 
which supplies from Britain and the United States 
had been reaching Chungking. It also opened the 
way for a two-pronged Japanese invasion—westward 
into India and northeastward into China. Nor was 
the situation in the Orient improved by the announce- 
ment, on May 2, that the All-India Congress party 
had decided to meet Japanese aggression by a policy 
of “non-violent non-cooperation.” This announce- 
ment threatened to split still further India’s already 
disunited political groups. 

AXIS PREPARES FOR ALL-OUT DRIVE. The 


‘ tapid advance of the Japanese, coupled with refer- 


ences in the German and Italian press to an im- 
pending campaign in the Mediterranean, once more 
emphasizes the crucial importance of Russia, and of 
the Near and Middle East, which still bar the junc- 
tion of Axis forces. At their meeting in Salzburg on 





ATTACK ON MADAGASCAR HAMPERS AXIS PLANS 
ws landing on Madagascar by British forces, of- 


April 29-30 Hitler and Mussolini, according to the 
official communiqué, discussed plans for an all-out 
offensive—presumably on the Russian front (for 
which the Fiihrer asked additional Italian troops), 
and in the Mediterranean. While the communiqué 
scrupulously refrained from mentioning Japan, it 
seems obvious that a new Japanese offensive would 
be timed to coincide with an Axis drive. 

The Salzburg conference followed closely on re- 
ports of anxiety in Italy concerning the gloomy tone 
of Hitler's Reichstag speech, and his reference to 
preparations for another winter of war. It seems en- 
tirely credible that the Italians are weary of war, and 
weary above all of having to contribute so large a 
share of their industrial and agricultural production 
to Germany’s war machine while receiving so little 
in return. It would be dangerous, however, to place 
too much weight on Axis-sponsored reports of strains 
and stresses within Germany and Italy, which may 
be merely bait for a peace offensive; or to believe 
that the Italians are in a position to throw off the 
Nazi yoke. On the contrary, it was announced im- 
mediately after the Salzburg conference that addi- 
tional contingents of the German Gestapo had been 
sent to Italy to maintain order. Similar measures ap- 
pear to be under consideration in France, where the 
Nazi authorities are said to have demanded control 
by the Gestapo over the police, communications, and 
transportation in occupied France. 

On the eve of far-reaching campaigns in Europe 
and Asia, the Allies felt encouraged not only by re- 
ports of unrest in conquered Europe, but also by news 
from the Russian and Mediterranean theatres of war. 
In his May Day speech Stalin urged the Russians to 
sharpen their weapons and techniques for victory 
against Germany in 1942. He also contributed to the 
diplomatic strategy of the United Nations by de- 
claring that Russia has “no aim of seizing foreign 

territory or conquering foreign peoples’ —although 

















—=[_anagwt ==SSS6S=— P.geTuo eee 


he described the peoples of the Baltic States, Mol- 
davia and Karelia as “‘brothers.’’ At the same time he 
praised Britain and the United States for increasing 
aid to Russia. According to Washington sources, ma- 
terial destined for the Russian front is being accorded 
top priorities; ships taken from the South American 
run are rushing supplies to Murmansk in the teeth 
of German raiders; and by June first it is expected 
that American commitments to Russia will be ful- 
filled 100 per cent. Men and lend-lease material are 
also being sent from the United States to Iran and 
Iraq, as well as to North Africa, and on April 28, 
in his broadcast to the nation, President Roosevelt 
revealed that American warships are now operating 
in the Mediterranean. 


SHOULD R.A.F. RAID HISTORIC CITIES? 
Further relief is being given to Russia by widening 
British air raids on German ports and industrial 
centers—among them Hamburg, Luebeck, Rostock 
and Cologne—as well as on strategic points in oc- 
cupied countries, notably Trondheim in Norway. In 
this port the British claim to have inflicted further 
blows on the German cruiser Prinz Eugen, which was 
being repaired after its flight from Brest in Febru- 
ary. In addition, the British believe that the battle- 
ships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau, laid up at Kiel 
and Gdynia respectively, had been so badly battered 
in the same flight that they will be out of action for 
a considerable time. Should these reports prove well- 
founded, Germany’s strength in battleships and heavy 


cruisers will have been materially cut. 

Both in Britain and the United States regret has 
been expressed that the R.A.F., in the course of raids 
on Luebeck and Rostock, should have destroyed his. 
toric monuments of great sentimental significance ty 
the German people. Desirable as it would be to Spare 
historic monuments, it is difficult to see how air war. 
fare—if it is to be prosecuted at all (and both British 
and Americans have been demanding a second front 
in Europe) can be prosecuted in such a way as to pre. 
serve historic landmarks which happen to be situated 
near military or naval bases, or ports of departure 
for war supplies. The Germans have made no effort 
to spare the monuments of London, or other cities 
they have attacked in Britain. Concern over the 
preservation of sticks and stones, no matter how 
hallowed by history, seems out of proportion with 
the lack of concern felt for human lives. It would 
be disastrous for the future of the United Nations 
to indulge blindly in ruthless reprisals against the 
Germans and Japanese, which would ultimately mold 
our thoughts and actions to the very pattern we reject 
in Axis countries. But it would also be entirely un- 
realistic to believe that total war can be fought ina 
“limited” way. The most valuable contribution that 
could be made by those who deplore the effects of ait 
raids is to bend every effort to the task of assuring, 
in the future, the establishment of a world order 
which might reduce the occasions for war to 4 


mininum. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


CANADA’S CONSCRIPTION VOTE REVEALS INTERNAL STRAINS 


As the final returns were tabulated in the national 
plebiscite of April 27, releasing the Canadian gov- 
ernment from its pledges against compulsory military 
service overseas, the Dominion anxiously awaited a 
statement from Prime Minister W. L. MacKenzie 
King on the course he would now choose to follow. 


The results of the referendum did not vary greatly 


from advance predictions. With well over 4,000,000 
persons participating, some 63 per cent voted to re- 
store freedom of action to the government. The rela- 


tively small majority in the country as a whole is 


due to strong anti-conscription sentiment in Quebec, 
where 72 per cent of the votes were in the negative. 





For a survey of India’s complex and delicate 
problems, which bear directly on its war effort 
and on post-war reconstruction, READ: 


India’s Role in the World Conflict 


by MARGARET LA FOY 


25¢ 


May 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 


REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











In the rest of Canada, more than four out of five 
persons favored Mr. MacKenzie King’s proposal. 


THE THREAT TO CANADA'S UNITY. The 
clash between French Canada and the remainder of 
the Dominion has once more laid bare the deep. 
seated differences between their populations which 
underlie so many issues in Canadian politics. Today 
as in 1917, the French Catholic community of Que 
bec and adjacent areas stands spiritually and to some 
extent economically self-contained. While the Eng: 
lish-speaking elements of the country have over 
whelmingly supported all-out aid to Britain, many it 
habitants of Quebec remain isolationist, affirming 
their determination to defend Canadian territory a 
all costs, but not to serve overseas on a compulsory 
basis at the present time. Only a handful of national 
ist extremists has ever claimed that religious and 
linguistic differences justified secession, but the prov. 
ince has jealously guarded its right, under Canadas 
federal system, to a conservative pattern of gover 
ment marked by strong clerical influence. 


When military conscription was adopted i in Canada 
twenty- -five years ago, there were riots and distuth 
ances in the province. It was said that evasion of the 





— 


law fr 
of su 
unity 
cautic 
June 
for h 
any | 
war, 
tions 
{roof 
ticipé 
the ; 
temp 
scrip 
dari 
estak 
simp 
give! 
to a 
serio 
¥ 
shou 
unin 
Don 
try. 
wait 
inva 
nent 
nav’ 
abo 
com 
for 
aval 


C 
eCot 
exp 
the 
ing 
cha 
wit! 
cre; 


* 


$3 
qué 
tho 


she 
of- 
11 
cer 
cal 
FOE 


Hea 


Secy 











- five 
al. 
The 
er of 
deep: 
vhich 
‘oday 
Que 
some 
Eng: 
over: 
ry if 
ming 
ry at 
ilsory 
onal- 
; and 
prov. 
ada's 
veri: 


nada 


stuth 
rf the 











————— 
S—_— 





} jaw ran as high as 40 per cent. To avoid a recurrence 


of such conditions, which would endanger national 
unity, Mr. MacKenzie King has proceeded with great 
caution. Under the National Mobilization Act of 
june 1940, compulsory military service was instituted 
for home defense, without major disagreement from 
any quarter. When the United States entered the 
war, however, and abolished all territorial restric- 
tions formerly governing the service of conscripted 
troops, the Canadian groups in favor of fuller par- 
ticipation in the war effort began a campaign to force 
the government to follow suit. The Premier at- 
tempted to steer a middle course between the con- 
scriptionist forces and the Quebec opposition by de- 
daring—with little success—that the issue was not 
establishment of compulsory overseas service, but 
simply whether or not the government should be 
ven a free hand. He must now seek some formula 
to achieve the desired purpose without provoking 
serious unrest in French Canada. 

Whatever the outcome of these difficulties, it 
should not be imagined that Canada’s war effort is 
unimpressive. Through voluntary recruitment, the 
Dominion has 150,000 men serving outside the coun- 
try. Over 100,000 of these troops are in Britain, 
waiting, it is believed, to act as the spearhead of an 
invasion force to be landed on the European conti- 
nent. The total number of Canadians in the army, 
navy and air force, both at home and abroad, is now 
about 400,000. Up to the present, volunteers have 
come forward in numbers sufficient to fill the quotas 
for overseas service—quotas limited in size by the 
availability of shipping and equipment. 


CANADIAN PRICE CONTROL. In the field of 
economic stabilization on the home front, Canadian 
experience has to some extent served as a guide for 
the new scheme of price control announced in Wash- 
ington on April 28. In both countries, increased pur- 
chasing power in the hands of the public, coupled 
with a diminishing supply of consumers’ goods, had 
created the conditions for an inflationary spiral of 
prices and costs. In the present fiscal year, for ex- 
ample, Canada’s war expenditures will be about 
$3 billion (Canadian), or the equivalent of three- 
quarters of the entire national output in 1937. Even 
though Canada has expanded total production by 
about 50 per cent since the beginning of the war, 
shortages of many goods and services drove the cost- 
of-living index, based on August 1939, from 107 to 
115 between March and October 1941. Effective De- 
cember 1, 1941, therefore, an over-all price ceiling 
calculated on September 15-October 11 prices was 


Page Three 





amma 
ee 


———SSSS 











On Sunday, May 10, from 12 to 12:15 p.m., David H. 
Popper, associate editor of the FPA, will speak over 
The Blue Network. 


Subject: HOW CAN DEMOCRACIES WAGE 
TOTAL WAR? 


We hope you will listen in and let us have your 
reactions afterwards. 











imposed on the Dominion and has been administered 
by a Wartime Prices and Trade Board. During the 
period of price control, the cost of living has varied 
by only a fraction of one per cent. 

The magnitude and complexity of the United 
States’ problems preclude the ‘adoption of an identi- 
cal policy in this country, although the general sim- 
ilarity of the two price control schemes is readily 
apparent. Outstanding among the differences is the 
fact that wages as well as prices have been frozen 
in Canada, except as they may be adjusted by a 
cost-of-living bonus to meet increased charges. Thus 
the pressure of increased purchasing power on prices 
is in part neutralized. The Canadian system, more- 
over, regulates retail prices only, while under the 
American plan, manufacturers’ and wholesalers’ 
charges are frozen as well. Where rising production 
costs tend to diminish the margin left for the Cana- 
dian retailer, attempts are made to eliminate market- 
ing and production wastes by standardization or sim- 
plification of products and other methods. In acute 
cases, especially when imported raw materials have 
risen markedly in price, subsidies are paid to produ- 
cers—a mechanism whose adoption was announced 
by the Office of Price Administration on May 3. 
Finally, the Canadian Board is not restricted by the 
necessity to maintain the prices of certain farm prod- 
ucts at 110 per cent of parity. 

While the initial accomplishments under the Cana- 
dian plan are encouraging, the regulatory mechan- 
isms in both countries will not face their sternest 
trials until the scarcity of consumers’ goods becomes 
much more pronounced than it now is. When that 
moment arrives the tendency to evade or violate price 
controls will become intense. Today, in all of non- 
Russian Europe and even in Britain, the existence of 
an illegal “black market” is acknowledged in spite 
of severe punishment for breaking price and ration 
regulations. Unless Canada and the United States 
can create and maintain a sense of individual and so- 
cial obligation in connection with their economic con- 
trols, similar policing will be necessary here. Hence, 
in the broadest sense, the war is testing the efficacy of 
democratic institutions as they have never been tested 


before. Davip H. PopPErR 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 29, 


May 8, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


1942. 


Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editer; Davin H. PoppEr, Associate Editor. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


isi 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
FraNk Ross McCoy, President; Wiriiam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lust, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





a 
= 








Washington News Letter 











| 


Prenat pred btagy — 








May 4.—The curve of national war expenditure 
took another sharp upturn last week when President 
Roosevelt signed the Sixth Supplemental War Ap- 
propriation Act of 1942 providing for new outlays of 
more than $19 billion. Since the fall of France in June 
1940, the total funds set aside by the United States gov- 
ernment for defense and war purposes now amount 
to $162,416,000,000, which includes $6 billion au- 
thorized for naval expenditures in the fiscal year 
1943. Before the week is over, according to current 
reports, President Roosevelt will ask Congress for 
a seventh major appropriation which may be higher 
than any of those yet placed before the national leg- 
islature. 

In the year and a half which elapsed between mid- 
1940 and the attack on Pearl Harbor, Congress au- 
thorized an outlay of $64 billion. Five months of 
war have therefore added approximately $98 billion 
to the total. These figures, of course, include vast 
sums which are as yet unspent. Even at the current 
rate of expenditure, which runs to about $100 million 
a day, and which may be doubled before the year is 
out—it may be 1944 before all the authorized funds 
have been paid out. Down to the end of the present 
fiscal year (July 1), it is anticipated that only $34 
billion, or about one-fifth of the total authorized 
within the past two years, will have been expended. 
In the next fiscal year, it is estimated that $70 billion 
will be spent for war purposes. 


PLANE EXPENDITURES IN LEAD. Some light 
is thrown on the general character of American 
military strategy when it is noted that the largest 
single item of authorized expenditure has been for 
the construction of airplanes, engines and parts. 
Less than a fourth—or $35.5 billion—of the sums 
authorized since mid-1940 have been allocated for 
this purpose. In the latest Appropriation Act, the pro- 
portion set aside for airplanes was much higher than 
the long-term average, exceeding 45 per cent. Other 
important channels of expenditure are indicated by 
the funds made available during the past two years 
for ordnance ($32 billion), and naval construc- 
tion ($15 billion). Pay, subsistence and travel for 
the armed forces so far seem relatively trivial, 
amounting to less than $5 billion. 

It is impossible to find an adequate basis of com- 
parison for the cost of America’s present military 
preparations. All other figures pale into insignificance 
beside it. In 1933 the entire world spent only two 
and a half billion dollars for armaments, and even 
in 1936 the new arms race, then getting into full 


swing, accounted for only $11 billion. Turning bade 
to expenditures during World War I, the recog 
shows that in 1918, many months after the Unit 
States had entered the war, we expended just $6 bil 
lion. The heaviest expenditure in any single year came 
after the armistice, in 1919, when the figure rose tp 
$11 billion. The total outlay made by the United 
States government from the outbreak of war to the 
signing of the peace treaty with Germany in 192} 
came to a little over $27 billion, somewhat less thap 
the amount which will have been expended in the 
current fiscal year to July 1. And during nearly half 
of that year the United States was at “peace.” 

PAYING FOR THE WAR. Facing the stupend. 
ous task of paying for these war costs the country is 
being called upon to make its current contributiog 
in two ways: (1) by paying the heaviest tax bill in 
its history; and (2) by sharply reducing the con 
sumption of non-essentials—thereby releasing addi- 
tional funds for the purchase of war savings bonds. 
As for the first, the revised estimates of net tax re 
ceipts, as announced by the Budget Bureau on April 
24, indicate that current levies will bring in during 
the fiscal year beginning July 1 nearly $17 billion, 
or approximately one-fourth of the anticipated war 
expenditure. If Congress should follow the Presi- 
dent's suggestion set forth in his budget message in 
January and raise the tax bill the next fiscal year by 
an additional $7 billion, the receipts would then pro- 
vide for 31 per cent of the outlay. 

The second requirement is one of the conditions 
making necessary the extensive and elaborate price 
control system which is now being put into operation. 
A rigid control of the production of consumers’ goods 
and service would not only contribute to the effort 
to speed the flow of materials and labor into wat 
channels, but might—particularly if it were accom 
panied by consumer rationing—limit the amount of 
individual income being absorbed in current expendi- 
tures. Thereby, more funds might become available 
for the purchase of war bonds. Although it is com 
ceivable that the time may come when some form 
of compulsory war savings will be necessary, no sub 
stantial support has yet developed for changing the 


present voluntary system. WyLL1AM P. MADDOX 





Arms and the Aftermath, by Perrin Stryker. Boston, 
Houghton, Mifflin, 1942. $1.75 
Mr. Stryker furnishes a lucid explanation of the tech- 
nical problems involved in gearing American industry # 
war production and puts some baffling questions about 
post-war problems without attempting to answer them 
His book can be heartily recommended to the layman. 
















