









it 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL. XV, No. 50 OcToserR 9, 1936 








RAW MATERIALS IN WORLD POLITICS 
by John C. deWilde 


Unequal distribution of raw materials, in a world 









without any real political security, has aroused inter- 
In this report, Mr. deWilde ad- 
vances remedies to hasten the solution of the problem 
and prevent its recurrence. 


national concern. 


September 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 











Entered as  second- 
class macter December 
2, 1921, act the Post 
—_ Office at New York, 
> N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


- 











» 


: gresS, 
Library of ee 


ya ching tons D. ©. 


kK 
ly , sf 
i 











A NEW TWENTY-ONE DEMANDS? 





LTHOUGH tension at Shanghai somewhat 
lessened during the first week of October, 
an underlying Sino-Japanese crisis of grave pro- 
portions still exists. In an effort to force China’s 
acceptance of far-reaching political concessions, 
the Japanese government has increased its marine 
detachments at Shanghai and Hankow and has 
indirectly threatened resort to “positive” action. 
Foreign Minister Hachiro Arita, in a statement 
made to the press on September 28 at Tokyo, de- 
clared that if the negotiations now being con- 
ducted at Nanking terminated without result 





“the lives and property of the large Japanese population 
in China could not, of course, be left exposed to any 
further danger. It will, therefore, be necessary to con- 
sider the steps to be taken in case of that eventuality. 
The outcome of the present negotiations can be in one 
of two ways only: Japanese-Chinese relations will be 
either very much better or very much worse. In the 
existing situation they shall not be permitted to drift in 
the ambiguous state of affairs as has been prevailing in 
the past. China is now at the momentous crossroads, 
to decide whether or not to shake hands with Japan. I 
very earnestly hope that China will grasp our hand in 
friendly response, whatever difficulties she may have to 
surmount.” 




























China’s difficulty in shaking hands with Japan 
is illustrated by the nature of the demands which 
Ambassador Kawagoe is now pressing at Nanking. 
These demands far exceed the reparation which 
Japan might legitimately exact for the murder of 
five of its nationals, even if the relation of the in- 
cidents to Japanese policy in China since Septem- 
ber 18, 1931 is left out of consideration. Early 
reports stated that the demands included such 
items as the creation of an “autonomous” régime 
in the five northern provinces, admission of 
Japanese advisers to both the civilian and military 
branches of the Nanking government, brigading 
of Japanese troops in equal numbers with Chinese 
in Nanking’s anti-Communist armies, and reduc- 
tion of China’s tariff to the level of 1928-1929, 
when Chinese tariff autonomy was first achieved. 



















These reports were termed “exaggerations” in a 
statement issued on October 6 by the Foreign 
Office spokesman at Tokyo. Nevertheless, this 
declaration admitted that recognition of Japan’s 
“special position” in north China was being 
sought, as well as appointment of some Japanese 
advisers to Nanking, reductions in the Chinese 
tariff, and Nanking’s cooperation with Japan 
against communism. The spokesman reveals that 
Japan is placing main emphasis on securing fur- 
ther political concessions in north China—a 
region, it should be noted, in which none of the 
incidents serving as the basis for the demands 
occurred. If Nanking acknowledges Japan’s 
special position in the north, the spokesman de- 
clares, negotiations would concern such “details” 
as establishment of Japanese military posts in 
Chahar and Suiyuan provinces, construction of 
railroads, harbors and airports, organization of 
Sino-Japanese commercial airlines, and appoint- 
ment of Japanese advisers to the north China ad- 
ministration. 

An important conference on these issues be- 
tween General Chiang Kai-shek and Kazue 
Kuwajima, special envoy of the Japanese Foreign 
Office, is expected to occur at Nanking during the 
coming week. On his arrival at Shanghai, Mr. 
Kuwajima stated: “What Japan wants is not 
platitudes but action. .. . China must reflect.” In 
view of this Japanese attitude, the results of the 
conference should provide a touchstone as to the 
intentions and policies of the Nanking régime. 

T. A. BISSON 


THE WEEK IN GENEVA 

When the League Assembly took up the problem 
of reviving world trade this week, its efforts were 
aided by two auspicious developments resulting 
from the three-power monetary agreement of 
September 25. As part of a “general customs 
demobilization,” the French government on Octo- 
ber 3 promulgated a series of decrees lowering 


— 
eat ncn nat 


















tariff rates on non-quota goods by 15 to 20 per 
cent, abolishing 105 out of 760 existing import 
quotas and reducing the tax on import licenses. 
Two commissions were also appointed: one to 
recommend further customs and quota changes 
when necessary to check domestic price increases; 
the other to undertake a more general revision of 
tariffs and quotas. On October 5 the Italian gov- 
ernment also decided to “realign” the lira with 
other currencies by reducing its gold content 40.93 
per cent. This measure is expected to be followed 
by the removal of foreign exchange restrictions 
and the modification of other import controls. 

Despite these favorable factors, discussions at 
Geneva have made little progress. The British 
have made clear that they are not prepared to 
make any contribution to the reduction of trade 
barriers other than a general undertaking not to 
depreciate the pound and raise their own tariffs. 
In fact, Britain’s representative in the Assembly’s 
economic committee even indicated that the 
French were expected to abrogate all their quotas 
in return for this “concession.” The French, how- 
ever, want the British to make a more substantial 
contribution and have announced their unwilling- 
ness to remove all quotas so long as exchange con- 
trols are maintained by such countries as Ger- 
many. The latter still declines to devalue the 
mark and abolish its foreign exchange restric- 
tions. In a statement made before the central 
committee of the Reichsbank on September 30, 
Dr. Schacht declared such action was contingent 
on the settlement of German foreign debt and 
colonial questions. 

Meanwhile, the British proposed to the eco- 
nomic committee on October 5 that the Council 
name a commission to study “the question of equal 
commercial access for all nations to certain raw 
materials.” Redistribution of colonies and man- 
dates would not fall within the province of this 
commission, in which the United States would be 
asked to participate. Exclusion of this topic is in 
accord with the demand made on October 1 by 
the British Conservative party conference that 
the cession of any British mandates be declared 
an “undiscussible question.” In a speech deliv- 
ered before this same conference on October 2 
Neville Chamberlain, Chancellor of the Ex- 
chequer, also declared that Britain would under 
no circumstances sacrifice the Ottawa agreements, 
which deny foreign countries equality of commer- 
cial access to the British Empire. 

In the political field no decisions of any im- 
portance have been taken at Geneva. The ques- 
tion of League reform will probably be referred 
to a commission. In a rather futile gesture to 


Page Two 








revive discussions for the limitation of arma- 
ments, the third committee of the Assembly 
adopted on October 5 a French proposal to con- 
voke the steering committee of the moribund dis- 
armament conference. On the same day the 
League Council approved a resolution inviting 
Poland “to seek means for putting an end to the 
obstruction offered by the Danzig government to 
the High Commissioner in the exercise of his 
functions and for rendering fully effective the 
League of Nations guarantee.” This decision will 
not deter the Nazis from proceeding with their 
plans to establish a completely totalitarian régime 
in the Free City in open defiance of the democratic 
constitution guaranteed by the League. The ap- 
pointment of Sean Lester to the post of Deputy 
Secretary-General of the League removes from 
Danzig a High Commissioner who has sought 
courageously to uphold the constitution. 
JOHN C. DEWILDE 


Eyes on Japan, by Victor A. Yakhontoff. New York, 
Coward-McCann, 1936. $3.50 


A useful general survey of Japan’s historical and cul- 
tural backgrounds and its current social, economic, political 
and international problems. 








Statement of the Ownership. Management, Circulation, Etc., 
Required by the Acts of Congress of August 24, 1912 and 
March 3, 1933, of 


Foreign Policy Bulletin 


Published weekly at New York, N. Y. for October 1, 1936. 
State of New York, County of New York, ss. 


Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State and county aforesaid, 
personally appeared Helen Terry, who having been duly sworn according to 
law. disposes and says that she is the Assistant Editor of the FOREIGN 
POLICY BULLETIN, and that the following is, to the best of her knowledge 
and belief, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the afore- 
said publication for the date shown in the above caption, required by the 
Act of August 24, 1912, as amended by the Act of March 3, 1933, em- 
bodied in Section $37, Postal Laws and Regulations, printed on the re- 
verse of this form, to wit: . ’ 

1. That the names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing edi- 
tor, and business managers are: 

Publisher—Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 8 West 40th Street, 
New York City. ; 

Assistant Editor—Helen Terry, 8 West 40th Street, New York Ciry. 

Managing Editor—None. 

Business Managers—None. 

2. That the owner is: : 

Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, the principal officers of which 
are: Raymond Leslie Buell. President; Esther G. Ogden, Secretary: both of 
8 Wesr 40th Street, New York City; and William A. Eldridge, Treasurer, 
70 Broadway, New York City 

3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holders 
owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, 
or other securities, are: 

None. 

4. That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners, 
stockholders and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stock- 
holders and security holders as they appear upon the books of the company, 
but also, in cases where the stockholder or security holder appears upon the 
books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, the name 
of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting, is given; also 
that the said two paragraphs contain statements embracing affiant’s full 
knowledge and belief as to the circumstances and conditions under which 
stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of the 
company as trustees hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of 
a bona fide owner; and this affiane has no reason to believe that any other 
person, association, or corporation has any interest, direct or indirect, in the 
said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by her. 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated. 
By HELEN TERRY, Assistant Editor. 

Sworn to and subscribed before me this 18th day of September, 1936. 
{Seal} CAROLYN E. MARTIN, Notary Public. 


New York County, New York, County Clerk's No. 289. Reg. No. 7-M-338. 
(My commission expires March 30, 1937.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 50, Ocroser 9, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lesiig Busit, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; Verma MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








er “is 














