7 


| 


xtending 
Gaulle’s 


.. Eisen 
n North 
tived in 
1 to take 


1 the ef. | 


le. Gen- 
ans neat 
h as one 
ectacular 
tein. this 
larity. 

ak with 
tate De. 
‘han two 
ranks to 


eded, as | 


> on No- 
1 falling 
ie it was 
h Africa 
vhat was 
ory. The 
Pétain’s 
ns, how- 


into the 
at sooner 
from the 
ee which 
eturn of 
tion that, 


1 opt for | 


ates and 
trous de- 
”” as Mr. 


ed States 
Vichy ré- 
1 of the 
f Europe 
ry possi- 
bliged to 
ch Medi- 
| France 
n of the 
zi puppet 
LLIOTT 


NDS 


| 


“ERIODICAL 
@ENBRAL * 
UNIV. nay 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Ur. Willian #. Bishop 


De 


’ Bightess + 
uiChigan ulbrary 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 5 


NOVEMBER 20, 1942 


AFRICAN CAMPAIGN RAISES GRAVE POLITICAL ISSUES 


HE Allied invasion of North Africa, like a well- 

laid fuse, has started a whole train of events 
throughout the world the repercussions of which 
cannot yet be clearly foreseen. Not only has it shed 
a glaring light on political differences among the 
French, and raised innumerable questions concerning 
France's future relations with its colonial empire, 
with Europe, and with the United States, but it has 
already affected the progress of war on the Soviet- 
German front, the outlook of Latin American coun- 
tries, and the position of Spain. Meanwhile, Allied 
jubilation over the African campaign must be tem- 
pered by the realization that, until Tunisia was 
reached, American troops had not yet come to grips 
with the Germans; that Spanish Morocco and Span- 
ish colonies on the west coast of Africa, not to speak 
of the French base at Dakar, are not in Allied hands 
and could still be used by the Axis powers; and that, 
by its very success in North Africa, the United 
States has assumed grave political responsibilities 
whose fulfillment—or nonfulfillment—will deeply 
influence both the course of the war and the shape of 
the post-war world. 


STALIN APPLAUDS ALLIES. The Soviet gov- 
ernment, which had reserved judgment on the re- 
sults of the British campaign in Egypt, regarding it 
as a relatively minor operation which would not 
serve to relieve Nazi pressure on the Russian Army, 
promptly acknowledged the far-reaching character of 
the Allied expedition to French North Africa. In a 
personal statement of November 14 to an American 
newspaperman in Moscow—the second such state- 
ment since October 1—Stalin declared that the Al- 
lied campaign “opened the prospect of the disin- 
tegration of the Italo-German coalition in the near- 
est future.” Not only is this the most buoyant state- 
ment made by a leader of the United Nations, but 
its optimism carries all the more weight because of 
the skepticism with which Stalin has until now viewed 


the military collaboration of the Western boson 
Stalin, moreover, described the Allies as “first-rate 
organizers,” and said that “a certain relief in pres- 
sure on the Soviet Union will result in the nearest 
future.” Not forgetting for a moment his demand 
for another land front in Europe, he declared that 
the African campaign is particularly significant be- 
cause it “creates the prerequisites for establishment 
of a second front in Europe nearer to Germany's vital 
centers which will be of decisive importance for or- 
ganizing victory over Hitlerite tyranny.” 

LATIN AMERICA WELCOMES U.S. MOVE. 
That this is also the view of Latin American ob- 
servers is indicated by the cordiality with which the 
countries of the Western Hemisphere have wel- 
comed the American expedition to Africa. It was to 
be expected that the campaign would be favorably 
received by Brazil, which has long feared a German 
attack by air from French West Africa. In his state- 
ment of November 8 announcing the landing of 
American forces, President Roosevelt specifically. said 
that they had struck “to forestall an invasion of 
Africa by Germany and Italy which, if successful, 
would constitute a direct threat to America across 
the comparatively narrow sea from Western Africa.” 
More significant than the relief experienced in Brazil 
is the extent to which Mr. Roosevelt’s tribute to 
“eternal France” and his declaration that Americans 
are fighting for the liberation of the French moved 
the peoples of Latin America, who have a deep at- 
tachment to France and to French culture. These 
declarations of the President, combined with Amer- 
ican military successes in Africa, had a particularly 
noticeable effect on the two countries hitherto most 
reluctant to break their ties with the Axis—Argentina 
and Chile—whose governments sent messages of 
congratulation to the United States. 

The friendly treatment accorded by the Wash- 
ington Administration to Italians in this country has 


also not passed unnoticed in Latin America—especi- 
ally in Argentina, with its large Italian population. 
On November 14, at a meeting of the Mazzini So- 
ciety in New York, Under Secretary of State Adolph 
A. Berle went further, and stated that the ‘“nation- 
hood” of Italy was guaranteed by the Atlantic Char- 
ter, and that the pledge of the United Nations “does 
not contemplate a punitive peace: the aim is justice, 
not revenge.” 

THE FUTURE OF SPAIN. While the United 
States is thus seeking to win the aid of Italians both 
within and outside Italy who oppose Fascism and 
fear German domination over their country, a far 
more difficult problem arises with respect to Allied 
efforts to win the support of Spain. In a message of 
November 8 addressed to General Franco, President 
Roosevelt explained the reasons for the American 
expedition to French North Africa, assured him that 
“these moves are in no shape, manner, or form di- 
rected against the government or people of Spain 
or Spanish territory, metropolitan or overseas,” and 
- expressed his belief that “the Spanish people wish 
to maintain neutrality and to remain outside the 
war.” In a statement released on November 13, Gen- 
eral Franco accepted President Roosevelt's assurances, 
and expressed his intention “of avoiding anything 
which might disturb our relations in any of their 
aspects.’’ This statement leaves unanswered the ques- 
tion of what Franco would do should Hitler per- 
suade, or force, him into permitting the Nazis to use 
Spanish territory against the Allies. Yet this question 
is of paramount importance, since General Franco 
controls not only Spain—hinterland of Britain’s naval 
base at Gibraltar—but also Spanish Morocco, a string 
of colonies on the west coast of Africa north and 
south of Dakar, and strategic islands in the Atlantic 
and the Mediterranean. 


Page Two 


a 
i 


Britain and the United States naturally hope that 
Franco will not deliver a ‘‘stab in the back” at Allied 
forces now poised for a grim showdown with the 
Axis for control of Tunisia and Libya. Yet, desirable 
as Franco’s neutrality is today for the Allies, the 
question arises whether it is, in the long run, sound 
policy to strengthen Franco's position against those 
very elements in Spain which have most ardently 
opposed Nazism and Fascism. In the case of Frango, 
even more than in that of Admiral Darlan, the Al. 
lies are confronted with the extremely delicate is. 
sue whether, in order to win the war, they should 
accept the aid of men who, in the past, have openly | 
collaborated with the Nazis, and thus extend their | 
protection to native rulers who, without such pro. 
tection, would face ruin and death at the hands of 
their anti-Nazi countrymen. 

The people of Spain and France, no less than the 
people of the United States, will understand that 
undesirable compromises may have to be resorted to | 
in the heat of battle in order not only to win the war 
but to win it as promptly as possible. At the same 
time, it is supremely important for the future influ. 
ence of the United States that such compromises as 
may seem necessary be accompanied by guarantees | 
that, once the war is over, the peoples of all liberated 
countries will be free to elect governments of theit 
choosing—as, in fact, has been promised in the At- 
lantic Charter. Otherwise the conquered peoples of 
Europe may reach the conclusion that an Allied vic- 
tory would merely consolidate the power of men 
like Franco, who by word and deed have indicated 


their hostility to the objectives for which the United | 
Nations are fighting—and, in sheer despair, abandon | 


the heroic resistance which today makes it possible 
for the Allies to contemplate the liberation of Europe. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


ALLIES GAIN NEW SUPPLIES IN NORTH AFRICA 


On November 11, 1942, after less than four days 
of fighting, the military commanders of the two main 
French territories in North Africa—Morocco and 
Algeria—ordered cessation of French resistance to 
the American-British occupation. Thus the first phase 
of the battle for control of the Mediterranean came 


For a survey of military strategy in Africa and of 
the natural resources of the African continent, 


READ: 


Africa and the World Conflict 


by Louis E. Frechtling 


25c 


VoL. XVII, No. 13, ForeicN Poticy Reports 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


to an end. The Allies are now in posesssion of a series | 


of airfields and ports strategically located along the 
coast of North Africa which will enable them to 
expel German and Italian troops stationed on the 
African continent. The occupation of French Moroc- 


co and Algeria, by an Allied expeditionary force | 


which Vichy estimated at 140,000 men, changed 
completely the military situation and profoundly 
modified the economic picture for the Allies, not only 


by shortening shipping routes but by making avail- 
able additional raw materials. 


NEW SOURCE OF SUPPLIES FOR ALLIES. 
Assuming that the Allies hold their present gains and 
succeed in occupying all of Tunisia, the valuable 
mineral output of French North Africa will be avail- 
able to the United Nations. Outstanding in this pro- 
duction are iron ore and phosphate rock. Before 
World War II, Algeria alone produced over 3,000,- 


_—— 


000 1 
and 
Afri 
need 
Briti 
pass 
ures 
4,00 
met 
dent 
quat 
port 
relic 
min 
4 3 
cons 
alm 
oliv 
less 
and 
Fur 
seve 


Equ 
I 


Afs 
194 
ton 


—=: 


Ope that 
at Allied 
with the 
desirable 
lies, the 
Nn, sOund 
ist those 
ardently 
: Franoo, 
, the Al 
licate is. 
y should 
e€ openly 
nd their 
uch pro- 
hands of 


than the 
and that 
sorted to 
| the wat 
the same 
ire influ- 
Mises as 
larantees 
liberated 
of their 
1 the At 
oples of 
llied vic- 
of men 
indicated 
e United 
abandon 
possible 
f Europe. 
DEAN 


f a series 
long the 
them to 
1 on the 
hn Moroc- 
iry force 
changed 
ofoundly 
not only 
ng avail- 


ALLIES. 
Zains and 
valuable 
be avail- 
this pro- 

Before 
sr 3,000,- 


CC ———— 
—————— 


000 tons of iron ore yearly, Tunisia around 1,000,000, 
and French Morocco nearly 300,000 tons. North 
African production of phosphate rock, which is badly 
needed as a fertilizer by the Allies, especially in the 
British Isles, is one of the greatest in the world, sur- 
passing even that of the United States. Pre-war fig- 
ures show that these three possessions produce some 
4,000,000 tons of phosphate rock a year. Strategic 
metals, such as lead, zinc, antimony, cobalt, molyb- 
denum and mercury, are also mined in significant 
quantities, while both Morocco and Algeria have im- 
portant deposits of manganese, which could help to 
relieve the acute shortage of this steel-hardening 
mineral in Britain and the United States. 

To these valuable minerals must be added the 
considerable production of wheat and other cereals, 
almonds, nuts and gums, dates, citrus fruits, figs, 
olives and wine. The large herds of sheep from the 
less fertile highlands furnish great quantities of meat 
and hides, and the Atlas forests, cork and cedarwood. 
Furthermore, if Axis contacts with Dakar should be 
severed, the peanuts and other products of French 
Equatorial Africa will also be available to the Allies. 

In the past, most of the products of French North 
Africa went to France. Even during the summer of 
1942 nearly a hundred ships, totaling some 250,000 
tons, ferried North African goods to Marseilles. 
Fighting French sources claim that from 75 to 90 
per cent of these supplies went on to Germany. This 
trafic has now been severed by the new Allied drive, 
thus depriving Nazi Europe of a source of valuable 
foodstuffs and war materials. It is true that by the 
same stroke, France, now entirely occupied by the 
German Army except for the harbor of Toulon, will 
in the future be deprived of the small portion of 
African supplies which it was formerly allowed to 


/ consume. The food situation in France, tragic since 
the armistice of June 1940, will become even worse. 


A POLITICAL KALEIDOSCOPE. Politically, 
the various territories which make up North Africa 
west of Libya form a rather hybrid group. Morocco, 
before 1912, was an absolute monarchy ruled by an 


_ independent native Sultan. Since that date, admin- 
| istration of Morocco has been in the hands of France 


-——_-_—~ 


and Spain, with France controlling by far the largest 
part. The Sultan is still nominal ruler of both French 


_ and Spanish Morocco, residing in the French zone, 
usually at Rabat. The administration of the two 
_ znes, however, is completely separate. In French 


Morocco effective authority is exercised by France 
through a Resident-General, and in Spanish Morocco 
by Spain through a High Commissioner. The small 


Page Three 


international zone of ‘Tangiers, on the Atlantic coast 
just west of the entrance to the Straits of Gibraltar, 
established by the 1923 Tangiers Statute, disappeared 
from the political map during the present war when 
Spain, in November 1940, took it over by a coup de 
force, suppressing the international administration. 
This action was interpreted at the time as a German- 
inspired move intended to pave the way for fortifica- 
tion of the hitherto demilitarized zone. 

Algeria is neither a colony in the usual sense nor 
an aggregate of French departments. Some of its 
more Europeanized sections (Oran, Algiers, and Con- 
stantine) are politically assimilated to metropolitan 
France, with their own representatives in the French 
Parliament. The rest of the country is governed as a 
colony, with political power in the hands of a French 
Governor-General. 

Tunisia, for the control of which Allied and 
Axis troops are now fighting, was formerly a king- 
dom acknowledging the sovereignty of Turkey. In 
1881 France sent a military expedition to Tunisia and 
established a protectorate over the country. The 
local king, or Bey, was maintained as nominal ruler, 
but administration of the Protectorate is controlled 
by the French government through a Resident-Gen- 
eral, in whose hands all power is concentrated. Italy, 
with almost as many nationals in the Protectorate as 
France, has never relished French occupation of 
Tunisia, whose northern coast is only about 100 miles 
from Sicily and Sardinia. Since coming to power in 
1922, Mussolini has agitated for conquest of Tunisia, 
but Allied occupation of French North Africa makes 
realization of this dream more remote than ever. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


Turkey, by Barbara Ward. New York, Oxford University 
Press, 1942. $1.00 
A little book crammed with illuminating facts interest- 
ingly presented. 


Federalism and Freedom, by Sir George Young. New 

York, Oxford University Press, 1942. $2.50 

An essentially constitutional approach to the question 
of European federation and economic integration. The 
author believes the development of each of the Great 
Powers into national federations with their federal states 
forming constituents of the federation of Europe to be pre- 
requisite to the successful solution of Europe’s problems. 


India Without Fable, by 
Knopf, 1942. $2.50 


A well-written, popular discussion of the economic, po- 
litical and social background of current Indian affairs as 
well as of the development of the nationalist movement. 
The best single account for the general reader who wants 
to understand India today. 


Kate L. Mitchell. New York, 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 5, NovEMBER 20, 1942. 


Published weekly 


by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHeres Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three 


| Ome month for change of address on membership publications. 


Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


oe 


Produced under union conditions and composed.and printed by union labor 


Washington News Letter 


Nov. 16.—The riddle of who is entitled to speak in 
the name of France has become more puzzling than 
ever as the result of the Anglo-American invasion of 
French North Africa. There are now three govern- 
ing groups—General Charles de Gaulle’s Fighting 
French movement with headquarters in London, Ad- 
miral Frangois Darlan’s administration in North 
Africa, and Marshal Pétain’s government at Vichy, 
all claiming to be the rightful representatives of the 
French people. 

Nothing can be more paradoxical than the appear- 
ance of Admiral Darlan, erstwhile arch-collabora- 
tionist, as the leader of the French forces in North 
Africa opposing the Axis. Equally strange is the 
fact that but a few days ago Darlan was directing 
the resistance to the American landing forces. It was 
only on November 11 that the Anglophobe Admiral 
called off the fighting on the ground that further 
resistance was useless. 

U.S. ARMY BACKS DARLAN. Yet, in making 
this sudden reversal of policy which certainly is in 
line with his reputation as an opportunist, Darlan 
claims to be acting in the name of Marshal Pétain. 
His contention is that Pétain directed General Au- 
guste Nogues, Governor-General of Morocco, to 
take over command in North Africa because the im- 
pression prevailed in Vichy that Darlan had been 
deprived of his freedom. According to Darlan, 
Nogues, on arriving in Africa on November 13, 
found that the Admiral was free to act and restored to 
him the powers that had been vested in the Governor 
by Pétain. Darlan contends that Nogues’ action was 
taken with the full approval of the Marshal and inti- 
mates that Pétain is now under restraint and is not 
able to function independently as Chief of State. 

This claim is flatly contradicted by Vichy. The 
Vichy radio quoted Pétain on November 16 as saying 
that Darlan had been “placed outside the national 
community’’ and deprived of his military command 
(he is also constitutionally still Pétain’s successor as 
chief of state) for violating his instructions. As the 
Vichy radio is now controlled by the Nazis, it is pos- 
sible that this broadcast may have been a fake. 

In announcing on November 13 that he was as- 
suming responsibility for French interests in North 
Africa, Admiral Darlan was acting with the explicit 
approval of General Dwight D. Eisenhower, the 
American commander in that zone. It may be taken 
for granted that the American military authorities are 
acting in conformity with the policy enunciated on 


FOR VICTORY °* 


several occasions by the State Department to the ef 
fect that the United States is prepared to cooperate 
locally with all de facto French governors who ajg 
prepared to fight the Axis. Meanwhile, Admirl 
Darlan has appointed General Henri Giraud, wh | 
came to Africa on General Eisenhower's invitation | 
“to organize French armies to take up the fight 
again,” as commander of the French forces in North | 
Africa. This precludes any conflict between Darlag | 
and Giraud. 

FIGHTING FRENCH INDIGNANT. The Fight | 
ing French, for their part, are furious about Darlan’s | 
appointment to a high command on the side of the | 
Allies. From General de Gaulle’s headquarters ip ) 
London on November 16 came a statement disclaim. | 
ing any responsibility for the negotiations in North 
Africa and stating that “any arrangements which 
would in effect confirm the Vichy régime in North | 
Africa” could not be accepted. The Fighting French, 
as one of their spokesmen in Washington has said, / 
could hardly be expected to accept as their leader a | 
man who a short time ago was a high official of a 
government engaged in persecuting de Gaullists. | 

Meanwhile the authority of Pétain appears more 
shadowy than ever. Nazi occupation of the hitherto 
so-called “free” zone has deprived it of what little| 
semblance of sovereignty it possessed. Some of the 
Marshal’s most eminent former Cabinet colleagues, | 
including Pierre Etienne Flandin, an ex-Foreign Min: | 


ister, and Pierre Pucheu and Marcel Peyrouton, both | 


former Ministers of the Interior, are reported to have 
fled to North Africa, while from Washington 


Camille Chautemps, who for a week in 1940 was | 


Vice Premier in Pétain’s first Cabinet, has cabled 
General Giraud offering to serve as a soldier undet 
him. Symptomatic of the growing effervescence in 
France is the revolt led by General Lattré de Tassigny, 
commander of the Montpellier region, a few days 
before the Nazi invasion of the unoccupied zone. 
The fate of Vichy’s remaining ace-in-hand—the 
French fleet— remains to be decided, however. Sixty- 
two naval units, including the two modern 26,000 
ton battle cruisers, Strasbourg and Dunquerque, att 
still at anchor at Toulon. They have not responded 


to Darlan’s call to repair to North Africa but, on the } 


other hand, they have not capitulated to the Axis. 
Toulon is the one unoccupied town in all France and 
the fleet, with steam up, its crews confined on board 
and watched by Nazi bombers, constitutes the last 
weapon in Pétain’s hands. JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


