g 
A 


funda. 
dl 

a 
$ must 
nue to 
vithout 
ct that 
n total 


nat the | 


: West. 
Europe 
2 possi- 
- forced 
ing this 
in. Latin 
ly over- 
ited the 
yme the 


>. Lord 
made in 
Noven- 
realistic 
. But tt 
ction of 
England 
ram. By 
ng wat, 
- end of 
financial 
ships for 
led Con- 
that this 
factor if 
ng years. 
ips, even 
will pre 
al sequel 
one is to 
ging the 
ber 1939 
t, setting 
ts of the 
financial 
nted any 
e United 
Congress 
financial 
re United 


STONE 


General Librarghntered as 2nd class matter 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, 


NichtcaWEe ” 
4g 


FOREIGN POLICY BUBLELIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XX. No. 7 


DECEMBER 6, 1940 


U.S. LOAN COUNTERS JAPAN-NANKING TREATY 


— gpbaeee'an moves at Washington and Nanking 

on November 30 emphasized continuing Jap- 
anese-American differences in regard to China. In 
the capital of occupied China, Lieutenant-General 
Abe, special Japanese envoy, signed a treaty with 
Wang Ching-wei, head of the Nanking régime, pro- 
viding for the “readjustment’’ of Sino-Japanese re- 
lations. From Washington came the announcement 
that the United States was extending additional cred- 
its, totaling $100,000,000, to the Chinese govern- 
ment at Chungking. On the same day, at his press 
conference, Secretary Hull called attention to his 
previous statement on March 30, 1940, when Japan 
set up the Nanking government. At that time he 
characterized Japan's action as ‘‘a further step in the 
program of one country by armed force to impose 
its will upon a neighboring country.” 


NEW LOANS TO CHINA. Announcement of 
the credits to China was contained in statements by 
the President and Mr. Jesse Jones, Federal Loan Ad- 
ministrator. The Export-Import Bank has already 
agreed to advance half of the total amount. The 
second $50,000,000 will be provided by the U. S. 
Treasury, and was approved by the monetary commit- 
tees of Congress on December 2. As in previous loans 
to China, the new advances will be covered by pur- 
chases of specified Chinese commodities. In this case 
the Metals Reserve Company is arranging to pur- 
chase additional quantities of Chinese tungsten, an- 
timony and tin, valued at $60,000,000, during the 
next few years. 

Although the two loans are to be retired by con- 
tinuing purchases of commodities from China, they 
are distinct so far as their uses are concerned. The 
Treasury loan, according to the President’s state- 
ment, will be used “for purposes of monetary pro- 
tection and management as between American and 
Chinese currencies.” This credit will presumably be 
applied entirely to stabilization operations, and thus 


will not be used to finance direct Chinese purchases 
in the American market. 

On the other hand, the loan advanced by the 
Export-Import Bank will be used “for general pur- 
poses, 1.€., apparently to cover American commodi- 
ties purchased by the Chinese government. Goods 
commonly suggested include trucks, gasoline and 
foodstuffs, but not munitions. Up to the present, 
American loan contracts with China have specifically 
prohibited purchases of American munitions. The 
Congressional act of September 26, 1940, however, 
which increased the lending authority of the Export- 
Import Bank, removed the limitations on loans for 
arms purchases. China’s authorities may therefore 
be able to devote part of the proceeds of the new 
loan from the Export-Import Bank to purchases of 
munitions, although the final details have not yet 
been worked out. 

Some confusion as to the exact total of recent 
American loans to China has been created by in- 
clusion in estimates of the old $50,000,000 cotton 
and wheat loan, originally granted in May 1933. 
This agreement was canceled in April 1935, after 
some $16,000,000 had been utilized by China. Three 
additional loans (excluding the latest credits an- 
nounced on November 30) have been made to 
China, as follows: $25,000,000 (December 1938) ; 
$20,000,000 (March 1940); and $25,000,000 (Sep- 
tember 1940). Of this total of $86,000,000, ap- 
proximately $43,824,000 have been actually dis- 
bursed — with payments by China totaling $13,- 
160,000. 

THE JAPAN-NANKING TREATY. Formal rec- 
ognition of the Nanking government, extended by 
Japan in the new treaty with Wang Ching-wei, has 
been delayed for eight months. Lieutenant-General 
Abe originally went to Nanking with plenipoten- 
tiary powers last April, for the announced purpose 
of arranging the treaty just signed. Two main fac- 


tors account for this long delay. The first has been 
Wang Ching-wei’s signal failure to attract popular 
support or wean political leaders away from Chung- 
king. The aiead b has been Japan’s hope that Chi- 
nese military resistance would laa down, that a 
peace on Japanese terms could be dictated, and that 
the Nanking and Chungking régimes might then 
be merged. Signature of the present treaty thus rep- 
resents an admission that these hopes have not been 
attained, especially since Tokyo has apparently been 
making sub rosa peace offers to the Chungking au- 
thorities during recent weeks. It is now clear that 
the Chinese government has rejected all such over- 
tures, and that Japan has perforce been led to sign 
a formal treaty with Wang Ching-wei. 


The new treaty makes little real change in Japan’s 
present position in China. Its provisions are so 
vaguely worded as to place no effective obstacles in 
the way of the de facto control which Tokyo exer- 
cises in occupied China, both in political and eco- 
nomic affairs. For the future, Japan’s armed forces 
will continue to occupy North China and Inner 
Mongolia, although they will withdraw from the 
rest of China within two years after a general peace 


is established. 


The treaty makes one point of some importance, 
especially for propaganda purposes. It provides for 
the abolition of extraterritoriality and for the ren- 
dition of Japanese concessions to China. Although 
Japan, of course, intends to dominate the govern- 
ment of China to which it yields these privileges, the 
offer can be played up for its effect on Chinese opin- 
ion. On this significant issue, the democracies have 
it in their power to make a crushing retort. It has 
been suggested that Britain and the United States 


GERMANY SEEKS TO REORGANIZE BALKANS 


Germany's drive to bring all European countries 
into its “new order” came to a sudden halt on No- 
vember 25, when it was announced in Berlin that 
no new adherences were expected to the Axis-Jap- 
anese alliance of September 27, which Hungary, 
Rumania and Slovakia had signed within one week.* 
This abrupt suspension of Nazi activities on the 
diplomatic front may have been due, in part, to the 
unexpected success of Greek and British arms against 
Italy, and in part to Russia’s reticence concerning 
its attitude toward the “new order.” The victories 
of the Greek forces, which on December 3 were un- 
officially reported within 30 miles of Tirana, capital 
of Albania, have severely shaken Italy’s prestige 
throughout the Mediterranean, from Spain to Egypt, 
and may strengthen British influence in the Balkans 
and the Near East. At the same time M. Molotov, 
after listening to the proposals made to him by 


*Cf. *‘Greek was Syrotm British in Near East,’’ Foreign Policy 


Bulletin, November 2 


Page Two 


— 


immediately conclude treaties with the Chungking 
government, providing specifically for the abolitiog | 
of extraterritoriality and the rendition of concessions 
and settlements within a fixed period after China | 
has re-established its territorial and administrative | 
integrity. Precedent for this action exists in the 
American treaty with China signed in July 1928 
which led to Chinese tariff autonomy. The move | 
would strengthen Chinese morale and enhance demo. | 
cratic prestige in the Far East. 


JAPAN’S SOUTHWARD DRIVE. The concen. 
tration of Japanese troops off China’s southern coasts 
has thus far led to no concrete action. Difficulties 
between France and Thailand (Siam) continue 
along the border of Indo-China, with reports of hos. 
tilities and mutual air raids. Dispatches from Bang. 
kok state that Thai troops have occupied a small | 
section of territory in southern Indo-China, opposite 
Saigon. Reported “incidents” in the Dutch East 
Indies, affecting Japanese nationals, have also been 
prominently featured in the Tokyo press. 

It seems evident that Japan’s recent efforts to 
clear the way for a southward drive have not been | 
successful. Attempts to arrange a peace with China | 


- 


have failed, and prospects of a quick settlement ap. | 
pear less likely than ever. Military operations in | 
China are becoming more extensive. A renewed Jap | 
anese offensive is taking place along the Han River 
valley in Hupeh province, and heavy fighting is oc 
curring in Shansi. Negotiations for a general Soviet: | 
Japanese accord have apparently bogged down in | 
Moscow, and the present conversations have turned | 
to the perennial fisheries question, since the current 
fisheries accord expires on December 31. 


T. A. BIssoN | 


Hitler in Berlin on November 12, and by Lieutenant | 
General Tatekawa, new Japanese Ambassador, in| 
Moscow, has given no indication that Russia ap} 
proves of Nazi plans for a “new order” in Europe 
and Asia. On the contrary, there are signs thal 
the Soviet government may have used its influenc 
in Bulgaria and Turkey to counteract Germanys) 
diplomatic campaign. 


STE APs Gh 


Regular Membership .......c.ccccccscmcrnemeernnsee 

Associate Membershi 

Special Subscription to Headline a 
PE I aii cach liveries GR 


* Members sending in 2 or more Regular Memberships may 
obtain them at a special gift price of $4.50 each. 


_— 


—_— 


W 
It w 
lieve 
suffet 
sion 
attacl 
out ¢t 
out f 
for % 
artn 
Balke 
—an 
whicl 
kirk. 
trieve 
aid. 
Yugce 
man 
Thrai 
the n 


, ceedi: 


Bulg: 
many 
ernm 


| whicl 


ing C 


offici: 
were 
to av 
reant 


lowe 
} sever 
} inces 


Gene 
hithe 
was ; 
Nove 
tion 

Iron 
ing t 
the s 
accor 
on N 
at Al 
vanic 
indic 
| Tran 
gust 

PORE! 


Headqu 
Entered 


=> 


essions | 
China 
Strative 
in the 
y 1928, 
> move | 
> demo. | 


concen- 
N Coasts | 
ficulties | 
‘ontinue | 
of hos. 
n Bang. 
a small 
Opposite 
ch East 
so been 


) 


forts to 
10t been 
h China 
nent ap- 
tions in 
wed Jap. 
an River 
ng is oC 
| Soviet: 
down in 
e turned 
> current | 


BISSON 


eutenant- 
sador, if 


ussia ap 
n Europe} 
2 ee 
igns that | 
influenct 
yermanys 


ips may 
ch. 


——— a] 
a 


—_—_— 
—_—_ 


WILL GERMANY AID ITALY IN BALKANS? 
It would be wishful thinking, however, to be- 
lieve that Germany will stand idly by while Italy 
suffers reverses in the Mediterranean. The impres- 
sion is gaining ground that Mussolini launched an 
attack on Greece without due preparation and with- 
out the approval of Hitler, in the hope of carving 
out for Italy a sphere of influence in the Balkans 
for which he would not be indebted to his Axis 
partner. By this move, Mussolini spread war to the 
Balkans—a development hitherto opposed in Berlin 
—and gave the British a foothold on the continent, 
which they had lacked since their retreat from Dun- 
kirk. I/ Duce, moreover, appears determined to re- 
trieve Italy’s prestige without appeal for German 
aid. Yet negotiations between Germany and the 
Yugoslav government may be the prelude to a Ger- 
man drive through Hungary and Yugoslavia into 
Thrace, a section of Greece claimed by Bulgaria. At 
the moment, a diplomatic struggle appears to be pro- 
ceeding behind the scenes between those elements in 
Bulgaria and Yugoslavia which believe that Ger- 
many is on the point of victory, and urge their gov- 
ernments to climb on the Nazi bandwagon, and those 
which still look to the Soviet Union for aid in block- 
ing German expansion. 


CIVIL WAR IN RUMANIA. German plans for 
reorganization of the Balkans may be furthered by 
the disorders, bordering on a state of anarchy, which 
broke out in Rumania on November 27, when 64 
officials associated with the régime of King Carol II 
were executed by radical members of the Iron Guard 
to avenge the execution in 1938 of Corneliu Cod- 
reanu, Iron Guard leader, and a number of his fol- 
lowers. These disorders, which apparently claimed 
several hundred lives in Bucharest and the prov- 
inces, notably the oil fields of Ploesti, occurred while 
General Antonescu, the Rumanian Premier, who had 
hitherto sought to moderate Iron Guard excesses, 
was absent in Berlin. On his return to Bucharest on 
November 28 General Antonescu, with the coopera- 
tion of his Vice-Premier, Horia Sima, a moderate 
Iron Guardist, attempted to restore order by plac- 
ing the Rumanian army on an emergency basis. At 
the same time, he took part in the elaborate funeral 
accorded to Codreanu by his Iron Guard supporters 
on November 29. Two days later, during ceremonies 
at Alba-Julia commemorating the cession of Transyl- 
Vania to Rumania 22 years ago, General Antonescu 
indicated that he would seek to recover Northern 
Transylvania, ceded by Rumania to Hungary on Au- 
gust 30 at the orders of the Axis powers, and said 


Page Three 


Germany and Italy had shown “understanding” for 
Rumania’s sufferings. 

In the absence of first-hand information, it is dif- 
ficult to determine whether the Nazis incited the 
mass executions of the Iron Guard, in the course of 
which perished not only a number of police and 
government officials, but also many leading Ru- 
manian intellectuals. It is obvious that the state of 
anarchy to which Rumania has been reduced cannot 
be helpful to the Germans, who need peace and 
order for full utilization of Rumanian oil and food- 
stuffs. Yet Rumania’s plight may be used by the 
Nazis to justify complete occupation of the country. 
On December 2 it was reported that four additional 
divisions were on their way to Rumania, and that 
Field Marshal General Wilhelm Keitel, Commander 
in Chief of the German forces, had been entrusted 
with the task of bringing order out of chaos. 

While the world’s attention was focused on 
Greece and Rumania, Britain continued to suffer 
increasingly destructive air raids on its ports and 
war industries, as well as submarine attacks on its 
shipping. The struggle between Britain and Ger- 
many is rapidly approaching a critical stage—more 
critical perhaps than people in Britain and the United 
States have yet begun to realize. Now that the con- 
tinent, for the most part under Nazi rule, is threat- 
ened with shortages of food and fuel, as well as 
with the kind of political breakdown that has de- 
veloped in Rumania, Germany would probably wel- 
come an early cessation of the war, which would 
permit it to consolidate its control of Europe. At the 
same time, Britain, faced with declining industrial 
production, sharply increased shipping losses, and 
the unremitting dangers of air raids and winter life 
in shelters, presses the United States for the 
greatly accelerated aid it needs if it is to carry 
on single-handed its struggle against Germany. 
Should additional American aid either not be forth- 
coming or else, owing to delays in industrial pro- 
duction and legislative procedures, be unavailable 
for months to come, the possibility that new peace 
feelers might be put out in the near future cannot 
be excluded. With Britain and Germany locked in 
stalemate, the rdle of the two great non-belligerent 
powers—the United States and the Soviet Union— 
assumes paramount importance for the outcome of 


the conflict. VerA M. DEAN 


LISTEN IN to the FPA’s radio program next Sunday. 
David H. Popper will broadcast from 2:15 to 2:30 p.m. 
E.S.T. The subject is: “Axis Prospects in the Balkans.” 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 7, DsgcemMBER 6, 1940. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera MicHEtgs Dgan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Sis 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
Dec. 3.—Before taking any legislative action on 
financial aid to Britain, Washington plans to explore 
other methods of dealing with the problem and in- 
= more carefully into the Empire’s existing 
cial resources in this country. While the im- 
portance of stepping up delivery of war materials 
to England is fully appreciated here, Lord Lothian’s 
statement that the British government is nearing the 
end of its resources is viewed with considerable 
skepticism. This attitude is not only reflected in 
the decision of the Senate Foreign Relations Com- 
mittee (November 27) to postpone consideration 
of the Johnson Act and the Neutrality Law until 
the next session, but is also evident in some of 
the executive departments directly concerned with 
British purchasing operations. 


BRITAIN’S FINANCIAL BALANCE-SHEET. It 
is difficult to draw up a precise balance-sheet, as the 
exact resources available to Britain for war pur- 
chases in this country are not known. However, a 
rough estimate may be made on the basis of trade 
and financial data collected by various government 
agencies. 

At the beginning of the war, the assets of Great 
Britain and Canada were summarized as follows by 
the Federal Reserve Board: 


United Kingdom 

Central api reserves $2,000,000,000 
Dollar balances 595,000,000 
Stocks and bonds 735,000,000 
Direct investments 900,000,000 


$4,230,000,000 


Canada 

Central gold reserves $215,000,000 

Dollar balances 355,000,000 

Stocks and bonds 500,000,000 

Direct investments 560,000,000 
$1,630,000,000 

Total, U.K. and Canada $5,860,000,000 


This total, of course, includes direct investments in 
American enterprises such as railways, utilities and 
factories, which could not be readily converted into 
cash. Excluding all direct investments, however, the 
liquid assets of Britain and Canada amounted to at 
least $4,400,000,000. 

How much of this has been drawn on for pur- 
chases in the United States is not entirely a matter of 
guesswork. During the first thirteen months of the 
war, our exports to all British countries (excluding 
minor colonies) totaled $1,861,400,000, and our im- 


ports from these sources amounted to $1,046,906,009 
—leaving the Empire with an adverse commodity | 
balance of about $814,500,000. 
It is most unlikely that this trade deficit has placed 
a serious strain on British resources in the United 
States. While Great Britain and Canada exported 
no less than $3,842,000,000 in gold to the United 
States during the first thirteen months of the war, | 


a large portion of this gold probably belonged ty | You. : 


France, Holland and other European countries; and 
even the British share cannot have been entirely used 
up for payments of war supplies. That Britain's 
liquid resources in the United States were not ex | 
tensively tapped is indicated by the most recent 
Treasury figures showing that the British and; 
Canadian dollar balances declined by only $169, 
000,000, and sale of securities amounted to only 
$193,000,000. 

The balance of commodity trade, of course, does 
not tell the whole story. British war purchases ate | 
now running far in excess of last year, and advance , 
war orders are assumed to be in the neighborhood 
of two billion dollars. Moreover, the British are 
known to be advancing funds for the expansion of 
American airplane factories, shipyards and other mu 
nitions facilities. They are also using some of theit 
American assets to pay for Latin American trade! 
Nevertheless, the consensus in Washington is that 
British purchases could be continued at the present 
rate of increase for at least a year or eighteen months | 
without draining the financial resources of the Em | 
pire. 

The assumption, therefore, is that Great Britain 
has raised the issue at this time for political, rather| 
than economic reasons. In the purely economic field) 
there are several ways in which the United States) 
might ease Britain’s credit position without repeal’ 
of existing legislation. The RFC, for example, coule| 
extend loans to American industry for plant expat 
sion, thus relieving the British of this necessity. The 
Treasury could use its equalization fund to bij 
sterling, or the Export-Import Bank might exten 
credits to cover Latin American trade with Greil 
Britain. In fact, some of these methods are being 
employed at the present time. 

The political issue, however, raises the dired 
question whether the United States is prepared # 
“go the limit’ in supporting Britain’s war effort 
The answer—which the American people may wél 
ponder—has not yet been disclosed in Washingtot 


W. T. STONE 


the h 
effect 
end ¢ 


| Greel 


base : 
mate! 
appal 
again 
terrar 
mand 
natio 
leade 
oppo: 
Chief 
garde 
had p 
was 

Islanc 
opian 
the + 
with 

point 
the 
miral 


of the 
Th 


atte 
eral ] 
the f; 
tainec 
milit 
count 
indic: 
At th 
in Al 
the | 
Egyp 


