COn- 


ablic: 


w the 
facies 
eace- 
nd in 
dicta- 
1 the 
their 


1e as- 
nptly 
Italy, 
more 
meri- 
could 
st of 


bluff. 
Toare 

face. 
onsid- 
‘'rance 
aSSiSt- 
terms 
ed by 
ill its 


1rope, 


Ow to 
st dic- 
O the 
dy to 
id the 
sritish 
res on 
speak- 
guage 
imself 
»rrow, 
yn this 
as in 
n and 
when 
opean 
s they 
t only 
nding 
re, en- 
racies. 


EAN 





Nationa! 
ss matter 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 

















Vou. XVII, No. 19 


Marcu 4, 1938 





—— 


WAR IN CHINA, by Varian Fry 


Here, briefly and simply told, and illustrated by pictorial 
maps, is the whole absorbing story: How the European 
nations began carving up China; how Japan followed 
their example; and what, for 40 years, the United 
States has been trying to do about it. 


cloth edition, 95 cents 
paper edition, 25 cents 


Headline Books, No. 13 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
PBR 2, 1921, at the Post 
GEN 2 ICAL Rov Office at New York, 
NERA, > N. Y., under the act 
UNiy. OF WPRARY of March 3, 1879. 
General Library 
Uni sity of Nichigan 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 








—— 
————— 





WEAKENING THE ROME-BERLIN AXIS 





— the dismay caused by the Berchtesgaden 
visit, Hitler's Reichstag speech and Mr. Eden’s 
resignation, sober second thought indicates that the 
situation arising out of these developments may not 
be as desperate as it seemed at first. Apparently the 
only issue between Prime Minister Chamberlain and 
Mr. Eden was whether Britain should demand con- 
crete guarantees of good faith from Italy, such as the 
withdrawal of troops from Spain, before beginning 
to negotiate a settlement of differences. The remain- 
ing members of the Cabinet believed that the imposi- 
tion of such conditions would merely lead to further 
recrimination, the conclusion of an iron-clad military 
alliance between Germany and Italy, and eventual 
war. They took the view that Britain should not al- 
low any question of prestige to stand in the way of 
immediately exploring the possibility of settling 
Mediterranean problems. 

In passing judgment on this shift in policy, Brit- 
ain’s critical position should be borne in mind. Un- 
able to rely on the LInited States and_supported_only 
by an alliance with France, Britain finds itself men- 
aced by three heavily armed aggressive dictatorships 
—Germany, Italy and Japan. It is possible that, in a 
general war, Britain could eventually triumph over 
all three dictatorships, for both Italy and Japan have 
grown weaker during the past year. No responsible 
statesman, however, can face the prospect of throw- 
ing his country into war without exploring every 
honorable avenue of escape. From the point of view 
of British prestige, it is unfortunate that Eden’s resig- 
nation should have seemed the result of noisy threats 
coming both from Berlin and Rome. But in view of 
the underlying problem it is not surprising that, on 
the issue of negotiation with one of three possible 
antagonists, the House of Commons on February 22 


should have supported Chamberlain by a vote of 
330 to 168. 


Realistic liberals should not oppose negotiations 
with Mussolini or Hitler merely because they detest 
fascism. What they should do is demand that these 
negotiations lead to a settlement which will not be 
bought at the price of creating new injustices. As far 
as Britain and Italy are concerned, an equitable com- 
promise should not prove impossible. Since no power 
is willing to dislodge Italy from Ethiopia, Britain 
is justified in asking the League to extend de facto 
recognition of the Italian conquest, if in return Italy 
agrees to withdraw from Spain and makes other con- 
cessions. Italy, for its part, is expected to ask certain 
guarantees of its security, such as naval parity in the 
Mediterranean, and possibly the demilitarization of 
some British bases. 

If an Anglo-Italian agreement is concluded, the 
Rome-Berlin axis may be shaken and the position of 
both Germany and Japan weakened. Mussolini is not 
likely to terminate the Rome-Berlin axis even if he 
comes to terms with Chamberlain, for the very ex- 
istence of this axis operates as a check on Hitler in 
Central Europe. Nevertheless, once his controversy 
with Britain is liquidated, Mussolini would be again 
in a position to throw his weight against Anschluss. 
Possibly as the result of such considerations, Chan- 
cellor Schuschnigg made a speech in Vienna on Feb- 
ruary 24 asserting that “Austria must remain Aus- 
trian.” Four days later, the Austrian army frustrated 
a plan of 50,000 Austrian Nazis to march on Vienna 
from Graz. While Rome expressed pleasure with 
Schuschnigg’s stand, Nazis in Berlin indignantly de- 
clared that the Austrian Chancellor must go. It is 
possible that Hitler may intervene in Austria, as he 
did in Spain, but it will be difficult for him to do so 
if an Anglo-Italian agreement has been consum- 
mated. Meanwhile, Czechoslovakia has given numer- 
ous indications that it will fight before accepting 
Germany’s racial demands, and on February 26 the 





ee tpt A cages it OE 








——_—_ 
——_—__ 








French Chamber almost unanimously endorsed For- 
eign Minister Delbos’ declaration that France's en- 

gements toward Czechoslovakia would be faith- 
fully kept. Until Hitler succeeds in absorbing Aus- 
tria into the Third Reich, he is not likely to proceed 
against Czechoslovakia. 


It is possible that, as a result of the forthcoming 
negotiations, a four-power pact will be concluded 
in an effort to liquidate the major difficulties of 
Europe. In certain pro-League circles the conclusion 
of such a pact is being vigorously opposed. While 
such a settlement might impose a fascist peace on 
Europe, this is not necessarily true. If war is to be 
avoided, the democratic, status guo powers must offer 
to remove the legitimate grievances of the dictator- 
ships. Until this offer is made, no one can tell 
whether these dictatorships are ready to accept a 
compromise. In 1925 five powers concluded the 
western Locarno agreement which served to bring 
Germany into the League of Nations. Today it will 
be much more difficult to bring Italy and Germany 
back to Geneva; yet conclusion of a four-power pact 
must be followed by a new and more realistic effort 


at international organization if any real appeasement 
is to take place. 


Recent developments in Europe are not likely to 
change the pattern of American foreign policy. We 


may expect something like the following during 
1938: 


1. The passage of the naval bill. The construction of a 
new American navy, made more certain than ever by Hitler’s 
speech and the British shift, will serve to strengthen the 
balance of power against both Germany and Japan, even 
though the United States remains aloof from all commit- 
ments. 


2. The conclusion of the British Trade Agreement. 
Hearings on this agreement are to begin on March 14. 
Although vehement protests against any reduction in indus- 
trial duties are being made by American manufacturers, it 
is probable thar chis agreement will be concluded by early 
summer. If the agreement provides for real reductions on 
the part of both governments, world economic recovery 
should be given a new impetus; and it might subsequently 
be possible to carry out more far-reaching auamneel world 
economic reconstruction. 


3. The reconvening of the Brussels Conference. The 
international position of Japan is steadily weakening. In 
view of the growing strength of Britain and America, it is 
not impossible that Japan will accept the mediation of the 
Nine-Power Conference. If this Conference can relieve 
Japan’s fear of eventual war with the Soviet Union and 
work out some means of meeting Japanese economic needs, 
it may possibly succeed in restoring China’s sovereignty. 


4. Perfecting of Inter-American peace machinery. Next 
December an Inter-American Conference will be held in 
Lima, Peru, for the purpose of discussing the formation of 
effective inter-American peace machinery. If Argentina and 
the United States can agree on a program, the Western 
Hemisphere may keep alive the principle of international 
organization at a time when it is being challenged in other 
parts of the world. 


Page Two 





— 
—— 


These predictions may be altogether too optimis. 
tic; the negotiations between England and Italy ma 
fail; the Nazis may make a successful putsch in Aus. 
tria; the war in the Orient may spread. In a sense the 
world remains at the mercy of incidents. Neverthe. 
less, taking all these factors into account, it is pos- 
sible that the coming months may see liquidation 
of certain tensions and a new start toward interna. 


tional cooperation. RAYMOND Les.iz BUELL 


JAPAN TIGHTENS ITS BELT 


Current military operations in China, engaging 
Japanese forces on a dozen major and minor fronts, 
illustrate the difficulties which confront Japan’s self- 
imposed task of subjugating half a continent. Even 
Tokyo's belligerent leaders begin to show signs of 
concern over the dimensions of the problem. After 
the fall of Nanking they made every effort to 
a peace settlement. The military campaign had run 
its prescribed six months’ term and all objectives had 
been achieved—all, that is, save the collapse of Chi- 
nese morale and resistance. On January 11 the full- 
dress Imperial Conference finally accepted the fact 
that Japan’s peace terms had been rejected; with- 
drawal of recognition from the Chinese government 
—a rather weak gesture—followed. 

The Japanese commanders had already broadened 
the scope of their military operations in China. By 
mid-January the expeditionary forces in Shantung 
province had pushed their advance along the Tien- 
tsin-Pukow Railway to a point at which it threatened 
Hsiichow, strategic junction on the east-west Lunghai 
Railway. On January 14 Generalissimo Chiang Kai- 
shek took personal command of operations on this 
front. His first act was to order the arrest of General 
Han Fu-chu, the Shantung governor, who was later 
executed for failure to resist the enemy. Large Chi- 





nese armies were rapidly massed along the Lunghai} 


Railway. The Japanese advance on Hsiichow fron 
the north was brought to a halt, and has only lately 
been resumed; a drive on Hsiichow from the south 
was similarly held up near Pengpu in the vailey of 
the Hwai River. A more recent Japanese offensive 
from the north on Chengchow, at the center of the 
Lunghai Railway, has been supported by a thrust 


into southern Shansi, which threatens to cut the | 


same railway by a crossing of the Yellow River fut 


ther to the west. Guerrilla attacks by Eighth Route 





offic 
tion 
dras 
fron 
ever 
thor 
Wh 





Army units cut the Peiping-Hankow Railway south 
of Paotingfu in mid-February, and held up the Jap- ob 
anese force advancing on Chengchow; in other areas, | 
notably the Shanghai-Nanking-Hangchow triangle, 
the Japanese forces also find it difficult to protect 


supply lines. af 
New airplanes for the Chinese army have evident- 
ly reached Hankow;; their effectiveness has been dem- 
(Continued on Page 4) 








Jened 
a. By 
ntung 
Tien- 
tened 
nghai 
r Kai- 
n this 
oneral 
; later 
> Chi- 
inghai 
fron 
itely 
south 

: of 
ensive 
of the 
thrust 
it the 
er fur- 
Route 
south 
e Jap- 
areas, 
jangle, 
protect 


vident- 
n dem- 


, 


W ashington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Mar. 1—A week ago, after hurriedly scanning 
official reports on the Hitler speech and the resigna- 
tion of Anthony Eden, Secretary Hull laid down a 
drastic edict forbidding State Department officials 


»| from discussing or commenting on the bewildering 
“| events 


in London, Berlin and Vienna. Second 
thoughts, he implied, are safer than first impressions. 
While the edict is still in force, Washington observ- 
s who have prodded beneath the surface of diplo- 
atic reticence have begun to revise their own first 
mpressions and to re-appraise the effect of European 
develop nents on American foreign policy. 


Within Administration circles they find a division 
of opinion which corresponds closely to the split in 
Britain, though here the line of cleavage is not so 
sharp and the difference is largely one of emphasis. 
One group, which has never liked the attempt to line 
up the “peace-loving” democracies against the “ban- 
dit” dictatorships, welcomes Mr. Chamberlain's “re- 
alistic’ approach to Italy and Germany and believes 
that direct negotiations will ease existing tensions in 
Europe. Members of this group refuse to accept the 
view that Britain has “surrendered” to the dictators. 
On the contrary, they insist that Mr. Chamberlain 
has reason to believe that Mussolini is equally 
anxious to reach a Mediterranean accord, in order to 
offset Hitler’s Austrian coup. Such an agreement, 
even though it may seem brutal, will postpone the 
langer of war in Europe and eventually strengthen 
Britai ind in the Far East. The other group, 
vhicl been strongly opposed to making any con- 
the dictators without guarantees of secur- 

and disarmament, is disturbed and skeptical about 
the future. They feel that Mr. Chamberlain has mis- 
judged the European situation and undermined the 


4 foundations of any effective collaboration between 


the democracies. The Roosevelt Administration, 
while unable to make political commitments in Eu- 
tope, had been moving away from traditional isola- 
tionism, and laying the basis for a policy of parallel 
action to uphold * ‘common interests and common 
objectives.” Members of this group admit that the 
turn of events in Europe has enormously compli- 
cated the task of American diplomacy and checked— 
temporarily at least—Secretary Hull’s campaign to 
uphold “orderly processes” in international relations. 


The extent to which the reorientation of British 
policy has cut the ground from under Mr. Hull was 








shown by statements in both Houses of Congress last 
week. Typical of Congressional comment among 
even strong Administration supporters was the ob- 
servation of Senator Pat Harrison, a member of the 
Foreign Relations Committee, that the United States 
“has enough to do taking care of its own business 
without getting mixed up in troubles abroad.” Many 
loyal Administration supporters were frankly relieved 
by Britain's abandonment of “collective security” 
which disposed of the suspicion that the United 
States had entered into an agreement or ‘‘understand- 
ing” in the Far East. House leaders agreed that the 
defeat of Mr. Eden had smoothed the path of the 
naval expansion program—which will now be justi- 
fied on the basis of ‘“‘armed isolation.” The bill, 
which it is now estimated will cost $1,100,000,000, 
will seek to establish the principle of a “two-fleet” 
navy capable of defending both coasts against any 
combination of powers. 


Another indication of Congressional sentiment 
was found in the response to the Hungarian debt 
settlement proposal, recently submitted to the State 
Department and made public by the Hungarian Min- 
ister on February 23. The proposal outlined a basis 
for settlement under which Hungary would repay 
the original principal, amounting to $1,685,000 with- 
out interest, less approximately $478,000 already 
paid under the funding agreement of 1924, in equal 
instalments over a period of 30 years. While many 
Congressmen admitted privately that this was a rea- 
sonable offer, and one which might be acceptable by 
itself, the prevailing opinion on Capitol Hill was 
hostile to any plan which could be used as a “prece- 
dent” for a general scaling-down of the war debts. 
This was made clear to Mr. Roosevelt at a White 
House conference held a few days before the Hun- 
garian announcement, when Vice President Garner 
and Congressional leaders strongly opposed raising 
the issue at this time. As a result, any plans which 
the Administration may have had for reviving the 
settlement of European debts have been shelved for 
the present. 


Despite the temper of Congress, however, there 
is no evidence that the State Department will alter 
its Far Eastern policy as a result of European devel- 
opments. Demands for wholesale withdrawal of 
American citizens, revived in Congress last week, 
have been ignored, and the position taken by this 
government with respect to lives and property of its 
nationals in China has been reaffirmed. In a note de- 











ore ES TE 











=________====[==—=_ = 








livered in Tokyo on February 18 and revealed by Sec- 
retary Hull on February 25, the United States in- 
formed Japan that it would be held responsible for 
any injuries or damage to Americans caused by Jap- 
anese troops in the central China war zone. This is 
accepted here as meaning that the United States will 
insist upon its rights under international law, regard- 
less of any voluntary measures it may take to remove 
citizens from war zones. WILLIAM T. STONE 


JAPAN TIGHTENS ITS BELT 
(Continued from Page 2) 

onstrated on the military fronts, and in the spectac- 
ular bombing raid of February 23 on Formosa. Al- 
though some planes may have been purchased from 
the Soviet Union, the bulk of China’s military sup- 
plies still seems to be arriving via Hongkong from 
European and American sources. Figures supplied 
in a year-end survey of Chinese finances by foreign 
experts show that China purchased military equip- 
ment valued at 100 million U.S. dollars from July to 
December 1937; on January 1, 1938 an additional 
25 million dollars’ worth was awaiting delivery. 
China’s foreign and domestic bonds were regularly 
serviced through 1937 at a cost of approximately 
100 million dollars; a moratorium affecting pay- 
ments on principal, but not on interest, may be de- 
clared in March 1938. On January 1, 1938 China's 
foreign currency reserves, mainly in dollars and ster- 
ling, aggregated 300 million dollars. 


The strain imposed by the war on Japan's finances 
is even more evident. Final Japanese trade figures for 
1937 show a merchandise trade deficit of 636 million 
yen; during the period from March to December, 


Page Four 














—e 
a 








Japan’s gold shipments to the United States totaled 
approximately 845 million yen. Lack of foreign ex. 
change is swiftly draining Japan’s gold reserves. The 
boycott of Japanese goods, which is growing in ex- 
tent and intensity, strikes at this vulnerable point and 
will exert proportionately greater effect in 1938. 
The National Mobilization Bill recently submitted 
to the Diet emphasizes the degree to which “eco. 
nomic control’ measures have become necessary, 
This bill, which is designed to complete the structure 
of Japan’s totalitarian state, would extend govern. 
ment control over every phase of industry, trade and 
finance, regulate wages and prohibit strikes, and 
gravely curtail the powers of the Diet. Despite 
strong opposition in the Diet, the bill entered the 
committee stage on February 25. Much of the regi- 
mentation envisaged by the bill has been applied for 
months past. Laws on Japan’s statute books already 
vest control of foreign exchange, imports and ex- 
ports, and the direction of capital investment in offi- 
cial hands. The restrictions on imports, especially 
raw cotton and wool, have severely hampered the 
textile manufacturers, whose interests are shunted 
aside in favor of “necessary” industries. These as- 
pects, however, are not paramount in the minds of the 
men leading the Diet opposition, who are more con- 
cerned lest the deliberative functions of the Diet be 
completely supplanted by imperial decrees issued 
under blanket powers conferred by the bill. The op- 
position may revise or delay this bill, but the general 
aims which it embodies express the logic of Japan's 
recent political evolution, and will sooner or later be 
enforced by the dominant coalition of reactionary 
industrialists and the army. T. A. Bisson 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


British Experiments in Public Ownership and Control, by 
rym H. O’Brien. New York, W. W. Norton, 1938. 
.00 


Three great public utilities—the Central Electricity 
Board, British Broadcasting Company and the London 
Passenger Transport Board—discussed in more detail than 
in an earlier and broader volume, Public Enterprise, ed- 
ited by William Robson (cf. review, Foreign Policy 
Bulletin, November 19, 1937). Writing in a careful but 
occasionally pedestrian manner, Mr. O’Brien maintains a 
remarkably logical and impartial approach. The develop- 
ment of the BBC is especially interesting in comparison 
with the growth of privately owned radio in America. 


A History of the League of Nations, by John I. Knudson. 
Atlanta, Turner E. Smith & Co., 1938. 


A general survey of international organization, con- 
ventional and uncritical in treatment. 


A Survey of European Civilization, by Wallace K. Fergu- 
son and Geoffrey Bruun. Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 
1936. $4.50 


European History Since 1870, by F. Lee Benns. New 
York, F. S. Crofts, 1938. $6.00 


Two comprehensive volumes, useful for teaching or ref- 
erence purposes. Professors Ferguson and Bruun, pre 
senting a textbook for college freshmen, span (in 1024 
pages) European history from the fall of the Rome of 
Augustus to the rise of the Rome of Mussolini. Professor 
Benns, writing for mature readers, presents (in 860 
pages) a detailed and well-balanced survey of modern 
history. Over one-third of the interestingly written nar- 
rative deals with the post-war period through October 
1937. Both books are enhanced by maps, illustrations and 
bibliographies, and the first-mentioned has paragraph 
headings. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 19, Marcu 4, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasix Buxgit, President; Vera MicHeres Dean, Editor. 


National 


Entered as second-class mattet 


December 2, 1921, at the Post Office atc New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








FC 


VoL 


OR 


dot 
line 
tron 
Ss 
dra 
Bri 
mit 


sta: 
uat 
Jar 
tot 
thi 


ula 


ing 


fey 


Cor 
tro 
an 
sea 
for 








