Ves 
it 
—It 
air- 
Lips 
han 
tab- 
and 

the 
that 
ions 
ger- 
hich 
: of 


itled 
ency 

his 
t, in 
rs of 
n to 
hile 


htest 
rdon 
early 
» im- 
cked 
war 
1 re- 
olini 

and 

pro- 
even 


oslo- 
thing 
ment 
rench 
fF the 
ge by 
case, 
argo 
Ww ing 


New 


; with 
states’ 


National 
Edttor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVII, No. 45 


—_—_ 


SEPTEMBER 2, 1938 





JAPAN’S HOME FRONT, by T. A. Bisson 


Does political opposition exist within Japan? What is 
Japan’s economic position? Can it continue its military 
campaign in China? Japan’s Home Front answers these 
questions, and analyzes not only the “reforms” of the 
present military-fascist Cabinet, but the important role 
of the great democratic powers in the Sino-Japanese War. 


September 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents a copy 





Entered as second: 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 




















NEW STORM OVER 


CZECHOSLOVAKIA 





by VERA MICHELES DEAN 
Mrs. Dean has just returned from a two-months’ trip to 
France, Germany, Austria and Hungary. 


‘y HE speech delivered by Sir John Simon, Chan- 

cellor of the Exchequer, at Lanark on August 27 
climaxed a week of rapidly increasing tension in 
Central Europe, aggravated by a German press bar- 
tage against Czechoslovakia and a proclamation of 
the Henlein party urging its members to resort to 
“self-defense.” In carefully guarded terms, avoid- 
ing any direct reference to Germany and leaving the 
way open for negotiations with the totalitarian states, 
Sir John reaffirmed Mr. Chamberlain’s statement of 
March 24 that Britain would probably become in- 
volved in a Central European war. The Czechoslovak 
situation, he added, “may be so critical for the fu- 
ture of Europe that it would be impossible to assume 
a limit to the disturbance that a conflict might in- 
volve, and everyone in every country who considers 
the consequences has to bear that in mind.” A state- 
ment issued on the same day by the British Foreign 
Office praised the “conciliatory attitude” of the 
Prague government, which has offered a plan for 
cantonal autonomy; expressed the hope that there 
would be a “constructive response”; and deplored 
the Henlein “‘self-defense” proclamation. 

These official declarations coincided with the an- 
nouncement on August 26 that a great part of the 
British Home Fleet will leave English Channel ports 
on September 6, the day the Nazi party congress 
opens at Nuremberg, for maneuvers north of Scot- 
land which will continue until November, and were 
intended to dispel the impression still prevailing 
in Berlin that Britain may remain neutral in a con- 
flict over Czechoslovakia. What the Germans are 
counting on is that, as in the case of Austria, the 
British will accept the fait accompli, provided no 
blood is shed and a general war is avoided. 


Germany’s actions during the past two weeks, be- 
ginning with the elaborate army maneuvers launched 
on August 15, would suggest that Hitler hopes to 
win a bloodless victory over Prague by methods 
made familiar in Austria. The stridently repeated 
Nazi claim that Sudeten Germans are endangered by 
“Marxists” and that Prague is ruled from Moscow 
provide the proper setting for what Berlin will 
doubtless describe as legitimate intervention to pre- 
serve order in Czechoslovakia. Reports that the 
Hitler government assured Rumania, Yugoslavia and 
the Soviet Union that such intervention would not 
constitute aggression recall anxious German inquiries 
in Prague regarding possible Czech resistance at the 
very moment German forces were advancing on 
Austria. To believe that Hitler wants war is to mis- 
understand the policy which the greatest one-track 
mind in Europe has consistently—and successfully— 
followed since 1933. Hitler's display of armed 
strength at this critical time is intended to ac- 
complish the objective which eluded him-on May 21, 
by playing on the reluctance of other countries to 
face the horrors of war. 


The form which a cold putsch against Czecho- 
slovakia may take is foreshadowed by the visit paid 
to Germany on August 20-25 by Regent Horthy and 
other Hungarian officials. This visit was clearly in- 
tended to bring Hungary within the orbit of German 
domination by stressing the danger of resisting the 
Nazi military machine. It also demonstrated the 
errors committed during the post-war period by the 
Little Entente states—Czechoslovakia, Rumania and 
Yugoslavia—which opposed Hungary’s rearmament 
and failed to heed its demands for concessions to 
Hungarian minorities within their frontiers. At its 
annual conference in Bled, Yugoslavia, on August 
21-23 the Little Entente, in a belated effort to detach 




















Hungary from Germany, recognized its right to re- 
arm in return for a pledge of non-aggression (which, 
according to Budapest, does not go beyond the com- 
mitments of the Kellogg-Briand pact), and promised 
to consider the claims of Hungarian minorities. 
Premier Bela Imredy of Hungary fears Nazism and, 
following Schuschnigg’s ill-fated example, hopes to 
combat it by a Catholic dictatorship equally opposed 
to Nazis and Socialists. But Hungary, like Austria, 
is not strong enough to resist Germany alone and, 
like Poland, hopes to benefit by the break-up of 
Czechoslovakia. If Hitler obtains the support, or 
even acquiescence, of Hungary, the encirclement of 
Czechoslovakia will be completed, and Prague will 
be faced with the choice of submitting to German 
domination, or fighting its way out of a hostile ring. 


In such a fight Czechoslovakia counts on the aid of 
the Soviet Union, which cannot remain indifferent to 
Germany's Drang nach Osten, and is more free to act 
in the West now that it has concluded a truce with 
Japan. French assistance, however, remains problem- 
atical, even though public opinion definitely favors 
fulfilment of France’s obligations to aid Czechoslo- 
vakia in case of aggression. Strategically France can- 
not hope to do more than immobilize a portion of 
the German army on the Siegfried line which is in- 
tended to match the French Maginot line. Feverish 
fortification of the Rhine region by hastily con- 
scripted labor bodes no good for a French attack on 
Germany. Confronted with threats from all direc- 
tions the French, who are never so calm as in mo- 
ments of imminent danger, reveal a spirit of modera- 
tion and a degree of national unity which offer a 
striking contrast to the ferment of the past two years. 
Unlike the British who today, as in 1914, have been 
slow—or perhaps reluctant—to realize to the full 
the dangers of Central European tension, the French 
have never had any illusions regarding Hitler’s aims 
and methods. They emphatically do not want war; 
but neither do they fear it. The British, hypnotized 
by dread of an air attack and anxious to complete 
their rearmament program, have but one object—to 
gain time by spinning out the Runciman negotiations 
until October when cold weather would force post- 
ponement of war until spring. The real danger is not 
that Hitler will provoke a general war, which would 
strain Germany’s economic system to the breaking 
point. The danger is that Britain, fearing war, may 
bring pressure on Paris and Prague to meet Hitler's 
terms, thus assuring Nazi hegemony of the European 
continent. 


Page Two 





——— 


U.S. URGES MEXICAN LAND COMPENSATION 

Secretary Hull’s note of August 22 on the Mexi- 
can seizure of American farm properties sums up the 
issues of a lagging controversy and puts increased 
pressure on the Cardenas government to begin pay. 
ment of compensation to American claimants. In a 
series of notes exchanged since March 1938, the 
Mexican government had declined proposals for the 
settlement of land claims valued by the American 
government at $10,132,388; and in a note of August 
3 had denied its duty under international law to make 
deferred compensation to foreigners for its expropri- 
ations. Secretary Hull’s note of August 22 expresses 
his “‘surprise” and “profound regret’’ that Mexico 
should deny this obligation. Brushing aside Foreign 
Secretary Eduardo Hay’s arguments that both the 
obligation and manner of payment are to be deter 





mined solely by Mexico’s domestic law, he re-asserts 
the American contention that Mexico is obliged t 
make prompt and definite provision for paying with 


in a reasonable time. 


Secretary Hull’s note squarely places before the 
Mexican government two earlier American proposals 
for solution of the controversy. On June 29 Under- 
Secretary Welles had suggested that each govern- 
ment appoint a commissioner to determine the 
amount of compensation required, and that points 
of disagreement should be settled by an arbitrator 
selected by the Permanent Commission at Washing- 
ton provided for by the Gondra Treaty of 1923. In 
his note of July 21, Secretary Hull had proposed 
arbitration of the matter under the General Treaty 
of Arbitration of 1929. In his note of August 22 the 
Secretary strongly urges Mexico to accept one solu- 
tion or the other, and in either case to seize no more 
property without prompt compensation. 


The importance of this controversy far transcends 
the value of the American land claims. For the 


United States to yield on this question might encour- 
age other countries to confiscate American property. 
By adopting a harsh attitude, however, the United 


States might easily undermine its good-neighbor 
policy in Latin America. The Cardenas government 
is also faced with a serious dilemma. If it should 
agree to make full and prompt payment for these 
land properties, it could hardly refuse similar com- 
mitments concerning expropriated oil properties 
whose value makes prompt payment of compensa- 
tion practically impossible. Yet refusal to honor its 
obligations would weaken the Cardenas govern- 


ment’s credit abroad and strengthen conservative 
Opposition at home. PauL B. TAYLOR 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 45, SepremBer 2, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lesiie BueLtt, 





National 
Edstor. 


Incorporated. 


President; DorotHy F. Lagt, Secretary; Vera MicHEies Dean, 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


AEF 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





