nerican 
zil and 


REEN 


National 
AN, Eéitor, 
Year. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XVI, No. 44 Avucust 27, 1937 


—_—_— 


MEXICO’S SOCIAL REVOLUTION 


and 
MEXICO’S CHALLENGE TO FOREIGN CAPITAL 
by Charles A. Thomson 


Two reports which deal with Mexican policies toward 
labor, education, and the Church under Cardenas’ paternal- 
istic dictatorship, as well as the expropriation of agricultural 
lands, the gradual extension of state socialism, and the ad- 
vancing program of labor legislation. 


Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents each 


of March 3, 1879. 


AMERICAN POLICY 


IN THE FAR EAST 


O more frightful example of the devastating 
nature of modern warfare has been given 
than in the present battle of Shanghai. Bombard- 
ment and fire have resulted not only in countless 


' casualties, but in the destruction of a large part 


of the city’s business area. The terrible injury 
done civilians by modern war implements was 
once more illustrated on August 23 when several 
aerial bombs exploded in the most populous part 
of the International Settlement, killing at least 
195 civilians and injuring 475. As far as the 
United States is concerned, the most serious inci- 
dent occurred on August 20 when a shell of uniden- 
tified origin hit the cruiser, Augusta, killing 
one sailor and wounding 18 others. Declining to 
consider proposals advanced both by Japan and 
China that foreign warships move away from the 
line of fire, Admiral Yarnell has insisted that he 


_ must maintain his present position in the Whang- 


poo river in order to protect the evacuation of 
Americans, half of whom have already left 
Shanghai. 

The accidental shelling of the Augusta, although 
received calmly by administrative officials, inten- 
sified the demand of a number of Congressmen, 
peace societies and periodicals for the withdrawal 
of American forces from the Orient and the ap- 
plication of the Neutrality Act. Instead of follow- 
ing this advice, however, the government on 
August 17 announced that an additional regiment 
of marines would be sent to Shanghai from San 
Diego and made it clear that for the time being 
the Act would not be applied. The Administration 
is unwilling to withdraw its forces from China, 
first because the abandonment of Americans de- 
siring to be evacuated would, to quote Senator 
Pittman’s radio speech of August 23, be “cowardly 
and unpatriotic”; second, because withdrawal of 
these forces would constitute encouragement to 
the Tokyo militarists. 


While Secretary Hull has not protested against 


Japanese aggression as strongly as’ Secretary 
Stimson did in 1931, he has constantly exercised 
his influence on behalf of peace. On July 16 Sec- 
retary Hull issued a statement laying down eight 
principles of international conduct, including that 
of the sanctity of treaties, which was circulated to 
every capital in the world. Although this state- 
ment did not mention the Orient, Secretary Hull 
obviously wanted to mobilize world opinion in an 
indirect way against Japan. The replies of 62 
states received by August 14 endorsed Mr. Hull’s 
views in principle, although Japan declared that 
these objectives could be attained only by “a full 
recognition and practical consideration of the ac- 
tual particular circumstances of the region.” On 
August 23 the Secretary went further and said: 
“We consider applicable throughout the world, in the 
Pacific area as elsewhere, the principles set forth in 
the statement of July 16...” which “embraces the prin- 
ciples embodied in many treaties, including the Wash- 
ington conference treaties and the Kellogg-Briand 
pact of Paris.... This Government does not believe 

in political alliances or entanglements, nor does it be- 
lieve in extreme isolation. It does believe in interna- 
tional cooperation for the purpose of seeking through 
pacific methods the achievement of those objectives set 
forth in the statement of July 16. In the light of our 
well-defined attitude and policies and within the range 
thereof, this Government is giving most solicitous at- 
tention to every phase of the Far Eastern situation.... 
This Government is endeavoring to see kept alive, 
strengthened and revitalized in reference to the Pacific 
area and to all the world, these fundamental principles.” 
While the Roosevelt Administration, like other 
governments, is unwilling to employ force to re- 
strain Japanese aggression, it does not wish to 
become an ally of Japan. This accounts in part 
for its hesitation to apply the Neutrality Act until 
one of the two belligerents has formally declared 
war or broken off diplomatic relations with the oth- 
er. Once the President proclaims the existence of 
a “state of war,” an arms and loan embargo would 
automatically be imposed against both belliger- 
ents. Japan is now virtually self-sufficient in mu- 


Se BOD 


fal ade 
che) ete Seta me ee 


ak 


tj EEA 


Faget 


aoe Weed So Senne 
Se 


nitions and would not be materially injured by the 
American embargo, but China, still dependent on 
outside supplies, would be severely handicapped. 
At the same time, Japanese ships could continue to 
import American cotton and oil, for the Chinese 
navy is too small to interfere with this trade. 
Those who demand application of the Neutrality 
Act assert that a Japanese naval blockade, even 
in the absence of an American embargo, could 
prevent China from importing arms from the 
United States. While to a certain extent this is 
true, China might succeed in running arms and 
planes from Siberia and French Indo-China. 
Under the old rules of neutrality, China was re- 
sponsible for determining whether it could suc- 
ceed in escaping seizure by the Japanese navy; but 
under the new law, the United States does not 
give China this choice. It takes the responsibility 
for cutting China off from the American market 
at the very time China is the victim of aggression. 
Thus our neutrality law imposes a penalty on 
China and probably violates the implied obliga- 
tions arising out of the Nine-Power Pact. 


What the “neutrality” school also overlooks is 
that Japan cannot establish a naval blockade of 
China while maintaining diplomatic relations with 
that country. Contending that it is merely pro- 
tecting its nationals, Japan apparently does not 
plan to declare war against China. But should 
the President proclaim that war exists, Japan 
would be encouraged to declare war and establish 
a naval blockade of the Chinese coasts, thus strik- 
ing a severe blow at Nanking. On the other hand, 
should President Roosevelt proclaim that Japan 
and China were at war, his declaration would, in 
the eyes of world opinion, condemn Japan as the 
aggressor, since it is fighting on Chinese soil. 
Rather than reduce “entanglements,” such a pro- 
nouncement might seriously endanger relations 
between Japan and the United States. 


The American government could safely apply 
the arms embargo against Italy and Ethiopia in 
October 1935 because it was public knowledge that 
the League Council was on the point of adopting 
stronger measures. It could safely apply the arms 
embargo against Spain in January 1937 because 
an even more severe policy had already been 
adopted by the 27 powers constituting the Non- 
Intervention Committee in London. In the Orient, 
however, no collective action has yet been taken 
and, in its absence, the application of embargoes 
by the United States alone might create far great- 
er dangers than it would avoid. 


It is striking that “isolationist” America con- 
tinues to preach the principles of international 
morality, at a time when the League of Nations is 
silent, and alone among the powers considers the 


Page Two 


adoption of an embargo policy. While the intep. 
tions of the Administration are sound, the dap. 
gers implicit in the Neutrality Act can be avoided 
only by a policy of concerted action. Such a pol. 
icy could be adopted if the European signa- 
tories of the Nine-Power Pact, together with the 
Soviet Union, would agree to apply an arms and 
shipping embargo against Japan, leaving Ching 
free to import from European markets, in ae. 
cordance with League of Nations principles, 
Simultaneously, the President of the United States 
could employ his discretion under the Neutrality 
Act to forbid American vessels to carry any ma- 
terials to China or Japan. Since Japanese ships 
carry only one-third of the trade between Japan 
and the United States, and since many Japanese 
vessels have necessarily been diverted into trans- 
port service, the imposition of an international 
shipping embargo against Japan would offset the 
damage which an American arms embargo would 
cause to China. What is more important, collective 
action of this sort would protect the United States 
from assuming responsibilities alone in the Orient, 
and tend to shorten a war which otherwise may 
rapidly spread to various parts of the world. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


LISBON BREAKS OFF WITH PRAGUE 


While Insurgent troops were closing in on San- 
tander the Portuguese government, on August 19, 
broke off diplomatic relations with Czechoslovakia, 
on the ground that Prague had refused to permit 
the export of machine guns which Portugal was 
on the point of ordering from a government-con- 
trolled Czechoslovak factory. This refusal, based 
by Czechoslovakia on its obligation under the 
non-intervention agreement not to furnish arms 
“directly or indirectly” to either side in the Span- 
ish struggle, was attributed in Lisbon to pressure 
“by those who wish to prevent or impede’’ Por- 
tuguese rearmament—a shaft thought to be aimed 
at the Soviet Union. In an official communiqué 
Czechoslovakia contended that the factory, find- 
ing it was not in a position to furnish guns of the 
type specified owing to previous orders placed by 
the Czechoslovak army, had offered to supply a 
different type, but that its offer had been rejected 
by Portugal. 


The Portuguese government, alarmed by the 
recent attempt on the life of Premier Salazar, 
which has been blamed on Communist agitators, 


Av! 


Bar LB 


An int 


alw 
in ; 
por 


affe 


Foreign 


previc 
drew 
demat 
note | 
“one 
interr 
batan 
side o 
to dis 
trary, 
the B 
Japar 
those 
will | 
event 

Th 
annol 
Chin: 
the § 
aid a 


is determined to check the spread of communism | 


the o 


mee that 
in the Iberian peninsula, fomented, in its opinion, i 


) come 


by the Soviet Union. What remains obscure is the | sonifi 


extent to which Germany is using Portugal as a 
catspaw in its campaign against Czechoslovakia. 


V. M. D. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 44, AuGusr 27, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasiim Bugit, President; Estuar G. OcpEn, Secretary; VERA Micuetes Dean, Béitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


| Kello 
direc 
assel 
it wi 
situa 
Picio 
sista 


