








FOREIGN 


University of Michigan 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


PERIENIC Al. ROOM General Librar 
Min cL LIBRARY ” z -p 27 WAS 
iy ‘4 Mice, - tr 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 


POLICY BULLETIN 





vill the 
st Asia 
nilitary 
NGER 


ARY 


rum of 
Astoria 
V orld.” 
ON Ses 
govern- 
es. The 
» Anni- 
mes of 
n days. 
»f these 


| George 
43. $2.75 


he com- 
- British 
. United 
evail in 


ay. New 
3.75 


mocratic 
ncluding 
ey apply 
articular 


943 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 49 


SEPTEMBER 24, 1943 





Ae! in the People’s Political Council, 
China’s national advisory body which convened 
on September 15, are now taking place after a series 
of important developments affecting Chungking’s 
internal organization, international relations and 
post-war position. The kaleidoscopic nature of these 
events is indicated by the bewildering order in which 
they have occurred. During a period of eight days, 
beginning September 6, the Central Executive Com- 
mittee—supreme organ of the official political party, 
the Kuomintang—gathered in plenary session and 
adopted a number of resolutions dealing with con- 
stitutional government, industrial reconstruction, and 
relations with the Chinese Communists. At the final 
meeting on September 13, Chiang Kai-shek was 
named President of the National Government, to 
succeed the late Lin Sen. In a press conference in 
Washington on the following day, T. V. Soong, 
China’s Foreign Minister, declared that Japan was 
making increasingly liberal peace proposals to 
Chungking and had offered to withdraw from all 
Chinese territory on the continent of Asia, except 
Manchuria. He added that he did not think any ‘‘con- 
scious” political group was in favor of responding 
/t0 Tokyo’s overtures. On September 15, in Chung- 
iking, K. C. Wu, the Vice Foreign Minister, re- 
sponded to inquiries concerning the question of 
peace by saying that ‘““Dr. Soong has made public a 
large portion of that situation.” 


| LOOKING INTO FUTURE. This striking juxta- 
| position of post-war plans and of peace sentiment 
suficiently significant to be hinted at in public by 
the Foreign Minister is symbolic of the dilemma that 
faces Chungking today. The problems of the war 
have been and continue to be most serious, but some 
oficials who peer into the future in an effort to 
foresee the problems of the peace may wonder which 
period will turn out to be more difficult. When the 
war is over, China will be faced by many baffling 








PROBLEMS OF VICTORY CAST SHADOW OVER CHUNGKING DISCUSSIONS 


issues: the return to a nOn-inflationary economy, the 


reincorporation into a national framework of terri- 
tories that have not been under Central control for 
many years, the physical reconstruction of devastated 
areas, and the maintenance of internal stability. 
These and other momentous questions will have to 
be dealt with at a time when China is no longer 
subject to the unifying pressure generated by re- 
sistance to foreign aggression. Certainly a very high 
order of Chinese statesmanship and unity will be 
required for success. 

There is little doubt that men like the Generalis- 
simo and Dr. Soong, although well aware of the 
complexity of the future, do not shrink from facing 
the post-war period, especially if China is assured 
of the whole-hearted aid of the other United Na- 
tions. But important individuals, fearing their in- 
ability to control the conditions arising after victory, 
may hope to find a “way out” in peace with a weak- 
ened Japan. Yet, despite this tendency, it appears 
improbable that China will end hostilities short of 
victory, in view of the progress of the United Na- 
tions in Europe and the accelerated pace of opera- 
tions in the Pacific. On the other hand, the situation 
is potentially dangerous in that, while Tokyo's ulti- 
mate defeat appears certain, it may still be a long 
way off. If, for example, the invasion of Burma on 
a major scale should be postponed until the autumn 
of 1944, further time would be given for the opera- 
tion of defeatist influences in China’s national life. 


POST-WAR DECISIONS. In the midst of this 
complex situation, the Central Executive Committee 
of the Kuomintang turned its attention—if the pub- 
lished resolutions are indicative of its discussions— 
to problems of the post-war era. It voted for the con- 
vocation of a National Assembly to adopt a perma- 
nent constitution within one year following the 
conclusion of the war, thus fixing a time limit for 
the establishment of representative government. The 





—_—_—aSS_ —_—_—_—_—_—=—a=_ = ~Page Two 


Generalissimo also stated very definitely in his open- 
ing address that, with the inauguration of a consti- 
tutional régime, the Kuomintang would have no 
special privileges, and all parties would be equal to 
it in rights and freedoms. A detailed resolution was 
also passed concerning post-war industrial recon- 
struction, at the same time that certain pre-war re- 
strictions on the participation of foreign capital in 
Chinese enterprises were removed. 

While these decisions are to be welcomed, it must 
be recognized that their effectiveness depends on 
whether, during the remainder of the war, China 
achieves a partial solution of three key problems: 
inflation, the raising of the country’s military effec- 
tiveness to a higher level, and the adjustment of 
Kuomintang-Communist relations. In the absence of 
improvements along these lines, elements working 
for capitulation are likely to grow stronger. And 
even if they are unsuccessful, China will face the 
peace in weakened condition. 


RETURN TO “NORMALCY” NO SOLUTION OF EUROPE’S CRISIS 


The need for a long-range view of international 
developments which could serve as both guidepost 
and yardstick for essential day-to-day, piecemeal ad- 
justments has been emphasized anew with Allied 
landings in Italy. It was Utopian to assume that the 
Italians, merely because they long to free themselves 
from Nazi domination, would necessarily be enthu- 
siastic about helping the Allies to whom they had 
unconditionally surrendered. On the other hand, the 
assumption that the Allies would encounter noth- 
ing but apathy among the Italian people, owing to 
war-weariness and various flaws in our previous po- 
litical strategy, has proved overpessimistic—as indi- 
cated by Italian operations in Sardinia and Badoglio’s 
appeal of September 16 to the people of Italy to 
take up arms against Germany. The truth lies 
somewhere halfway between the two extremes. 
Allied experience in Italy only confirms the impres- 
sion that has prevailed since the outbreak of war 
four grueling years ago: that the people of Europe 
would reject Hitler’s ‘new order” but that, at the 
same time, they have no desire merely to restore pre- 
fascist or pre-war régimes, with or without the col- 
laboration of the great powers. 

RESTORATION VERSUS CHANGE. It is on 
the issue of restoration versus change—whether or 
not change takes the form of thoroughgoing revo- 
lution—that the future of Europe, and of its rela- 
tions with Britain, Russia and the United States will 
turn. There is a natural tendency, as President Sey- 
mour of Yale has recently noted, for war-weaty 
peoples to look back with a certain degree of nostal- 
gia to the period when they were not actively in con- 
flict, as was done at the Congress of Vienna in 
1815 and at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919. 











—= 
iia 


REFORMS NEEDED NOW. Reports on the ge 
sions of the Central Executive Committee fail , 
indicate that any fundamental changes are planned j 
connection with these matters. The Generalissiny 
himself declared that, while China’s ‘economic gi, 
uation is by no means without difficulties . . . ther 
is absolutely no danger to speak of.” But if econom 
questions are not dealt with vigorously, it is not 
to see how the Chinese front can be galvanized inty 
new activity, in view of the injurious effects of the 
food problem on the Army. As for the Communig 
situation, while Chiang Kai-shek, in speaking to th 
Committee, emphasized that the issue was purely 
political and should be solved by “political means,” 
this concept was not incorporated into the resolution 
that was actually passed. It would therefore seem 
that Chungking still needs to strengthen its eo! 
nomic, political and military policies, in order to face 
victory with genuine confidence. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 











We inevitably tend to contrast present disasters with 
a less disastrous past—the disorder of war with 
relative peacetime order; destruction with construe 
tion; impoverishment with the opportunity, if not 
always the achievement, of prosperity—and to won- 
der whether, by restoring certain conditions and te 
lationships that existed when war was not yet i 
stark reality, we may not recapture something of the 
then existing stability. 

Today there is far less cause for such backward 
looking nostalgia than in 1815 or 1919. The decade 
that preceded World War II was neither a period 
of stability under long-accepted institutions such a 
the pre-1789 era, nor a golden period of tert 
torial and commercial expansion such as that whic 
laid the fuse for World War I. The years of de 
pression and frustration that followed the unbridled 
materialistic splurge of the twenties left few illv 
sions in their wake, and perhaps the most shocking 
aspect of our times is that war, for many people, | 
actually offered an escape from the problems and) 
vicissitudes of the Long Armistice. 

ORDER IS NOT ENOUGH. Yet, in spite of thi 
lack of illusions about the past, the impression per} 
sists that order—almost any kind of order is pref 
erable to changes that might merely add to the dis 








order already generated by war. This was indicated} 


by Mr. Churchill's speech on July 27, after the fall| 
of Mussolini; and in judging Allied policy toward| 
Italy it may well be asked whether Italy’s future 
orderliness might not have been better preserved by 
some other policy than that of dealing with Be 
doglio to the exclusion of all other other ant 
Fascist elements. As it is, we have not succeeded it 
avoiding the very prospect Mr. Churchill feared— 





a—- am. & 2 be Se See ee 6 Se 2 ee eee 








the s¢ 
fail j 
inned ; 
alissimg 
MMIC sit 
then 
conomi 
not Casy 
zed int 
3 Of the 
nmMunis 
& to the 
} purely 
means,” 
solution 
re seem 
its eco. 
* to face 


NGER 


ers with 
ar with 
onstruc 
, if not 
to won 
and te 
t yet 2 
2 of the 


ckward. 
» decade 
| period 
such 4s 
f terri 
t whic 
; of de 
rbridled 
ew illu- 
hocking 
people, 


ms and 


> of this 
ion per 
is pref: 
the dis-| 
rdicated } 
the fall 
toward 
; future 
rved by 
vith Ba 








er ant 
-eded in 
eared— 














that of reducing Italian life ‘‘to a condition of chaos 
and anarchy,” and of laying upon our armies the 


burden “of occupying mile by mile the entire coun-° 


try.” No one can question the advisability of nego- 
tiating for unconditional surrender with Badoglio.* 
But, while these negotiations proceeded, Italian 
anti-Fascists, counting on Allied aid, exposed them- 
selves to subsequent retribution on the part of the 
Nazis, and may have been needlessly sacrificed in a 
cause they had defended for twenty years, with- 
out having even the ultimate satisfaction of being 
invited by the Allies to become active partners in 
the common task of destroying Fascism. 

One can understand the determination of Britain 
and the United States not to prejudice the decision 
of the Italian people regarding their political future 
—but in an attempt to maintain what might be de- 
scribed as neutrality on this score the Allies have, 
in a sense, acted unneutrally. They have not openly 
invited the collaboration of all elements in Italy 
opposed to Mussolini, but only of those elements, 
represented by Badoglio, which at that time had 
actual control of power. Yet, meanwhile, the 
Allies had hoped that all Italians—not only those 
who might approve of Badoglio—would fight on 
their side against Germany. This unresolved paradox 
proved a windfall, however temporary, for Hitler 
in his attempt to scatter and dishearten anti-Fascists, 
while rallying old-line Fascists behind Mussolini. 

NEED FOR COMMON ANTI-NAZI FRONT. 
The test of any political group in liberated countries 
—Axis-ruled or Axis-conquered—is whether it is 
against Fascism and Nazism. If it is, it should be 
enlisted as a matter of course in the ranks of the 
United Nations, no matter whether it belongs to 
Right, Left, or Center. That, in actuality, is what 
the Soviet government has done by dissolving the 





*See ‘‘End of Fascism Enhances Prestige of Democracy,”’ 


Foreign Policy 
Bulletin, August 6, 1943. 





For a survey of inter-American agricultural coop- 
eration from the point of view of (1) gradual 
permanent development of Western Hemisphere 
resources, and (2) accelerated wartime exploitation 
of strategic materials and commodities, READ— 


AGRICULTURAL COOPERATION 
IN THE AMERICAS 
by Ernest S. Hediger 


25c 


September 15 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











here ————————— 


Communist International, and urging all anti-Nazi 
elements, including the Communists, to join in the 
war effort of each nation against Germany. That, 


too, is the tenor of the Free German manifesto is- - 


sued in Moscow, which does not exclude even ad- 
herents of Hitler from future participation in post- 
war Germany, provided they repudiate their leader 
in time. To say that this is merely propaganda is 
not to answer the main question. We are all engaged 
in propaganda, designed to complement military 
strategy with political strategy. The only queStion is 
whether we are engaged in propaganda that we in- 
tend to implement by future action—or whether we 
are shooting a lot of verbal ammunition without 
definite knowledge of the targets we are attempting 
to hit, or of our ultimate objectives. The fact that 
President Roosevelt, in his message of September 
17 to Congress, said that ‘when Hitler and the Nazis 
go out, the Prussian military clique must go with 
them,” may indicate that the Western powers are 
beginning to realize that it is not enough to over- 
throw Hitler: the system which encouraged and 
abetted the growth of Nazism must go too. 


Toward the end of World War I Lenin, who 
showed an extraordinary grasp of the temper of our 
times, shook the consciousness of millions of people 
throughout the world by declaring that what many 
believed to be a war between nations, in defense of 
democracy against autocracy, was in reality a war 
between rival imperialisms. This concept did not pre- 
vent peoples of many races, colors and traditions, 
including the Russians, from taking up arms in this 
war in a joint effort to check aggression by one or 
more of the Axis powers. But the suspicion that 
what Lenin said may still be true affects the think- 
ing of millions about the future, and is bound to 
influence their attitude toward the formation of an 
Anglo-American alliance—unless Britain and the 
United States can prove by positive deeds, not mere- 
ly by words, that this alliance will not be used to 
“freeze” the pre-1939 status quo in Europe and Asia. 
From the outset this war has been waged on two 
ideological fronts: against the encroachments and 
brutalities of the Axis powers, and against the politi- 
cal, economic and social conditions that bred war. 
Mere restoration of pre-fascist or pre-war conditions, 
even if it were possible, is not enough. But in what 
direction will change come, and what form shall it 
take if it is not to prove even more destructive 
Can ae VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The second in a series on the outlook for the future in Europe.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 49, SepremMBer 24, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lugr, Secretary; Vera Micnetes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at lease 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Ee 181 


—— 


SE 





————————— ee Page Fou 


MESC HOLDS PROMISE FOR FUTURE OF MIDDLE EAST 


In the past eleven months — since the British 
Eighth Army launched its attack at El Alamein—the 
Middle East has changed from an area of last-ditch 
defense for the United Nations to a potential base 
for offensive operations against the European Con- 
tinent. Allied occupation of Cos, one of the key 
bases in the Dodecanese, was reported on Septem- 
ber 21, and may be expected to lead to increased 
bombing of Nazi defenses in Greece. Rumors in Tur- 
key about the imminence of an invasion of the Bal- 
kans should be treated with reserve, however, since 
the British Ninth and Tenth Armies under General 
Sir Henry Maitland Wilson, Middle East Com- 
mander in Chief, are not large, and the bulk of 
Allied shipping and landing craft are now engaged 
in the Italian campaign. 

But if and when such an invasion takes place, an 
important part will be played by the Middle East 
Supply Center on which James M. Landis, formerly 
chief of Civilian Defense, has become the chief Amer- 
ican representative. Appointed on September 10 as 
“American Director of Economic Operations in the 
Middle East’”” with the personal rank of Minister, 
Mr. Landis will be the American counterpart of 
R. G. Casey, British Minister in the Middle East. 
His appointment is a recognition by Washington not 
only of the importance of regional economic plan- 
ning but of the vital role being played by the MESC. 


MESC PLANS IMPORTS. The Middle East Sup- 
ply Center was set up in April 1941 to handle all 
major supplies for eastern Mediterranean countries. 
Originally a British agency, it has been a joint Anglo- 
American body since the United States became a co- 
member in March 1942. Today the MESC covers an 
area larger than Europe and serves a population of 
some eighty million. It includes Egypt, Palestine, 
Syria, Lebanon, Transjordan, Iraq, Iran, Saudi 
Arabia, Sudan, Eritrea, Ethiopia, British Somaliland, 
and, for trade outside the Mediterranean, Turkey. 
With headquarters in Cairo and branches in Bag- 
dad, Ankara, Teheran and Beyrouth, the MESC 
controls and directs a large part of the economic 
life of this whole area. 


The Center was established primarily to achieve 
two objectives: first, to provide the essential sea- 
borne import requirements of the area and to set up 
an effective system of import controls; second, to 
satisfy the essential civilian requirements with the 
utmost economy of shipping space by developing 
local production of civilian and military commodi- 
ties. In handling imports the agency has maintained 
as much private trade as the shipping shortage per- 
mitted. But such basic commodities as cereals, sugar, 











fertilizers, tea, oil seeds and quinine have been given 
top priority, and minimum requirements are handled 
by a pool under the control of the MESC, which 
then allocates them to the various states in the area 
according to need. 


AIDS MIDDLE EAST PRODUCTION. To re 
duce imports and save shipping, agricultural and 
industrial production has been encouraged on a wide 
scale. In Egypt a major shift from cotton to 
food production has taken place; in Iran and Iraq 
large-scale agricultural development and irrigation 
schemes are under way or planned. In Syria and 
other states the distribution of fertilizers and trac. 
tors has been planned with a view to maximum 
output in the entire region. Industrial ventures as 
well have been made possible by the MESC—a 
plant for crushing oil seeds in Iraq, canning plants 
in Egypt, superphosphates in Palestine and Egypt, a 
cotton mill in Iran, paper production in Egypt. 


As a result of these activities the Middle East 
Supply Center is undoubtedly making important con- 
tributions to the war effort. And many observers, 
especially in Britain, feel that it can make equally 
vital contributions at the conclusion of hostilities. As 
the London Economist points out: “If freedom from 
want becomes the goal of international collabora- 
tion, and the lessons of wartime administration are 
learnt, the MESC and its dependent committees 
fit into the pattern of world-wide economic collabora- 
tion foreshadowed by Lend-Lease [and] the Com- 
bined Boards.” At present, of course, the Center's 
hold over the economic life of the Middle East rests 
on shortages—shortages of both shipping and sup- 
plies. When these conditions are relaxed in the post- 
war period, much of the work of the MESC will 
probably lapse. It is suggested, however, that enough 
of the organization could be maintained to integrate 
the economic life of the whole region, not only 
through unified control of supplies and transport, 
but through the continued encouragement and di- 


rection of agricultural and industrial development | 


on a regional pattern. — tow arp P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


25th ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A. 
Mrs. Henry Goddard Leach, member of the F.P.A. 


Board of Directors, is the chairman of the 25th | 


Anniversary celebration of the Association to be held 
on October 16th. 





The Legacy of Nazism, by Frank Munk. New York, Mac- 
millan, 1943. $2.50 
Stern warning that there can be no return to pre-Nazi 
conditions and that bold departures from Europe’s tradi- 


tional economy will be needed to preserve the forthcoming 
peace. 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 








ww 


on | 


, ae, —- ._y fra 2 BD te rs 


