


Gen- 
ieved 
ment 
1 the 
con- 
ymen 
r dis- 
rope, 
with 
r lib- 
f ne- 
oubt- 
dfroy 
war- 
since 


Ss 


PBRIODICAL ROWS. 
GENERAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF MICH. 


“eueral 13 brary 


Univers; 
versity of Vichigan 
Ann Arbor, Nich, 


! POLICY 


JUN 1] 1943 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vor. XXII, No. 34 


JUNE 11, 1943 








on June 4, compelling seventy-two-year old Presi- 
dent Ramén S. Castillo, head of the conservative 
Democratic Party, to abandon the reins of govern- 
ment, has provoked such widely varyir~+ reactions as 
to reveal profound uncertainty regarding its character 
and aims. 

For two years, first as Acting President and, after 
the resignation of the late liberal President, Roberto 
M. Ortiz, in June 1942, as President of the Argentine 
Republic, Ramén Castillo governed the country in 
dictatorial fashion, maintaining a neutrality policy 





directly favorable to Axis interests. After Pearl Har- 
bor, his isolationist bent became increasingly danger- 
ous for the United Nations. Although all the Ameri- 
can Republics, including Argentina, adopted at the 
Rio de Janeiro Conference of January 1942 a reso- 





lution providing for a break of relations with the 
Axis, the Argentine government, under Castillo’s 
, influence, never implemented this resolution, thus 
| permitting Axis spies and diplomats in the Western 
Hemisphere to continue their activities unhindered. 
| Moreover, in a move that was ostensibly made to 
| curb Axis espionage, but in reality to crush opposi- 
| tion to his policies, President Castillo had declared 
, 4 state of siege throughout the country, which per- 
mitted him, among other things, to muzzle the press 
and make electoral propaganda for non-govern- 
mental candidates extremely difficult. Such actions 
were bitterly resented by the liberty-loving Argen- 
tines, especially by the liberal bloc which controls 
the Chamber of Deputies. This bloc is composed of 
the Unién Civica Radical, Argentina’s largest politi- 
cal party, and the Socialist party. A showdown of 
some kind was expected before or during the forth- 


coming presidential election campaign scheduled for 
September 1943. 


ARGENTINE REVOLUTION A MILITARY 
COUP. Although President Castillo’s dictatorial 





NEW ARGENTINE LEADERS UPHOLD CASTILLO'S POLICY 
| hr military revolt that broke out in Argentina 


ways were opposed most of all by the liberal ele- 
ments, the one-day “revolution” of June 4 was es- 
sentially a military coup, and not a political upris- 
ing. It was planned and carried out by a group of 
senior officers of the army and air force, led by Chief 
of Cavalry, General Arturo Rawson, and Castillo’s 
own Minister of War, General Pedro. Ramirez. 
Political motives, notably strife within Castillo’s own 
conservative party, have played a rdle in the revolt, 
but other considerations, such as the desire of army 
leaders to obtain from the United States planes and 
other military equipment denied Argentina by reason 
of Castillo’s isolationist policy, as well as growing 
conviction that the Axis is losing the war, seem to 
have been even more important in bringing it to 
the fore. 

Except for a brief clash with the garrison of the 
Navy Mechanical School, there does not seem to 
have been any serious opposition to the revolting 
generals. In spite of Castillo’s order to fight the re- 
bellious troops, both the rest of the armed forces 
and the Buenos Aires police stood aloof. Moreover, 
highly respected public figures, such as Carlos 
Saavedra Lamas, Nobel prize winner and diplomat, 
and Senator Alberto Palacios on the very first day 
offered their services to the insurgents in an unsuc- 
cessful attempt to convince President Castillo to re- 
sign immediately. Instead he preferred to take refuge 
on the Uruguayan bank of the Plate River, only to 
return the following day and surrender, finally re- 
signing from the Presidency. 


POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS. If, militarily 
speaking, the Generals’ coup was a complete success, 
politically the situation appears far from settled. 
Castillo’s successors have not yet been able to estab- 
lish a truly representative government. At first, it 
seemed that the disappearance from the political 
scene of isolationist President Castillo would in itself 
represent a gain for the cause of the democracies. 














Subsequent events, however, have shown that this 
was not necessarily true. The popular demonstrations 
in favor of the democracies which broke out im- 
mediately after the ousting of Castillo were appar- 
ently quickly stopped, and martial law was intro- 
duced. The new men chosen for public office have no 
special pro-democratic record, and one of their first 
public political moves was the dissolution of the 
Congress and suppression of the Communist news- 

per La Hora, while the pro-Nazi papers E/ Pam- 
pero and Cabildo were unmolested. On June 7, after 
unsuccessful attempts to form a cabinet, General 
Rawson resigned, turning the new provisional gov- 
ernment over to General Ramirez. The latter finally 
succeeded in constituting a cabinet of seven military 
and naval officers and one civilian—the Finance Min- 


FOOD CONFERENCE SETS EXAMPLE FOR UNITED NATIONS COOPERATION 


While the visits to North Africa of Prime Minister 
Churchill, Foreign Minister Eden and General Mar- 
shall were offering fresh indications of imminent 
Allied military action in Europe, the first United 
Nations conference on post-war problems came to 
an end on June 3. The food parley, which began at 
Hot Springs, Virginia, on May 18, brought together 
representatives from 45 governments for the purpose 
of discussing ways and means of achieving freedom 
from want for their people after the war. 

WAR RESTRICTS POST-WAR PLANNING. The 
attempt of the Food Conference to set up post-war 
objectives at a time when the participating nations 
are concentrating their main effort on winning the 
war was beset by inevitable difficulties. Chief among 
these obstacles was the cautiously “exploratory” 
agenda that steered discussion away from subjects 
which might possibly interfere with present plans or 
machinery for waging the war. When the Russians, 
for example, wanted to consider immediate rather 
than future needs for food, Chairman Jones referred 
their plea to the Lend-Lease Administration, which 
controls the United States wartime distribution of 
food to the Allies. Moreover, the ban on journalists’ 
interviews with delegates and reports of sessions, 
which was particularly rigid at the outset, prevented 
the Conference from getting the wide publicity and 


Page Two 





For a comprehensive analysis of New Zealand’s 

economic mobilization for war, its new relation- 

ship to the United States, and the special post-war 

problems it will face, READ— 

NEW ZEALAND’S ROLE IN THE PACIFIC 
by David R. Jenkins 


25c 


June 1 issue of ForEiGN Po.icy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5.00; to F.P.A. members, $3.00. 




















Tt, 
—— 


ister, Dr. Jorge Santamarina, a former director of the 
Central Bank of Argentina. The new cabinet promised 
loyal cooperation with the other nations of America 
but at the same time declared that it would, for the 
present, stick to Castillo’s policy of neutrality jg 
the war. 

The news filtering through the strict Argentine 
military censorship is too scant and biased to give, at | 
the present time, a clear picture of the internal politi. 
cal situation. The developments of the next few weeks 
will indicate, however, if the revolt of the generals 
is to remain essentially a palace revolution, with Only 
a change of heads, not of principles, or if the wish 
of most Argentines to see their country abandon its 
isolationist stand and join the American anti-Axis 
bloc is to be realized. ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


popular understanding that the meeting warranted, 
not only because of the important issues with which 
it dealt but also because of its attempt to inaugurate 
United Nations collaboration for peace. Such restric. 
tions, much as they may have curbed constructive 
suggestions and popular interest, were understand. 
able, however, at a time when the Allies are straining 
every effort to gain the victory without which al] 
United Nations plans would be made in vain. 

Another hindrance that wartime conditions im- 
posed on the Conference was the great uncertainty 
concerning many of the factors that will affect the 
future food situation. Social and economic planning, 
notoriously difficult even in a fairly static situation, 
becomes even more hazardous in a world at war, 
The renewal of the United States reciprocal trade 
program on June 2, however, is an example of the 
kind of authoritative political expressions favoring 
future collaboration that will help dispel post-war 
uncertainties. 

ACTION TO COME LATER. The final report 
presented by the Food Conference on June 2 was a 
2,600 word-long summary of the social and economic 
philosophy which will underlie an international pro 
gram of increased production and consumption of | 
food. The fundamental fact on which the Confer | 
ence agreed was that the peoples of the world need 
more and better food than they are now getting 
Starting with this conclusion the report went on to 
urge that the governments represented acknowledg¢ 
their responsibility for securing improved nutrition 





for their citizens, instead of leaving it to chance of} ! 


to the unrestricted working of “economic laws” ut | 
der a system of /aissez-faire. 

If the United Nations assume the obligation for 
ending both the war-created food shortages and long: 
term dietary deficiencies, two main lines of action 
will be essential. According to the Conference, one 
course depends on individual national effort and 
the other on international cooperation. Each nation 





tie 
ce 
da 
of 
th 


ar 


P 


sone zw sf 





— 


of the 
ised 
erica, 
or the 
ty ji 


-Ntine 
ve, at 
oliti. 
weeks 
nerals 
1 Only 
wish 
On its 
I-Axis 
SER 


LON 


anted, | P 


which 
Purate 
estric- 
uctive 
stand. 
aining 
ch all 


iS im- 
tainty 
ct the 
nning, 
1ation, 
t war, 

trade 
of the 
voring 
»st-war 


report 


was @ 
ynomic 
al pro 
‘ion of 
Confer: 
d need 
retting. 
t on f0 
wledge 
utrition 
ance Of 
vs’ ufr 


ion fot 
id long: 
action 
ice, one 
ort and 
. nation 





es 
Ee 











would have responsibility for improving the educa- 
tion of its consumers, providing at least children 
and pregnant women with minimum food require- 
ments even if this meant sacrifices for the rest of the 
population, giving assurances to farmers that their 
labor would earn an adequate livelihood, develop- 
ing new agricultural areas, and encouraging efficient 
production. Most of the governments represented 
at the Conference have already entered some of these 
fields of social welfare, but implementation of the 
report's suggestions would mean a considerable en- 
largement of such services in many states, and in 
others would entail the permanent adoption of some 
wartime measures, such as Great Britain’s free 
lunches to school children. 


Among the steps which the Conference declared 
the United Nations should take. in concert, those 
articularly stressed were in the field of foreign in- 
vestments, trade, and currency regulations. A con- 
certed instead of a bilateral approach to these ques- 
tions would mean that the Allies recognize that eco- 
nomic, as well as political, security is indivisible. 


Page Three 








—= 
Their present military cooperation could then ulti- 
mately be succeeded by economic collaboration for 
peace. In order to emphasize the importance of this 
point the Conference recommended ytd pore 
organization be set up in the field of food and agri- 
culture to serve as a kind of clearing house of infor- 
mation and advice on both agriculture and nutrition. 

Although the Conference’s report was admittedly 
a statement of theories rather than a list of specific 
measures, the attainment of general agreement on 
some of the basic requirements of such a program 
should not be under-estimated. Furthermore, the en- 
dorsement of the Conference’s suggestions by the 
U.S.S.R. offers a new indication, in addition to the 
dissolution of the Comintern, that Stalin wants to 
cooperate with the Allies after the war. With such as- 
surances as these the United Nations should be able 
to proceed to their next step—that of drawing up 
practical plans for achieving their post-war . 
Then will come the real test of the ability of the 
United Nations to work together on peacetime 


problems. WIniFReD N. HADSEL 








THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


México; La Formacién de una Nacién, by Hubert Herring. 
Mexico City, Ediciones Minerva, Av. Hidalgo 11, 1943. 
Pesos 2.50 (50¢). 


El Nuevo Imperialismo Econémico Aleman, by Ernest S. 
Hediger. Mexico City, Ediciones Minerva, Av. Hidalgo 
11, 1943. Pesos 2.50 (50¢). 


These two booklets are authorized Spanish editions of 
previous Foreign Policy Association publications, the first 
of Hubert Herring’s Headline Book on Mexico, the second 
of two Foreign Policy Reports (June 1, and August 15, 
1942), by Ernest S. Hediger, on Nazi Exploitation of Oc- 
cupied Europe. The translation is excellent, the presenta- 
tion handsome, and the booklets can profitably be used to- 
gether with the original texts for advanced Spanish study. 


US. Foreign Policy: Shield of the Republic, by Walter 
Lippmann. (Boston, Little, Brown & Company: an At- 
lantic Monthly Press Book, 1943). $1.50 


Through careful reasoning Mr. Lippmann reaches the 
same conclusion arrived at by Mr. Willkie through emo- 
tion. He points out that the United States has never suc- 
teeded ih staying out of wars that overflowed the boun- 
daries of Europe, and urges the formation by this country 
ofa “nuclear alliance” with Britain, Russia and China as 
the basis of a world organization that might maintain law 
and order after the war. 


Pacific Charter: Our Destiny in Asia, by Hallett Abend. 
New York, Doubleday Doran, 1943. $2.50 


A popular survey of the problems of freedom in war 


and post-war Asia, combined with some of the author’s 
personal experiences with Japanese diplomacy. 


The World of the Four Freedoms, by Sumner Welles. (New 
York, Columbia University Press, 1943). $1.75 


These addresses of the Under-Secretary of State present 
the main objectives of America’s foreign policy. 


America, Russia, and the Communist Party in the Postwar 
World, by John L. Childs and George S. Counts. New 
York, John Day, 1943. $1.25 
This small book, prepared under the auspices of the 

Commission on Education and the Postwar World of the 

American Federation of Teachers, comes to the conclusion 

that post-war cooperation between the United States and 

the U.S.S.R. is not only desirable but practicahle—pro- 
vided that the American Communist party is dissolved and 
the U.S.S.R. repudiates the Communist International, 
while the United States, for its part, assumes a responsible 
role in world affairs and corrects domestic conditions that 


have served the propaganda purposes of American Com- 
munists. 


Peace Plans and American Choices, by Arthur C. Mills- 
paugh. Washington, Brookings, 1943. $1.00 


The pros and cons of various peace plans, ranging from 
the concept of the “American Century” to participation 
by the United States in various forms of international 
organization, are succinctly presented, but without any 
attempt to analyze specific plans and proposals. 


The Great Offensive: The Strategy of Coalition Warfare, 
by Max Werner. New York, Viking, 1942. $3.00 


A military expert whose reputation has stood the test. 
of prediction presents a brilliant analysis of the German- 
Soviet war, the war in the Atlantic and Pacific, and the 
strategy of United Nations coalition. 


One World, by Wendell L. Willkie. (New York, Simon and 
Schuster, 1943.) $2.00 


The former Republican presidential candidate discovers 
the oneness of the modern world with all the freshness 
and enthusiasm of a new experience, and succeeds in viv- 
idly communicating his conviction that the United States 
must participate as a partner with other nations in the 
“grand adventure of post-war reconstruction.” 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 34, Jung 11, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vena Micue.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., umder the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Bis Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








— , anil ~~ -<aeentito time 
2 


een cent 





| 
Washington News Letter 














JUNE 11.—The cause of international collabora- 
tion won a notable triumph in the Senate on June 2 
when that body adopted the bill to renew the Re- 
ciprocal Trade Agreements Act for a period of two 
years by a vote of 59 to 23. Failing any action as yet 
on the Ball resolution or any of the other proposals 
now pending before the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee which would commit that. chamber to 
favoring international collaboration by the United 
States, the vote on the Trade Agreements Act is the 
nearest approach the Senate has made to expressing 
its views on post-war foreign policy. 

The House had already passed the bill on May 13 
by the even more overwhelming vote of 342 to 65, 
so the measure went to President Roosevelt for his 
signature exactly ten days before the Act would have 
expired and was signed by the President on June 7. 

A ROOSEVELT INNOVATION. The Reciprocal 
Trade Agreements Act represents the contribution 
of the Roosevelt Administration to the tariff history 
of the United States. In the past it had been cus- 
tomary for a new Administration, on coming to 
power, to repeal the existing tariff law and replace 
it with a new one drafted according to its own views. 
Thus the Democratic administrations of Grover 
Cleveland in 1890 and Woodrow Wilson in 1913 
proceeded to enact so-called “tariffs for revenue 
only” in place of the high protective schedules of 
their Republican predecessors. 

But precedent was not observed in this as in other 
respects when the Roosevelt administration took 
office in 1933. The existing Smoot-Hawley tariff 
law was permitted to remain on the statute books, 
despite the fact that this high-water mark of pro- 
tectionism was generally regarded by economists as 
a major impediment to recovery from the financial 
and economic collapse that shook the world between 
1929 and 1932. The power to alter tariff schedules, 
however, was delegated by Congress to the Presi- 
dent, who was authorized to cut existing rates as 
much as 50 per cent in return for concessions by 
foreign governments. 

Under this unique method of making tariffs, 
agreements with twenty-seven nations have been con- 
cluded in the nine years of the program’s existence. 
While opinions differ as to the economic benefits 
the United States has derived from the measure, it 
is significant that the renewal of the act was advo- 
cated before Congressional committees by spokes- 
men both of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and or- 
ganized labor. The new legislation has also elim- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


BUY UNITED STATES 





inated the “log-rolling’’ scandals of Congressio 
tariff-making, and more than one Republican Sena 
during the debate openly admitted that he ho 
never to see the return of those bad old days. 

A VICTORY FOR MR. HULL. Originally adopt 
ed in 1934 for a period of three years, the present 
Act has since been renewed in 1937 and 1940 for 
a similar length of time. On these previous occa. 
sions, it had been opposed almost unanimously by 


the Republicans. It was consequently feared that, | jo 


when the bill came up for renewal this year in the 
78th Congress, it would either fail of passage or be 
so emasculated as to become worthless. 

These predictions were not realized. The bill a 
it emerged from Congress was changed in only one 
important respect, and that not a particularly dam 
aging one—namely the reduction of the renewal 
period from three years to two. But all amendments 
that the Administration regarded as “crippling,” 
such as the proposal to require Congressional ap 
proval for all trade agreements concluded under the 
Act, were rejected. The hardest fight centered on an 
amendment offered by Senator Danaher, whic 
would have authorized Congress to terminate any 
agreement six months after the cessation of the wat, 
This amendment was actually accepted by the Senate 
Finance Committee by an 11 to 10 vote, but was 
subsequently thrown out in the Senate by the decisive 
vote of 51 to 33. 

It is a hopeful augury that on the final vote im 
both Houses a majority of the Republicans rallied 
to the support of the bill. In the Senate the Republi 
cans voted 18 to 14 for it, and in the House, the 
party went 145 to 52 in its favor. The final passage 
of the bill represented a great personal victory fot 
Mr. Hull, consistent proponent of the reciprocal 
trade program. Even opponents of the bill like Sena 
tor Taft openly admitted that under his direction i 
has been wisely administered. From the moment the 
fight in Congress to obtain the prolongation of tht 
Act began last April Mr. Hull has insisted that the 
attitude Congress took concerning this measure would 
determine whether the United States was ready # 
cooperate for peace and security in the post-wal 
world. The decisive votes by which the Act has beet 
renewed by both Houses of Congress should givt 
some reassurance to our Allies, who wonder whethet 
this country will revert to a policy of isolation af 
the war as it so disastrously attempted to do aftel 
1919. 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


WAR BONDS 


anc 
out 
i 
I 
WI 
wh 
ta 
mi 
ee 
con 
for 
Th 
the 
S10: 
me 
tho 
a 

el 
for 
pro 
mu 








