her quar- 
bility to 
nal rela. 

issued a 
vhich de. 
laborator 
tary help 
1e United 
called on 

peaceful 
ile in the 

interfer. 
1e United 
requested 
fy on be 
rhom the 
aborating 
s refused. 
; told the 
S country 
sia of in- 
at threat- 
ie United 
accepted 
its troops 
‘rom Iran 
| its eco 
an a day 
n oil con- 


poses, the. 


terference 
yur desire 


Western 
he United 
nnels for 
he wishes 
diplomag 
1 Nations 
ne in af- 
epresenta- 
2 roots of 
h surface 


BOLLES 


“HUN AL RGM 
‘RP RAL LIBRARY 
uUNtY, OF MIC® 


inke 
vu 


Entered as 2nd class matte: 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


You. XXV, No. 28 


APRIL 26, 1946 


CHANGES IN EUROPE SINCE V-E DAY ALTER TASK OF PEACE MAKING 


 ponaggee by the course of events in Eastern Eu- 

rope, the Balkans, Iran and Manchuria since the 
Moscow Conference of December 15, 1945, the 
Foreign Ministers of the Big Four gathered in Paris 
on April 25 in an atmosphere gravely inauspicious 
to the making of a European peace settlement. Al- 
though hostilities on the continent ended nearly a 
year ago, no progress has been registered in achiev- 
ing agreement among the United States, Britain 
and Russia concerning the terms of peace east of 
Germany, or among the Big Three and France con- 
cerning a definitive settlement with Germany and 
Italy. It will be recalled that a delay in drawing up 
peace treaties had been urged during the war by 
leading statesmen and commentators who, convinced 
that the arrangements drafted by the Paris Peace 
Conference eight months after World War I had 
proved unsatisfactory, proposed that this time the 
victors should allow a “‘cooling-off” period. While 
a “cooling-off” was in theory desirable, Allied plans 
seem to have been made on the mistaken assumption 
that, somehow or other, the international situation 
would remain in Status quo, permitting the victor 
nations, after careful consideration, to mold the 
world to their heart’s desire. Life, however, refuses 
to stand still; and during this period of waiting Eu- 
fope, not to speak of the rest of the world, has 
undergone far-reaching changes which must now 
be taken into account by the Paris peacemakers. 


RUSSIA’S ECONOMIC INFLUENCE. The most 
striking of these changes, and one for which in- 
sufficient allowance had apparently been made in 
Washington and London, is that Russia has rapidly 
solidified its political and economic relations with 
countries along its western border, from the Baltic 
to the Black Sea, as well as with the Russian zone 
in Germany. Not that all the countries in this area, 


which Moscow regards as within its sphere of 
security and, hence influence, have been won over 
to communism. On the contrary, elections held in 
some of them since the war have indicated that, in 
spite of the presence of Russian troops on their soil, 
the political current has been running in the direc- 
tion of moderate reforms rather than radical revo- 
lution. But the urgent need for bare survival now, 
and for eventual economic reconstruction, forces the 
countries east of Germany, impoverished by war 
and civil strife, to cooperate with any great power 
willing or able to give them a measure of aid. There 
is little doubt that all of the countries now classi- 
fied as in Russia’s “orbit” would be only too glad 
if they could count on loans or credits from the 
United States. But the program of freer world 
trade advocated by the Washington Administration 
is still on paper, and offers no hope of immediate 
relief to peoples who are on the verge of starva- 
tion and bankruptcy. 


It is entirely understandable that the United 
States should insist on the “open door” in Europe 
east of Germany, since it is Washington’s hope that 
the countries of this area will prove an important 
market for American machinery, tools and manu- 
factured goods. But unless provision can be prompt- 
ly made here to accept vastly increased imports from 
these countries, most of which produce primarily 
wheat and a few raw materials like tobacco, oil, 
copper and so on, we shall have to face the reality 
that, with the drastic curtailment of German in- 
dustry, once the principal source of supply for East- 
ern Europe and the Balkans, the countries along 
Russia’s border will have no choice but to become 
associated with the economy of the U.S.S.R. Al- 
though an American loan to Russia, now again un- 
der discussion, might ease U.S.-Russian tension, it 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


ow is-oe =—s. - =—— = ee vane = 


seems to have come too late to alter fundamentally 
the picture in Eastern Europe. 

PEACE SETTLEMENT MUST COVER GER- 
MANY. The role assumed by Russia in Europe’s 
economy is a direct result of the other major change 
that has occurred on the continent since V-E Day— 
and that is the sharp reduction in Germany's in- 
dustrial productivity. This reduction is due partly to 
wartime destruction, the breakdown of transporta- 
tion, and the division of the country into four 
watertight zones, but partly also to the decision of 
the Allies to stabilize German economy at the level 
of 1932, before Hitler came to power and provided 
work for thousands of unemployed in armament 
factories. There is no disagreement among the Big 
Four about the need of curtailing Germany’s capa- 
city to produce for war. But it has now become 
obvious that, unless economic unity is effected in 
Germany, the defeated country will become a prey 
to political unrest which can result either in revival 
of Nazism or in a growing drift toward a Socialist- 
Communist front in which the Communists would 
be predominant. At the same time, the Germans 
would become increasingly dependent on the Allies 
—and that means in effect the United States—for 
the food and essential raw materials they must im- 
port, without as yet having means of international 
payment. It was from the outset a mistake to as- 
sume, as was done at Potsdam, that peace could 
be made piecemeal, and that a settlement for 
Italy and Eastern Europe could be achieved separate- 
ly from a settlement for Germany. This mistake has 
been repeatedly pointed out by France whose For- 
eign Minister, Georges Bidault, has now won the 
opportunity of raising the German question in Paris 
—although apparently only after negotiations on 
other peace treaties have been concluded. 

Meanwhile in Italy, too, economic questions have 
come to overshadow even such crucial strategic prob- 


Page Two —. 


lems as the future of Trieste and the Italian colonies, | 
American observers are ‘convinced that Italy's 
broken-down economy could pay reparations, now 
demanded by Russia, Yugoslavia and Greece, only 
if American funds were pumped into the country— 
which would obviously place the burden of repara. 
tions on the United States without contributing to 
Italian reconstruction. Washington ' believes that 
Italy has a good chance of recovery if it can start 
production with a clean slate, free of reparation ob. 
ligations. That view, not unnaturally, finds little 
sympathy either in Yugoslavia or Greece, both of 
which suffered grievously from Italian devastation; 
and the former, at least, can count on Moscow’s sup- 
port. At the same time the veiled threat from Wash. 
ington that, should the Paris negotiations break 
down, the United States would have to negotiate 
separate peace treaties, does not sound practicable. 


—— 


disillus: 
bate Of 
powers 
policy. 
Nether 
sincere 
mitted 
Charter 
tion the 
ter sole 
the evi 
interna 
lective 
The pc 
Spanist 
implica 
itself v 
ment. 


A separate peace treaty with Italy about Trieste, for | Charte 
example, would have little hope of survival unless | 


it had the approval of Russia and Yugoslavia. 
The basic issue in Paris, as at Hunter College, is 
still the issue that haunted relations between Russia 
and the rest of the world during the inter-war years 
—and that is whether peaceful co-existence is pos- 


sible between what we call the free private enter- 
prise system of capitalism, and what the Russians 
call socialism and we cali communism. The Rus- 
sians themselves answered this question in the af- 
firmative at the International Economic Conference 
of 1927—but with the reservation that, in the long 
run, they foresaw the “happy elimination’ of capi- 
talism. Other possible ways in which this question 
might be answered during the Paris negotiations 
and in the United Nations organization will be dis- 
cussed in subsequent articles. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(This is the first of a series of articles on the 
peace negotiations in Paris.) 


GHOSTS OF SPANISH CIVIL WAR HAUNT SECURITY COUNCIL 


Spain, once the testing-ground of World War II, 
became again the subject of an international 
debate on April 17 when, at Poland’s request, the 
United Nations Security Council discussed the ques- 
tion whether the Franco régime constitutes a threat 
to world peace. Urging that the Council direct all 
member states to break diplomatic relations with 
Spain, Dr. Oscar Lange, the Polish delegate, based 
his government’s case against Generalissimo Franco 
on the following four counts: that the Franco 
régime was forced on the Spanish people by the Axis; 
that it was an active partner of the Axis during the 
war; that it has since created a state of international 
friction by mobilizing troops on the French fron- 
tier; and that it tolerates and ‘‘encourages’’ numer- 
ous German military and scientific personnel in 
Spanish territory. The case presented by Dr. Lange 


was well documented with facts, mainly drawn 
from United States official sources, and the proposal 
for the severance of diplomatic relations seemed sur- 
prisingly moderate, if not inadequate, in view of the 
gravity of the charges. Again today, as in 1936 when 
the League of Nations Council approved the policy 
of non-intervention adopted by six principal Euro- 
pean states in the Spanish civil war, the great 
wers skirted the underlying issues which have 
deeply divided them during the past decade. 

THE CHARTER AND INTERVENTION. The 
arguments raised at the Security Council session also 
recalled the League discussion of 1936, for the crux 
of the problem, as viewed by the majority of the 
Council representatives, was whether, under the 
Charter, intervention on the grounds cited by Poland 
would be in order. This approach may have been 


United 
country) 
and se 
breedit 
sian re 
in the } 
years © 


| be ove 


AF] 
the de 
define 
they w 
what 
membe 
unanir 
and th 
Morec 
agree | 
succee 
democ 
verget 
tions. 

It is 
of the 
has lo 
Russi 
shape. 
that it 
uatior 
Iberia 
see tc 
Medi 
coalit 
FOREIG 
Headqu: 


Editor. 
Please 


be a 


—— 
LL 


Colonies, 
t Italy's 
Ons, now 
ece, Only 
-Ountry— 
»f repata- 
buting to 
ves that 
can start 
‘ation ob. 
ads little 
both of 
vastation; 
OW’'s sup- 
m Wash- 
ns break 
negotiate 
acticable, 
teste, for 
al unless 
avia. 

ollege, is 
*n Russia 
war years 
€ is pos- 
ite enter- 
Russians 
The Rus- 


1 the af. | 


on ference 
the long 
of capi- 
question 
rotiations 


ll be dis- 


DEAN 


e 


y drawn 
proposal 
‘med sut- 
‘w of the 
136 when 
he policy 
yal Euro- 
he great 
ich have 
le. 

IN. The 
sion also 
the crux 
y of the 
nder_ the 
y Poland 
ave been 


——— 
——— 


disillusioning to those who had hoped that a de- 


‘pate on Spain at this time would give the great 


powers an Opportunity to rectify past mistakes of 

licy. On the other hand, the statements of the 
Netherlands and Australian delegates indicated a 
sincere desire to canvass the limits of action per- 
mitted the Security Council by the terms of the 
Charter. Britain and the Netherlands took the posi- 
tion that the nature of the Franco régime was a mat- 
ter solely of domestic concern and, moreover, that 
the evidence adduced to prove Spain is a center of 
international friction is too slender to justify col- 
lective action of the kind envisaged by the Charter. 
The point was made that intervention would drive 
Spanish moderates into the Franco camp; and the 
implication was plain that the present discussion 
itself would tend to strengthen the Spanish govern- 


ment. However, Russia takes the view that the 


Charter positively authorizes intervention by the 
United Nations when the internal situation of any 
country constitutes a danger to international peace 
and security. The Franco government was and is “a 
breeding ground of fascism,” according to the Rus- 
sian representative, and if the Council takes refuge 
in the policy of non-intervention which in the prewar 
years ‘led to utter catastrophe and failure,” it will 
be overlooking the lessons of history. 


AFTER FRANCO WHAT? It became clear as 
the debate progressed that until the great powers 
define their objectives in Spain with more precision, 
they will not be able to agree on their definition of 
what constitutes non-intervention. On one point 
members of the Security Council were in striking 
unanimity, and that was in their desire to see Franco 
and the Falange eliminated from the Spanish scene. 
Moreover, Britain, the United States and Russia 
agree that they wish to see a democratic government 
succeed that of Franco. Their concept of Spanish 
democracy, however, is in each case qualified by di- 
vergent strategic, political and economic considera- 
tions. 

It is Spain’s fortune, or misfortune, to occupy one 
of the most strategic positions in the world. This 
has long been realized by Britain. As the outlines of 
Russian policy in the western Mediterranean take 
shape, it is evident that the U.S.S.R., too, considers 
that its security interests are related to the Spanish sit- 
uation. Moscow believes it important to have on the 
Iberian peninsula a friendly government which will 
see to it that Russia will not be bottled up in the 
Mediterranean. Russia might, therefore, support a 
coalition of the Left as successor to the Popular 


Page Three 


Front government of the Republic. Britain, however, 
fears that such a coalition would inevitably result in 
a dictatorship of the Left, given the superior organ- 
ization of the Communists and the tendency toward 
extremism in Spanish politics. Aware of the vulner- 
ability of the Straits of Gibraltar, Britain would 
have favored the restoration of the monarchy, safe- 
guarded by constitutional checks, which would re- 
spect Britain’s historic interest in the western ap- 
proaches to the Mediterranean. But Don Juan and 
Franco have been unable to come to terms as to what 
would be the Generalissimo’s role under a restored 
monarchy. 

It remained for the United States to express most 
nearly what was uppermost in the minds of many 
of the Security Council representatives, when Mr. 
Stettinius pointed out that, while the present situa- 
tion of Spain could not seriously be viewed as a 
threat to peace, a resumption of civil war in that 
country would almost surely have grave internation- 
al repercussions. For this reason, the United States 
has consistently opposed any action that would re- 
vive bitter Spanish enmities. Yet there are already 
indications from inside Spain that if the United Na- 
tions do not produce a solution, middle-of-the-road 
elements in Spain will gravitate to the two political 
extremes, thus solidifying opposing points of view 
and producing a situation equally fraught with dan- 
ger for the rest of the world. No interim arrange- 
ments—neither a typical Spanish Junta of generals 
nor the Giral government-in-exile (which was recent- 
ly broadened to include, among others, a Communist 
representative)—can be acceptable to all the great 
powers. Nor is there any evidence that they have 
reached the point where they believe it is desirable 
or practicable to consider interim solutions. There 
appears to be general agreement in the Security 
Council that the Australian proposal to create a sub- 
committee of inquiry into the Polish charges— 
despite the procedural problem it raises—offers the 
best way out of a difficult impasse. O.LtvE HOLMES 


My Twenty-five Years in China, by John B. Powell. New 
York, Macmillan, 1945. $3.50 


A veteran newspaperman, editor of the China Weekly 
Review, describes his observations and experiences in 
China from the time of his arrival in 1917 until his re- 
patriation on the Gripsholm in 1942. 


A Price for Peace, by Antonin Basch. New York, Columbia 
University Press, 1945. $2.50 
A plea for the reconstruction of Europe’s economy with- 
in the framework of world trade revival. Special attention 
is given to the problems of Eastern European nations, often 
overlooked in considering the economic problems of the 
continent. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 28, APRIL 26, 1946. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 


Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 Bast 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; Dorotuy F. Lesr, Secretary; Vora Micugres Dan, 


Editor, Bntered as second-class matter December 2, 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., 


under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


ae 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


seeaearrerrers 


oem a erS oe =~ + 2... 


£e 
a) 
nt: 
§ 
Bf 
pa 
, 
* 
. ¥ 


h > 
i 
me | 


eee 


—e 


be os ‘ 


* 


oon, 


ane ol = 


apecape. 


Washington News Letter 


5 ye G00 "OG OS 0 Os S800 ee 2 


FR EE OS ON IEE IES 5 FEE 
: : 


WORLD ACTION NEEDED TO ALLEVIATE FAMINE 


A year ago, in April 1945, the United States re- 
ceived its first responsible warning about post-war 
food shortages from Judge Samuel Rosenman, who 
at President Roosevelt's request visited Europe on 
the eve of Germany's surrender. Joseph C. Grew, 
then Under Secretary of State, repeated that warning 
in July. On September 29 the Agriculture Depart- 
ment said that “only substantial food imports from 
outside sources can save millions of Europeans from 
near-starvation in the coming winter.” On November 
27 the State Department reported that 350,000,000 
persons desperately needed food, and President 
Truman told Prime Minister Mackenzie King of 
Canada that “we expect to ship all [the food} we 
can possibly spare.” On February 7 the President 
said the United States might resort to meat-rationing 
to save others from starvation. On March 1 he 
set up the Famine Emergency Committee, with 
Herbert Hoover as chairman. In spite of this long 
acquaintance with the problem and Presidential as- 
surances of help, the United States has been able to 
do little to alleviate the danger of famine. Recog- 
nition of that inadequacy caused President Truman 
on April 19 to order American millers to set aside 
25 per cent of the wheat they normally consume in 
making flour, earmarking this “set-aside” for export. 

RATIONING REJECTED. The chief reason for 
this country’s inability to help the starving in Europe 
and Asia in a manner commensurate with their 
need has been the government's reluctance to insti- 
tute consumer-rationing, which would help to divert 
larger quantities of food from home consumption 
for overseas. John J. McCarthy, president of the 
American Baking Association, has said that ra- 
tioning will be necessary to make the set-aside 
order workable. Yet hitherto the Administration 
has relied on appeals for voluntary reduction of 
food consumption, the Famine Emergency Commit- 
tee on March 11 asking Americans to cut consump- 
tion of wheat by 40 per cent and fats by 20 per cent. 
On April 15 Herbert Hoover, speaking from Cairo, 
said that voluntary reduction in food consumption 
would be superior to rationing. The request of March 
11, however, has not been met. Voluntary reductions 
in food consumption have not enabled the United 
States to fill the food export obligations it accepted 
before the Truman announcement of February 7 
that the foreign food crisis would extend far beyond 
the winter months. Wheat exports for the first quar- 
ter of 1946 were 12,000,000 tons short of our com- 
mitments for that period. Accordingly, the ‘‘set- 
aside order” of April 19 was issued to make avail- 


able for export food which non-observance of the 
voluntary 40 per cent reduction plan had failed ty 
produce. An order offering farmers a special price 
inducement to part with hoarded wheat stocks val 
issued on the same day. 

It is true that, in spite of these partial measures 
the United States has sent abroad half of all the 
food that Europe and Asia have received from out. 
side sources. At the same time, the United States is 
the foremost food producer in the Western Henj. 
sphere, and its inhabitants have a more than ade. 
quate diet. The world cannot expect, however, thats 
country with a population of 130,000,000, whid 
in recent years has had an increasingly smaller agri 
cultural surplus, could remedy the dietary plight of 
almost a billion persons in Europe and Asia! 
Drought, lack of farm machinery, and inadequate| 
transportation systems disrupted by war account for 
the plight of those two continents. While Ameri 
cans have an average daily caloric intake of 3,000, 
the Emergency Economic Committee for Europe ha 
reported that 140,000,000 Europeans average 2,000) 
calories, and 150,000,000 get 1,500 or less. Although 
that Committee and UNRRA had these alarming 
Statistics in their possession long ago, President Tru 
man on March 17 sent Mr. Hoover overseas to ascer- 
tain the need for relief. The Hoover mission has 
dramatized the problem but not solved it. 

The problem of food is political as well as hu- 
manitarian, and has been colored by internation 
al rivalry. Food allocations from the Westem 
Hemisphere are decided on by the Combined Food 
Board, which is controlled by the United States, 
Britain and Canada. Russia, not a member of the 
Board, signed an agreement on April 6 to supply 
France with 400,000 tons of wheat and 100,000 tons 
of barley—at the same time continuing to draw on 
the food resources of Eastern Europe and the Bal- 
kans to feed its armed forces stationed in an area 
usually known as “the breadbasket of Europe.” As- 
sistant Secretary of State William L. Clayton com- 
mented that what France received from Russia 


would have to be deducted from the CFB alloca , 


tions to France. But the responsibility for alleviating] 
the world crisis does not lie wholly in the Wester) 
Hemisphere even if Argentina supplies larget| 
amounts of wheat than in the past. The conference, 
on food and allied problems in Southeast Asia, held 
in Singapore on April 17 and 18, concluded that) 
the key to the solution of Asia’s food problem would 
be release of rice stocks held in Siam. 
BLAIR BOLLES 


histor 
the n 
interr 
cept 
sourc 
sover 
collec 
spect 
raw 

socia 
arme: 
a wo 
natio 
on A 
Unite 
disar 
the « 
Gern 


pow 
thesi 
syste 
migh 


