— 
at 


“fifth 
Cially 
Future 
Hemi- 
°nse,” 
f pre- 
> of a 
South 
—that 
quate 
While 
de of 
"anti. 
© past 
st-war 
meet- 
onsid- 
unced 
re cific 
ut at 


“the 
t the 
exet- 
> gi0Ns 
$ ma- 
Jnited 
7, the 
SIONS, 
vould 
> pos- 
ds of 
many, 
1 this 
Mon- 
lution 
1 pos: 
inde- 
ey be 


e the 
ied to 
1 the 
Found 
guay, 
ye in- 
d the 
Inited 
nany. 


mS 


3, 1940. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XIX, No. 38 


Juty 12, 1940 


_ 


A NEW F.P.A. SERVICE 
PAN AMERICAN NEWS 


Devoted to current developments in Latin America, back- 
ground information and comment on the significance of the 
news—together with a special section on trade and finance. 


Published every other Thursday 
Subscription: $3.00 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Dr. Willian y. Bishop 


- Vaiversity of Michigan Library 
Ann Arbor, Wieck. 


BRITAIN AND GERMANY PREPARE FOR FINAL ROUND 


ew past week has been one of preparation for 
the Battle of Britain, by which Hitler hopes to 
destroy British sea power and defeat the British Em- 
ire before autumn. Three preliminary developments 
indicate that the next, and perhaps final, round in 
the European struggle is at hand: Great Britain’s 
action against the French navy, the Hitler-Ciano con- 
versations in Berlin, and the ever-increasing air bom- 
bardments of British and German controlled areas. 

BRITAIN vs. FRANCE. On July 3 the British 
government moved swiftly and drastically to prevent 
the transfer of the French fleet to Germany and 
Italy. Prime Minister Churchill, speaking in the 
House of Commons on the following day, revealed 
that France had refused to send its ships to British 
harbors before signing a separate armistice—despite 
its treaty of alliance and subsequent pledges of Ad- 
miral Darlan, commander of the French navy, that 
it would do so. In addition to seizing two battleships, 
two light cruisers, several submarines, eight destroy- 
ers and about 200 smaller craft which had taken 
tefuge in Portsmouth and Plymouth, Britain de- 
manded the surrender of French units at Oran and 
Mers-el-Kebir in Algeria. After the French admiral 
in command had refused three alternative proposals 
—to join the British and continue the war; sail 
for a British port, with repatriation of the crews; 
or submit to internment in a port in the French West 
Indies or the United States — the British sank or 
ctippled the battleships Bretagne, Dunkerque, and 
Provence, as well as a seaplane carrier and two de- 
stroyers. The Dunkerque, which had been beached, 
was later heavily bombed by British planes, but its 
sister ship, the Strasbourg, escaped to France after 
being torpedoed. At Alexandria, one French battle- 
ship and other units were guarded by the British, 
pending final disposition of their fate, while a 
squadron at Martinique in the West Indies was re- 
ported to be blockaded by a British force. On July 8 


the British Admiralty announced that it had taken 
“successful action” against the Richelieu, France's 
newest, 35,000-ton battleship. 


By this action, in which the French declared they 
suffered 1,000 casualties, Britain retained naval su- 
premacy over Germany and Italy, which would have 
benefited greatly if they had been able to take over 
the French fleet intact. As a result, the Pétain gov- 
ernment immediately severed diplomatic relations 
with Britain, thus ending the Entente Cordiale that 
dated from 1904, and on July 7 French planes joined 
German and Italian squadrons in an attack on Gib- 
raltar. In view of the imminent adoption of a Fascist 
constitution by France and the extension of Britain’s 
blockade to include the French coasts, further diplo- 
matic recriminations and possibly even open hos- 
tilities between the two countries may be expected in 
the future. 


THE AXIS PARTNERS CONFER. After receiv- 
ing a tumultuous welcome in Berlin as the conqueror 
of France and avenger of Versailles, Chancellor 
Hitler turned to the more arduous task of subduing 
Britain. He conferred with Count Ciano on July 7 
and prepared for further conversations, to take place 
after the Italian Foreign Minister had toured 
German-occupied territories in the West. Although 
no official revelations were forthcoming, it was as- 
sumed that the conference, like that of Hitler and 
Mussolini at the Brenner Pass on March 18, dealt 
with both immediate questions of strategy and long- 
term problem of reorganizing Europe. Meanwhile, 
Germany's position in the Balkans, somewhat men- 
aced by the Soviet occupation of Bessarabia, had 
been improved on July 4, when King Carol ap- 
pointed a pro-German and anti-Semitic cabinet, 
headed by Ion Gigurtu and composed of several 
Iron Guard leaders. Two days before, Rumania had 
renounced the Anglo-French guarantee of April 15, 


De 


—_—___—_—_—___=[[_[]["—=—-==[==_=_== 


1939 and ordered the expulsion of British oil en- 
gineers and technicians. 


AIR BOMBINGS. Both Britain and its enemies 
prepared for the impending battle by extensive air 
taids. While Britain and Italy exchanged attacks in 
the Mediterranean, Britain incessantly bombed 
strategic objectives in Western Germany and in 
German-occupied territory along,the entire west coast 
of Europe. Germany continued its air attacks on 
Britain, while apparently massing men and ships 
for the projected attémpt to invade the British 
Isles. It is impossible at, present. to. estimate the ef- 
fects of these aerial bombardments, which may prove 
to be the vital factor in the Battle of Britain. The 
British claim that they have destroyed 2,500 German 
planes—in addition to losses inflicted by French and 
other forces—and that their own production has 
improved notably in recent weeks. On July 7 Lord 
Beaverbrook, Minister of Aircraft Production, an- 
nounced that Britain in June had doubled its pro- 
duction of planes over June 1939—actually a re- 
markably small increase—and that it had placed 
orders totaling $1,000,000,000 in American factories. 


BRITAIN’S CHANCES. While no one can pre- 
dict the outcome of the next phase in the war, it is 
possible to outline Britain’s assets and liabilities. 
Foremost among its assets, Britain has achieved a 
remarkable degree of national unity under a coalition 
cabinet, despite the dissatisfaction of many Laborites 
and others because the advocates of appeasement— 
Neville Chamberlain and Lord Simon — still hold 
office. However selfish and short-sighted the Cham- 
berlain group may have been, it was never guilty 
of the corruption and treasonable activities of many 
leading French statesmen, and the British parlia- 
mentary government was never so demoralized by 
the multi-party system, partisan politics, and class 


GERMANY TIGHTENS GRIP 


The Swedish Foreign Office announcement on 
July 5, that the government had permitted Germany 
to transport war materials and troops to Norway 
through neutral Sweden, constitutes striking evi- 
dence of the extent to which the Nazis now control 
all of Scandinavia. German hegemony in the North 
was further substantiated on July 7, when Sweden 
openly embarked on a policy of close economic col- 
laboration with the Reich through a series of trade 
agreements with Germany, German-dominated Den- 
mark, and German-controlled Norway. These de- 
velopments go far to incorporate Sweden in the 
Reich’s political and economic orbit. 

Throughout Germany's Norwegian campaign the 
Swedish government, acting under the international 
law of neutrality, refused to allow Nazi supplies or 
soldiers to cross its territory. Since British and French 


Page Two 


— 


conflict. The British, secondly, are fighting with their 
backs to the wall and defending their own territoy 
without the complicating frictions of alliances, |y 
the third place, the British navy, which demonstrated 
its traditional power during the withdrawal from 
Dunkerque, may provide formidable resistance ty 
any expeditionary force crossing the Channel. With 
the French fleet under its control, it can continu 
the blockade of the Continent with more or less sug. 
cess. And, finally, if Britain can withstand the inj 
tial impact of the German assault, it can utilize mor 
successfully both its own factory production and that 
of the Empire and the United States next winter. 


These advantages are perhaps outweighed by 
Britain’s weaknesses in the face of an Italo-Germay 
Blitzkrieg. The British army, which lost all of its 
most modern equipment in Flanders, has apparently 
reorganized and re-equipped only nine divisions 
The navy is vulnerable to airplane and submarine 
attacks and to artillery bombardment across the 
Channel. Britain is apparently still dangerously 
inferior to Germany both in first-line planes and 
factory production. It offers, with its concentrated 
urban areas and communications, excellent targets 
for aerial bombardment. In Ireland, torn by the 
feud between neutral Eire and belligerent Ulster, 
Germany may attempt to establish additional air 
and naval bases. As in the World War, Britain's 
population depends heavily on imports of foodstuffs 
and raw materials, of which a large proportion— 
even more than in 1914-18—must come from. across 
the Atlantic. It remains to be seen whether Adolf 
Hitler, who has conquered more of the European 
coastline than either Napoleon or William II, can 
gain domination over Europe by destroying British 
sea power. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


ON NORTHERN EUROPE 


forces withdrew from northern Norway on June 9, 
however, and the last Norwegian troops surrendered, 
Sweden has become increasingly subject to domina- 
tion by the Reich and the U.S.S.R. Swedish ship- 
ping to the Baltic countries is now under Soviel 
control, and the Swedes are completely dependent 
on Germany for other imports and exports. Theit 
only remaining gateway to transatlantic trade, 
through Finland’s northern port of Petsamo, is com 
manded by a new German submariné base at Kir 
kenes, Norway. Under the circumstances it is not 
surprising that the Swedish government, despite its 
determination to remain neutral, acceded to strong 
German demands for transit privileges. The gov 
ernment explained that the cessation of hostilities 
in Norway had created a new situation in which 
Sweden’s traditional views of neutrality no longef 


— 


applied. 
forth imi 
groups in 
While 
Kattegat 
attack, G 
row strai 
borg in S 
Swedish 
way. Ge! 
sion at t 
has cease 
transport 
bers at I 
attack or 
Stavange 
to be co: 
of Brita 
north of 
DEN] 
Scandina 
of count 
—Polan 
France— 
by insta 
informa 
tremely 
an appz 
In the 
much | 
utilize < 
ernmen 
Denma 
invasiot 
Nazi d 
others. 
domest 
though 
tty’s fo 
Germa: 
the Da 
tificate 
tesour 
Germa 
tory v 


Why E 
1940 
An ¢ 

course 

beginn 
tively, 
plight 

less di 

_ 

FOREIG 

Headqua 

Entered 


> 


— 


1 their 
rritory 
es. Ip 
strated 

from 
1Ce to 
With 
ntinue 
SS Suc 
1€ ini. 
> More 
id that 


er. 


ed by 
erman 
of its 
rently 
1Sions, 
narine 
ss the 
rously 
S and 
trated 
fargets 
>y the 
Ulster, 
al air 
‘itain’s 
dstuffs 
tion— 
Across 
Adolf 
‘opean 
I, can 
British 


EEN 


une 9, 
dered, 
omina- 
| ship- 
Soviet 
endent 
Their 
trade, 
S$ com: 
it _Kir- 
is not 
rite its 
strong 
e g0V- 
stilities 
which 


longer 


— Page Three ———— 


applied. This diplomatic retreat, however, called 
forth immediate criticism from influential anti-Nazi 
groups in Sweden. 

While sea passage through the Skagerrak and 
Kattegat is still subject to British air and submarine 
attack, German forces can now safely cross the nar- 
row strait from Copenhagen to Malmé or Hilsing- 
borg in Sweden, and travel on either of the two main 
Swedish railroad lines from these points into Nor- 
way. Germany's insistence on winning this conces- 
sion at the present time, when fighting in Norway 
has ceased, gives credence to recent rumors that Nazi 
transports and troops are assembling in large num- 
bers at Norwegian harbors in preparation for their 
attack on the British Isles. The ports of Bergen and 
Stavanger, where most of the German forces are said 
to be concentrated, are less than 300 miles due east 
of Britain's Shetland and Orkney Islands, slightly 
north of Scotland. 

DENMARK AND NORWAY. Recent news from 
Scandinavia has also directed attention to the fate 
of countries under German occupation. In each case 
—Poland, Denmark, Norway, Holland, Belgium and 
France—Nazi military occupation has been followed 
by installation of strict censorship on news. What 
information is received from Poland indicates ex- 
tremely harsh treatment of the local population, and 
an appalling shortage of food and other supplies. 
In the other five countries conditions are apparently 
much better, with the Nazis generally trying to 
utilize a native administration to conduct local gov- 
emment in accordance with orders from Berlin. 
Denmark, which was unable to resist the German 
invasion on April 9 and immediately submitted to 
Nazi demands, has fared better than any of the 
others. It has retained its own nominal rulers and 
domestic control over its civil administration, al- 
though Germany has assumed direction of the coun- 
tty’s foreign relations and economic life. While the 
German army of occupation purchases supplies from 
the Danes with special Reichsmarks, or “credit cer- 
tificates” which are valid only in Denmark, Danish 
fesources are being steadily exploited to enhance 
Germany's war effort. Thousands of Danish fac- 
tory workers, thrown out of employment by the 


THE F.P.A. 

Why Europe Fights, by Walter Millis. New York, Morrow, 

1940. $2.50 

An outline history, simply and clearly written, of the 
course of Europe from the end of the first world war to the 
veginning of the second. Mr. Millis strives to write objec- 
tively, but does not conceal his conviction that Europe’s 
plight is due primarily to the rise of German Nazism and, 
less directly, to the conduct of the democracies since 1919. 


a 


sudden reorientation of Danish industry, have been 
transported to the Reich to plug gaps in German 
production. Some indication of increasing dissatis- 
faction among the Danes was given on June 13, 
when a decree ordered that all private arms, in- 
cluding hunting rifles and collections of firearms, 
must be deposited at police stations. A terse com- 
muniqué by the Nazi military commander in the 
Netherlands on July 6, accusing local residents of a 
disloyal attitude toward the German occupation, re- 
vealed the existence of dissatisfaction in the Low 
Countries as well. 


Germany's method of “indirect” control over the 
border countries, moreover, was forcefully illustrated 
last week in two other measures. On July 1 the Nazis 
advised the United States to discontinue its diplo- 
matic missions in Norway, Belgium, Luxemburg and 
the Netherlands by July 15, and to discuss questions 
concerning these countries in Berlin. Secondly, Ger- 
man military authorities took definite steps to depose 
King Haakon and establish a local régime in Norway 
that would carry out German instructions. These 
measures, revealed in a dispatch from Stockholm 
on July 5, climaxed a month’s campaign in the 
German-controlled Norwegian press demanding the 
abdication of King Haakon, who fled to England 
with Prime Minister Nygaardsvold on June 9. The 
Germans have now compelled the Norwegian ad- 
ministrative commission, recognized by King Haakon 
as the legal government in occupied Norway, to 
set up a National Council with supreme authority, 
composed of such pro-German interests as Major 
Vidkun Quisling. This body promptly “requested” 
the abdication of King Haakon and summoned the 
Norwegian Parliament to meet on July 15 to create 
a pro-Nazi government in Norway. On July 8 the 
King formally refused to renounce his throne, and 
Norwegian Foreign Minister Koht—at a press con- 
ference in London—asserted that the projected ses- 
sion of Parliament had been postponed. The Ger- 
mans have not yet succeeded in establishing a new 
Norwegian government which will be legitimate 
under the Norwegian constitution. 


A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 


BOOKSHELF 


The German Army, by Herbert Rosinski. New York, Har- 
court Brace, 1940. $3.00 


Dr. Rosinski, who had the advantage of close association 
with Germany’s armed forces until 1936, has written an 
excellent review of the development of the German army 
from Frederick the Great to Hitler. Recent events, how- 
ever, hardly justify his skepticism of Germany’s reliance 
on a “war of movement.” 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 38, Jury 12, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera Micuergs Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
S181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JuLty 9.—The Administration moved swiftly last 
week to keep abreast of totalitarian triumphs in 
Europe and Asia. The German reply to a State De- 
partment note of June 18 opposing transfer of 
Western Hemisphere territory to a non-American 
power provided the occasion for three pronounce- 
ments on American policy which may ultimately 
assume great importance. 


MONROE DOCTRINE RE-INTERPRETED. The 
first and most formal of these was contained in an 
official statement of Secretary Hull on July 5. The 
gist of the Nazi position, Mr. Hull revealed, is that 
any demand for non-intervention by European na- 
tions in American affairs can only be valid if the 
American nations, for their part, do not interfere 
in the affairs of the European continent. In contest- 
ing this view, the Secretary carefully distinguished 
between the United States’ policy in this Hemisphere, 
and German and Japanese attempts to establish su- 
premacy in Europe and Eastern Asia. He described 
the Monroe Doctrine as “solely a policy of self- 
defense . . . designed to prevent aggression in this 
hemisphere on the part of any non-American power, 
and likewise to make impossible any further exten- 
sion to this hemisphere of any non-American system 
of government imposed from without.” The Doc- 
trine contained no vestige of any implication of 
United States hegemony; in this it differed sharply 
from policies “alleged to be similar” to it in other 
areas, which “would in reality seem to be only the 
pretext for the carrying out of conquest by the sword, 
of’ military occupation, and of complete economic 
and political domination.” This basic distinction af- 
firmed, Mr. Hull was able to justify present Ameri- 
can policy in Europe as cooperation not in political 
affairs but for the purpose of promoting economic 
rehabilitation and orderly international processes. 

The second pronouncement was made by Presi- 
dent Roosevelt on the same day. In a press confer- 
ence at Hyde Park the Chief Executive listed five 
essentials of a just and enduring peace: freedom of 
information, knowledge and the press; freedom of 
religion; freedom of expression; freedom from fear 
of attack and threats to territorial integrity; and 
freedom from want, together with the greatest pos- 
sible cultural and commercial intercourse among na- 
tions. On July 6 Mr. Roosevelt released a third, more 
tentative indication of Administration policy. Using 
Stephen T. Early, his press secretary, as a mouth- 


piece, the President informally suggested applica. 
tion of the principle of the Monroe Doctrine ji 
Europe and Asia as it is practiced in the Americas— 
by settling territorial questions through consultation 
among all the nations of the area concerned rathe 
than by the decision of one conquering power, 
Early also stated that the United States has no ip. 
tention of interfering with territorial adjustments ip 
Europe or Asia, giving Indo-China but not the Dutch 
East Indies as an example. He insisted that the “ad. 
ministrative or ultimate disposition” of American 
colonies of conquered states should be decided by all 
the American republics, not by this country alone. 
THE BROADER IMPLICATIONS. With an ob 
vious eye for the effects on the pending Havam 
Conference of American Republics, opening July 20, 
the Administration has thus reaffirmed some of the 
central principles of its foreign policy. It has not 
done so, however, without raising some interesting 
questions. In particular, Mr. Early’s assertion that 
the United States has no intention of interfering with 
territorial adjustments in Europe or Asia might con. 
ceivably be regarded as hinting at abandonment of 


the American position in the Far East, although it| 


is not believed here that such an interpretation is 
warranted. What is considered significant in the 
Early statement is the tacit assumption that France 
is to have no voice in the disposition of its Asiatic 
and American colonies. The State Department might 
ultimately be tempted to adhere to this view in order 
to avoid the embarrassing possibility that, while the 
colonies remain under the flag of a Fascist French 
government, they may be utilized by the Nazis for 
their own ends. 

From a domestic point of view, the three pro 
nouncements are apparently intended as a response 
to two currents of thought now prevalent in the 
country at large. One of these, championed by 4 


highly vocal group both inside Congress and out, it | 


essence accepts the Nazi thesis that the United States 
must dissociate itself from European affairs com 


pletely if it is to demand non-intervention here. The | 


second, swelled by the Nazi triumph, is persuaded 
that this country must sooner or later reach ao 
amicable agreement with Germany. By its open e 
pression of concern regarding Nazi activities in the 
Americas, and its insistence on “freedom” in the 
broader sense as a prerequisite for an enduring peace, 
the Administration has intimated that it puts no faith 
in such easy solutions of America’s external problems. 


Davip H. Popper 


FORE 


An inter pr 


FTE 

Fre 
the han 
French | 
1870-71, 
débacle. 
Vichy, ir 
political 
of its v: 
effected 
| July 9 | 
ing Ma 
create a 


landslid 


ties anc 
| day the 
| Nation< 
by 569 
succeed 
the nev 
claimed 
appoint 
Chief c 
“we” i 

AUT 
est out! 
in the 
Chief « 
tory o! 
makin; 
legisla 
tensior 
Altho 
of the 
comm. 
state oO 

Rep 
the fi 
will p 


