





fo- 
ves 
rip- 
2) 
bec 
one 


an 
OV 


an 
sion 
>me 
far, 


ndi- 


uell, 


lents 
lates 
1 the 


J.B. 
1.00 


e de 


Ifred 
Tess, 


enta 
‘ational 


LEET, 
; York, 





vr. William W. Bishop 


Entered as dnd class matter 


* University of Wichigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. § 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





A. 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vot. XXI, No. 33 


JUNE 5, 1942 





U.S. TAKES INITIATIVE IN POST-WAR PLANNING 


al speech delivered on Memorial Day by Under- 
secretary of State Sumner Welles, taken in con- 
junction with other recent addresses, indicates that 
government officials, far from postponing considera- 
tion of peace aims until the war has been won, are 
giving continuous thought to the strategy of post- 
war reconstruction, which has become an inextricable 
part of the strategy of war. From these official 
American statements emerge certain key ideas, which 
are beginning to rally public support in this country. 

Treatment of Axis Peoples. Mr. Welles indicated 
that, once the war is over, “‘justice will be done in- 
exorably and swiftly to those individuals, groups or 
peoples, as the case may be, that can truly be held 
accountable for the stupendous catastrophe into 
which they have plunged the human race.” This 
declaration, which would seem to pledge retribution 
against the Germans and the Japanese, as well as 
against their leaders, was qualified by the statement 
that “no element in any nation shall be forced to 
atone vicariously for crimes for which it is not re- 
sponsible, and that no people shall be forced to look 
forward to endless years of want and of starvation.” 
While Mr. Welles suggested no method for 
determining degrees of responsibility, his speech 
was at least intended to assure the peoples of Axis 
countries that they will not be subjected to wholesale 
revenge and exclusion from the society of nations 
after they have been defeated. 

No Return to “Normalcy.” Once the United Na- 
tions have won the war, there should be no rush to 
get back to ‘‘normalcy,’’ as in 1919. On the contrary, 
according to Mr. Welles, we should be prepared to 
face a period of “social and economic chaos” im- 
mediately following cessation of military hostilities. 
This transition period will have to be bridged by 
the initial and gigantic task of relief, of reconstruc- 
tion and of rehabilitation” which will have to pre- 
cede the negotiation of peace. 


In anticipation of this eventuality, a selected group 
of American army officers is being specially trained 
for tasks of rehabilitation at the University of Vir- 
ginia. A similar course, for civilians as well as mem- 
bers of the armed forces, is being opened at Colum- 
bia University. The United Nations are also con- 
certing measures in London and Washington to rush 
food and medical supplies into Europe as soon as 
Nazi control has been broken. These supplies could 
be distributed not only to the peoples of the con- 


quered countries, but to Germans and Italians as 
well. 


From United Nations to W orld Organization. Mtr. 
Welles suggested that the United Nations might 
become the nucleus of a world organization of the 
future to determine the final terms of “a just, an 
honest and durable peace’ to be negotiated at the 
close of the transition period. In other words, the 
machinery of collaboration being developed by the 
United Nations to meet wartime requirements would 
be adapted to the needs of post-war reconstruction, 
instead of trying to create, ad hoc, a new interna- 
tional organization having no roots in practical ex- 
perience. 


Maintenance of International Police. The United 
Nations may also be called upon to undertake “the 
maintenance of an international police power . . . to 
insure freedom from fear to peace-loving peoples 
until there is established that permanent system of 
general security promised by the Atlantic Charter.” 


“Freedom from Want.” Just as Vice-President 
Wallace proclaimed the twentieth century as the 
century of “the common man,” so Mr. Welles de- 
clared that this war is ‘‘a people’s war .. . which 
cannot be regarded as won until the fundamental 
rights of the peoples of the earth are secured.” 
Among these rights he included the right of peoples 
to demand higher social and economic standards, 











Page Two 











— 


unhampered by the policies of “‘self-seeking minori- gle. Yet many leaders in Britain and the United} oratin 
ties of special privilege.” States who welcome the support of anti-Nazis ig} fuel « 
International Economic Collaboration. Mr. Welles _ Europe, still fear the explosive forces released by the} jyamp 
predicted that the principal economic problem after war, and think in terms of “restoring” political and perts 
the war will not be primarily one of production, but economic institutions in Europe once war 1S Over} other 
of distribution and purchasing power. The United Such restoration, desirable as it may seem to some} the d 
States has already obtained the collaboration of the of the governments-in-exile, would be rejected W 
United Nations in planning for this great task which, the conquered peoples just as vigorously as they noy this c 
he said, “in every sense of the term is a new frontier ‘reject Hitler's “new order.” the I 
—a frontier of limitless expanse—the frontier of It is not a question whether we like or dislike the Cana 
human welfare.” The !ease-lend agreement con- revolutions that are in the making in each of the ing | 
cluded by the United States with Britain, and simi- conquered countries—as well as in Germany and} 74, 
lar agreements offered last week to Russia and China, Italy. It is a question of ascertaining as realistically tion 
look toward post-war economic collaboration be- as we can the elements in Europe with which we} 4-0, 
tween the United Nations. shall have to work in the future, instead of seeking heen 
WORDS ARE NOT ENOUGH. While the state- to perpetuate obsolete conditions. The forces off j otic 
ments of American officials are beginning to put doubt and discontent that unquestionably exist in} j,9}j, 
content into the vague promises of the Atlantic Europe cannot be conjured away by formulas. The gene 
Charter, they have not yet come to grips with the ust be alleviated by genuine reform. : force 
grim realities of the profoundly altered situation in _ Nor is it clear how the leaders of the United Na} até 
Europe and Asia. It is true that there will be a de- _—‘*#ons expect to reform the economic system, so as to} the | 
mand for an international police force after the Place purchasing power in the hands of peoples it pecte 
war. But the great powers which command the backward areas, unless these areas are either first} (. 
world’s principal industrial and, therefore, military industrialized, or offered better terms for their prod. - 


resources, will have to exercise the utmost wisdom 
and restraint in the use of their power if they are not 
to arouse suspicion among the peoples of Asia and 
Latin America that a United Nations victory may 
develop into a new form of imperialism. It is also 
generally acknowledged that the war crystallized the 
demand, long in the making, of ‘the common man” 
for a more equitable share in economic, as well as 
political, life. The phrases ‘‘the common man” and 
“people’s war’ express acceptance, in the United 
States, of the fact that the struggle against Hitler 


ucts than in the past, possibly at the expense of liy. Higl 
ing standards in industrial countries. In this respect} y+ 
our wartime policy toward Latin America may se 
an important precedent, as pointed out by Under 
secretary of Commerce Wayne Taylor on May 18 R 
In brief, it is essential for the people of the United} YU 
States to understand that peace may be just as hari} With 
to win as war—but that at least sacrifices for peact and 
can be made to reap a rich harvest in terms of im thei 
proved human relations, provided we couple ou} “8! 
great power with an equally great sense of respon) tt 


alon 








in Europe is at the same time a revolutionary strug- “bility. VERA MICHELEs DEAN ues 
LIBYAN REVERSES LESSEN AXIS INFLUENCE IN FRANCE cla 
Launching the sixth offensive in Libya after three Tobruk, another cut through the mine fields near the} P!™%é 
months of inactivity on the African front, German sea. Within five days, however, the British Eighth} 
and Italian forces under Field Marshall Erwin Army, which included contingents of the Free French the 
Rommel unleashed simultaneous attacks on May 27 forces, had pounded heavily the advancing units in} ‘* 
against the British defensive zone, extending from at least one major tank battle, and compelled them} PO" 
the coastal village of El Gazala some 40 miles south- to retreat. b : 
east into the desert. As one column swung around In marked contrast to earlier Mediterranean cam} “°° 
the British southern flank and then drove toward paigns, the Allies now appear to possess air su| ™ 
periority over the Axis, and RAF planes contributed 
What are the wartime relations of the U.S. and the substantially to the favorable outcome by disrupting 

Latin American countries? What steps have been communications behind the German lines as far &| 1 
taken to implement hemisphere defense? Read: Benghazi. Again the decisive factor in the campaign} of 
Hemisphere Solidarity in the War Crisis appeared to be the maintenance of supplies. An} Pre 

by David H. Popper army operating in the desert wastes of northem! tec 

Africa must receive a continuous flow of watet,| Ax 

25c food, ammunition and replacements if it is to capr} <at 

May 15 issue of ForEIGN Po.icy Reports talize on an initial break-through of the enemys} to 

REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. defenses. The RAF’s reported destruction of 600 Jar 
Sutpeniption, $5 s year; to F-P-A. members, $9. Axis vehicles must have crippled the tank forces op} «nt 














iS to 
S if 


rod. 


“liv 


r set 
der. 
18, 
ited 
hard 
eace 


our 
pon: 


r the 
ghth 
ench 
ts in 
them 


Catt 
r Sue 
uted 
pting 
ar a 
aign 
. Ao 
them 
vater, 
capi 
omy’ 


s OP 











erating in the forward sectors by depriving them of 
fuel and shells. The Axis forces may also have been 
hampered by the desert heat, although military ex- 
now believe that recently developed tanks and 
other equipment permit operations in summer after 
the dust storms have passed. 

What can Rommel have hoped to accomplish by 
this offensive? The strategic advantages of crushing 
the British and driving to the banks of the Suez 
Canal are obviously great. Allied supplies now mov- 
ing to Russia would then have to be redirected, 
Turkey's situation would be weakened, and a junc- 
tion with the Japanese in the Indian Ocean would 
become possible. But, conceding that Rommel had 
been able to reinforce his Afrika Korps—which was 
believed to include only three German and seven 
Italian divisions during the winter—the British were 
generally considered to have built up a seasoned 
force in the Near East, equipped with much new 
matériel from the United States. It is possible that 
the German commander hoped to strike an unex- 
pected blow and destroy the Allied advance forces, 
or he may have sprung an offensive to forestall an 
imminent British attack. In any case, the Allied 
High Command is reminded, if it needs reminding, 
that tanks and planes must continue to reach Egypt 
along the long route around and across Africa. 


REACTIONS ELSEWHERE. A .defeat in Libya 
would not strengthen the Axis in its negotiations 
with Vichy regarding the western Mediterranean 
and Africa. By encouraging the Italians to renew 
their demands for Nice, Savoy and Tunisia, and by 
urging the Spanish to present claims for portions of 
French Morocco, Hitler is apparently trying to wring 
concessions from Pierre Laval, Chief of Government 
at Vichy. In return for possible support against these 
daims, Berlin wants French collaboration in ship- 
ping munitions and troops across the Mediter- 
tanean Sea to Libya. Hitler also desires control of 
the French Navy to protect the movement of cargo 
vessels from Italy to North Africa. Unconfirmed re- 
ports indicate that German sailors are to be trained 
in French naval yards, in preparation for service 
aboard units of the still powerful Vichy fleet. Ger- 
man claims may also be raised for use of French 


CASTILLO’S REPRESSIVE POLICIES 


The action of the Mexican Congress—both houses 
of which, on May 29-30, unanimously approved 
President Manuel Avila Camacho’s request that they 
fecognize the existence of a state of war with the 
Axis—has had a profound effect in all Latin Ameri- 
an countries. In nations already cooperating fully 
to carry out the recommendations of the Rio de 
Janeiro conference for hemisphere defense, Mexico's 
entry into the ranks of the belligerents has strength- 


—_—— Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: PLANNING PEACE IN WARTIME 
Speaker: William P. Maddox 
Date: Sunday, June 7 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 
For station, please consult your local newspaper 











Atlantic ports in West Africa. Vichy is reported 
to have fortified strongly the strategic base at Dakar, 
presumably with German approval, and to have or- 
dered a close air patrol of its frontiers. On May 20 
the Pétain government announced that two British 
planes had been forced down along the coast of the 
Gulf of Guinea—in the area where American 


bombers pass on the ferry route to the Middle East. — 


If these developments are indicative of an intention 
on the part of Vichy to retaliate for the Allied occu- 
pation of Madagascar and other French possessions, 
the British colonies in West Africa would probably 
be placed in a dangerous position, for they have long 
land frontiers with French territories and are but 
lightly defended. 


Laval and his supporters in Vichy have not yet, 
however, made any important concession to the 
Nazis, not because they may not believe that 
France's salvation lies in accepting Hitler's “new 
order,” but because French popular opinion on both 
sides of the demarcation line has become more em- 
phatically anti-Axis, if not pro-Ally. Even an authori-’ 
tarian ruler like Laval cannot maintain his position 
in the face of overwhelming public disapproval. 
Moreover, the tide of war in its present European 
phase appears to be turning against the Nazis, as in- 
dicated in the mass bombings of Cologne on May 30 
and Essen on June 1, in both of which more than a 
thousand British planes were employed. Recent Al- 
lied successes controvert one of Laval’s most potent 


arguments—that France should make the best pos- - 


sible terms with Germany as the ultimate victor. It 
seems that only an important military triumph by 
the Germans in Libya, in Russia, or against Britain 
can swing France into the conflict on the Axis side. 


Louts E. FRECHTLING 


BOLSTER ARGENTINE NEUTRALITY 


ened the trend toward open involvement in the 
conflict. Thus, in Brazil, both Brazilian and United 
States bomber crews, with considerable initial suc- 
cess, have been attacking Axis submarines operating 
off that country’s coasts, while the government has 
pressed its drive against Axis agents and their means 
of communication with Europe. On the other hand, 
in countries with more evenly divided sympathies, it 
is pointed out that Mexico’s defiance led only to 


== | 


¢ 





————————————_—=[KAana99ananan—E—l=[=_=_“Pgeee EI —SSSL"—L—_=SE=—eSS==aa_an=mnmamm_le_=_—_=_=_ 


involvement in the struggle—a contingency these tionary channels if it is not to be reduced to complete 











states desire to avoid. impotence. 
ARGENTINA’S GAG RULE EXTENDED. Meanwhile, the Asanetin’ government has te. 
From this point of view, the most ominous events peatedly emphasized its determination to maintaiy 
have occurred in “neutral” Argentina, where Acting what its Foreign Minister, Enrique Ruiz Guiii 
President Ramén S. Castillo is gradually throttling calls its “cold” and “prudent’’ neutrality. Address 
the organs of political opposition to his administra- ing a Spanish commercial mission now in Buenos 
tion and moving toward the establishment of a full- Aires to negotiate an agreement which may benefit 
fledged dictatorship. On December 16, 1941, acting the Axis powers, the Foreign Minister on May 27 
on dubious constitutional grounds, the government pledged his country to maintain communications 
proclaimed a state of siege which the Chief Execu- with Spain “at any cost.” This inflexible position 
tive indicated was directed against Axis propaganda has facilitated formation of a Chilean-Argentine 
and activities. With the aid of his extraordinary bloc designed to enable the two Western Hemi- 
powers Dr. Castillo then proceeded to establish a sphere countries which still maintain relations with 
strict censorship of press, radio and public assembly the Axis to avoid complete isolation. The two states} 7 
so administered that the great, liberal Argentine have arranged certain barter and transportation} —— 
newspapers were precluded from expressing any transactions, but these are strictly limited in scope 
opinion on Argentine foreign policy and the war— They have, however, strengthened the Chilean goy- 
although E/ Pampero, the Nazi organ, has indulged ernment in its refusal to align itself with the other it 
in scurrilous condemnation of the democratic system American republics. s¢ 
and the United States. GAPS IN HEMISPHERE ALIGNMENT. On} State 
During the campaign prior to the Congressional the whole, the Latin American scene exhibits 4 great 
elections of March 1, discussion of the Acting Presi- tendency toward closer collaboration in many fields} [f la 
dent’s foreign policy was prohibited. When, despite among the nineteen American republics which are} coms 
fraud and duress at the ballot boxes, the Radical implementing the Rio de Janeiro resolutions, while} muct 
and Socialist party opposition managed to maintain Argentina and Chile tend to draw together in their} Paci! 
a scant voting majority, his followers unsuccessfully opposition stand. At the Rio de Janeiro meeting.) Pear 
attempted to obstruct the organization of the new where these differences were already apparent, they} Nav 
Chamber of Deputies. Dr. Castillo then failed to were submerged in an attempt to preserve a super. supe 
summon Congress into session on May 1, the date ficial hemisphere unity. As the war continues, this is ply i 
indicated in the Constitution. He did inaugurate it becoming increasingly difficult. It may become ad} J/ 
on May 28, but on the next day he effectually de- visable to abandon the efforts for unanimity, if that} The 
stroyed much of its value as a sounding board for is unattainable, : and differentiate between Latin} jp ¢ 
national opinion by forbidding the local press to American countries on the basis of their support for} Japa 
print or comment on any speech delivered in Con- hemisphere solidarity. No definite policy of this} dom 
gress “on international questions, on the state of type can be adopted until the Axis submarine menace} mitt 
siege or on its application.” On May 30 a form of in the Atlantic and the Caribbean is sufficiently} tine: 
censorship on outgoing news was established by an mastered to permit us to supply at least our friends} eyid 
order forbidding foreign news agencies to transmit with the materials they need for economic stability} ly » 
details of Congressional debates on foreign policy. Yet it is difficult to see how pressure against re’ first 
These measures must be regarded as almost the final calcitrants can ultimately be avoided if Pan Ameti- | Seq 
stages in the neutralization of all liberal opposition anism is to pass completely from the plane of words} onl; 
to the Castillo régime. The Acting President had to that of deeds. Davip H. Popper | Aus 
already resorted increasingly to decree rule not only stret 
to renew prior appropriations, despite the Cham- America’s Strategy in World Politics, by Nicholas John} ized 
ber’s refusal to approve the executive budget, but Spykman. New York, Harcourt, Brace, 1942. $3.76 Har 
also to carry out other administration plans. With Drawing extensively upon geopolitical conceptions, the higt 
= S : . author propounds two theses: that hemispheric self-sufi- 
even its negative, or obstructive powers whittled ciency is an illusion, and that the United States should} "V: 
down by executive encroachment, the numerically _— ha gece so “ete verge Aa cote at Ss Asia ver 
Superior but hitherto ill-organized pro-democratic “a Galteael tr en critics he Tousring mene for 
opposition to Castillo may be forced into revolu- tors, and for rejection of the tenets of collective security. | and 
Way 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 33, JuNeE 5, 1942. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated National # an 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNnKx Ross McCoy, President; WittiaAM P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. LET, Ha 
Secretary; VERA MicHe tks Dean, Editor; Davin H. Poppgn, Associate Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York 
N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Ern 
ae’ Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. Stat 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year for, 








