acqui- 
Russia, 
ised in 
nment. 


Roose- 
nt that 
t won. 
rategic 
are to 
cist ag- 
s dem- 
of the 
sh con- 
Malta, 
for our 
al and 


le, cer- 
ndies— 
of the 
d to be 
h-ruled 
on was 
resident 
Brazil 
hen the 
o make 
ar shall 
ywed to 
inst the 


LIOTT 
DS 


Univers; ty of wm: ch! 


FEB 27 1943 
Entered as 2nd class matter 
Yeneral Library 


+Ean 


Ann Arbor, Michizan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 19 


FEBRUARY 26, 1948 


§ Russia and China press for accelerated war ef- 
forts on the part of Britain and the United 
States, whose forces meanwhile face a German offen- 
sive in North Africa, discussions about the post-war 
world enter a new phase. Stalin’s order of the day of 
February 22, on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the 
Red Army, in which he declared that Russia is bear- 
ing “the whole weight of the war,” raises anew the 
question whether Russia will claim a share in the post- 
war settlement commensurate to its share in the wag- 
ing of the war. While the Kremlin defines its terri- 
torial expectations in Europe, the possibility looms 
that this country and Britain, in the absence of any of- 
ficially formulated program of cooperation with Rus- 
sia, may stake out their own territorial claims in such 
a way that, should no international organization 
backed by a police force come into being at the close 
of the war, they will have at least taken steps to 
achieve national “security.” 

A glimpse of this policy was given by Secretary of 
the Navy Knox on February 9 when, in the course of 
testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Com- 
mittee, he said that the United States must start im- 


, mediate negotiations for complete post-war control 


of sufficient island air and naval bases in the Pacific 
Ocean to prevent Japan from entering on ‘another 
war of aggression in the future.” A similar view had 


~ 


been expressed earlier by Senator Tydings, who con- 
tended that the United States should assume full own- 
ership of the bases in the Atlantic which Britain 
granted in 1940 on a 99-year lease in return for the 
transfer of 50 American over-age destroyers. The 
face is on once more between the possibility of 
achieving some form of international collaboration, 
and the centuries-old urge of national groups to seek 
the greatest possible measure of “security” for them- 
selves, irrespective of the needs and desires of others. 

RUSSIA’S CLAIMS IN EASTERN EUROPE. 
Speculation in London and Washington as to the 


STRUGGLE FOR NATIONAL SECURITY THREATENS ALLIED HARMONY 


kind of territorial settlement Moscow might contem- 
plate after the war was answered bluntly by a Pravda 
editorial of February 5, whose author stated that 
Russia has a “legal claim’ to Bessarabia and the 
Baltic states—Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. This 
claim rests in part on the historical ground that 
the four areas mentioned in the editorial had been, 
for varying periods of time, part of the Tsarist Em- 
pire. In 1918, however, the Soviet government sur- 
rendered the Baltic states (as well as Finland and 
Russian Poland) under the Treaty of Brest Litovsk 
imposed on Russia by Germany; while Bessarabia 
was seized by Rumania, one of the Allied and Asso- 
ciated Powers. 

The “legal” basis of the Soviet claim is that Bes- 
sarabia, occupied by Russian forces in 1940 over Ru- 
mania’s protest, and the Baltic states, occupied by 
Russian forces in 1940 on the ground that they were 
not complying satisfactorily with the terms of treaties 
under which they had agreed to let the Soviet Union 
use their air and naval bases, voted in the course of 
plebiscites to enter the U.S.S.R. Estonia, Latvia and 
Lithuania entered as Soviet Socialist Republics, while 
the major part of Bessarabia was united with Soviet 
Moldavia into the Moldavian S$.S.R. A somewhat 
similar procedure was followed in 1939 with respect 
to eastern Poland (which the Russians had occupied 
following Poland’s conquest by Germany), when Po- 
lish White Russia was incorporated into the White 
Russian S.S.R., and Polish Ukraine was incorporated 
into the Ukrainian S.S.R. The Pravda editorial makes 
no reference to eastern Poland, but that the Poles 
have no illusions on this score was indicated by 
Polish Premier Sikorski’s protest of February 21 
against Russia’s attempts to extend its influence over 
German-occupied Polish territory. 

It is not yet clear whether, once the Finns declare 
themselves ready for peace negotiations, the Kremlin 
will again present demands for strategic bases 


= 


a 


ee 


: Se ARO a Re Sn 
ee Ce eal = 


———— 


— 


= 


eS = 
7a 
RE - an ee 


oe 


ns oer = mecemmemenams 
_ 


———__—_—_——————:= 


in Finland—demands which in 1939 led to the out- 
break of the first Russo-Finnish war. What the Soviet 
government has made clear is that, when it speaks 
of “ejecting” the German invaders from Russian soil, 
that soil includes Bessarabia, Estonia, Latvia and 
Lithuania. In other words, the fate of these terri- 
tories, according to the Soviet psint of view, has al- 
ready been settled, and is not subject to discussion at 
a peace conference—regardless of the fact that Brit- 
ain and the United States refused to recognize their 
incorporation into the Soviet Union and, in the At- 
lantic Charter, pledged themselves to restore self- 
government to peoples deprived of it by force. 
SHOULD BRITAIN AND U.S. CHALLENGE 
RUSSIA’S CLAIMS? The position taken by the So- 
viet government places Britain and the United States 
in a difficult predicament. It cannot be argued that 
the entire population of the areas occupied by the 
Russians in 1939-40 welcomed incorporation into 
the U.S.S.R., although a considerable proportion of 
workers and peasants did. Before holding pleb- 
iscites, the Kremlin arrested or put into concentra- 
tion camps many of those who, for one reason or 
another, were opposed either to the Soviet system or 
to Russian domination, or both. The long and the 
short of it is that the Baltic peoples like the Poles, 
the Finns, the Czechs, and other national groups in 
Europe, have no desire to live under the control of 
any foreign state, and want to achieve or maintain 
national independence. Their nationalism is in no 
whit diminished by the internal conflicts that do exist 
and will continue to exist among them—conflicts of 
which, in the past, both Germany and Russia have 
tried to take advantage. The crucial question is not 
whether these peoples prefer Russia to Germany, or 
vice versa, but how they can be assured independence 
in a world rent by recurring clashes between the 
great powers in whose path they happen to lie. 
The only way their independence as national 
groups can even begin to be assured is through 


Page Two 


gtadual development of an international organiza. 
tion, which would have international police force a 
its command, and could undertake to provide 4 
modicum of political and military security, as well as 
economic stability, for all states, large and small. As 
long as such an international organization remains | 
on paper, all countries will have recourse to “self. | 
help,” even though it has been abundantly proved 
that no nation, no matter how powerful—not even 
Britain, or Russia, or the United States—can protect 
itself unaided against the industrial and military | 
might of an aggressive country like Germany 0, 
Japan. 

The scramble for strategic positions which now 
threatens to develop promises to become the more 
fierce the less hope there is of collaboration among 
the United Nations in the post-war period. That mil. 
itary force must be maintained by the United Na. 
tions is now generally agreed. But will it be military 
force at the disposal and under the control of na- 
tional states, each seeking to assure its own security 
—or will it be at the disposal and under the control 
of an international organization of which a political 
council formed today by the United Nations could be 
the nucleus? The only way in which Britain and the 
United States can challenge Russia's territorial 
claims is to indicate by concrete measures right now, 
in the midst of war, that they are willing to make 
adjustments necessary for the establishment of an 
international organization within whose framework 
national territorial and strategic interests could be 
subordinated to the need to assure security for all 
Since the British and American governments, how- 
ever, cannot act in a dictatorial manner, and must 
consult public opinion on foreign policy, it is essen- 
tial that the public in Britain and the United States, 
through Parliament and Congress, make known their 
views concerning adjustments they are willing to 
have their countries make once the war is overt. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


MADAME CHIANG AROUSES NEW CONCERN OVER AID TO CHINA 


Although Allied military prospects have improved 
considerably in recent months—chiefly because of the 
Soviet winter offensive—there still seems to be a lack 
of integration in fighting the war as a truly global 
struggle. Decisions reached at Casablanca may 
greatly alter this situation, but there are continuing 
problems of military and political cooperation that 
will apparently remain to plague the United Na- 
tions—not least of all in the Far East. This is indi- 
cated by the cautious and rather unenthusiastic re- 
action of the Chinese press to Casablanca and by 
the statements of Madame Chiang Kai-shek in 
Washington. 

WHAT DOES CHINA WANT? In her talks to 
the Senate and House of Representatives on Febru- 


ary 18 and her joint press conference with President 
Roosevelt on the following day, Mme. Chiang men- 
tioned several aspects of China’s dissatisfaction with 
the position assigned to it in the war effort of the 
United Nations. She asked for more supplies. She 
expressed disapproval because ‘‘the prevailing opit- 
ion-seems to consider the defeat of the Japanese 4s | 
of relative unimportance and that Hitler is our first | 
concern.” She spoke of her “belief and faith that 
devotion to common principles eliminates differences 
in race and that identity of ideals is the strongest 
possible solvent of racial dissimilarities.’ And she 
emphasized the necessity of taking concrete action 
to implement idealistic pronouncements. 

There is some evidence that the quantity of sup 


—— 
Organiza. 
e force at 
provide a 
as well as 
small. As 
Nn remains 
: to “self. 
ly proved 
—not even 
an protect 
1 military 
tmany or 


hich now 
the more 
on among 
That mil. 
nited Na- 
e military 
rol of na- 
N secutity 
he control 
a political 
s could be 
in and the 
territorial 
right now, 
> to make 
ent of an 
ramework 
could be 
ty for all. 
ents, how- 
and must 
it is essen- 
ted States, 
10wn their 
willing to 
$ over. 
5s DEAN 


NA 


President 
jang men 
ction with 
ort of the 
plies. She 
ling opin 
apanese as 
is our first 
faith that 
differences 
> strongest 
' And she 


rete action 


ity of sup 


— 
— 


lies flown into China has recently increased and 
that the Lease-Lend Administration is planning a 
greater effort to speed the flow. The President has 
also promised that we will get more help to Chung- 
king as quickly as possible and that in the long run 
China will be the most important base of United 
Nations operations against Japan. Yet, at present 
China is still receiving little, and the problem re- 
mains a serious one not only for military reasons but 
also because of its political repercussions within that 
country. In this respect it is clear to all Americans 
that more must be done to bolster the Chinese front. 
At the same time the Chinese themselves must fight 
against internal weaknesses that have a debilitating 
effect on their war effort. 

WHAT ELSE CAN WE DO? Mme. Chiang’s 
suggestion that Japan is the major enemy is a criti- 
csm of the fundamental strategy of the United 
States, Great Britain and the Soviet Union. Prime 
Minister Churchill and President Roosevelt both 
committed themselves to a policy of placing major 
emphasis on the defeat of the Nazis, when they con- 
ferred in Washington at the end of 1941, soon after 
Pearl Harbor. Since Casablanca they have reiterated 
this view, and it is plain that the discussions in North 
Africa resulted in plans, first of all, to crush the 
Axis in Europe. Not only is it highly unlikely that 
this fundamental policy will be abandoned, especially 
after all the decisions that have been made, but such 
a change does not appear to be in the interest of the 
United Nations, including China. Concentration of 
force against Germany is neither the result of chance 
nor of narrow Anglo-American-Soviet self-interest, 
but represents the shortest road to victory every- 
where. It is necessary, however, that, while stressing 
the defeat of Germany at this stage of the conflict, 
we and the British follow a policy of prosecuting 
the Far Eastern war as vigorously as possible and of 
preparing that area politically and militarily for the 
time when Japan will be the primary front. 


For a description of the machinery set up in 1917- 
18, an appraisal of its value, and an analysis of 
its breakdown with the coming of the Armistice, 
READ 


Why Alllied Unity Failed in 1918-19 


by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


February 15 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5.00; to F.P.A. members, $3.00. 


Page Three —----4 


POLITICAL ISSUES. Today conditions seem 
especially appropriate for ending the long period of 
discrimination against Chinese wishing to immigrate 
to the United States. Not only is the existing inequal- 
ity completely out of harmony with China's position 
as a major ally, but the whole policy of treating the 
Chinese as inferiors under our laws of entry and 
citizenship has done us incalculable harm through- 
cut the Orient, as well as in China itself. In a war 
which is being fought both for survival and for a 
better world, Chinese exclusion simply casts doubt 
upon all our good intentions and furnishes grist for 
the Japanese propaganda mill. 


It is therefore encouraging to learn that Represen- 
tative Martin J. Kennedy of New York has intro- 
duced in the House of Representatives a bill to re- 
peal these discriminations and to place the Chinese 
under the same quota and citizenship regulations as 
other foreigners entering this country. Although 
military questions are of great importance to the 
Chinese, especially in view of current Japanese ef- 
forts to cross the Salween river in Yunnan province, 
we must never forget that there are other issues that 
touch them closely. America could hardly pay a 
greater tribute to its Chinese allies and to their rep- 
resentative, Mme. Chiang, than to follow up the 
retrocession of extraterritorial rights by the termina- 


tion of exclusion. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


The Twilight of France, 1933-1940, by Alexander Werth. 
New York, Harper, 1942. $3.50 
A British reporter’s contemporary political record of the 
last years of the Third Republic. The Vichy régime is 
shown to be no accident of fate but the triumph of ideas 
and politicians present long before 1940. A good deal of 
fresh information, dispassionately handled. 


The Ageless Indies, by Raymond Kennedy. New York, John 
Day, 1942. $2.00 


A fascinating account of the life of the 70 million in- 
habitants of the Netherlands East Indies. The author be- 
lieves that, after the defeat of Japan, there must be a 
“rapid extension of self-government” in the islands. While 
regretting that the war in the Indies was “fought by the 
Dutch and the Japanese over the Indonesians, not by the 
Dutch and the Indonesians against the Japanese,” he holds 
that the Dutch should play the major part in directing this 
post-war reorganization. 


Glimpses of World History, by Jawaharlal Nehru. New 
York, John Day, 1942. $4.00 
A survey of world history from primitive times until 
the present day, written by the Indian nationalist leader 
during three years in prison, 1930-33. Consisting of letters 
written to his young daughter, this book sheds considerable 
light on the mind and philosophy of Nehru. 


as 3 ES JESS SS — 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
second-class matter December 2, 
ome month for change of address on membership publications. 


19, FEBRUARY 26, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; Verna MicHeLes Dgan, Editor. 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Thr 


Association, National 
Entered as 


Please allow at least 


Incorporated. 


ee Dollars a Year. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Qs 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


pp oe 


Soe 


we 


oe 


2 See sf ee an 


eee 


See 


es go ges 


% 

4 
" 
‘ 


Washington News Letter 


Fes. 23.—Not since “Papa’’ Joffre came to Wash- 
ington as a member of the French Military Mission 
in April 1917 has the emissary of any foreign gov- 
ernment pleading for aid for his country obtained such 
a popular triumph as Mme. Chiang Kai-shek received 
here last week. Her gracious and winning person- 
ality conquered Congress, secured from President 
Roosevelt a pledge that the United States would rush 
aid to China in 1943 ‘‘as fast as the Lord will let us,” 
and brought home to the American people as never 
before the significance of China’s role in this war. 


It was probably not just a mere coincidence that, 
while the wife of the Chinese Generalissimo was 
making her eloquent appeal in Washington, the 
Japanese were opening what spokesmen in Chung- 
king said was an important military offensive. Large- 
scale Japanese attacks were started in four strategic 
areas in central, southern, and southwestern China, 
and were coupled with the occupation of the French- 
leased territory of Kwangchowwan with its fine har- 
bor in the southern part of the country. These moves 
are perhaps aimed at preventing the use of China as 
a base for an aerial offensive against Japan. 


AIR OFFENSIVE PLANNED. A decision to 
undertake such an offensive was apparently reached 
at the Casablanca Conference. The President gave 
a hint of it in his speech to White House cor- 
respondents on February 12, when he said that ‘‘great 
and decisive actions” would be taken to “drive the 
invaders from the soil of China.” He added that 
“important actions are going to be taken in the skies 
over China—and over the skies of Japan itself.” The 
action of the Combined Chiefs-of-Staff in sending 
Lieut.-General Henry H. Arnold, chief of the United 
States Air Forces, to Chungking immediately after 
the Casablanca talks as the American member of an 
Allied delegation to confer with Generalissimo 
Chiang Kai-shek on February 5-7 is regarded here as 
circumstantial confirmation of the belief that China 
will shortly become the base for offensive air opera- 
tions against the Japanese. 


Whether the Allies are also in a position to under- 
take a campaign to reopen the Burma Road now, as 
the Chinese are urging, is more questionable. The 
lack of adequate road communications and transports 
complicates the military problem, and the advent in 
May of a heavy, 7-month rainy season probably does 
not leave enough time to mount an offensive in 
Burma before next autumn. 


FOR VICTORY 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


IMPORTANCE OF THE BURMA ROAD. 
Nevertheless, the reconquest of the Burma Road jg 
as vital to the Allies in this war as the establishment 
of communications with Russia by opening up the 
Dardanelles was to Britain and France in World | 
War I. Ever since the closing of this highway nearly 
a year ago, China has been cut off from virtually all 
effective aid from its Western Allies. As Edward R. 
Stettinius, Jr., Lend-Lease Administrator, said in his 
report to Congress on January 25, ‘following the loss 
of Burma, shipments to,China were reduced to a | 
trickle, carried principally by cargo planes from | 
India.” Of a total of $8,253,000,000 of lend-lease 
aid given by the United States to our Allies from 
March 1941 through December 1942, China received 
assistance only to the value of $156,738,000. Partly 
owing to lack of foreign supplies, inflation in that | 
country is now increasing at a fantastic rate. 

But while Mme. Chiang Kai-shek’s appeal for in- 
creased aid for her country is likely to receive a quick 
response, she will probably be less successful in her 
challenge to the “prevailing opinion’’ of the Anglo- 
American High Command which, as she put it in 
her address to the House of Representatives on Feb- 
ruary 18, considers the defeat of the Japanese as of 
relative unimportance and regards Hitler as the first 
concern. Her impressive warning about the danger 
of leaving Japan in undisputed possession of th 
vast natural resources it has conquered during the 
past year to be a “waiting sword of Damocles’’ ready 
to descend on the head of the United Nations gives 
new emphasis to fears that have been voiced by 
Joseph C. Grew, our former Ambassador to Tokyo 
and by leading Australians. But the Anglo-American 
military leaders are acting on the sound military 
principle of concentrating on one foe at a time, and 
the decision reached at Casablanca to defeat Hitles 
first is not one likely to be reversed even by Mme 
Chiang Kai-shek’s graceful eloquence. 


JOHN ELLIoTT 
FPA APPEARS IN “MARCH OF TIME” 


As an FPA member, you will be interested to | 
know that the latest issue of the MARCH OF TIME | 
—'‘The New Canada’—contains a sequence of 
Brooke Claxton’s speech, made at the FPA luncheon 
discussion in New York on February 6, in connection 
with the Canadian-American Institute arranged by 
the Association. The MARCH OF TIME also if- 
cludes a shot of one of the Institute’s round tables. 


