a uu 


ites 
ion 
pe. 


OV- 


her 


On 
$a 
elds 
are 
hile 
heit 
ing, 
‘hey 
pet: 
IS is 
ad- 
that 
atin 
for 
this 
nace 
ntly 
onds 
lity. 
1eri- 
ords 


aR 


John 
} 
, the 
suffi- 
ould 
A sia. 
igor- 
fac- 
rity. 


———— 


ational 
LE&t, 
York, 





Ann Arbor, Mich, 


“Yr. Willian W¥. Bisho 


Entered as 2nd clag$gnatter 


University of Wichizan Library 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 34 


JUNE 12, 1942 





U.S. NAVAL-AIR VICTORIES REFLECT NEW TACTICS 


HE important but not decisive naval success 

scored near Midway Island on June 4-6 by United 
States forces is bound to have consequences of the 
greatest import in the strategy of the Pacific War. 
If later reports confirm the accuracy of the American 
communiqués, it may be assumed the battle has done 
much to diminish Japan’s naval supremacy in the 
Pacific, gained as a consequence of the attack on 
Pearl Harbor and the dispersion of the United States 
Navy in other areas. Behind the screen of its sea 
superiority, Japan had been able to transport and sup- 
ply its forces in Southeast Asia with little danger. 

JAPAN’S STRATEGIC PLAN THWARTED. 
The Midway Island action, and the subsequent clash 
in the Aleutian zone, must be viewed as portions of 
Japan’s over-all strategic plan designed to obtain 
domination over all the western Pacific. Before com- 
mitting the full weight of its land forces on the con- 
tinent, or in Australia, the Japanese high command 
evidently believed it necessary to strike at the rapid- 
ly growing American naval threat in its rear. The 
first major blow, delivered in the Battle of the Coral 
Sea on May 4-9, now appears to have been aimed not 
only at interruption of the American supply route to 
Australia but also at diversion of American naval 
strength to the southern Pacific. The second, signal- 
ized by bombing and reconnaissance raids on Dutch 
Harbor on June 3, was correctly regarded by our 
high command as a feint to draw off our air and 
naval forces to the north. Had this elaborate maneu- 
ver achieved success, the way would have been clear 
for the Japanese task force, including battleships 
and troop transports, to capture our outpost at Mid- 
way Island and thus obtain a jumping-off point for 
an attack on the citadel of American power in 
Hawaii. From the press statement issued by Admiral 
Ernest J. King, Commander-in-Chief of the United 
States Fleet, on June 7, it is evident that the American 
forces were too scattered to prevent a complete 


United States triumph in the Midway engagement. 
But by admirable intelligence work, scouting and 
combat tactics, the Japanese plan of campaign has 
been thwarted, and the Americans have gained a sig- 
nificant defensive victory. 

In this battle, as in most of the previous naval en- 
gagements in the Pacific since December 7, the 
primary role appears to have been played by the car- 
rier-bas2d air power of the Navy operating in con- 
junction with land-based Army and Marine Corps 
planes. Thus, even in the largest ocean, where the 
pre-war “blue water’ fleets were expected to go into 
action beyond the range of air forces operating from 
the shore, the aerial weapon has assumed predom- 
inant importance. The Midway encounter indicates 
that the American Navy has made the adjustment to 
a revolution in naval tactics every bit as drastic as 
the tactical changes embodied by the Blitzkrieg of 
air and mechanized forces on land. Today the capital 
ship has lost its once unsurpassed hitting power and 
invulnerability, its greatest assets, to newer combat 
types, and must therefore assume a subsidiary posi- 
tion in maritime warfare. The bomber and the tor- 
pedo craft—submarine, destroyer, torpedo bombing 
plane and motor torpedo boat—are now the offensive 
core of the modern fleet, for they strike with the 
greatest speed, stealth and range either above or be- 
low the strong over-water belt of side armor which 
protects the older naval vessel. Vulnerable though it 
is, the aircraft carrier, together with cruisers and 
destroyers, now forms the “carrier striking force” 
which is delivering the modern naval attack. 

OUR NEW “CARRIER” NAVY. In the six 
months since the assault on Pearl Harbor, when our 
capital ship force was partially crippled by Japanese 
air power, much progress has been made in reshaping 
the American Navy to meet these new war condi- 
tions. The Navy Department's extreme reluctance to 
reveal its own losses—which many observers believe 

















is carried to excessive lengths—precludes any attempt 
to estimate accurately the size and com sition of 
our forces today. It is possible, however, tu forecast 
the nature of the fleet now under construction, under 
the “‘two-ocean” naval appropriations and subsequent 
authorizations. The building of capital ships no 
longer enjoys top priority, except for those units al- 
ready in an advanced stage. The greatest energy is 
now being devoted to the completion of an expanded 
aircraft carrier program. On December 7, 1941 seven 
carriers were in service and eleven under construc- 
tion; and numbers of uncompleted merchant ships 
and cruisers have been or are being converted into 
carriers. On June 3, moreover, the House of Repre- 
sentatives received from its Naval Affairs Committee 
a bill to authorize the construction of 1,900,000 addi- 
tional tons of combat ships, 500,000 tons of which 
would be aircraft carriers—a figure representing 
about 25 vessels of the size hitherto favored by our 
naval officials. 

Meanwhile, Congress is also acting on other pro- 
posals to meet the Navy’s pressing needs. About 120 
submarines are to be built at high speed, to supple- 
ment those already with the fleet or on the ways, in 
an obvious effort to increase the effectiveness of our 
undersea operations against Japanese maritime com- 
munications in the western Pacific. The Navy will 
also be given appropriations to build, buy or convert 
500,000 tons of auxiliary ships to be used “in con- 
nection with the submarine program’’—undoubtedly 
as servicing craft for long-range submarines. The 
1,900,000-ton authorization act mentioned above also 
provides for 500,000 tons of cruisers, and 900,000 


Page Two 








—_ 


tons of destroyers and escort vessels—but no battle 
ships. This bill, which alone should add 500 fighting 
ships to the fleet, is not to be confused with the pre 
war ‘‘two-ocean” program, whose first destroyers and 
submarines will be commissioned in about six months 
and which it is now hoped will be completed, ip 
all categories, in 1944. In addition, 800 small coastal 
vessels are to be built under pending legislation fo, 
defense against enemy submarines. 

By a construction program unparalleled in histoy 
the Navy is therefore preparing not only to modern. 
ize its forces but to expand them to a point where 
they may be able simultaneously to engage a number 
of enemies on several distant fronts. Signs are mul. 
tiplying, however, that the Navy's most pressing 
problem at the moment continues to be the Axis sub. 
marine campaign in American waters, despite a num. 
ber of reassuring statements from Washington 
While submarine operations close to our eastern sea 
board have for the time being ceased, they are still 
effective in the Gulf and Caribbean region; and the 
toll of sinkings reported since January 14 has réached 
261. Without fuller information than is now avail: 
able, it is impossible to verify charges that inflexible 
adherence to routine methods has prevented greater 
success in the defense against this critical danger. Ye 
the adjustment in planning, combat and construction 
which is slowly but surely being made in our broader 
naval strategy must be duplicated in our submarine 
defense system. Unless this is done, we may find that 
attacks on our inadequately guarded sea communica 
tions will rob us of the fruits of our preparation for 
victorious warfare overseas. Davin H. Popper 


U.S. WEIGHS ITS POLICY TOWARD FINLAND 


As the Nazis increased their pressure at both ends 
of the Soviet-German front—in the Leningrad-Mur- 
mansk region in the north, and at Sevastopol in the 
Crimea—the informational fog that had settled down 
over the eastern battlefront was momentarily lifted. 
While the Nazis have not yet made the direct attack 
on Russia’s southern defenses long anticipated by 
military observers, they appear determined to disrupt 
Russia’s supply line through Murmansk and Arch- 
angel. Plans for such an operation, which would have 
to be based on Finnish Karelia, were highlighted by 





For an analysis of the Nazi drain on occupied 
Europe, computed at 4'/2 billion dollars a year, 
re 


Nazi Exploitation of Occupied Europe 
by Ernest S. Hediger 


25c 


June 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 








Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 





the visit Hitler paid the Finnish Field Marshal von 
Mannerheim on June 5, on the occasion of the Mart 
shal’s seventy-fifth birthday, apparently in an effort 
to enlist all-out aid by Finland in the Nazi cam 
paign against Russia. 

U.S. POLICY TOWARD FINLAND. Hitlers 
visit severely tested the policy this country has hither 
to followed toward Finland. The United States 
showed great sympathy—unaccompanied by concrett 
aid—for the Finns during the Soviet-Finnish wat 
of 1939-40, when Russia seemed aligned with Get 
many against the Western powers. This attitude 
changed materially when Finland resumed war with 
Russia in 1941, following invasion of the USSR 
Now many Americans feel that Finland has definitely 
thrown in its lot with Germany, and should be treated 
as Hitler's ally—on the same basis as Hungary, Ru 
mania and Bulgaria, against all three of which the 
United States declared war on June 5. 

Until recently, however, the State Department ha 
acted on the assumption that Finland was fighting 
Russia not in order to aid Germany, but merely ® 





a | 


recov 
treaty 
war t 
force 

since | 


to cot! 
to ma 
influe 
mean 
non-E 
the F: 
from 
face s 
prefe 
Unite 
ment: 


Helsi 
prise, 
June 
tain ° 
gree 
tions. 
the | 
Gern 
of th 
atten 
contr 


pred 
fatec 
confl 
majo 
Russ 
ment 
Tsar 
merl 
achie 
befo 
final 
dom 


for : 
Finn 
cipit 
Finr 
cont 
of v 
lin | 
base 
justi 
lanc 
mar 
tion 
in r 


ng 
re. 


ind 


tal 


for 


on 
Th 
ere 


ul. 
ing 


ub. 


ea: 
till 


hed 
ail. 
ble 


ater 


hat 
1Ca- 
for 


von 
{ar- 
fort 
am: 


er's 
het: 
ates 
rete 
wal 
5et- 
ude 
vith 
SR. 
tely 
ated 
Ru 
the 


ting 
y 











—_ 
_—_ 





recover the territory it had lost under the Moscow 
treaty of 1940, which brought the first Soviet-Finnish 
war to a close. Washington has been reluctant to 
force Finland into an alliance with Hitler, especially 
since it is known that many Finns—notably the Social 
Democrats and the trade union groups—are opposed 
to continuance of war with Russia, and would like 
to make peace if they could only shake off German 
influence. Finland’s dependence on Germany has 
meanwhile been increased by its isolation from the 
non-European world, which makes it necessary for 
the Finns to obtain essential supplies, notably wheat, 
from areas of Europe under Nazi control—or else 
face starvation. The elements in Finland who would 
prefer peace with Russia need concrete aid from the 
United Nations—not merely warnings to the govern- 
ment—if they are to resist Hitler. 


Confronted by intensification of Nazi pressure on 
Helsinki, which apparently took many Finns by sur- 
prise, Secretary of State Hull warned the Finns on 
June 6 that this country is watching closely to ascer- 
tain whether Hitler’s visit will lead to a greater de- 
gree of Finnish cooperation against the United Na- 
tions. This visit, Mr. Hull declared in a statement to 
the press, is “a deliberate ruse on the part of the 
Germans to compromise Finland further in the eyes 
of the anti-Axis world and a cover for the desperate 
attempt of Hitler to induce Finland to make further 
contributions to Axis military campaigns.” 


FINLAND BETWEEN TWO FIRES. Finland’s 
predicament reveals the difficulties of small nations 
fated by their geographic position to live between 
conflicting great powers. There is little doubt that the 
majority of Finns have resented Russian rule and 
Russian influence—not merely since the establish- 
ment of the Soviet government, but since 1809, when 
Tsarist Russia obtained control over Finland, for- 
metly a province of Sweden. When the Finns 
achieved their independence in the spring of 1917, 
before the Bolshevik revolution in Russia, they were 
finally determined to uproot every vestige of Russian 
domination, once and for all. 

Under the circumstances, Russia's demands in 1939 
for rectification of frontiers and cession of bases on 
Finnish territory—whose rejection by Helsinki pre- 
Cipitated the Soviet-Finnish war—appeared to the 
Finns as a fresh attempt by Russia to establish its 
control over their country. Yet from the Russian point 
of view these demands seemed legitimate. The Krem- 
lin feared that Germany would seek to use Finnish 
bases for an attack on the Soviet Union—a suspicion 
justified by subsequent events. But the fact that Fin- 
land fears Russia does not mean that it likes Ger- 
Many, or wants to exchange former Russian domina- 
tion for that of the Reich. The Finns’ dilemma is that, 
in resisting the encroachments of one of their neigh- 


Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: RELIGION AND THE COMING PEACE 

Speaker: Dr. George N. Shuster, President, Hunter 
College; Member, FPA Board of Directors 

Date: Sunday, June 14 

Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 


For station, please consult your local news paper 











bors, they frequently find it necessary to accept aid, 
unwelcome as it may be, from the other. 


RUSSIA’S TERRITORIAL CLAIMS. During the 
negotiations conducted for the past few weeks by 
Soviet representatives in London and Washington 
regarding post-war settlements, Moscow is reported 
to have indicated that, after the war, it would seek 
control, in some form or other, of the Baltic states— 
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania—and would want to 
obtain from Finland certain strategic bases and 
islands regarded as essential for the defense of Len- 
ingrad. These demands raise baffling problems for 
the United States and Britain, which in the Atlantic 
Charter pledged themselves to restore the indepen- 
dence of conquered countries. Will they, while de- 
manding restoration of an independent Poland and 
Czechoslovakia, acquiesce in the occupation by Rus- 
sia of the Baltic states and of key points in Finland, 
irrespective of the wishes of the populations? Or will 
internal revolutions meanwhile have altered the 
views of the inhabitants of these territories ? 


So far, Washington has taken the view that the 
United Nations do not seek territorial aggrandize-- 
ment, and that adjustment of disputed territorial 
questions should be postponed until after the war 
—thus seeking to avoid the kind of wartime com- 
mitments that the Allies made in the secret treaties 
of 1914-18. At the same time, it is already clear 
that, if Russia does succeed in defeating Germany, 
it will be in a position to decide the fate of Eastern 
Europe, with or without the acquiescence of Britain 
and the United States. Would Russia, in the event of 
victory, wish to preserve the goodwill of the Western 
powers, and exercise self-restraint in its territorial 
claims? The answer to this question will depend, in 
large part, on the extent of responsibility that the 
United States may be ready to assume, after the war, 
for the policing and reconstruction of Europe. For 
only if the European continent, through federation 
or other form of political and economic reorganiza- 
tion, is assured some measure of stability and secur- 
ity, would it be possible for both Germany and Rus- 
sia eventually to lay aside their mutual fears and 
suspicions and thus, in turn, alleviate the anxieties 
of the small states that lie between them. These small 
states, for their part, would have to learn that they 
can best contribute to the stability and security of the 
continent by curbing their sometimes excessive na- 














tionalism, developed as a reaction against the cen- 
turies-old efforts of their neighbors to Germanize 


BRITISH BOMBINGS DEMONSTRATE GROWING ALLIED AIR STRENGTH 


The recent British bombing raids on western Ger- 
many, unprecedented in their intensity, and the rela- 
tively weak defense presented by the Nazis, have 
been interpreted by some observers, especially in the 
United States, as a definite turning-point in the war. 
While it is patently dangerous to assume that the 
Germans have lost much of their vaunted and proven 
striking power, the R.A.F. has demonstrated that 
Allied air strength is now great enough to take the 
offensive on a major scale. 

EFFECT OF RAIDS. On six nights between May 
30 and June 6, the British sent more than 7,000 
planes over Nazi Europe and dropped 3,000 tons of 
bombs on Cologne, 1,000 tons on the Ruhr valley, 
and smaller amounts on German port cities and in- 
stallations in the occupied zones. Eight square miles 
or about one-twelfth of the metropolitan area of 
Cologne was laid in ruins and damage inflicted on 
railway yards, docks, and factories producing chem- 
icals, synthetic rubber, and aircraft and submarine 
engines. Less specific claims have been made regard- 
ing the effect of the raids on the crowded Ruhr in- 
dustrial region, 40 miles long and 15 miles wide, 
which before the war accounted for 65 percent of 
Germany's coal production and 75 per cent of its 
iron, steel and munitions. 

. In these raids the British employed on a larger 
scale the bombing pattern tried on Luebeck and Ros- 
tov. Until the end of 1941, the R.A.F. attempted to 
hit specific targets of high military importance—air- 
craft factories, aluminum works, synthetic oil plants, 
and rail centers. Experience proved that such attacks 
by precision bombing were ineffectual, leading the 
British to shift to area bombing which calls for the 
intensive pounding of a specified sector in the ex- 
pectation that at least some of the missiles will de- 
stroy communications, disrupt industrial operations, 
and hit important plants. 

Whether the R.A.F. will be able to continue strik- 
ing at Germany, “city by city,” as Prime Minister 
_ Winston Churchill has promised, depends on several 
factors. One is the continued delivery of bombing 
planes from the United States. As a result of the visit 
of Captain Oliver Lyttelton, British Minister of Pro- 
duction to Washington, this country’s plane industry 
was assigned, under a combined production planning 
scheme announced on June 7, to concentrate on 
bombing craft. These planes must have a long range 


Page Four 








es 


or Russify the non-German and non-Russian popula. 
tions of Eastern Europe. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


if the air offensive is to succeed, for besides the ip. 
dustrial centers in the Rhine-Ruhr area, the Nag} 
possess considerable arms production facilities jg 
Bavaria, Czechoslovakia and Silesia. Apparently th 
have moved some plants from the west to these mo 
sheltered sites since the war began. From British aig 
bases, it is 250 to 350 miles to Cologne and the Ruhr, 
but two or three times farther to the eastern objec. 
tives. The Germans, with bases only 25 miles from 
Britain, still enjoy the advantage of proximity. 
Nor should it be assumed that the German indus. 
trial machine is surpassed by the Allies. According 
to an American estimate of May 1942, war produc | 
tion in the Reich continues at an annual level of $45 | 
billion, although it does not seem to be increasing. 











—_ - 


Vou. > 


With the $10 billion contribution of the satellite, betwe 
states in Europe, the Axis enjoys a distinct superiority | States 


over Britain with $20 billion output and the Soviet 
Union with perhaps $15 billion. As the United States 
arms output passes the yearly rate of $36 billion, it is 
able to send increasing quantities of matériel to the| 
European war fronts. It should be remembered, how- 
ever, that we are still using a considerable part of 
our energy in building plants to make arms, and ships 
to transport them, and that we must provision the 
Far Eastern forces as well as Britain and Russia. 


Strategically, the British raids constitute at least 
a partial reply to the Russians’ demands for a West- 
ern front. They reduce the quantity of matériel which 
might be employed in the Ukraine or Crimea, and 
they may compel the Nazis to rush squadrons of de- 
fensive aircraft from the Russian battlelines. The 
aerial attacks may also be considered as part of the 
preliminary process of softening up the enemy’s de: 
fenses in Western Europe in preparation for an in 
vasion of the continent. The debarkation of a large 
American Army contingent in Northern Ireland in 
mid-May was interpreted in some quarters as a move 
to free Britain's home forces for action, presumably 
across the English Channel, while General George 
C. Marshall, Chief of Staff of the United States 
Army, suggested in an address at West Point on May 
29 that our troops would join in an assault on Naz 
held Europe. While these plans may be unfulfilled for 
weeks or months, they bolster Allied morale and give 
new hope to the peoples of the occupied countries. 


Louis E. FRECHTLING 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 


34, JuNE 12, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


1942. 


Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor; Davin H. Popper, Associate Editor. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


a * 


Three Dollars a Year. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Frank Ross McCoy, President; Witttam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lest, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2 


Incorporated. National 


2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





sent é 
both 
comp 
of pr 
purel 
it be 
main 
agret 
sumr 
Al 
treat 
eign 
Mol 
objer 
total 
two 
the 
and 
on t 
ance 
atte 
the 
nuc 
wort 
C 
tion 
aff 
sup 
Clat 
bee 
tun 
of | 
tea 
urs 
19. 


fur 


