








nal 


arts 
‘ive 
» to 


ace 


oub- 
ides 
Lt. 
five 
Why 
ines 
yrint 
only 


ght- 
orld 


3S 
$3 


PERIODICAL R@OA Entered as 2nd class matter 


iQA4 


ai F 


JAN v 





1943 a 


Ann A anti nv ne? 2% 
atawe ein * 4+ * miCche 


| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 




















Vou. XXIII, No. 11 


Decempmr 81, 1948 





IS U.S. PREPARED TO LIVE IN A CHANGED WORLD? 


RESIDENT ROOSEVELT’S announcement on 

Christmas Eve that General Eisenhower had been 
appointed to lead the invasion of Europe from the 
north and west has given new impetus to public 
speculation concerning the time and place of inva- 
sion, the period that must ensue before the United 
Nations can achieve victory over Germany, and the 
cost victory will entail. The President himself, and 
several of his closest associates have expressed seri- 
ous concern regarding what they consider the dan- 
getous Over-optimism prevailing in this country. To 
offset this trend, it was anonymously indicated from 
high sources in Washington on December 22 that 
the nation must steel itself for heavy losses of lives— 
possibly 500,000—in the course of the next few 
months. 


LEADERS ENCOURAGE OPTIMISM. It is un- 
questionably true that fighting men and travelers re- 
turning from the various battlefronts find the Amer- 
ican people disturbingly light-hearted as compared 
with peoples in other continents who have endured 
wat for between four and twelve years. In all fairness, 
however, it should be said that such optimism as 
does exist about an early termination of the war in 
Europe is due, first of all, to the confident predictions 
of our political and military leaders. When Gen- 
eral Eisenhower, referring to the European theatre 
of war, declares flatly that ‘‘we shall win in 1944” 
it is too much to expect that the man and woman in 
the street should act, contrary to such expert opinion, 
as if the war might go on in Europe until 1945 or 
1946. The mere intimation that victory may be with- 
in our grasp—great as its cost is bound to prove— 
inevitably has the effect of turning the minds of 
civilians, and even soldiers, to the manifold prob- 
lems of reconversion and readjustment to peacetime 
conditions. And, as these problems are weighed, it is 
equally inevitable that some of the fundamental con- 
troversies over social and economic issues latent in 


this country long before the war should again come 
to the fore. In the United States, as in Britain, and 
even in lands still under Nazi occupation, many 
people fear that, as war pressures are relaxed, there 
will develop an almost irresistible tendency on the 
part of some groups to return to pre-war conditions, 
and that the promises of reform held out to human 
beings everywhere as the guerdon of victory will re- 
main unfulfilled. General Eisenhower did warn that, 
to achieve victory in Europe in 1944, it will be neces- 
sary ‘for every man and woman, all the way from the 
front line to the remotest hamlet” of Britain and the 
United States “to do his or her full duty.” But there 
might be a greater surge of enthusiasm on our home 
front, where the goad of immediate danger is absent, 
if it were felt more uniformly that victory would be 
not merely the end of war, but the beginning of an 
equally forceful struggle against the social and eco- 
nomic maladjustments that, in our time, have bred 
war and revolution. 


GAP BETWEEN U.S. AND EUROPE. It is, of 
course, true that we in this country have suffered rela- 
tively so little from the war that it is sometimes 
well-nigh impossible for us to imagine the agony of 
others. The conquered peoples of the continent, and 
to a lesser extent the British, have lived through such 
cruel hours, have had to rethink so many basic issues 
of life and death, that they are further away from 
us today than if we and they were living in different 
periods of history. Their wartime suffering may 
prove—one must hope it will prove—their post-war 
salvation. For, shorn of all illusion, forced to draw 
strength from the only values tyranny cannot destroy, 
they may have greater courage than ourselves in fac- 
ing the problems of post-war reconstruction. Here, 
our present safety promises to be our future danger. 
It may well happen that, when the war is over, Eu- 
rope, and Britain too, will seem to us to have passed 
through a revolution we have not shared—not merely 

















a political and economic change, but a spiritual revo- 
lution. We shall then be faced with the choice of 
either accepting the new values they have forged in 
the midst of war and resistance, or rejecting them— 
and perhaps becoming, in the eyes of the world, a 
citadel of conservatism, even reaction. 

There are, obviously, certain experiences we have 
no occasion to undergo. We have no reason for 
trudging, scantily clad, through icy wastes, as Rus- 
sian civilians—old men, women and children—did 
when they fled from the German invaders; or seek- 
ing precarious refuge in mountain fastnesses, as the 
Yugoslav Partisans, in their hegira revealed last week 
by the New York Times, were forced to do before 
they could strike at the enemy; or seeing our children 
starve, as in China, or killed by bombs, as in Rotter- 
dam and London. But the fact remains that many 
Americans in our armed forces will have gone 
through similar or worse experiences before the war 
is over—and that to them the safety and relative 
plenty in which we live may seem as remote and 
Strange as to the conquered peoples of Europe. To 
the extent that we can narrow the gap which now 
separates us from our fighting men, as well as from 
the peoples of other United Nations, we shall be 
not only strengthening ourselves for the blows that 
are to come. We shall be making an investment in 
the reconstruction which we, in common, with others 
now fighting on our side, must undertake once war 
is over. 


OCCUPIED COUNTRIES WANT AID—NOT TUTELAGE—FROM ALLIES 


When President Roosevelt declared in his Christ- 
mas Eve address that ‘‘the rights of each nation to 
freedom must be measured by the willingness of that 
nation to fight for freedom,” he gave his answer to 
a question that is assuming paramount importance 
in our relations with Europe: What role will the 
underground resistance groups and the armies of 
liberation in the occupied countries play in the Allied 
invasion of the continent? In his statement the Pres- 
ident encouraged the peoples of Europe to be active 
participants in the forthcoming struggle and not 
merely passive observers of what will undoubtedly 
be a long and bitter fight between the Allied and 
German armies. Recent experience in Italy, where 
most of the people have stood by while the Allies 
have been inching up the peninsula, has given rise 
to the view that the liberated countries cannot be de- 
pended on to supplement the invading forces’ efforts 
against the Nazis. Italy, however, cannot be regarded 
as typical of the occupied countries. Not only had it 
been a full-fledged partner of Nazi Germany but 
also, for an entire generation, its Fascist régime had 
wiped out local initiative and curbed the development 
of political leadership. 


ALLIES IN YUGOSLAVIA AND FRANCE. The 


PageTwo 








— 


When hostilities cease, the United Nations, as wel 
as the Axis countries, will have to resume life unde 
conditions that may have been altered beyond recog 
nition. Such change will prove most difficult for thoy 
who were fortunate enough to know something of 
the stability and security which, in some countries y 
least, characterized the pre-1914 period. But, as th 
British economist Geoffrey Crowther has pointed out 
those born since 1900 have never known anything 
but insecurity. They have seen so many values de 
valued, so many flags hauled down, so many instity 
tions shaken or destroyed that, whatever else 
may be, they cannot be traditionalists. The genem 
tion now coming to power all over the world has on 
thing in common: a fearlessness born of having out 
lived fear. Many of them, having lost practically all 
that the individual wants to possess—family, friends 
property—may prove capable of rising above mer 
personal considerations. These, for better or worse 
will be the leaders of the post-war period. We ir 
this country must take heed not to be frightened of 
by such new leaders simply because they do not con 
form to the mental picture we have of Europe as it 
was before 1939. We, too, although we have los 
so much less, must be prepared to embody our ideas 
about a better world after the war not merely in fine 
phrases, but in concrete acts of collaboration with 
the new forces emerging out of the holocaust. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





belief that a distinction exists between Italy and 
Nazi-occupied countries is also borne out by recent 
reliable reports of the rise of large-scale resistanc 
groups. In Yugoslavia, according to trustworthy wit 
nesses, 250,000 men and women now belong to Mat 
shal Tito’s Partisan movement—a force that, in rela 
tion to population, would be comparable to two mil 
lion in the United States. The part these Yugoslav 
Partisans will play in the liberation of their county 
is, moreover, no longer simply a matter of specule 
tion, for they already control large stretches of theit 
national territory, coordinate their assaults on Ger 
man communications and strongholds with Allied ait 
attacks, and make use of Anglo-American supplies 
and military advisers. 


In France, as in Yugoslavia, evidence is accumulat 
ing that, when the long-awaited Anglo-American it 
vasion is launched, it will not encounter inert mass¢s 
The French Committee of National Liberation i 
Algiers has repeatedly asserted that the forces o 
resistance at home are ready not only to fight but 
also to control their own affairs as soon as the Nazi 
are expelled. Speaking on behalf of the resistant 
movement, the Committee has argued that the AMG 
—which has been training some of its men to handle 








Frot 
cout 
thei: 
certi 
Stat 
plar 
cons 
crea 
tries 
has 

ack 


obli 
had 
194 


witl 


ee, 





REFS) | 





ge es I} 


3 of 


Out, 
hing 


titu. 


era} 
One 
Out: 
y all 
nds, 
nere 
OFse, 


1 of 
COM 
as it 

los 
ideas } 
| fine 


with 





tanc 
AMG 
andle 








—_- 
—_-_ 





French affairs—should not be established in France, 
because that country, being one of the United Na- 
tions, deserves to be treated differently from the 
Axis. As an alternative to AMG the Committee pro- 
posed on December 18 its own plan for setting up a 
temporary post-invasion régime in France. Accord- 
ing to this plan, municipal elections would be held 
as soon as approximately half of France is liberated, 
and the local councils so chosen would select dele- 
gates to a provisional national assembly. This as- 
sembly would, in turn, name the chief of the pro- 
visional government, who would then form a cabinet 
of representative men, selected both from among 
those who stayed in France and from refugees in 
Algiers and London. According to this proposal, the 
provisional government would function until the re- 
turn from Germany of millions of prisoners of war 
and war-workers made possible the holding of a 
regular national election. 


A SOUND ANGLO-AMERICAN POLICY. 
From these facts, which indicate that the occupied 
countries are determined to play an active role in 
their own liberation and reconstruction, there follow 
certain corollaries which Britain and the United 
States would do well to note as their armies perfect 
plans for invading Europe. Chief among these is the 
consideration that it is not possible for the Allies to 
create the forces of liberation within occupied coun- 
tries according to their own specifications. This fact 
has been somewhat belatedly and as yet incompletely 
acknowledged by Britain and the United States in 
the case of Yugoslavia. There the Allies have been 
obliged to concede that the government-in-exile they 
had dealt with as the official Yugoslav authority since 
1941 is powerless to control events at home, whereas 
the new Partisan group, which came into existence 
without Allied blessing, is assuming dominant power. 
When, therefore, Marshal Tito demanded on De- 
cember 22 that the Allies acknowledge his régime in- 





What effect will the United States attitude toward 
the tariff, shipping, rubber, foreign lending and 
lend-lease have in influencing Britain’s post-war 
trade policy? READ— 
BRITAIN’S POST-WAR TRADE AND 
WORLD ECONOMY 
by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


December 15 issue of FOREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 





Page Three 





Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members $3. 

















stead of King Peter’s cabinet in Cairo, he was asking 
for recognition of an authority that already has its 
own army, police, cabinet, civil service, postal system, 
etc. At the same time, the French Committee has also 
extended its influence by bringing all organized anti- 
Nazi forces within France under its control. To be 
sure, neither the Yugoslav Partisans nor the French 
resistance movement comprises all the anti-Nazis in 
their respective countries, but the important point is 
that they do include those daring and active indi- 
viduals who can‘give the most valuable aid to the 
Allied invasion armies. 

Judging from the strength of the Yugoslav and 
French resistance groups which have sprung up al- 
most in spite of the Anglo-American attitude toward 
them, the future of these liberated countries will be 
largely in their hands. Since these organizations have 
been welded together not only by the presence of a 
foreign invader on the soil of their homelands, but 
also by the determination that pre-war conditions shall 
not be restored, it may be expected that their lead- 
ers will insist on far-reaching post-war reforms. Un- 
der these circumstances, any attempt on the part of 
Britain and the United States to restore the pre-war 
political and social order would encounter active o 
position from the liberated nations. If workable fu- 
ture relations are to be developed between Britain. 
and the United States on the one hand, and the lib- 
erated European countries on the other, it is essential 
that the invading powers treat the post-war goals of 
the resistance movements with sympathy and under- 


standing. Winirrep N. HADsgEL 





Lessons of My Life, by The Rt. Hon. Lord Vansittart. New 
York, Knopf, 1948. $3.00 


With “Vansittartism” a foremost subject of debate, this 
collection of essays is a timely and brilliantly written ex- 
position of the view that the German menace is not Nazism 
but Militarism, which can be overcome only by a process 
of reeducation controlled by the United Nations. 


Henry Ponsonby—Queen Victoria’s Private Secretary, by 
Sir A. Ponsonby. New York, Macmillan, 1943. $3.75 
Collected letters of and to a little-known but very im- 

portant official—a study in patience and tact. 


Men of Maryknoll, by James Keller and Meyer Berger 
New York, Scribner, 1943. $2.00 
Stories of missionaries trained at Maryknoll-on-the- 
Hudson and what befell them in the far places of the earth. 
The tale of the siege of Hongkong is particularly moving. 


The Land of the Great Image, by Maurice Collis. New 
York, Knopf, 1943. $3.00 
Story of a Portuguese friar in 17th century Arakan, 
deftly raising and discussing numerous moral and political 
questions of the most timely interest. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 11, DeceMBER 31, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President ; Dorotny F. Lugt, Secretary; Vera Micugeres Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


One month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ss 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





Washington News Letter 














Dec. 27.—The revolution of December 20 which 
forced General Enrique Pefiaranda del Castillo from 
the Presidency of Bolivia and brought to power 
Major Gualberto Villarroel, has confronted the State 
Department with an embarrassing dilemma. The 
problem is to decide, on the basis of available evi- 
dence, whether Pefiaranda’s ouster was inspired by 
sinister Nazi or Argentine elements who took ad- 
vantage of internal unrest for their own ends, or by 
a genuine revolt against the social repressions of his 
régime, which had already provoked several crises. 

It is too early as yet to assert that the National 
Revolutionary Movement, which under the leader- 
ship of Victor Estenssoro—recently back from a visit 
to Argentina—carried out the coup, is liberal or il- 
liberal. What is undeniable is that Bolivia had long 
been ripe for political violence. The miserable work- 
ing and living conditions of the tin miners, the coun- 
try’s most important industrial workers, had encour- 
aged the activities of extremist elements, both fascist 
and communist. Moreover, Bolivia, like many other 
countries of Latin America, is readily influenced by 
attacks against foreign capital—and, since a large 
part of the foreign capital invested in the tin mines is 
either British or American, such attacks, even without 
Nazi inspiration, easily take the form of criticism of 
Britain and the United States. 

The State Department’s embarrassment over the 
revolt is due in considerable part to the fact that the 
United States government had displayed friendship 
for Pefiaranda—who visited this country in May at 
the invitation of President Roosevelt—and had 
shown confidence that his home policies, frequently 
criticized in Bolivia, would not endanger his régime. 
It was Pefiaranda who took Bolivia into the war on 
the United Nations’ side and kept supplies of Bo- 
livian tin moving northward to the smelter at Texas 
City, Texas, after Far Eastern tin sources had fallen 
into Japanese hands. 

CLIMAX TO YEAR OF TROUBLE. Acute dis- 
satisfaction with Pefiaranda, who was inaugurated on 
April 12, 1940, was aroused among some groups of 
the Bolivian population by the massacre of Catavi 
on December 21, 1942, when soldiers, at the orders 
of the government, fired at a crowd of 8,000 striking 
miners, killing 19. A Bolivian-American Commission, 
set up soon afterwards under the chairmanship of 
Justice Calvert Magruder of the Federal Circuit 
Court in Boston, investigated the conditions of these 
miners and found a low wage-scale and an absence 
of elementary safety precautions. 


On December 27 Secretary of State Hull said that 
recognition of the Villarroel government would be 
withheld until the countries of the Western Hemi. 
sphere could determine whether the revolt had been 
inspired by Axis sympathizers. Pefiaranda, who fled to 
Arica, Chile, has already stated that the revolution 
was organized and carried out by Nazis. According to 





Carlos Montenegro, new Minister of Agriculture, the | 


revolution was “popular” and “democratic” and 
looked “toward better living conditions in the country 
through improvement of economic and social condi- 
tions and the establishment of justice.’’” However, 
Americans have noted that the revolt was headed by 
a group of army leaders who, in recent years, had 
expressed vigorous anti-Semitic and anti-democratic 
views, and are therefore taking with a grain of salt 
the new government's official professions of support 
for the “common man.” 


OTHER CAUSES BEHIND REVOLT. While 
the controversy over conditions in the tin mines may 
have been an immediate cause of the Bolivian revolt, 
at least two other factors deserve consideration. First 
of all, the Villarroel régime lost no time in making 
a bid to nationalist sentiment by reiterating Bolivia's 
historic claim to a land corridor to the Pacific Ocean 
across the territory of Chile. The assertion of this 
claim in the midst of a global war in which all of 
the countries of Latin America with the notable ex- 
ception of Argentina are in one way or another en- 
gaged, injects a dangerous element into Wester 
Hemisphere relations, threatening to precipitate a 
territorial conflict. Second, Argentina has not only 
a political but also an economic interest in Bolivia, 
which it may attempt to strengthen at this time with 
the aid of the new government. It will be recalled 
that when the pro-Nazi government of German 
Busch expropriated the oil properties of the Standard 
Oil Company in 1937—only to find that it lacked 
both technicians and equipment to develop them— 
Argentina, which needs oil, promptly offered its as- 
sistance. The Argentines were also definitely dis- 
turbed last June when Brazil offered landlocked 
Bolivia free port facilities in Santos with the pro- 
posal that a new railway line be built to that port, a 
development which might have diverted Bolivian 
oil from the Argentine market. Social ideology may 
well be at stake in the Estenssoro revolt. But so als? 
are the age-long objects of controversy between na 
tions—strategic territories and raw materials. 


BLamrm BOLLES 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


~ 


— ——w 











1918 


pes 


Vou. X 


—— 


PRO 


N° 
the p 
ate ul 
newly 
sia al 
claim: 
natiot 
cussio 
popul 
an iss 
A} 
ern F 
Polis: 
Russ: 
gle f 
Ukra 
ous | 
grou: 
lowit 
teent 
three 
whic 
Russ 
taine 
non- 
vary 
the 
quir 
Fi 
Rus: 
witl 
Rus 
Pils 
as { 
ove: 
Litl 
in , 
avo 


