nore 
pfo- 


> to 


dd 


hine 
ance 


pfo- 
ative 
1 On 
May 
tion 
tude 
ome 
must 
ses." 

Mr. 
juan: 
uced 
ving 
-nices 


spite 
who 
mpt 
t Of 


Pp 
nim- 





‘ense | 
e of 

le to | 
em: 
sup 
TESS, 
lead. 
NE 





= “ Uiy 6 194} 
~iLorary 


Bs er Af te 
wavy Oi 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vo. XX, No. 33 


—_ 


JUNE 6, 1941 





THE WAR OF DIPLOMACY IN EAST ASIA 


[N the Far East, as in Europe, an undisguised diplo- 
matic battle of great scope, complexity and im- 
portance has accompanied the actual fighting during 
recent weeks. Four or five great powers, and twice as 
many dependencies, are directly involved in the strug- 
gle between the Anglo-American front and the Axis 
for control of Tokyo's policy. Germany and Italy are 
linked to Japan by military alliance, and thus have 
the inside track, particularly since Japan’s objectives 
lie mainly in the Anglo-American sphere. Britain 
and the United States have waged a defensive battle, 
strengthening their armed positions in the Pacific on 
the one hand, while seeking to avoid an open break 
with Japan on the other. 


STRENGTHENING PACIFIC DEFENSES. 
Japan’s greatest liability, the war in China, represents 
the most decisive advantage for Anglo-American de- 
fense in the Far East. After nearly four years of 
struggle, the vast effort required to hold the widely 
scattered Japanese battle-lines in China still con- 
tinues to undermine Tokyo’s economic and military 
fesuurces. Direct assistance to the Chinese armies thus 
constitutes a primary aspect of Anglo-American de- 
fense activities in Asia. For the first time since 1937, 
shipments of American planes are now reaching 
China, although much greater supplies of heavy 
munitions must be sent before the Chinese forces will 
be able to engage in large-scale offensive action. 


In the strictly diplomatic sphere, moreover, the fur- 
ther definition of American pos.-war aims, embodied 
in the exchange of letters on May 26 and 31 between 
Secretary Hull and Quo Tai-chi, new Chinese Foreign 
Minister, will prove a distinct psychological advan- 
tage in China. Secretary Hull’s letter stated that the 
American government “expects when conditions of 
peace again prevail to move rapidly, by processes of 
orderly negotiation and agreement with the Chinese 
Government, toward relinquishment of the last of 
certain rights of a special character which this coun- 


try, together with other countries, has long possessed 
in China by virtue of agreements providing for extra- 
territorial jurisdiction and related practices.” While 
this statement emphasized the necessity of post-war 
negotiation before the extraterritorial system in China 
is surrendered, it will be welcomed by Chinese as a 
pledge of greater definiteness than any previously 
made. 

Immediate prospects on China’s home front are 
more hopeful than for some time past. Recent dis- 
patches from Chungking, indicating that the Eighth 
Route Army is cooperating in the defense of Shansi 
province through offensives undertaken in the regions 
assigned to it, have disproved Japanese-inspired ru- 
mors to the contrary. On the other hand, the editorial 
statement in the influential Chungking newspaper, 
the Ta Kung Pao, urging a direct meeting between 
Chiang Kai-shek and Mao Tse-tung, chief Commu- 
nist leader, to settle all outstanding issues, indicates 
that Kuomintang-Communist relations have still not 
been stabilized since the attack on the Fourth Route 
Army’s rear guard unit in January. The period of 
greatest tension, it is now known, was reached early in 
April, following a conference at Sian between Gen- 
eral Ho Ying-chin, War Minister, and the ranking 
Kuomintang commanders in the north, at which plans 
for a general offensive against the Eighth Route 
Army’s garrison area were considered. Several of the 
leading generals are said to have objected to such 
a drastic step, which would have meant large-scale 
civil strife, and the Kuomintang-Communist differ- 
ences were again patched up when renewed Japanese 
offensives occurred. Continued unity in China is more 
important even than munitions, and it may be pre- 
sumed that American diplomacy is following up the 
efforts toward that end made by Lauchlin Currie dur- 
ing his special mission to Chungking. 


Aside from the major issues centering around the 
maintenance of China’s defense, Britain and the 


te ae EE Ss is. Se aes 
4 


Bs 
ba 
a 
: 
1 


be nar 


para as 


Sie SS 


oe aks 

















United States are also cooperating to strengthen the 
defenses of the strategic region of southeast Asia. 
The resistance which Singapore, the Netherlands East 
Indies and the Philippines can offer is today much 
more formidable than a year ago. All previous mili- 
tary estimates, however, have included the full Amer- 
ican Pacific Fleet in any discussion of the defenses of 
southeast Asia. Indications that part of the Pacific 
Fleet has now been transferred to the Atlantic may 
force a revision of these calculations, although there 
is as yet no definite evidence that the battleships of 
the Hawaiian naval forces have left the Pacific. 

AVOIDING A SHOWDOWN. At the same time, 
Anglo-American policy in the Far East has been care- 
fully directed so as to avoid measures which might 
appear provocative to Japan and thus force a show- 
down. The most recent, and most dramatic, instance 
of this policy was the President’s failure to mention 
Japan at any point in his fireside chat of May 27, 
which has been interpreted as a direct bid to the Jap- 
anese moderates. 

Late developments on the embargo front indicate a 
slight stiffening of the Anglo-American attitude. On 
May 29 the provisions of the export-import control 
act were extended to the Philippines, where Japan 
had been making record purchases of cocoanut oil, 
chromite, copper, manganese and hemp during the 
first four months of 1941. In the Netherlands Indies, 
since last November, Japan has been permitted by 
agreement to increase its annual oil purchases from 
494,000 to 1,800,000 tons; on the other hand, the 
demands of the Japanese economic mission at Batavia 
for larger quotas of oil and other products, pressed 
through months of negotiations, have been steadily 
rejected by the Netherlands authorities. At the end 
of May the Japanese delegates, backed by their home 
authorities, demanded a final answer by June 5 or 6, 
when the negotiations are expected to reach a crisis. 

Direct exports to Japan from the United States are 
the clearest example of pressure applied up to a cer- 
tain point, and then not carried further. In the first 





Page Two — 





— 


quarter of 1941, embargoes and licensing control gy 
American exports to Japan by nearly half. Raw cottop 
contributed the major share of this decline, but sh 
decreases were also registered in certain war my. 
terials, especially iron and steel products and machine 
tools. On the other hand, the export of petroleyp 
products, at $11,713,000, was rather above the cop. 
responding 1940 figure of $10,252,000, despite the 
embargo levied on high-test aviation gasoline. 

CAN AGREEMENT BE REACHED? Several te. 
ports during the past few weeks, only one of whic) 
offered specific details, have suggested that negotia. 
tions for a comprehensive Japanese-American agree 
ment on Far Eastern issues are now taking place, 
Official sources at Tokyo and Washington, however, 
have failed to confirm these reports. 


The major difficulties which have confronted , 
Far Eastern settlement since 1937 still exist. After 
nearly four years of war, it is difficult to see how 
Japan could accept any terms which did not at leas 
include North China. Recent efforts of the Japanes 
conservatives to force a withdrawal from parts of 
China were defiantly rejected by the army leaders, 
who proceeded to stage a series of new offensives, 
Nor can China, after its huge losses in men and te 
sources, be expected to accept a peace which meant 
the loss of its northern provinces. While a minority in 
Chungking might be willing to accept such a peace, 
it would undoubtedly be rejected by the majority. 

It may be doubted, then, that Anglo-American pol. 
icy, through a combination of pressure allied with 
extensive concessions, will be able to set the stage for 
a final settlement in the Far East at the present time. 
The bare possibility that the American fleet might be 
forced to concentrate in the Atlantic would tend to 
strengthen the hands of the extremists at Tokyo. Un- 
der these conditions, the crisis in the Pacific still 
looms ahead and may develop at the most awkward 
moment for Britain and the United States. 


T. A. Bisson 


AXIS PREPARES NEW THRUST IN NEAR EAST 


Following closely the 12-day battle for Crete, the 
meeting of Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini at the 
Brenner Pass on June 2 presages the opening of a 
new phase of the war. The two dictators may have 
discussed measures to counteract the increasing im- 
portance of American aid to Great Britain and the 





READ... 


TOWARD A NEW WORLD ORDER 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


This Foreign Policy Report, just published, presents 
a broad analysis of peace aims, outlining reconstruc- 
tion proposals along social, political and economic 
ts is Bi « ¢ 6 © «* 25c. 











next move to be made in the eastern Mediterranean, 
where the British forces are seriously weakened by 
losses of men and matériel in the Greek and Cretan 
campaigns. War in the Near East was also probably 


—_ 





one of the subjects considered during the visit paid 
by General Weygand to Marshal Pétain on June 2 
The crisis in Franco-British relations, sharpened by 
Admiral Darlan’s speech of May 31 in which he 
openly assailed Britain for blocking Franco-German 
“collaboration,” reached a climax in Syria this week, 
when it was reported that German troops were land 
ing in that French mandate while British troops wett 
being concentrated on the Syria-Palestine border. 


While previous German victories have been wof 








— 


on lan 
stratin 
streng 
Crete 
gage f 
for 
consid 
sea, 0 
combi 
ish fo 
to giv 
conte: 
Pos 
the sé 
and a 
the B 
neare 
been 
empl 
tratio 
place 
TI 
of th 
stiffe 
invas 
Briti 
Nazi 
the | 
sibly 
and 
A 
arm. 
Iraq 
ish | 
Pers 
raise 
pare 
Axi 
tial 
Syri 
ern 
line 
fore 
will 
dra 
Gu 
I 
con 
the 
dir 
ma 
Ira 


FO! 
Hea 
Ente 


€ 


FSERPBSS2 I 


tia. 
ree. 
ace, 
ver 


fter 
10W 
Cast 


; of 
lets, 
ves, 
fe 
cant 
y in 
ace, 


pol 
with 
for 
ime. 
t be 
d to 
Un- 
still 
yard 


ean, 
1 by 
etan 
ably 
aid 
e 2, 
1 by 
| he 
nan 
eek, 
ind- 
vere 


won 








| 











on land, the battle of Crete is significant in demon- 
strating that a power possessing overwhelming air 
strength can cross the 75 miles of open sea separating 
Crete fiom the Greek mainland and successfully en- 
gage forces depending primarily on naval superiority 
for their protection. British sea power, previously 
considered dominant in the eastern end of the inland 
sea, NOW appears much less decisive. This factor, 
combined with the comparative weakness of the Brit- 
ish forces in armored vehicles and airplanes, seems 
to give the Nazis a preponderance of strength in the 
contest for the gateways to the Indian Ocean. 

Possession of Crete enables the Germans to cover 
the seaward flank of the Axis forces in North Africa 
and also to take the next step toward the east. Cyprus, 
the British island lying about equidistant from the 
nearest Dodecanese Island and Palestinian bases, has 
been weakly defended in the past. The Germans may 
employ it as a springboard to Syria, where an infil- 
tration of German air units and tourists has already 
placed them in control of many of Syria’s 30 airfields. 

Thus far, the British have respected the integrity 
of the French mandate, although London’s gradually 
stiffening attitude toward Vichy may portend an early 
invasion of Syria from Palestine. At this stage, the 
British would expect to meet little resistance, for the 
Nazis have not had time to organize their bases, while 
the French forces themselves are composed of pos- 
sibly 30,000 men, and are short of munitions, food 
and supplies. 

Axis plans in the Near East were set back by the 
armistice signed in Baghdad on May 31 between 
Iraqi representatives and the commander of the Brit- 
ish forces which had advanced from Basrah on the 
Persian Gulf. Rashid Ali Beg Gailani, who had 
raised the revolt against the British, fled to Iran, ap- 
parently having taken active measures before the 
Axis powers were able to furnish him with substan- 
tial aid. German detachments flown in by air from 
Syria continue to hold the valuable oil fields of north- 
ern Iraq and may either destroy the wells and pipe- 
lines if the British approach or hold them until rein- 
torcements arrive. The loss of the Iragi oil supply 
will not, however, be critical for the British, who can 
draw on ample resources in Iran and the Persian 
Gulf area. 

Behind the battle-lines, the warring powers are 
competing for the support of the Arab population of 
the Near East. Hitherto, Britain’s policy has been 
directed solely toward the preservation of peace and 
maintenance of the status quo in the Arab states. The 
lraqi outbreak indicated, however, that dissident ele- 


Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: THE WAR AT SEA : 
Speaker: William T. Stone 

Date: June 8, 1941 

Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 








Station: NBC, blue network 





ments among the native populations were impressed 
by the military strength of the Axis and hoped to im- 
prove their position, if only for a brief moment, by 
striking at the empire which had long been dominant 
in the Arab world. The rebellion has been crushed 
and has not, for the moment at least, produced any 
sympathetic outbursts elsewhere. It has, however, 
evoked a statement from Foreign Minister Anthony 
Eden in London that Britain was prepared to support 
“any scheme that commands general approval” for 
the closer unity of the Arab peoples. This statement 
may be followed by more concrete proposals for post- 
war benefits to be granted to the Arabs if they resist 
the appeals of Axis propagandists and agents. 


Louts E. FRECHTLING 





The Struggle for North China, by George E. Taylor. $2.00 


Prerequisites to Peace in the Far East, by Nathaniel 
Peffer. $1.00 


Japan Since 1931, by Hugh Borton. $1.25 
Government in Japan, by Charles B. Fahs. $1.00 
Canada and the Far East—1940, by A. R. M. Lower. $1.25 


Far Eastern Trade of the United States, by Ethel B. Die- 
trich. $1.00 

Inquiry Series, Institute of Pacific Relations. New York, 

1940. 

These new additions to the Inquiry Series cover a wide 
variety of pertinent subjects. Nathaniel Peffer cogently out- 
lines the broad considerations which must govern a sound 
peace settlement in the Far East. George Taylor offers 
a penetrating analysis of the methods by which the North 
China guerrilla movement has prevented consolidation of 
the Peiping puppet régime. The well-rounded discussion 
of Canada’s relations with. the Far East deals with official 
policy, public opinion and the press, trade, immigration 
and defense. Two volumes cover recent political and eco- 
nomic developments in Japan, while a third reviews the 
scope and importance of American trade with east Asiatic 
countries. Nearly a score of books has now been issued 
under the Inquiry Series, which has become an indispensable 
reference library on Far Eastern conditions and problems. 


China and Some Phases of International Law, by L. Tung. 
New York, Oxford University Press, 1940. $2.25 


This carefully documented study, issued under the 
auspices of the China Institute of Pacific Relations, ex- 
amines the Chinese government’s attitude toward certain 
selected phases of international law in the modern period. 
The subjects treated include jurisdiction over territory, 
ships and persons, nationality, diplomatic intercourse, con- 
sular service, and the pacific settlement of international 
disputes. 


? 

a 
y 
ay 


Se SSE Fe ES 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 33, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Bw 181 


JUNE 6, 1941. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lager, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y.., 


National 


under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


ae 


ers 


Re dere Se 


ee ee 








Washington News Letter 





peed btag, 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JUNE 2.—In the past, Washington observers have 
invariably turned to Congress for the first reaction 
to public pronouncements, using Congressional opin- 
ion as a convenient yardstick against which to mea- 
sure the effect of major policies advanced by the ex- 
ecutive branch of the government. Last week, how- 
ever, many observers turned elsewhere for the re- 
sponse to President Roosevelt's speech of May 27, 
finding the customary yardstick inadequate for ap- 
praisal of this momentous pronouncement of Amer- 
ican policy. 

CLEARING THE WAY FOR ACTION. The 
reason was apparent. For in his statement of policy 
and his proclamation of “unlimited national emer- 
gency,” the President had laid the basis for a course 
of action which will be shaped by strategic necessity 
as interpreted by the Executive, without the advice of 
Congress. In summoning the American people and 
the entire Western Hemisphere to gird for whatever 
action might be necessary, in reasserting the doctrine 
of freedom of the seas, and in warning Germany 
that the United States would not retreat from its posi- 
tion, the President had carried American policy be- 
yond the point of Congressional debate. 

Congress itself was aware of the change. While 
the President's statement failed to achieve complete 
unity on Capitol Hill, the old alignments somehow 
appeared less important. Supporters of Administra- 
tion policy hailed the speech as a clear and courage- 
ous statement of the choice confronting the nation, 
but continued to call for action rather than words. 
A number of critics were won over by the President's 
cold logic, but the majority of isolationist leaders 
continued their opposition to convoys and declined 
to support a resolution sponsored by Senator Pepper 
calling for a vote of confidence on foreign policy. At 
his press conference on May 29, Mr. Roosevelt found 
it necessary to reassure Congress and public opinion 
that he had no immediate intention of asking for re- 
peal of the Neutrality Act or ordering the use of con- 
voys to assure deliveries to Britain. But despite this 
evidence of continued legislative opposition, Con- 
gress recognized that it had ceased to be a controlling 
factor, and accepted the national emergency as notice 
that future decisions would be taken by the Chief 
Executive whenever, in his opinion, action becomes 
necessary. 


SIGNIFICANCE OF EMERGENCY PROCLA- 
MATION. The significance of the emergency proc- 


lamation is not measured solely by the additiongl 
powers which it grants to the Executive. It is true, of 
course, that Congress had already granted broad 
emergency powers in legislation voted during the 
past few years, particularly since the fall of France ig 
June 1940. Under existing statutes the President had 
full authority to forbid or control exports, to requisi- 
tion materials essential to national defense, to regu. 
late foreign exchange, to enforce priorities, and tp 
requisition any plant refusing to comply with manda. 
tory defense orders. Under the emergency proclama. 
tion these powers are extended to include government 
control over all transportation and shipping facilities 
—not yet authorized in specific legislation—and tp 
fix all conditions affecting capital, labor and manage. 
ment. But above and beyond the statutory powers is 
the constitutional authority of the President as Com. 
mander-in-Chief. It is here that the proclamation of 
national emergency opened the door to action. 

The field of action, however, is governed by po- 
litical and strategic considerations which now assume 
critical importance. First and foremost is the strategic 
problem posed by the imperative need for additional 
naval strength in the Atlantic. The Navy cannot be 
expected to carry out the missions implied by the 
President in his reference to ‘the island outposts of 
the New World’’—the Azores and the Cape Verdes 
—or other missions involved in the guarantee of full 
aid to Britain, with the sea and air forces now at its 
command in the Atlantic. Nor can the Navy be ex- 
pected to divide its fleet and scatter its strength across 
two oceans if a showdown is imminent in one or the 
other area of hostilities. The primary rule of naval 
strategy is concentration of force at the point where 
it is capable of decisive action. If we are proceeding 
on the assumption that our major threat lies in the 
Atlantic, and that the outcome of the war may be de- 
termined in this area, then we must accept the neces 
sity for transferring important naval units from the 
Pacific. President Roosevelt's omission of any pointed 
reference to Japan in his speech, and his announce 
ment that we are steadily adding more ships and 
planes to our Atlantic patrol indicate that such 4 
transfer may be under way. 

The return of Ambassador W inant for consultation 
with the President and the State Department sharp- 
ens the political issues created by these strategic fac 
tors. For the political consequences of any major shift 
of naval power to the Atlantic not only alter out 
own position in the Pacific, but affect Britain's calcu 
lations in both Europe and Asia. wT Srone 











| 


F 
wa 


| 


Elz 


vaded 
the Li 
able * 
from 

preset 
admit 
cited 

attack 


strate 
Levat 
occuf 
the } 
ward 
Iraq 

cover 
and | 
able 

favo: 
coast 


bord 
tural 


coas' 
regic 
and 


entit 


rane 
and 
and 
Mos 
the 
vers 


an | 


