












































) PeRIUON A eae’ 
. op mice 

4 — 1946 — 

\ 

|| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 

NS, 

\u- 

his 

An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 

-an FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 

est 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 

ary 

. Vou. XXV, No. 44 Aucust 16, 1946 

a uw 

all | NEW BALANCE OF POWER UNDERLIES BIG-THREE DISPUTES AT PARIS - 
ak. Eye of the most dangerous crises in the long and What are the issues that are actually at stake in 
lec. difficult process of peacemaking came to a all the tactical maneuvering that has thus far ac- 
tial | dimax on August 9, when 15 of the 21 nations | companied the peacemaking process? Why has the 
The represented at Paris agreed that the conference | formula for peacemaking that the Big Three 
less | should make recommendations to the Council of evolved at the Potsdam conference just a year ago 
1, | Foreign Ministers concerning the peace settlements this month been the subject of such diverse inter- 
{0 | with the Axis satellites by a majority as well as by —_—pretations on the part of Moscow, Washington and 
ates | 4 two-thirds vote. As a result of this decision, the London? This formula, it will be recalled, provided 
/ ™ | conferees at the Luxembourg Palace are finally able that the peace treaties should be drafted by the For- 
yf | t9 move on from procedural matters to a considera = eign Ministers of the great powers, preparatory to 
fore | tion of the draft treaties themselves. Since, how- their “submission to the United Nations.” How 
mM, | ever, the conference finds itself in the anomalous many other Allied nations should be included in 

position of operating under rules which do not their deliberations, however, and—above all—how 

The | meet with the approval of Russia and the five pro- | much weight should be given to the recommenda- 
raM | Soviet delegations, it is by no means certain that tions of these smaller powers were left open to sub- 
viN§ | the bitter debate over procedure will not arise in sequent negotiations, most of which have created 
ome | some new and equally serious form at a later date. considerable confusion because both Russia and the 
fom | -TECHNICALITIES OBSCURE ISSUES. Perhaps Western powers have had plausible arguments. 

ail one of the most unfortunate aspects of the debate at The Soviet contention that the participation of 
aad Paris concerning the majority versus the two-thirds the smaller Allied nations should be kept to a mini- 

i tule is that it involved procedural points which were mum rests upon the realistic assumption that no 
7 dio | © fine-spun that even the delegates themselves fre- peace treaties can be concluded unless unanimity 
.. | quently appeared to have considerable difficulty in exists among the Big Three. On the other hand, it 
a | deciding just what the issues were. Under these is equally true, as Britain and the United States in- 
ia conditions it is hardly surprising that public inter- sist, that there is no satisfactory reason for holding 
cials | in the conference has dwindled in this country a general peace conference if this body is so hedged 
a and been replaced by a widespread feeling of con- about by restrictions that it cannot function even in 
com | fusion and frustration. This sense of disillusion- its limited capacity as a sounding board for those 
: the ment is all the greater because the disagreements nations whose proportionately large sacrifices in be- 
They over procedure at Paris have followed a pattern half of victory give them a right to be heard. 
~~ which is by now all too familiar. Again and again WHY RUSSIA GUARDS PREROGATIVES. But 
“that | the course of the meetings held during the past the mere fact that both Russia and the Western 
of a | Mar to prepare the draft treaties, the major diplo- powers have logical arguments on their sides does 
‘ants, | Matic battles between Russia and the Western pow- little to explain their respective attitudes on the 
ey , | ts have been fought over procedural points which question of how the peace settlement should be 
ome | "ere calculated to determine how substantive issues made. Whether logical or not, the theory of great 

would be handled later. power unanimity as the basis for peace would se- 

LES | Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 





Se 


sey Porn ciieenceat 


: 
‘i 


fosaald tee nme alent, Reoateed 











cure Russia’s support at the Paris conference for 
two reasons. In the first place, Russia wishes to pre- 
vent the conference from upsetting the draft treaties 
for Eastern Europe. A survey of the membership of 
the committees which will consider the proposed 
treaties with Finland, Rumania, Bulgaria and Hun- 
gary reveals that Russia will be able to block anv 
Suggestion by these groups provided a two-thirds 
vote is required for recommendations. It appears, 
therefore, that Soviet leaders are willing to modify 
the draft treaties with the former Axis satellites, if at 
all, only in the Council of Foreign Ministers. 

The second and more important reason for Rus- 
Sia’s essentially negative attitude toward the Paris 
conference is to be found in the Soviet conviction 
that its present position in world affairs would be 
seriously weakened if any inroads were made in the 
theory of great power unanimity as the basis for 
peacemaking. To some extent this belief is un- 
doubtedly a reflection of Russia’s own dictatorial 
form of government and resulting sense of inse- 
curity both at home and abroad. But it should also 
be frankly admitted by the United States and Brit- 
ain that any reduction in the peacemaking preroga- 
tives of the great powers would almost certainly 
have different results for Russia than it would for 


Page Two 











—., 





them. Since the U.S.S.R. is a newcomer on the jp. 
ternational stage and has not developed strong tig; 
with the governments of numerous small powers, 
and since the Soviet type of régime is actively feared 
in many quarters, it should be recognized that Russig 
would find itself repeatedly outvoted in any inter. 
allied meeting. Under these circumstances it is not 
surprising that Russia views any proposal to experi. 
ment with voting by an arithmetical majority as , 
genuine threat and looks to its own diplomacy ty 
safeguard what Moscow considers its basic inter. 
ests. All this does not mean that the Western poy. 
ers support the rights of small nations because of 
Machiavellian rather than idealistic reasons. Ney. 
ertheless, the championship by Washington and 
London of “democracy” versus “great power dicta. 
torship” at Paris should not obscure the funda. 
mental fact which has affected all the debates cop. 
cerning peacemaking procedure during the past year, 
This fact is that Russia has emerged from World 
War II as a strong and expanding state, and that 





Britain and the United States are, therefore, eager 
to secure the support of the smaller Allied nations in | 
establishing a new international balance of power, | 


WAINIFRED N. HADSsEL | 


BRITAIN PRESSES U.S. FOR CLEARER POLICY ON PALESTINE 


Taking forcible measures to prevent further 
Jewish immigration into Palestine, Britain sealed 
off the port of Haifa on August 11 and prepared to 
deport the Jewish refugees crowded on boats in the 
harbor. The government in Whitehall issued notice 
on August 12 that it intends to maintain the status 
quo in Palestine until word is received from Wash- 
ington, members of the Jewish Agency, and Arab 
leaders about the proposal to partition the mandate. 

As yet the President and State Department have 
not announced any policy toward Palestine. But re- 
ports on August 9 indicated that Mr. Truman might 
be prepared to accept a divided Palestine if it were 
opened immediately to the 100,000 Jews, as he had 
originally requested. Later bulletins from Washing- 
ton forecast that America would favor a partition of 
the mandate if the Jewish sector were enlarged. It 
was suggested also that the United States might con- 
tribute as much as $300,000,000 to raise the economic 
and social standards of the Arab states, $50,000,000 
being earmarked for the Arabs in Palestine. In ad- 
dition, wide latitude for Jews to control their own 
immigration would be requested under this plan. 

WIDER ISSUES AT STAKE. Whatever final de- 
cision the President makes about Palestine, he must 
bear in mind the broad scope of America’s policy in 
the Middle East. Britain is now readjusting its rela- 
tions with the Arab states and is withdrawing its 
military forces from Egypt. By partitioning the man- 
date London hopes to reduce Arab-Jewish tension 


there and provide areas where military installations | 
may be placed within easy reach of the vital Suez | 
Canal. It is very doubtful, however, whether Britain 
can succeed in quieting Arab-Jewish rivalries by this 
means. Nor is it likely that Britain can thus secure 
its wider strategic aims in the Middle East. 

The recent labor troubles in the rich oil lands of 
lower Iran have demonstrated anew that Britain’ 
hold over the Arab world is under attack. Disputes | 
between the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company and its 
workers, provoked by the Communist-dominated 
Tudeh party, have caused London to send additional 
military forces to the Persian Gulf within the range 





of Iran, and roused Teheran to sharp protest. The '' 


Tudeh party has followed closely the tack which | 
Russia takes toward Britain’s policy in the Arab 
States. 

The Anglo-Soviet struggle for influence in this 
region has become clearer with every passing month | 
since the Azerbaijan revolt in northern Iran last 
fall. Turkey revealed on August 12 that Russia had | 
outlined its stand on the future control of the Dar 
danelles. The USSR demands that the Straits be reg: 
ulated only by the states bordering on the Black 
Sea. Such a régime would give Russia a dominant 
status there, excluding both Britain and the United 
States. America is not now a signatory to the Mon: | 
treux Convention governing the Dardanelles, but | 
Turkey hopes that this country will take part in the 
future administration. Moscow has also taken 4 


| 


— 


more 
Augt 
plan 
dom! 
W 
Pale: 
mant 
at Of 
Nati 
that 
Pale 
titio: 
Ame 
any 
cum: 
take 
P: 
cue 
ing 
pers 
or 1 
for 
in E 
fina 
thre 
icy, 
aske 
Pre: 
mig 
pro! 
fe 
fir 
mat 


| org 


tate 
or t 


as 
sou 


ute 
ret 





tions , 
Suez | 
itain 
- this 
cure 
ls of 
ain’s 
utes | 
1 its 
ated 
ional 
ange 


The |' 


rhich | 
Arab 


this 
onth | 
last | 
had | 
Dar- 
reg: 
slack 
nant 
nited 
Mon- 
but | 
1 the | 
na 











——_ Page Three 


more direct interest in the Palestine issue, and on 
August 10 Izvestia charged that the British partition 
lan had but one aim, the strengthening of British 
domination in the countries of the Middle East. 

WHAT CAN THE U.S. DO? A showdown on 
Palestine appears imminent, whether or not it per- 
manently settles the controversy. London offered 
at one time to turn the mandate over to the United 
Nations. Foreign Office spokesmen have since said 
that Britain will go ahead with its own plans for 
Palestine regardless of America’s answer to the par- 
tition scheme. British officials have repeatedly asked 
America for financial and military aid in adopting 
any new approach to Palestine. Under these cir- 
cumstances, what course should the United States 
take ? 

President Truman has wisely attempted to res- 
ae 100,000 Jews in Europe. But while insist- 
ing on swift action to care for these displaced 
persons, America also should fully support UNRRA, 
or its successor, in making adequate arrangements 
for the other million or more stranded refugees 
in Europe. Both measures will involve considerable 
financial outlays. And if the President wishes to cut 
through the vagueness now surrounding our pol- 
icy, he will notify Congress forthwith that it will be 
asked to make such appropriations. In addition, the 
President should ask Congress to liberalize our im- 
migration rules in order to relieve the larger refugee 
roblem. 

As for Palestine’s status, the United States should 
firmly state that it is in favor of transferring the 
mandate to the UN Trusteeship Council, soon to be 
organized. This move, once it is taken, will precipi- 
tate an involved struggle about the future trustee 
or trustees to be appointed. But by taking joint action 
about Palestine, the Big Three, and the Arab states 
as well, can prevent Palestine from becoming the 
source of further bitterness among them all. 








Since it is probable that joint economic undertak- 
ings are necessary to stabilize the Arab lands, the 
United Nations should propose that funds be made 
available to improve health facilities, increase in- 
dustry and begin agricultural reforms. The strike 
against the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company shows 
clearly that unless fundamental changes are inau- 
gurated in economically backward countries like 
Iran, Russia will continue to exploit local griev- 
ances against the Western powers. 


The United States and Britain must be largely 
responsible for such economic aid, and the recent 
indication that America is seriously considering a 
grant of $300,000,000 for rehabilitation work in 
the Middle East is one of the first signs that this 
country is facing squarely the issues involved in the 
Palestine problem. The reduction of political ten- 
sions in this area and the establishment of higher 
living standards will ultimately mean greater trad- 
ing opportunities and less likelihood that America 
will be involved in war at some future date in the 
Middle East. 


Oil resources and strategic outposts of the region 
are important to the United States as well as Britain 
or Russia. But if unilateral decisions are taken by 
each of the great powers about oil and bases in the 
Arab states, war can be the only result. If this coun- 
try wishes to lift the problem out of its present 
morass it will announce what security proposals it 
wishes to make for this area. Part of any broadly 
conceived solution for Palestine’s problem and the 
security of the Middle East must include United 
Nations military arrangements. But the United 
States has yet to urge the Security Council to out- 
line any such plans. Washington must still do so if 
this country’s policy toward the Middle East is to 
consist of more than good intentions. 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


END OF UNRRA POSES PROBLEM OF WORLD FOOD DISTRIBUTION 


On the world food front, the United States has 
recently made two important decisions, both of 
which reflect a desire that in the future food dis- 
tribution be handled on an individual country basis. 
Shortly before the fifth council session of the United 
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration 
met in Geneva on August 5, the State Department 
held a series of talks with British and Canadian ofh- 
cials on the continuance of UNRRA. It was decided 
that the agency should be disbanded in Europe be- 
ginning October 1, and in the Far East by April 1. 
Those countries which have been the recipients of 
telief—Poland, Yugoslavia and Greece have re- 
ceived by far the largest share of the 13,000,000 
tons of food, medicines and supplies so far distrib- 
uted—were informed at that time by Assistant Sec- 
fetary of State William L. Clayton that the demise 


of UNRRA was impending. As further evidence of 
the new policy to move food through normal 
channels, it was announced in Washington on Au- 
gust 8 that the Cabinet had declined to endorse the 
plan of Sir John Orr, Director General of the UN 
Food and Agricultural Organization, whereby an 
international agency would be established to control 
food prices and distribute surpluses to needy nations. 

RELIEF ON A NATIONAL BASIS. The new 
United States policy was explained to the UNRRA 
Council on August 7 by Mr. Clayton, who had come 
to Geneva via Paris where he is reported to have 
discussed the political implications of the end of 
UNRRA with Secretary of State Byrnes. Mr. Clay- 
ton informed the Council that the immediate post- 
war emergency was nearly at an end, and that the 
“proper solution for any country that may require 























assistance is to apply on an individual basis to an- 
other country which in its opinion is able and pre- 
pared to furnish this assistance.” He recommended 
further that a new international agency be created to 
provide for refugees and displaced persons; that the 
health work be taken over by the new World Health 
Organization; and that the World Bank be employed 
to finance some of the rehabilitation requirements. 

The decision of the United States to end its con- 
tributions to UNRRA was based in part upon the 
opinion of food experts that the current crop out- 
look in Europe is much improved. In a report issued 
on July 28, the Department of Agriculture stated 
that European crops will reach almost 90 per cent 
of their prewar average, compared to 80 per cent in 
the 1945-46 crop year. For the Far East, however, it 
was predicted that many would die of starvation be- 
fore this fall’s rice harvest; even after the harvest, 
the rice supply would still be 10 per cent short. But, 
until April 1, 1947 at least, the Chinese will con- 
tinue to receive UNRRA aid, although well-founded 
charges of inefficiency and use of supplies for politi- 
cal purposes prompted LaGuardia on July 9 to limit 
shipments to vital foodstuffs. Famine is no recent 
phenomenon in China; the current crisis, however, 
has certainly been aggravated by the failure of rival 
factions to achieve unity and reduce their armed 
forces. Whether the new United States policy will 
induce China to return its peasant soldiers to farms 
remains to be seen; the outlook is not very encour- 
aging. 

In Europe, political considerations are also a factor 
prompting the decision to put relief on a national 
basis. Mr. Byrnes, in speeches before the Council of 
Foreign Ministers and more recently at the Paris 
Peace Conference, has made it clear that the United 
States is convinced that the delay in working out 
treaties for the Axis satellites, and the resulting 
failure to withdraw occupation forces, have retarded 
European economic recovery. Russian forces in 
Austria, Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria have been 
charged with removing food supplies of those coun- 
tries to the extent that, in the case of Austria, 
UNRRA was called upon to give assistance. Before 
the war the Danubian states produced food sur- 
pluses, supplying other deficit countries in Europe; 
these trade relationships, it is argued, should be re- 
stored forthwith. Under the Yalta declaration, Brit- 
ain, Russia and the United States agreed to take 
joint action in that direction; but to date the agree- 
ment has not been implemented. In the case of Hun- 
gary, the Russian thesis has been that economic re- 


Page Feur 











—$———> 


covery should be worked out by the Hungarian goy. 191 
ernment alone, otherwise the sovereignty of thy 
country is undermined. 

U.S. COOL TO WORLD FOOD PLAN. Wit 
the end of UNRRA in sight, countries needing 
food and lacking foreign exchange to pay for it haye 
shown a renewed interest in the FAO, which i 
scheduled to meet in Copenhagen on September 2 ] 
at which time it will consider the proposal of Dj. 
rector General Sir John Orr to establish world cop. 
trol over food prices by “buffer stock operations,” 
with surpluses distributed on a relief basis. The 
United States last week, however, indicated its dis 
approval of this plan. Washington experts fear that 
the cost of the program will be prohibitive for this 
country. But although the plan is defective for ec. 
nomic reasons, its objective is commendable —i 
seeks to avoid the errors of the interwar period CRE 
when some areas suffered from food gluts and low 
prices, while elsewhere many people went hungy VY 
for want of adequate purchasing power. 

HAROLD H. HUTCHESON | j¢.1 


| 


VoL. 


| 








To Members: : 
YOU CAN STILL SAVE 25% a 
on 24 issues of the semi-monthly 


Foreign Policy Reports tati 


Although, beginning next month, the subscription | | Au; 
price for members will be $4 yearly, you may subscribe had 





until September 1 — 

at the old rate for members of | 

only $3 | acc 

Forthcoming issues of the ForEIGN Poticy Re- || ie 
PORTS (research reports, 12 to 20 pages each) in- hor 
clude China in Ferment, by Lawrence K. Rosinger, wa 


who returns Sept. 1st from the Far East. Other early 
Reports will deal with the role of the armed services B 
in U.S. foreign policy, the Ruhr, the problem of an : 


International Secretariat, and the Arab League. Vi 
Please use the coupon below and mail it together Al 
with your check. we 
a a ne Re +h 
FOREIGN PoLicy ASSOCIATION | le 
22 East 38th St., New York 16, N. Y. W 
Please send me the ForEIGN Po.icy Reports for one yeat th 
(24 issues). $3 are enclosed ($4 if coupon is mailed after \ 
September 1, 1946). 

| 

EEE a ie ee EE 
m 
A at 
a ee ee ee | CI 














FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 44, Aucusr 16, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES DEAN, 
Editer. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Yea. 
Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> '*) Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. | 


