


+ Q 
nd- 
cts 


pa- 
ave 

or 
suc. 
ver, 


s of 


licy 
aps 


of- 
\ of 


hat 


est- 
suc- 


lia, 


tti- 
nin. 
wer 


da 

on 
10F- 
1d’s 
on- 
na 
hed 
tra- 


"ick 
.or- 


ain 
ire 
ld’s 


. 
cional 


diter. 








| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vout. XVI, No. 9 


DECEMBER 25, 1936 





TOWARD A NEW PAN-AMERICANISM 
by C. A. Thomson 


A discussion of the problems which were considered at the 
Inter-American Conference for the Maintenance of Peace, 
held at Buenos Aires December 1-23, 1936: peace organiza- 
tion, neutrality, trade, the Monroe Doctrine, armaments, 
communications and intellectual cooperation. 


November 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 





of March 3, 1879. 











Dr. William W. Bishop 
X University of Michigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











BUENOS AIRES PACTS—A 


CHALLENGE TO GENEVA 





OMPLETING three weeks of intensive nego- 
tiation, the Inter-American Peace Confer- 
ence which opened at Buenos Aires December 1 





set the seal of its. approval on 69 conventions, ~ 


resolutions and recommendations preparatory to 
adjournment on December 23. The negotiations 
have been characterized throughout by a remark- 
able degree of good feeling, credit for much of 
which is undoubtedly due to the efforts of the 
United States delegation. 

The principal achievements of the Conference, 
as revealed in press dispatches, may be summar- 
ized as follows: 

1. A collective security convention pledging 
consultation among the American nations “in the 
event that the peace of the American Republics 
should be menaced” from any source, or “in the 
event of war, or a virtual state of war, between 
American states.” Moreover, “in the event of 
an international war outside America which 
might menace the peace of the American Repub- 
lics, such consultations shall also take place to 
determine the proper time and manner in which 
the signatory states, if they so desire, may even- 
tually cooperate in some action tending to pre- 
serve the peace of the American continent.” 

2. A “declaration of solidarity” in which the 
United States and other American nations affirm 
that “any act of an unfriendly nature” toward 
an American republic “susceptible of disturbing 
the peace affects each and all of them and is the 
basis for the initiation of the procedures of con- 
sultation provided for” in the collective secur- 
ity convention. The declaration also condemns 
territorial conquest, intervention and the com- 
pulsory collection of pecuniary claims. 

3. A protocol on non-intervention reiterating the 
stand taken at the Montevideo Conference in 1933 
and defining intervention as a threat to peace 
sufficient to set the new machinery in motion. 

4. A “neutrality” convention, diluted by ardu- 
ous negotiations to satisfy Argentina and other 
states members of the League of Nations. This 
would re-enforce the American treaty structure 





for pacific settlement of disputes by providing 
that, in case of conflict between the contracting 
parties, the American republics “shall, through 
consultation, immediately endeavor to adopt in 
their character as neutrals a common and sol- 
idary attitude.’ For this purpose they “may 
consider” imposition of embargoes on arms and 
loans in accordance with domestic legislation and 
without detriment to League of Nations obliga- 
tions. Important reservations by Argentina ex- 
empt foodstuffs and raw materials intended for 
civilian populations, and loans for their purchase, 
from the scope of the pact, and state that each 
nation may reserve its attitude on an arms em- 
bargo in case of a war of aggression. 

5. Resolutions sponsored by the United States 
delegation calling for equality of treatment in in- 
ternational trade and gradual reduction of trade 
barriers. 

6. Miscellaneous projects dealing with interna- 
tional law, intellectual cooperation, interchange 
of publications, radio, citizenship for women and 
the like. 

7. Postponement of consideration of plans 
such as those for an “American League of Na- 
tions” until the Pan American Conference to be 
held in Lima, Peru, in 1938. 

These achievements offer ground for both hope 
and disappointment. If the United States draft 
proposals of December 6 are taken as a criterion, 
the projects actually adopted are merely shadows 
of the action contemplated. The United States 
plan of consultative procedure, for example, has 
been vitiated by dropping out provision for a 
permanent consultative body with definite func- 
tions. How will the consultative pact operate 
when, like the Kellogg-Briand Anti-War Pact, it 
contains no machinery for enforcement, no real 
sanctions for violation and no obligation to accept 
a consultative verdict? As for neutrality, the 
proposed extension of embargoes on arms and 
loans to American belligerents by states not par- 
ticipating in League sanctions has been ham- 












strung by transforming it into a purely optional 
procedure based on the existing domestic legis- 
lation of each signatory. The Argentine reserva- 
tions, which were the subject of much dispute 
during the Conference, clearly illustrate the con- 
tinuing discrepancy between the obligations of 
League members and the desire of the United 
States, Brazil and other countries to avoid in- 
volvement in war and discourage hostilities 
through non-intercourse. The difficulty of secur- 
ing concrete commitments on trade policy as well 
as neutrality suggests that the political and eco- 
nomic dependence of many Latin American states 
on Europe may continue to be a stronger bond 
than the concept of Pan American solidarity. 
Yet the Conference’s accomplishments should 
not be minimized. Had it done no more than 
adopt the projects providing for consultation to 
combat foreign intervention in the Americas, it 
would have been notably successful. The Monroe 
Doctrine is now in a sense a multilateral obliga- 
tion; but in the last analysis the United States 
appears to retain a free hand should consultative 
precedure prove abortive. Considered as a whole, 
the various pacts and resolutions block out a re- 
orientation of inter-American policy. At present, 
to be sure, these new trends depend on the psy- 
chological atmosphere of mutual trust and good 
will fostered by Secretary Hull and his colleagues 
rather than on unratified treaties and projects 
expressing mere pious hopes. The significance of 
the Buenos Aires Conference rests not in addi- 
tions to the tangled network of American peace 
treaties but in the challenge with which it has 
confronted the League. Should Geneva gain new 
vitality through reform of the Covenant or im- 
provement of the world political situation, the 
developments of the Inter-American Conference 
might remain in an embryonic state. The Amer- 
ican nations, like other regional groups, have 
granted Geneva a reprieve; but if the League’s 
principles are flouted in the future as they have 
been in the past, the Americas may well pre-empt 
its functions in matters of concern to the New 


World. Davip H. POPPER 


EUROPE DEADLOCKED ON SPAIN 

The reported landing of 5,000 German “volun- 
teers” at Cadiz, in Rebel-controlled territory, on 
December 1, stirred France and Britain into re- 
newed action to secure enforcement of the non- 
intervention agreement, hitherto honored more 
in the breach than in the observance. The two 
Western democracies began to fear that their 
previous efforts to keep war within Spanish boun- 
daries might merely transform Spain into a bat- 


Page Two 








ae 
— 





a 
LL 


tleground for the troops of rival European pow. 
ers. A Franco-British suggestion that the non- 
intervention agreement be expanded to prevent 
foreign volunteers from joining the forces of 
either Rebels or Loyalists was blocked on Decem- 
ber 4 by Germany, Italy and Portugal. On the 
same day Britain and France invited the three 
Fascist powers and the Soviet Union to join them 
in an effort to terminate the Spanish civil war by 
offering to mediate between the government and 
the Rebels. This proposal was accepted by the 
Soviet Union and received the moral support of 
the United States and the Vatican, but met with 
far-reaching reservations from Germany and 
Italy, and strong objections from Portugal. Nor 
did it arouse much enthusiasm on the part of the 
Rebel and Loyalist groups in Spain, each of which 
hopes to break in its favor the deadlock now hold- 
ing them at the gates of Madrid. 

On December 10 the League Council, sum. 
moned in special session, considered the Novem- 
ber 27 appeal of the Madrid government, which 
contended that armed foreign intervention in 
Spain threatened to disturb international peace, 
Two days later the Council unanimously adopted 
a resolution which declared that good understand- 
ing between nations ought to be maintained ir- 
respective of their internal régimes; affirmed 
that every state is under obligation to refrain 
from interfering in the internal affairs of others; 
urged the London committee to “spare no pains” 
to render non-intervention undertakings as strin- 
gent as possible and to arrange “forthwith” for 
their effective supervision; and expressed the 
Council’s “sympathy” for the Franco-British me- 
diation proposal. 

The British government, which had hitherto 
been reluctant to admit violations of the non-in- 
tervention agreement by Fascist powers, shifted 
its position on December 18, when Foreign Min- 
ister Eden referred in the House of Commons to 
“blatant breaches” by certain signatories, speci- 
fically naming Germany, Italy and the Soviet 
Union. On December 19 Mr. Eden protested to 
Herr von Ribbentrop, German Ambassador in 
London, against the reported arrival in Rebel 
ports of 6,500 Germans, said to be drawn from 
the regular army, which would bring the total 
of German soldiers in Spain to between 12,000 
and 15,000. This protest, which aroused resent- 
ment in Germany, was given particular point by 
rumors that Italy, anxious to obtain a settlement 
with Britain in the Mediterranean, might leave 
Germany to pull the chestnuts out of the Spanish 


fire. VERA MICHELES DEAN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 9, Decemssr 25, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Leste Bue, President; Estuer G. OcpeEn, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dean, Eéitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











