



nst 
ish 
ers 





nee 


or- 


ver 
an 
an 
ro- 
nt, 
ipi- 

on 
ery 
will 
‘his 


rth- 
» be 
ntil 
ita- 
the 
on 
not 
tion 
the 
ard 
the 
2aty 


sire F 


ver, 

the 
ves- 
intil 
res- 
‘xist 

are 
tion. 


fises. 
ourt, 


rgely 
ecul- 
es of 
f ad- 


—_—_—— 


Jational 





ital | 


AAS pcre ee aR RE NEI BS ENA LER 


5} 


Editor. © : 








FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 








Entered as second- 
class matter December 











2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New “York, 
N. Y., under the act 

i di a of March 3, 1879. 

‘ sg I 4 / 3 } 

oy “J 

7, 

SO; 





9 


Vou. XV, No. 


NOVEMBER 8, 1935 


lc Sy 


SAV Vis 
> 





Could the League have averted the conflict? 
Can it succeed in stopping war? 
Is the League ready to apply sanctions? 


What is the attitude of the United States? 


THE LEAGUE AND THE ITALO-ETHIOPIAN CRISIS 
22. 


by Vera Micheles Dean 


November 6 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


Periodical Division, 


Library of Congress, 


Washington, D. @. 











ee re eee 


JAPAN STRIKES A SNAG IN CHINA 





HE Japanese demands presented to the north 

China authorities at the end of October have 
been sidetracked at least temporarily by two un- 
expected developments — China’s newly promul- 
gated silver policy, and the attempted assassina- 
tion of Premier Wang Ching-wei. 

The attempt on Wang Ching-wei’s life occurred 
on November 1 while the ruling committees of 
the Kuomintang were assembled at Nanking in 
plenary session. Police authorities identified the 
assassin as a former sergeant in the Nineteenth 
Route Army, which fought Japan at Shanghai in 
1931-1932. The fact that Wang Ching-wei — one 
of the foremost Chinese advocates of Sino-Jap- 
anese rapprochement—was singled out as the ob- 
ject of attack has served to focus attention on the 
opposition within the country to the govern- 
ment’s policies concerning Japan. When Wang re- 
signed last summer, following acceptance of 
Japan’s demands in north China, it was rumored 
that the pro-European and pro-American clique 
at Nanking had forced his hand. At that time 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek’s personal efforts 
were required to induce him to withdraw his 
resignation. This awkward issue will again be 
raised, should it now prove necessary to replace 
Wang Ching-wei. 

China’s departure from the silver standard, 
officially announced by Finance Minister Kung on 
November 3, was attributed to serious overvalua- 
tion of the Chinese currency as a result of “the 
abandonment of the gold standard in recent years 
by many leading nations and the rapid rise in the 
world price of silver.” The effects on China of 
these events, for which the American silver pur- 
chase policy is chiefly responsible, have been “severe 
internal deflation, growing unemployment, wide- 
spread bankruptcies, a flight of capital abroad, a 
fall in government revenues and an adverse bal- 
ance of payments.” The new monetary policy calls 
for the nationalization of silver and adoption of a 
managed paper currency. How successful the 





Nanking authorities will be in enforcing the sur- 
render of silver holdings and securing general ac- 
ceptance of the new bank notes remains to be 
seen. Since the government intends to maintain 
the present exchange rate of the Chinese dollar 
with foreign currencies, it is apparent that other 
considerations than the alleged overvaluation 
prompted the new step. The evidence tends to 
indicate that it was primarily designed to facili- 
tate efforts to prevent the large outflow of silver 
and thus bolster the Chinese currency and the 
position of the government banks. 

The fact that Tokyo received no advance no- 
tice of this move while Great Britain apparently 
expected it has intensified the vigorous condemna- 
tion with which it was greeted in Japanese circles. 
Japan’s suspicions concerning the activities of Sir 
Frederick Leith-Ross, British treasury adviser 
now in China, were expressed in the Shanghai 
Mainichi’s report of a £10,000,000 British ex- 
change stabilization loan in return for a virtual 
British monopoly on the reconstruction of China’s 
railway system. Leith-Ross immediately denied 
the reports of a British loan to China, and asserted 
that Nanking’s silver move was entirely inde- 
pendent. Nevertheless, promulgation of the sil- 
ver law was followed immediately by issuance of 
British regulations backing it up to the fullest ex- 
tent. 

Although the actual degree of British influence 
on China’s new silver policy still remains to be 
ascertained, recent events afford sufficient indi- 
cation of the Anglo-Japanese duel waged over 
this issue. Leith-Ross left Tokyo on September 
18 without having obtained Japanese cooperation 
in advancing financial aid to stabilize the Chinese 
currency. Meanwhile, continued smuggling of 
silver from China had reached proportions which 
were seriously threatening China’s monetary and 
banking structure. That much of this silver was 
being smuggled to Japan was indicated by Sep- 
tember trade figures showing Japanese silver ex- 






















ports totaling ¥20,973,000, while the officially re- 
corded imports of silver amounted to only ¥1,675. 
For the first nine months of 1935 Japan’s exports 
of silver totaled ¥144,160,000 compared with 
¥7,625,000 in the same period of 1934. The re- 
sulting threat to China’s financial system gave 
rise to fears for the security of £31,000,000 of 
Chinese loans held in Great Britain. Dispatches 
from London on November 1 reported the ap- 
pointment, on the advice of Leith-Ross, of a com- 
mittee of prominent British financial experts to 
negotiate “in case of need” on behalf of British 
holders of Chinese bonds. Two days later the 
Nanking authorities announced the adoption of 
the new monetary policy. 

These developments have obviously dealt a se- 
vere blow to Japan’s program for an “economic 
rapprochement with China.” Their natural corol- 
lary will be renewed and intensified Japanese 
pressure on the Nanking régime. It remains to 
be seen whether this pressure will take the form of 
further demands in north China or direct ap- 
proaches at Nanking. T. A. BISSoNn 


SHOULD U.S. EMBARGO RAW MATERIALS? 


On November 2 the League Coordination Com- 
mittee, composed of 52 states, decided that eco- 
nomic and financial sanctions against Italy should 
go into effect on November 18, four days after 
the British general elections. This decision was 
made possible by the renewed cooperation of 
France and Britain, which had seemed to be drift- 
ing dangerously apart in the Italo-Ethiopian 
crisis. On October 26 France had clarified its 
pledge of naval assistance to Britain in the Medi- 
terranean by a memorandum in which it prom- 
ised collaboration on sea, land and in the air, pro- 
vided Britain reduced its Mediterranean fleet to 
avoid untoward incidents with Italy. Experts of 
the two countries, now holding preliminary meet- 
ings in London on the eve of the naval confer- 
ence, are to work out details for fueling and pro- 
visioning British ships in French ports. 

Franco-British cooperation was further dis- 
played on November 2 when the League, at the 
suggestion of Belgium, gave Britain and France 
a mandate to continue diplomatic negotiations 
with Italy in the hope of reaching a peaceful set- 
tlement of the conflict. Both belligerents are ap- 
parently not averse to a compromise. Mussolini 
is said to be ready to accept a collective League 
mandate over Ethiopia, provided Italy receives a 
predominant position in its administration and 
obtains some Ethiopian territory; while reports 
from Addis Ababa indicate that Haile Selassie 
might consider cession of the province of Ogaden 


Page Two 





— 
—, 





to Italy, in return for an outlet to the sea, possibly 
through Eritrea. Britain has hitherto declared 
that it will tolerate no settlement unless it is ac. 
ceptable to the League as well as to Italy and 
Ethiopia. Yet any settlement which gives Mus. 
solini more than he would have obtained without 
resort to force would encourage potential aggres- 
sors to take the risks of war, in the hope that other 
countries will shrink from paying the price of 
peace. 

teluctance to pay this price has already been 
shown both by some of the League members and 
by the principal non-members, of which the 
United States is the most important. Until No- 
vember 18 Italy can import all key raw materials, 
provided it can pay cash, and shipments from 
many of the countries accepting sanctions have 
noticeably increased in recent days. Even after 
sanctions go into effect, the League will have no 
embargo on such sinews of war as oil, cotton and 
scrap iron, which are exported in large quantities 
by the United States. A vicious circle will thus 
ensue. The League will hesitate to embargo raw 
materials which Italy can purchase from non- 
member states, while non-members will not be 
eager to ban exports permitted by the League. 

The Roosevelt administration is aware of this 
problem. The Congressional neutrality resolu- 
tion of August 24, 1935, however, is limited to 
“arms, ammunition, and implements of war,” and 
the term “implements of war” cannot now be ex- 
tended to include key raw materials except by 
dubious interpretation. Nor can neutrality legis- 
lation be revised until Congress reassembles in 
January. Meanwhile, both President Roosevelt 
and Secretary of State Hull have exhorted Ameri- 
can exporters to consider the risks of war trade 
and urged them not to reap “abnormally increased 
profits” from exports to the two belligerents—a 
policy which only by courtesy can be described 
as “neutral,” since our trade with Ethiopia is 
negligible. The administration is closely watch- 
ing all shipments consigned for export or trans- 
shipment to Italy, and intends to publish trade 
figures in the hope of exerting moral pressure. 
Under the Congressional resolution, however, ex- 
ports of raw materials to Italy are entirely legal; 
nor do American exporters incur any “risk” un- 
less the League powers decide to impose a naval 
blockade, which Mussolini has declared he will 
regard as an act of war. If the United States 
sincerely desires to reap no profits from war 
trade with Italy, it must go beyond the present 
neutrality legislation and impose an embargo on 
raw materials necessary for war purposes. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 2, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at 


November 8, 1935. 


RAYMOND Lestte BUELL, President; 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weckly by the Forcien Policy Association, 
Estuer G. Open, Secretary; 


New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 


Incorporated. National 
Vera MicHetes Dean, Evitor. 
1879. One Dollar a Year. 





“1 


