Olicy: “In 
Hitler, in 
der Stalin, 
nly as the 


yr associa 
yut Russia 
1 Nations. 
o develop 
nization,’ 
his means 
reign pol. 
develop a 
lainly dis 
d clear to 
said: “We 
n a bipar 
which we 
ith Russia. 
firmly dis 


ost closely 


Policy As 
1 and Mil. 
- comment 
gth of his 
[innesota’s 
m for the 
Shipstead 


BOLLES 


°F 


PRRTOGIGA. wen 
TENBRAL LIRPAR’ 


. 1946 


APR & 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


Ann Arbor, Wich: san 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


You. XXV, No. 24 


Marcu 29, 1946 


FASING OF IDAN TEMCION FACHITATES CONSTR 


So ¢ «© stew’ 


a 


HE second session of the United Nations Secur- 

ity Council opened in New York City on March 
25 under more favorable conditions than could have 
been anticipated at any time within the last month. 
Notice that Russian troops are to leave Iran in five 
or six weeks if nothing unforeseen occurs came 
from Moscow just the day before the delegates as- 
sembled. Prime Minister Stalin had reiterated his 
support of the UNO on March 22, and on the fol- 
lowing day the Iranian Premier, Ahmad Ghavam, 
expressed his belief that a satisfactory settlement of 
the Russo-Iranian dispute was possible. Thus the 
chief issue before the eleven Council members lost 
much of the earlier menacing quality that tended to 
make it a test case of Russia’s intentions in the Mid- 
die East. But UNO’s effectiveness as a mechanism 
through which Big Three aims may be reconciled 
still remains to be tested. 

CONFLICT OVER PROCEDURE. The Council’s 
procedural problems, which were first on its agenda, 
would have arise is any serious dispute that 
might have been submitted to it. But Russia’s pro- 
posal to extend the veto power hereafter over 
discussions as well as decisions on controversial 
issues would alter the provisions of the San Fran- 
cisco Charter of the UNO, making it necessary 
for the great powers to agree even on what topics 
or disputes are to be heard in the Security Coun- 
cil. The members of the Council can hardly abstain 
now from a thorough examination of the Iranian 
problem. Yet if the Council is to become an ef- 
fective agency of international consultation and ac- 
tion, the Big Three must also, during the present 
session, agree on procedures that will make it pos- 
sible for them to discuss controversial issues without 
creating on every occasion the necessity for a show- 
down fraught with danger of war. 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


Loni 
VInGAE 


i WORK BY 

Iran’s appeal for the removal of Russian forces 
from its northern province of Azerbaijan was first 
discussed at the mid-February meeting of the Security 
Council in London. Russia and Iran were then re- 
quested to seek a solution through direct negotia- 
tions. But this appro. ach failed, according to 
Teheran, and the Iranian government notified the 
UNO’s Secretary Genera! on March 19 that it wished 
the Council to reconsider the matter. The USSR, de- 
claring that negotiations with Iran had not been 
completed requested the Council to delay its meet- 
ing until April 10. In London, Soviet Foreign Vice 
Commissar Vishinsky had contended that under the 
UNO Charter the Iranian issue was a “situation” 
and not a “dispute,” and hence direct negotiations 
only were in order. The Security Council, however, 
has proceded as though a “dispute’’ were under con- 
sideration, thus preventing Russia’s use of its veto 
power to prohibit hearings or discussions—a proce- 
dure favored by the small nations which want to 
have an opportunity to plead before the UNO any 
complaints they may have against the great powers. 


DISPUTE OVER TROOPS. Beyond the dispute 
over procedures in the Iran case are differences about 
the status of Iran’s sovereignty and the presence of 
foreign troops on its soil. Iran, which has had the 
backing of both Britain and the United States in 
bringing its claim before the Security Council, has 
based its case not only on its rights under the UNO 
Charter but also on other documents. By the terms 
of the Anglo-Russian-Iranian Treaty of January 29, 
1942, which formalized the joint entrance of British 
and Soviet forces into Iran in August 1941, foreign 
troops were to be withdrawn six months after the 
end of the war. The United States joined that pledge 
in the Teheran Declaration of December 1, 1943 
which affirmed Iranian sovereignty, as had the earlier 


ais 
wwe 


2 
IES EE I Oe eS a ae a <= Sense 2S Fae ime 


. 


-y- = 


‘ 
eh 
a 

’ 

i 

7 
é 
bt 
ot 
i 
, 
wih 
a 
‘5 
~ 
1 


Anglo-Russian pact. March 2, 1946 was determined 
as the date of withdrawal through an exchange of 
letters between Foreign Secretaries Bevin and Molo- 


‘tov last September. American military units left Iran 


at the beginning of 1946 and British units by 
March 2. 

Russian forces, however, have remained, chiefly in 
the Azerbaijan province of northern Iran, where a 
revolt begun last November led to the creation of an 
autonomous republic in defiance of the central gov- 
ernment at Teheran. This revolt received support 
from Moscow, and Iran has charged that Soviet 
forces prevented government troops from quelling 
the Azerbaijan outbreak at its outset. Recent troop 
movements within the Russian zone of Iran raised 
fears both in Teheran and the Western capitals that 
Russia’s aims went beyond protection of the Com- 
munist-led régime which had emerged in Azerbaijan. 
Equally disturbing was the fact that Kurdish tribes- 
men in Iran, first reported in revolt on March 20, 
were said to have set up an independent state south 
of Azerbaijan. The Kurds inhabit the territory lying 
at the juncture of Iran, Turkey and the Mosul oil 
fields of Iraq. Taken in conjunction with earlier Rus- 
sian territorial claims regarding the Turkish prov- 
inces of Kars and Ardahan, the Kurdish revolt led to 
further Iranian and Turkish uneasiness, and to 
Anglo-American concern about possible Russian de- 
mands for radical alteration of the régime at the 
Dardanelles. 

BASIC ISSUE OF OIL. Russia, too, couid invoke 
treaty rights to justify the maintenance of its troops 
in Iran. On March 21, Izvestia referred to the 1921 
treaty with Iran and pointed out that under its terms 
Russian forces may move across the border into 
Iranian territory if there is danger that the latter 
might become a base of hostilities against the USSR 
—although not indicating the nature of any present 
danger. In addition, the 1921 Russo-Iranian treaty 
also dealt with the basic issue of oil rights in Iran. 
While the treaty abrogated the former Tsarist oil 


FOOD SHORTAGES AND POLITICAL CONTROVERSIES HARASS UNRRA 


ATLANTIC Crry, March 24—The most important 
statement yet made in the sun-drenched ballroom 
of the Hotel Traymore, just off Atlantic City’s 
famous boardwalk, where the forty-seven nations 
belonging to the United Nations Relief and Re- 
habilitation Administration are struggling with the 
problems raised by the current world food shortage, 
was not—as might have been expected—a message 
of hope to the famine-stricken peoples of Europe 
and Asia. Instead, it was a strongly-worded speech, 
on March 22, by retiring Director-General Herbert 
H. Lehman, criticizing the administration in Wash- 
ington for having terminated its war-time food con- 
trols so abruptly last autumn that UNRRA is now 
able to procure from this country only a fraction of 


SRI 


Page Two 


—— 


— 
concessions there, it prevented Iran from granti 
them to any other country. During the last two yeay 
of World War II, the USSR, as well as America 
and British companies, tried to gain petroleum 
and other mineral concessions in Iran, but sy. 
cessive governments at Teheran resisted this pres 
sure. At present the only operating concession to ey. 
ploit Iran’s oil is held by the Anglo-Iranian Oil Com. 
pany. Whether Russia's recent agreement with Irap 
to withdraw its troops also included terms on petro. 
leum rights was not disclosed at the time of its ap. 
nouncement on March 24. 

As the Council approaches the tangled Iraniap 
problem — granting that the procedural difficulties 
are overcome—it must attempt to reconcile Bj 
Three needs for oil and security in the Middle East, 
and at the same time insure that the Arab peoples 
themselves share in the wealth of their own coun. 
tries. If joint action were taken for exploitation of 
Middle Eastern oil, the valuable resources of the 
Arab world could provide much of the capital for 
agricultural developments and industrialization % 
sorely needed in the Middle East. An international 
conference to map out this type of joint action could 
do a great deal to ease world tensions. The Security 
Council could also delegate to its Military Staf 
Committee the task of outlining strategy require 
ments necessary to maintain security at the Dar 
danelles, the Suez and in the Persian Gulf. 

Such measures demand creative vision and deter. 
mined execution similar to Allied military coopera. 
tion in this area during the war and the economic 
collaboration of the Middle East Supply Center es. 
tablished by Britain and the United States. Unless 
the Big Three reach military and economic arrange | man « 
ments at the same time that reconstruction of) mun th 
the individual Arab states is begun, the Arabs will | minat: 
tend to play the great powers against each other and} po 
they, in turn, will continue their present jockeying} gy. , 
for position in a struggle that could develop into 


traces O 
play of 
boardw. 
the fore 
IS IT 
In his 
measur 
sharp 1 
Agricul 
conduct 
both of 
present 
days. F 
some t 
control 
effort t 
while s 
many | 
Whe 
Depart 
grim oO 
rect vé 
tion, C 
of con: 
It wou 
which 
half y 
nation 
| judge 
Ameri 
overse 
matior 
be litt 
of the 


litic 

another world conflict. GRANTS. MCCLELLAN | furin 
is to 

the supplies it had hoped to purchase here. oe 
The United States Department of Agriculture, - 
Mr. Lehman reported, has just informed UNRRA A 
that it can provide only 5,000 tons of wheat flour Ban 


and 195,000 tons of wheat for shipments in lead 
April— amounts so small that, in his opinion, | 
“they can only spell disaster and death.” Mr. Leh | “Y® 
man’s observation that he could, despite these offi shou! 
cially-announced shortages, “see here in the United num| 
States large quantities of food which could be ex whic 
ported,” seemed particularly pertinent in the luxutt ) jo, 
ous setting of the conference. For as this mecca of | Headq: 
vacationers begins what is clearly going to be the | “4 
most profitable season it has had since before Peatl 
Harbor, the menus of the large hotels reveal 10 


SS 


} 


——= 


§ran 
two red 
American 


etroleum 
but suc. 
this pres. 
ion to ex. 
Oil Com. 


with Irap 


On petro. 


of its ap. 


1 Iranian 
ifficulties 
icile Big 


idle East 
> peoples 
wn coun 
tation of 
s of the 
ipital for 
zation $0 
national 


nd deter. 
coopera: 
economic 
enter ¢s- 
s. Unless 
arrange 
ction of 
rabs will 
other and 
jockeying 
elop into 
ELLAN 


nents in | 


Opinion, 
Mr. Leh- 
hese offi- 
ie United 
ld be ex- 
1e luxuti- 
mecca of 
0 be the 
ore Pearl 
eveal no 


—_—— 
—— 


traces of war-time restrictions, and the general dis- 
lay of comfort and plenty in the shops along the 
boardwalk appears fabulous and unreal to most of 
the foreign delegates. 

IS IT TOO LATE TO RESTORE RATIONING ? 
In his plea for more effective food conservation 
measures in the United States, Mr. Lehman took 
sharp issue with Clinton P. Anderson, Secretary of 
Agriculture, and Herbert Hoover, now in Europe 
conducting a food survey for President Truman, 
both of whom have indicated their belief that the 
present food crisis will end in approximately 120 
days. Recognizing the force of the argument that 
some time would be necessary to restore rationing 
controls, Mr. Lehman nevertheless insisted that the 
effort to restore control measures would be worth- 
while since “the general result might well be to save 
many lives which otherwise might be lost.” 

Whether the relatively rosy picture painted by the 
Department of Agriculture and Mr. Hoover, or the 
grim outlook depicted by UNRRA is the more cor- 
rect version of the immediate world food situa- 
tion, cannot be easily ascertained amid the welter 
of confusing technical data available on the subject. 
It would seem, however, that UNRRA, as an agency 
which has been charged for the past three and one- 
half years with responsibility for studying inter- 
national food needs, is in a far better position to 
judge the acuteness of the present crisis than are 
American officials whose knowledge of conditions 
overseas is necessarily based on second-hand infor- 
mation or quickly garnered impressions. There can 
be little doubt, moreover, that the large majority 
of the American people would prefer, as Mr. Leh- 
man declares, to adopt strict controls rather than 
tun the risk of failing to act with courage and deter- 
mination. 

POLITICAL QUESTIONS INTRUDE. Despite 
the oft-repeated desire of Mr. Lehman to keep 
politics out of UNRRA, several issues have arisen 
during this conference which reveal how difficult it 
is to divorce relief tasks from the large political 
questions of a world that is deeply conscious of its 
division into potentially rival blocs. When the Yugo- 
slav, Czechoslovak and Soviet delegations attempted, 
on March 22, to obtain membership for Albania 
in UNRRA, the United States and Britain took the 
lead in thwarting Russia’s move. The ostensible 
issue in the debate was whether or not Albania 
should still be considered as being at war with a 
number of the United Nations despite the change 
which has recently occurred in its régime. The real 


Page Three 


——SS=—_—_— 


question at stake, however, was whether or not the 
Western powers would recognize the frankly pro- 
Russian government of Premier Hoxha. 

In connection with Russia’s offer of 500,000 tons 
of wheat and barley to France, part of which is 
now being shipped to French ports, other disturb- 
ing political questions have arisen. During this 
week’s debates, delegates of Canada, Australia, the 
United Kingdom and the United States have all 
given broad hints to the Soviet Union that if it 
has exportable food surpluses, it should pool its re- 
sources with those of other food-supplying areas by 
joining the cereals committee of the Combined Food 
Board instead of making separate arrangements with 
individual nations for allegedly political purposes. 

The most delicate political problem which has 
arisen at the conference was posed on March 23 in 
a tense session on the subject of the treatment of 
the nearly one million displaced persons, primarily 
political refugees from Eastern Europe, who still 
remain in UNRRA and military camps in the three 
western zones of Germany. In the opinion of the 
Polish and Yugoslav delegates, UNRRA should 
cease its operations in behalf of these people, a large 
number of whom Jan Stanczyk—Poland’s Minister 
of Welfare—asserted, are being “exposed to the sys- 
tematic propaganda of troublemakers whose aim is to 
sow the seeds of another war.” Minister of State 
Philip Noel-Baker, representing the United King- 
dom, answered this charge by asserting that UNRRA 
must not restrict the rights of political refugees who 
are afraid to return to their homelands under present 
conditions. “We have fought the war for the lib- 
erty of the individual,” he declared, “and we do not 
propose to sacrifice it now.” Although the contin- 
uation of UNRRA’s program for displaced persons 
has not yet been assured, Mr. Lehman’s statement 
that it is “unthinkable” that UNRRA should 
abandon men and women who have gone through 
the horrors of war before a United Nations authority 
for the care of refugees has been established, holds 
out hope that political considerations alone will not 
determine the fate of some of the most unfortunate 
victims of the war. 

WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


A Daughter of Han: The Autobiography of a Chinese 
Working Woman, by Ida Pruitt. New Haven, Yale Uni- 
versity Press, 1945. $2.75 
Fascinating story of “Old Mrs. Ning” and the problems 

of every-day life among the Chinese people. A book of last- 

ing significance because it approaches China in purely 
human terms, giving the reader background that cannot 
easily be secured elsewhere. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 24, Marcu 29, 1946. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, Presi: dent; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELEs Dgan, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
one month for change of address on menbership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dellars a Year 


Be 5 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


The strain in relations between the United States 
and the Soviet Union, which has now been consid- 
erably eased, developed at a time when the United 
States lacked a clear-cut military policy. The Army 
and Navy were being rapidly depleted in numbers 
when Secretary of State James F. Byrnes sent 
sternly worded notes to Moscow questioning Rus- 
sia’s removal of industrial equipment from Man- 
churia and protesting the maintenance of Soviet 
troops in Iran beyond the treaty date of March 2. 
Although daring diplomacy succeeds best when 
military force is available to back diplomatic notes, 
the strength of our armed forces is not commensur- 
ate with the strong tenor of our diplomatic dis- 
patches. Both the Administration and Congress, 
however, are now aware that it is time to link mili- 
tary policy with foreign policy. Even if relations 
with Russia were entirely harmonious, international 
obligations we have assumed through our partici- 
pation in the occupation of Germany, Austria, Italy, 
Japan and Korea, and our membership in the United 
Nations Organization, require us to have a military 
force adequate to meet our needs. 


CONGRESS HESITATES OVER MILITARY 
POLICY. On V-E Day, May 8, 1945, the United 
States Army had 8,300,000 officers and men. It now 
consists of 2,500,000, and at the present rate of 
demobilization its strength will be 1,550,000 on 
July 1. No committee of the House or Senate has 
as yet studied the country’s military needs with 
sufficient care. On October 23 President Truman 
urged Congress in a special message to pass legisla- 
tion that would provide a year’s military training 
for all boys reaching 18, but neither branch of Con- 
gress has acted on it. Voluntary enlistments num- 
bered 185,000 in November 1945, but they have 
been declining month by month—131,000 in Decem- 
ber, 113,000 in January, 93,000 in February, 73,000 
(estimated) in March. In an effort to attract more 
recruits, the War and Navy Departments have asked 
Congress to increase the pay and allowances of 
officers and men by 20 per cent, and both services 
have arranged for investigations of charges of un- 
fair discrimination between officers and men. 


Congress showed almost no interest in the problem 
of military policy before the recent differences over 
Russia’s policy in Iran developed. On January 23 a 
subcommittee of the Senate Military Affairs Commit- 
tee demanded that the Army release by March 10 
those men who had been in service two years. On 


U.S. SEEKS MILITARY POLICY TO BACK WORLD COMMITMENTS 


February 23 Acting Chairman R. Ewing Thomasop 
of the House Military Affairs Committee declared: 
“We don’t want to have to continue selective service 
any longer than necessary.’ But on March 21 both 
the House Military Affairs Committee and the Senate 
Military Affairs Committee began to hold hearings 
on a bill for extending the selective service act beyond 
May 15, when it expires. General Dwight D. Eisen. 
hower, chief of staff, asked the House Committee to 
extend it indefinitely. Chairman Andrew J. May of 
the House Committee had proposed an extension of 
six months, and Chairman Elbert D. Thomas of the 
Senate Committee an extension of six weeks. 
After the Senate Committee had heard Secretary 
Byrnes testify on March 21, Senator Warren R 
Austin, Republican of Vermont, said that the testi 
mony had shown the international situation “was 
such as to make more clear the necessity for extend. 
ing the selective service act.’ Three days earlier 
leading members of the House Committee had pre. 


dicted extension because of “the Russian situation,” | 


and Chairman May said: “We must retain the 
vehicle (of selective service) so that it will be ready 
if we should get into trouble.” 


DANGER IN ARMS RACE. To develop 
military policy simply by extending the wartime 
draft law under the emotional stress of anxiety 
about Russian intentions would be a dangerously 
haphazard way to deal with an important problem. 
While we need a force adequate to the requirements 
of our foreign policy, we invite trouble if, by vague 
ness about our military program, we encourage other 
states to engage in an arms race with us. The climate 
of opinion for such a race is being created. Repre 
sentative Robert L. F. Sikes, Democrat of Florida, 
on March 18 said that national defense requires 4 
force of “men and weapons at least equal in effective 
ness to those of any nation whose purposes we cai 
not trust.” In Russia on March 21 the Communist 
party journal Party Construction said: “We cannot 
forget that the armies of other countries are not 
stopping their development.” Adjustment of politi 
cal issues in such a way that nations can regain 4 
sense of world stability is needed before statesmen 
and legislators will consider military policy with any 
degree of clarity. Meanwhile, postponement of the 
atomic bomb tests at Bikini—which many civic and 
scientific leaders believe should be abandoned alto- 
gether—may contribute to relaxation of international 


tension. BLaim BOLLES 


VOL. 


| 


