


































HW 


ed 


nd 
\s- 
ut 


2¢ 
-S 


er 


)lu- 
to 
ind 
ex- 
by 


ris- 


velt 
pri- 
ade 
sed 
—a 
bed 
, is 
tch- 
ins- 
ade 
ure. 
ex- 
ral; 
un- 
ival 
will 
ates 
war 
sent 
) on 


ational 
EJ itor. 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 
Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


VoL. XV, No. 3 





NOVEMBER 15, 1935 





Could the League have averted the conflict? 
Can it succeed in stopping war? 
Is the League ready to apply sanctions? 
What is the attitude of the United States? 


THE LEAGUE AND THE ITALO-ETHIOPIAN CRISIS 


by Vera Micheles Dean 25c. 


November 6 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 





Entered as second- 
class matter Deoember 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











Periodical Division, 
Library of Congress, 


4ashington, D. C. 











ITALY STRIKES BACK 





N Armistice Day, a week before League sanc- 
tions were due to go into effect, Italy ad- 
dressed a note to both members and non-members 
of the League threatening to take counter meas- 
ures. In this note Mussolini denied the legality of 
the League’s action in adopting sanctions, defend- 
ed Italy’s course in East Africa, protested against 
the proposed penalties, and warned of reprisals. 
The note expressed particular bitterness concern- 
ing the League boycott on Italian exports, which 
it described as “more than an economic measure” 
and “a true act of hostility which amply justifies 
inevitable counter measures.” 

That this was no idle threat was indicated on 
November 12, when a Fascist decree provided 
that, beginning November 18, special licenses 
must be obtained for the importation of 128 com- 
modities. Licenses will apparently be issued by 
the Ministry of Finance only for imports from 
countries not participating in League sanctions 
when they can provide the commodities listed. 
These include not only raw materials already em- 
hbargoed by the League—rubber, zine and various 
metals and minerals—but also articles not yet on 
the League’s blacklist, such as cotton, raw silk, 
textiles and certain foodstuffs, notably butter and 
wheat. Government regulation of trade in min- 
eral oils had already been decreed on November 
10. While these threatened reprisals may give 
pause to some League members like Yugoslavia, 
20 per cent of whose exports normally go to Italy, 
they may also prove a boomerang for the Italian 
population. Even before the application of sanc- 
tions and licenses, prices of gasoline and various 
foodstuffs have soared sky-high in Italy and con- 
tinue to rise, in spite of the government’s struggle 
against profiteering. 

Italy’s determination to resist League sanctions 
appears to have been strengthened by the incon- 
clusiveness of diplomatic negotiations with France 
and Britain. Sir Eric Drummond, British Am- 
bassador to Rome, is reported to insist that Italy 


withdraw two more divisions from Libya and 
abandon anti-British propaganda in the govern- 
ment-controlled press; while Mussolini, who has 
already moved one division from the Libyan fron- 
tier to the interior of Tripoli, refuses to take fur- 
ther action until Britain recalls some of its 
more powerful battle cruisers from the Mediter- 
ranean. Many Italians believe that Britain, by its 
firm stand in the Ethiopian crisis, hopes to ex- 
tract a pledge that Italy will never again challenge 
British supremacy in the Mediterranean region. 

Meanwhile, the two principal non-League coun- 
tries—Germany and the United Stateg—have 
acted independently in the direction of strength- 
ening sanctions against Italy. On November 7 the 
Hitler government announced that an embargo on 
arms and ammunition to both belligerents had 
been in force since the beginning of hostilities and 
that, if in the course of the conflict there should 
be “an extraordinary increase” in exports of cer- 
tain raw materials and foodstuffs to the detriment 
of Germany’s economic interests, the government 
would adopt “appropriate measures.” The first. 
step in that direction was taken on November 12, 
when Germany, which needs both imported and 
domestic raw materials for its own program of 
rearmament, embargoed as of November 16 a 
list of commodities which includes potatoes, ma- 
terials for iron, metallurgical and rubber indus- 
tries, and various metals and minerals, but ex- 
cludes such key raw materials as coal and copper. 
This measure, according to the Nazis, is based 
solely on internal economic necessities. It is in- 
teresting to note, however, that it coincides with 
renewed negotiations between Germany, France 
and Britain concerning a possible European settle- 
ment. Germany, it is reported, might offer to 
limit its armaments and return to the League, 
provided that France scraps its mutual assistance 
pact with the Soviet Union, which has not yet 
been ratified, and gives the Nazis a free hand in 
Eastern Europe. M. Laval, who has long favored 





























Franco-German rapprochement and was reluctant 
to sign the Soviet pact, might not be averse to 
some compromise. Such a step, however, would 
be resisted by the Nationalists who, although hos- 
tile to communism, want Soviet support against 
Germany, and by the Left groups, which want to 
collaborate with Moscow in resisting Fascism. 
The Roosevelt administration, which can take 
no action on a raw materials embargo until Con- 
gress reconvenes in January, has meanwhile made 
it increasingly plain that the United States will 
find it difficult to follow a policy of isolation. In 
his radio speech of November 7 Secretary of State 


Hull pointed out that “the shipment of arms is’ 


not the only way and, in fact, is not the principal 
way by which our commerce with foreign nations 
may lead to serious international difficulties.” He 
emphasized that “our own interest and our duty 
as a great power forbid that we shall sit idly by 
and watch the development of hostilities with a 
feeling of self-sufficiency and complacency when 
by the use of our influence, short of becoming in- 
volved in the dispute itself, we might prevent or 
lessen the scourge of war.” Similarly, President 
Roosevelt, speaking on Armistice Day at Arling- 
ton National Cemetery, pointed out that, while 
“the primary purpose of this nation is to avoid 
being drawn into war,” yet “we cannot build walls 
around ourselves and hide our heads in the sand,” 
but must seek “in every practicable way to pro- 
mote peace and to discourage war.” The issue is 
thus being more and more clearly drawn between 
those who desire outright isolation yet frequently 
refuse to forego trade with belligerents, and those 
who believe that the United States, acting inde- 
pendently of Geneva, can take action which may 
aid the League both in eliminating the causes of 
war and in stopping war once it has begun. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


GREECE RECALLS KING GEORGE II 


The Greek “plebiscite” held on November 3 
under the military dictatorship of Premier and 
Regent Marshal Kondylis resulted in an over- 
whelming victory for the monarchy. A million 
and a half ballots were cast for the “crowned re- 
public” and only 32,400 in favor of continuation 
of the so-called “uncrowned republic’—the two 
alternatives presented to the voters. The signifi- 
cance of the poll was diminished by its very size; 
despite the almost complete abstention of Repub- 
lican voters, 500,000 more ballots were cast on 
November 3 than in the plebiscite held in 1924, 
and the total vote recorded was apparently larger 
than the number of registered voters in Greece. 
Military control, stuffing of ballot boxes and com- 


Page Two =e 








plete suppression of Republican electioneering, 
as well as strict censorship of the press, make jt 
hard to believe that the plebiscite reflects the ac. 
tual opinion of the Greek people. 

King George II has nevertheless accepted his 
people’s call to the Greek throne and is expected 
to arrive in Athens on November 24. The King 
personally favors a constitutional monarchy pat- 
terned on the British model. He will consequent. 
ly find it difficult to cooperate with Regent Kon- 
dylis, who has already announced that he will re- 
main in power after the King’s return, and whose 
dictatorial policies do not square with George's 
more liberal views. At the same time the King 
will hardly be in a position to oppose the men who 
have returned him to the throne, unless he wins 
the support of the Republicans. 

Owing to tension between Britain and Italy, 
Greece has become an important strategic factor 
in the Mediterranean; this lends color to reports 
that restoration of the monarchy was desired, if 
not facilitated, by Great Britain. Hope of British 
support was apparently decisive in persuading 
George II to return despite the obvious unfairness 
of the plebiscite. It is rumored, moreover, that 
Marshal Kondylis has pro-Italian sympathies and 
might therefore oppose British use of Greek har- 
bors and aviation bases. Britain is apparently 
hopeful that restoration of King George will sta- 
bilize Greece internally and at the same time 
strengthen the country’s tendency toward a pro- 
British, anti-Italian policy. 


MILDRED S. WERTHEIMER 


F. P. A. CONTRIBUTIONS TAX-EXEMPT 


From time to time during the past year mem- 
bers have notified us that the United States 
Bureau of Internal Revenue had disallowed, as a 
deduction in computing net taxable income, con- 
tributions which they had made to the Foreign 
Policy Association. On April 26, 1929 the Bureau 
of Internal Revenue ruled that beginning with the 
year 1927 contributions to the F. P. A. were de- 
ductible on the ground that the Association is an 
educational institution. However, due to the fact 
that the Collector’s Office in the Second District 
of New York failed to include the Foreign Policy 
Association in the list of exempt organizations, in 
certain cases contributions have been disallowed. 

This matter was taken up with the Office of the 
Commissioner of Internal Revenue and we are 
advised that the Collector referred to above has 
been requested to amend his records to conform 
to the ruling made in April 1929. 

We are bringing this to the attention of members 
who may have had difficulty in this connection. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 3, November 15, 1935. Published weekly 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lestig Bust, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MICHELES Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 





