the Axis 
| College 
resulting 


mortal 
the vital 


rence on 
nounced 
‘eminded 
two un- 
S in the 
e Carib. 


the seas, 


pared to 
iven, the 
tion, for 
it, which 
hipments 
Jorse an 


y certain | 


bn Africa. 
,» reports 
partment 
1d would 
; control. 
2 of this 
r of the 
Lission to 
neces and 
y appear 
yyria, the 
eport be: 


ternative 
CONvoys. 
the Axis, 
ng factor 
still seem 
yorters in 


lazi chal: 
dy begun 


opinion, 


isolation: 
O Occupy 
s in the 
this de 
ie Exect: 


STONE 


Ann Arbor, Mi at 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


. 
y* > . e ) 
: J 5 
“J OF M44CQ 
. 


‘SMa 2 


-+C2lL7an 


D iogy 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


Dt yum FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
ee BRAR 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y 
i ast t treet, New York, N. Y. 
ot ov MICH. 


Vor. XX, No. 32 


May 30, 1941 


WAR BECOMES STRUGGLE FOR NAVAL AND AIR POWER 


ia reaching a decision as to the future course of the 
United States, President Roosevelt has had to 
weigh certain long-term factors in the world situa- 
tion which are bound to affect the course of the war 
and to determine the character of the future peace. 
Among these factors are extension of the war be- 
yond the continental boundaries of Europe; the un- 
disputed superiority of Germany in land warfare; 
the striking power of the German air-force against 
the British navy in narrow waters, as shown most 
recently during the battle for Crete; and the need 
to give the Western peoples a psychological orienta- 
tion toward the future, away from a past which is 
now irrecoverable. 

1. Extension of War Outside Europe. At the out- 
break of war in September 1939 it was possible for 
many Americans to believe that the conflict was 
concerned with purely European issues, and would 
leave the Western Hemisphere unaffected. While 
Hitler, by 1939, had already visualized the war as a 
struggle for world power, he, too, was preoccupied 
in the first place with domination of Europe. At that 
time, he even contemplated some measure of coop- 
eration between a German-dominated Europe and 
the British Empire, which was to be excluded from 
all influence over the continent. 

In the course of the war, however, it has become 
necessary for the Nazis—even if they had not origi- 
nally contemplated campaigns outside Europe—to 
overflow into Africa and Asia and to challenge 
Britain in the Atlantic, in an effort to crush the Brit- 
ish navy and to cut Britain’s communications with 
the United States and the British Dominions, which 
have become both the larder and the arsenal of the 
British Isles. This extension of war to other con- 
tinents demonstrates, in itself, that the Nazis are not 
adhering to their often-proclaimed plan for division 
of the world into continental units, each ruled by a 
Master-race, and that the United States cannot 


achieve isolation within its continental boundaries. 
Whatever differences of opinion may divide Ameti- 
cans today, both isolationists and interventionists 
agree on one point—that the United States should 
be prepared to defend not only its own territory, but 
the Western Hemisphere as a whole. 

2. Change in Character of War. As the war de- 
velops into a conflict between continents, its char- 
acter becomes rapidly altered. From September 1939 
until the close of the Balkan campaign in April 
1941, the war had been chiefly a contest between 
land forces, supported from the air. In this contest, 
the Germans demonstrated unquestionable superiori- 
ty, both in terms of man power and mechanized 
equipment. It is estimated that, as a minimum, the 
Germans have 250 divisions, or 3,750,000 men, un- 
der arms; of these 250 divisions, barely 30 were used 
in the Balkan campaign. No army in the world is 
prepared today to confront that of Germany on the 
continent of Europe. The Soviet Union could prob- 
ably mobilize greater man power and has experi- 
mented with many of the devices used by the Ger- 
mans, notably parachute troops; but military experts 
are virtually unanimous in believing that the Red 
Army could not compete with the Germans either 
in leadership, or in training and equipment. More- 
over, the German army is backed by a modern and 
efficient industry, drawing on the industrial resources 
and skilled labor of conquered Europe which could 
not be matched in the U.S.S.R. The British, on the 
basis of their experience at Dunkirk, in the Balkans 
and in North Africa, believe that their troops, man 
for man, can outmatch the Germans, but acknowl- 
edge that they do not have equality in numbers, and 
that their mechanized equipment, especially tanks, 
is inferior to that of the Germans in quantity, al- 
though possibly not in quality. 

Now that the war has spread outside Europe, the 
Germans are turning from land to intensified sea 


= = Page Two —. 


and air warfare. The battle for Crete, where a su- 
perior German air force has apparently wreaked 
havoc on the British navy, and the sinking of the 
Hood and the Bismarck, mark a new stage in the war. 
Until now, there has been considerable difference 
of opinion among military experts regarding the vul- 
nerability of warships to attack from the air. The 
battle for Crete, although not conclusive, again demon- 
strates the effectiveness of a first-class air force when 
pitted against naval units close to land. The Ger- 
mans, for the time being, have air superiority, and 
now that they control the Atlantic seaboard, can 
harry the British navy and merchant fleet. 

The war has thus become a contest for control 
of the air and of the high seas. What Britain needs 
most urgently today are long-range bombers and war- 
ships. Discussion of whether the United States may 
be called on to send an expeditionary force to 
Europe or Africa is, for the moment, premature on 
two counts: first, this country does not have a suf- 
ficiently large mechanized force available for such 
a purpose at the present time; second, operations on 
land against Germany would become feasible only 
if Germany had first been defeated in the naval and 
air struggle now raging in the Atlantic and the 
Mediterranean. If Germany can win the contest for 
control of the high seas, it will have won the war. 
If not, it would have to confine its activities to the 
European continent, where it would ultimately have 
to face the passive resistance of millions of Euro- 
peans, as well as the possibility that Britain might 
eventually achieve equality, and even superiority, in 
the air. Germany’s immediate purpose is to prevent 
American naval aid to Britain, by demonstrating its 
own naval strength, stressing collaboration with 
France, and threatening the United States with Jap- 
anese intervention in the Pacific. 


3. Beyond the War—W hat? It is legitimate for 
those who fear the effects of war on the United 
States more than the effects of Nazi victory to ask 
whether, under the present circumstances, it is pos- 
sible to defeat Germany in Europe. No one, no mat- 
ter how well informed, can possibly give a dogmatic 


READ... 


WAR ON THE SHORT WAVE 
by Harold N. Graves, Jr. 


This Headline Book, just published, presents radio’s 
new role as a war weapon, and describes Nazi 
efforts to sway both neutral and enemy opinion, 


as well as British countermeasures. - - - 25c. 


——— 


answer to this question. The defeat of Nazism fe. 
quires far more than mere equality in man power and 
armaments—assuming that Britain and the United 
States can achieve such equality by sacrifices commep. 
surate with those accepted by the Germans since 1933, 
It requires, above all, mobilization in the Wester 
world of psychological forces which could transform 
apathy into enthusiasm, defeatism into hope for the 
future. This cannot be accomplished here, any more 
than it was in Europe, until the Western peoples 
become convinced that they are fighting not againg 
something, but for something. Whatever course of 
action is adopted by the United States, it must be 
coupled with a vision, however general in formulg. 
tion, of the kind of peace the Western peoples hope 
to establish in case of victory. Without such a vision, 
the most painstaking preparations for defense of the 
Western Hemisphere may prove as easy to circum. 


vent as the Maginot Line. VgRA MICHELES Dray 


INDEX to Foreign Policy Reports Available 
The Index to Volume XVI (March 15, 1940 to 
March 1, 1941) is now ready, and we shall be glad 
to send a copy to FPR subscribers who write for it 
(Library subscribers will receive their copies of 
the Index as usual.) 


United We Stand! Defense of the Western Hemisphere, by 
Hanson W. Baldwin. New York, Whittlesey House, 1941. 
$3.00 


The military correspondent of The New York Times has 


written what is at once the best survey of the state of our 
defenses and the keenest critique to which our armed ser- | 
vices have been subjected in recent years. 


The Anatomy of British Sea Power, by Arthur J. Marder, } 


New York, Knopf, 1940. $5.00 


An exhaustive study of the evolution of Britain’s naval 
policies during the years 1880-1905, when many aspects of 
modern naval doctrine took shape. The product of years of 
careful research, this book should be in the possession of 


all students of sea power and related subjects. 


Invasion in the Snow, by John Langdon-Davies. Boston, / 


Houghton, Mifflin, 1941. $2.50 

A revealing study, written for the layman, of the stra- | 
tegies of the opposing sides in the Russo-Finnish war. Al | 
though a prominent British leftist, the author is in ful 
sympathy with the Finns and finds no valid excuse for th 
Russian invasion. 


England’s Hour, by Vera Brittain. New York, Macmillas, 
1941. $2.50 


A sensitive English author records her impressions ané 
experiences during the first year of the war. A pacifist, | 
she accuses the “guilty politicians” who governed Engiané 
after 1919 of responsibility for the failure to make a dut 
able peace. If a better world is to emerge from the preset 
holocaust, individuals and nations must reject power anl| 
accept love as their guiding principle. : 


— 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 32, May 30, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nation! 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHeres Dean, Eéitor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
> 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 

F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


GE 
strugs 
Ameri 
of a di 
to take 
that t 
elimin 
of fin 
mately 
Aéreo 
trolled 
sary al 

The 
paign 
in the 
nated 
ously 1 
man fp 
line w 
Pan A: 
as Arc 
pilots, 
Colom 

As 
of this 
the pl 
branch 


' contro 


cided | 
for th 
Callao 
coura’ 


As ; 


| the sn 


Ecuad 
curtail 
oil col 
line w 
future 
Sedta’ 
northe 
air act 
Ameri 
Here 

netwo 


TH 
An an 
and th 
to Pe: 


I 7” mor 


cop) 


—= 


ZiSM fe. 
wer and 
United 
Oommen. 
ce 1933, 
W estern 
ansform 
- for the 
Ny more 
peoples 
| against 
ourse of 
must be 
Formula. 
les hope 
a Vision, 
e of the 

circum 
iS DEAN 


able 


1940 to 
be glad 
te for it 
pies of 


sphere, by 
use, 1941, 


limes has 
ate of our 
rmed ser- 


|. Marder, 


in’s naval 
aspects of 
f years of 
session of 


s. Boston, 


the stra 
n war. Al 
is in ful 
se for th 


Macmillan, 


ssions and 
A pacifist, 
i Engian 
ake a dur 
he present 
power ant 


—— nl 


-d. Nations 
EAN, Editon, 


GERMAN AIR LINES ELIMINATED. The 
struggle to displace Nazi air lines operating in South 
America has been carried a step further as a result 
of a decision by the Bolivian government on May 15 
to take over Lloyd Aéreo Boliviano. It is understood 
that this company will be reorganized after the 
dimination of German personnel and the severance 
of financial ties with German interests. Approxi- 
mately half the route formerly served by Lloyd 
Aéreo Boliviano will be transferred to the U.S.-con- 
trolled line of Pan American Grace, once the neces- 
sary authorization and subsidy have been secured. 


The first and most impressive victory in the cam- 
paign to clip Nazi wings in Latin America was won 

in the spring of 1940 when the large German-domi- 
tated Scadta line of Colombia, operating danger- 
ously near the Panama Canal, was eliminated. Ger- 
man pilots and technicians were removed, and the 
line was reorganized as Avianca, with the help of 
Pan American Airways. Recently, a small line known 
as Arco, which had been started by two ex-Scadta 
pilots, was absorbed into Avianca, thus making the 
Colombian round-up complete. 


A second major victory was achieved on April 1 
of this year, when the Peruvian government seized 
the planes and ground establishment of the local 
branch of Lufthansa. Suppression of this German- 
controlled air line had already been officially de- 
cided upon, but action was accelerated in retaliation 
for the scuttling of German ships in the harbor of 
Callao. Peru’s vigorous measures undoubtedly en- 
couraged Bolivia in tackling its own problem. 

As a result of action by the Peruvian government, 
the small Nazi air line of Sedta, which operates in 
Ecuador, has been isolated. Sedta has already had to 
curtail its services, owing to refusal by a Canadian 
oil company in Peru to supply further fuel, and the 
line will probably disappear completely in the near 
future. Pan American Grace is already duplicating 
Sedta’s routes. Thanks to these developments in 
northern, western and central South America, Nazi 
air activity on a large scale is now, as far as Latin 
America is concerned, pretty well restricted to Brazil. 


Here the Condor line still maintains an extensive 
network. 


THE ECUADOREAN-PERUVIAN DISPUTE. 
An announcement to the effect that Argentina, Brazil 


and the United States are offering their joint services 
to Peru and Ecuador to help settle their boundary 


TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA 


By JOHN I. B. McCULLOCH sees 


controversy focuses attention on one of the gravest 
problems now challenging inter-American statesman- 
ship. Since the end of the three-year Chaco war be- 
tween Bolivia and Paraguay (1932-1935) and the 
subsequent negotiation of a settlement between the 
nations involved, the Ecuadorean-Peruvian dispute 
has represented the most serious outstanding issue 
between any pair of Western Hemisphere republics. 

Within the past two months, first Venezuela and 
Colombia, then Panama and Costa Rica, have en- 
tered into frontier agreements terminating century- 
old disputes. The issue between Ecuador and Peru 
is more serious than either of these, however, both 
in extent of area involved and in degree of ill-will. 
Feeling has run particularly high in Ecuador, where 
persistent newspaper reports of Peruvian advances 
in the south have led to vigorous defense prepara- 
tions. To prevent widening of this breach in inter- 
American solidarity, and to forestall attempts by the 
Nazis to turn the troubled situation to their ad- 
vantage, the United States, in conjunction with the 
two most important powers of the South American 
continent, presented a joint mediation proposal, of- 
ficially announced on May 9. 

Reactions in Ecuador and Peru have differed 
widely. In Ecuador, by far the weaker of the two, 
the offer has been accepted unconditionally, and 
enthusiastically acclaimed. Peru’s acceptance, how- 
ever, includes reservations: the government is not 
prepared to debate the nationality of the three prov- 
inces of Jaén, Tambez and Mainas, which Lima has 
considered Peruvian territory for 120 years. Appar- 
ently Peruvians are worried by the use of the word 
“equity” in the mediation offer. They fear this means 
a large-scale reshuffling of frontiers and provinces. 
Impressive demonstrations have been held in the 
Peruvian capital, backing the government in its 
avowed intention of permitting no infringement of 
national sovereignty. There are indications that anti- 
United States circles in Peru will attempt to soft- 
pedal participation of Argentina and Brazil in the 
proposal, and to turn current resentment in Lima 
against the North American republic alone. 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: AMERICA CHARTS ITS COURSE 
Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 
Date: Sunday, June 1 
Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 
Station: NBC, blue network 


For more extensive coverage on Latin American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS, 4 bi-weekly newsletter edited by Mr. McCulloch. For sample 


copy of this publication, write to the Washington Bureau, Foreign Policy Association, 1200 National Pre 


s Building, Washington, D.C. 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


May 26.—The debate on America’s rdle in the 
war reached a high point of tension last weekend 
as Washington awaited President Roosevelt's state- 
ment to the nation and the world. In both Congress 
and the executive branch of the government ob- 
servers found a reflection of the widening area of 
conflict abroad in the widening concept of defense 
held by representatives of the American people. 


EXPANDING DEFENSE CONCEPTS. This ex- 
panding concept of defense was revealed by unex- 
pected moves: isolationist leaders united with inter- 
ventionists to urge immediate occupation of all 
French possessions in the Western Hemisphere; 
dollar-a-year men joined with New Dealers to de- 
mand government intervention in critical defense 
industries; OPM officials supported Washington 
columnists in outspoken criticism of existing pro- 
duction schedules and administrative confusion. 

To some observers, this response to the deepening 
crisis seemed to hold the promise of greater unity 
and to suggest a common ground for action based 
on the widest application of the doctrine of hemi- 
sphere defense and sheer self-interest. To others, it 
pointed to war. To still others, even the broadest 
extension of the hemisphere formula appeared too 
narrow a base on which to build foreign and do- 
mestic policies adequate for the emergency. 

In the field of foreign policy, members of the 
President's Cabinet projected a course looking well 
beyond the Western Hemisphere to counter the Nazi 
challenge on the seas. Renewing their warning that 
the United States would not surrender control of the 
seas to any combination of hostile powers, Secre- 
taries Stimson and Knox publicly urged repeal of the 
Neutrality Act to permit a return to the “‘traditional” 
American policy of freedom of the seas. 

Secretary Hull was no less emphatic. At his press 
conference on May 26 Mr. Hull took official cog- 
nizance of a statement by Grand Admiral Raeder in 
which the commander-in-chief of the German navy 
was quoted as saying that American convoy opera- 
tions would be regarded as “an act of war.” It was 
indicated in Washington that this threat of Nazi 
reprisals—delivered in an interview with a Japanese 
correspondent in Berlin—would draw an even 
stronger reply than the German warning of April 26. 
that the Red Sea was to be considered a war zone. 
In that instance, the Administration reaffirmed its 


decision to send some 28 American merchant 
to the Red Sea, presumably with naval escorts, 
deliver war supplies to British forces in the N 
East. 

On the domestic front, statements by leading de. 
fense officials last week introduced a sharper note 
of urgency and self-criticism. An official summary 
of 12 months’ progress in the defense effort, released 
by the Office of Emergency Management on May 25, 
frankly recognized shortcomings that had bee 
glossed over in earlier reports and acknowledged 
that the record was “not good enough.” The report 
went on to show that, while the expenditure of more 
than 42 billion dollars had been authorized or pro. 
jected, only about 45 per cent of this sum had beep 
contracted for. Contracts actually awarded up ty 
May 1 totaled 15.2 billion dollars, with an addi. 
tional 3.7 billion in orders for Britain. Even more dis. 
turbing was the continued bottleneck in machine 
tool production and the resulting lag in the ordnance 
and airplane program. 

The strongest plea for expansion of defense pro 
duction and the sharpest criticism of administrative 
confusion came from a prominent business man on 
the staff of OPM. In a statement broadcast on May 
15, W. L. Batt, Deputy Director of the Production 
Division, declared that ‘‘a radical change of attitude 
on the part of some people in Government, some 
people in labor and some people in industry mus 
take place if we are to make good our promises.’ 
Calling for drastic expansion all along the line, Mr. 
Batt warned that “we cannot produce the vast quat- 
tities of fighting material which must be produced 
and at the same time preserve our standard of living 
in terms of automobiles and electric conveniences 
and leisure hours.” 

In Congress division of opinion persisted despite 
the growing pressure of events. Most observers who 
know Congressional sentiment agree that an attempt 
to pass legislation to repeal the Neutrality Act ot 
to ‘authorize’ convoys would encounter strong opp 


sition. On the other hand, there is virtual unanim | 


ity on the need for speeding up the entire defenst 
program and any measures essential for defense of 
the Western Hemisphere. If the Executive is able to 
base its policy on the expanded concept of hem 
sphere defense, it is assured of overwhelming sup 
port in both the Senate and the House. Congress, 
like the country, is waiting for the President to lead 
W. T. STONE 


Vou. X 


[N th 
mat 
portan 
recent 
many « 
gle be 
for co! 
linked 
the in: 
lie mé 
and th 
streng 
the on 
with J 

ST. 
Japan 
the m 
fense 
strug 
scatte: 
tinues 


fesuul 
consti 
fense 

shiprr 
Ching 
munit 


be ab 


In 
| ther « 


| in the 
Secre’ 
| Mini: 
tage 
Ame: 
peace 
order 
Gove 
certa 


