











a +. ys"  ~.., Entered as 2nd class matter 
“ee ~- . Sip ry 
: De 


FOREIGN POLICY BULEETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vo. XX, No. 34 


—_—_ 


JuNE 13, 1941 





BRITAIN AND DE GAULLE CLASH WITH VICHY OVER SYRIA 


—e the initiative from Germany in the Near 
East, British Imperial and Free French forces in- 
yvaded the French-mandated territories of Syria and 
the Lebanon on June 8, thereby forestalling a prob- 
able “peaceful penetration’’ by Axis forces operating 
from Crete and the Italian Dodecanese islands. The 
presence of Nazi detachments in Syrian airfields, 
admitted by an acquiescent Vichy government, was 
cited by Allied spokesmen as justification of the 
attack. 

The objective of the new campaign is primarily 
strategic. Although the French mandates on the 
Levant coast cover only 57,900 square miles, they 
occupy an important position at the crossroads of 
the Near East. Railroads and highways lead south- 
ward to Palestine, Egypt and Arabia, and eastward to 
Iraq and the Persian Gulf. Syria and the Lebanon 
cover the northern approaches to the Suez Canal 
and provide the only land link with Turkey avail- 
able to the Allies. The configuration of the area 
favors the British and French troops, for near the 
coast the valleys of the Lebanese mountains give 
easy access from Palestine, and inland along the 
borders with Transjordan and Iraq there are no na- 
tural obstacles. 

The mandate for the rorthern part of the Levant 
coast was assigned to France in 1920. Although the 
fegion is administered as a single unit for customs 
and fiscal purposes, it is divided into two political 
entities—the Republics of the Lebanon and of Syria. 
The former, a small area lying along the Mediter- 
fanean and including the important ports of Beirut 
and Tripoli, contains a small majority of Christians, 
and is more Europeanized than the predominantly 
Moslem Arab state of Syria proper. The history of 
the French mandates has been marked by contro- 
vetsy, riot and bloodshed, stemming principally from 
the passionate desire of the Syrian nationalists for 
an independent state linked with other Arab lands 


in a Pan-Arab league. The least they expected was a 
quasi-independent status like that granted by the 
British to Egypt in 1930 and to Iraq in 1932. The 
nationalists were first placated by the negotiation of 
Franco-Syrian and Franco-Lebanese treaties in 1936 
providing for independent responsible governments 
and military alliances with France for 25 years, and 
then outraged by the refusal of the Paris govern- 
ment to ratify the treaties. It is significant that Gen- 
eral Georges Catroux, representing the Free French 
committee, has repeated Foreign Minister Anthony 
Eden’s pledge of May 29 to guarantee to the Syrians 
and Lebanese an “independent and sovereign status.” 

Besides this appeal to elements within the French 
territories, the British hope to weaken Vichy’'s forces 
by inviting the French troops to join the de Gaulle 
movement. General Henri Dentz, the French High 
Commissioner, however, is reported to have removed 
many officers suspected of Free French tendencies, 
while the colonial troops are expected to obey the 
commands of their superiors. With only 30,000 to 
50,000 men at his command and with limited num- 
bers of weapons, vehicles and supplies, General 
Dentz must receive reinforcements from the Axis 
if he is to make a successful stand. 

Allied concentration on Iraq and Syria has en- 
abled the Axis to strengthen forces elsewhere for the 
threatened attack on Suez. Increased pressure on 
British forces in the western desert of Egypt and 
air raids on Alexandria, with its vital naval base, is 
reflected in the governmental crisis at Cairo, where 
the cabinet of Hussein Sirry Pasha resigned on 
June 4. The British are pressing the King for more 
active cooperation, but the aversion of almost all 
Egyptians for war against the Germans will prob- 
ably prevent any positive aid to the Allied armies. 
In Ankara, Nazi diplomats are apparently content 
to ask only an increase of trade between Turkey and 
the Reich, as indicated in the new commer-‘al agree- 














ment of June 6. The existence of a through rail route 
from the Dardanelles to Syria, already being used 
for the transportation of German supplies, suggests 
the possibility of further demands on Ankara for 
cooperation in the Axis drive to the East. The possi- 


WASHINGTON AND LONDON SCOTCH PEACE RUMORS 


As the international civil war latent in the world 
conflict broke out into the open in Syria, rumors 
were circulated that Hitler might launch a peace 
offensive before becoming involved in the next phase 
of the war—the campaign for control of the Near 
East. These rumors, which according to President 
Roosevelt's statement of June 6 were instigated by 
Germany, had started with a series of outwardly dis- 
connected developments in April and May—notably 
the Japan Times Advertiser article outlining Axis 
peace terms, the still mysterious flight of Rudolph 
Hess, and suggestions in the German-controlled 
Paris press that the United States should offer its 
services as a mediator. Peace rumors were accom- 
panied by reports that the British, shocked by their 
defeat in Crete, had warned the United States they 
would have to sue for peace unless this country ac- 
tively entered the conflict; and simultaneous dis- 
closures from several sources that Hitler was on the 
point of proclaiming a “United States of Europe” 
which, it was intimated, would be willing to col- 
laborate with the Americas. 

Further impetus to these reports was given by the 
sudden return to Washington of Mr. Winant, 
American Ambassador to Britain, who was said to 
have made the trip for the special purpose of con- 
veying Britain’s warning to President Roosevelt. It 
would seem, however, that such a warning, if made 
at all, would have been delivered by the British in 
advance of the President's fireside chat of May 27. 
Close on the heels of reports from Washington re- 
garding the nature of Mr. Winant’s mission, Ameri- 
can newspapers and Life Magazine published an 
interview with Hitler obtained by John Cudahy, for- 
mer American Ambassador to Belgium, in which 
the Fuhrer ridiculed fears of a German attack on the 
Western Hemisphere, at the same time warning the 
United States that ‘convoys mean war.” 


These various rumors were scotched by the Presi- 
dent on June 6. They were also answered by Mr. 





We produce 20 times more oil than Axis Europe; 
we are the most important factor in the oil econ- 
omies of Britain and Japan. What is our oil policy? 
To whom do we export? What is the oil tanker 
situation? READ: 


OIL AND THE WAR 
by Louis E. Frechtling 


June 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports .. . 25c. 





Page Two 














——— 


bility of the Nazis operating from Iran to outflank 
British positions in Iraq is suggested by persisten 
rumors that many Germans, traveling via th 
U.S.S.R., have arrived in Teheran. 

Louis E. FRECHTLING 


Winant in a statement to a group of Senators on the 
same day, to the effect that Britain is in “an e& 
tremely grave” position, but does not face “any im. 
mediate or impending disaster”; and by Joseph ¢ 
Grew, American Ambassador to Tokyo, who wrote 
a group of American church workers on June 7 that 
peace with Germany at this time is “utterly impos. 
sible.” Meanwhile, in London, the annual British 
Labor party conference, by a majority of 2,450,009 
to 19,000, rejected a compromise peace, and re 
affirmed its determination “‘to fight until Nazism and 
Fascism are overthrown’; and Ernest Bevin, British 
Minister of Labor, in a statement broadcast from 
London to the National Conference of Social Work 
at Atlantic City on June 3, declared that Britain's 
working masses will oppose all appeasement talk, 
because ‘‘we will not be driven back into slavery.” 
It may be noted that Mr. Bevin was the only British 
official who, on May 15, publicly denounced Hess 

While it is obviously difficult to document Mr. 
Roosevelt's statement of June 6 that the variow 
peace rumors can be traced to Axis sources, it is true 
that Axis press statements and radio broadcasts for| 
the past few weeks reveal views so similar to these 
rumors as to represent more than a mere coincidence 
It is understandable that Germany, having won cop- 
trol of virtually the entire European continent, might 
now pause before embarking on conquest of the 
British Empire, in the hope, as one Italian news 
paper put in on June 8, that the war might end in 
Britain's ‘‘adjustment’’ to “the new historic situs 
tion.’’ Such a pause is all the more natural at a mo 
ment when President Roosevelt has indicated that 
he and his advisers will determine where and by 
what means an attack on the security of the Westem 
Hemisphere is to be met, and when American arms 
ment production is being speeded up under the terms 
of unlimited national emergency. Equally under 
standable is the attitude of those Americans who 
ask themselves whether the British may not, in ft 





ality, be ready to sue for peace, and whether this may 
not be an appropriate time to explore peace terms, | 


before an expanding war has taken still greater toll) ° 


of men and economic resources. 

No reasonable human being can welcome pie 
longation of the war. The natural desire of all people 
for peace offers perhaps the most fruitful field for 
Nazi propaganda, since any attempt to answer argu 
ments against war can be dismissed as “warmonget 





—_— 


ing. 
that | 
those 
tion, 

in ot 
posed 
ally f 
as th 
are C 
victor 
less t 
the | 
could 
undet 
count 
territ 
the A 
the t 
if ne 
West 
to Sa 
even 

of pe 
prese 
State: 
to Sai 


FORE] 
Headqn 
Entere: 


=> 


RRR 


“se 


rom 


Lin's 


i0us 
true 
- for 
hese 
nice. 
Con 
uight 

the 
ews 


d in 


that 


stern 











— Page Three 





ing.” Yet European experience has demonstrated 
that the Nazis, while suppressing in Germany all 
those who urged peace and international collabora- 
tion, have used to their own advantage all elements 
in other countries who, for a variety of reasons, op- 

sed war. Discussions of a “negotiated peace’’ usu- 
ally neglect two points: first, that the Axis powers, 
as the Japan Times Advertiser candidly admitted, 
are contemplating not a negotiated peace, but a 
victors’ dictated peace; and second, that peace, no 
less than war, will require sacrifices by Britain and 
the United States. It is conceivable that Europe 
could have remained at peace almost indefinitely 
under one of two alternatives: either the Western 
countries could, of their own volition, have made the 
territorial and economic concessions demanded by 
the Axis powers; or else they could have armed to 
the teeth and prevented the Axis powers, by force 
if necessary, from fulfilling their ambitions. But the 
Western powers, before 1939, were ready neither 
to sacrifice for peace nor to sacrifice for war. And 
even today many of those who discuss the possibility 
of peace with Germany apparently think in terms of 
preserving the status quo for Britain and the United 
States, even if it should prove regrettably necessary 
to sacrifice Europe to the Nazis or China to Japan. 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: THE FIGHT FOR THE NEAR EAST 
Speaker: Louis E. Frechtling 

Date: Sunday, June 15 

Time: 2:15 p.m. E.D.S.T. 

Station: NBC, blue network 











Most people still find it difficult to believe that 
there can be no return to the past—that the choice is 
not between Hitler's “new order” and restoration of 
the world as it existed in 1939, but a choice between 
Hitler's “new order” and a forward-looking peace 
settlement that might be worked out by the Western 
powers if and when they check the military opera- 
tions of the Axis. Nor can the peace terms that might 
be offered by Britain and the United States be lim- 
ited any longer to platitudes regarding “brotherhood 
of nations” and “equal distribution of raw ma- 
terials.” They must have the quality of rousing the 
imagination and inspiring the collaboration of Eu- 
rope’s conquered peoples, of China, of Latin Amer- 
ica, of the Arabs and others, who have no sympathy 
for Hitler’s ‘“‘new order,’ but who were also not 
satisfied with 1939 conditions, and do not necessarily 
see the shape of things to come from a purely Anglo- 


American point of view. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The Wounded Don’t Cry, by Quentin Reynolds. New York, 
Dutton, 1941. $2.50 
Vividly moving eye-witness report of the spirit of people 
hard-pressed by war’s terror in France and England. 


Juggernaut Over Holland, by E. N. van Kleffens. New 
York, Columbia University Press, 1941. $2.00 


The Netherland Foreign Minister sketches his country’s 


struggle to preserve its neutrality and draws a graphic 
picture of the German invasion. 


Speak Up for Democracy, by Edward L. Bernays. New 
York, Viking Press, 1940. $1.00 


A credo of Democracy, followed by manifold suggestions 
to the citizen indicating how he can become more effective 


in maintaining and improving the democratic system. Pre-' 


pared by an outstanding advertising executive. 


Not By Arms Alone, by Hans Kohn. Cambridge, Mass., 
Harvard University Press, 1940. $1.75 


Stimulating essays attempting an historical and juridical 
analysis of the world crisis, by the author of “Revolutions 
and Dictatorships.” 


Political Handbook of the World, edited by Walter H. Mal- 
lorry. New York, Council on Foreign Relations, 1941. 
$2.50 


The fourteenth edition of this valuable reference work 
for students of foreign affairs. Unfortunately the editor 
devotes only a few lines to the political and juridical 
changes produced by the German conquests. 





The Industrialization of Japan and Manchukuo: 1980-1940. 
Edited by E. B. Schumpeter. New York, Macmillan, 
1940. $7.50 


A technical study dealing mainly with the past decade 
of Japanese economic development, this work by five dif- 
ferent experts is a storehouse of information. It includes 
sections on population problems (E. B. Schumpeter, E. F. 
Penrose), agriculture and raw materials (E. F. Penrose), 
the organization and development of Japanese industry 
to 1937 (G. C. Allen), on industrial policy and develop- 
ment in Japan, Korea and Manchukuo since 1936 (E. B. 
Schumpeter), and on Japan’s balance of international 
payments (M. S. Gordon). Its conclusions stress Japan’s 
economic grievances, as well as the strength of the Jap- 
anese economy. 


The Quest for Peace Since the World War, by William E. 
Rappard. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 
1940. $4.00 


The Foundation of a More Stable World Order, edited by 
Walter H. C. Laves. Chicago, University of Chicago 
Press, 1941. $2.00 


These two books are invaluable for a discussion of the 
political system to be established at the end of the present 
war. Mr. Rappard, with an intimate knowledge of the in- 
ternational institutions which operated in Geneva, ex- 
amines thoroughly and critically the League, the World 
Court, and the disarmament conferences. The second vol- 
ume incorporates the views of historians, an economist, 
a geographer, and a political scientist on the necessary 
bases for a durable peace. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 34, JuNgE 13, 1941. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lggt, Secretary; VERA MicHEeLes Dgan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
Bris Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JUNE 9.—There should be no doubt about the 
gravity of the decisions which confront Washington 
with the extension of hostilities to Syria. For the 
new campaign which opened in the Middle East this 
week, bringing French troops into conflict with their 
own countrymen and their former British Allies, not 
only compels this government to reconsider its re- 
lations with France but involves the whole question 
of our relation to the war. 

Some indication of what may lie ahead was fur- 
nished last week, when this no-longer-neutral capi- 
tal reacted sharply to two major offensives which gave 
advance warning that another decisive turning-point 
was close at hand. The first offensive—diplomatic 
maneuvers for Franco-German collaboration — 
brought Secretary Hull’s sharp warning to the Vichy 
government. The second—a “peace offensive” 
launched on the wings of rumor and conjecture— 
provoked President Roosevelt's angry accusation 
against Nazi propaganda. 

WARNING TO VICHY. Among Washington 
correspondents, Cordell Hull's daily press confer- 
ence has never ranked as one of the capital’s most 
productive sources of news. Cautious by tempera- 
ment, and painfully conscious of his responsibility 
as official spokesman on foreign policy, Mr. Hull is 
seldom guilty of indiscretion and never speaks with- 
out thought of the consequences. As a result, his in- 
frequent statements “for the record” assume a great- 
er significance than those of any other man in Wash- 
ington except the President. 

The warning to Vichy which the Secretary deliv- 
ered at his press conference on June 5 may have been 
overdramatized in newspaper headlines, but the im- 
plications of the statement itself could not be mis- 
understood. Mr. Hull carefully avoided direct 
threats, and reviewed at length the efforts of this 
government to assist France in its difficult situation. 
But when he declared that further collaboration with 
Germany would make France “the instrument of 
aggression” against other states, he indicated clearly 
enough that the United States had already begun to 
reconsider its position. The conclusion was almost 
inescapable that if Washington's worst fears proved 
true—if France threw in its lot with the Axis—the 
American government would feel free to take any 
action deemed necessary for defense of its own in- 
terests. 

Washington’s “worst fears’ concerned the French 





colonial empire in Africa, rather than Syria; but the 
connection was obvious even before the actual fight 
ing began on June 8. Syria is the key to the oilfield 
of Mosul, the Suez Canal and the entire Middle Bag 
The French Empire in Africa, however, holds the 
key to Dakar and Casablanca facing the Atlantic 
and the “island outposts” of the Western Hemi. 
sphere. Thus Hitler's strategy was to hold out the 
promise that France could retain its colonies, map. 
dates and overseas possessions after the war, pro- 
vided only that it now resists Great Britain. And 
that, according to the Washington view, was the 
ultimate peril against which Mr. Hull had warned 
For once French troops had taken up arms agains 
their former allies, then Germany would be free ty 
enter North Africa in the guise of protectors of 
France and its empire. 

What action this government will take following 
the events in Syria depends almost entirely on Gen. 
eral Weygand’s course in North Africa. If it appear 
that Weygand persuaded Vichy not to surrender 
Africa, Washington will not force a showdown at 
once. But if events confirm the worst fears, then 
Strategic considerations alone will determine the 
course of action. 

REJECTING APPEASEMENT. If further proof 
were needed to demonstrate the present temper of 
the executive branch of the government, it was 
found in President Roosevelt's answer to the peat 
rumors which flooded Washington last week. With 
the return of Ambassador Winant from London 
on May 30, the “‘peace offensive,” under way sinc 
the middle of May, gained surprising momentum 
The fact that Mr. Winant had made an unscheduled 
flight to report to the President was magnified by 
speculation that he had come with word the British 
would have to make terms unless the United States 
entered the war at once. For nearly five days Wash 
ington buzzed with such rumors, until President 
Roosevelt’s press conference on Friday. 

Mr. Roosevelt did not deny that Germany might 
welcome a settlement based on the existing militay 
situation. Instead, he told correspondents that Mr 


Winant had not brought a peace offer from Britaia’ 


—"not even a tenth cousin of a peace offer”—and 
that the talk of peace had been deliberately inspired 
by the Nazi propaganda machine for its own ulterior 
purposes. If the President's statement did not stop 
all speculation, it left no doubt about the determin# 
tion of the Administration to reject anything 
motely resembling appeasement. W/. T. STONE 








Vou. X 


AS 
. 
countt 
at onc 
betwe 
from | 
Sine 
is the 
and th 
course 
welte: 
few s 
tion. 
camp: 
been 
of Yu 
an Ite 
and § 
Germ 
Sovie 
Sea, 
tione: 
Germ 
are f 
Germ 
Anka 
had ¢ 
all le 
too, | 
evacu 
as a | 
the € 
some 
Mini 
Strate 
the | 
was ; 
Affai 
pecte 


