at com- 
S acted 


Truman | 
avy De- 


ordina- 
of for- 


unless a | 


of Con- 
y Pres- 
»m Con- 


lenberg, | 


1 States 
ird this 
an nor 
ard the 
Oration 
January 
iar” for 
th par: 
hrough- 
nembers 
and the 
ing the 
- of ma- 
ian and 
nembers 
lied on 
devising 
1e Views 
ney has 
a, which 
ferences 
rot only 
ranches 
| Repub- 


OLLES 


ee ee cay 


SG NrRaAL ike x 


PNY. of ment Mered as 2nd class matter 


JAN 1 01946 


Ann Arbor 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


Michi 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


-| Vou. XXV, No. 12 


JANUARY 4, 1946 


r his radio address of December 30, reporting on 
the results of the Moscow Conference of Decem- 
ber 16 to 26, Secretary of State Byrnes made no pre- 
tense that the agreements reached at that conference 
by the United States, Britain and Russia were ideal, 
or covered all the matters that had brought about 
controversies between the three great powers. The 
important thing, however, as Mr. Byrnes pointed 
| out, is that the Big Three negotiations which, at the 
London Council of Foreign Ministers seemed to 
lave come to a dead end, have been resumed, and 
resumed in an atmosphere of greater effort to under- 
stand respective divergences of views. 


COMPROMISE ON PEACEMAKING. So far 
as Europe is concerned, the most welcome news is 
that the Big Three have adopted a procedure of 
peacemaking closely modeled on the proposal made 
at the close of the London Council of Foreign Min- 
isters by Dr. Evatt, Australian Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, who has become known as an indefatigable 
champion of the rights of small nations* This pro- 
cedure is to consist of three stages: first, the draft- 
ing of peace treaties by the United States, Britain 
and Russia with Italy (France to participate in 
this instance), Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria; 
and by Britain and Russia with Finland (the United 
States did not declare war on Finland). Second, 
'these draft treaties will be submitted to a peace 
conference which, in addition to the Big Three, as 
well as France and China (the latter two have been 
invited to sponsor the conference), will be attend- 
ed by ‘all members of the United Nations which 
actively waged war with substantial military force 
against enemy states,” this conference to be held not 
later than May 1, 1946. Third, upon conclusion of 
this conference and consideration of recommenda- 


*V. M. Dean, ‘‘New Approach Needed to Rebuild Bi 


I > Three Unity,’ 
Foreign Policy Bulletin, October 12, 1945. 


LOG-JAM IN PEACEMAKING BROKEN AT MOSCOW CONFERENCE 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


tions, the Big Three (and, in the case of the treaty 
with Italy, also France) will draw up final texts of 
the peace treaties. 

This procedure attempts to reconcile the view 
strongly held by Russia (and almost equally strongly 
by the United States) that it is the great powers 
which decided the outcome of the war in Europe, and 
thus are entitled to rule on the terms of peace set- 
tlement, with the prevailing sentiment of the public 
in the United States and Britain that small nations 
should have an opportunity to express their views 
about the peace terms, especially since many of them 
were the first to suffer from Hitler’s aggression. It 1s 
true that the Big Three are not bound by the recom- 
mendations of the nations participating in the peace 
conference—but. Mr. Byrnes assured the small na- 
tions that “certainly the United States would not 
agree to a final treaty which arbitrarily rejected such 
recommendations.” 

The chief problem of peacemaking in Europe is the 
position of France which, except in the case of the 
treaty with Italy, will be treated as some French 
critics point out, on the same footing as Ethiopia— 
and will have no initial voice in the negotiation of 
peace treaties with the countries of the Balkans, in 
which France has been traditionally interested as a 
counter-weight to Germany. Difficult as it obviously 
is for France to accept what appears to it a position 
of greatly diminished influence on the continent, 
French statesmanship should consider two points of 
paramount importance: France's security from te- 
newed attack by Germany, and retention of its prim- 
acy as cultural leader of Europe. If the United Na- 
tions Organization, whose General Assembly opens 
in London on January 10, succeeds in assuring the 
security of France as well as other countries—and it 
can do so only if the United States, Britain and Rus- 
sia can find a basis for long-term cooperation—then 


« 


the French will not be in such urgent need of military 
alliances east of Germany as they were before 1914 
and again after 1919. And once France no longer 
feels under pressure to maintain the military estab- 
lishment and structure of foreign loans previously 
required by its policy of eastern alliances, it will be 
in a better position to concentrate its creative ener- 
gies on those cultural achievements which have made 


Paris in the past the acknowledged world center of 
culture and taste. 


TOWARD DEMOCRACY IN THE BALKANS. 
The process of peacemaking should be speeded by 
the decisions adopted in Moscow concerning changes 
in the governments of Rumania and Bulgaria, which 
hitherto had threatened to create a conflict between 
the Western powers and Russia. Once the require- 
ments set by the Big Three have been fulfilled, the 
Rumanian and Bulgarian governments, already rec- 
ognized by Russia, will be recognized by the United 
States and Britain, thus clearing the way for conclu- 
sion of peace treaties with them. The Rumanian gov- 
ernment of Premier Groza is to be enlarged by the 
inclusion of one member each of the National Peas- 
ant party and the Liberal party. This reorganized 
government shall then declare that “free and un- 
fettered elections’’ will be held as soon as possible 
on the basis of universal and secret ballot. It shall 
also give assurances concerning the grant of free- 
dom of the press, speech, religion and association, 
regarded as essential by Western democracies. The 
performance of these tasks is to be supervised by an 
Allied commission composed of the American and 
British Ambassadors to Moscow and Russian For- 
eign Vice-Commissar Vishinsky. 

The situation in Bulgaria, where elections held on 
November 18 had resulted in an 88 per cent vote 
for the Fatherland Front, composed of the Agrarian, 
Social Democratic and Communist parties, is more 
complicated because, as Mr. Byrnes frankly stated, 
the Soviet government regards these elections as free, 
and “we do not.” The compromise reached in this 


UNITED STATES ACCEPTS ALLIED CONTROL OF JAPAN 


As a result of the agreements concluded by the 
Big Three at Moscow, 1946 is opening in a more 
hopeful atmosphere in Asia than seemed possible 
a few weeks ago. In drawing up their first far-reach- 
ing peacetime accord, paralleling the wartime pacts 
of Teheran, Yalta and Potsdam, the great powers 
have given the world new reason to hope that the 
unity which made military victory possible can be 
recreated to preserve the peace. 

The most significant of the Far Eastern agreements 
is the accord on Japan, under whose terms American 
control is to be merged into an eleven-nation set-up 
in which the United States, the U.S.S.R., Britain 
and China will each have a veto power over the 


Page Two 


es, 
—— 


case is that the Soviet government has taken “y 
itself the mission of giving friendly advice to the 
Bulgarian government with regard to the desirabjj. 
ity” of including in the cabinet of the Fatherland 
Front (now being formed) two additional repre. 
sentatives of “other democratic groups,” that js 
groups representing the Opposition, which declined 
to participate in the elections on the ground that jt 
was not given an equal opportunity at the polls. 

More far-reaching than the political agreements 
on Europe was the decision of the Big Three—who, 
according to Mr. Byrnes, at no time discussed the 
technical or scientific aspects of the atomic bomb~ 
to recommend the establishment by the United Na. 
tions of a commission to consider problems arising 
from the discovery of atomic energy and related 
matters. This commission will be responsible to the 
Security Council of the UNO, and will be composed 
of one representative from each of the eleven na 
tions on the Council, and Canada (which played 
an active part in the discovery of the atomic bomb) 
when that country is not a member of the Security 
Council. The terms of reference laid down for this 
commission follow closely those agreed upon by 
President Truman, Prime Minister Attlee and Prime 
Minister Mackenzie King of Canada during Mr. 
Attlee’s visit to Washington. 

Viewed as a whole, the agreement reached at 
Moscow cannot be described as merely dictation by 
the great powers of set terms to the small nations. 
It constitutes another attempt—and many others 
will have to be made in the years ahead—to find a 
workable compromise between the aspirations of 
the Big Three, as well as between the Big Three and 
the smaller nations. Although the smaller states are 
not necessarily more selfless than the great, their 


—————— 
them WO! 
approval 
paper CL 
on the 2 
United S 
Unqu 
Three, V 
cated scl 
tion anc 
good w! 
resentat! 
amore : 
and the 
simple i 
be reco! 
portant 
able to 
which |} 
regard 
is in no 
Americ 
Genera 
subject 
IND 
to crez 
States, 
of up | 
dent t« 
the A: 
It is u 
immec 
ship” | 
agreen 
additic 
sian at 
of a | 


intrinsic weakness makes them more dependent on 
an effective international organization for their se 
curity, and for that measure of justice and human 


understanding without which any peace would be, 


merely a scrap of paper. = Wer MICHELES DEAN 


formulation of new policies or the modification of 


those already in existence. At the same time the Sv | 


preme Commander, General MacArthur, will rt 
tain significant powers, and the United States will 
have the most important single voice among the Big 
Four. This clearly is a compromise between the 


original American view that other nations should | 
be limited to an advisory role in the administration 


of Japan, the Russian demand for four-power con: 
trol machinery in Tokyo, and the British desire to 
have more than the power to advise. 

MacARTHUR’S OBJECTIONS. General Mac 
Arthur announced on December 30 that he objected 
to the control arrangements, but would try to make 


it sub 
for th 
Korea 
More 
addre 
comm 
Kore: 
with 
It 
make 
perio 
incur 
end { 
ment 
ever, 
fricti 


FOREI 
Headqu 
second. 
one m¢ 


S arising 
1 related 
le to the 
omposed 
even na- 
h played 
c bomb) 
Security 
. for this 
upon by 
id Prime 
ring Mr, 


ached at 
tation by 
- nations. 
y others 
to find a 
tions of 
hree and 
tates are 
at, their 
ident on 
their se- 
1 human 
vould be 


ES DEAN 


cation of | 
e the Su 
will re 
ates will 
r the Big 
yveen the 
s should 
istration 
wer COn- 
desire to 


al Mac 
objected 
to make 


——/ 
— 


them work. He did not specify the reasons for his dis- 
approval, but sympathetic Congressional and news- 
aper circles have attacked the control machinery 
on the ground that it deprives MacArthur and the 
United States of a dominating position in Japan. 

Unquestionably the plan drawn up by the Big 
Three, with the concurrence of China, is a compli- 
cated scheme, containing many possibilities of fric- 
tion and requiring the highest degree of tact and 
good will on the part of the powers and their rep- 
resentatives. But international cooperation is always 
amore complex matter than action by a single state, 
and the arrangements for Japan could hardly be 
simple in view of the divergent attitudes that had to 
be reconciled within a single formula. The most im- 

rtant fact is that the three foreign ministers were 
able to agree on a cooperative policy, an objective 
which properly overrides other considerations. With 
regard to General MacArthur, the Moscow accord 
js in no sense a reflection on his services; but, like all 
American occupation officials—and this was true of 
General Eisenhower in Germany—he is necessarily 
subject to a higher political authority. 

INDEPENDENCE FOR KOREA? The intention 
to create a four-power trusteeship of the United 
States, the U.S.S.R., China and Britain “for a period 
of up to five years” before Korea becomes indepen- 
dent touched off several days of demonstrations in 
the American-held southern zone of that country. 
It is understandable that the Koreans should wish 
immediate independence and that the word “‘trustee- 
ship” therefore arouses their fears. Nevertheless, the 
agreement is an important step forward, since in 
addition to pledging the coordination of the Rus- 
sian and American occupation zones and the creation 
of a ‘provisional Korean democratic government,” 
it substitutes a maximum period of foreign control 
for the vague promise of the Cairo declaration that 
Korea is to become independent “in due course.” 
Moreover, as Secretary-Byrnes announced in his radio 
address of December 30, the joint Soviet-American 
commission which is to work with the provisional 
Korean government “may find it possible to dispense 
with a trusteeship.”’ 

It is now up to the Koreans to do their best to 
make the trusteeship unnecessary and to reduce the 
period of foreign control to a minimum, while it is 
incumbent on American opinion to seek the earliest 
end to the occupation consistent with the establish- 
ment of a functioning Korean state. In Korea, how- 
ever, as in Japan, many dangers of American-Russian 
friction will exist over such questions as the per- 


Page Three 


sonnel of the provisional Korean régime and the 
arrangements for coordinating the Russian and 
American zones. 

The least specific section of the Far Eastern de- 
cisions is the statement about China, which does not 
provide for joint action on particular problems, but 
simply asserts the common desire of the Big Three 
“for a unified and democratic China under the Na- 
tional Government, for broad participation by demo- 
cratic elements in all branches of the National Gov- 
ernment and for the cessation of civil strife.” The 
declaration will strengthen General Marshall’s posi- 
tion in China, but perhaps its most positive fea- 
ture is the reference to “broad participation in all 
branches” of the Central government, since this 
amplifies President Truman’s policy statement of 
December 15, calling for ‘‘a fair and effective repre- 
sentation” of Chinese opposition elements in “a 
broadly representative government.” This wording 
suggests that the United States would not consider 
an offer of a few Central government posts as meet- 
ing the purposes of General Marshall's mission. 

On the crucial question of Soviet troops in Man- 
churia and American forces in North China the 
statement declares that Byrnes and Molotov “were 
in complete accord on the desirability of withdrawal 
... at the earliest practicable moment consistent with 
the discharge of their obligations and responsibil- 
ities.” The Soviet forces, at the request of the Chung- 
king government, are scheduled to remain until 
February 1, but no time limit has been set for the 
American troops which, according to Byrnes’ ad- 
dress of December 30, will be withdrawn from 
North China ‘‘when the Japanese troops are disarmed 
and deported from China or when China is able to 
complete the task unassisted by us.” If recent an- 
nouncements by General Wedemeyer represent long- 
term American policy, this task is expected to take 
quite some time. 

The willingness of American political leaders to 
seek compromise formulas, in accordance with the 
desire of public opinion, has made it possible to 
retrieve some of the ground lost at the London 
Council of Foreign Ministers. Yet it must be em- 
phasized that all the agreements, including those 
on the Far East, are no more than formulas that 
remain to be applied. If they are to be carried out 
with a minimum of friction, both the home gov- 
ernments of the powers and their representatives 
abroad must continue to show the same flexibility 

that made it possible to draw up the Moscow accord. 
LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 12, January 4, 1946. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DeaAN, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at leasr 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ss: 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


FEAR OF CIVIL WAR IMPEDES OUSTING OF FRANCO 


The State Department is at present awaiting a note 
from the French Foreign Office to learn whether the 
French government is willing to summon a confer- 
ence at which the United States, Britain and France 
could discuss whether the three countries would serve 
their best interests by taking steps for the ouster of 
General Francisco Franco as Caudillo of Spain. 
Georges Bidault, French Foreign Minister, invited 
the United States and Britain early in December to 
disclose their attitude toward severing diplomatic re- 
lations with Franco. Uncertain whether Bidault put 
the question merely to placate the three leading 
French political parties—Communists, Socialists and 
Popular Republicans—each of which has demanded 
that France break with Franco, or really wanted in- 
ternational action, the United States replied that it 
would participate in a conference on the subject. 
The next move depends on France. 


FRANCO SEEMS SECURE. While the United 
States respects France's interest in its neighbor, Spain, 
it still doubts that foreign pressure could unseat 
Franco without a bloody Spanish upheaval, which 
this country is anxious to avoid. Despite many pre- 
dictions during World War II that Franco could 
not long survive its end, El Caudillo appears to dip- 
lomatic observers to be firmly entrenched in office. 
The Spanish police and the army stand firmly by 
him, and it may be that, as long as there is no rift 
in the loyalty of the troops, foreign incitations of the 
Spanish people to revolt will prove vain. The many 
Spaniards who oppose him are stayed from action by 
memories of the horrors of the civil war of 1936 to 
1939. Meanwhile Franco keeps the opposition of the 
pre-Republic traditionalists softened by suggestions 
such as he made on July 17, 1945, that in time he 
will return the monarchy to Spain. Nevertheless, 
Spaniards in exile insist that rebellion in Spain could 
quickly be touched off from the outside. 


ANTI-FRANCO FORCES DIVIDED. The refu- 
gee resistance to Franco has been so divided on all 
questions except a common desire to oust El Caudillo 
that its membership does not offer an effective 
agency through which the United States could inter- 
vene. The exile government in Mexico City, of which 
Jose Giral was named prime minister on August 22, 
1945, is at odds not only with the Spanish com- 
munists but also with Juan Negrin, the last prime 
minister of republican Spain, who in turn differs 
with Fernando de los Rios, last republican ambassa- 
dor to the United States. However, on December 28, 


1945, Dolores Ibarruri, secretary-general of the Span. 
ish Communist party, wrote to all the anti-Frango 
exiles proposing a meeting at Paris to reconcile their 
differences. 


When Acting Secretary of State Dean Acheson te. 
ceived Negrin at the State Department on December 
15, he only sought information and made no sugges. 
tion that the United States would favor Negrin 
among the other exiles. The reception of Negrin 
constituted an unfriendly action toward Franco, but 
El Caudillo already knew that the United States dis. 
liked him. This country, it will be recalled, joined 
in the Potsdam Declaration barring Spain from the 
United Nations Organization as long as it remained 
under Franco’s rule. 


CAN BIG THREE AGREE? The possibility is said 
to exist that the United States would consent to 
breaking relations with Spain if France, which has 
only partial relations with that country, presented a 
sound argument that such a step might cause Franco 
to withdraw under peaceful conditions. Ambassador 
Norman Armour returned to the United States on 
December 21, after seeking in vain for a wedge to 
drive out Franco. The United States will not replace 
him, but it continues to maintain its Embassy in 
Madrid. Washington has found the Spanish govern- 
ment cooperative in disclosing the whereabouts of 
Germans in Spain whom the Allies want expelled 
and in breaking up German economic interests in 
Spain. But the Franco government is discriminating 
against our commerce by the application of his 
autarchical economic policy, which limits imports 
from the United States by stingy allocation of for- 
eign exchange. 


The decision of the United States and France on 
Spain would be affected strongly by Britain’s attitude 


toward the advisability of severing relations with | 


Franco. British Foreign Minister Ernest Bevin has 
said that his government “detests the Franco régime,” 
but Britain, at a time when its sources of imports 
are few, may not want to jeopardize the flow of 
food and raw materials it obtains from Spain under 
favorable trade relations. The long-standing British 
desire that Franco give way to a monarchy is said to 
be weakening, but the question remains whether 
France, the United States, Britain and the Soviet 
Union could readily agree on the successor régime 
they would prefer. 
BLAIR BOLLES 


1918- 


T has 
that, 
lied po 
fermen 
after a 
is no re 
lution 
rescript 
claims 
reflects 
country 
tion pc 
charact 
Gener: 
in Jap: 
as rele 
and es 
ing th 


seven | 


| and bz 


ous Ca 
nation 


HA 
Imper 
that t 
peopl. 
the w 
thing 
to dri 
ment, 
the b 
is it 
on th 
gagec 
their 
again 
it eve 
mode 


