SEE 
——_—_____ 


fer re- 
-netra- 
t raid- 
uiyuan 
dvanc- 
| prov- 
munist 
rd ad- 
yement 
‘essure 
politi- 
ement, 
Shiang 
panese 
eaders 
> move 
oncen- 
ve per- 
ons of 
o fight 


by op- 
panese 
om the 
in the 
etween 
uation. 
yme an 
ountry 
nst the 


SSON 


udents 
Sontest 
Vation. 
ind 38 
ded to 
udying 
ind the 
| 
sity of 
ting of 


ollege; 
; Mar- 
liam J. 
cherine 


VART 


National 
N, Editor. 
ear. 


Pa ARMOR OI rv 9 
eve et Lark Ro DS 


Se nape Dae MIB Se 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


VoL. XV, No. 28 May 8, 19386 


EUROPEAN MILITARY POLICIES 
by David H. Popper 


An analysis of recent trends in military thought and or- 
ganization among the Continental states which presumably 
would become embroiled at the outset of a European con- 
flict—France, Germany, Italy and the Soviet Union. 


May 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at che Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


, aca 
r rf Co Bs Vor 
¢ 

tones De C. 


THE END OF 


ETHIOPIA? 


ESPITE assertions that he would fight to the 
finish, Emperor Haile Selassie on May 2 
took flight to French Somaliland, where he boarded 
a British warship for Palestine. His armies 
demoralized by Italian poison gas and his retreat 
to the western provinces cut off because of dis- 
affection of tribal chiefs apparently bribed by 
Italian funds, the Emperor was obliged to abandon 
his capital. The wild looting subsequently taking 
place in Addis Ababa, in which the Turkish and 
American Legations were attacked, subsided with 
the arrival of Italian troops on May 5. 

In view of the unpopularity of sanctions in 
many League states it may be expected that, since 
“war” has now ended, League sanctions will be 
lifted at the Council meeting of May 11. Al- 
though Italy’s economic position would thus be 
eased, its difficulties would by no means be solved. 
The task of maintaining an army of 500,000 men 
in Ethiopia during the rainy season, mopping up, 
and exploiting the country will be costly and dif- 
ficult. Italy has already lost much of its gold re- 
serve and foreign trade. 

The half-hearted sanctions imposed by League 
states last November did not attempt to restrain 
the Italian armies in the field. Their purpose was 
merely to weaken the foundations of Italy’s do- 
mestic economy. From the beginning it was re- 
alized that, despite this pressure, Italy could 
carry on war for at least a year; but it was hoped 
that Ethiopia would be sufficiently strong to resist 
for this period. The resources of this native 
kingdom, however, proved no match for the 
Fascist legions with their heavy artillery, tanks, 
airplanes and poison gas. 

As a result of Ethiopia’s destruction, the first 
serious effort of the League to resist a flagrant 
act of aggression has met with failure. In a 
seven months’ campaign Mussolini has belied the 
prophecies of his own staff that Ethiopia could 
not be conquered for several years. He has suc- 
cessfully resisted the efforts of the League and 


defied the British Empire. Once more it has been 
demonstrated that an aggressive dictatorship can 
acquire what it wants through, overpowering 
force and unscrupulous treaty violation without 
meeting effective resistance from the gneat status 
quo powers—most of which are liberal democra- 
cies—so long as the immediate “interests” of 
these powers are not directly involved. If the 
democracies are not eventually to be overwhelmed 
by the anti-liberal dictatorships, they must soon 
offer some form of resistance. Such resistance 
can come through a reorganized and strengthened 
League or through return to the opportunistic, 
ruthless and ineffective methods of power-politics. 
The present trend is unmistakably in the latter 
direction. Whether it continues to be so depends 
on the world’s three great democracies—France, 
Britain and the United States. 


French Uncertainty—British Chagrin 


Under both Laval and Sarraut, France refused 
to support the League against Italy because it 
desired Mussolini’s aid against Germany. To- 
day this aid seems more valuable than ever. With 
the conquest of Ethiopia, Mussolini’s prestige and 
influence in Europe have greatly increased. It is 
hardly likely that the French elections of May 3 
will alter France’s policy. Apart from the ques- 
tion whether a Socialist government can long 
maintain internal peace, France’s unprecedented 
anti-Fascist majorities may increase tension with 
Germany—especially if Léon Blum, a Jew, should 
become Premier. 

Chagrined at Mussolini’s striking victory, 
prominent sections of British opinion once more 
incline toward isolation. They blame the failure 
to check Italy on the “faulty” structure of the 
League, which in their opinion should be reorgan- 
ized so as to become either a purely humanitarian 
institution, or a concert of a few great powers. 
This type of criticism will be discounted by those 
who remember that, with the notable exception 


> genta > <eppage 


te 


hk 


of Anthony Eden, the conservatives in control 
since 1931 were never pro-League at heart, and 
that the Baldwin government belatedly and half- 
heartedly adopted a League policy only after be- 
ing driven to it by the pressure of British opinion. 
This failure to stop aggression should not be 
placed on the “League,” but on its component 
member states which hesitated to assume responsi- 
bility for upholding its authority. 

Britain today is feverishly rearming; but unless 
pro-League sentiment once more re-asserts itself, 
this strength will be used, not on behalf of a 
strengthened world organization, but to bolster 
up the old system of balance of power, which at 
best can maintain peace only for a few years. If, 
as a result of the Ethiopian debacle, Britain should 
limit its foreign policy to an alliance with France 
safeguarding the Rhine frontier, Nazi penetra- 
tion in Central and Eastern Europe would proceed 
apace, notwithstanding the opposition of France 
and Italy. Once dominant in this area Germany, 
in alliance with Japan, might eventually reduce 
France and Britain to the position of second-rate 
powers, and liberalism generally would enter a 
period of eclipse. 

The United States Rearms 

The remaining great democracy, the United 
States, is also belatedly arming. On May 1 the 
House of Representatives, despite the opposition 
of 73 Congressmen largely from the Middle West, 
voted an unprecedented naval bill, appropriating 
$531,000,000 to further the construction of 102 
naval vessels and 33 additional airplanes, and 
authorizing the building of two new battleships. 
Contrary to the pacifist view, the weakness of 
American policy is not the increase in its arma- 
ments. The weakness of the armament policy of 
both Britain and America is that it is not linked 
up with a dependable international program. In 
theory it is possible for the United States to 
bottle itself up under the New Isolation advocated 
by a number of liberals. Nevertheless, America 
today is building a military establishment far 
larger than is necessary to defend this country 
from invasion, and apparently it is the intention 
of the present administration to protect the whole 
of the Western Hemisphere against attack. At 
this session, Congress refused to abandon the 
doctrine of the freedom of the seas and neutral 
rights, and there is a strong undercurrent in favor 
of remaining in the Philippines and fortifying the 
Pacific islands. According to these trends, the 
United States will probably enter the next world 
war just as it did the last. 

The death of the League, with the return to 
power-politics, competing armaments and shift- 


Page Two — 


ing alliances, sooner or later means a new worl & 
war which is bound to injure this country se 


verely. Such a war might yet be prevented if the g 
United States would join with Britain and France § 


in placing their armaments behind a new effort a ¥ 
world organization. 
to dislodge Italy from Ethiopia or Japan fron 
Manchoukuo. But much can be done to prevent 


new aggressions on the part of the dictatorial 


powers. For numerous reasons, the United States 
will not today take the lead. But if Britain, the 
most stable, powerful and enlightened democracy § 


in the world, determines to make a new effort at | 
world organization, based on the two great prin- § 


ciples of collective security and peaceful change, 


the United States sooner or later should give such 


a movement its warm support. 
RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


THE LEFT WINS IN FRANCE 


The final French elections, held on May 3, re- 
sulted in a sweeping victory for the Popular Front 
composed of Left parties. 
creased their seats in the Chamber from 10 to 71; 
the Socialists—for the first time the largest single 
party—returned 146 deputies, a gain of 49; and 
the Radical Socialists 115. An additional group 
of dissident Communists and Socialists was 
elected, and the Popular Front may reckon on 
some 375 deputies out of a total of 618. 

This Left victory, which outstrips the most 
optimistic predictions of Popular Front sup- 
porters, apparently represents a negative vote 
against previous governments rather than an ex- 
pression of opinion regarding specific policies. 
The Socialists are reported ready to form a gov- 
ernment, which M. Léon Blum, despite his ill 
health, will probably lead. It is not yet certain 
whether the Communists will join a semi-bour- 
geois government; negotiations for a cabinet may 
in any case be expected to test the cohesive quali- 
ties of the Popular Front. The groups composing 
this Front are fundamentally agreed on only one 
issue: the menace of fascism. Meanwhile the 
financial situation grows daily more acute and the 
new Left government, scheduled to take office in 
June, will doubtless have to bear the onus of de- 
valuating the franc provided the currency is main- 
tained on the gold standard until then. The Left 
has also been more pro-sanctionist and anti-Italian 
than the Right-Center groups which have been 
governing France, but the Ethiopian catastrophe 
and the breakdown of the collective system raise 
questions of foreign policy whose solution must 
strain the resourcefulness of any government. 


M.S.W. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 28, May 8, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesiig Busit, President; EstHmr G. Ocpsn, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Today nothing can be don: } 


The Communists in- & 


‘S 


May 


