i. ‘ Entered as 2nd class matter 
|= a ; FEB 6 1943 
Za FPENMIGDICAL ROUM _— ‘sity of Wr! hican 
’ @SNERAL LIBRARY : 
UnIyY. OF MiG. Ann Ar} or, Michican 
es a a | + 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
arl Har. An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
od Pacific FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
> United 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
uld now 
Vout. XXII, No. 16 Fesruary 5, 1943 
ny case} 
of ‘the HITLER AGAIN PROCLAIMS “CRUSADE AGAINST BOLSHEVISM” 
ey es proclamation to the German people on and that is the absence, as yet, of complete confidence 
orandum January 30, tenth anniversary of his appoint- between Britain and the United States on the one 
nergency | ment by President von Hindenburg as Chancellor hand, and Russia on the other. There are many rea- 
ral the | of the Reich, confirmed the impression created by sons for this lack of confidence—among them, ob- 
sws how | previous reports from Germany that the Fuehrer viously, fear in Western countries of Communist 
orandum | once more intends to use fear of Russia in his psy- propaganda against capitalism, matched, in Russia, 
Iquarters chological warfare against the United Nations. The by fear of capitalist hostility to the Soviet system. It 
services | Nazi thesis that Germany is engaged in a “crusade cannot be denied, moreover, that there are elements 
informa- | against Bolshevism” in which it claims to have the in every country of Europe and the New World for 
men and | support of “the major part of Europe” was again whom the prospect of a Russian victory—that might 
Pp move: restated by Hitler in Wagnerian terms when he bring in its wake the spread of Soviet doctrines and 
eatres of | Said: ‘Today there are only two alternatives, either practices—looms as dark or even darker than the 
> directly | Germany and her allies win or the Central Asiatic prospect of Nazi victory. 
| flood from the east will surge over the oldest civilized NEED FOR PRIORITIES ON WORRIES. By 
| Nations | continent. All other events pale before the grandeur raising once more a hue and cry about the “triumph 
xction in | of this gigantic struggle.” of Bolshevism,” Hitler hopes to worry and divide 
bassy. It | While the continuance of Russian military suc- the coalition that opposes him. This makes it all the 
s will be { cesses, especially at Stalingrad, undoubtedly disturbs more important for the peoples of the United Na- 
ina. The | Getmany’s leaders and must cast a dark shadow on tions to establish priorities on worries. If a defeat of 
ere to a | the German people, who are only gradually being Germany—and it is Germany which today dominates 
that has | informed of losses suffered on the Russian front, it and oppresses the countries of Europe—is our first 
- affirmed | Siill seems that the Nazis are making a disproportion- objective, as the Casablanca conference would indi- 
21, when | ate propaganda effort to emphasize, even exaggerate, cate, then this objective must be undeviatingly pur- 
rgentina’s | the magnitude of their defeats. It is difficult to escape sued, irrespective of differences that may exist today 
‘ the conclusion that the object of this drive is not between the political and economic systems of the 
tina have | 80 much to cement zero-hour unity at home as to various United Nations. Hesitation on our part can 
en identi- | undermine the war effort of the United Nations. Nor only strengthen the impression, still latent in Mos- 
- of tem- | 18 it without significance that this new psychological cow, that Britain and the United States are, for 
tine gov- | “mpaign, designed to confront Europe and the Russia, war-weather friends only, and have no in- 
-alousy of world with a choice between German and Russian tention of permitting the U.S.S.R. to share in the 
a role to | Victory, is accompanied by intensification of sub- peace as it has in the war. The argument sometimes 
repercus- | Marine warfare under the direction of Grand Ad- advanced that Russia, in turn, is but a part-time ally 
based on | Mitral Karl Doenitz, U-boat expert, who took com- since it refuses to become involved in war with 
ing caste | mand of the German Navy on January 31. Japan may sound logical, but is actually irrelevant. 
principal | _WOULD RUSSIA’S VICTORY THREATEN If Russia, today, were engaged in a major struggle 
sa policy WORLD? The emphasis placed by Hitler on the with Japan, it would be unable to defeat the Ger- 
LLioTr | Possibility and danger of a Russian victory points to mans. From the point of view of Britain and the 


NDS 


what the Nazis, at least, consider one of the prin- 
cipal chinks in the armor of the United Nations— 


United States, unable as yet to deliver telling blows 
at Germany directly, it is essential that Russia should 


—SISSE]"“]|"[[—__=S==——S_ Page Two 


continue to direct the full force of its war effort 
against the Reich. 

On sober reckoning it would appear that, while 
the Russian Army has killed thousands of Germans 
and destroyed great quantities of war material, it 
has not yet inflicted a decisive defeat on the Reich. 
Such a defeat cannot be assured unless Britain and 
the United States succeed in striking at Germany in 
some other sector of its far-flung front. Nor is it by 
any means a foregone conclusion that the Russians, 
if they do succeed in carrying out Stalin’s order of 
the day on January 26 to hurl “the invaders over the 
boundaries of our motherland,” would necessarily 
carry the war to German soil. It is conceivable that 
the Russians might stop at the Russo-German fron- 
tier as it existed in June 1941 (when it embraced 
the Baltic states and eastern Poland), and leave the 
rest of the task to the other United Nations. Those 
in Britain and the United States who fear that 
Russia may win the war single-handed might seek 
an antidote to their worries by doubling and re- 
doubling our own war effort. 

SIMILARITIES IN OUTLOOK OF U.S. AND 
U.S.S.R. What is true of the prosecution of the war 
also applies to post-war reconstruction. Just as the 
Western powers must match Russia’s military suc- 
cesses if they are to share in victory over Germany, 
so they will have to match the influence Russia is 
gaining over men’s minds if they are to share in the 
making of the peace. Russia’s newly won influence 
is due primarily not to the Communist propaganda, 
which has been relatively ineffective in the countries 
of the Western world, but to the fact that the Rus- 


NN Se 


———— 


sians have demonstrated they have the courage, the 
ingenuity and the stamina to withstand the most 
powerful industrial and military nation in Europe. 
Most of the conquered peoples have no desire to 
adopt the Russian way of life if they can work out } 
their salvation in terms of democratic procedures, If 
they should finally turn to Russia for assistance and 
guidance it will be due not solely to Russia's suc. 
cess: it will be due chiefly to default on the part of 
the Western powers. 

At the same time, there is no reason to believe that 
an ineradicable conflict exists between the aims of 
Britain, Russia and the United States, or between 
their aims and those of the conquered nations of 
Europe. On the contrary, the opportunity exists for 
a sort of honorable competition in which the United 
Nations might vie with each other in formulating 
and presenting plans and policies for post-war te. 
construction. In such a competition the United States 
and Russia have three advantages in common. The 
peoples of both countries, perhaps because of the 
vastness of their homelands, perhaps because of their | 
varied racial composition, are used to thinking and | 
acting in terms of large horizons and, once liberated 
from historical tendencies to isolation, may prove 
peculiarly well adapted for twentieth-century inter. 
nationalism. The Russians, like the Americans, have 
unbounded faith in material progress, enhanced by 
their relatively recent experience with the modem 
machine. And, like the Americans, the Russians | 
combine this faith in material progress with a sin- 
cere desire to advance human welfare. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


WAR WITH JAPAN IS NOT A RACIAL CONFLICT 


Current American interest in the establishment of 
a four-power strategy council, which would include 
the Soviet Union and China as well as Britain and 
the United States, indicates increasing awareness of 
the need for strengthening Allied solidarity. By this 
time it is widely appreciated that the manipulation 
of prejudices among the United Nations is the main 
psychological weapon in the armory of fascism, but 
it is not so generally known that Axis propaganda 
directed at the United States holds up not only the 
Russians and the British, but also the Chinese as 
objects of fear. Anti-Chinese doctrines often center 


. RUSSIA AT WAR 


20 Key Questions and Answers 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 
Headline Book No. 34 
Order from FPA, 22 East 38th St., New York 


about the view that the war in the Pacific—or the , 
war as a whole—is a “racial conflict,” a struggle | 
which is variously described as taking place between | 
“the white and yellow races,” “East and West,” or | 
“Orient and Occident.” 

VIEW NOT WIDESPREAD BUT DANGER. | 
OUS. So crude a conception naturally carries little | 
weight in well-informed circles, but its sinister pos 
sibilities should not be underestimated. Recently, ¢ | 
participant in a nation-wide radio discussion of | 
global strategy declared that “the white man’s type | 
of civilization” is at stake in the Pacific. When 
questioned concerning the application of this idea 
to our Chinese allies, he emphasized that he had 
used the phrase “type of civilization,” and that, in 
his view, the Chinese, as well as ourselves, are fight 
ing for this. 

Actually, this is not true, and no amount of 
juggling with words can make it so. The Chinese do 
not grant for a moment that their type of civilization 
is inferior to any other, nor would they admit that 
they have found it necessary to fight five and a half 


—= 
rage, the 
he most 

Europe, 
desire to 
work out 
dures, If 
ance and 
sia's suc: 
> part of 


ieve that 
aims of 
between 
itions of 
xists for 
e United 
mulating 
t-war re. 
ed States 
10n. The 
e of the 
> of their | 
king and 
liberated 
ay prove 
iry inter- 
uns, have 
anced by 
- modern | 
Russians 
th a sin- 


DEAN 


—or the 

struggle 
between 
Vest,” of 


A NGER- 
ries little 
ister pos- 
cently, a 
ssion of 


an’s type | 
c. When 


this idea | 


t he had | 
1 that, in | 
are fight- 


nount of 
hinese do 
vilization 
dmit that 
nd a half 


——— 
a 


years at enormous cost in order to win the right to 
accept somebody else’s culture and way of life. They 
are fighting, first of all, to save themselves from a 
rapacious aggressor who would subject them to the 
Axis system of exploitation—the most methodical 
and callous imperialism known to the modern world. 
Secondly, they are seeking an opportunity to deal 
freely with the many problems that beset them, prob- 
lems that they intend to meet in ways appropriate 
to Chinese conditions, although they are interested 
in utilizing foreign experience along similar lines. 
Certainly it is a devastating refutation of all racial 
theories that, to achieve these ends, the Chinese have 
been obliged to fight to the death against the Jap- 
anese—a people allied to them racially and, in 
many respects, culturally. Britain, the Soviet Union, 
the United States and other nations are likewise 
struggling to bring about the unconditional surrender 
of “white Germany and Italy, together with Japan. 

EFFECTS OF THE RACIAL THEORY. The fact 
is that the war cuts sharply across all racial lines, 
and any attempts to reduce it to a color pattern are 
not only worthless intellectually but represent a 
danger to victory. Let us imagine the possible out- 
come if the United States were really to accept the 
idea of a war of races. First of all, we would lose 
the Chinese as allies, for we would no longer have 
any interest in them. In effect, we would be en- 
couraging them to join the Japanese or, at the least, 
to make peace. It would then be a simple matter 
for Japan to win the support of the nationalist 
movements of southeast Asia and India, since the 
appeal of anti-white propaganda throughout the Far 
East would become well-nigh irresistible. Secondly, 
there would be grave danger of military collapse 
in the Far East because Japan, for the first time since 
1937, would not have to maintain a front in China. 
Inevitably, our war effort in Europe would be ham- 
pered by the necessity of diverting part of our 
strength to Asia, and voices would be heard de- 
manding peace with Hitler, so that we might con- 
centrate on the “yellow menace.” 

A MORE CLEVER VARIATION. If this out- 
come appears fantastic, it is only because the racial 
view of the war has made so little headway. But it 
is sensible to recognize small dangers, in order to 
draw useful conclusions from them and prevent 
them from growing larger. Here it will do no harm 
to glance at a subtler counterpart of the theory just 
described. According to at least one American ex- 
ponent of geopolitics, there is grave danger that 


Page Three 


+e ee 


after victory China will prove as serious a threat to 
the United States as Japan is today. It may there- 
fore become necessary—so we are told—to build 
up Japan in the future as a bulwark against China. - 

This verbal dagger thrust at the United Nations 
has been dealt with effectively by Generalissimo 
Chiang Kai-shek. In a statement of November 17, 
1942 to the New York Herald Tribune Forum on 
Current Problems, the Chinese leader declared: 
“China has no desire to replace Western imperialism 
in Asia with an Oriental imperialism or isolationism 
of its own or of any one else. We hold that we must 
advance from the narrow idea of exclusive alliances 
and regional blocs which in the end make for big- 
ger and better wars, to effective organization of 
world unity. Unless real world cooperation replaces 
both isolationism and imperialism of whatever form 
in the new inter-dependent world of free nations, 
there will be no lasting security for you or for us.” 


It would be false to say that Americans who adopt 
a racial view of the war do so out of sympathy for 
the Axis. On the contrary, their attitude is generally 
a product of misunderstanding. But, regardless of 
intentions, the theories they advocate would drive 
our allies away from us and force us closer to our 
enemies. Similarly, it is dangerous for some liberals, 
overlooking the political, economic and military de- 
terminants of policy, to hint that Anglo-American 
shortcomings in Asia arise from racial attitudes. 
Nor is it wise for them to develop a benevolent in- 
version of the racial theory by suggesting that every- 
thing done in the Far East depends solely on the 
West and that—to cite one example—the govern- 
ment and people of China have no obligations with 
regard to their own future. If we are to have victory 
in peace as well as in war, constant emphasis must 
be placed on the interest and responsibility of all 
peoples, colored and white, in the destruction of the 
Axis, a struggle not confined to any nation or group. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(This is the third of three articles on war and reconstruction 
in the Far East.) 


F.P.A. RADIO ROUND TABLE 


On Saturday, February 13, the Foreign Policy 
Association will broadcast its second round-table 
discussion over the Blue Network from 1:15 to 
1:45 p.m. The subject will be: Russia’s Role in the 
Post-War World; and the speakers will include 
Vera Micheles Dean, with James G. McDonald as 
chairman. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 16, Fesruary 5, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lust, Secretary; VERA MicHEtes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


ERo 81 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


Fes. 1—The attempt of the United States and 
Britain to compose the differences of General Charles 
de Gaulle, leader of the Fighting French, and Gen- 
eral Henri Honoré Giraud, High Commissioner for 
French North Africa, has at least for the time being 
brought no tangible results. The meeting between the 
rival French chiefs from which so much had been 
hoped took place at Casablanca on the margin of the 
Roosevelt-Churchill talks of January 14-24, and re- 
sulted in a deadlock. The communiqué published on 
January 27 registered a vague ‘‘agreement on the 
end to be achieved which is the liberation of France,” 
but revealed an absence of any accord for the political 
union of Frenchmen living outside their country. 

Quite apart from the personal element involved 
in the clash of the two French military leaders, both 
of whom are politically inexperienced, negotia- 
tions appear to have broken down over two issues. 
According to an interview by General Giraud on 
February 1, the chief bone of contention was his de- 
mand that the de Gaullist fighting forces in Africa, 
which he estimated at between 15,000 and 20,000 
men should be amalgamated with his own command. 

GIRAUD DEFENDS VICHYITES. The second 
subject of dispute concerned General de Gaulle’s 
insistence on repudiation of the “Vichy men” in 
high places in North Africa. General Giraud de- 
clared flatly on January 30 that he felt the criticism 
of the former followers of Marshal Pétain in his 
administration to be unwarranted. He referred, as 
an example, to Pierre Boisson, Governor General of 
French West Africa, who, General Giraud said, al- 
though holding office under Vichy, “had never al- 
lowed a Boche in Dakar.’ He added that it was “not 
likely” that he was “going to throw out men like 
that—men who are capable and patriotic.” 

The chief target of de Gaullist criticism has been 
Marcel Peyrouton, who on January 19 succeeded 
Yves Chatel as Governor General of Algiers. Pey- 
routon, as Minister of Interior in Marshal Pétair’s 
cabinet, was opposed to Pierre Laval, but suppressed 
all democratic movements while he was in office. 
Peyrouton was summoned to Algiers from Argen- 
tina not by U.S. Minister in North Africa Robert 
Murphy, but by General Dwight D. Eisenhower, 
Allied commander in that theatre of war, acting on 
the request of General Giraud. The French general 
wanted Peyrouton to take charge of Algiers because 
of his record as a skilled administrator in view of the 
extremely disturbed internal situation prevailing in 


FOR VICTORY °* 


that province where the Arabs are in a state of unrest 
— largely because of deterioration in economic 
conditions. 

Criticism of American authorities for accepting the 
collaboration of Vichyites like Darlan and Peyrouton 
is considered unjustified here, since even the Fight- 
ing French admit their following in French North 
Africa is small. According to an AP dispatch from 
Allied headquarters there, dated January 27, de 
Gaulle’s partisans in that area are relatively few. 
Moreover, many men in the French Army, with its 
traditional respect for constituted authority, regard 
General de Gaulle as a rebel for his defiance of Mar- 
shal Pétain. Any attempt on the part of General 
Eisenhower to impose de Gaullists on the French au- 
thorities in North Africa, it is believed here, would 
have been followed by serious internal troubles. The 
Fighting French, however, point out that democratic 
administrators who are not de Gaullists could have 
been found and appointed instead of Vichyites. Their 
main objection to the present political situation in 
North Africa is that, consciously or unconsciously, 


the American authorities appear to sponsor a régime } 


that has an anti-democratic background. 

Despite their disagreement, both General de 
Gaulle and General Giraud have publicly stated 
their belief that the future government of liberated 


France must be decided by its 40,000,000 inhabitants | 


and not by any régime existing now outside its fron- 
tiers. General Giraud has repudiated any desire to 


“impose a Vichy-minded administration” on North 


Africa and has proclaimed the gradual “relaxation” 
of the anti-Jewish laws in that region. It is hoped in 
Washington that the military and economic missions 
the French leaders have agreed to exchange may 
pave the way for gradual political collaboration. 
The Casablanca meeting, while failing to produce 
an agreement between the two French leaders, does 
appear to have resulted in an accord between the 
Americans and British as to the policy to be pursued 
in French North Africa. Although the British in the 


past have consistently stood behind General de } 


Gaulle, Prime Minister Winston Churchill concurred 
with President Roosevelt in approving General Eisen- 
hower’s measures. If Washington and London can 
avoid the temptation to play off de Gaulle against 
Giraud for temporary, particular advantages, theit 
joint influence can help enormously in facilitating 
eventual union of the two French movements of 
liberation. JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


