mR 


A 








liar 


pre- 





| 


lave | 


War 
tate 


yard 
ton 
ajor 
yuld 
tine 
f a 


not | 


the 


af. 


nh, 2 | 


nave 


nave 
rong 
it is 
‘igh- 
ofa: 
por P 
olicy 
‘ican 
ay 9 
ora- 


ES 


4) 





ODICAL RVG 
\ isQARY 
VnMiy,. VF ICH, 





MAY e 0,194 as 2nd class matter 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 31 


May 19, 1944 





ALLIFS SEEK UNITY IN EUROPE’S UNDERGROUNDS BEFORE INVASION 


A$ Allied troops on the offensive in Italy smash 

deeper into the Gustav Line, the Allies anxious- 
ly scan the possibilities of underground support by 
the various European underground movements of 
their forthcoming assaults on other Nazi-held areas. 
Sound warnings have already been given against ex- 
pecting too much of peoples who have been the vic- 
tims of mass terror and who may yet experience even 
more extreme Nazi reprisals. Despite repression and 
threats, however, remarkable proofs of tenacity on 
the part of the men and women of the enemy-occu- 
pied countries have never been lacking, and their 
cooperation with the Allies at this crucial moment 
could prove a powerful aid to the invasion. 


LESSONS FROM EASTERN EUROPE. From 
what has happened in eastern Europe as the Red 
Army appeared in Nazi-occupied countries some- 
thing can be learned about the probable reaction of 
underground movements to the liberating forces in 
the west. When word went out last January that the 
Red Army was in eastern Poland, the well-organized 
Polish underground army is reported to have 
blown up vital bridges, destroyed gasoline sup- 
plies bound for the eastern front, and undertaken 
railroad sabotage that hindered the Nazi defense 
of Lwow. The Red Army’s arrival also helped close 
the gap between the “partisans” —friends of the So- 
viet Union who believed in guerrilla warfare at all 
times regardless of cost—and the other Polish under- 
ground forces, who insisted on saving as many of 
their people’s lives as possible by awaiting the ar- 
tival of Allied troops. This issue of active versus 
passive military tactics, which has also caused rifts 
in Yugoslavia and Greece, ceased to be important 
once a liberating army appeared, and one of the out- 
standing causes of friction between rival Polish 
groups thus disappeared. There seems to be reason 
for hope, therefore, that the arrival of Russian or 
Anglo-American armies in other countries threatened 


by civil war may similarly have a unifying effect on 
groups engaged in internecine warfare. 

As the Red Army reached the eastern border of 
Czechoslovakia in April and President Benes gave 
the order to exchange passive for active resistance, 
the situation developed as it had in Poland. A guer- 
rilla movement emerged, and one of its first achieve- 
ments was severance of the Nazis’ main railroad 
artery in Slovakia. Farther west, in Bohemia and 
Moravia, there was less underground activity—not 
because these provinces were less eager to expel the 
Germans but because the Red Army, with its tre- 
mendous moral and military support, was more re- 
mote. It also appears that Red Army men trained in 
guerrilla tactics have helped the Poles, Czechs and 
Slovaks with increased sabotage activities. In the west, 
therefore, it seems likely that Anglo-American forces 
will use specially equipped and trained men to aid 
the Norwegians, Dutch, Belgians and French in 
destroying key bridges and railroads and in releasing 
prisoners taken by the Germans. 


UNSOLVED POLITICAL PROBLEMS. In pav- 
ing the way for cooperation between the peoples of 
Europe and the liberating armies, the United States 
and Britain are making last-minute attempts to bring 
dissident underground movements into at least tem- 
porary harmony with their official governments-in- 
exile. British pressure is being exerted on King Peter, 
as on several previous occasions, to form a more 
representative Yugoslav cabinet. But the confer- 
ence the young monarch called in London on May 
15 can hardly produce a government of national 
unity since it includes no representatives of Tito’s 
Partisans. There is, perhaps, a greater possibility 
that the Greek government-in-exile, with similar en- 
couragement from London, may come to terms with 
the EAM—the republican liberation front in Greece 
that includes Communists as well as leftists and lib- 
erals—for at least all Greek political groups are rep- 





ae 

ai 
a 
1 
i 


Sa eee er 
eae 


ae ee 


an rer a nnn ety nr mn 
= Su ae te ATA Bi dhe at Rea 


Di Tw 


=e Chi 


prvtitied a Oe 


Se ee 


bees 


x ret 


whats. 





et eer ree ae 


CIC ee spt orien aaah Nears met >. pul 


menage Appian 





resented in the meetings which Prime Minister 
Papandreou is preparing to hold in the Lebanon. 

In contrast to eastern Europe, negotiation with the 
resistance movements in Norway, Holland and Bel- 
gium has proved a relatively simple matter for the 
Allies on the eve of invasion. These countries were 
not only more united than most of their eastern 
European neighbors when World War II began, but 
their governments that went into exile were demo- 
cratic in character and rested on popular elections. 
It is not surprising, therefore, to énd a recent issue 
of the Norwegian underground newspaper Krig- 
soversikt (War Survey) declaring that, among Nor- 
way’s primary war aims, is a return to the legal and 
constitutional institutions that prevailed before the 
war, and the establishment of a government appoint- 
e” oy King Haakon and “guided by his sure and 
practiced hand.” 

FRANCE IN KEY ROLE. It is chiefly on France, 
however, that Anglo-American attention is now 
focused. France not only seems destined to be one 
. Of the major battlegrounds of the war but, unlike 
Belgium, Norway and Holland, has a guerrilla army 
that is estimated by the Germans to number 175,000 
men trained by regular army officers. The ‘“‘Maquis,” 
as it is called, is known to have been supplied with 
at least some Allied arms, and recent Nazi regula- 
tions applying the death penalty to any persons shel- 
tering members of the enemy's armed forces may in- 
dicate that Allied planes have dropped not only 
supplies and instructions but also military experts in 
various parts of France. Properly equipped, the 
“Maquis” might aid the Allies in opening routes 
into France in much the same way as the Yugoslav 
Partisans are doing in their theatre of war by attack- 
ing Nazi communications in the Vardar and Ibar val- 
leys—key routes from the Aegean to the Danube. 


Since close cooperation between the Allies and the 
French underground forces may be of considerable 
importance to the success of the invasion, the an- 
nouncement by the French Committee in Algiers on 
May 10 that the “Maquis’’ is to be incorporated into 
the French army gives new urgency to the question 
of relations between tlic Allics and de Gaulle. This 
fact was underlined on May 11 when the French 
Committee suspended negotiations between General 
Eisenhower and General Koenig, head of the French 
military mission to London, concerning collaboration 
between representatives of the Committee and the 
civil affairs branch of the Anglo-American armies. 
The ostensible reason for this crisis in French-Allied 
relations was the pique the French felt with the Brit- 
ish for subjecting them to the ban on all secret com- 
munications from England—a restriction from which 
the United States, the Dominions and the Soviet 
Union were exempted. Fundamentally, however, the 
French action is an indication of de Gaulle’s dissatis- 








Page Two 





ee, 
ee 


faction with the Allies for refusing to recognize the 
Committee in Algiers as the provisional government 
of France and indicates the importance of adjustin 
the French and other remaining political problems 
lest they impede military plans on which the fate of 
all the United Nations depends. 

WiIniFreD N. HaADseEL 


FAR EAST’S UNDERGROUND 


Just as the United Nations have underground 
allies within the conquered nations of Europe, so in 
the Far East a less publicized opposition is waging a 
daily struggle against the evils of Japanese tule, 
This popular anti-Japanese movement exists not only 
in the guerrilla areas of China and in the Philippines, 
but also within the citadels of Japan’s older empire 
—the colonies of Formosa, Korea and Manchuria. 
For it is a striking fact that, although the Japanese 
have ruled Formosa for almost fifty years, Korea for 
considerably more than thirty, and Manchuria for 
well over a decade, they have by no means succeeded 
in wiping out the nationalist sentiments of the local 
populations. 

Last month, for example, the Japanese radio ad- 
mitted that the colonial government of Korea was 
having difficulties with the population of the penin- 
sula. In the quaint, indirect language of Japanese 
officialdom, the Governor-General complained of 
“signs in some sections that the spirit of the people 
is shrinking.’”” Then, becoming more explicit, he 
stated that “there are some places where I cannot 
say that the people of Korea are devoting their 
fullest morale happily to their respective works. .. . 
In any nation the morale of the people tends to be 
reduced when a war is prolonged. . . . There should 
be no incidents which cause disunity of the people's 
morale. This statement lent weight to earlier re- 
ports from Chungking that riots, in which students 
were active, broke out in Korea after Japan enforced 
conscription early this year. 

It should be understood that places like Korea 
and Manchuria—in which discontent has also been 
hinted at by Japanese sources—are an integral part 
of Japan’s war economy. Japan could wage war 
without Burma or the Philippines, which belong to 
its outer ring of empire, but could not fight long 
without the vital supplies of rice, soy beans, iron 
ore, steel, coal, and other war essentials secured from 
the near-by areas of Korea and Manchuria. 

Clearly it was good military strategy, as well as 
simple justice, for Roosevelt, Churchill and Chiang 
Kai-shek to declare at the Cairo conference last 
November that Manchuria and Formosa would be 
returned to China and that Korea would become an 
independent nation “in due course.” Even the ex- 
istence of the reservation about Korea, which has 
given rise to criticism, cannot obscure the fact that 
this was an important step in aligning the anti-Axis 














— 


countt 
thoug] 
decisic 
qrousi 
the z 
ssi 
gh 
they 4 
war. | 
ably 
reachi 
Britai 
ernme 


use th 


) as an 


deadle 
coura, 
indep 
shorte 


post-y 


Af 
at Te 


sessiO 


1 on M 


gatio: 
of go 
tives. 
and | 
the L 
fepre 
Repu 
Conf 


| gathe 


In 


LL.C 


| CONV 


hour 
etc. § 
bind 
mem 
Phil. 
CISio 
it w 
favo 
that 
well 

M 








| ager 


Org 
FORE 
Headg 


seconc 
one m 





"- >.> SB oe 


7 oe a 


rt 
or 


al 


as 
1g 
ist 
be 
an 
X- 
as 
at 
cis 








countries with populations oppressed by Japan. It is 
thought in some quarters that reports of the Cairo 
decision have already had influence inside Korea in 
srousing new hopes of freedom. It now remains for 
the United Nations to enlist as much support as 

ssible from the East Indies, Indo-China and 
neighboring territories by indicating clearly that 
they are also to benefit from victory in the present 
war. Declarations of intention will help, but prob- 
ably nothing would have as great an effect as the 
reaching of an early settlement in India between 
Britain and the nationalist movement. For the gov- 
emment of India, if it so wishes, is in a position to 
yse the recent release of Gandhi on medical grounds 
| as an occasion for a new effort to break the political 
deadlock. Certainly, any action now taken to en- 
courage the peoples of Asia to identify their own 
independence with the defeat of Japan will help to 
shorten the war in the Far East and lay the basis for 
post-war stability in that region. 








LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


| LL.O. MAPS NEW PROGRAM 


After three and a half weeks of intense discussion 
at Temple University, Philadelphia, the twenty-sixth 
session of the International Labor Conference closed 

| on May 12. Forty-one member countries sent dele- 
gations, of which 28 were full delegations, composed 
of government, employers’, and workers’ representa- 
tives. Three non-member states—Iceland, Nicaragua, 
and Paraguay—sent observers. Broader in scope than 
the United and Associated Nations, since it included 
fepresentatives of four neutral states, the Argentine 
Republic, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey, the 
Conference was the most universal international 
gathering convened since 1939. 

In pre-war times, the main purpose of the yearly 
IL.O. conferences was to adopt international ‘draft 
conventions’’ dealing with such matters as maximum 
hours of work, employment of women and children, 
etc. Sixty-seven of these conventions—which become 
binding international treaties once ratified by the 
member states—have been adopted so far. The 
Philadelphia Conference, however, did not take de- 
cisions of such binding character. From the outset 
it was considered that world conditions were not 
favorable to the adoption of new conventions, and 
that only recommendations for national action, as 
well as general resolutions, could be adopted. 

MAIN DECISIONS. On the first item of its 
agenda—future status of the International Labor 
Organization—the Conference, contrary to expecta- 





Page Three 








tions, did not suggest any important changes in the 
I.L.O. structure, except to provide that in the future 
the Montreal office of the I.L.O. may communicate 
directly with member states without passing through 
the Secretariat. The same resolution requests the 
Governing Body of the Organization to appoint a 
committee to consider the future relationship of the 
I.L.O. with other international bodies—for instance, 
UNRRA and the United Nations Commission on 
Food and Agriculture. On item I]—recommenda- 
tions to the United Nations for present and post- 
war policy—the Conference adopted a series of de- 
tailed resolutions concerning measures for the pro- 
tection of transferred foreign workers; economic pol- 
icies needed to attain such social objectives as full 
employment; and problems involved in labor provi- 
sions for internationally financed public works. 
In the field of organization of employment in the 
transition from war to peace, three comprehensive 
recommendations to governments were adopted, 
dealing with (1) the organization of employment 
in the transition from war to peace; (2) the em- 
ployment services; and (3) the national planning 
of public works. On item IV—social security—the 
Conference adopted recommendations concerning in- 
come security and medical care. The last recommen- 
dation adopted by the Conference establishes mini- 
mum standards of social policy in dependent 
territories. 

THE “PHILADELPHIA CHARTER.” The out- 
standing decision of the Conference was the “Phila- 
delphia Charter.” This declaration of social aims 
and purposes declares it the prime duty of all 
governments to achieve full employment and attain 
a high standard of living for their people. It further 
indicates that all national and international policies, 
notably those of an economic and financial character, 
must be judged in the light of this goal, and sug- 
gests definite programs—such as the extension of 
social security measures to provide a basic income 
for every one, extensive medical care, adequate hous- 
ing, nutrition, etc—for the achievement of better 
social conditions throughout the world. 

The recommendations adopted by the I.L.O. Con- 
ference will be sent to the governments for due study 
and consideration. Whether their relatively bold, but 
in no way revolutionary, proposals will serve as guid- 
ing principles for future action in the social field 
depends on the reaction of member countries. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


(Mr. Hediger was a member of the temporary 
staff of the I.L.O. Conference at Philadelphia) 





oe month for change of address om membership publications. 


S181 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 31, May 19, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lugr, Secretary; Vera Micueces Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





oe Oars Sew ae CESS - 
RP nope ANG I Re ee) BLD D EA. Net AE A A i 


a A igen ae ce 
Ce ee 


‘yogi las 
“ha 


Sy ae 
Erg 


So <7 See 


oe ee aren 


ed 


Washington News Letter 




















FATE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY IN NAZI-HELD COUNTRIES 


Official observers in Washington expect that the 
invasion of western Europe will be attended by wide- 
spread destruction of industrial and agricultural 
property as a result not only of military operations 
but also of looting and planned destruction as the 
Germans withdraw. Already the occupied countries 
have been pushed by the Nazis to the brink of na- 
tional impoverishment. While many factories in 
France, the Netherlands and Belgium have been 
bombed out of existence, the Nazis have method- 
ically been moving others to the safer regions of 
Silesia and the Government General of Poland. The 
liberated nations individually and the United Nations 
as a group will be faced with a most difficult prob- 
lem, probably impossible of satisfactory solution, of 
unscrambling European economy after the war. 


GERMAN LOOTING IN EUROPE. On January 
5, 1943 the United States, 16 other United Nations, 
and the French National Committee (now the 
French Committee of National Liberation) warned 
that they ‘‘reserved all their rights to declare invalid 
any transfers of, or dealings with, property rights and 
interests of any description whatsoever” in the oc- 
cupied zones. To implement this statement the gov- 
ernments concerned established a committee in Lon- 
don whose task was to record (1) the methods used 
by the Germans in plundering the occupied coun- 
tries and in transferring titles to immovable prop- 
erty, and (2) the laws and decrees respecting prop- 
erty put into effect in the conquered countries during 
the occupation period. 

The catalogue drawn up by this committee, which 
is sitting in London, remains a secret. Its study cov- 
ers two broad types of plundering: the theft by in- 
dividual Germans of such consumers’ goods as stock- 
ings, food, perfume and refrigerators, which soon 
lose their usefulness; and the ostensibly legalized 
impressment of factories, farms, dockyards, trans- 
portation systems, ships and other property of con- 
siderable permanent value. The Germans have co- 
ordinated many European economic enterprises im- 
portant for war purposes into large holding and 
operating companies, such as the Hermann Goering 
Works, the majority shares of which are either 
owned by the Reich or are under control of appar- 
ently private German concerns like I. G. Farben- 
industrie. 

Some of the governments-in-exile are uncertain 


FOR VICTORY °* 











191 


as to the practicability of revoking transfers of title : 
made under German occupation during the wa: 
years. It has been suggested that persons who fee| 

they are rightful owners might be encouraged to sye — 
in the courts to regain their property. The curren 
policy of the Allies is to leave to the government of 

each particular liberated country the responsibility 

for settling property questions in its territory. The; Yo... 
disposition of materials moved to Germany from al|}_ —— 
conquered lands, however, is considered the concem 

of all the Allies. 

The Czech government, for one, is prepared to} (7? 
declare null and void all transfers of title to prop. | "7H 
erty carried out in the Sudetenland after its annexa.) * at 
tion under the Munich Agreement, and in the rest| powe 
of Czechoslovakia after the occupation of March| by Y 
1939. President Eduard Benes is reported here to have | factic 
proposed the nationalization of heavy industries in} in Le 
his country, where the Hermann Goering Works is | findir 
the successor to former Czech and foreign owners of ¢ Euro) 
great enterprises like Skoda, the Prague Ironworking Nazi: 
Co. and the Foldi Steel Works. Some of the former _ tions 
Czech owners, however, have become citizens of , their 
other countries, including the United States, and] sist < 
Benes is said to wonder whether nationalization of | venor 
their property might not cause international legal strife 
complications. by th 

unde 


RECONSTRUCTION 


DIFFICULT. Overshad- | 


owing any question of property restoration is the | "”® 


t 


alarming fact that the productive property left inj Al 
Europe at the close of hostilities is likely to be far| It is 
below what will be needed to support the continent's | adva: 
population. Machines are nearly worn out from ws? of vis 
strain of high-volume war production and, in many! decis 
cases, new parts and machines zre impossible to ob-| Euro 
tain in Europe. Transportation systems, except those three 
urgently needed by the Germans for prosecution of | Russ 
the war, are deteriorating. The United States gov- | beac 
ernment already has begun to consider what part it | wher 


{ might wisely play in helping to put Europe back on befo: 


its feet while at the same time urging Europeans | dang 
themselves to do their utmost to restore the economy | form 
of their countries. The heroic action of the Russians | his | 
in restoring the transportation system between Stalin- Well 
grad and the Rumanian border is regarded here as | POSS! 
a hopeful portent of the future determination of | ‘tut 
Europe's populations to build anew on the ashes of | Will 


war. Bia Boies | So 
and 





BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS | &fin 








