


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Entered as second- 








Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 










EE 1940 
es == FEBRUARY 16, — g. Bishop 
For a survey of Pan-Americanism since 1826, together Pree ar’ 
itt} pith a study of recent developments in inter-American % University o+ wichigan Libr 
: economic and political collaboration, read: Ranges _— 
ed | PROGRESS OF PAN-AMERICAN COOPERATION 
Ns, by Howard J. Trueblood 
e February 15th issue of Foreign Policy Reports... . 25 cents 
ory | —— — 
_ IS EUROPE READY FOR ROOSEVELT PEACE MOVE? 
ese 
the — caaatggidal ROOSEVELT’S “exploratory” peace of Deputies, at the close of a secret session regard- 
the move comes at a moment when the European ing the conduct of the war, gave a unanimous vote 
xi. | conflict threatens to become generalized. Germany of confidence to M. Daladier on February 10. If this 
ind | and the Allies are deadlocked on the Western front, vote is an indication of French public opinion, then 
ym-| where the war is confined largely to air skirmishes it would appear that France is not ready at this 
279 | and naval action. The Soviet Union has launched a moment for another Munich. In fact, observers re- 
any | new and determined attack on the Mannerheim Line, —_cently returned from the Allied countries believe 
where its superior man power threatens to crush the that a “peace move” undertaken today by the Cham- 
finns, who have appealed to the world for help. In berlain and Daladier governments would be the 
i. the Near East the Allies, with the aid of Turkey, are signal for popular revolts which, far from saving 
‘it | preparing for a possible drive either against Germany what is left of capitalism in Europe, might have ex- 
| op Russia. It has long been expected in Washington actly the opposite result. 
a that this spring, possibly as early as March, the bel- To understand this mood, one has to remember 
~ ig lperents would attempt to end the present stalemate _ that the French and British people came to the con- 
the ly undertaking large-scale operations. Europe might clusion last September that the kind of peace Europe 
vie then experience the kind of totalitarian war which it had known during the six years of Hitler's rule was 
has so far been spared in the West, and the prospects even more nerve-wracking than war. They emphati- 
if a “negotiated” peace would be reduced to the cally do not want to go back to that kind of peace. 
ayj vanishing point. Under the circumstances, it has And they contend that, even if Hitler should resign, 
the} xemed to the President and to some of his advisers the evils of Nazism would remain, and would con- 
ates that the United States, as the most powerful neutral tinue to plague Europe. They want to destroy these 
hips | n the world, should take advantage of this breathing- evils root and branch, even if they have to endure a 
; en | spell to sound out the belligerents regarding the pos- terrible war to achieve their purpose. The question 
ay sbility of a negotiated peace. is: how can these evils be destroyed without also 
itu} ALLIED DESIRE TO CRUSH HITLERISM. But driving the German people to despair? And if the 
ZT on what basis could peace be negotiated in Europe German people are driven to despair in the process, 
NOt) today? Even more important, would peace negotia- what hope is there of reconstructing Europe on a 
Ger- tions at this time merely increase Germany's strik- sane basis after the war? To this the French and the 
itish ing power in the future? A majority of the French British reply that Europe will know an even worse 
king and British remain determined to continue the war fate if the Nazis remain in power, and worst of all 
This util Hitlerism — not merely Hitler — has been if Germany should prove thé victor. So they demand 
y the tushed. There still are elements in France and war to the finish—and many of them feel that the 
0 be Britain—as in the United States—who support the United States, by intervening at this time, may be 
right policy of “appeasement” and think that if only Hitler unconsciously playing into the hands of Hitler, who 
ent! were removed by some magic, a peace settlement would be satisfied, until further notice, with a peace 
of & that would save “capitalism” could be arranged with sanctioning his conquest of Austria, Czechoslovakia 
fens | ther Nazis, for example Goering. Yet in spite of and Poland. 
NE | these “appeasement’’ activities, the French Chamber GERMAN FEAR OF DISMEMBERMENT. Ie 


AL roéx 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
‘AL LIBRA Y 





\ \ class matter December’ 

he 2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 









































a 











must also be realized, however, that millions of Ger- 
mans who oppose Hitler on every other ground are 
reluctant to t a peace dictated by the Allies. 
They fear ab a heey accepts such a peace, it 
will again be dismembered, humiliated, and econom- 
ically weakened. They believe that Hitler alone can 
preserve German unity; and the desire to achieve 
unity has dominated the German people for at least 
a century. The problem of the Allies—and now the 
problem of the United States as well—is to discover, 
within Germany, a group who could succeed the 
Nazis if Hitler were overthrown, and negotiate a 
compromise with France and Britain. There is still 
a danger that the Allies and the United States might 
turn to the German monarchists and industrialists, 
who appear at this moment to offer the only alterna- 
tive to Hitler. But men like Rauschning and Thyssen, 
now in exile, helped Hitler to power in 1933 because 
they hoped he would crush communism and restore 
Germany's military prestige. They showed no con- 
cern, at that time, for either democracy or European 
peace. They turned against Hitler only when it be- 
came apparent that his movement was “‘socialist” as 
well as nationalist. Should the Allies and the United 
States lean on these elements in their efforts to 
achieve peace, they might find themselves support- 
ing the forces of reaction in the Reich, not the forces 
which might ultimately produce a unified but lib- 
eral Germany. The Western powers might even find 
themselves playing the rdle of a new Holy Alliance, 
whose endeavor would be to repress all revolutionary 
groups in Europe, whether they be labeled Nazi, 
Communist, or “anti-Christian.” 

LESSONS OF THE WORLD WAR. It is into this 
vortex of conflicting and confusing forces that Mr. 


WAR CLOUDS GATHER IN NEAR EAST 


Extension of the war to the Near East appears to 
loom as a distinct possibility following several de- 
velopments during the past week. On February 8 
the Turkish government abruptly seized the German- 
owned Krupp shipyards on the Bosporus, thus lend- 
ing emphasis to its recent contention that Turkey 
should be considered “non-belligerent” rather than 
“neutral.” The following day it dismissed 100 Ger- 
man technicians hitherto employed by the War and 
Naval Ministries in various armament enterprises. 
On February 12 the arrival of 30,000 Australian and 
New Zealand troops at Suez called attention to the 
continued reinforcement of British and French gar- 
risons in the Near East. 

FRENCH AND BRITISH TROOP CONCEN- 
TRATIONS. According to reports emanating from 
Turkey, Allied forces in the Near East now total 
about 570,000 men. In its mandated territory, Syria, 
France is reported to have concentrated 300,000 
soldiers, consisting primarily of Senegalese, Algerian 


= Page Two 








a, 
— 


Welles will be plunging next week. One can 
hope, for the ihe of both Europe and the Unite 
States, that his exploratory trip is not being light) 
undertaken; that it will not be made a football of 
domestic politics; and that the Roosevelt Administra. 
tion, as well as the American people, is fully awar 
of the responsibilities it implies. For by exploring 
the possibilities of peace in Europe, the Unite) 
States is obviously departing from the path of strig 
isolation. It is starting on a course which, as in the 
World War, may ultimately necessitate some form 
of open intervention. 

One lesson drawn from our World War exper. 
ence should be borne in mind. The intervention of 
the United States, first as a peacemaker, then as, 
belligerent, profoundly altered the balance of powe 
in Europe at that time, and enabled the Allies t 
win a military victory. This victory might hay 
proved more fruitful if the United States, having 
shouldered the burdens of war, had remained j| 
shoulder the burdens of peace. By withdrawing from 
Europe after the Paris Peace Conference, the United 
States, for the second time in two years, again pro 
foundly altered the European balance of power 
There is room for legitimate difference of opinion 
as to whether this country should or should not have 
entered the war in 1917. But one thing seems clear 
If this country does not intend to share the respons 
bility for adjusting the far-reaching problems tha 
lie at the root of the present conflict, then it woul 





be far better, in the long run, for the United State 
to keep its hands off European affairs. Otherwise, we! 
would again be creating vain illusions and arousing) 
false hopes in Europe, only to destroy them as we did) 


in 1919. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


and Madagascar regiments, as well as one division 
of the Foreign Legion and some highly mechanizei 
French troops. Britain is said to have about 40,00 
soldiers in its Palestine mandate, almost all of whom 
were recruited in the United Kingdom. The bulk o! 
the British troops— approximately 200,000, com 
posed largely of Moslems and Indians — are st 
tioned in Egypt. Britain also has a strong air Fore 
and some auxiliary troops further to the east, in Traq| 
Both Iraq and Egypt are allied to Britain by treaties 
concluded on June 30, 1930 and August 26, 1936) 
respectively. Under the terms of these alliances, they 
are compelled, in time of war, to give Britain all tht 
assistance in their power, including the use of thet! 
ports, airdromes and means of communication. 


The concentration of troops in the Near East maj 
well be a purely precautionary measure, designed t 
meet a possible German-Russian attack on the Ba 
kans and the Straits, or a Russian drive through Ir 
and Afghanistan. As early as last December Italia’ 








dispa 
ment: 
these 
ries. 
alarn 
Afgh 
that 

joint] 
conve 
doub 
US. 
tate | 
preor 
stage 
Gern 
sourc 


UNI 
to la 
as a 
Rum 
abou 
Unic 
lies ¢ 
pipe 
the | 
oper 
wou 
men 
large 
prob 
troo 
take 


2g 2 Il 








— Page Three 





dispatches reported considerable Soviet troop move- 
ments on the Iranian and Afghan frontiers. While 
these reports were generally discounted, the coun- 
tries in the Middle East have remained in a state of 
alarm. Only a few weeks ago the governments of 
Afghanistan and Iran were said to have suggested 
that the non-aggression pact which they concluded 
jointly with Turkey and Iraq on July 8, 1937 be 
converted into a pact of mutual assistance. It appears 
doubtful, however, that either Germany or the 
US.S.R. would risk any move which might precipi- 
tate hostilities in the Near East. The Soviet Union, 
preoccupied in Finland, is hardly in a position to 
sage a diversion elsewhere for the moment; and 
Germany is anxious not to dissipate its limited re- 
sources Over a wide area. 

AN ALLIED ATTACK ON THE SOVIET 
UNION ? It is far more in the interest of the Allies 
to launch an attack in the Near East. Using Turkey 
as a base, they might cut off German oil supplies in 
Rumania or strike at the Caucasus, which produces 
about three-fourths of the oil output of the Soviet 
Union. Batum, the Soviet oil port on the Black Sea, 
lies only fifteen miles from the Turkish frontier. The 
pipe-line connecting it with the Baku oil wells near 
the Caspian Sea might be seized. Yet Allied military 
operations, whether in this area or in the Balkans, 
would require a large amount of men and equip- 
ment. The forces available at present, consisting 
largely of colonials, seem far from adequate. The 
problem of transporting supplies for large bodies of 
troops operating far from home bases would also 
take on formidable dimensions. Moreover, the 














U.S.S.R. is said to be rapidly fortifying its ports on 
the Black Sea and its frontier in the Caucasus—with 
the assistance of German military engineers accord- 
ing to some reports. 

In the last analysis, Turkey holds the key to the 
situation in the Near East. Without its cooperation 
and active assistance Allied operations in this area 
would be impossible. While Turkey is extremely sym- 
pathetic to the Franco-British cause, it still wants to 
stay out of war. All its efforts in the Balkans have 
had this purpose in view. Moreover, its alliance with 
France and Britain, concluded last October, specifi- 
cally does not apply to war with the Soviet Union. 
Turkish officials were also anxious that no exagger- 
ated inferences should be drawn from the dismissal 
of German technicians. It was emphasized in Istan- 
bul that the replacement of these Germans started 
soon after the conclusion of the Anglo-French- 
Turkish alliance and was considered only a “logical 
result of that trend in Turkish foreign policy.” 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


ANNOUNCEMENT 


Recently the attention of the Foreign Policy Asso- 
ciation has been called to the unauthorized use of its 
name in sponsoring the work of other groups in vari- 
ous fields. We wish to remind our members, as well 
as the public at large, that the Foreign Policy Asso- 
ciation is a non-partisan, educational organization. 
It cannot and does not officially endorse the work of 
any other organization, or individual. In some in- 
stances, it has cooperated with other groups, but only 
in a consultative capacity. 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


“Humane Endeavour”: The Story of the China War, by 
Haldore Hanson. New York, Farrar & Rinehart, 1939. 
$2.50 
A running commentary on the Far Eastern conflict by 

an Associated Press correspondent who covered the war 

at first hand, traveling through the interior provinces 
from Peiping to Chungking. Drawing on his experiences 
with Japanese officers and soldiery, the North China 
guerrilla forces, the Chinese Communist leaders, and 

China’s central authorities, the author combines a gripping 

personal narrative with a thorough study of the military, 

political and economic aspects of the war. 


The Portugal of Salazar, by Michael Derrick. New York, 
Campion Books, 1939. $2.00 
A sympathetic and superficial argument that Professor 
Salazar’s corporate state is distinctly Portuguese, Catholic 
and popular. 


Inside Europe, by John Gunther. New York, Harper, 1940. 
“War Edition.” $3.50 
Mr. Gunther’s intimate study of the European scene and 
its personalities, revised to include Europe’s two wars, is 
a revealing backdrop against which the war drama is 
enacted. 


Commonwealth or Anarchy? by Sir John A. R. Marriott. 
New York, Columbia University Press, 1939. $2.00 
A capable survey of leading peace projects, from the 
sixteenth to the twentieth century, in their historical set- 
tings. This should be a helpful handbook for those in quest 
of a new world order. 


The Story of the Political Philosophers, by George Catlin. 
New York, McGraw-Hill, 1939. $5.00 
A popularized history of political theory, with emphasis 
on the modern period, and relevance to contemporary world 
problems. 


Manual of Government in the United States, by R. K. 
Gooch. New York, Van Nostrand, 1939. $3.75 


Reorganization of the National Government, by Lewis 
Meriam and Laurence F. Schmeckebier. Washington, 
Brookings, 1939. $3.00 
These two books are useful companion pieces—the first 

as an able statement of how the United States is governed, 
the second as an investigation of technical problems which 
have resulted from the increasing functions of govern- 
ment. Professor Gooch, fusing documentary sources with 
descriptive analysis, combines in his textbook the study of 
federal, state and local government. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. X{X, No. 17, Fesruary 16, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DororHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicueLtes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


ee 181 F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News L ettec 





pred eben 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Fes. 13.—News of the forthcoming journey of 
Undersecretary of State Sumner Welles to Rome, 
Berlin, Paris and London has set loose a flood of 
speculation in Washington. Taken in conjunction 
with Secretary Hull's disclosure that informal conver- 
sations are being held with neutral countries, it has 
thrust sharply to the fore the question whether any 
active attempt to restore peace in Europe can long 
remain consistent with strict American neutrality. In 
the course of negotiations, the United States might 
conceivably drift into a situation where it would 
underwrite some of the peace terms of one side or 
the other. Isolationist circles have been quick to re- 
call the famous memorandum of Sir Edward Grey, 
British Foreign Secretary, dated February 22, 1916, 
which was the culmination of Colonel House’s Euro- 
pean travels during the first World War. That docu- 
ment recorded President Wilson’s willingness to 
summon a peace conference at a moment considered 
opportune by Britain and France, and declared that 
the United States would “probably” enter the war 
against Germany if the Reich refused to participate 
or to accept terms “not unfavourable to the Allies.” 

MOTIVES FOR MEDIATION. There is no dis- 
position in Washington to draw anything but the 
most general parallel between the roving missions of 
Colonel House and Undersecretary Welles. Circum- 
stances have altered; the Administration can profit 
by American experience in 1914-1917; and Mr. 
Welles is thoroughly schooled in the methods and 
implications of diplomacy. Moreover, political ob- 
servers inside the Administration and out generally 
discount any prospect of an early settlement. They 
discern the following motives for last week’s moves: 

1. President Roosevelt may feel that, slight though they 
are, the chances for a negotiated peace will dwindle rapidly 
once a major offensive is unleashed in the spring. Since the 
difficulties of European reconstruction and the danger of 
American involvement in the war will probably grow as 
the conflict spreads, every effort must be made to halt it now. 

2. Mr. Welles may really be seeking information only, 
particularly in Berlin, where the United States has not been 
represented by an Ambassador since November 1938. It 
would obviously be impolitic to sent a first-rank diplomat to 
Germany alone; hence the visit to other belligerents. 

3. The very disclosure of the Welles mission may oper- 
ate to postpone an offensive, for the belligerent which at- 
tacks while discussions are proceeding would forfeit Amer- 
ican and other neutral sympathy. 

4. As the November elections draw closer, the Admin- 
istration’s actions are increasingly affected by domestic po- 
litical considerations. Although this was probably not a 


major factor in their calculations, Mr. Roosevelt and Secre. 
tary Hull—both potential candidates for the Presidency 
doubtless realize that a bold bid for peace will enhance their 
prestige among the electorate, whether or not it succeeds, 


Here and abroad the comment has been heard that 
Mr. Welles should visit the U.S.S.R. and Finland 
as well as Western Europe if he wishes to make 4 
thorough survey of present conditions. Some sources 
regard the absence of the Soviet Union from his 
itinerary—and the blunt castigation of the Russiay 
dictatorship in President Roosevelt's speech to the 
American Youth Congress—as evidence that the Ad- 
ministration is contemplating a peace based princi- 
pally on the status quo. Like the Munich agreement, 
such a settlement might be built in part on the com- 
mon antipathy of Britain, France and Germany to 
communism. In view of the unpopularity of the 
Nazis, however, it is unlikely that Washington would 
support any scheme of this character. Omission of 
the U.S.S.R. may more plausibly be laid to the 
extreme frigidity of Soviet-American relations since 
the City of Flint incident and the invasion of Finland, 

CONTACTS WITH NEUTRALS. The consulta- 
tions with the neutrals, still apparently in the most 
tentative stage, also have important implications. 
They were immediately construed abroad as a move 
designed to rally neutral support for a compromise 
peace plan. Adverse foreign reaction prompted Sec 
retary Hull, on February 10, to stress the fact that 
the purpose of the talks was to determine an equitable 
basis for peace after the war ends, rather than to 
seek immediate cessation of hostilities. 

The concept of a united group of neutral powers 
which would throw their influence on the side of 
sanity when the time for a final settlement arrives 
is unobjectionable from the point of view of Ameti- 
can policy. Secretary Hull was particularly careful to 
limit his specific objectives to two subjects on which 
there is little disagreement in this country: the estab- 


lishment of a sound and liberal international eco- | 


nomic system, and the reduction of armaments. It is 
interesting to note that President Roosevelt, in his 
peace appeal of April 14 last, urged Europe to settle 
its problems by conference, but restricted participa 
tion of the United States to the same two fields. At 
that time the President’s proposal was criticized on 
the ground that the United States could not expect 
to secure freer international trade and disarmament 
unless it helped Europe to solve its fundamental difi- 
culties. On its face, the Hull project for collabora- 
tion with neutrals seems to be open to the same 


objection. Davip H. Popper 





An int 


thi 
wegia 
Febru 
Isthm 
plight 
descri 
as an 
by the 
less C 
board 
Graf 
of th 
Cossa 
water 
destre 
by N 
ment 
Norv 
enter 
Britis 
Norv 
awar 


boarc 


Norv 
wegi: 
in f; 
Altm 
asser 
oner: 
Nor 
ing t 
right 
“the 
pass; 
prize 
of t 
Altn 


