


4 
Al 





ance, 
et 18 
Ss and 
e the 
- Suc. 
ce of 
aning 
1g to 
stock, 
dered 
1 the 
which 
rially 
raine, 
ry no 
>. On 


dcast 





Pierre | 
rench 


Jakar, 
ry of 
hat a 

with 
ioner, 
ndies, 
rench 
Inited 
ssaty. 
- was 
rench 
ndent 
usion 
miral 





; 


> De | 


>ment 
vide, 


f the | 


=rican 
1 the 
1 into 
Dakar 
2s the 
y the 
yer of 
n the 
at the 
r CON- 
hmen 
YTT 


S 





——— 


. gon 
HICAL RK 
. 7 jBRARY 
“arcyw 


PBRIO 
GENERA 
qint¥. VF 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


pec «4 1944 


General Library 
University of Michizan 


Aan Arbor, Michigan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vow. XXII, No. 7 


DECEMBER 4, 1942 





ALLIED SUCCESSES HOLD OUT HOPE TO BELEAGUERED EUROPE 


HE rapid unfolding of events precipitated by 

British and American successes in North Africa 
and by the offensive simultaneously launched in 
Russia has profoundly altered not only the strategic 
picture of the war but, even more important, its 
psychological atmosphere as well. For three grueling 
years, the climax to two decades of frustration and 
depression, the smell of death was in the air—the 
seeming death of a civilization. Today, as we enter 
the fourth year of the second world war, the smell 
in the air is, paradoxically, that of a new springtime, 
bringing hope, however slight as yet, that among 
the dead leaves of the past may be stirring the roots 
of fresher and sturdier growth. 

CHURCHILL LOOKS TO POST-WAR. This 
note of confidence in the future dominated Mr. 
Churchill’s broadcast of November 29, when for the 
first time the British Prime Minister, who has hith- 
erto insisted that the primary task was the winning 
of the war, expressed the hope that ‘‘we shall be 
able to make better solutions, more far-reaching, 
more lasting solutions of the problems in Europe at 
the end of this war than was possible a quarter of a 
century ago.” The expectation that effective action 
for post-war reconstruction might become practicable 
in the not too distant future was reflected also in 
President Roosevelt's announcement on November 
21 that Governor Lehman of New York—who sub- 
sequently retired from office on December 3—had 
been appointed Director of Foreign Relief and 
Rehabilitation. Even the struggles for the right to 
fepresent conquered peoples, such as have broken out 
among the French over Admiral Darlan and among 
the Austrians over Archduke Otto of Hapsburg, 
indicate the growing belief that the time of recon- 
quest — and consequent political readjustment — is 


now in sight. 
This sudden change in atmosphere, heartening as 
it is to the United Nations so long inured to a cli- 


mate of defeats, should not obscure the fact that the 
Nazis still have a strong army—greatly whittled 
down, it is true, by the Russians, but as yet unbeaten 
by the British and Americans; and that they must be 
expected to make even greater use than in the past 
of submarine warfare to disrupt sea communications, 
which become increasingly important for the Allies 
as they establish new fronts overseas. 

HITLER’S EUROPEAN FORTRESS. Yet it is 
already clear that, contrary to his Mein Kampf con- 
cept of the strategy that would assure victory for 
Germany, Hitler is now forced to fight on two fronts 
—and must either weaken his front in Russia if he 
is to reinforce his position in the Mediterranean, or 
else sacrifice North Africa if he is to hold, at least 
temporarily, part of the gains he has made in the 
East at such heavy sacrifices in men and material. It 
is not outside the realm of possibility that Hitler 
may try to cut his losses in Africa and concentrate on 
consolidation, especially in Italy and southern France, 
of what the Nazi press, with increasing emphasis, 
calls ‘‘the fortress of Europe’—in the hope that the 
Allies will ultimately weary of besieging this fortress. 
As the Germans pass to the defensive, the Allies 
face the task of relentlessly pressing their present 
advantages, giving Hitler no respite to carry out his 
plans for the reinforcement of Europe. To use Mr. 
Churchill’s phrase, Africa is not a halting place but 
a springboard for coming closer to grips with the 
Axis powers. 

In the unremitting struggle that must be waged 
before the war can be carried to Germany on land, 
as it already has been from the air, the Allies have the 
invaluable aid of that ‘‘silent front” in Europe on 
which the conquered peoples have been resisting 
Hitler's “new order’ under conditions of hardship 
that our imaginations cannot even encompass. If 
further proof were needed of how the Europeans 
feel about the “new order,” it was furnished with 


























dramatic heroism by the officers and men of the 
French fleet at Toulon. 

THE PRICE OF RELIEF. But this very resistance, 
unless promptly and effectively sustained by the Al- 
lies, could spell disaster for the valiant defenders 
of the conquered countries who, with the occupation 
of unoccupied France, are now more exposed than 
ever to Nazi reprisals. No one who has shared, how- 
ever slightly, in the life of pre-war Europe—no one, 
in fact, with any feeling of humanity—can hear of 
the mass reprisals reported in recent weeks from 
Poland and Czechoslovakia without imagining the 
even worse disasters that may lie ahead for the very 
men and women whose courage, energy and vision 
will be most needed for the reconstruction of the 
continent. The measures of relief and rehabilitation 
promised to the conquered peoples by Britain and 
the United States, no matter how generous, cannot 
of course replace lives that have been destroyed or 
permanently crippled. Already some questions have 
been asked in this country as to the cost, in dollars 
and cents, and possibly in lowered standards of liv- 
ing, that aid to the conquered peoples may involve 
for the United States after the war. What we must 
bear in mind is that no formal bookkeeping can 
balance off any amounts of food, clothing, medicine, 
or money sent to Europe against the sufferings ex- 
perienced by the peoples of the continent who, 


Page Two 








<a 
—— 


through their stubborn resistance, are now facilitay. 
ing the task of Britain, Russia and the United State 
in storming Hitler’s “fortress.” 


Moreover, the emphasis on the economic losse 
that the United States may face is misleading. There 
is no reason to believe that, by aiding other peoples 
to rebuild a shattered and impoverished continent 
and achieve a minimum standard of living that might 
prove a safeguard against recurring wars and reyo. 
lutions, this country would come out the loser. Op 
the contrary, practical experience would indicate that 
policies of freer international exchange, of helping | 
to increase the productivity of regions as yet rela 
tively undeveloped, of eliminating trade discrimina. | 
tions, and so on, would open new channels for the 
trade of the United States, aiding this country to 
increase its productivity and, consequently, | it | 
standard of living. Sacrifices undoubtedly will have | 
to be made to achieve stability after this war—sac | 
rifices whose cost, in any case, would be infinitesimal 
when compared with the cost of the war on which 
we are now engaged. And they may at the same 
time rid us of shortsighted, selfish and prejudiced | 
policies which have too often dominated the thought | 
and action of all nations, great and small, to the 
detriment of the welfare of their own peoples. 





; 
; 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


WHAT WILL HITLER DO ABOUT SPAIN? 


Occupation of Vichy France by the German Army 
on November 11 emphasizes once more Spain's 
strategic importance in the Mediterranean war. Suc- 
cess or failure of the present battle for North 
Africa, and ultimately of a second front in the Medi- 
terranean, depends largely on the capacity of the 
Allied nations to keep open their supply line across 
. the Atlantic and through the Straits of Gibraltar. 
The maintenance of this lifeline depends in turn to 
a considerable extent on the attitude Spain may take 
in the immediate future. If Spain remains a non- 
belligerent, Allied vessels will be able to enter the 
Mediterranean in relative safety. On the other hand, 
military necessity may compel the German High 
Command to use strategic points on Spanish territory 





What are the economic difficulties confronting 
Chungking which must be solved before China can 
make its maximum contribution to victory? Read: 


China's War Economy 
by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25c 


November 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLticy REPORTS 


REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











as bases for a sea and air blockade of the Allies, since | 
this appears to be the most efficient way for the Axis | 
to interrupt the flow of reinforcements to the Medi- 
terranean front. 


IMPORTANCE OF SPANISH BASES. Geograph: 
ically, Spain is in a position to close the Straits of 
Gibraltar, all-important western gateway to the Medi | 
terranean. To the north, the Rock is surrounded by 
Spanish territory. To the south, and only 18 miles 
away, lies Spanish Morocco, a 200-mile long and 50- 
mile wide stretch of African coast. If the Straits 
were blocked by action from either direction, the al- 
ready overtaxed railroad which runs from Rabat on , 


_ the Atlantic coast of Morocco to Tunis, by-passing | 


Spanish Morocco, could not transport all the supplies ' 
needed for an Allied invasion force, in spite of the 
shipment of a number of American locomotives along 
with the expeditionary forces. 


Should Hitler decide to invade Spain in order to ' 
close the Straits, an immediate Allied countermove 
would most probably be the occupation of Spanish 
Morocco, as well as an area of Spanish continen 
tal territory sufficient to protect Gibraltar against 
attack from the rear and to prevent the Nazis from 
using near-by territory to prey on Allied shipping. 
But even if the Nazis should not be able to gain 





ilitat. 
States 


OSSes 
Phere 
Oples 
inent 
night 


Tevo- 


> that 
ping 
rela. 
nina- 
r the 
ry to 
,. its | 
have \ 
—$ac- 
simal 
vhich 
same | 
diced 
yu ght 
> the 





AN 


since | 
Axis | 
Medi- 


raph- 
ts of 
Medi- 
od by 
miles | 
d 50- 
traits 
1e al | 
at On , 
ssing 
»plies 
f the 
along 
ler to} 
move 
anish 
tinen- 
yainst 
from 
ping. 
- gain 








—_—_ 
— 


control of the southern tip of the Iberian peninsula, 
occupation of the rest of Spain by the Wehrmacht 
would clearly offer numerous military advantages to 
the Axis. The Spanish naval base of Cartagena, for 
instance, only 125 miles across the sea from Allied- 
occupied Oran, could serve as a starting point for air 
and submarine operations against the Allies. Farther 
east, Spain owns the excellent naval base of Mahon 
on Minorca, one of the Balearic islands, located 
about halfway on a straight line between Toulon 
and Algiers, and roughly 220 miles from the latter. 
It has long been one of the best fortifications of 
the Mediterranean. Under German or Italian con- 
trol, and with the southern coast of France now oc- 
cupied by the German Army, this stronghold would 
represent a real danger spot for the North African 
Allied forces. 

A German military invasion of Spain might, how- 
ever, end disastrously for the Nazis if they were 
not able to seize all the Spanish keypoints 
promptly. Should the Allies reply by occupying 
part of the strategic Spanish coast, a second con- 
tinental front would automatically be opened in 
Spain. Moreover, even if a successful military opera- 
tion proved impossible on either the Allied or the 
Spanish side, other disadvantages for the Axis, such 
as renewal of the civil war in Spain, and reinforce- 
ment of the British blockade which would aggravate 
the already critical food situation of the country, 
could result from an invasion. It is conceivable that 
the risks involved might cause the German High 
Command to decide against a move through Spain. 

FRANCO'S POSITION. On November 26 Gen- 
eralissimo Francisco Franco ordered mobilization, to 
take place three days later, of four classes of the 
Spanish Army, apparently against a possible inva- 
sion of Spanish territory (presumably by Germany, 
for President Roosevelt had promised Spain on No- 
vember 8 that the Allies would respect Spanish ter- 
titory). The following day, however, a new order 
was issued, limiting this partial mobilization to one 
class only. No explanation was given, but it can be 
assumed that the groups without which Franco could 
not rule Spain—the Falange and the representatives 
of the Nazi High Command—had a hand in this. 

No illusions should be cherished in Allied coun- 
tries about Franco’s potential rdle. Franco is hardly 
in a position to decide for himself the fate of Spain. 
His whole régime is built on the Falange, Spain's 
official fascist party, which has gradually eliminated 
other groups, such as the Monarchists, who sup- 





Page Three 





ed 





ported Franco. The Falange is ideologically com- 
mitted to the Axis. The officers of the Spanish Army 
are known to be pro-Axis, including the new Min- 
ister for Foreign Affairs, General Gémez Jordana, 
who recently succeeded Serrano Sifier, now a promi- 
nent member of the new Falange National Council. 
Moreover, the Nazis are firmly entrenched in Spain. 
It is reported that about 50,000 Axis agents control 
Spain's vital centers in the rdle of technicians, mili- 
tary advisers and Gestapo. Under these conditions, 
there seems little chance that Franco would be able 
to oppose a German invasion effectively, even if he 
were personally inclined to do so. For its part the 
Falange, realizing that it has but a tenuous hold on 
the Spanish people, and that a defeat of the Axis 
would end its power, cannot ally itself to the democ- 
racies. Meanwhile, the only thing Franco can do is 
try to obtain as many advantages as possible from 
the Allies by claiming the credit for Spain’s non- 
belligerency. If the German High Command finds 
the invasion of Spain advisable, however, the Ger- 
man Army would move in, with or without the ap- 
proval of Franco. Hitler, not Franco, will decide on 
the continuation or end of Spain's present neutrality. 
ERNEST S. HEDIGER 





Government by Assassination, by Hugh Byas. New York, 

Knopf, 1942. $3.00 

Mr. Byas, on the basis of considerable knowledge of 
Japan, analyzes the domination of Japanese politics by 
military terrorists. He helps to clarify the position of the 
Emperor—a figurehead essentially controlled by circles 
about him. He concludes that Japan must suffer complete 
military defeat, but suggests rather lenient peace terms, 
apparently considering it most important to deprive Japan 
of territorial stepping-stones to aggression. Surprisingly, 
Korea is not included among these. 


For the Healing of the Nations, by Henry P. Van Dusen. 
New York, Friendship Press, 1941. Paper, 60 cents. 
Aimed primarily at recording facts about the Christian 

World movement which impressed themselves upon the 

author during an eight-month round-the-globe journey. to 

the 1988 World Missionary Conference at Madras, India. 

Special emphasis on Asia. 


No Retreat, by Anna Rauschning. Indianapolis, Bobbs- 
Merrill, 1942. $2.75 
The wife of the author of The Revolution of Nihilism 
describes with quiet distinction the impact of Nazism on 
her family’s life in Danzig, their flight to France, and 
finally to the United States. 


The Latin American Republics: a History, by D. G. 
Munro. New York, Appleton-Century, 1942. $5.00 
Out of the author’s varied experiences in Latin America 
and his extensive research has come this excellent bringing 
together of historic background and present wartime inter- 
American relations. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 7, Decemper 4, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


“Ee 181 








Washington News Letter 











Nov. 30.—The highly dramatic self-destruction of 
Admiral Jean de la Borde’s fleet of 62 French war- 
ships at Toulon on November 27 to prevent them 
from falling into Nazi hands is likely to stand out 
as one of the decisive events of the war. For it en- 
tails, as Winston Churchill said in his broadcast two 
days later, the extinction for all practical purposes 
of the ‘‘sorry farce and fraud of the Vichy Govern- 
ment,” and, what is perhaps even more important, 
it marks the end of Franco-German collaboration. 
For the first time since June 1940, the Germans have 
fired on the Vichy French. The scuttling of the French 
fleet may prove a turning-point in French history. 


From the point of view of the United Nations, it 
is of course unfortunate that Admiral de la Borde 
did not see fit to respond to Admiral Francois Dar- 
lan’s appeal from Algiers to join the Allies in Africa. 
But the scuttling of the French fleet at Toulon is a 
more serious blow to the Axis than it is to the Allies. 
The fear that has long haunted the United Nations 
that the French fleet with the two modern 26,000-ton 
battleships, Strasbourg and Dunkerque, would fall 
into Nazi hands is now definitively removed. Indeed 
the Vichy radio said that the immolation of the 
French fleet had been carried out in accordance with 
general instructions, dating back to the time of the 
Franco-German armistice in June 1940, whereby the 
commanders of all units of the French Navy were 
ordered to scuttle their ships rather than allow them 
“to be taken over by any foreign power whatever.” 
Marshal Pétain has repeatedly given assurances to 
the United States government that he would not per- 
mit the French fleet to fall into the clutches of the 
Nazis, and the drama of Toulon attests to the sin- 
cerity of his word. 


PASSING OF THE VICHY REGIME. Within 
the past week the last semblance of authority has 
been stripped from the Vichy government. The Nazi 
seizure of Toulon completes the occupation of 
France. The destruction of the French warships at 
Toulon was quickly followed by Hitler’s decree 
ordering demobilization of the small army permitted 
France by the terms of the armistice. All metropolitan 
France has now been placed under Nazi military 
rule under the command of Field Marshal Karl von 
Runstedt, and the notorious line of demarcation 
which inevitably tended to create divisions among 
Frenchmen has vanished. 


FOR VICTORY ° 





The violation of the armistice by Hitler has dealf 
a death blow to the hollow pretense of Frange 
German collaboration that was officially inaugurated 
at Montoire on October 24, 1940. As the Vichy gov. 
ernment has been deprived of all means of govern. 
ment, it can no longer negotiate, and the sham of 
collaboration has now been replaced by the brutal 
dictatorship of the sword. It is still not clear whether 
Pierre Laval will continue to issue laws under his 
own signature, in which case he will unmistakably 
set himself up as a Quisling, or whether the Vichy 
régime will simply be replaced by Nazi military rule 

In any case, the last pretense of a Nazi “New 
Order” in Europe has now vanished. Hitler must | 
now keep down by force the entire population of 
metropolitan France at the same time that he has 4 
new frontier—the French Mediterranean—to guard | 
against an Anglo-American invasion threat. These | 
requirements constitute a severe drain on German 
manpower at a time when Nazi troops are being | 
decimated on the plains of Russia. 


WANTED—A “UNION SACREE.” The elimi 
nation of the Vichy régime, as Churchill noted in 
his broadcast, is a ‘‘necessary prelude to that reunion 
of France without which resurrection is impossible.” | 
Unhappily, the prospect of a union of all French 
men outside France engaged in resisting the Axis | 
is still remote. The British Premier, on Novem: 
ber 24, suppressed a radio attack that General Charles 
de Gaulle was planning to deliver against Admiral 
Darlan, and the Fighting French radio speaker in 
London last week was so displeased with the North | 
African set-up that he suspended his broadcasts to 
France for the first time since 1940. Unconfirmed re- 
ports from London state that General de Gaulle is 
not satisfied with President Roosevelt's assurance of 





~ 


November 17 that the arrangement with Admiral } 
Darlan is only a ‘temporary expedient,” and is con- | 


sidering coming to Washington to make a ‘‘strong 
personal appeal” to the President to abolish Darlan’s 
status as French High Commissioner in North Africa 
The United States military authorities there, however, 
are highly pleased with the results of the accord with 
Darlan which has enabled them to acquire French 
North Africa as a base for military operations at the 
cost of relatively few casualties, and offers the pros- 
pect of similarly acquiring the use of strategic Dakar. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


ao 


