





ED. 
pre- 
vard 


vay, 
' the 
off- 
yuld 


20. 
rkey 
aits, 
ly 1 
cOn- 
hich 


July 
Ons. 
nree 


and 
eaty 


ates 
y in 
d's 
reat 
10n- 


Ose- 
vith 
rary 
‘ots- 
ican 
yun- 


— 





ee 
¢RNERAL LiwmaR® 
SLY, Oat moa. 


Genera) bi bras 


AUG 2 1945 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


NA 


*ta2 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIV, No. 40 


JuLy 20, 1945 





BIG THREE STRIVE AT POTSDAM TO UNIFY POLICY ON GERMANY 


a contrasts in the policies the Allies 
have been pursuing in their respective zones of 
defeated Germany should cause no surprise, since no 
joint over-all policy for the control of Germany has 
thus far been established. It must be hoped that the 
Big Three conference which opened at Potsdam on 
July 16 will issue a joint directive speeding the es- 
tablishment of the Allied Control Council for Ger- 
many and giving this body sufficient power to coor- 
dinate basic plans for all four Allied military zones. 
In judging newspaper reports from all zones in Ger- 
many, it must be borne in mind that reporters do 
not have full access to information, and are not 
always aware of the military necessities that may 
have prompted this or that measure. 

NAZIS AND THE GERMAN PEOPLE. One 
fundamental point on which all the occupying au- 
thorities in Germany will have to reach approxi- 
mately the same conclusion if they are to pursue 
common policies is the long-debated question 
whether the Nazis alone or the entire German people 
should be held responsible for Hitler's aggressions. 
During the earlier stages of the war both Britain and 
the United States tended to regard Nazism as the 
ptincipal enemy in Germany. But the prolonged 
fighting and the revelation of Nazi atrocities during 
the concluding months of the war combined to 
strengthen the view that the German people shared 
the guilt of their leaders. It was in a mood of anger 
and disgust with all Germans that Marshal Mont- 
gomery ordered his troops to “behave as conquerors” 
after V-E Day, while General Clay, General Eisen- 
hower’s deputy, declared that the purpose of the 
Allies’ military government was ‘‘to punish Germany 
and hold her down.” 

By contrast, the Russians, who have at least as 
Many reasons as the British and Americans to hate 
the Germans, are carefully distinguishing between 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


the Nazis and the average German. Even before the 
Red Army entered Berlin, Russia made it clear that 
it would not regard Nazis and Germans as identical 
—a theory strongly propounded during the war by 
the Russian writer Ilya Ehrenburg. Instead, the Rus- 
sians emphasized the view Stalin had formulated 
early in the war when he declared that the object of 
Russia was to destroy Nazism, not the German 
people. The actions of Soviet officials in Russian- 
occupied areas of Germany indicate two things: first, 
Russia wants to reduce its military responsibilities in 
Germany as soon as possible and realizes that a stable 
and friendly German government is essential to this 
plan. Second, the Russians have been seriously dis- 
turbed by the mass flight of civilians from their 
zone during the last phases of the war and are trying 
to dissipate the fears of the Germans. 

ANGLO-AMERICAN NEGATIVES. Meanwhile, 
the emphasis the United States and Britain have been 
placing on their role as conquerors makes their tasks 
of military government more difficult than those of 
the Red Army. The lifting, on July 14, of the ban on 
fraternization should help to end the social vacuum 
that has hitherto existed in the American and British 
controlled areas. This step has been taken, it is offi- 
cially stated, because Nazis are being rapidly rounded 
up, and security reasons no longer require non-com- 
munication betwen Allied forces and the German 
population. This ban, however, was only the most 
publicized, and the most frequently violated, of a 
long list of negative commands given to American 
and British forces in Germany. In addition, the oc- 
cupying authorities are under orders not to permit 
the existence of any political party, with the result 
that no new groups are emerging to replace the 
Nazis. In areas, such as Bavaria, where faint signs 
of reviving political activity have appeared, they 
have been promptly suppressed. 















12 yt inte BREE te 
Paar - 


ots st AT ee 
EY & Sea Si 


~ Gen Di . 


Cnet 


————— 








The Anglo-American policy of suspending normal 

life in Germany has also led to bans on public 
gatherings and on publications, which are now being 
somewhat modified. The problems of resuming eco- 
nomic activities, too, have been faced chiefly from 
the negative angle of what industries and types of 
work are forbidden. As a result, western Germany is 
threatened with mass-unemployment and serious 
food shortages which could lead to disorders; and 
disorders, in turn, might lead to new prohibitions. 
. RUSSIAN POLICY OF RECONSTRUCTION. 
In the Russian zone, on the other hand, where non- 
Nazi Germans are regarded by the Red Army as 
potential friends, definite encouragement is being 
given to the revival of political, economic and cul- 
tural life. Anti-fascist political parties have been or- 
ganized, the formation of a united front of four par- 
ties has just been announced in Berlin, and trade 
unions have been revived. Movies, theatres and con- 
cert halls have been reopened, with the Russians 
paying their respects to the German culture of the 
past. Reconstruction tasks, for which workers are 
drafted, have begun in the cities, and several thou- 
sand urban dwellers have been sent to farms to help 
restock eastern Germany's food basket. Moreover, 
partly as a result of the fact that the Russian zone 
has a comparatively small population and possesses 
larger agricultural resources, the Red Army has been 
able to announce an increase in German rations that 
will give workers greater amounts of food than they 
had under the Nazis. 

The Russians’ emphasis on reconstruction does not 
mean, however, that the Red Army is offering a 
“soft” peace to Germany. In addition to the obvi- 
ously constructive side of the picture of German life 
in the Russian zone, there are punitive measures that 


RUSSIA RESUMES HISTORIC ROLE IN MIDDLE EAST 


Predictions abound that every question currently 
vexing the Allies will be raised at the Potsdam con- 
ference. Joint decisions by the Big Three are indeed 
urgently needed concerning many issues aside from 
the problems of joint occupation of Germany. Among 
these are frontier quarrels in the Balkans, rising ten- 
sion in Greece, control of the Dardanelles, and terri- 
torial or political demands presented by Russia to 
Turkey and Iran. It is doubtful, however, that more 
than tentative plans can be made at this time for a 
coming peace conference to deal with many of these 
developments. Some problems confronting the Allies 
in the eastern Mediterranean and in the Middle East 
grow out of the European war. Others reflect long- 
term strategic or geographic interests and demon- 
strate clearly that the Soviet government intends to 
recover the position Russia held in world affairs 


‘ under the Czars. 


ANGLO-RUSSIAN STRAINS. At Teheran agree- 


Page Two 





—— 
—$—$—$—, 





may offset somewhat any hopes the Germans 
have for national restitution under Russian leader. 
ship. For example, Soviet authorities have been te. 
moving large amounts of machinery to Russian fac. 
tories, thus obtaining reparations for the USSR 
before the inter-Allied reparations committee jg 
Moscow has officially announced its plans. Yet to 
the defeated Germans the policies of the Russian 
occupying authorities may seem to give Germany, ag 
the Red Army claims, a chance to find its way back 
into the comity of nations. 


DANGEROUS COMPETITION. Since a marked 
contrast exists between the Anglo-American and 
Russian zones, there is inevitably an element of com- 
petition for German support in the Red Army's more 
positive strategy of occupation. The Western powers 
cannot ignore the dangers of such competition, and 
for this reason—if no other—they need to reexamine 
their current policies toward Germany. 

This does not mean, however, as some observers 
in this country and Britain are suggesting, that the 
American and British occupying authorities must try 
to build up a western Germany that will take its cue 
from Washington and London. Such a plan, if it 
succeeded, would almost surely cause Russia to 
extend its security demands still further. If it failed, 
Britain and the United States would find themselves 
virtually restricted to the fringes of western Europe, 
and further attempts to cooperate with Russia would 
be jeopardized. Instead of seeking a solution of the 
German problem in such an obviously dangerous 
plan, further attempts must be made to organize Ger 
many under united Allied control despite the physical 
division of the country into zones of occupation. 


WINIFRED N. HADsEL 


ment was reached between Britain and Russia recog: 
nizing Greece as in the British sphere of influence. 
But despite the Soviet Union’s hands-off policy thus 
far in Greece, events there are perhaps the most likely 
to lead to serious deterioration of Anglo-Russian re 
lations. Recent reports indicate that Greece faces 4 
virtual state of terror, allegedly instigated by pro 
monarchist elements which control the British-spon- 
sored government. Greek irredentists have recently 
made extravagant claims about the country’s borders, 
and it is to be noted that pro-communist elements 
have taken up these requests, asking also for Eastern 
Thrace. While the Greek Regent, Archbishop 
Damaskinos, charges that Greek subjects are mal- 
treated in a small sector of Albania, the Yugoslav 
leader, Marshal Tito in a statement of July 8 at 
tacked Greece, and may hope to incorporate Mace 
donia, with its valuable Aegean port of Salonika, if 
the projected Yugoslav state or at least in the pro 














yuld 

the 
ous 
set 
sical 
10n. 


COR: 
nce. 
thus 
kely 
1 fe 
es a 
pro- 


ontly 
ders, 
ents 
stern 
shop 
mal- 
yslav 
3 at 
{ace- 
a, if 
pro- 











— 





South Slav federation which is backed by 
Russia. On July 11 Russian troops were said to have 
drawn up to the Greek-Bulgarian border where inci- 
dents, as in Macedonia, are reported. 

Only if the Big Three conferees at Potsdam de- 
vise binding and realistic plans for cooperative super- 
vision of the coming plebiscites in Greece and Yugo- 
savia would there seem to be hope of assuring sta- 
bility in Southeastern Europe. Otherwise, if the 
Soviet Union now decides openly to support political 

ups in Greece to which Britain has heretofore 
objected, there is little doubt that Russian interests 
will conflict with those of the present British govern- 
ment which will surely continue to pursue vigorously 
its policy of retaining a hold on Greek affairs. Britain 
has sponsored, jointly with the Soviet Union, the 
leftist regime of Marshal Tito in Yugoslavia and 
must now anticipate greater Russian influence in the 
Dardanelles, as well as in the Middle East generally. 
The expansion of Russian influence in this region, 
however, will render Britain’s position extremely 
precarious in the eastern Mediterranean unless the 
Aegean approaches to Britain's empire lifeline like 
Crete are fully protected. 

RUSSIA IN THE MIDDLE EAST. In both Tur- 
key and Iran Moscow’s demands clearly reflect the 
permanent geographical realities of the area and 
Russia’s security needs. Moscow’s desire for bases 
near the Dardanelles and a privileged position in 
the Montreux regime governing the straits between 
the Black Sea and the Mediterranean were presented 
formally to Turkey on June 22 and announced in the 
press on June 25. Although these demands have been 
tumored for several months, since Russia denounced 
the Soviet-Turkish neutrality pact of 1925 on March 
20, it has been apparent that relations between the 
two countries could only be regularized after clari- 
fication of the Montreux convention. Although the 
traits were demilitarized by the Treaty of Lausanne 
of 1923, Turkey obtained the right to militarize the 
atea when the Montreux convention was signed in 
1936. 

With respect to the administration of the straits, 
as with respect to Tangiers, Britain will doubtless 
accept increased Russian participation. Yet in view 
of its alliance with Turkey of 1939, Britain will 
back the Turkish claim that any change in the 
Dardanelles must be undertaken under international 
auspices, and that the problem of the straits is not 
to be dealt with bilaterally between Turkey and 
Russia. Turkey is expected to resist the additional 


a 





Page Three —— 





——— 


Russian demands made known on June 25 for stra- 
tegic bases and for annexation of the former Rus- 
sian provinces of Kars and Ardahan. These provinees, 
of some strategic importance since they lie near the 
juncture of Turkey, Iran and the U.SS.R., were 
given up by the Soviet government under the Brest- 
Litovsk settlement of 1918. Their incorporation in 
Turkey was accomplished in the Russo-Turkish treaty 
of 1921. Recent precedents in eastern Europe, how- 
ever, suggest that after prolonged negotiation and 
after the great powers have adjusted their claims 
with respect to the Dardanelles, Kars and Ardahan 
will be returned to the Soviet Union. Here, above all, 
Moscow’s policy seems to be motivated by an attempt 
to rectify the terms imposed on a gravely weakened 
Russia at the time when it withdrew from World 
War I. 

In Iran attention centers on the withdrawal of 
Allied troops from that country in conformity with 
the pledge to respect Iran’s independence, given by 
the Big Three at Teheran in 1943. Troops were to 
be withdrawn within six months after the end of the 
war, and on July 14 London reported that Britain 
had proposed withdrawal of British and Russian 
forces in the near future. Virtually all American mil- 
itary personnel in the country had already been 
evacuated. More significant, however, is the con- 
tinued Russian press campaign against the present 
Iranian government. Last autumn the U.S.S.R. was 
balked in obtaining oil and other mineral concessions 
in northern Iran, although its demand led to the 
downfall of the government, which has since under- 
gone further changes. Now Pravda on July 9 has 
urged that the government be reformed once more. 
In Iran, perhaps more than in any other Middle East- 
ern state, the Soviet Union can hope to benefit from 
internal political pressures. Certain leftist groups in 
Iran, although less well organized than in eastern 
Europe, have taken up the plea for a pro-Russian 
policy on the part of the Iranian government. What- 
ever agreement is reached to withdraw military 
forces in Iran, British control of the Persian Gulf 
and Anglo-American oil concessions in the southern 
provinces will inevitably stimulate Russia’s desire for 
greater participation in Iranian affairs. 

GRANT S. McCLELLAN 





The Speeches of General de Gaulle. New York, Oxford 
University Press, 1944. $1.75 


This compilation of speeches made between June 18, 
1940 and December 28, 1942 reveals the intense belief and 
fixed purpose of the French leader. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 40, Jury 20, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DornotHy F. Luet, Secretary; Vena Micueces Dean, Béitor. Entered as 
scond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


oe month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ss 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





si 





ie etd 


: Washington News L etter | 











JAPAN SEES ITS ONLY HOPE IN ALLIED RIFT ON CHINA 


The conclusion on July 13 of two weeks of 
talks in Moscow between Marshal Stalin and T. V. 
Soong, Premier of China, has brought the United 
States to a critical point in its Chinese policy, 
which might undergo radical change at the Potsdam 
conference. The Moscow conversations, which re- 
portedly arrived at no conclusion, dashed Washing- 
ton’s hopes that the rival governments of China 
in Chungking and Yenan would voluntarily unite in 
a combined regime. The possibilities either that the 
Soviet Union will agree explicitly to take part in the 
Far Eastern war or that Japan, whose mainland is 
now subjected to shelling from United States war- 
ships, will sue for surrender make the problem 
of Chinese internal political division particularly 
urgent for the Truman administration. China poses 
the one important issue in the world that could pre- 
vent the United States from establishing long-term 
good relations with the U.S.S.R. 

ASIATIC PROBLEMS AT POTSDAM. Through 
Ambassador W. Averell Harriman the United States 
followed the Soong conversations with the serious 
hope that they would bring agreement between the 
Soviet Union and the Chungking government, which 
Soong represents, on two outstanding issues—the 
territorial integrity of northern China and the re- 
organization of the central government. Soong and 
Stalin apparently reached no agreement on either 
issue, although the door to future negotiation re- 
mains open. Indifference on Moscow’s part toward 
the attainment of political unity in China, or con- 
tinuing reluctance on the part of Chungking to seek 
such unity would jeopardize our present policy and 
could create a gulf between this country and Russia. 
The policy of the United States currently is to co- 
operate with the central government, which main- 
tains a military blockade along the borders of the 
Yenan territories controlled by the Communists, and 
gently urge that government to reach an under- 
standing with its northern rival. 

Truman and his advisers on Chinese affairs went 
to Potsdam with the realization that the United 
States must be‘readf to modify its strictly correct 
policy of dealiiig- only with the recognized govern- 
ment of China. IA the absence of Chinese unity, the 
United States has to’decide whether it should grant 
military assistance to thé enan government, whose 
troops are fighting the Ja ese separately from the 
central government troops. “Wajis decision is of crucial 


FOR VICTORY ° 


importance if Russia plans to fight Japan. For Red 
Army forces advancing southward into free Ching 
from Siberia againt the Japanese would enter firs 
the region controlled by the Yenan regime, and mil. 
itary necessity, if no other reason, would drive the 
Russians to cooperate with that regime. Even jf 
Russia does not enter the Far Eastern war, it will 
retain its political interest in northern China, 4 
border zone, and that interest, it is expected, will 
lead to sympathetic relations with the Yenan regime 
Support of rival Chinese factions by the United 
States and the Soviet Union could lead to dangerous 
conflict between the two great powers. It should be 
noted that Chungking has recently manifested cool- 
ness toward internal pressure for unity. Chow Ping. 
Ling, speaking on July 8 to the Peoples’ Political 
Council meeting in Chungking, advocated coopera. 
tion between Chungking and Yenan. On July 9 he 
protested that official censorship had deleted his te. 
marks from the newspapers. 

JAPANESE HOPES AROUSED. The prospect of 
a disagreement between Russia and the United States 
over China is buoying Japan’s hopes in the grim days 
of its military decline. Kusuo Oya, chief of the edi 
torial department of the Tokyo radio, said ina 
broadcast on July 9: “No battle beyond Okinawa can 
be planned by America without expecting some col- 
lision in one form or another, directly or indirectly, 
with the Soviet interests in Asia . . . Japan has com 
fidence enough in its ability to expect a dramatic tum 
of events in the Pacific, and it is of small concem 
to the Japanese, and to their advantage, if nobody 
can understand such confidence.” 

This broadcast brings back vivid memories of the 
situation that existed in Germany on the eve of its 
defeat. In Germany, as in Japan, political leaders ex- 
pressed utmost confidence—a confidence difficult for 


non-Germans to understand at that time—that some } 


miracle would save the Reich in the nick of time 
German spokesmen, like those of Japan, looked for 
that miracle to be produced by a clash between the 
United States and Britain, on the one hand, and 
Russia on the other. An American-Russian misundet 
standing today regarding relations with China would 
only redound to the ultimate advantage of Japan— 
as a similar misunderstanding about Europe would, 
before V.E. Day, have redounded to the advantage 
of Germany. 
BLaiR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 














