1 gress 
idvice 
vately 
er the 


On at 
nonth 
er in 
rences 
Ss and 
Hull 
re the 


major 


at wat 
ork of 
ed to 
he en- 
e CON: 
Trade 


liberal | 


NOMIC 
1g cer: 


cilities | 
| more | 


to fe 


1eficial 


ts pro 
Lligent 
nt Act 


ONE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XIX, No. 10 DECEMBER 29, 1939 


THE PEACE THAT FAILED 
How Europe Sowed the Seeds of War 


Headline Book No. 21 25c 


By Varian Fry 
“By all odds the best brief diagnosis of European 
developments from the First World War to the 
Second which has yet appeared.” 


—Frederick L. Schuman 


J 

AN ] Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


1 1949 


RIODICAL ROOM 
NBRAL LIBRARY 
UNTV. OF MICH. 


PEACE PROBLEMS STRESSED IN CHRISTMAS SPEECHES 


HE President's Christmas message to the Pope 

and to leaders of the Protestant and Jewish 
faiths in the United States— discussed in the 
Washington News Letter—voiced a hope for peace 
and post-war reconstruction which was echoed, with 
varying emphasis, by several European leaders. 
Pope Pius XII, in his Christmas Eve address to the 
College of Cardinals, expressed great anxiety regard- 
ing the capacity of nations exhausted or weakened 
by war to undertake the task of reconstruction, 
“among difficulties that will be enormously in- 
creased and which the forces of disorder that lie in 
wait will seek to make use of in the hope of being 
able to give the final blow to Christian Europe.” 
Without offering his services as a mediator, the Pope 
set forth five fundamental bases of ‘‘a just and hon- 
orable peace.’’ Such a peace, he said, must “assure 
the right to life and independence of all nations, 
large, small, strong or weak”; liberate the nations 
from ‘‘the heavy slavery of armaments’’; create or 
reconstruct international institutions to assure faith- 
ful observance of treaty obligations; satisfy ‘‘the 
teal needs and just demands of nations and peoples 
as well as of ethnical minorities,” even if this in- 
volves “‘an equitable, wise and unanimous revision 
of treaties’; and establish a spirit of justice and 
responsibility in harmony with Christian ideals. 

ALLIES’ CHRISTMAS BROADCASTS. Similar 
concern for preservation of ‘Christian civilization” 
was voiced by King George VI in his Christmas 
broadcast to the Empire, when he said: “‘On no other 
basis can a true civilization be built. Let us remem- 
ber this through the dark times ahead of us, and 
when we are making the peace for which all men 
pray.” A more militant note was struck by Premier 
Daladier in his Christmas Eve broadcast. If Ger- 
many, he said, had “‘so carelessly and lightly had 
recourse to violence,” it was because it had never 


suffered war on its own soil. ‘““This time,’ he warned, 
“exact count will be kept of the destruction that she 
causes. She will, if it becomes necessary, pay for all 
she does’’—which may presage a new demand on 
Germany for reparations. 

A still different approach to Europe’s problems 
was made by Eamon de Valera, Prime Minister of 
Ireland, who in his Christmas Day broadcast to the 
United States urged the belligerents to hold a peace 
conference now, rather than wait for a conference 
after a long war which would meet in an “at- 
mosphere of fury and resentment, of hate and fear.” 
At the same time, he asked Americans to give their 
moral support to the reunion of Northern Ireland 
with the Irish Free State “by peaceful means.” His 
appeal was underscored by the news that on Decem- 
ber 24 Irish terrorists had raided a fort in Dublin for 
munitions, and that Irish Republican Army riots were 
spreading in Northern Ireland. 

While Allied leaders were declaring their support 
of Christian civilization, Nazi spokesmen also in- 
voked the aid of God. Rudolf Hess, speaking from a 
German destroyer on December 24, said that the 
prayer of the German people was: “God, you gave 
our nation your blessing; we, God, will win your 
blessing in the coming year. We will earn your bless- 
ing in battle, in the battle for our country, for the 
man whom you gave us.” And Colonel-General von 
Brauchitsch, Commander-in-Chief of the German 
armies, declared that, in view of the Allies’ deter- 
mination to crush the German people, there was only 
one thing for the Germans to do: “Fight until victory 
is attained so that one day Germany will shine as the 
nation that brought about permanent peace.” 

CONFLICTING WAR AIMS. These Christmas 
speeches reveal the gap which still exists between 
the aims of the warring powers, and which must be 
bridged if the peace hopes expressed by President 


_ SCRIP an 
rE 


Roosevelt and Pope Pius XII are to be fulfilled. The 
Allies remain determined to crush Hitlerism, which 
by millions of Germans is regarded as the only bul- 
wark against dismemberment and subjugation of the 
German people. Defeatist sentiment has been ex- 
pressed in France, both on the extreme Left by the 
Communists who declare that the war serves the 
interests of imperialist capitalism, and on the ex- 
treme Right by reactionary elements which still con- 
sider Nazism as a safeguard against communism. 
But the majority of the French and British are in no 
mood to consider a peace settlement which would 
leave aggressive Nazism in power and Germany in 
control of non-German territories like Poland and 
Czechoslovakia. What the Allies apparently hope is 
that anti-Nazi elements in Germany — presumably 
the army, the monarchists and the industrialists, pos- 
sibly under the leadership of Marshal Goering, who 
is regarded as a “moderate’”—may overthrow Hitler 
before the Nazis have launched the submarine and 
airplane attack they confidently predict for next 
spring, and before Germany has abandoned itself 
to bolshevism. The task of preparing such a change 
is obviously both delicate and risky, since any 
overt attempt by the Allies to dictate internal devel- 
opments in the Reich might merely consolidate the 
Germans behind Hitler. 

PROBLEMS OF “ANTI-CHRISTIANISM.” Even 
more fundamental issues are raised by efforts, here 
and in Europe, to rally “Christian civilization” 
against ‘“‘anti-Christian” forces. There is an ever- 
present danger that the term “anti-Christian” may 
become synonymous with the term “revolutionary” ; 
and that the nations of Europe, as well as those of 
the Western Hemisphere, may find themselves 
aligned overnight in an anti-revolutionary front. No 


AMERICAN REPUBLICS INVOKE DECLARATION OF PANAMA 


As a direct result of the Graf Spee incident, the 
neutrality policy developed by the American repub- 
lics at the meeting of the Ministers of Foreign 
Affairs, held September 23-October 3, is receiving its 
most serious test. On December 23 the American 
republics, for the first time invoking the Declaration 
of Panama,* unanimously protested to France, Britain 
and Germany against violation of the wide “safety 
belt” designed to keep hostilities at a distance from 
the shores of the Western Hemisphere. In addition 
to the Graf Spee episode, the protest cited the “‘sink- 
ing or detention of German merchant vessels by 
British vessels in American waters.” As defined by 
the Declaration of Panama, “American waters’ ex- 
tend to an average distance of 300 miles offshore, 
within which the American states declared that they 
have the “inherent right’ to exclude hostile acts. 


*Cf. Washington News Letter, Foreign Policy Bulletin, October 7, 1939. 


Page Two 


es, 
—— 


one familiar with the history of the past twenty-five 
years can fail to realize the degree to which the 
spiritual demoralization of our times has contributed 
to the present conflict. But this demoralization is no, 
due solely to the “anti-Christian” propaganda of 
Nazis and Communists. It is also due to the fact tha 
organized religions, in recent years, have often failed 
to provide men with that inspiration which, rightly 
or wrongly, many of them have sought in Nazism 
and Communism. 

To the extent that religious leaders, of whateve 
faith, show concern for the material as well as spirit 
ual welfare of their flocks, to that extent their ob. 
jectives coincide, and will continue to coincide, with 
those of twentieth-century democracy. But when. 
ever they place their services at the disposal of ay. 
tocratic governments which block social and eco. | 
nomic reforms—as in Tsarist Russia and monarchig | 
Spain—they tend to forfeit the confidence of theit 
peoples, and create the danger that a revolution | 
against autocracy may also develop into an attack | 
on organized religion. True Christianity is repre. | 
sented not merely by dogmas and hierarchies. It | 
represented by a genuine attempt to foster conditions 
of life, both within and between nations, which | 
would assure a minimum of comfort and security for | 
all. It will take more than war against Germany or | 
the Soviet Union, or both, to defeat the “anti | 
Christian” doctrines of Nazism and a 
These doctrines will be defeated only if organized 
religions, working in cooperation with democratic | 
forces throughout the world, out-revolutionize the | 
Nazis and Communists by fulfilling the great prom-| 
ises which democracy—itself the fruit of many revo- | 
lutions—continues to hold out to the world. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN | 


None of the belligerents, however, has conceded | 
that the American nations possess such an “inherent | 
right.” Admission of such a right by the belligerents | 
would constitute a distinct innovation in interna 
tional law, which does not permit territorial control 
beyond the 3-mile limit. Conceivably the American 
states, utilizing the United States Navy, might make 
their position effective by force or threat of force. | 
But any naval action of this type, or even the seizure 
of a belligerent warship seeking supplies or refuge 
in a neutral American port, would be regarded by, 
the belligerents as a hostile act. Thus, in the last 
analysis, the American nations might have to use 
force to keep the “safety” zone clear of belligerent 
action. While such a development is extremely um 
likely, the United States, by approving the Declata- 
tion, has placed itself in an awkward diplomatic 
position from which it may prove difficult to retreat. 

The Declaration may have been originally drawn 


—— 


up to de 
states anc 
the Euro) 
gestion tl 
ligerents 
rovides 
sultation’ 
acts with 


Under 
steps Cat 
Declarat: 
tions it 
Decembe 
suggestec 
of rules 
from suy 
in Amer: 
mitted w 
lished in 
this mea 
and Braz 


National 
Nathar 
1939. § 
A sobe 


between 1 


In Seare 
Putnar 
A colle 

the Briti 
fice—fr 


Contemp 
Charle 
Wiley 
Thirty 

affairs — 

movemer 
clarity 


work . 


War Is 
Se rie 8 
Based 

national 

addition 
cessors, 


tual inf 


In Defe 
Doub! 
The F 

plement 

The Go 
Shary 
A cor 

ization. 


—_——_—-- 


FOREIGN 
Headquart 
Entered as 


Bos 


1 eco. | 
irchig | 
| thet 
lution | 
attack 
repre. 
. It is 
litions | 
which 
ity for | 
ny oF 
“ant 
inism, 
inized 
cratic | 
ze the | 
prom- 
revo: | 


3AN 


ceded | 
herent 
erents 
tera: 
ontrol 
erican | 
make 
force. | 
eizure | 
refuge 
led by | 
e last 
Oo use 
gerent 
ly ut 
oclara- 
matic 
etreat. 
drawn 


—= Page Three 


up to demonstrate the solidarity of the American 
sates and their unquestioned desire to stay out of 
the European war. The Declaration makes no sug- 
gestion that force might be used to compel the bel- 
ligerents to accept its provisions. On the contrary, it 
provides only for “‘joint representation” and “con- 
sultation” in case the belligerents resort to hostile 
acts within the zone. 


Under the circumstances, it is difficult to see what 
steps can be taken to preserve the spirit of the 
Declaration without creating the kind of complica- 
tions it was designed to avoid. In their protest of 
December 23, the twenty-one American republics 
suggested the possibility of retaliation in the form 
of rules ‘which would prevent belligerent vessels 
from supplying themselves and repairing damages 
in American ports, when the said vessels have com- 
mitted warlike acts within the zone of security estab- 
lished in the declaration of Panama.” A variant of 
this measure of retaliation, supported by Argentina 
and Brazil, envisages the internment of all belliger- 


THE F.P.A. 


National Socialism and the Roman Catholic Church, by 
Nathaniel Micklen. New York, Oxford University Press, 
1939. $3.00 
A soberly written, documented analysis of the conflict 

between the Nazis and the Catholic Church. 


In Search of Peace, by Neville Chamberlain. New York, 
Putnam, 1939. $3.50 
A collection of speeches on foreign affairs, delivered by 
the British Prime Minister during his first two years in 
fice—from May 1937 to May 1939. 


Contemporary World Politics, edited by F. J. Brown, 
Charles Hodges, and J. S. Roucek. New York, John 
Wiley & Sons, 1939. $5.00 
Thirty-four specialists study the forces at work in world 

affairs—in terms of national objectives, international 

movements, and world citizenship. Careful organization, 
clarity of styles, and apt pictorial analysis feature the 
work. 


War Is Not Inevitable: Problems of Peace, Thirteenth 
Series. London, Peace Book Co., 1938. $1.50 
Based on lectures given at the Geneva Institute of Inter- 
national Relations in August 1938, this book is another 
addition to a readable and useful series. Like its prede- 
cessors, it fuses international idealism with extensive fac- 
tual information 
In Defense of France, by Edouard Daladier. New York, 
Doubleday, Doran, 1939. $2.50 
The Premier’s principal speeches since April 1938, com- 
plemented by a laudatory biographical sketch. 
The Government of the French Re public, by Walter Rice 
Sharp. New York, Van Nostrand, 1938. $1.75 


A competent study of French political life and organ- 
ization. 


ent vessels arriving in American ports after engag- 
ing in warlike acts within the zone. On the other 
hand, Uruguay, which was most directly concerned 
with the Graf Spee incident, seeks to distinguish be- 
tween raiders, and warships protecting commercial 
vessels against raiders. Not only is there no legal 
authority for such a distinction, but it might be con- 
strued by Germany as definitely favoring Britain and 
France. 


Between now and the time the Inter-American 
Committee on Neutrality meets in Rio de Janeiro 
next month to make recommendations, other pro- 
posals for “‘sanctions” against belligerents infringing 
the ‘‘safety zone” will doubtless be made. To devise 
a formula which will at once maintain the spirit of 
the Declaration and avoid complications with one or 
more of the belligerents will be no easy diplomatic 
feat. Sanctions of some type, however, appear to be 
definitely on the agenda, and the question of their 
effectiveness will naturally arise. 


Howarp J. TRUEBLOOD 


BOOKSHELF 


Golden Avalanche, by Frank D. Graham and Charles R. 
Whittlesey. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1939. 
$2.50 
In this acute analysis of the gold problem, the authors 

make a strong case for the conclusion that our present 

acquisitions of gold serve no useful economic purpose and 
can be justified only by the desire to strengthen the posi- 
tion of the Allies against Germany. 


Germany Rampant, by Ernest Hambloch. New York, Car- 
rick & Evans, 1939. $2.50 
The author, an Englishman, marshals much evidence to 
prove his contention that Nazism is only one more expres- 
sion of an ever-recurring German urge to dominate. He 
shows little understanding, however, of the historical 
experiences which have molded German character and 
thinking. 
Australia: Her Heritage, Her Future, by Paul McGuire. 
New York, Stokes, 1939. $3.50 
A delightful survey of Australian life, combining travel, 


history, folklore, and economic and social analysis. Many 
excellent photographs enhance the sprightly text. 


Twenty Years’ Armistice, 1918-1938, by William Orton. 
New York, Farrar and Rinehart, 1938. $2.50 


An interestingly written record of Europe from the 
Armistice through the Munich crisis. 


Strangers Everywhere, by Pem. London, Bodley Head, 
1939. 7s. 6d. 

The absorbing “human interest” stories of a score or so 
of German refugees. 

German Financial Policies 1932-1939, by Kenyon E. Poole. 
Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1939. $3.50 
Although this book is too technical for the layman, it 

brings together a vast amount of material showing how the 

Nazis have financed economic recovery and rearmament. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 10, DgcEMBER 29, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationa! 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New 


York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


> 181 F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Sons eho 


Washington News Letter 


pebd bingy 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Dec. 26.—Much speculation as to the possible 
réle of the United States as mediator in the Euro- 
pean war has followed President Roosevelt’s peace 
messages to Pope Pius XII and leaders of the 
Protestant and Jewish faiths in the United States, 
made public on December 23. In particular, the ap- 
pointment of Myron C. Taylor as the President's 
“personal representative’ at the Vatican has given 
rise to rumors that a new peace effort may be initi- 
ated in the near future and that diplomatic relations 
may be restored with the Vatican. 


MEDIATION MOVE NOT IMMINENT. To 
most Washington observers these rumors appear 
premature, even if not entirely without substance. 
Certainly, they find no confirmation in official quar- 
ters. At the White House and the State Department 
it is pointed out that the President’s message to the 
Pope referred only guardedly to future peace moves, 
and suggested that “no given action or given time 
may now be prophesied.” The message spoke of the 
desire to encourage “a closer association between 
those in every part of the world—those in religion 
and those in government—who have a common pur- 
pose,” but added that the time for action is not yet. 
Mr. Roosevelt went no further than to suggest that 
“when the time shall come for the re-establishment 
of world peace on a surer foundation, it is of the 
utmost importance to humanity and to religion that 
common ideals shall have united expression.” 


As to the appointment of Mr. Taylor, an emphatic 
denial that this move represents a step toward re- 
storing diplomatic relations with the Vatican came 
from White House press secretary, Stephen Early, 
on December 26. The only period during which the 
United States maintained a diplomatic representative 
at the Vatican was between 1848 and 1868. Rufus 
King, the last American Minister, resigned on Janu- 
ary 1, 1868 following the refusal of Congress to 
grant further appropriations for maintenance of the 
American mission. In recent years, friendly relations 
have existed between the United States and the Vati- 
can without formal diplomatic representation and, 
according to Mr. Early, no change is contemplated 
now. Mr. Taylor will have the rank of Ambassador, 
but without portfolio. As the President’s personal 
representative, his status will be similar to that of 
Norman H. Davis, who carried out various diplo- 
matic missions under both the Hoover and Roosevelt 
Administrations. His salary—which has not yet been 


discussed—will be met, if necessary, from the gen. 
eral fund of the State Department. 


While accepting these explanations, some up. 
official observers are inclined to weigh the Presi. 
dent’s initiative against the background of curren; 
developments abroad and related moves in Ameri. 
can policy. Since the invasion of Finland by the §p. 
viet Union, the attitude of the Administration has 
apparently shifted at several points. Up until the 
end of November, Administration spokesmen dis. 
couraged any talk of possible mediation by this 
government. They allowed it to be known that the 
United States could entertain no suggestion for 
mediation without definite assurances that the offer 
would be acceptable to all the belligerents, and 
without some promise that it would lead to more 
than a temporary truce. As Britain and France gave 
no indication of negotiating with Hitler, Washing. 
ton made no move to support the appeal of King 
Leopold and Queen Wilhelmina, and ignored any 
peace feelers which may have been relayed from 
Berlin. 


Outwardly the position remains unchanged, and 
Washington officials deny any knowledge of recent 
moves in Rome or other European capitals looking 
toward termination of hostilities. Yet beneath the 
surface there are signs that the position of the So- 
viet Union has altered the calculations of all Euro 
pean belligerents, and introduced a new element 
affecting the United States as well. The prospect of 
a crusade against communism is not regarded as a 
promising formula for ending the war in the West, 
but the call for a “closer association” between re 
ligion and government might easily coincide with 
suggestions for a united front to check the spread 
of bolshevism. Also, the extension of the ‘moral 


embargo” to forbid the export of plans, plants, man- | 


ufacturing rights or technical information required 
for the production of high quality aviation gasoline, 
as announced by the State Deparment last week, 


FORE! 


An inter pret. 


FO] 


—— 


every Sund 
Blue Netwo 
entitled ““A 
ments on tl 
If you 
urge your |c 
Willi 


POL 


ARAD¢ 

entere 
than 1939 
proved ea 
ticipation 
Hitler’s c 
Costly as 1 
—if not y 
it has als 
appeared 
pre-war a 

THE § 
perspectiv 
of non-ag 
velopmen 
conservat 
watk age 
| the Sovie 
disservice 
By that : 
and Sovi 
sort of r 
democrat 
economic 
viet Un: 
opinion 
and Left 


might also implement a united front program. 


Some observers profess to find similar tendencies | 


operating in the Far East as well as Europe. While 
the current negotiations with Tokyo seem unlikely 
to result in a modus vivendi before the existing com: 
mercial treaty expires on January 26, the desire t 
prevent a Soviet rapprochement with Japan seems (0 
represent a governing factor in the calculations of 
the Administration. 


W. T. STONE 


| generate 
| revival 
| century 
tenewed 
by simul 
leaders ¢ 
welfare. 
Not ( 
unforese 
tries; it 
and the 


