—-— 
oO 


yvern- 
de at 
r 14, 
. cast 
tions 
sanc- 


DEAN 


TRIA 
reor- 
once 
ienna 
s his 
er by 
10 re- 
1 now 
erior, 
reign 
ranks 
vy cab- 
‘irtual 
iklas 

men. 
is the 

com- 
tions” 
imedi- 
rently 
yrivate 
ia, the 
irhem- 


ve un- 
liopian 
ded as 
in the 
is re- 
cial as- 
1 from 
»s thus 
ion to- 
ion not 
impos- 


s it dif- 
toward 
-Italian 
"easing, 
| broad- 
al gov- 
by Ger- 
3 active 
n. Yet 
hing on 
benefit. 
LIMER 


——— 
1. Nationa 
FAN, Editor. 
Year. 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


nterpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


VoL. XV, No. 1 


NOVEMBER 1, 1935 


THE END OF NAVAL DISARMAMENT 
by David H. Popper 


The naval situation in Europe; Anglo-German naval 
agreement; German naval renaissance; Naval power 
in the Pacific; Japanese-American competition. 
October 23 issue Foreign Policy Reports 
25c a copy 


Subscription: $3 to members; $5 to non-members 


Entered as second- 
clase matter Deoember 
2, 1921, at the Post 


BRITAIN’S CHOICE: 


GENEVA OR 


ISOLATION 


HE existing confusion in the European situa- 

tion is not likely to be dispelled before the 
British general election on November 14. Premier 
Laval of France has continued his efforts to re- 
solve the Ethiopian crisis by diplomatic negotia- 
tions, but no settlement acceptable to London, 
Rome and Geneva has been evolved. The chances 
of appeasing Jl Duce’s colonial ambitions, preserv- 
ing at least nominal Ethiopian independence, and 
assuring British supremacy in the Mediterranean 
appear slight. The League Coordination Com- 
mittee was convened on October 31 to specify the 
date—probably in mid-November—when the eco- 
nomie and financial sanctions already agreed 
upon in Geneva will go into force. On the eve of 
this meeting, 38 nations had already informed the 
League that they would impose an arms embargo 
against Italy; 29 had promised to block loans and 
credits; and 24 had agreed to ban all purchase of 
goods from and sales of essential war materials 
to Italy. 

Britain’s determination to continue its leader- 
ship in pressing enforcement of economic and 
financial sanctions was re-emphasized in the short 
parliamentary session of October 22-25, which 
devoted itself exclusively to a debate on foreign 
policy. On October 22 Sir Samuel Hoare, British 
Foreign Secretary, declared that His Majesty’s 
government had been earnestly and sincerely at- 
tempting to apply the provisions of the League 
Covenant, “because we are convinced that if they 
do fail, the world at large and Europe in particu- 
lar will be faced with a period of almost unrelieved 
danger and gloom.” Denying that Britain was 
motivated by any imperial interest, “save the na- 
tural concern that a world-wide empire must feel 
for the preservation of world-wide peace,” Sir 
Samuel attempted to reassure Mussolini by stat- 
ing that Britain had not regarded the controversy 
“as an opportunity for attacking fascism.” He 
declared, however, that since the end of 1934 the 
British government had made “incessant repre- 


sentations’” to Mussolini, warning him of the 
gravity of the issues involved in the Ethiopian 
question. After defending the League’s attempts 
to settle the crisis by conciliation and its conse- 
quent delay in taking punitive action, the Foreign 
Secretary expressed his belief that the economic 
pressure envisaged at Geneva would shorten the 
duration of the war if collectively applied and “if 
states not members of the League do not attempt 
to frustrate it.” : 
This lack of conviction in the immediate ef- 
ficacy of economic sanctions was emphasized by 
Sir Samuel’s reiteration of the necessity for real 
collective action in their application, as well as 
cooperation in resisting “any attack upon one 
state for the action it has taken to defend the 
Covenant.” In connection with this obvious ref- 
erence to a possible blockade of Italy by the Brit- 
ish fleet, he assured the House that Franco-British 
solidarity had been established and that the 
French interpret Article XVI of the Covenant 
“as we interpret it.” Nevertheless, the Foreign 
Secretary stoutly denied that resort to military 
sanctions had even been discussed at Geneva. 
Prime Minister Baldwin, addressing Parlia- 
ment on October 23, underlined Sir Samuel’s dec- 
laration that Britain did not contemplate isolated 
action against Italy. He stated, however, that it 
must be prepared to “take risks for peace” and 
to that end must build up its armed strength. The 
Prime Minister’s remarks in the House, as well 
as his subsequent campaign speeches make it clear 
that the British government is determined to 
carry out a policy of intensive rearmament from 
which it will not be deflected regardless of the 
League’s success in applying economic sanctions. 
3ritain’s present whole-hearted devotion to the 
League offers a splendid election platform; it 
remains to be seen whether the Baldwin govern- 
ment’s rediscovery of Geneva will outlast the elec- 
tion, especially in some future eventuality when 
British imperial interests do not coincide so com- 


pletely with those of the League. In any case, 
whether it pursues a pro-League policy or returns 
to splendid isolation, Britain is determined to 
strengthen its military, naval and air forces. 

Meanwhile, the effectiveness of League applica- 
tion of economic sanctions against Italy must de- 
pend in large measure on cooperation of non- 
member countries—above all, the United States. 
In his note of October 26 to the president of the 
League Coordination Committee, Secretary Hull 
reiterated the deep interest of the United States 
in peace and prevention of war and listed the 
steps already taken by this government in the 
present crisis. ‘The course thus pursued,” the 
note declared, “ ... indicates the purpose [of the 
United States] not to be drawn into the war and 
its desire not to contribute to a prolongation of 
the war.” The note was favorably received in 
Geneva, although it fails to indicate what further 
steps the United States may take under the neu- 
trality legislation. The President and the State 
Department, for the time being at least, are ap- 
parently unwilling to extend the arms embargo to 
include other raw materials. Meanwhile, the dan- 
ger remains that Britain and France may settle 
the Ethiopian war by making concessions to Mus- 
solini. Such encouragement to aggressive action 
by other dictators would make the future of 
world peace dubious indeed. 


MILDRED S. WERTHEIMER 


BRITISH CALL NAVAL CONFERENCE 

After months of fruitless effort to discover a 
preliminary basis of agreement, the British gov- 
ernment on October 24 invited France, Italy, 
Japan and the United States to participate in a 
naval conference at London on December 2, 1935. 
The United States promptly announced its ac- 
ceptance, while the other governments have indi- 
cated they would reply favorably. It is under- 
stood that if prospects for an agreement develop, 
“other naval powers’”—presumably Germany and 
the U.S.S.R.—will be asked to attend. 

The primary reason for the British invitation 
is a clause in the London Naval Treaty which calls 
for a conference this year to determine what shall 
replace the Washington-London agreements when 
they expire at the end of 1936. Rarely has an 
international conference been called under less 
auspicious circumstances. Political animosities 
and accelerated naval building have made limita- 
tion at present tonnage levels a virtual impossi- 
bility. In the Pacific area the conditions which 
prevented the United States, Great Britain and 
Japan from reaching an agreement during their 
conversations of last year remain unchanged. 
Japan continues to press its activities on the Asi- 


Page Two 


atic mainland and to insist on naval parity with 
the United States. On October 23 Secretary 
Swanson reiterated American insistence on con- 
tinuation of the present ratios, while on Septem. 
ber 27 President Roosevelt had reaffirmed the 
naval building policy within the Washington and 
London naval treaty limits, which would be al- 
tered only by “a failure to renew these treaties.” 

In Europe the British national government is 
using the possibility of collective action against 
an aggressor to win a mandate for heavier British 
armaments, including the addition of 20 cruisers 
to the present strength of 50. A naval conference 
which sanctions this increase must permit cor- 
responding rises in the strengths of other navies. 
The British also desire to maintain a two-power 
standard in relation to continental European 
fleets, a difficult objective in a period of European 
tension. Alarmed by Germany’s building pro- 
gram under the Anglo-German naval agreement, 
France is hastening the construction of four capi- 
tal ships recently authorized. Although work on 
Italy’s two 35,000-ton vessels is proceeding very 
slowly, there is no indication that Mussolini will 
abandon his claim for parity with France. This 
Paris is determined not to yield. 

The most which may be achieved at the forth- 
coming conference, therefore, would appear to be 
a mutual adjustment of building programs until 
1942 and some degree of qualitative naval limita- 
tion. Britain announced its intention to seek the 
former when it abandoned the ratio system on 
July 22, 1935, but the British government has not 
satisfactorily answered the Japanese contention 
that such an arrangement would only renew the 
principle of ratios in another form. With regard 
to qualitative limitation, which would prevent the 
construction of new types of ships making treaty 
vessels obsolete at one stroke, the British desire 
to decrease the size and gun calibre of capital 
ships and cruisers. The United States, however, 
is resolutely adhering to the status quo, while the 
Japanese, although they favor smaller naval ves- 
sels, refuse to bind themselves on this point until 
their demand for parity is granted. In the pres- 
ent situation, no great hopes can be said to exist 


for the compromises on major issues which are f 


necessary for a continuance of naval limitation. 
D. H. POPPER 


The Theory of Money and Credit, by Ludwig von Mises. 
Translated by H. E. Batson. New York, Harcourt, 
Brace, 1935. $4.50 


A magnum opus on monetary fundamentals, largely 
written before the war, by one who believes that ‘‘recur- 
ring economic crises are nothing but the consequences of 


attempts to stimulate economic activity by means of ad- f 


ditional credit.” 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 1, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, 


November 1, 


1935. Published weckly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
RAYMOND Leslie BUELL, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor 
at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. National 


One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Cas ale ee 


AN He Sgr Stake el 


ee ees 


Co 


