Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library VEp 2> 
) University of Mich! van "Sy, 
" PRI AL. ROOM ns 


FO = 





GEN! 


UNIV. OF MICH, 


FOREIGN 


Lt BRARY 


Ann Arbor. Michizan 


MOIR (Ga¢ 316) oy) By 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XX, No. 10 


—_— 


DECEMBER 27, 1940 





AMERICAN AID TO BRITAIN ANGERS NAZIS 


wane German successes in the sea and air warfare 
around the British Isles and continued British 
gains in the Mediterranean, the announcement of new 
American measures of assistance to Britain has pro- 
voked the first official Nazi reference to the non-bel- 


constitutes a sharp reversal of the previous view that 
such aid could not become effective in time to alter 
the outcome of the war. On its face, therefore, the 
German statement indicates that a long campaign of 
attrition may be in prospect before an attempt is made 





de- 
ves, 
: of 


t to 
mpt 
ha 
arge 
ited 


n he 
st in 


that 
ch is 
illips 
days 
ition. 
- that 


NE 


PPA’ 
James 


> blue 


ligerency of the United 
States. On December 21, 
a day after President 
Roosevelt's appointment 
of a four-man defense 
board to expedite pro- 
duction, a spokesman of 
the Wilhelmstrasse 
warned foreign corre- 
spondents that seizure 
of Axis ships in Amer- 
ican harbors for British 





APPEAL TO THE MEMBERSHIP 

The Association is approaching the end of the year 
with its budget not yet raised, due in part to the di- 
version of certain gifts to war charities. We therefore 
hope each member will try to secure at least one new 
member or subscriber at this time. The cooperation 
of our membership is urgently needed to complete the 
1940 budget. 

We take this opportunity to thank members who 
have given F.P.A. memberships for Christmas. 


to cross the English 
Channel in force. Ger- 
man air and sea attacks 
have already imposed 
an increasing burden on 
the British. Emulating 
the tactics of the R.A.F., 
the German air force 
now seeks out industrial 
centers and seaports as 
targets for its bombs. 














At the same time, 





use would be regarded 
asa warlike act. Basing his statements on a misquo- 
tation of remarks by R. H. Cross, British Minister of 
Shipping, the spokesman inferentially threatened seri- 
ous consequences for the United States if support for 
Britain were carried too far. One nation, he main- 
tained, could not continually observe a “restraint” 
verging on ‘“‘self-effacement’” while another per- 
mitted a policy of ‘‘pinpricks, injury, insult, chal- 
lenge and moral aggression.” As if to empha- 
size to the American public the danger of its gov- 
ermment’s course, the German Foreign Office simul- 
taneously requested the withdrawal of three members 
of the American Embassy staff in Paris, on the ground 
that they had helped a British officer to escape. A day 
earlier, Berlin had announced the establishment of 
technical military and economic commissions to im- 
plement the Axis-Japan pact, while the German press 
alluded to American friction with Japan and the haz- 
atds of a two-front war. 


INVASION OR ATTRITION? The Nazis’ open 
expression of concern over American aid to Britain 


long-range German 
planes have ventured hundreds of miles out over 
the Atlantic both to attack shipping directly and 
to guide submarines operating in groups toward 
British convoys. The effectiveness of these meth- 
ods is reflected in the mounting toll of mer- 
chant vessels lost at sea which, according to 
the British, reached a total of 101,190 tons in 
the week ended December 1 and 81,685 tons in the 
following week. Including these figures, sinkings of 
British, Allied and neutral shipping for the war as a 
whole have passed the 4,000,000-ton mark and con- 
tinue at what Prime Minister Churchill called on 
December 20 ‘‘a very disquieting level.”” Mr. Church- 
ill informed his countrymen, moreover, that th 
must be prepared not only for this type of deadlock 
but also for a possible winter invasion, and counseled 
undiminished vigilance. During 1941, he asserted, 
Britain would finally become a well-armed nation, 
with a large, mobile army to repel attack and fight in 
“other theaters’ at any time. Meanwhile, in a s 

to the Italian people on December 23 Mr. Churchill 
placed the responsibility for the Anglo-Italian hos- 

















tilities on Mussolini and expressed the hope that the 
Italians would resume control of their affairs. 


THE MEDITERRANEAN THEATER. One ex- 
ample of Mr. Churchill's strategic conceptions has 
already proved its success in North Africa, where 
advancing British troops have laid siege to the Italian 
port of Bardia, 30 miles inside the Libyan border. 
While desperate Fascist resistance at this point may 

ive Marshal Graziani time to prepare strong de- 
enses farther to the west, an unusual “report” by the 
Marshal to Mussolini, published on December 22, 
casts doubt on the ability of the Italians to make a 
stand. The army, Graziani declared, knew in advance 
of the impending British assault but could not resist 
the “crushing superiority of the enemy's armored 
units” because its own communications and supply 
lines had been largely interrupted by British naval 
and air forces. There is as yet no evidence that the 
operations of these British forces have been impeded. 
On the contrary, the British Middle Eastern Head- 
quarters has apparently felt sufficiently confident of 
their predominance to detach capital ships, cruisers 
and destroyers for a heavy shelling of the Albanian 
port of Valona on December 18, and a sweep of the 
lower Adriatic which was not opposed by the Italians. 
As long as the maritime routes to Libya and Al- 
bania remain precarious, British and Greek advances 
will be limited principally by the size of reserve 
forces and their physical problems of supply. 

The Graziani statement and the Italian press policy 
of emphasizing, even exaggerating, the strength of 
the British arms in the Mediterranean are obviously 
designed to cushion public reaction to present and fu- 
ture defeats. They may also serve to pave the way for 
extensive German military aid. Unofficial reports of 
Nazi participation in the Italian war effort have been 
numerous, especially in coordinating war services and 
combating sabotage. It seems highly probable that 
Junkers transport planes have been ferrying reinforce- 
ments across the Straits of Otranto to Greece. Yet 
without — which can scarcely be sent by air, 
there is a definite limit to the augmentation of Italian 
fighting power. In this sector, however, the Greeks, 
too, are showing signs of strain. Despite claims of 
slow advances, they have not yet occupied the key 


Page Two 





Order your copy NOW! 


U.S. AID TO BRITAIN— 


1. What have we supplied? 

2. What else does Britain need? 
3. What more can we provide? 
4. What are the risks involved? 


January 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports . . . 25c. 

















— 
—— 


road junctions of Tepelini and Klisura, which bar the 
way to the more nearly level Albanian coastal plaip 

FRANCE’S FATE IN THE BALANCE. Nothwith. 
standing the importance of the Mediterranean theater, 
it still seems true that the decisive battleground of 
the war remains in Western Europe. Here po, 
tentous negotiations are in progress between the 
Nazis and the Vichy government, with the scope of | 
Franco-German “‘collaboration” the chief issue. Mar. 
shal Pétain has apparently braved German displeasure 
by refusing to reinstate in the Vichy Cabinet Pierre 
Laval, supposedly the strongest exponent of turning 
over the French fleet and naval bases to the Reich, 
although Laval has been permitted to take up private | 
residence in Paris. Even in defeat, the Marshal does 
not lack high cards in the diplomatic contest with the 
Nazis. The French forces in North Africa and Syris 
are loyal and might swing to the British if all of 
France were occupied. Anti-German sentiment is said 
to be reviving among the French masses, and Britain's 
cause to be growing more popular. On December 23 
Admiral William D. Leahy sailed aboard a cruiser for 
Lisbon, to present his credentials to Marshal Pétain as 
American Ambassador and, presumably, to work for 
restriction of Franco-German collaboration to the 
narrowest possible sphere. 

If the elements of the complicated war situation are 
considered as a whole, it may be noted that, despite 
vast differences, the struggle is assuming the character 
of an endurance test, just as in 1914-1918. On the 
one hand, Germany is striking at British shipping and 
industry and preparing for a final military blow, 
while it strives to employ the energies of the sullen, | 
ill-nourished populations now under its control for 
purposes of war production. On the other hand, Brit 
ain is maintaining a partially effective blockade of the 
continent and battering at Italy — which it hopes, 
through command of the Mediterranean and com 
tinued French neutrality, to contain until Ameria 
aid reaches decisive proportions. The importance of 
this factor was emphasized by the appointment on 
December 23 of Viscount Halifax as the new British 
Ambassador to Washington. Whether Britain’s effort 
can go on will depend not only on its militay 
strength, but perhaps even more directly on its succes 
in propounding new doctrines with which to gal 
vanize Europe and America for enthusiastic ant 


Nazi efforts. Davip H. Popper 


“WAR AND PEACE PROSPECTS FOR 1941” i 
the subject of the FPA’s broadcast on December 29; the 
speaker will be Vera Micheles Dean. We are eager ® 
have your comments on these broadcasts, which att 
heard every Sunday, from 2:15 to 2:30 E.S.T., over tht 
blue network of the National Broadcasting Company 


a 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 10, Dsecemper 27, 1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Legt, Secretary; Vera Michetes DEan, Ednw. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





1 


Nations 








($50 


tion 
anno 


also ; 
000,¢ 
Repu 
polit: 
Chile 
O! 
buoy 
Cam 
polit 
from 
brace 
gene’ 
tion 
rathe 
the n 
an hi 
Cam: 
is to| 


Presi 
by ar 
Most 
dreu 
renot 
Avil: 
Alm; 
hims 
prog 
assut 
bishc 
4 th 
of th 
tem 
twee 
pend 
sider 
try, : 
have 
years 


State 
at tk 
Amc 
grea 
at a 


For m 








u 




















The extension of a $110,000,000 loan to Argentina 
($50,000,000 from the Treasury's currency stabiliza- 
tion fund, $60,000,000 from the Export-Import 
Bank) marks a long step forward in Washington's 
announced policy of economic cooperation with the 
Latin American republics. The Export-Import Bank 
also granted credits of $7,500,000 to Uruguay, $10,- 
000,000 to Peru and $3,000,000 to the Dominican 
Republic. Meanwhile, in Latin American domestic 
politics, interest centers chiefly on Mexico and 
Chile. 


OPTIMISM IN MEXICO. An atmosphere of 
buoyancy characterizes the Mexican scene as the Avila 
Camacho administration gets under way. Although 
political forecasters are at a loss to draw conclusions 
from the composition of the new Cabinet, which em- 
braces elements both conservative and radical, the 
general impression prevails that the Mexican revolu- 
tion of the last thirty years is to be “consolidated” 
rather than pushed further to the Left. Indicative of 
the more conservative tendency of the new régime is 
an historic decree—first major step taken by the Avila 
Camacho government—under which individual title 
isto be given to farmers working communal lands. 

With a surprising degree of harmony, the new 
President has been accepted—provisionally, at least— 
by an overwhelming majority of the Mexican people. 
Most of the former supporters of General Juan An- 
dreu Almazan have lost faith in their candidate, who 
renounced all claims to the Presidency on the eve of 
Avila Camacho’s inauguration. Conservative ex- 
Almazanistas believe that the new President will 
himself put into effect many planks of the Almazan 
program. The devoutly Catholic element has been re- 
assured, moreover, by a statement of Mexican Arch- 
bishop Martinez, who publicly declared on December 
4 that Avila Camacho may be considered a loyal son 
of the Catholic Church. In labor circles, enthusiasm is 
tempered by fear that some sort of showdown be- 
tween the government and labor leaders may be im- 
pending. Two knotty problems are already up for con- 
sideration: the reorganization of the petroleum indus- 
try, and the status of the National Railways, which 
have been under worker management for several 
years, 

As far as relations between Mexico and the United 
States are concerned, prospects seem unusually bright 
at this time for a program of intimate cooperation. 
Among the mass of the Mexican people there is a 
greater feeling of cordiality toward this country than 
at any time in recent years, and such anti-United 


TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA 


= By JOHN I. B. McCULLOCH 














States demonstrations as that which occurred in front 
of the American Embassy on the occasion of Mr. Wal- 
lace’s visit can be written off in part as the perform- 
ance of agitators in Nazi hire. Prospects for a settle- 
ment at an early date of the oil dispute and other is- 
sues between Mexico and the United States are excel- 
lent, and close collaboration on the defense front can 
be predicted. 

CHILEAN PATTERN ALTERS. Important de- 
velopments are taking place in Chile which bid fair 
to alter considerably the political pattern in that re- 
public. Although a Popular Front government — 
backed by the Radical, Socialist, Communist and sev- 
eral lesser parties—took power two years ago, the 
Rightist opposition has maintained control both of 
the Senate and Chamber. On March 2, Congressional 
elections are to be held for a partial replacement of 
Senators and a total renovation of the lower house. 
Several weeks ago Chile’s two old-line traditional 
parties, the Liberals and Conservatives (both of which 
are now in opposition) announced that they would 
abstain from going to the polls in March. The reason 
advanced was lack of proper guarantees, as revealed 
in recent by-elections. 

Since then, however, the political pattern has been 
altered in one significant respect. Returning from 
Washington after a four-month sojourn in the United 
States, Oscar Schnake, the Socialist Minister of 
Fomento (Development), lashed out furiously at the 
Communists, whose policy of subservience to Mos- 
cow he stigmatized as both absurd and insidious. This 
was not the first time that the Communists had been 
so berated: an anti-Communist group was formed sev- 
eral weeks ago in Chile, and a bill outlawing the party 
has already been passed by the Chamber and is pend- 
ing before the Senate. The significance of Schnake’s 
attack, and of similar attacks which followed from 
other responsible Socialist leaders, lay in the fact that 
they originated from within the Popular Front coali- 
tion itself. 

So far, the Radicals have shown themselves loathe 
to drop the Communist connection and the Executive 
Committee of the Popular Front as a whole has re- 
fused to take action. In the light of the clearly ex- 
pressed Socialist attitude, however, this situation can 
scarcely continue. Should the Popular Front revise its 
stand, as the result of an agreement between Socialists 
and Radicals to throw the Communists overboard, it 
might then be possible to secure a realignment of 
political parties in Chile, based on a broad alliance 
between moderate Leftists and moderate Rightists. 


For more extensive coverage on Latin American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS, a bi-weekly newsletter edited by Mr. McCulloch. For sample 
copy of this publication, write to the Washington Bureau, Foreign Policy Association, 1200 National Press Building, Washington, D.C. 





Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Dec. 23.—In the series of dramatic moves initiated 
by President Roosevelt last week, the Administration 
has disclosed the outlines of a vast program which 
extends beyond the limits of industrial production for 
defense and aid to Britain into a new and uncharted 
area of foreign policy. The implications are clear, 
even though the ultimate objectives have yet to be 
stated. 


THE NEW DEFENSE PROGRAM. The scope 
of the program was outlined in the following specific 
moves: 


1. A proposal by Mr. Roosevelt (December 17) 
that the United States government finance all future 
orders for war materials in this country, turning over 
to Britain whatever amounts are necessary on a loan 
or “mortgage” basis. A ‘“gentleman’s agreement” 
would provide for future repayment in kind. 

2. An executive decision (December 18) advising 
the British Purchasing Mission to go ahead with new 
orders estimated at $3,000,000,000, without waiting 
for final action on plans for financing. 


3. Creation of a new ‘Office for Production Man- 
agement for Defense” (December 20) to coordinate 
the entire industrial defense program in a super- 
council of four men: William S. Knudsen, Sidney 
Hillman, Secretary of War Stimson, and Secretary of 
the Navy Knox. The “one mission” of the new office 
was described by Mr. Knudsen (December 21) as 
“production to the maximum of American resources 
in capital and labor, in management and industry, in 
every field which can contribute to victory.” 


4. Consideration by several government agencies 
of plans for augmenting Britain’s merchant tonnage 
by (a) immediate construction of new shipyards to 
lay down at least 60 ships for Britain in 1941; (b) 
sale or transfer of more than 150,000 tons of old 
vessels; and (c) the possible requisitioning of foreign 
vessels laid up in American ports. 


In implementing this program during the critical 
weeks ahead, Congress is likely to become a factor 
of some importance, even though the Administration 
has avoided the direct issue of repealing the Johnson 
Act and neutrality legislation. By its control of appro- 
priations, Congress retains not only the power to fix 
the rate of defense expenditure but also the power 
to define the purposes for which expenditures are 
voted. Hence, the present trend of Congressional 
opinion may be significant. 


That part of the program which deals with speed. 
ing defense production and coordination of admin. 
istrative machinery has already been assured over. 
whelming support in both houses. For many weeks 
Congressional spokesmen have been calling for action 
to meet the lag in armament production and to over. 
haul the cumbersome machinery of the National De. 
fense Commission. They will approve any move 
which promises speed. A few critics may ask if the 
new set-up will solve the critical question whether 
basic industries shall be expanded by government in. 
tervention, or if it will meet the problem of produc. 
tion planning on which members of the Defense 
Commission are still divided. Others may continue to 
press for action on the controversial issue of labor's 
demands for protection. But if speed is attained, Con- 
gress will give united support to any plan proposed 
by the President. 


When it comes to the uncharted area of foreign 
policy, however, doubts and misgivings are heard in 
several quarters. Up to the present, a large section of 
Congress—perhaps a majority—have supported all 
possible aid to Britain because they believed that only 
in this way could the United States gain time to com- 
plete its own armament program. But they have not 
come to the point of military intervention, and they 
strongly question the wisdom of such steps as the 
requisitioning of foreign ships in American ports, of 
sending American ships into war zones. Few of them 
will be intimidated by threats from Berlin, but they 
Oppose measures on our part which invite reprisal—at 
least until we are better prepared. On questions of 
finance and defense, moreover, a number of rank and 
file members are saying—with some truth—that they 
are expected to approve vital national policies with 
out being given the information necessary to form an 
intelligent opinion. 


Many questions are now being asked in Wash 
ington on the following points. If the United 
States is to intervene to prevent a British defeat, what 
are the actual military probabilities for 1941 and 
1942? If Britain is able to win with our aid, what 
kind of peace does it propose to make? Can the Amer 
ican people assume that a victory over Hitler will 
allow them to live in peace and security at the end of 
the war without assuming any further responsibility 
for the future of England? If not, what kind of system 
would we offer Europe as an alternative to Nazi dom 
ination? These questions deserve thoughtful consi¢- 
erations. 

W. T. STONE 











| 


VoL. > 


| 


EY! 
le 
year, | 
Balka 
movet 
the Sc 
ernme 
and b 
orderi 
ports. 
ther v 
the G 


“to cc 


TR 
thoug 
ports 
subst 
mania 
Decer 
ways 
Germ 
No re 
cernir 
ment: 
must 
and ¢ 
inade 
21 th 
bered 
week 
move 
Germ 
a Cam 

Sor 
move 
Germ 
IS sai 
Minis 
sever: 





