ties 
“ing 
yhy. 


ran. 
944, 


por- 
ully 
reat 


ard. 


and 
dian 


tional 
red # 
: least 





UNITY. oF 


PHRIGDICAL Rove 
@BNERAL Lie’ 


MAY 9 1945 


lead ’ ~ 
*saty of Uicht can 
“oe & 6 
Rua 4 
’ 4 »} 
: Or. Nieh 
othe 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIV, No. 29 


May 4, 1945 





SAN FRANCISCO. — Perhaps the most incredible 
aspect of a war that at every turn has exceeded the 
bounds of the imaginable both in brutality. and hero- 
jm is that its impending termination—at least in 
Europe — has the effect of an anticlimax. There 
should be dancing in the streets at the fall of Berlin, 
the liberation of North Italy. But millions of people 
saw the great military victory of 1918 dissipated in 
bickering and frustration. Before 1939 they were re- 
luctant to wage another war. Now they are on guard 
against expecting too much from the peace and, as 
British Foreign Secretary Eden remarked, they feel 
that ‘“‘there’s a job of work to be done.” 

The atmosphere in which the job of building the 
machinery of international organization is being un- 
dertaken is not that of exaltation, but of grim de- 
termination to succeed. In spite of San Francisco's 
dramatic setting of cerulean-blue sky, dizzying hills, 
and breath-taking harbor, the conference so far has 
been entirely—perhaps to some extent purposely— 
lacking in glamor or emotion. There are here no 
Wilsons, Lloyd Georges, or Clemenceaus. There are 
no Roosevelts. 

GREAT POWERS CHART COURSE. The four 
great powers that sponsored the conference — the 
United States, Britain, Russia and China—have vied 
with each other in assuring the world of their un- 
stinted devotion to the task of establishing an inter- 
tational organization which, in the words of Clement 
Attlee at a press conference, could perform both the 
negative function of preventing war and the positive 
task of alleviating the economic and social condi- 
tions that lead to war. But there are interesting vari- 
ations in the main points urged by spokesmen for 
the Big Four. President Truman, in his speech open- 
ing the conference, as in his address to Congress, 
stressed the responsibility of great powers not to use 
force except in defense of law. Great powers, he 





GREAT POWERS DIFFER ON APPROACH TO WORLD SECURITY 


emphasized, must serve, not dominate small nations. 
They must be “good neighbors.” On behalf of China, 
which has become the mouthpiece of small nations 
in their demand for peace based on justice—not 
merely peace—T. V. Soong pleaded for the creation 
of legal order. 

Soviet Foreign Commissar Molotov, repeatedly ex- 
pressing Russia’s sincere determination to participate 
in an international organization, dwelt on the in- 
capacity of the League of Nations to prevent World 
War II, and on the need for giving the United Na- 
tions organization adequate military force that could 
be used promptly against an aggressor. Arguments 
about the rights of small nations or sovereign equal- 
ity of all peoples, he said, should not become pre- 
texts to weaken the machinery outlined at - 
ton Oaks. Elsewhere he reiterated Russia’s conviction 
that the great powers which have borne the burdens 
of war should be the ones to steer the world in the 
post-war period. British Foreign Secretary Eden, who 
deeply stirred the audience in the vast Opera House, 
expressed best of all the sentiments of his listeners 
when he declared that the great powers can make a 
two-fold contribution: by supporting international 
organization; and by setting up standards of inter- 
national conduct and observing them in relations 
with other nations. 

WHAT SMALL NATIONS HOPE FOR. It is 
the lack of standards—now that the Axis powers, as 
Mr. Eden pointed out, have deliberately debased such 
international morality as did exist in the past—that 
preoccupies small nations. Actually, at this confer- 
ence, most of the small nations are those of Latin 
America. Only Holland, Belgium, Luxemburg, Nor- 
way, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Greece and Turkey 
are here to represent the small nations of Europe. 
Sweden, Switzerland, Spain, Portugal, Denmark are 
absent because they did not declare war on the Axis. 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 











rae 
~ SE) eA 





—_—_—_——S_____a=——=") = 





Finland, Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria, as well 
as Italy, are absent because they fought on the Axis 
side. Poland is not here because the Big Three have 
been unable to agree on the composition of its govern- 
ment. France, now in the throes of recovering the con- 
fidence and prestige it lost in the debacle of 1940, 
still seems to hesitate between championship of the 
small nations against the great powers, and return 
to great-power rank. For what France wants to 
obtain in the peace settlement—control of the Rhine- 
land and return of Indo-China—can be achieved only 
with the aid of the great powers. 


The lack of standards of international conduct in 
the relations of the great and small nations would 
have been less alarming if it had proved possible, 
before this conference, to reach an agreement about 
the government of Poland. There has been a ten- 
dency, natural under the circumstances, to regard 
Russia's attitude on this problem as arbitrary and 
unyielding. Yet the admission of Argentina to the 
conference has given a curious twist to the Polish 
question. For if the Warsaw provisional government 
is regarded as undemocratic, the Farrell government 


Page Two 








es 
———— 


has been also so described by Washington—and its 
character has not been altered by a last-minute deg. 
laration of war on the Axis powers. Moreover, jf 
Argentina, which claimed to be neutral throughout 
the war, is admitted, why exclude Sweden and Switz. 
erland? Neutrality can take different colorations— 
and that of the Argentine dictatorship was distinctly 
pro-Axis. And then how justify the absence of Den. 
mark, whose people have courageously resisted Ger. 
many with all the means at their disposal ? 

It is true that in the case of Poland an agreement 
was reached at Yalta to broaden the base of the pro. 
visional régime. The fulfillment of this agreement 
is now at issue. And there is a tendency on the part 
of the small nations to scrutinize Russia’s good faith 
and intentions with even more skepticism than those 
of other great powers. But in the days ahead, which 
may be filled with controversy, it would be well to 
bear in mind that Russia—if perhaps less concerned 
with the niceties of diplomatic usages—is not essen. 
tially different in its great-power manifestations 
from Britain and the United States. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


DE GAULLE POLICIES INCUR GROWING CRITICISM 


The unexpected return of Marshal Henri Philippe 
Pétain to France, on April 26, and the disagreement 
between French and American military authorities 
over the question of whose troops should occupy 
Stuttgart, throw into bold relief some of the prob- 
lems confronting General de Gaulle’s government 
as it attempts to maintain unity at home and insure 
France an important position abroad. Since the lib- 
eration of France last summer, de Gaulle has con- 
sistently minimized political rifts among Frenchmen 
in order to secure national solidarity, and relied on a 
lone-hand policy in winning his points with Wash- 
ington and London. But now it seems that the pro- 
visional régime in Paris will be obliged in the near 
future to revise its course of action in both domestic 
and foreign affairs. 

PETAIN—THREAT TO UNITY. It is so often 
said of French political trials that they are new ver- 
sions of the Dreyfus case that the comparison has 
lost much of its force. But the trial for treason that 
the former Chief of State at Vichy will face some 
time this summer may well uncover social and ideo- 
logical divisions similar to those involved in /’ Affaire 
Dreyfus, when the entire politically conscious public 
was split by the issue of authority versus personal 
liberty. For when the 89-year-old Marshal opens his 
defense, he will be speaking for the whole group of 
people in France who resigned themselves to defeat 
in 1940, either because they were convinced of their 
national weakness or frankly preferred an author- 
itarian state to a democracy in which the Left held 
an important position. 


In Allied circles the Free French who refused to 
accept Pétain’s defeatism and his National Revolu- 
tion, based on an amalgam of fascist and old French 
monarchical principles, have become identified with 
the new France that has emerged from four years of 
enemy control. This is as it should be, for the French. 
men who fought alongside the Allies are the hope of 
a progressive future for France. Yet many prominent 
industrial, political, educational and religious lead. 
ers who accepted Vichy’s policies during the period 
of German occupation may not have revised their 
ideas. Instead, it seems likely that these groups have 
merely been silenced by Allied victories and await 
a more favorable opportunity to reappear on the po- 
litical stage. Such an opportunity may be created by 
Pétain’s trial, since it will be possible for those who 
supported the old Marshal's régime to argue that con 
sideration for his age, his reputation as “the hero of 
Verdun,” and his sincere intentions should win him 
an acquittal. If such a course were successful and the 
head of the Vichy government were permitted to 
go free or condemned to a penalty less than death, 
the whole purge program would be largely vitiated. 
It is, therefore, easily understandable that de Gaulle 
wanted Pétain tried in absentia and attempted to pet 
suade the Swiss government not to admit him at the 
German border, on the ground that the French re¢ 
garded him as a war criminal. 

The fact that France is still in a kind of inter 
regnum makes any threat to national unity particu 
larly serious since the government cannot claim 
popular backing or constitutional support for the 








rs 


measi 
electi 
day, . 
hence 
these 
local 

been 

may { 
muni: 


FR 
front 
quest 
will 
Gaul 
resist 
tion’s 
his re 
prov! 
nortl 
press 
econ 
ing, 
grou 
adhe 
the s 


Tl 
tinue 
these 
cesse 
diplc 
and 
isola 
posit 
his ! 
with 
ently 
Ma fe 


Ju 








ul 


Pol PRRs 


8 


| to 
ylu- 
nch 
vith 
; of 
1ch- 
= of 
ent 
-ad- 
‘iod 
heir 
ave 
wait 


po 
1 by 
who 
con 
> of 
him 
the 
1 to 
ath, 
ted. 
ulle 


per 
- the 


iter: 
ticu- 
laim 

the 








= Page Three 





measures it takes to maintain order. The municipal 
elections that were held throughout France on Sun- 
day, April 29, and the second balloting two weeks 
hence, will do nothing to remedy this situation, for 
these polls will merely result in the selection of new 
local officials. Nevertheless, the fact that there has 
been a clear trend toward the Left, in Paris at least, 
may force de Gaulle to add more Socialists and Com- 
munists to his Cabinet and the Consultative Assembly. 


FRANCE FACES ISOLATION. Pétain’s case con- 
fronts the government at a moment when the basic 
uestion of the form France’s future economic life 
will take is still unanswered. Before liberation, de 
Gaulle identified himself with the demand of the 
resistance forces that the great sources of the na- 
tion’s wealth should belong to the state. Following 
his return to France, however, the General restricted 
provisional nationalization to the coal mines of 
northern France, and he has resisted considerable 
pressure from the Left for a definite declaration of 
economic policy along revolutionary lines. In so do- 
ing, he has incurred sharp criticism from the very 
groups that formerly filled the ranks of his strongest 
adherents and has found no adequate substitute for 
the support of these organizations. 


That it has been possible for de Gaulle to con- 
tinue as the unquestioned leader of France under 
these circumstances is due, above all, to past suc- 
cesses in foreign policy. But today the General’s 
diplomacy is suffering widespread attacks in France, 
and he is charged with having led the nation into 
isolation. That the French are, in fact, in an isolated 
position there can be little doubt. For de Gaulle built 
his foreign policy almost exclusively on the treaty 
with Russia, signed on December 10. He was appar- 
ently unprepared for Moscow's rebuke, early in 
March, to the French Foreign Office for its refusal to 





Just published— 


IRAN: Test of Relations between Great 
and Small Nations 


by Christina Phelps Grant 


25c 


A summary of contemporary developments and an analy- 
sis of Iran’s internal problems, together with a of 
the important place the country holds today in Allied 
military strategy. 
April 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
Reports are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 














———_ 





join in sponsoring the San Francisco Conference until 
the relationship between the Franco-Soviet pact and 
the proposed world security council had been clari- 
fied. As a result of this indication that Russia was un- 
willing to disturb the unanimity of the Big Three for 
the sake of an air-tight security pact with France, 
many Frenchmen are drawing the conclusion that 
France would be wise to come to a closer understand- 
ing with the other great powers. There is in this 
reaction a touch of opportunism that may prevent the 
successful adjustment of French foreign policy. But 
mere opportunism need not form the basis for closer 
ties between France and the Western powers, for 
there are solid interests that bind the French to 
Britain and the United States as well as to Russia. 
It is possible that the need of all four nations to co- 
operate closely in the occupation of Germany may 
help emphasize that fact. At any rate, France must 
reach an agreement with Britain and the United 
States, as well as with Russia, concerning the German 
zone it is to occupy, or difficulties similar to that 
arising at Stuttgart will greatly complicate the entire 
task confronting the Allies in Germany. 
WINIFRED N. HADSEL 





A War Atlas for Americans, prepared with the assistance 
of the Office of War Information. New York, Simon and 
Schuster, for Council of Books in Wartime, 1944. $1 
paper; $2.50 cloth. 

Uses the orthographic instead of Mercator projection. A 
most interesting method of presenting the history of the 
war by maps and accompanying texts. 


Faith, Reason and Civilization, by Harold J. Laski. New 

York, Viking Press, 1944. $2.50 

A plea from the veteran English socialist writer that 
the world must adopt the “Russian Idea,” much as the 
declining Roman Empire accepted Christianity. Although 
the “Russian Idea” is inadequately defined in this work, 
the author has displayed his usual erudition in drawing 
the analogy between that idea and early Christianity. 


A Guide to Naval Strategy, by Bernard Brodie, completely 
revised edition. Princeton, N. J., Princeton University 
Press, 1944. $2.75 
Fortunately, at this time of keenest interest in our 

Navy and its far-flung operations, there comes this book, 
addressed primarily to laymen. The author quotes with 
relish Clemenceau’s saying that war is too important to 
be left to the generals, and he sets out to give a simple, 
sound and most readable guide to naval strategy. Even in 
this time of war censorship he takes us behind the curtain 
with many hitherto unpublicized incidents of recent naval 
operations right up to D-Day. 


Middle East Diary, by Noel Coward. Garden City, Double- 
day, Doran, 1944. $2.00 


Using the war as a backdrop the actor-playwright does 
a rather charming, slight tale of his performances in the 
Middle East. His facility in phrasemaking makes him at 
times dash off thoughtless remarks to which people often 
give more importance than they rate. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 29, May 4, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated.. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. ¥. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lugr, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Bess 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





——— — 


i 
1 
‘ 
by 
if 


Ee - a 
SS ee 


SSS 


SS 














Washington News Letter 











INFLUENCE OF THE NAVY ON U.S. FOREIGN POLICY 


Since the world powers are planning to keep the 
peace by armed force, the era of international rela- 
tions now being charted at San Francisco will provide 
a crucial test of whether Allied states can maintain 
great peacetime military forces without alarming 
. one another. Proposing to discourage by cooperation 
aggressive states from fomenting war, the powers 
still display uncertainty as to whether the more im- 
portant task for the armed forces of each state will 
be to enhance its individual security by its own ac- 
tion, or contribute to the general scheme of coopera- 
tive security. In the United States, the problem of 
which point of view will prevail centers on the Navy. 

THE NAVY AND NEWS FACILITIES. The 
United States Navy is larger today than the war 
fleets of all other countries combined. Its officers 
and civilian officials favor retention of a great estab- 
lishment after the war. Secretary of the Navy James 
Forrestal, in his annual report on February 20, said 
that the United States should retain ‘the weapons 
with which to fight if we must—because the means 
to conduct war must be in the hands of those who 
hate war.” Supposedly, the Navy's role is to share in 
execution of foreign policy devised by other agencies 
of the Administration, but lately it has been using 
its influence in actually shaping this policy. 

Two outstanding instances relate to telecommuni- 
cations and bases. On March 19 Secretary Forrestal 
and Rear Admiral Joseph R. Redman proposed to a 
subcommittee of the Interstate Commerce Committee 
that Congress enact a law requiring the merger of 
all American-owned international communications 
facilities under a corporation which the Federal gov- 
ernment would organize and partially control 
through its appointment of 5 of the 20 directors. 
Senator Burton K. Wheeler, Democrat of Montana 
and chairman of the committee, objected that such 
an arrangement would jeopardize the freedom to 
transmit news between this and other countries. The 
Navy proposal came at a time when this country was 
considering the possibility of seeking a convention 
for the international guarantee of freedom to gather 
and disseminate news, and after the United States 
had argued with success for free competition in inter- 
national aerial communication at the Chicago air 
conference. 

PACIFIC BASES. The issue of how much influ- 
ence military and naval thinking will have on polit- 
ical policy during the coming years is especially pro- 
nounced in the matter of bases. In the Pacific, the 


FOR VICTORY °* 


BUY UNITED 


United States has taken from Japan islands in the 
Marshalls, Marianas and Caroline groups. On April 
9 Representative George H. Mahon, Democrat of 
Texas, introduced a bill in the House directing the 
United States to claim permanently any former Jap. 
anese island wrested by our forces. The bill, it was 
assumed, reflected the view of Admiral Ernest J. 
King, Commander-in-Chief of the U.S. Fleet and 
Chief of Naval Operations, who had said: ‘Failure 
to maintain bases essential for our defense raises the 
fundamental question — how long can the United 
States afford to continue a cycle of fighting and build- 
ing and winning and giving away, only to fight and 
build and win and give away again?” 

The State Department, on the other hand, held 
that this country should keep Pacific bases not for 
itself but as the trustee of all the United Nations. 
If the claim is allowed that the islands belong to us 
because we liberated them, some validity would be 
given to a claim by Russia that it should dominate 
Poland, which the Red armies liberated. And it is 
possible that peace might be endangered, rather than 
served, if this country had absolute control over a 
chain of islands which were fortified steppingstones 
from North America to a part of Asia in which the 
Soviet Union has a direct interest. 

Reports from San Francisco on April 27 de 
clare that the United States has devised a plan 
for distinguishing between “strategic bases” and 
other colonial territories. In the former, the trustee 
power would have virtually complete sovereignty, 
although a base might be open to use by more than 
one power and the United Nations organization 
would possess certain rights of inspection. In so- 
called non-strategic areas, the governing authority 
would have a far greater responsibility to the world 
body and would be expected to conform to certain 
standards of colonial rule. 

Another instance of official action on questions 
raised by the Navy occurred on April 13, when As 
sistant Secretary of State Will C. Clayton said that 
the State Department opposed a full monopoly over 
telecommunications. Moreover, the Navy has re 
duced its building program. On March 6 Admiral 
King announced that 84 new fighting ships would 
be constructed; on March 12 he said this number had 
been reduced to 12. The following day Secretary For- 
restal declared the curtailment order had come from 
James F. Byrnes, then Director of War Mobilization 
and Reconversion. BLAIR BOLLES 


STATES 


WAR BONDS 








withir 


which 
The f 
indep 
gover: 
Germ 


the d 
tary 


Germ 
Fast | 
tion 
the C 
ern se 
the v 
there 
a po! 








