pe 





er- 


1a- 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XIX, No. 4 NoveMBER 17, 1939 





corTx~" 


HUMAN DYNAMITE: The Story of Europe’s Minorities 
By Henry C. Wolfe Headline Book No. 20 


“The Headline Books score again, with a 
survey of Europe’s tangled minorities, 
chock full of maps.”—Common Sense. 


Selected as the November “Pamphlet of the Month’—25 cents 


—_—_— 











NUV 22 1939 
Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
DICAL ROUM Office at New York, 
AL LIBRARY N. Y., under the act 
UNIV (*) mich. of March 3, 1879. 





General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 

















BELLIGERENTS REJECT NEUTRAL PEACE OFFERS 





S the world was anxiously watching for signs 

of a German invasion of Holland or Belgium, 
at the other end of Europe Finland suspended its 
protracted negotiations with the U.SS.R. on No- 
vember 13 and the Soviet press denounced Finnish 
“obstinacy.” Finland, apparently, had declined to 
comply with Soviet demands for a naval base at 
Hangoe, revision of the southern border between the 
two countries on the Karelian isthmus, and two 
Finnish peninsulas on the Arctic Ocean. 


The breakdown of Soviet-Finnish negotiations 
coincided with the rejection, by France and Britain, 
of any peace terms which would recognize the ter- 
titorial acquisitions of Germany. The replies given 
by King George VI and President Lebrun on Novem- 
ber 12 to the peace proposal made by Queen Wil- 
helmina of Holland and King Leopold of Belgium 
on November 7 were identical in their determination 
to continue the war until an end has been made to 
the use of force and violence in international affairs. 
The rulers of the Low Countries, apparently 
prompted by fear of German invasion, had offered 


| their good offices ‘‘to ascertain the elements of an 


agreement” that might be reached “before war 


| breaks out on the Western front in all its violence.’’ 


In replying for Britain, King George said that the 
British are fighting to redeem Europe, in Mr. 
Chamberlain's words, “from perpetually recurring 
fear of German aggression,” and “to prevent for 
the future resort to force instead of pacific means 
in settlement of international disputes.” He put the 
tesponsibility for the next move on Hitler by stat- 
ing that, if the Belgian and Dutch rulers could 
communicate to him “any proposals from Germany 
of such a character as to afford real prospect of 
achieving” the purpose he had described, the British 
government “would give them their most earnest 
consideration.” 


Expressing these sentiments in more precise terms, 
President Lebrun asserted that France would wel- 
come “all possibilities of assuring a just and lasting 
peace between all peoples.” A lasting peace, he 
declared, ‘‘cannot be established except by reparation 
of the injustices which force has imposed on Austria, 
Czechoslovakia and Poland. Neither can it be estab- 
lished unless effective political and economic guaran- 
tees assure in the future respect for the liberty of 
all nations.” Any solution, he concluded, “that con- 
secrated the triumph of injustice would give Europe 
only a precarious truce.” The deadlock between the 
Anglo-French and German conceptions of peace 
terms was indicated on November 13, when it was 
reported that Hitler, in a note addressed to the 
Dutch and Belgian rulers, would reject any proposal 
based on “dismemberment” of Greater Germany, 
such as would follow restoration of Austria, Czecho- 
slovakia and Poland. 


LORD HALIFAX’S SPEECH. The peace offer of 
the Low Countries had already received an indirect 
answer from Lord Halifax, British Foreign Secre- 
tary, who on November 7 had said: “We have 
learned that there can be no opportunity for Europe 
to cultivate the arts of peace until Germany is 
brought to realize that recurrent acts of aggression 
will not be tolerated.” While declining to speculate 
on “the shape of the post-war world,” he promised 
that ‘‘we shall use all our influence, when the time 
comes, in the building of a new world in which the 
nations will not permit insane armed rivalry to deny 
their hopes of fuller life and future confidence to 
be forever overborne by grim foreboding of disas- 
ter.” In addition, Britain would ‘find means of 
reconciling the necessity of change in a constantly 
changing world with security against the disturbance 
of the general peace through resort to violence.” 
He did not commit himself, however, to plans for 























a European federation which have won support 
in some sections of Allied opinion, and which were 
warmly endorsed by Lord Lothian at Swarthmore 
College on November 11. 

While the people of France and Britain, no less 
than those of Germany and neutral countries, are 
anxious to have Anglo-French war aims defined in 
more concrete terms, it is obviously difficult for the 
Allies to formulate long-range plans at a moment 
when all belligerents are engaged in efforts to ob- 
tain the aid of neutral or wavering states, and when 
the outcome of the war is still obscure. That Britain 
hopes to have the support, or at least the benevolent 
neutrality, of Germany's anti-Comintern partners, 
Italy and Japan, and counts on the Soviet Union— 
despite its anti-British and anti-capitalist attacks— 
to check Germany’s eastward expansion, was indi- 
cated by Winston Churchill, First Lord of the Ad- 
miralty, in a fighting speech delivered on Novem- 
ber 12. Mr. Churchill, in reviewing the first ten 
weeks of war, found satisfaction in his estimate that 
no country in the world is well-disposed toward the 
Nazis, and that the breathing-space since Germany's 
conquest of Poland has enabled the Allies to strength- 
en their defenses. He challenged Hitler to make 
good his repeated threats of attack, and said Britain 
was ready to fight until Germany “has had enough 
of it.” 


RESTORATION OR RECONSTRUCTION? 
While one may agree with Lord Halifax that the 
shape of the world which may emerge from this con- 


THE LOW COUNTRIES IN DANGER? 


In the face of alarmist reports regarding a pro- 
jected German invasion of the Low Countries, the 
Netherlands Premier, Dirk Jan de Geer, assured his 
people on November 13 that “acute danger does 
not exist any more now than it did in the first days 
of September” when Dutch defense forces were 
mobilized. He compared the precautionary defensive 
steps recently taken with similar measures adopted 
during the World War and characterized as unwar- 
ranted the conclusion “that the threat to our frontier 
had increased.” After indirectly rebuking purveyors 
of rumors in Britain and France, he cautioned the 
Dutch against the belief “that violation of our 
territory was imminent.” 

STRATEGIC ALTERNATIVES. However treas- 
suring in tone, this speech is unlikely to end specu- 
lation about a possible German drive through the 
Netherlands. In some respects the logic of such a 
move seems self-evident. Thwarted in its efforts to 
dictate an early peace, Nazi Germany faces the pros- 

of a long war in which it may be starved out 
by the Allied blockade. A successful offensive war is 
one way to obviate this possibility. Since the German 
forces appear to be checkmated by the almost im- 


Page Two = —— = 














=| = 
flict cannot yet be clearly defined, the question Britain} fgilin 
and France have left unanswered is how much of the} grous 
order that existed in Europe before 1933 they intend} A : 
to restore at the end of the present conflict. It is ip. yields 
creasingly recognized in both countries that Europe proba 
has undergone so profound a revolution since 1919} |gnds 
that return to the post-war status quo is now impos.| other 
sible. And while representatives of the school which | rate: 
demanded dismemberment of Germany in 1919 haye| has, 
renewed their plea for such a course, others acknowl. | [nite 
edge the impossibility of either exterminating or! oyer, 
indefinitely subjugating 80 million people whose} easte 
talents and energy, if properly channeled, could} gyen 
prove a great contribution to the reconstruction of parat 
Europe. The Allies have not yet officially imple | any 
mented their new attitude toward Europe’s ancient| gre r 
problems by practical measures. A step in this direc-| ery ; 
tion, however, has been taken by the new Polish! are ¢ 
government established on French soil. This govern-| the : 
ment has publicly forsworn the principles and| whic 
methods of the old dictatorship of ‘“‘colonels’’ and js try f 
seeking to develop a democratic approach both to-| is 6 
ward Poland’s complex social and economic prob-| Dut 
lems and toward its eventual collaboration with | trate 
other peoples of Eastern Europe, notably a recon | the : 
stituted Czechoslovakia. The conflict now suspended | thou 
over Europe will not have been fought in vain if| cons 
the various nations, out of their own bitter experi: Se 
ence, will have learned the necessity of correcting | diffi 
some of the more glaring maladjustments left in the | the 
wake of the last war. VERA MICHELES Dean | P £ 

| strat 
up. 
penetrable Maginot Line in France, strategists have) in t 
been tempted to conclude that a German march) Brit 











through the Low Countries is the only alternative to} p0s' 
defeat. According to these theorists, two possibilities | W0v 
are open to the German General Staff. The firs} ton 


would be to seize only the Netherlands in an ef- | 
fort to acquire submarine and air bases from which 

Britain might be attacked more directly and effec | Y 
tively. At present air raids against Britain can be | A 
carried out only from North German bases, and| 
planes are compelled to fly a long, circuitous route | the 
around Holland and Belgium before they can reach | jn, 
London and the south of England. The second| } 
possibility would be to invade France through the | ” 
southern Netherlands and Belgium, thus outflank| 5 
ing the strongest part of the Maginot Line in eastern | 

France. During the past few weeks reports of Ger | %™ 
man troop concentrations along the Dutch and Bel- 
gian borders and repeated declarations in Berlin| is 
that Germany was preparing to strike a decisive} “ 
blow against the Allies seemed to presage either 
or both developments. These alarming reports coif-} 0! 
cided with accusations in the German press that the 
Low Countries were guilty of unneutral conduct if} « 








BREE Il 


ope 


Bes 


ave 
wi. 

Or | 
Ose 
uld 


ple. 
lent 
rec- 


ern 
and | 
d is | 
to- 
rob. | 
vith 
-On- 
ded 
n if 





efi- 


the 


lave 
arch 
€ to 
ities 


| ef- 
hich 
ffec- 
1 be 

and 
oute 





each | 


cond 

the 
ank- 
stern 
Ger- 
Bel- 
erlin 
isive 
ither 
coin: 
+ the 
ct in 


I 
| 
| 


| 











Page Three 





failing to resist British blockade practices more vig- 
orously. 

A sober appraisal of the situation, however, also 
jelds much evidence to the contrary. The Nazis 
probably realize that any violation of the Nether- 
jands or Belgium might go far toward bringing 
other neutral countries, particularly the United 
States, into the war. So far the German government 
has, on the whole, been careful not to offend the 
United States. Invasion of the Low Countries, more- 
over, bristles with military difficulties. To seize the 
eastern half of the Netherlands and use it as an 
avenue to invade Belgium and France might be com- 
paratively easy. The Netherlands could not put 
many more than 300,000 men in the field, and these 
are rather poorly equipped with tanks, heavy artil- 
lery and planes. The Belgians and French, however, 
are much better protected against an invasion from 
the north. Belgium has fortified the Albert Canal 
which stretches across the northern part of the coun- 
try from the Meuse to the Scheldt. The Belgian army 
is 600,000 strong and better equipped than the 
Dutch. Even after the Belgian defenses are pene- 
trated, the German army would have to reckon with 
the northern extension of the Maginot Line which, 
though not as strong as in the east, could still offer 
considerable resistance. 

Seizure of the Dutch coast would be an even more 
dificult military operation. The western third of 
the Netherlands, lying below sea-level, can easily 
be flooded to the depth of two feet or more, and 
strategic roads can either be submerged or blown 
up. To move an army through these flood waters 
in the face of Dutch resistance, reinforced by the 
British air force and navy, would be well-nigh im- 
possible. If Germany tried such a maneuver, it 
would indicate that its leaders consider the situa- 
tion desperate. 














THE QUESTION OF MORALE. It is possible 
that the frequent German threats of an impending 
offensive are only part of the “war of nerves” de- 
signed to keep the enemy alarmed. In fact, Germany 
might find it to its interest to stay on the defensive 
on land, while striking periodically at Britain from 
the sea and the air. If the Nazis can keep the war on a 
modest scale, they can conserve their resources and 
strengthen their ability to withstand a long siege. In 
this way they might save man power and materials 
for their factories and farms, thereby maintaining 
domestic food production and keeping export in- 
dustries humming. Meanwhile, the Germans could 
build up transport lines to southeastern Europe and 
Russia, so as to utilize their economic hinterland 
more effectively. 


If both sides employ “waiting tactics,” the issue 
may ultimately be decided by civilian morale. The 
Germans still hope that the French “will to fight” 
may in the end be undermined, particularly if 
France itself is not invaded. For their part, the Al- 
lies are speculating on internal unrest in Germany. 
The abortive attempt on Hitler’s life at the Bérger- 
bréukeller on November 8 has probably strengthened 
their belief that the Fuehrer’s popularity is rapidly 
waning. While the Nazis were quick to attribute 
the inspiration of the bombing to the British Secret 
Service, the evidence seems to indicate the complicity 
of discontented Nazi elements. To conclude from this 
attempt that the Nazi régime is threatened with col- 
lapse from within would be unwarranted. While the 
German people are without doubt keenly disap- 
pointed at the failure of the Blitzkrieg and dread 
the prospect of a prolonged war, most of them see 
no alternative but to fight it out to the bitter end. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


How Strong is Britain? by C. E. Count Puckler. New 
York, Veritas Press, 1939. $2.50 
A Nazi journalist makes an estimate of British eco- 
nomic, financial and military resources which, in the light 
of war conditions today, seems rather too optimistic from 
the German point of view. 


International Trade and Finance, by John Parke Young. 
New York, Ronald Press, 1938. $4.00 
International Economics, by P. T. Ellsworth. New York, 
Macmillan, 1938. $4.00 
Both of these textbooks on international trade can be 
recommended. The first is simpler and more comprehen- 
sive in treatment, containing much factual material on the 
development of world trade and finance. The second is dis- 
tinguished by its sound theoretical analysis and its full 
discussion of the more modern methods of regulating in- 
ternational trade through quotas, foreign exchange re- 
strictions and clearing agreements. 


Neo-Neutrality, by Georg Cohn. New York, Columbia Uni- 
versity Press, 1939. $3.75 


An extensive, technical study by a Danish scholar and 
statesman, who seeks a compromise between traditional 
neutrality and the post-war collective security system. 


Lunacy Becomes Us, by Adolf Hitler and his Associates. 
Edited by Clara Leiser. New York, Liveright, 1939. 
$1.25 
Numerous quotations culled from Nazi speeches and pub- 

lications serve the purpose of ridiculing the Third Reich, 


but hardly contribute to an understanding of the Nazi 
system. 


I Broadcast the Crisis, by H. V. Kaltenborn. New York, 
Random House, 1938. $2.00 
A minute-by-minute transcript of Mr. Kaltenborn’s re- 


markable commentaries during the September crisis, with 
excerpts from important speeches and interviews. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 4, NovEMBER 17, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micugres Dgan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


> 181 F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News LE ettec 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 

National Press Building 

Nov. 13.—The prevailing view in Washington is 

that events of the past week point toward a con- 

tinued stalemate on the Western Front, at least 

until next spring. This prospect has not been altered 

by the abortive attempt on Hitler's life or by the 

peace appeal of Queen Wilhelmina and King 
Leopold. 


Germany's delay in reaching a final decision to 
invade the Netherlands is attributed to divided 
counsels within the Reich and opposition from the 
Army High Command. Nevertheless, this hesitation 
is not regarded here as evidence that Chancellor 
Hitler’s position has been weakened in any impor- 
tant respect. On the contrary, Washington opinion 
believes that the likelihood of a German govern- 
ment headed by some one other than Hitler is still 
remote. This pessimistic appraisal, however, does 
not exclude the possibility that a stalemate may 
strengthen opposition elements in Germany and 
lead to renewed peace efforts in the spring. 


MERCHANT SHIPPING AND NATIONAL 
DEFENSE. Meanwhile, the Administration is still 
searching for a solution of the controversy over 
transfer of American merchant vessels to foreign 
registry. While Secretary Hull has maintained his 
Opposition to such a move, on the ground that it 
violates the spirit of the Neutrality Act, the pressure 
to keep American ships on the seas has not been re- 
laxed by other agencies inside and outside the gov- 
ernment. 


Much of this pressure has come from half a dozen 
shipping lines which are faced with the loss of their 
former north Atlantic trade. But equal pressure has 
come from both the Navy Department and the Mari- 
time Commission, who fear that their plans for an 
expanded merchant marine will be jeopardized by 
the new neutrality law. The Irish Free State contends 
that it has been injured by its inclusion in the 
American “combat zone,” within which no Ameri- 
can ships may operate. And the maritime unions, 
representing an estimated 10,000 men whose jobs 
have been destroyed by the Act, have been only 
partially mollified by a Coast Guard plan to open 
its training schools to provide, ultimately, for al- 
most half of the unemployed. 


During the past fifteen years the United States 
government has invested over $230,000,000 for the 
maintenance and operation of a merchant fleet de- 





signed to serve as a naval auxiliary and officially 
sponsored as part of the national defense program, 
Under the Roosevelt Administration, government 
subsidies have been increased and new impetus has 
been given to the building program. Within the pas 
two years the Maritime Commission has ordered 129 
new vessels of more than a million tons, represent. 
ing the first instalment of a long-term replacement 
program involving a total of 500 ships, to be con. 
structed over a period of 10 years at a cost of $1, 
500,000,000. The entire program, moreover, has 
been endorsed by the Navy, and all the new ships 
have been designed to meet naval requirements. 


Concern over the future of this ambitious program 
led the Maritime Commission to voice its fears dur- 
ing the neutrality debate. In a formal statement 
prepared for Senator Bailey, chairman of the Senate 
Finance Committee, the Commission made no secret 
of its opposition to the provisions of the original 
Pittman Bill and declared that, should the principle 
of this measure become the established policy of 
the United States, “many, if not all, of the new ships 
ordered or planned would face a very doubtful fu- 
ture and represent extremely poor risks from the | 
investment standpoint.” While pointing to the “dis. 





ruption of certain of our shipping services,” how: | 
ever, the Maritime Commission apparently made no 
effort to inform Congress of its plan to sanction | 
transfer of registry as a device to keep American | 
ships in operation. During the first month of the 
war, no less than 20 American vessels, totaling 
119,000 tons, were transferred to foreign registry. 
Some of these were bona fide sales but others, in- 
cluding 15 tankers owned by the Standard Oil Com- 
pany of New Jersey, were placed under Panamanian 
registry with approval of the Maritime Commission in 





order to avoid the restrictions of the Neutrality Act. 


In attempting to reach a decision, President Roose: | 
velt is faced with a problem of national interest in- | 
volving considerations which are broader than the | 


interests of the shipping companies or the govefi-| » 


ment investment in a merchant marine. If national 
defense requires the maintenance of a strong met 
chant marine, the cost should be carried under the 
national defense budget. If the national interest i 
served by keeping American vessels out of combat 
areas, financial considerations should not be allowed 
to intervene. In any case, the remedy is not likely t 
be found by resort to a loophole in the neutrality 


legislation. 
ea fe eae W. T. STONE 








FC 


Ani 


VoL. 


Will 
in th 


Nove 


\\ 


Tok; 
decle 
Wel 
State 
linec 
indic 
Japa 
of ci 
ever, 
Amk 
ber 


| ferre 


the / 
eral 

Gau: 
whet 
Com 
dor 1 
Chur 
after 
Cons 
Tok: 
with 
Mol 
been 
Nov 
con 
ciple 
Li 
g-« 
imp 
and 

cials 
ence 
aug 


War 


fl) 
Mu 





