— 


cre- 
on 
Ow- 
yubt 
ited 
eeks 
the 
ones 
cre- 
ined 
d to 
ope. 
days 
idly 
wet, 
both 
ould 
Eu- 
vility 
cies, 
tem- 
deny 
with 
that 
itain 
said, 
was 
ie ws- 
gov- 
Vita- 
ment 


rate, 
n of 
as to 
t Six 
Op- 
y on 
intry 
They 
ough 
tion. 
flows 
make 
ople. 
de of 
ident 
ficult 
nited 
itting 


NE 


National 
Editor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





You. XVII, No. 48 SEPTEMBER 23, 1938 


— 


Will the European Situation Complicate 
the Problem of American Neutrality? 


War in Europe involving Great Britain would almost 
certainly bring in Canada and create new problems in 
Canadian-American relations. For a survey of Canada’s 


foreign policy with particular reference to a general war, 
read: 





CANADA IN WORLD AFFAIRS 
by James Frederick Green 
July 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents a copy 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 




















“PEACE” IN EUROPE-—-ON HITLER’S TERMS 





M2: CHAMBERLAIN’S spectacular flight to 
Berchtesgaden had been greeted with relief 

in Europe because it was hoped that the British 
Prime Minister would not only have an opportunity 
to hear Hitler’s side of the case, but would make it 
clear to the Fuehrer, beyond peradventure of a doubt, 
that Britain was prepared to fight if Germany in- 
vaded Czechoslovakia. It may be doubted, in the light 
of subsequent events, whether Mr. Chamberlain had 
ever intended to convey such information to Hitler. 
The results of the conference held by the French 
and British Ministers in London on September 18 
confirmed the worst expectations of those who had 
predicted throughout the Sudeten crisis that the 
Western powers would try to avert war by surrender- 
ing Czechoslovakia to Hitler. The official com- 
muniqué merely stated that the representatives of 
the two governments were in complete agreement 
“as to the policy to be adopted with a view to pro- 
moting a peaceful solution of the Czechoslovak ques- 
tion,” and hoped that “‘thereafter’’ it would be pos- 
sible to consider a more general settlement in the 
interests of European peace. It was reported, how- 
ever, that they had agreed to accept the terms brought 
back by Prime Minister Chamberlain from his 
dramatic three-hour visit to Hitler on September 15. 
These terms were believed to include outright sur- 
tender to Germany, without a plebiscite, of all pre- 
dominantly German areas in Czechoslovakia, pre- 
ceded by an exchange of populations to protect the 
Czech and anti-Nazi German minorities in the border 
areas and the Germans who live in the interior of 
Czechoslovakia; creation of a cantonal system of 
government which would transform the rest of the 
country into something like Switzerland; and aban- 
donment by Prague of its alliances with France and 
the Soviet Union. In return for the sacrifices to be 
exacted from Prague, the French representatives 





urged their British colleagues to join France and pos- 
sibly other powers in giving a military guarantee of 
Czechoslovakia’s new frontiers. This guarantee sev- 
eral of the British Ministers were unwilling to give, 
on the ground that it was against Britain’s traditional 
policy of making no commitments in Central Europe, 
but Mr. Chamberlain was apparently prepared to 
override this objection. 

Britain and France accepted Hitler’s terms of un- 
conditional surrender by Czechoslovakia without first 
consulting Prague, and Mr. Chamberlain appeared 
determined to take this plan back to Hitler at 
Godesberg irrespective of the Czechs’ decision about 
their own fate. Before the Anglo-French communiqué 
had been issued, and at a time when it was still 
thought that Chamberlain’s utmost concession to 
Hitler would be a plebiscite in the Sudeten region, 
Premier Hodza of Czechoslovakia had declared in a 
radio broadcast of September 18 that a plebiscite was 
“unacceptable.” Nor did Mussolini seem to contem- 
plate anything beyond a plebiscite in his speech of 
September 18 at Trieste, when he declared that the 
only solution of the Czechoslovak problem was 
“plebiscites for all nationalities that demand them” 
—with the exception, apparently, of the 250,000 
Germans in the Italian Tyrol, whom I/ Duce is trying 
to placate by economic concessions. He also declared, 
somewhat ambiguously, that, if ‘‘a line-up of uni- 
versal character is brought on for or against Prague, 
let it be known that Italy’s place is already chosen.” 

The Czechoslovak crisis is a new test of Mr. Cham- 
berlain’s “realistic” policy. This policy has been 
based on efforts to conciliate first Italy, then Ger- 
many, and to obtain peace at any price—the price 
each time being paid not by Britain, but by weaker 
countries like Loyalist Spain or Czechoslovakia. The 
Tory elements represented by Mr. Chamberlain share 
Hitler's fear of communism and his hostility to the 




















Soviet Union. Like the Nazis, they are inclined to 
treat the peoples of Eastern Europe as “a lesser breed 
without the law,” fit only to be bartered about in 
deals between the great powers. Lord Runciman’s 
mission was sent to Prague without any clear man- 
date except that of gaining time, and proved far 
more adept at extracting concessions from Prague 
than in moderating Hitler's demands. As in the case 
of Spain in 1936, the British apparently brought 
strong pressure on the French government by indi- 
cating that, if France went to the aid of Czechoslo- 
vakia, Britain would not be responsible for the con- 
sequences. This pressure may not have been entirely 
unwelcome to the French government, which during 
the past week suddenly abandoned its earlier deter- 
mination to fulfill France's treaty obligations to 
Czechoslovakia. France's defection, in turn, raised 
serious doubts regarding the assistance Prague might 
receive from the Soviet Union, which is bound to aid 
Czechoslovakia only if France simultaneously helps 
the Czechs. 


The diplomatic realignment precipitated by Cham- 
berlain’s visit to Hitler raises four fundamental 
questions. 


1. Would Germany have gone to war over the 
Sudeten issue? Hitherto Britain's policy has been 
based on the assumption that Germany was noi 
ready for war and thar, if time could only be gained, 
something would “turn up’’ to check the Nazi drive 
to the east. Now Mr. Chamberlain seems to have 
been convinced at Berchtesgaden that Hitler will 
not shirk war if he fails to obtain the Sudeten region 
by threat of force. Various arguments may be mar- 
shaled against Mr. Chamberlain's point of view. It 
may be argued that Germany's economic system, al- 
ready strained by feverish rearmament, would not 
withstand the shock of prolonged war; that the Ger- 
man General Staff is reluctant to risk war under such 
conditions; and that the German people fear war no 
less than the French or British. These arguments, 
whatever their validity, might not prove convincing 
to Hitler. The Fuehrer is a man of peculiar detach- 
ment, free from desire for self-satisfaction, family 
affections, or even considerations of personal prestige. 
He has, in a sense, nothing to lose, and everything 
to gain by a bold gamble. Nor, in view of Britain's 
vacillations, did the Nazis think they were gambling. 
They believed-—apparently not incorrectly—that 
France would not support Czechoslovakia unless it 
was assured in advance of British support, and that 
Britain would not lift a finger to save Prague. Under 
these circumstances, it is at least within the realm of 
probability that Hitler, like the Kaiser, may have 
thought that a show of force would entail no risk 
for Germany. 





Page Two 





—— 
—— 





2. If there was danger of war when Chamber. 
lain went to Berchtesgaden, will the surrender of 
Czechoslovakia contribute to European appease. 
ment? Or is it the beginning of further German de. 
mands which will keep the world in a nightmarish 
state of nervous strain? In answering this question 
we must realize that, twenty years after a world 
war fought to prevent German hegemony of the 
European continent, a resurgent Germany, under 
Hitler's leadership, is seeking to achieve the objec. 
tives of which it was balked in 1918. Nazi aspira- 
tions must consequently be regarded not as some sort 
of disease generated by the “shame” of Versailles, 
but as another manifestation of Germany's pre-war 
bid for power. These aspirations, as set forth in 
Hitler's Mein Kampf, contemplate, for Eastern Eu- 
rope, the inclusion of all German-speaking peoples 
in the Third Reich, and the acquisition of ‘‘room and 
soil” for the German peasant. The principal regions 
inhabited by German-speaking peoples are Memel 
in Lithuania, Upper Silesia and the Polish Corridor 
in Poland (where the Poles have done all they can 
to de-Germanize the Germans), and the Sudeten 
area—regions which are highly industrialized and 
already heavily overpopulated. Germany's need for 
“room and soil,” can only be satisfied by domination 
over Hungary, Rumania, Yugoslavia and Bulgaria, 
rich in foodstuffs and raw materials, where Nazi pene- 
tration has made rapid strides during the past few 
years, and eventually the Ukraine, which the Ger- 
man General Staff vainly tried to detach from Russia 
by the Brest-Litovsk treaty of 1918. Hitler's racial 
theories may conceivably preclude outright incor- 
poration into the Third Reich of peoples other than 
those of German race, who would be considered in- 
ferior to the Germans. The fate reserved by the Nazis 
for these peoples—especially the Slavs of Eastern 
Europe, regarded as historic enemies of the Teutons 
—is that of more or less willing vassals, who would 
gear their national economies to the needs of the 
German “master race.” 


3. Can the Czechs block Germany’s drive to 
the east? Czechoslovakia has proved an obstacle 
to German expansion not only because it has been 
relatively secure against Nazi attack behind the na- 
tural mountain barriers of Sudetenland, but because 
it has hitherto relied on the support of France and 
the Soviet Union, which claimed to have a voice in 
the affairs of the Danubian region. With the an- 
nexation of the Sudeten area, Czechoslovakia’s sub- 
jugation to Germany would be merely a matter of 
time. In the terms dictated by Hitler and seconded 
by France and Britain the Czechs see a choice be- 
tween death now or death deferred. No matter how 
much the Czechs may be blamed for their failure to 
conciliate the Sudeten Germans in the past, the world 





can 
the 
Ch: 
pec 
cau 
me 
hol 
of 

191 


res! 


we 
ex) 
act 
it 

Ste 
ye 
tio 
tio 
the 


yic 
Sir 
sh 
Vil 


fe 
th 
ou 
me 
Wi 


th 
in 


— 


—— 
a 


ber. 
r of 
ase. 
| de- 
irish 
tion 
orld 

the 
nder 
bjec- 
Dira- 
sort 
iLles, 
-wat 
h in 

Eu- 
ples 
and 
rLONS 
emel 
ridor 
’ Can 
leten 
and 
1 for 
ation 
raria, 
pene- 
few 
Ger- 
ussia 
-acial 
ncor- 
than 
d in- 
Nazis 
stern 
utons 
vould 
f the 


ye to 
stacle 
been 
ie na- 
cause 
> and 
ice in 
e afr 
; sub- 
er of 
ynded 
e be- 
- how 
ire to 
world 











—_= Page Three 


cannot but admire their determination to maintain 
their independence against German pressure. In 
China, in Spain, relatively weak but determined 
peoples have shown what iron will and faith in a 
cause can do against modern weapons. It is by no 
means impossible that the Czechs might be able to 
hold Germany at bay long enough to involve the rest 
of Europe in war. Should this happen, Britain, as in 
1914, will have missed the opportunity of convincing 


Germany that general war would follow German 
resort to force. 


4. But, it may be asked, would not Germany, 
once it had established its influence in Eastern 
Europe, become a “‘satisfied” and satiated power? 
It is possible to argue that Germany’s retarded na- 
tional development, which reached the stage of ag- 
gressive imperialism in 1914, when other great 
powers had already settled down to peaceful enjoy- 
ment of colonial empires, might be fulfilled by ex- 
pansion in Eastern Europe, and that a satisfied Ger- 
many would then become a factor for peace. Noth- 
ing, of course, is impossible. But, judging from 
Hitler's own program, it seems more probable that 
the Reich, strengthened by the resources of Eastern 
Europe and the Balkans, would then make a bid for 
world power, and confront France and Britain with 
demands they would no longer be able to meet by 
concessions at the expense of other countries. 


Whatever the future may bring, it would be 
worse than hypocritical for the American public to 
express righteous indignation regarding a course of 
action which, if confronted by similar circumstances, 
it might have been inclined to follow. The United 
States, where isolationist sentiment has for twenty 
years defeated every constructive move in the direc- 
tion of international collaboration, is not in a posi- 
tion to throw the first stone at Britain and France for 
their ‘‘betrayal” of Czechoslovakia. 

VeRA MICHELES DEAN 
PRAGUE FACES WAR OR PARTITION 


Faced with probable dismemberment, whether it 
yields or fights, Czechoslovakia, for the first time 
since the outbreak of the Sudeten crisis, began to 
show signs of wavering after September 18. Only the 
virtual certainty that it would receive no help against 
a German attack had shaken its determination to de- 
fend its existing frontiers. Before announcement of 
the Anglo-French plan, the government had stamped 
out a premature revolt and taken effective action to 
meet the combined German attack from within and 
without which it was expecting in the near future. 

Chancellor Hitler's Nuremberg speech had been 
the signal for the outbreak of a general Nazi revolt 
in the Sudeten area. The government sent additional 





oo 
ee 





forces to the centers of disturbance, and on Septem- 
ber 13 imposed martial law in all such districts, for- 
bidding public assemblies and censoring newspapers. 
Ignoring the Sudeten leader's ultimatum, which de- 
manded in effect that most of the government au- 
thority in the German areas be turned over to him, 
Premier Hodza extended martial law to other dis- 
tricts where outbreaks had taken place until it was 
in force throughout most of the German area. As 
the government’s forces re-established its authority 
in one town after another, Konrad Henlein fled to 
the Reich and, on September 15, issued a proclama- 
tion over the German radio, declaring that German 
and Czech populations could no longer live side by 
side in the same state and that the Sudeten Germans 
now wanted to “go home to the Reich.” The govern- 
ment promptly ordered Henlein’s arrest for organiz- 
ing a revolt. On the following day it first proclaimed 
the dissolution of the F.S. (Freiwallige Schutzkorps) 
—Henlein’s storm troops, which had played the 
leading part in the uprisings—and then disbanded 
the entire Sudeten German party as a subversive or- 
ganization. With the dissolution of the party, its 
representatives remained in Parliament as individual 
members without party affiliation. 


Henlein’s measures of revolt, and his flight with 
extremist lieutenants such as K. H. Frank and Dr. 
Sebekowsky, left moderate Sudeten Germans in a 
quandary. Deputy Kundt, who had led the negotia- 
tions with the government, issued a statement urging 
Germans “to remain inwardly what you always 
were’ and to await the result of the talks at Berch- 
tesgaden between Chamberlain and Hitler. Many 
others dissociated themselves from the violent meas- 
ures which had been taken. Refugees poured from 
the contested areas toward Prague or across the Ger- 
man frontier, according to their political allegiance. 


In order to keep the Sudeten Germans from 
acquiescing in the measures taken by the Czechoslo- 
vak state to maintain its authority, the Sudeten 
emigrés announced on the 17th that they had 
organized a Free Corps which would fight the 
Czechs along the border and in Czechoslovak ter- 
ritory. On the following day, they made a minor 
attack on a Czech frontier post. 


The severity of the demands made by the great 
powers place the Czechoslovak government in a des- 
perate dilemma. Surrender of the Sudeten areas would 
deprive Czechoslovakia of important raw materials, 
and transfer to Germany some of the country’s prin- 
cipal industries. Loss of the Sudeten mountain barriers 
would also cripple the Czech defenses. Although the 
Anglo-French plan would leave the Hungarian and 
Polish minorities within the Czech state subject to a 
considerable measure of local autonomy, Germany 
and Italy were already exerting increasing pressure to 











———— 
a 





separate these areas—both vital strategic and eco- 
nomic assets—from Czechoslovakia. 


Since the foundation of the Republic in 1919. its 
citizens had been schooled for the day when they 
would have to spring to its defense. This week, when 
the time seemed to have come, Czechoslovak opinion 
—even including that of the formerly autonomist 
Slovak Peoples’ party—could not understand how any 
other course could be considered, and was in no mood 
to tolerate surrender by its government. Yet President 
Benes and his Cabinet realized that, in case of war, 
only a desperate chance could save them from more 
complete dismemberment than that dictated by the 
Anglo-French plan. If, as appeared certain, Czechoslo- 
vakia had been entirely deserted by its friends, the 
question was whether the government had enough 
authority to induce its people to submit overnight to 
what they regarded as a far worse betrayal than the 
Hoare-Laval deal. Pau. B. TAYLOR 


JAPAN NONCOMMITTAL ON EUROPE 


In the event of a European war Japan will adopt a 
policy of “‘watchful waiting,” according to state- 
ments from Tokyo during the past critical week. The 
Japanese Foreign Office communiqué declared on 
September 14 that “Japan is prepared to cooperate 
with Germany and Italy in combating the world- 
wide activity of the Comintern in accordance with 
the spirit of the anti-Comintern pact.” This legalistic 
adherence to the terms of the German-Italian- 
Japanese pact failed to specify Japan’s probable ac- 
tion in the case of European hostilities. Questioned 
on this point, a Foreign Office spokesman explained 
that Japan would not enter a war immediately on 
the side of the Fascist powers but, at the outset of 
hostilities, its attitude would be one of “benevolent 
neutrality in favor of Germany and Italy.” 


The sympathies of Japanese officialdom, but not 
necessarily of the Japanese people, are clearly on 
the side of Germany. In the Foreign Office statement 
quoted above, Hitler’s Nuremberg speech is lauded 
as ‘a genuine expression of ardent patriotism,” and 
Hitler's demands regarding the Sudeten issue are 
characterized as embodying “‘a solution with justice.” 
The Japanese press, under official tutoring, not only 
attributes the Czech crisis to “Comintern machina- 
tions,” but views critically all Franco-British actions 
which may be interpreted as opposing Germany's 
demands. It may be doubted whether the Japanese 
people subscribe to these views; despite official prop- 


Page Four 








a 
—ee 


aganda, the majority still maintained—at least until 
recently—their old allegiance to Britain and the 
United States. 


Nevertheless, both Japan’s ideological commit- 
ments and the situation which now prevails in the 
Far East tend toward a reversal of the stand taken 
in 1914. At that time Japan was on friendly terms 
with the Allies, including Tsarist Russia—in July 
1912 a secret Russo-Japanese treaty had delimited 
mutual spheres of interest in Manchuria and Mon- 
golia. To Japan the immediate prize was the German 
interests in China, especially those centered around 
Tsingtao in Shantung province. Action in this di- 
rection also served to settle an old score with Ger- 
many dating back to 1895, when the Dretbund 
intervention deprived Japan of South Manchuria. 
Today Japan regards the Soviet Union not only as 
its ideological foe, but as the chief obstacle to its 
conquest of China; Great Britain, France and the 
United States, in varying degree, also stand in the 
way of this ambition. War in Europe would seem to 
clear the way for achievement of Japanese hegemony 
in the Far East. A policy of temporary Japanese 
neutrality might best serve this end. Before the die 
was Cast, in any case, caution would prescribe a care- 
ful estimate of the actual balance of forces, especially 
with reference to the Soviet Union. Japan postponed 
its declaration of war for nearly a month in 1914; 
in a similar contingency today, this interval might be 
considerably extended. 


At present Japan’s military forces are fully occu- 
pied in the Yangtse valley campaign, where mini- 
mum advances have been won since the capture of 
Kiukiang on July 26. After nearly two months of 
difficult fighting, the Japanese forces have just 
reached the Matouchen-Wusueh boom—some 30 
miles above Kiukiang and 100 miles from Hankow. 
A stiff Chinese defense has also held up the Japanese 
advance southward toward Nanchang. North of the 
Yangtse River, however, Japanese forces in south- 
eastern Honan province are pressing toward the 
Peiping-Hankow Railway. At Geneva the Chinese 
delegate, Dr. V. K. Wellington Koo, startled the 
delegates to the League Council session on Septem- 
ber 11 by appealing for action against Japan under 
Article 17 of the Covenant. Ironically enough, in view 
of the Chamberlain-Hitler deal over Czechoslovakia, 
the League Council unanimously agreed on Septem- 
ber 19 to invite Japan to sit with it in considering the 
Chinese appeal, thus setting in motion the League's 
punitive machinery. T. A. BIsson 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 48, SEPTEMBER 23, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Screet, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Leste Buett, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELES DeAN, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Ae. 181 


Two Dollars a Year. 


C 


Ani 


~~ = ot eet ee 


Worl 


} 


terri 
dem 
cate 
sitic 
how 
Brit 
acqi 
tO 1 
pro) 
und 


neg 


siOr 
beit 
inte 
anc 
onl 
nei, 


pic 
th: 





