MmMission, 
le tests a 
might be 
e a usefyl 
akened to 
are fought 

however, 
serve this 
xperiment 
omparison 
| and that 
ter atomic 
ie June 30 


Or sugges 
C weapons 
‘al public 
rtain pun 
ving to do 
icates that 
in Atomic 
hed. In $0 
fied, how- 
abandon- 
ouncil on 
ct necessi- 
s Charter 
ngements, 
sermanent 
s_ already 
7 Council; 
e Council 
' that the 
Many Sen- 
with Rus- 
Francisco 
of politi- 
the great 


BOLLES 


Entel 2g Thd pass matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 39 


JuLY 12, 1946 


BIG FOUR AGREE ON FREE DISCUSSION BY PEACE CONFERENCE 


ee the peace conference of the twenty-one 
nations which participated in the war against 
Germany meets in Paris on July 29, it will have be- 
fore it decisions on a wide range of territorial and 
economic questions reached by the Council of For- 
eign Ministers that met for its fourth session on 
June 15. Under the draft treaties drawn up at Paris, 
the Foreign Ministers recognize certain boundary 
changes which have already taken place. The most 
important of these are the transfer of Northern 
Transylvania from Hungary, to which it had. been 
allotted by Hitler in 1940, to Rumania; the cession of 
the province of Southern Dobruja to Bulgaria by Ru- 
mania, which had acquired it at the end of World 
War I; and the relinquishment by Rumania of Bes- 
sarabia (a part of Russia before 1918) and Northern 
Bukovina to the U.S.S.R., effected before Germany’s 
invasion of Russia. The draft peace treaty with Fin- 
land confirms the cession to Russia of the Karelian 
Isthmus above Leningrad and the port of Petsamo 
on the Arctic. 


ITALY CHIEF LOSER. Of the five European 
countries that fought on the side of the Axis, Italy, 
which went over earliest to the Allies, comes out 
with the heaviest losses. Italy must transfer the 
Dodecanese Islands in the Aegean (which it had 
obtained from Turkey during the Italo-Turkish war 
of 1911-12) to Greece. It must cede to France the 
Briga-Tenda area a few miles from Nice, contain- 
ing important hydroelectric developments. Italy must 
also renounce all claims to its colonies in Africa, 
which will continue to be administered by the British, 
who occupied them during the African campaigns 
of the 1940's, until the Big Four agree on final dis- 
position of these strategically situated territories. If 
no agreement is reached within a year, the problem 
of Italy’s colonies will be referred to the General 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


Assembly of the United Nations. Contrary to gen- 
eral expectations, as well as to ethnic considerations, 
the Austrian-populated South Tyrol, ceded to Italy 
under the Treaty of St. Germain of 1919, is to re- 
main part of Italy, to the profound distress of the 
Austrians. 


COMPROMISE ON TRIESTE. The most thorny 
question on the agenda was that of Trieste and the 
adjoining area of Venezia Giulia, claimed with equal 
vigor by Italy and Yugoslavia. Italy’s position had 
been supported by Britain and the United States. 
This shocked Yugoslavia, which felt that its sacri- 
fices during the war entitled it to far greater con- 
sideration than Italy, who not only had fought on 
Germany’s side but had wreaked destruction on its 
Slav neighbor. Russia, for its part, supported the 
claims of Yugoslavia, having itself an interest in 
the future of the Adriatic. Even without the back- 
ing of Moscow, however, Belgrade would probably 
have stood firm on Trieste, as it did in 1919 on 
Fiume, when Russia was excluded from the Paris 
Peace Conference. The compromise finally reached 
by the Foreign Ministers, although probably the 
most practicable that could be obtained, is disap- 
pointing to both Italy and Yugoslavia, and is des- 
tined to become a threat to peace in that region un- 
less it is firmly enforced against opposition from 
any quarter. The Italo-Yugoslav boundary is set ap- 
proximately along the so-called French line, pro- 
posed by Georges Bidault, President and Foreign 
Minister of France, who struggled hard to recon- 
cile the conflicting views of his colleagues. Yugo- 
slavia will thus acquire 3,000 square miles, includ- 
ing most of the Izonso Valley and nearly all the 
Istrian peninsula, with a population of 376,000 
Yugoslavs and an Italian minority of 128,000. The 
city of Trieste, an important port on the Adriatic, 


—_— 


and the surrounding area, estimated at about 300 
square miles altogether, are to become the “Free 
Territory of Trieste,” and to be placed under the 
administration of the United Nations, which will 
guarantee its territorial integrity and independence. 
Since the UN at the present time has no machinery 
for governing territories outside of dependent colo- 
nial areas, a new agency for this purpose will have 
to be established—as the League of Nations found 
it necessary to do in the comparable case of the Free 
City of Danzig. 

In addition to territorial losses, Italy, according 
to a last-minute concession made by Secretary of 
State Byrnes, will have to pay Russia $100,000,000 
over a period of seven years in reparations for dam- 
age inflicted by Italian troops during the invasion of 
the Ukraine. The reparations claims of Greece, 
Yugoslavia and other countries against Italy are to 
be considered at the peace conference. It was also 
agreed, contrary to views previously expressed by 
the United States and Britain, that Italian repara- 
tions to Russia should come out of current industrial 
production—thus directly aiding Russia’s reconstruc- 
tion—and that Italian warships should be consid- 
ered as war booty, and not as reparations. The 
Italian navy is to be limited to two small battleships 
and four cruisers. Within three months after the 
treaties come into effect, American and British 
troops are to be evacuated from Italy, and Russian 
troops from Bulgaria. 

The immediate reaction in Italy to the Paris de- 
cisions was an explosion of resentment against the 
Big Four, especially against France because of its 
so-called “‘stab in the back,” but most of all against 
Britain and the United States which, according to 
the Italian view, had received substantial aid from 
Italy after its surrender in 1943, and therefore 
should have spared the country from the humilia- 


= Page Two —$ 


tion of a harsh peace. This resentment may haye! hort 0! 
adverse effects on the internal stability of Italy| sbroad. 
which, in spite of the strong support recently regis | month! 
tered at the polls for a republican régime and 4, js threa 
moderate government typified by the program of} Give 
the Christian Democrats, continues to be threatened problen 
by economic difficulties and particularly by the dap. prograt 
ger of inflation. substan 
GREAT POWERS VERSUS SMALL NATIONS} jing ad 
Meanwhile, the same issue between Russia and the} Britain 
Western powers that has overshadowed the discus} trade v 
sions of the Security Council and the Atomic Energy} mainta 
Commission arose in Paris over plans for the peace} trol. T 
conference. Ever since Dumbarton Oaks Moscow! to crea 
has made it plain that it wants all important policies} made ' 
of peace-making to be determined by the power} obtain 
that bore the brunt of winning the war—that is the} tent to 
United States, Russia and Britain. It was with great} has be 
reluctance that Stalin, at Yalta, agreed to President} trol sy 
Roosevelt's suggestion for submission of the Dum} terms 
barton Oaks proposals to the scrutiny of other na.| Britais 
tions at San Francisco; and at San Francisco the| curren 
Russians did everything in their power to retain} fectiv 
authority in the hands of the Big Three, or at least} to apy 
the Big Five. The Soviet government wanted to} sofar 
make sure that the terms agreed upon by the Big, with 1 
Four would not be materially altered by other | the U 
tions invited to the peace conference. Britain and| minec 
the United States, for their part, were determined} pp 
to see to it that the conference should be, not a! app, 
mere rubber-stamp for the Paris decisions, but a} jp O; 
free forum for criticism and discussion. The de 
cision reached on July 8—that the general peace! penn 
conference will be free to make its own rules and t0| and | 


discuss all parts of the five draft treaties—should ; efor 
serve to ease the tension between Russia and the} aricir 
Western powers in Europe. ment 


VERA MICHELES DEAN seer 


FREER WORLD TRADE HINGES ON BRITISH LOAN | lars. 


The delay of Congress in approving the $3,750,- 
000,000 loan to Britain has been primarily respon- 
sible for the announcement on June 19 that the 
International Trade Conference will not meet until 
next spring. The conference was to have been this 
summer to draft commercial treaties embodying the 
United States proposals for non-discriminatory, mul- 
tilateral trade. The American proposals were ac- 
cepted “in principle” by the British during the ne- 
gotiations for the loan agreement, the purpose of 
which was to provide Britain with sufficient dollar 
exchange so that it could liberalize its trade policy. 
Pending approval of the loan by the House of Rep- 
resentatives, it is not surprising that the trade 
conference should have been delayed. 

THE LOAN AND BRITISH TRADE POLICY. 
An important problem of world trade today is that 
Britain and other European trading nations continue 


to experience a large deficit in their balance of pay-| °° 
ments. Since 1938 British overseas investments have | ‘hat 
declined by approximately $4.5 billion; foreign prin 
short-term debts have increased fourfold, amounting | *3°° 
to about $15 billion at the beginning of 1946. ln liber 
the meantime revenue from banking, shipping, in | tradi 
surance and other services has fallen drastically. | “*: 
These sources of foreign exchange cannot be quickly | Pr 


restored. Moreover, Britain’s internal economy was of tl 
greatly weakened as a result of the war; according with 
to one estimate, the amount of physical assets used | ™°® 
up and not replaced during the six years 1940-45 | ef 


was roughly $5.2 billion. Heavy imports will there 
fore be required to restore productive capacity. Until | > 
such time as exports can be considerably expanded | Head 
—it has been officially estimated that exports must | 5" 
be increased until they are at least 75% above the 

pre-war level—British receipts will continue to fall | 


—————=S=] = Page Three 
may haye| short of the necessary payments that must be made within specified limits. A similar treaty was signed 
| £ Italy ae Exports mag were 15% we the by Sweden and the Netherlands on June 29. 
ntly regis | monthly average of 1938, but a serious coal shortage 
me andl is ictening farther progress. OUTLOOK FOR MULTILATERAL TRADE. 
ogram of| Given the almost insuperable balance of payments Even should Congress approve the loan to Britain, 
hreatened problem, London's acceptance of the American trade an immediate return to freer world trade cannot 
y the dan} program was necessarily conditional on a grant of be expected. Although Britain has agreed to abolish 
substantial dollar credits by the United States. Lack- exchange control, it remains free to continue the 
ATIONS| ing adequate foreign exchange, especially dollars, system of licensing imports. If Britain is to make a 
a and the| Britain has developed the maximum amount of permanent transition to a system of multilateral 
he discus} trade within the sterling area, and in doing so has trade, it can do so only by reorganizing and mod- 
Lic Energy maintained a rigid system of foreign exchange con- ernizing its export industries. Its success to date in 
the peace} trol. The avowed wartime purpose of this policy was restoring exports has been largely due to the fact 
- Moscow} to create a dollar pool, from which payments were that it has not yet had to compete with this country 
nt policies} made only for essentials that could not possibly be in the sale abroad of vehicles, machinery, iron and 
1e powers| obtained in sterling area countries. While the ex- steel—items at present heading the British export 
hat is the| tent to which members can draw on the dollar pool list. These are export lines in which British pro- 
with great} has been somewhat liberalized, the exchange con- ducers for the most part have never been able to 
President | trol system nonetheless continues in force. Under the match their American competitors. 
the Dum} terms of the American loan agreement, however, Britain, moreover, is not the only country which 
other na| Britain undertook to dissolve the dollar pool for will find acceptance of a freer world trading system 
icisco the} current transactions within one year after the ef- difficult and uncertain. The economies of France, 
to retain} fective date of the agreement. Should Congress fail the Netherlands, and Belgium, for example, were 
ot at least} to approve the loan, Britain will continue and, in- devastated by the war > and enormous reconstruction 
vanted to} sofar as possible, extend its wartime arrangements programs must be carried out if they are to compete 
y the Big; with members of the sterling group. Purchases from successfully in foreign markets. Heavy imports for 
other na | the United States will be held to a minimum deter- reconstruction create a difficult problem of balanc- 
itain and| mined by the dollar receipts of member countries. ing international payments. The rebuilding pro- 
etermined} BRITAIN’S OBJECTIVES OUTSIDE STERLING grams will involve large domestic outlays that will 
be, not a AREA. Beginning with an agreement with Belgium increase money incomes; and unless restrictions are 
ns, but a in October 1944, Britain has signed bilateral finan- continued on smports, non-essential purchases will b a 
The de} cal pacts with Holland, France, Czechoslovakia, made abroad, dissipating the already scant supplies 
tal peace’ Denmark, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland, Turkey, of foreign exchange. | 
les and t0| and Greece. These agreements represent a mutual HAROLD H. HUTCHESON 
s—should effort to overcome the handicap to foreign trade (The second of three articles on postwar commercial policy.) 
and the arising from the lack of balance in international pay- ; . 
- ments. They also enable the participants to obtain oe erry N. 8. Timasheff. New York, B. P. 
— a certain amount of imports without the use of dol- The Reehee author, who left Russia in 1921, and 
| lars. Moreover, they contain clauses that limit the since 1940 has been a member of the sociology staff at 
e of pay | Convertibility of sterling into third currencies. In cules andl aaa ee ee a 
ents have that respect they are decidedly at variance with the the conclusion that all the achievements of the past quar- 
: foreign principles of multilateral exchange and trade. Such ter of a century for which the Soviet leaders have taken 
mounting | #greements, however, are not the results of any de- — pre See eee ae the resultant cost in 
7 ae uman suffering—had Russia continued without revolution 
1946. In liberate effort by Britain to foster a postwar world on the course it was following before 1917. 
ping, in- trading system based on restrictive bilateral trea- The Basis of Soviet Strength, by George B. Cosme aan 
rastically, | tis; on the contrary, they are unavoidable given the York, Whittlesey, 1945. $3.00 
e quickly present disordered state of world commerce. Several An excellent summary of the natural resources of the 
omy was| of the countries that have concluded financial pacts pg 9 > industrial potential, by an authority in 
according with Britain have also signed similar trade agree- — es oul 
sets used | ments with each other. Thus, for example, Sweden F ee: 4 a by Albert Guérard. New York, 
1940-45 and France announced on June 28 a new trade treaty A vividly written history of France that is the product 
rill there- | calling for an exchange of each other’s products of years of reflection and scholarship. 
ity. Until FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 39, Juty 12, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
=xpanded Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, 
yrts must Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
ea the Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 
ie to A F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


GSI 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


ANGLO-AMERICAN ACTION NEEDED TO CHECK PALESTINE VIOLENCE 


The issue of Palestine has become a world prob- 
lem of first magnitude because the resentment of 
American Zionists against recent British measures 
in that country is affecting Anglo-American rela- 
tions. This resentment was given political expres- 
sion last week, when some members of the House of 
Representatives, friendly to Zionism and disturbed 
by the plight of Jews in regions where they con- 
tinue to suffer persecution, announced that they 
would: vote against the British loan. Even if Zionist 
hostility does not defeat the loan, the Truman Ad- 
ministration fears that the Palestine issue will con- 
tinue to disturb our relations with Britain. 


CORE OF U.S.-BRITISH CONTROVERSY. The 
controversy over Palestine has been growing since 
June 12, when British Foreign Secretary Ernest 
Bevin, in his address to the Labor party conference 
at Bournemouth, analyzed the implications of the 
proposals published on April 30 by the Anglo-Amer- 
ican Committee of Inquiry, which advocated the 
admission of 100,000 European Jews to Palestine as 
permanent residents. Some criticisms voiced by 
Americans in public life concerning Britain’s delay 
in implementing this provision of the report have 
shown lack of fairness, because they fail to note that 
the Committee proposed the United States should 
assume certain obligations in that connection. The 
Washington Administration has not endorsed the 
Committee’s recommendations that the United States 
relax its immigration laws and that it “participate 
vigorously and generously’’ with the British govern- 
ment in carrying out the report’s suggestions. For 
example, British Prime Minister Clement Attlee has 
declared that the United States must provide military 
aid in Palestine, but on July 2 President Truman 
stated only that this country would give technical 
and financial assistance in the migration of the 
100,000 Jews. 


OFFICIAL CRITICISM OF BRITAIN. At the 
very time that President Truman is trying to solidify 
our collaboration with Britain in world affairs, he 
has himself joined the ranks of critics over Pales- 
tine. The wave of criticism started on June 15, when 
Senators Robert F. Wagner and James M. Mead of 
New York cabled a protest to Bevin concerning his 
remarks at Bournemouth. On June 24 Wagner, 
Mead and seven other Senators, protesting that 
Bevin had used “biased and untenable arguments” 
in his analysis and had revealed a “clearly hostile 
attitude” toward the report of the Committee of 


Inquiry, requested Truman to press Britain to im 
plement that report. The President on July 2 but 
tressed the view that Britain is wholly responsible 
and this country is free of blame for the course of 
events in Palestine, when he authorized the Whit. 
House to issue a statement that the British had 
undertaken their current measures of military rt. 
pression without consulting the United States. While 
from a legal point of view full responsibility fo; 
affairs in Palestine does fall on Britain, we cannot 
expect that country to follow the course we advocate 
unless we give it adequate material support. 
Unrest in Palestine and British measures of te 
pression have grown increasingly severe as the 
United States and Britain have delayed action op 
the Committee’s report. The Committee had hinted 
at impending violence when it stated that “Palestine 


1918 


i | 


Vou. X 


WiL 
HI] 
the 

July 1 

of the 

Reich. 


is an armed camp.” The British forces in Palestine 
acting under general instructions from the govern. 
ment in London, on June 29 subjected Palestine 
Jews to virtual siege in order to destroy the leader. 
ship of Hagana, the underground army of the Jew. 
ish community. Prime Minister Attlee told the 
House of Commons on July 1 that Hagana was asso- 
ciated with the Jewish Agency, which is officially in 


charge of Jewish immigration and settlement in) 


Palestine. Violence spread as the Irgun Zvai Leumi, 
a more extreme underground organization, proposed 
on July 4 the “formation of a Jewish liberation army 
which would not lay down its arms until an inde. 
pendent Jewish state was established.” 


NEED FOR PROMPT ACTION. The cessation 
of warfare in Palestine depends on prompt political 
decision rather than on further use of arms. Yet 
action has been repeatedly postponed. Twenty days 
after publication of the Committee’s report, the two 


governments invited Jews and Arabs to present theit | 


comments. Almost a month later the two govern 
ments set up Cabinet committees to explore further 
moves in Palestinian policy. These committees are 
to meet in London on July 14. Hope remains that 
they will devise a course to which both governments 
can readily subscribe. But the terrible plight of the 
Jews in Europe, 40 of whom were massacred in 
Poland on July 4, calls for a prompt and vigorous 
program of assistance. This means that the United 
States must take positive action in collaboration with 
Britain, and not merely offer criticism or advice from 
the sidelines. 
BLAIR BOLLES 


towar 
powe! 
it is | 
befor 


amon 


W! 


Super 
cussi¢ 
neith 
of pr 
state. 
July 
the € 
econ 
| that 
This 
bear: 
and 
need 
Secre 
Russ 
dust 
Mar 
by 1 
to b 
| sitio 
| this 
to t 
that 
not 
tool 
and 


