— 
CEST 


ty of the 
Zanization 
itary con. 
and _ thus 
n Davies, 
declared 
dy begun 
se Of the 
ses at the 
ower. 


M. Mean- 
Canadian 
gn power 
1 the case 
> Commit: 

that the 
aused the 
cretary of 
ral L. R 
1g Project, 
eged espi- 
ild follow 
it is not of 
country is 
covered by 
Byrnes on 
the secret 
estigation, 
rets are at 


nmittee to 


monopoly 
ut atomic | 
ernational | 
n kept in 
ypt toward 
of urgency 
acted with 
e Senator 
d interna: | 
upon this 
g bills re 
tands that 
, and the 
velopment 
ents. Early 
a series of 
mic energy 


BOLLES 


CaNezaL Lis® A®* 


ently, OF MCh 


MAR 1 5 1946 


Entered as 2nd class matte: 
General Library 
a 


T¥xy fe a= ; ? 
vaiversity of Nichigan 


Ann Arbor, Nich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


VoL. XXV, No. 21 


Marc# 8, 1946 


IS RUSSIA ALONE TO BLAME? 


1% HE address of Secretary of State Byrnes at the 
Overseas Press Club in New York on February 
28, taken together with Senator Vandenberg’s report 
of the previous day to Congress on the UNO session 
in London, reveals the extent to which the world 
has lost the mood of V-E Day, when Norman Cor- 
win could celebrate victory over the radio “On a 
Note of Triumph.’’ Six months later the note has 
been muted to one of mutual fear. As Mr. Byrnes 
said, ‘‘all around us there is suspicion and distrust, 
which in turn breeds suspicion and distrust.’’ This is 
the miasmic climate of opinion that breeds wars. 


BIG-THREE BALANCE SHEET. It would be 
easier and more bracing for us if we could squarely 
place the blame for the disturbed condition of the 
world on some one foreign country. And to an ex- 
tent that is reaching the proportions of a landslide 
commentators and official spokesmen do tend to 
place the blame, openly or by implication, on Russia 
alone. The Soviet government, it must be admitted, 
has done little to dispel unfavorable opinion abroad, 
and some of its actions in Iran, in Manchuria, in 
Eastern Europe, lend themselves to the interpreta- 
tion placed on them by Mr. Byrnes, Senator Vanden- 
berg, and John Foster Dulles in his speech of March 
1 before the Philadelphia branch of the Foreign 
Policy Association. The Russians are maintaining 
troops not only in their zone of Germany, but also 
on the soil of Germany’s ex-satellites. The Russians 
are still in Manchuria, but say they will leave not later 
than U.S. troops leave China. We claim that we are 
in China with the consent of the Chinese, and the 
British offer the same justification for the mainte- 
nance of their troops in Greece. 

Russia has used its military power and political in- 
fluence to foster the establishment in countries along 
its borders in Europe, the Near and Middle East, and 


Asia of governments that would conform to Mos- 
cow's idea of “friendliness.” With little or no ad- 
vance consultation with other countries of the West- 
ern Hemisphere, the United States has used its eco- 
nomic power and political influence unilaterally to 
bring about in Argentina a government that, unlike 
the Perén régime, would not constitute a threat to 
our interests. This policy has seemed justified to 
many Americans, although Britain, whose economic 
stake in Argentina is greater than ours, has viewed 
our course with disapproval and anxiety, and some 
Latin Americans other than the Argentines have seen 
in it a revival of “Yankee imperialism.” The Russians 
have helped themselves to what Mr. Byrnes calls 
“alleged enemy properties” in liberated or ex-satel- 
lite countries in advance of an Allied reparations set- 
tlement. Such action is crude, and unquestionably 
works hardship on innocent people. But although 
Russia has greater war losses of economic resources 
to recoup than Britain, and certainly than the United 
States, few Westerners see anything objectionable in 
our policy of helping ourselves to German assets in 
neutral countries. 


SEEING OURSELVES AS OTHERS SEE US. Is 
it possible that we may be expecting of Russia higher 
standards of international conduct than our own? 
If the atomic bomb, as some say, has made the pos- 
session of strategic bases obsolete, Russia (which is 
barred from sharing our atomic secret) has therefore 
little reason to claim bases in the eastern Mediter- 
ranean or Manchuria. But then why is it that we 
seek bases in Iceland and Greenland (which might 
seem rather menacing when seen from Russia's 
northern regions), and are reluctant to place under 
trusteeship the Pacific bases we took from Japan? 
Why do we not urge Britain to give up bases pre- 
sumably made obsolete at Gibraltar, Malta, Sin- 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


gapore? If we feel that the Russians are selfish and 
short-sighted in seeking to establish spheres of ex- 
clusive economic influence in Eastern Europe and 
Manchuria, why do we not prove ourselves unselfish 
and far-sighted by extending a loan to Britain with- 
out further tergiversation (or even making a free 
gift, as former Ambassador Kennedy has sug- 
gested) ? Why do we not give generous economic 
aid to countries which are outside Russia's orbit? 
Why do we not reduce our tariffs so that our cred- 
itors can repay our loans by selling goods to us? If 
we are as worried as some of our commentators say 
we should be about Russia’s superior manpower and 
its capacity to catch up by 1970 with our industrial 
development of the 1940's, why do we not open our 
borders wide to the thousands of skilled men and 
women who would like nothing better than to work 
here and help to expand our industrial production, 
which owes so much in the first place to the imagina- 
tion, endurance, and talents of generations of im- 
migrants ? 

POSITIVE ACTIONS NEEDED. Mr. Byrnes has 
said that our diplomacy must not be “negative and 
inert’; that “it must be marked by creative ideas, 
constructive proposals, practical and forward-looking 
suggestions.” We should applaud his views. But, 
above all, we should stop talking about a positive 
policy, and start being positive. 

For if we are really honest with ourselves, we 
cannot escape the conclusion that since V-J Day our 
economic withdrawal, our naked materialism as ex- 
emplified by our attitude toward the feeding of 
starving peoples, our political vacillations and, above 
all, our moral negativism, have done more to keep 
the world in turmoil than Russia’s actions. Mr. 
Byrnes said that “it is not in our tradition to defend 
the dead hand of reaction or the tyranny of priv- 
ilege.” Yet we have until now tolerated just such 
conditions in Spain, even after the disappearance of 
the last vestiges of security considerations which dur- 


FRANCO CHALLENGED BY 


With the release on March 4 of the joint Ameri- 
can-French-British note calling upon the Spanish 
people to force Generalissimo Franco out of power, 
the United States and Britain assured France of their 
support on an issue that has long been of particular 
concern to the French. In support of the three 
powers’ assertion that Franco had given wartime aid 
to Hitler and Mussolini and patterned his govern- 
ment on theirs, the State Department published fif- 
teen captured German, Italian and Spanish docu- 
ments that revealed the Spanish dictator's role as a 
non-belligerent Axis partner. The joint note further 
declared that the three signatories did not intend any 
direct intervention in Spain’s internal affairs, but ex- 
pressed the hope that Franco might be replaced by a 
“caretaker” régime that would receive full diplo- 


Page Two =a 


ing the war could be held to justify this policy. No 
responsible person would deny the existence of a 
dictatorship in Russia. And it is understandable that 
the Vatican, now as much alarmed by Moscow’s ag- 
gressive support of the Russian Orthodox Church as 
it once was by the anti-religious campaign of Soviet 
leaders, should denounce the “totalitarianism” of 
Russia. But it is disturbing that American church- 
men, amid the pomp and circumstance of ceremonies 
in Rome, should appear to associate themselves with 
pronouncements of the Vatican which, judging from 
the Pope’s Christmas allocution, are directed not only 
against totalitarianism but against the liberal tradi- 
tion and what Pius XII calls “secularism.” 

It would be unjust to say, as many disillusioned 
people are saying in Europe and Asia, that the United 
States has become a bulwark of conservatism in a 
world that is in the throes of one of the most far- 
reaching upheavals in human history. But actions 
speak louder than words. The war brought to the 
forefront in all conquered countries men and women 
of signal courage, penetrating vision, and ardent 
loyalty to the ideals of freedom and justice. These 
people who, if what Mr. Byrnes says is true, should 
have had first claim to our sympathy and support, 
have instead found themselves cold-shouldered by 
many of our official representatives, who tend to as- 
sociate even now with reactionary elements among 
outworn aristocrats and monarchists, and with the 
least forward-looking of churchmen. Our failure to 
sense the temper of Europe, to lend a hand in what 
seemed, at the end of the war, a promising renais- 
sance of revitalized democracy, has given comfort to 
our enemies, and has disheartened our friends. Mr. 
Dulles is right. The United States has “very few real 
friends in the world today’’—not because Russia has 
won them away from us, but because through in- 
decision and insensitiveness we have done our best 
to lose them. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


3-POWER DECLARATION 


matic and economic support from abroad. 

To the French the course of events in Spain during 
the past decade has been a source of alarm for both 
strategic and ideological reasons. From a strategic 
point of view, an unfriendly government south of 
the Pyrenees is only somewhat less disturbing to 
France than a militaristic Germany across the Rhine. 
Now that Germany has been defeated and France is 
no longer surrounded by enemies, the French gov- 
ernment feels that the moment has arrived to im- 
prove the situation along the country’s southern 
frontier. 

From an ideological point of view France has 
equally strong reasons to act against Franco. Most 
Frenchmen who supported the resistance movement 
during the German occupation regard Franco as the 


v of th 
be Vichy 
rench Ce 
litical 
Popular I 
me Com 
favor C 


GARC 
Despite | 
eorges 
wteral ac 
ear that 
possible | 
vited th 
er tO if 
jiplomat: 
on made 
id it. we 
_ the | 
he matt 
ranco £ 
ebruary 
h Repu 
French f 
he War, 
bain. V 
yoainst t 
truggle 
banizatic 
portatior 
he gove 
égime. 
Pyrenees 
ical not 
king t 
Council 
tiploma 
s Franc 


| Mean 
that, bac 
Wo renev 
political 
ichists. 

the a 
t the F 
lations 


sioned 
United 
nina 
st far- 
actions 
to the 
women 
ardent 
These 
should 
ipport, 
red by 
| to as- 
among 
ith the 
lure to 
n what 
renais- 
fort to 
ls. Mr. 
-w real 
sia has 
igh in- 
ur best 


EAN 


during 
yr both 
rategic 
uth of 
ing to 
Rhine. 
ance is 
h gov- 
to 1m- 
uthern 


ce has 
. Most 
yement 
as the 


ily of those French Fascists who collaborated with 
he Vichy régime. Although Franco charges that the 
reach Communists alone oppose him, all three main 
jlitical parties in France—the Socialists and the 
popular Republican Movement (MRP), as well as 
he Communists—have repeatedly gone on record 
, favor of action that would insure his fall. 


GARCIA INCIDENT PRECIPITATES CRISIS. 
spite this popular pressure, Foreign Minister 
eorges Bidault has been reluctant to take uni- 
wteral action against the Franco government for 
ar that France might be forced, unaided, to meet a 
wssible attack by Spain. Accordingly, M. Bidault 
wited the United States and Britain early in Decem- 
+ to indicate their attitude toward severance of 
liplomatic relations with Franco. When Washing- 
m made no direct answer to this query but merely 
id it would participate in a conference on the sub- 

, the next move was clearly up to France. There 
he matter might have been allowed to rest if the 
ranco government had not arrested and shot, on 
bruary 21, Cristino Garcia and nine other Span- 
h Republican sympathizers who had fought in the 
ench resistance forces and, following the end of 
he war, resumed their underground activities in 
main. When Madrid ignored protests from Paris 
ginst this treatment of men who had shared in the 
truggle against the Germans, powerful workers’ or- 
anizations in France threatened to tie up all trans- 
portation to the southern frontier and thus forced 
he government to take new steps against the Spanish 
égime. On February 26 M. Bidault ordered the 
yrenees frontier closed. Two days later he sent iden- 
ical notes to the United States, Britain and Russia 
king them to join in urging the UNO Security 
ouncil to take up the question of breaking off all 
iplomatic and economic relations with Spain as long 
Franco remained in power. 


Meanwhile, the State Department held the view 
hat, bad as Franco was, his removal might lead only 
brenewal of bloody civil war in Spain among rival 
litical groups ranging from Communists to mon- 
thists. While, therefore, the United States joined 
the anti-Franco statement made by the Big Three 
tthe Potsdam Conference last July and the United 
lations’ formal refusal to permit Franco’s govern- 
ft to join the UNO, American statements on 
ain remained relatively mild and ineffective. Dur- 
g the past three months, however, the State De- 
artment has been consulting with Spanish Repub- 
ian leaders—which it had not done previously— 


Page Three 


and, by proposing the three-power anti-Franco decla- 
ration of March 4, it took a step that narrowed the 
gap between American and French policy toward 
Spain. 


U.S. LIMITS ECONOMIC AID. But no degree 
of cooperation between the United States and France 
on an important diplomatic question can obscure the 
fact that the French are now looking without success 
to the United States for urgently needed economic 
support. Since the end of the war American credit 
to France has been limited to the $550,000,000-loan 
from the Export-Import Bank negotiated last Sep- 
tember, which was designed to cover only the costs 
of surplus property and lend-lease materials ordered 
before V-J Day. The provision of an adequate 
amount of dollar exchange to assist France during 
the next few years, before it is able to produce 
enough exports to pay for essential imports, remains 
to be negotiated. 


It is for the purpose of discussing such a loan for 
approximately $2,500,000,000 that the French have 
considered sending Léon Blum to Washington as 
special envoy. Unfortunately for the Blum mission, 
however, the prospects for a large American loan to 
France are far from bright. The gist of the Re- 
port by the National Advisory Council on Interna- 
tional Monetary and Financial Problems, transmitted 
to Congress by President Truman on March 1, ts 
that there should be no more large loan agreements 
such as the proposed loan to Britain. Hereafter, ac- 
cording to the Report’s recommendations, nations 
seeking loans should address appeals exclusively to 
the Export-Import Bank. Since the total capital of 
this bank is $3,500,000,000 — $1,560,000,000 of 
which had already been expended by the end of 
1945 — any individual loans from this source will 
necessarily be relatively small. A small loan, how- 
ever, will not enable France to procure the fuel, raw 
materials and food needed to prime its disrupted in- 
dustrial machine and cope with the inflation that is 
now sweeping the country. Yet restoration of French 
industry to maximum efficiency is clearly an objective 
that should be fostered by the United States. For if 
this country is to give effective aid to the demo- 
cratic elements in Western Europe, it is not enough 
for Washington to advocate the removal of men like 
Franco. It must also give substantial economic as- 
sistance to moderate political elements, such as the 
Socialists and the MRP, which are now seeking to 
stabilize France. 


WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


REIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 21, Marcu 8, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


tadquarters, 22 East 38ch Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera Micueves Dean, Editor. Entered as 
ond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


Month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


. J 
ae pe eer a 


. 
or cet Samet 


_ 


| 
i. 
by 
i. 
a 
A 


> =* 


Washington News Letter 


NARROW NATIONALISM DOMINATES CONGRESSIONAL DEBATES 


Since the end of World War II many officials 
and members of Congress, as well as rank-and-file 
citizens, have disclosed a strong tendency toward iso- 
lationism in their thinking about international food, 
loan and immigration problems. This tendency ex- 
plains in part why the Administration has been un- 
able to implement the post-war foreign policy of the 
United States consistently and vigorously. While the 
nation in general understands that America is a 
world power, with responsibilities which reach far 
beyond its shores or vaguely defined zones of im- 
mediate security, we are still groping for methods of 
positive action abroad. 


ISOLATIONISM STILL POWERFUL. The post- 
war isolationists hold that the United States has a 
choice of helping the world or helping itself, and 
that its best chance of surviving is to help itself. 
Such a view accounted for the decision by Secretary 
of Agriculture Clinton B. Anderson last September 
to do away with most of the ration controls on food, 
with the result that the United States could not 
send much food abroad. The meeting of the Famine 
Emergency Committee in Washington on March 1, 
summoned by President Truman, and headed by 
former President Herbert Hoover, represented a 
change in the September policy. For the Committee 
appealed to Americans to reduce their bread con- 
sumption “so that millions [abroad} may survive 
who are otherwise doomed to death by starvation.” 

Some of the arguments against the proposed 
Treasury loan to Britain reflect the isolationist 
thought that our own prosperity is unrelated to eco- 
nomic conditions abroad. “If we have $4,000,000,- 
000 to give away, let us turn our attention to the 
United States, where we have some very difficult 
problems,” Senator Burton K. Wheeler, Democrat 
of Montana, said on February 16 in stating his rea- 
sons for opposing the loan. Others fear that the 
British loan may prove a precedent for extending 
additional credit to many other countries. A some- 
what similar attitude caused a majority of the mem- 
bers of the House Committee on Immigration and 
Naturalization to vote in favor of hearings, be- 
ginning February 21, on the bill sponsored by 
Representative Ed Gossett, Democrat of Texas, 
which would reduce the 1924 immigration quotas 
by one-half for a period of 10 years. Other bills 
on the Committee calendar would suspend im- 
migration altogether- until unemployment, includ- 
ing that of war veterans, has dropped below 


a, 


Present United States quotas permit the entry 
154,000 immigrants a year if every country fills; 
individual quota. | 
The legislative history of the Gossett bill su 
that isolationism is increasing rather than diminj 
ing. The Committee on November 27, 1945 
mitted to the House of Representatives a report 
ing: “No widespread popular demand exists 
immediate drastic changes in the existing law 
immigration.” President Truman, hoping to 
pedite the movement of displaced persons f 


1,000,000, in one instance, or 100,000, in 4 


Europe, on December 22 urged that “‘no such leg \{ 0! 
lation” as the Gossett and other bills be passed. N 
after hearings opened on the Gossett bill, the sag midwes 
Immigration Committee voted to withdraw fr attracte 
the House calendar the report submitted in Noves official 
ber. An objection in the House prevented the wit his prc 
drawal, so that if the Committee recommends pq his_pl« 
sage of the Gossett bill, legislators will be fac} the Un 
with contradictory propositions. Support for imm) military 
gration restriction comes chiefly from long-estd of Russ 
lished veterans’ organizations. The authors of th li pet 
restricting bills are southerners—Gossett of Texy Washir 
A. Leonard Allen of Louisiana, Stephen Pace ¢ Ye! in 
Georgia, O. C. Fisher of Texas, and John E. Rank the ma 
of Mississippi—but opposition to the measure hi Policy 
been voiced in the South by the Archbishop of N Organi 


Orleans and others. man’s 


PROBLEM OF REFUGEES. The pursuit of parc 


with vi 


GRC 


lationist policies would lessen our influence over 
course of world affairs and, especially in the case 
immigration, would make it impossible for us to hej urgenc 
solve the problem of Jewish refugees abroad, whidl Both t 
has aroused widespread American concern and i Sent st 
terest. The United States has steadfastly advisd tone, | 
Britain to open up Palestine to these refugees, a} oops 
participated with the British government in th ly arra 
establishment of an Anglo-American Committee ¢ “te th 
Inquiry on Palestine, which has been holding h by the 


ings in Washington, London, Cairo and Jerusalem feturn 
This Committee may find that the Jews in Eur han. B 
need and deserve some non-European sanctuary. Russia 
occupation policy in Germany is also complica known 
by the presence of displaced persons from Easte the ot! 
Europe who are unwilling to return to their nati §, to \ 
lands. Yet the United States remains unwilling # ‘ndur 
provide new homes for Jewish and other Euro 4 4 
4 


refugees within its own borders. 
BLA BoLLss 


