


2 #¢bL2\ \ \ J 


BE s88e28 








mn Arbor, Nich 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


~ & ‘Fr. 


“ichigan 


pep 18 8 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 














An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 18 


Feeruary 18, 1944 





RUSSIA’S DRIVE FOR VICTORY SHARPENS CONFLICT WITH VATICAN 


in assertion of Izvestia on February 1 that the 
foreign policy of the Vatican has disillusioned 
Catholics throughout the world and “earned the 
hatred and contempt of the Italian masses for sup- 
porting Fascism” has, understandably, aroused wide- 
spread discussion in this country. The Izvestia article 
linked its allegations to a report, ‘Foreign Policy 
of the Vatican,” published on January 15 by the 
Foreign Policy Association, Since it is unlikely that 
copies of this report had reached Moscow by Febru- 
ary 1, it must be assumed that the Izvestia article was 
based on newspaper dispatches concerning the report 
which gave wide publicity to its contents both in this 
country and abroad. As several leading Catholic or- 
gans, notably America and the National Catholic 
Welfare Conference, have pointed out, some of the 
news stories did not give an entirely rounded version 


| of the FPA report. One of the main conclusions of 


the report, in direct contradiction to the Izvestia ar- 
ticle, reads as follows: ““The view that the Pope is at 
heart a Fascist and wishes to see the triumph of 
modern dictatorships, while a long sequence of 
superficial evidence can be con::iucted to support it, 
proves to be without foundation in fact. At the same 
time, he is not a supporter of democracy but is just 
what he claims to be—indifferent to political forms, 
accepting any government which will meet the mini- 
mum demands of the church.” 

POLITICAL ISSULZS AT STAKE. No organiza- 
tion that undertakes to discuss a subject so contro- 
versial and so charged with varied emotions as the 
foreign policy of the Vatican can possibly expect to 
escape criticism from all sides. What to one person 
may appear unfair aspersions may seem to another 
an attempt at whitewashing. In fact, one of the most 
disturbing aspects of our times is the apparent im- 
possibility for large sections of people to listen 
with any degree of reasonableness to views with 
which they do not happen to agree. Amid the welter 


of arguments and counterarguments aroused by dis- 
cussion of the Vatican’s foreign policy, three points 
should be borne in mind: 


1. Any questions that are raised by responsible 
students of international affairs regarding the posi- 
tion of the Vatican concern not the spiritual lead- 
ership of the Pope or the content of Catholic be- 
liefs, but the political influence which the Pope 
unquestionably exercises as spiritual leader of mil- 
lions of Catholics. If other religious organizations 
—the Church of England, or the Methodists, or 
the Greek Orthodox Church—had a Secretariat of 
State like the Vatican, and maintained representa- 
tives of diplomatic rank in foreign capitals, their 
views and pronouncements would be similarly 
open to public discussion. 

2. The Soviet government’s recurring attacks 
on the Vatican—that, in the form in which they 
are often couched, cannot but hurt the sensitive- 
ness of many religious people, whatever their 
faith—are due first and foremost to Moscow’s 
opposition to the political influence of the Vatican: 
This influence, the Soviet leaders feel—and with 
justification—has often been used against the 
U.S.S.R. during the past quarter of a century. The 
fact that Russia is now at odds with Poland, a 
predominantly Catholic country, has recently en- 
venomed this long-standing conflict, and at least 
in part explains the fierceness of the broadside 
delivered by Izvestia. 

3. The Vatican’s hostility toward the Soviet 
government, of which there is also no doubt, has 
been due first and foremost to the treatment meted 
out by Soviet authorities to religious organizations, 
and to the ruthless attacks directed before 1941 
by such Soviet organizations as The Godless against 
all outward manifestations of religious sentiment. 
Fear that what happened in Russia after 1917 
might be repeated in other countries where poli- 





pare 


SST ecceancan Donnan 


mt BM pa le BES an 








i 
ty 
oS 
‘ 











tical groups influenced by Soviet doctrines were 
active unquestionably had a profound influence on 
the policy of the Vatican toward Mussolini, Hitler 
and, especially, Franco. 

U.S.S.R. DETERMINED TO WIN NOW. What 
has now crystallized all these long-run trends is the 
determination of the Soviet government to bring the 
war with Germany to an end this year, if at all pos- 
sible. While the United States, and in lesser measure 
Britain, might conceivably afford to go on fighting 
for an indeterminate period, since their productive 
capacities have not been destroyed by the enemy, that 
is not true of the U.S.S.R. and—what may prove most 
important for the future of Europe—it is even less 
true of the conquered countries. The unremitting way 
in which the Soviet government has been lashing out 
since the Teheran conference at all of Hitler's volun- 
tary or involuntary satellites—Spain, Hungary, Bul- 
garia, Rumania, Finland—indicates its determination 
to shatter Germany's political front as the Russian 
armies are shattering German military resistance. To 
the extent that the Vatican, in its opposition to the 
anti-clericalism of the Loyalists, has displayed sym- 
pathy for Franco, it too has become an object of Rus- 
sian attack. The militant “we or they’’ tone of the 
Soviet press reflects the heightened tension of a coun- 
try which for nearly three grueling years has been en- 
gaged in a life and death struggle, and does not in- 
tend to let anyone or anything stand in the way of its 
termination. 

In the heat of verbal battle, Soviet spokesmen have 
made statements about the Vatican that are histori- 
cally unconvincing. Izvestia denounces the Vatican for 
maintaining relations with the Hitler and Mussolini 
governments—but before 1939 all the great powers 
maintained relations, including Russia which, far 
from breaking off with the Reich at the start of 


EQUATORIAL AFRICA SETS NEW PATTERN FOR FRENCH EMPIRE 


The French Colonial Conference held at Brazza- 
ville in French Equatorial Africa during the first week 
of February, at which General de Gaulle delivered 
the opening address, resulted in the announcement 
of three alternative plans for the development of 
France's colonial affairs. In one sense the delibera- 
tions at Brazzaville represent but another step in the 
process of coordinating French affairs already under- 
way in Algiers. Certain other developments within 
the Empire previous to the conference—notably the 
achievements of Felix Eboué in French Equatorial 
Africa and the proposal for colonial “federation” 
announced last December in connection with Indo- 
China—suggest that modifications are being made in 
French colonial policy. 

FUTURE COLONIAL POLICY. The three al- 
ternative suggestions emanating from the conference 
were; (1) an enlarged colonial representation in the 


PageTwo 








——., 
— 


World War II, concluded the Russo-German pag 
of nonaggression in the hope of postponing Nazi at. 
tack on its territory. Nor did the Vatican have at ity 
disposal the material power commanded by countries 
like Britain, Russia and the United States. Judged by 
secular standards, then, the Vatican may be said to 
have shown no more, but certainly no less, courage 
and prevision than these three great powers, none of 
which are predominantly Catholic. 


On the spiritual plane, however, it could be argued 
that the Vatican, because of its opposition to the anti. 
religious character of the Soviet government, tended 
to favor individuals and movements that claimed to 
be fighting communism. In the process it did not give 
sufficient weight to the fact that much of the unrest 
throughout the world that was labeled communism 
actually resulted from deep-seated maladjustments 
which several Popes of modern times have repeatedly 
recognized, urging secular society to correct them 
through timely reforms. Yet when such reforms did 
not take place—as for example in Spain—and frus 
trated people sought to achieve long-overdue changes 








= 


Gover 
was ni 
held 1 
in the 
that tl 
Eboué 
union 
istice 

de Gi 
unitec 
istrati 
a refc 


EB 


a nat 
Frenc 
deau: 
Scien 
ludes 
Mart 
has s 
toria 
have 


by revolution, the Vatican cast its political influence | lonia 
on the side of those who claimed to be fighting not | the / 
only revolution, but also anti-clericalism. This trend | cultv 
has laid the Vatican open to criticism from quarters | cott¢ 


other than Moscow. And that is why many people 
who are deeply religious, and have nothing but the | 
most profound respect for the high moral courage } 
displayed by members of the Catholic hierarchy in Eu- 
rope, most recently in the precincts of the Vatican 
itself, hope that at this critical hour the Vatican will 
incontrovertibly place itself on the side of the suffer- 
ing and disinherited millions who see nothing incom 
patible between religious belief and social change. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





French Parliament; (2) the creation of a Colonial | 
Assembly, to be located in France, which would act 
in an advisory capacity on colonial questions to the 
Ministry and Parliament; and (3) the creation of a ' 
Federal Chamber composed of representatives both | 
from France and the colonies. These resolutions must | 
await final sanction in France once the metropolitan 
area is reconquered and the French Committee of | 
Liberation has been succeeded by properly consti 
tuted authority. 
Any one of these proposals would indicate broader 
interest in colonial matters than existed in pre-waf 
France. The consultative assembly is not unknown in 
French colonial experience, but the proposal im | 


dicating a “federation” of colonial areas repte 


sents a new departure. If such a colonial policy is 
developed, it must be viewed in relation to the 
reforms and influence of Felix Eboué, at present 








mate 
ing | 
ernc 
colo 
Pub 
pose 
larg 
con: 
at | 
whe 
the 
con 


I 


| 





FO! 
Hez 


Sect 
one 


of 


| ate 
its 
Ties 


| to 


age 
> of 


inti. 





—_—— 
—_* 





Governor-General of French Equatorial Africa. It 
was no coincidence that the Colonial Conference was 
held in Brazzaville, where Eboué is stationed. It was 
in the Chad province of French Equatorial Africa 
that the Free French forces first gained support, for 
Fboué, then Governor, proclaimed that province in 
union with the de Gaulle forces shortly after the arm- 
istice of 1940 in France. In September 1940 General 
de Gaulle appointed Eboué Governor-General of a 
united French Equatorial Africa. Under his admin- 
istration, the long-neglected colony has experienced 


_ areformation that foreshadows future French policy. 








EBOUE—FRENCH ADMINISTRATOR. Eboué, 
a native of French Guiana, has long served in the 
French Colonial Service. After early training in Bor- 
deaux he was graduated from the School of Colonial 
Science in Paris. Since 1911—except for two inter- 
ludes during which he acted as Secretary-General of 
Martinique and as Governor of Guadeloupe—Eboué 
has spent the greater part of his life in French Equa- 
torial Africa. His long service and indefatigable work 
have made him one of the outstanding French co- 


| lonial administrators and a trusted representative of 


the Africans. He has an intimate knowledge of native 
cultures, and through his efforts the production of 
cotton, rubber and diamonds has been increased— 
materially contributing to raising the standard of liv- 


| ing in the colony. Following his appointment as Gov- 
, ernor-General, the resources and manpower of the 





_s 





colony have been harnessed to the cause of the Allies. 
Public works were quickly undertaken for this pur- 
pose. Pointe-Noire, the Atlantic port, was greatly en- 
larged and improved. Two trans-African roads were 
constructed and various airports completed, notably 
at Fort Lamy and Brazzaville. During the period 
when the Axis threat hung heavily over North Africa, 
the colony, due to its strategic position, provided wel- 
come bases on the route to the Middle East. 


Primarily, however, Eboué’s life interest has been 





PageThree 





For a 25-year survey of the foreign policy of the 

Vatican, as well as a record of its relations with 

Italy, Spain, Germany and the U.S.S.R., READ— 
FOREIGN POLICY OF THE VATICAN 


by Sherman S. Hayden 


25c 


January 15 issue of ForEIGN Poxicy Reports 
Reports are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















in the problems of native society, and it is here that 
his reforms will have their most telling effect. While 
it may be said that Eboué considers himself the repre- 
sentative of the French national idea and does not 
necessarily reflect the native’s position in any conflict 
of interests, it has been his consistent policy to con- 
serve political institutions as a means of preserving 
their cultural and moral traditions. This is a depar- 
ture from the “assimilation” theories that were the 
essence of previous French colonial policies. It does 
not imply a divergence, however, from those policies 
which so largely freed French colonial life from the 
effects of the color barrier. It involves, rather, full 
recognition of the problems inherent in raising the 
living standards within dependent areas. Eboué does 
not propose political independence, but a progressive 
development of native participation in local self- 
administration. In his words: “The native must be 
considered as a human being . . . capable of progress 
in the framework of his natural institutions, and 
probably lost if he is detached from this background. 
We must preserve his institutions, and develop his 
sense of dignity and responsibility.” 

The recent proposals of the Brazzaville conference 
must be viewed in the light of Eboué’s opinions re- 
g.rding colonial rule. Federation, new to French co- 
lonial thinking, would demand many innovations 
before it could become fully practicable, and such 
federation could be effected only after a period dur- 
ing which the various French colonies had been ad- 
ministered according to the gradual system elaborated 
by Eboué in French Equatorial Africa. 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 





The Road Back to Paris, by A. J. Liebling. New York, 
Doubleday, 1944. $3.00 


Keenly perceptive and thoughtful report on the people 
of Paris, London, New York and Oran during the period 
of the Allies’ struggle to gain the initiative against the 
Nazis. 


Clemenceau, by Geoffrey Bruun. Cambridge, Mass. Har- 
vard University Press, 1943. $3.00 


Scholarly and pertinent appraisal of the French leader 
in the light of recent events. It is the best biography of 
Clemenceau in English. 


War and Peace Aims of the United Nations, edited by 
Louise W. Holborn. Boston, World Peace Foundation, 
1943. $2.50 


Large and useful collection of statements on war and 
peace aims by representatives of all the United Nations 
from the outbreak of war to January 1948. Designed to 
indicate the growth of unity among the Allies. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 18, FasRUARY 18, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dran, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Bw 181 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











~ ee oes of 


Pred ee 
—— 


ee 





ee: 


a a a eee a 





~ 


Washington News Letter 




















Fes. 14.—Ever since the automobile displaced the 
horse and buggy, the United States economy in war 
and peace has depended on petroleum. The most 
optimistic reports now forecast that petroleum re- 
serves in this country will last 30 years; the most 
pessimistic predict 14 years. The resulting desirabil- 
ity of augmenting American production from abroad 
prompted the announcement on February 5 by Har- 
old L. Ickes, president of the Petroleum Reserves 
Corp., that the United States government plans to 
construct a 1,250-mile pipeline to carry oil from the 
rich fields of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, near the 
Persian Gulf, to the eastern Mediterranean shore. 
This project will cost between $130,000,000 and 
$165,000,000, and will be financed by the govern- 
ment in the form of a 25-year loan to the Arabian 
American Oil Co. (owned by Standard Oil of Cali- 
fornia and the Texas Oil Co.), which controls the 
Saudi Arabian field, and the Gulf Exploration Co. 
(owned by Gulf Oil Corp.), which controls the 
Kuwait field. The United States chiefs of staff and 
the Army-Navy Petroleum Board view the pipeline 
as a valuable source of supply, and the companies 
have agreed to maintain for 50 years a reserve of 
1,000,000,000 barrels for the military services. 

OIL AN INTERNATIONAL QUESTION. The 
need for Arabian oil stresses the international char- 
acter of this country’s economic position. The Amer- 
ican government’s proposal to finance construction 
of the pipeline is in itself an international undertak- 
ing fraught with great consequences, and implies a 
commitment on our part to protect the line if it is 
built. Maintenance of the pipeline would require a 
relationship of complete trust between the United 
States and Britain, in order that the two nations 
through joint action may contribute after the war to 
the continuance of peace in the Near East. 

The proposed pipeline would traverse the British 
mandated territory of Transjordan, and terminate in 
Egypt, where Britain enjoys special treaty rights, or 
possibly in Palestine. British Foreign Secretary An- 
thony Eden told the House of Commons on Febru- 
ary 9 that he had requested information on the Amer- 
ican plan from the British Embassy in Washington. 
Acting Secretary of State Edward R. Stettinius, Jr., 
announced on February 11 that talks on Near Eastern 
oil had been scheduled between the United States and 
Britain. Nor did he rule out the possibility that Rus- 
sia might be included. 

The war has placed a heavy drain on American 
petroleum reserves. The United States produced 67 


FOR VICTORY ° 





BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


per cent of world output in 1943, when consumption 
from this country’s fields amounted to 4,565,000 bar. 
rels a day. Estimates of reserves here range from } 
20,000,000,000 barrels, by vice president Wallace 
Pratt of the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey, tp 
50,000,000,000, by Deputy Petroleum Administrato; | @™ 
for War Ralph K. Davies. Synthetic oil can be made 
from coal, of which American reserves may last 3,000 
years. But the cost of this process is great. 
Estimated reserves abroad include 7,000,000,000} Vor. . 
barrels in the Caribbean area (Trinidad, Venezuels|~ 
and Colombia); 1,000,000,000 in the Netherlands 
East Indies; 25,000,000,000 in the Persian Gulf are | 
(Arabia, Iraq, Iran and Bahrein Islands); and un. T 
known quantities in Russia. Oil for the Allies was} ~ A 
produced last year in these areas and, in lesser quan-| Toky 
tities, in Mexico, Bolivia, Argentina, Ecuador, Brazil | is be 
and India; and for the Axis in Rumania, Poland, |\y, & 
Sakhalin Island and Formosa. Japan’s chief source is |" ! 
the Indies, which last year produced an estimated | !942 
18,000,000 barrels. Germany’s chief source is Rv- Durt 
mania, which before the war accounted for two per- been 
cent of world production but is believed to have de | 4 
clined since then. have 
American oil companies own holdings in Ven- |‘? ! 
ezuela, Colombia, Trinidad, Iraq, Bahrein Island, | “"* 
Iran, British India, the Netherlands Indies and China,| P!2"' 
as well as Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, and are develop-| “*" 
ing a considerable portion of the world petroleum} °"" 
resources that exist outside the United States and} “’° 
Russia. Until the present arrangement for a pipeline, ar 
the official United States policy was simply to insist re 
on “open door” privileges for American companies Y 
in all regions where other outside companies operate. | © 
This policy won admission of American companies | anes 
into Iraq over initial British opposition. | said 
AND A DOMESTIC QUESTION. On February 4m 
6 Republican Senator Edward H. Moore of Okla »Am 
homa, an oil man, challenged the pipeline arrange: | 
ment on the ground that it would lead to interna: |" 
tional complications that would be the “breeding | W 
places of future wars.” Senator Moore is a member) 8" 
of a subcommittee of the Senate Interstate Com: | “>I 
merce Committee which opened hearings on Febru: bo 
ary 15 on a resolution providing for the abolition of | 8 
the Petroleum Reserves Corp. Construction of the ' 
pipeline awaits negotiation with the governments of Si 
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, arrangements for a right | - 
of way, and decision about the point of outlet where,“ 
it is expected, a refinery will be built. | Por 
BLAIR BOLLES 








offe 
‘vit 





