LN 


ions’ vig 


> 


States ig 
ainst the 
vigorous 
1ce iS ac. 
y are go- 
n people 
‘ust upon 
ly is the 
one near 
Nn requisi- 
h of Oc 
be called 
Switzer- 
f of the 
ly visit to 
Mussolini 


re of the 
German 
h the in- 
- General 
his guer- 
Nazis are 
iS an “‘in- 
of it; to 
an coast; 
formerly 
y to con- 
roughout 


becomes 
got their 
intry into 
ant when 
culations 
uccession 
id Libya. 
s they did 
e Italians 
ishington 
t régime, 
ow. The 
is staked 
ow from 
in link in 


NDS 


FRRIGDIGAL ROOM 
GENERAL LIBRARS 
waly, oF mice 


General | brary 

Univ ‘ty of Michigay Entered as 2nd class matter 
R " a + 

Ann Arbor, Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XXII, No. 2 


OctoBer 30, 1942 


AFRICAN OFFENSIVE CREATES NEW INTEREST IN ALLIED WEAPONS 


N October 23, four days after Field Marshal 
Smuts of South Africa had declared that the 
defensive phase of the Allied war effort had come 
io an end, the Allies seized the offensive on the 
Egyptian front. Reports from Cairo indicate that, 
under cover of a sustained air attack and artillery 
barrage, British forces have penetrated Rommel’s 
first and second defense lines but that until the main 
tank forces clash the decision will remain in doubt. 
With the action in North Africa apparently 
marking the beginning of a general Allied offensive 
in the African, and ultimately the European, theatre 
of war, it is important to take stock of the aircraft 
and heavy mechanized equipment with which United 
Nations forces go into battle. Although President 
Roosevelt revealed on October 23 that attainment 
of his goal of 60,000 planes in 1942 had been sacri- 
feed for the sake of higher quality, there is no rea- 
son to doubt the assurance which Oliver Lyttelton, 
British Minister of Production, gave the same day in 
London when he declared that the United Nations 
had surpassed the total Axis output of aircraft. 
While no such statement has been made regarding 
Allied tank production, and President Roosevelt's 
goal of 45,000 tanks in 1942 has also been sacrificed 
largely as a result of the conversion from the M-3 
medium tank to the M-4, it seems safe to assume that 
the United States alone is now producing well over 
Germany’s estimated 1,600 a month. If British tank 
production has lagged behind expectations, it is prob- 
ably sufficient to counterbalance that of the occupied 
countries in Europe. 


PLANES AND TANKS COMPARED. In qual- 
ity the Allied position with respect to aircraft is clear- 
cut. The outstanding fact in the Office of War In- 
formation’s report of October 19 is that the United 
States and Britain between them have planes in every 
type which are equal or superior to the best the 
Nazis have to offer. In the high-altitude heavy 


bomber field the American Boeing B-17F and the 
Consolidated B-24D with their speed and unmatched 
armament are in a class by themselves, and there is 
no evidence as yet that Germany’s new high-altitude 
bomber, the Junkers 86-P, can compare with either 
of these American planes, let alone with the Consol- 
idated B-32 and the Boeing B-29 now under con- 
struction. In middle-altitude heavy bombers, the Brit- 
ish have the Lancaster, Sterling and Halifax—planes 
which can out-carry any other bomber now in use. 
Allied supremacy in the medium bomber class is 
probably not as decisive, since the Martin B-26 and 
the North American B-25 are rivalled by Germany's 
Dornier DO-17. Among light bombers the new Brit- 
ish Mosquito appears to be in the front rank, to- 
gether with the Douglas A-20 attack bomber. In the 
fighter class, the British Spitfire has filled in the gap 
left by the failure of the United States to produce a 
fighter capable of meeting the newest Messerschmitt 
109 and the new Focke-Wulf 190 at high altitudes 
over Britain. Recent models of the Curtiss P-40 and 
the Bell P-39 have, none the less, given an excellent 
account of themselves alongside British Hurricanes 
on the African front. 


Against an array of German tanks which includes 
the PzKw IV, a medium tank of 22 tons carrying a 
75 mm. gun (now in use by Rommel’s forces in 
Egypt), and the PzKw VII, a super-heavy tank of 
possibly 90 tons carrying a 105 mm. and two 47 mm. 
guns, the mainstay of Allied tank armies seems to be 
the American M-4 (General Lee), a 30-ton medium 
tank carrying a 75 mm. gun and several heavy ma- 
chine guns. But, in addition to the M-4, the United 
States is also building the T-6, a heavy tank of 60 
tons whose armament is at present secret but prob- 
ably includes a gun of at least 105 mm. The heaviest 
British tank now in use appears to be the 28-ton 
Waltzing Matilda (called the Churchill at Dieppe), 
carrying a 2-pounder gun and a Besa machine gun— 


armament which has proved too light for the gun- 
power of the German PzKw IV. The British also 
use the 16-ton Valentine and the 18-ton Crusader, the 
latter with a speed of over 30 miles an hour, but the 
same light armament. 

While it seems certain that the M-4 will stand up 
to the best the Germans have in medium tanks, it is 
not so clear that the British and Americans have as 
yet anything in the field to compare with the Ger- 
man self-propelled, 88 mm. dual-purpose gun. The 
British have made good use of their 25-pounder but, 
unless a change has been made very recently, it still 
does not move under its own power. When the new 


After weeks of cautious preparation for a counter- 
offensive, Japanese troops, using tanks and artillery 
and supported by planes and ships, have launched a 
drive to retake the American-held airfield on Guadal- 
canal island. The Battle of the Solomons, which 
began in early August as a limited offensive, has 
broadened out into a slugging match that will have 
important effects on the balance of power in the 
whole Far Eastern theatre of war. 

THRUST AND PARRY IN SOUTH SOLO- 
MONS. A minor enemy push against the western 
flank of our troops on Guadalcanal on October 20 
was followed, during the night of October 23-24, by 
four more attempts to penetrate the American lines. 
These were repulsed, as was an additional early 
morning attack on October 25, but the all-out Jap- 
anese drive soon began. During previous days 
United States bombers had twice attacked units of 
the Japanese fleet several hundred miles north of the 
island, damaging one light cruiser and one destroyer, 
and hitting several other vessels. On the morn- 
ing of October 25, Japanese transports landed fresh 
troops at the northwestern end of Guadalcanal. Later 
American dive-bombers made three attacks on enemy 
cruisers and destroyers north of near-by Florida 
island, inflicting damage on Japanese vessels. The 
following day, in an exchange of aerial blows, the 
U.S. destroyer Porter was sunk, one aircraft carrier 
severely damaged, and lesser injuries suffered by 
other American vessels, while hits were scored on 


Is London more anxious than Washington to begin 
the work necessary to carry into effect the common 
principles of post-war reconstruction? READ— 


As Britain Sees the Post-War World 


by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


October 15 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS afe issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


Page Two 


— 
———< 


American M-5, a 105 mm. gun mounted on an M4 
tank chassis, goes into use, however, it should moge 
than make up for this deficiency in Allied anti-tank 
weapons. The relative merits of some of these 
weapons will undoubtedly be more clearly revealed 
by the action on the North African desert, and ex. 
perience may well call for improvements. Probably 
the most that can be expected is that on the average 
we should have tanks and guns superior to the 
enemy's. Given this, and a stronger will to victory, 
our greater productive capacity should guarantee the 
ultimate defeat of the Axis. 
HowarbD P. WHIDDEN, Jr. 


two enemy carriers. Japanese bombers and fighters | 
have been attacking the Guadalcanal airfield, but 
with far greater losses than they have been able 
to mete out to the American planes with which they 
have clashed. 

In the midst of these operations, it was announced 
on October 24 that Vice Admiral William F. Halsey, 
Jr., had relieved Vice Admiral Robert L. Ghormley 
of command in the South Pacific. Although no ex 
planation was given, dissatisfaction was known to 
exist over the high cost paid by the United States 
Navy during the period after the initial offensive of 
August 7 had brought the marines ashore on Guadal- 
canal and other islands. United Nations shipping 
losses in the immediate waters, not including vessels 
damaged, greatly exceed those said to have been in- 
flicted on the Japanese Navy in the same area. The 
sinking of the 14,700-ton American aircraft carrie 
W asp on September 15, made public on October 27, 
is the latest setback so far announced. Criticism has 


arisen because of the circumstances under which cer- | — 


tain vessels were sunk: one Australian and three | 
American cruisers, for example, were lost on August 
9 in a hit-and-run raid by Japanese destroyers which 
had been sighted some time previously from the ait. 

CLARIFYING THE CAMPAIGN. The 


surrounding the fighting in the Solomons have been | 
dispelled somewhat by a series of articles in the 


musts | 


New York Times by Hanson W. Baldwin, military 
editor of that newspaper, who recently returned 
from a trip to the southwest Pacific, including Gua- 
dalcanal. According to his information, excessive 
ship losses resulted in large part from the adoption 
of a defensive naval strategy under which our ves- 
sels patrolled fixed positions, instead of ranging 
northward into Japanese waters to strike at the 
enemy or, at least, to deprive him of the advantage of 
surprise. Mr. Baldwin also comments on the existence 
of some bitterness between the Army air forces and 
the Navy, chiefly among the medium and junior regu 
lar officers—friction which has been encouraged by 
the emphasis of certain theorists on the displacement 


=—— 


of se 
diffic 
trali< 
of th 
cana 
Ches 
whil 
the 

he p 
close 
of C 


nigh 


} ping 


SHOWDOWN IN SOLOMONS MAY SHAPE COURSE OF PACIFIC WAR | 


an € 
addi 
dam 

T 
on ¢ 
Chit 
coal 
per! 
whi 
bas¢ 
Fou 
first 
hou 
mo! 


Clo 


——— 
———> 


n an M4 
uld more 
anti-tank 
of these 
revealed 
, and ex. 
Probably 
e average 
r to the 
> victory, 
antee the 


EN, JR. 


AR 


1 fighters 


held, but 
een able 
hich they 


nnounced 
'. Halsey, 
shormley 
th no ex 
nown to 
ed States 
ensive of 
1 Guadal- 
shipping 
ig. vessels 
been in- 
irea. The 
ft carrier 
tober 27, 
icism has 
thich cet 
nd three 
n August 
=rs which 
n the aif. 


he mists 
ave been 
s in the 
, military 
returned 
ing Gua 
excessive 
adoption 
Our vVes- 
ranging 
e at the 
antage of 
existence 
yrces and 
or regu- 
raged by 


ylacement 


—_ 
—_ 


of sea power by air power. He indicates some of the 
dificulties faced by General MacArthur in his Aus- 
tralian command and criticizes the arbitrary division 
of the Pacific area into two commands, with Guadal- 
canal and a wide range of islands under Admiral 
Chester W. Nimitz, Commander of the Pacific Fleet, 
while New Guinea, Australia and other areas lie in 
the territory of General MacArthur. Nevertheless, 
he points out that the two leaders have cooperated 
dosely, a fact attested to by the latter’s communiqué 
of October 26, reporting that in the three previous 
nights approximately 80,000 tons of Japanese ship- 
ping had been destroyed or badly damaged at Rabaul, 
an enemy base in New Britain, while at least 20,000 
additional tons were believed more or less seriously 
damaged. 


THE FRONT IN CHINA. American bombers 
on October 21 sailed into the northeastern corner of 
China, where they bombed important Japanese-held 
coal mines with considerable effect. The objective, 
pethaps significantly, was not far from Manchuria, 
which has been developed into a powerful industrial 
base by Japan during eleven years of occupation. 
Four days later United States bombers made their 
first raid on the Hongkong area, blasting docks, ware- 
houses and shipping. This was followed up the next 
morning by a second attack, in which the White 
Cloud airfield in near-by Canton was included. 

These limited forays are more than overshadowed 
by serious economic difficulties in China, for in the 
strategically located north central province of Honan 
the Chinese are experiencing one of their worst 
famines. As a result of a two-year drought, spring 
frosts, locust plagues, and a brief Japanese invasion 
of some districts a year ago (causing the abandon- 
ment of harvests), thousands are said to be dying 


THE F.P.A. 


Europe, Russia, and the Future, by G. D. H. Cole. New 
York, Macmillan, 1942. $2.00 
A candid analysis of the problem of post-war collabora- 
tion between Britain and the Soviet Union, with a strong 
argument for the socialist reconstruction of Europe. Al- 
though it often suffers from hasty writing, this book is an 
important contribution to a vital question. 


How the Jap Army Fights, by Paul W. Thompson, Harold 
Doud, and John Scofield. New York and Washington, 
Penguin Books and The Infantry Journal, 1942. $.25 
U.S. Army men discuss the Japanese Army’s organiza- 

tion, training and equipment, as well as certain features 

of the Japanese campaigns in China and Malaya. A brief, 
highly informative account. 


Europe in Revolt, by René Kraus. New York, Macmillan, 


Page Three 


each day, with millions on the verge of ‘starvation. 
The government at Chungking has reduced the 
Honan grain tax and is attempting to move as many 
people as possible to the northwest. Unfortunately, 
the poorly developed state of China’s transport sys- 
tem makes either a large-scale evacuation of civilians 
or the shipment of adequate food supplies impos- 
sible. Through this unexpected situation a new bur- 
den has been placed on China’s already overtaxed 
economic structure. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


UNITED NATIONS DISCUSSION GUIDE 

A discussion guide on the United Nations, pub- 
lished by three leading magazines, has been prepared 
by Vera Micheles Dean with the aid of the F.P.A. 
research staff in consultation with the U.S. Office of 
Education. This guide, issued in a first edition of 
300,000 copies by Time, Readers’ Digest and News- 
week—all of which have educational services—is 
being distributed free by the U.S. Office of Education, 
Washington, D.C., to superintendents of schools, 
teachers of English and social sciences, college war 
information centers, and leaders of adult education 
groups. Others interested in this discussion guide can 
obtain it through the Foreign Policy Association, 
which is distributing it—but only on request—as a 
supplement to its most recent HEADLINE Book, 
“United Today for Tomorrow,” by Grayson Kirk 
and Walter Sharp, the price of which is 25 cents. 


The discussion guide consists of five parts: I. Who 
Are the United Nations? II. Why Did These Na- 
tions Unite? III. What Are These Nations Fighting 
For? IV. What Are These Nations Doing to Win? 
and V. Can These Nations Stay United in Peace? 
In addition to text and charts on these five topics, the 
guide contains questions for discussion and reading 
references. 


BOOKSHELF 


sufferings and restive attitude of the conquered European 
countries. Its documentary value is somewhat diminished 
by the novelistic form of the narrative, but it makes at- 
tractive reading. 


The Axis Grand Strategy: Blueprints for the Total War, 
compiled and edited by Ladislas Farago. New York, 
Farrar and Rinehart, 1942. $3.75 
Numerous extracts from the voluminous Nazi and pre- 

Nazi literature on various aspects of total war, with ap- 

pended commentaries. More suitable for reference than for 

reading. 


The War at Sea, by Gilbert Cant. New York, John Day, 
1942. $3.00 


The author, naval expert for a New York newspaper, 
has assembled remarkably comprehensive data on all the 


( 9 QF ° 
1942. $3.50 important naval engagements of the war, through the end 
A good description of various “‘Quislings,” and the life, of 1941. 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 2, Ocroper 30, 1942. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leger, Secretary; VERA MicHELEs Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three 


Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


ee a 


a 


SS ee 


ee — eet 


Washington News Letter iio 


Oct. 26.—The attitude of the United States gov- 
ernment toward Vichy’s labor conscription policy 
was again emphatically set forth by Secretary of State 
Cordell Hull on October 21, when he issued a state- 
ment praising the French people for their resistance 
to it and classing Pierre Laval, its author, among the 
followers of Hitler. 


Mr. Hull’s considered remarks were apparently 
designed to serve a two-fold purpose. In the first 
place, they were doubtless intended to convey a 
grave warning to Laval that if his policy is carried 
out, it would be followed by a break in diplomatic 
relations between Washington and Vichy. On Sep- 
tember 15, the day following promulgation of the 
labor conscription act, Mr. Hull stated that “this ac- 
tion, if carried out, would be of such aid to our 
enemies as to be wholly inconsistent with France's 
obligations under international law.” Military circles 
in Washington consider that the sending of 150,000 
skilled workers to the Reich would be of more ma- 
terial aid to the Germans than handing over the 
French fleet to Hitler. 


GROWING FRENCH RESISTANCE. At the 
same time Mr. Hull’s statement is calculated to drive 
still deeper the wedge between Laval and the French 
people. The difficulties that the Chief of the Vichy 
government is encountering in carrying out his de- 
tested policy are increasing hourly. French workers, 
ordered to report for shipment to Germany, refuse 
to appear at the railway station at the scheduled time, 
thereby obliging General Otto von Stuelpnagel, Nazi 
commander in Paris, to issue a warning that, unless 
they comply, the authorities of occupation will use 
force. Protest strikes in France reached a climax last 
week when more than 10,000 workers, mostly from 
the railroad industries, quit their jobs. The pro- 
prietors of the famous Michelin tire plant at Cler- 
mont-Ferrand, who in the past have been leading 
financial supporters of the Fascist Croix de Feu, re- 
fused to allow government propaganda officials to 
enter their factories and urge workers to go to the 
Reich. On October 6 ten high officials of the Vichy 
Labor Ministry—which is headed by Mussolini’s 
friend, Hubert Lagardelle—resigned their posts. So 
great has been growing French resistance to the slave 
labor policy that the Nazis have extended the dead- 
line for their quota by four weeks, to the end of 
November. 


Laval’s task is to find roughly 133,000 skilled 
POR VICTORY ° 


French workers to toil in German munition plan 
as he is already reported to have sent some 17, 
men across the Rhine. In a broadcast on October 
Laval hinted that, unless the French volunteered for 
this service, Fritz Sauckel, Nazi labor commissioner, -_ 
would draft them himself. The established rate of 

exchange of three French workers for one French 

prisoner of war has not enhanced Laval’s reputation 

as a bargainer. The Nazis themselves are reported to = 3 
be becoming more and more dissatisfied with Laval’s —— 
failure to deliver the goods and to be grooming 

Jacques Doriot, former Communist demagogue, as 

his successor. In this connection, Laval’s dismissal of jr yy 
the notorious pro-Nazi, Jacques Benoist-Mechin, |} 55 
from his Cabinet on September 26, allegedly for plot | the 
ting with Doriot to take over the Vichy government, * ; 
is significant. pictu 


DARLAN’S MISSION TO DAKAR. Concomi- the / 
tant with the French internal crisis, tension ovet | ti 
Dakar steadily increases. Admiral Francois Darlan, |ofen 
Commander-in-Chief of the French armed forces, }he p 
flew to that key French West African port, it was 
announced from Vichy on October 22, with a mes- |have 
sage from Marshal Pétain telling the colony to resist | jy. 
any attack as it did that of the British and de Gaullists } pay. 
in September 1940. All reports from Vichy suggest | ck 
that am imminent attack on Dakar, to be deliv-} 7 
ered by an Anglo-America force, is expected shortly. | ig, 


But a dispatch from Berne offers a totally different } the 
theory for the Darlan mission. It states that the situ- plas 
ation in unoccupied France has become so acute that }Rus 
Vichy Cabinet members were ordered to be prepared dist 
to leave the French provisional capital on 24 hours’ Jan 
notice, adding that Admiral Darlan has been sent to | Sta 
Dakar to study the possibility of using French West } po) 
Africa as the seat of government if Nazi pressure } tie 
to send workmen to Germany leads to chaos in | jh, 
France. That this is not so improbable as it sounds 
at first is indicated by a dispatch, gotten out of Vichy | ch 
three days previously, stating that Marshal Pétain | tel 
has “‘persistently” refused to deliver a radio speech } gis 
which had been prepared for him, appealing for | jp 
skilled workers to go to the Reich. 

A denouement such as the departure of the Vichy } to 
government to Africa would produce an extraordi- | he 
nary situation. The Germans in that event would | of 
certainly occupy the rest of France. And a self-exiled 
Vichy government would be installed in strategic | t 


Dakar. JOHN ELLIOTT ci 


fava 


d 
BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS bd 


