= 
S it 
eat. 
viet 
1ent 


the 
ree. 
anal 
} in- 
the 


in 4 
e as 
cers, 
y of 
stey 
eign 





egu: 
Coal 


gure 
that 
unce 
sury 
ts in 


ther. 


ts as 
oviet 
nt of 
sited 
1 im. 
vhich 
stert 
[ER 


Toyn 
936, ! 


Heald, 


refer 
yymat. 
, deal 
stress 
yposalt 
[taliat 
scrip 
Vol 
onflict, 
sembly 
paniol 
kes its 
ch cal 
ess t 


——— 
Nation# 
, Edita 


ir. 





J FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vout. XVI, No. 43 


AvucusT 20, 1937 





MEXICO’S CHALLENGE TO FOREIGN CAPITAL 


by Charles A. Thomson 


A number of signs point toward a possible stiffening of 
Washington’s cordial attitude toward Mexico as a conse- 
quence of recent policies of the Cardenas administration. 
This report deals with the widespread expropriation of agri- 
cultural lands in Mexico, the gradual extension of state 
socialism, and the advancing program of labor legislation. 


August 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 














Dr. William W. Bishop 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











THE SECOND BATTLE OF SHANGHAI 





OPE that the hostilities begun six weeks ago 
would be peacefully compromised, or at least 
localized, has been ended by the tragic events of 
Shanghai. Today China and Japan seem to have 
embarked on a general war, which apparently 
has arisen out of events which the Japanese gov- 
ernment did not anticipate. 

From all appearances, Tokyo’s original pro- 
gram was directed merely toward establishing 
puppet governments in North China, converting 
these provinces into a second Manchoukuo. On 
August 8, 3000 Japanese troops triumphantly 
marched into Peiping, while planes dropped leaf- 
lets informing the Chinese population that the 
Japanese army—now numbering about 45,000 men 
in North China — would protect them against 
Nanking. At the same time Japanese officers 
issued orders forbidding the teaching of Sun Yat 
Sen’s Principles in the schools and suppressing 
hationalist newspapers. During the same period 
Japanese columns began to march southward, de- 
manding the withdrawal of Nanking troops from 
southern Hopei. A Japanese spokesman declared 
that the “continued concentration of Chinese 
troops north of the Yellow River means hostili- 
ties....” In an effort to absorb Chahar province 
and to cut communications between Hopei and 
Soviet Russia, Japanese troops also moved toward 
Nankow. The Japanese government on August 7 
took the unprecedented action of abandoning its 
concession in Hankow, located in the interior of 
central China, while generally evacuating its na- 
tionals from the Yangtze valley. By means of this 
strategy, Tokyo apparently hoped to seize North 
China as easily as it seized Manchuria in 1931. 

The Nanking government, however, would not 
acquiesce in this program. Following confer- 
ences with political and military leaders from 
every part of the country, General Chiang Kai- 
shek announced that China would yield no further 
territory “even though this means fighting in- 


adequately and to the death.” Much to Japan’s 
surprise, troops rushed by the Central Govern- 
ment from Suiyan province offered severe resis- 
tance at Nankow pass to the Japanese column en- 
tering Chahar. Despite reinforcement from Man- 
choukuo, Japan has not yet succeeded in dominat- 
ing the pass. 

Any possibility of a peaceful settlement of the 
North China affair was dashed with the new de- 
velopments in Shanghai. On August 10 an offi- 
cer and a seaman of the Japanese navy were 
killed by members of the Chinese Peace Preserva- 
tion Corps, near the Hungjoa airdrome. In the 
diplomatic clash that at once ensued, Mayor O. K. 
Yui agreed to punish the guilty and make an 
apology should it be established that the Chinese 
had been responsible; but he refused to accept 
the Japanese demand that the Peace Preservation 
Corps be withdrawn from Shanghai. Negotia- 
tions were interrupted when the Japanese navy, 
jealously eager to equal the exploits of the Jap- 
anese army, suddenly moved 20 warships into the 
Whangpoo river, joining 12 vessels already there. 
At the same time, about 7000 Japanese marines 
were landed in Shanghai, within the International 
Settlement. In reply, Chinese authorities moved the 
German-trained 87th and 88th divisions, contain- 
ing about 30,000 crack troops, into the Shanghai- 
Woosung area, bordering on the International 
Settlement. To the Japanese contention that this 
concentration violated the 1932 agreement con- 
cluded after the “first Shanghai war,” China re- 
plied that Japan had already torn this agreement 
to shreds by moving its warships into Shanghai 
harbor and landing its troops. Both the Chinese 
and Japanese assured the authorities of the In- 
ternational Settlement that neither would open 
hostilities unless first attacked. 

Nevertheless, on August 13 the first fighting 
occurred when a Japanese naval party invaded 
Chapei. On the same day the Tokyo cabinet voted 


% University of Michigan Library 


ee 


1 
9 
i 
" i 
4 








ie OS ree od 


- 5 F r 
aE hes FE FRI Be ie 


ah» Oo Soe 














—— 


to open “negotiations” to induce Nanking to drop 
its “provocative” attitude. Underestimating the 
military strength and courage of Nanking, Tokyo 
no doubt hoped that the mere presence of its 32 
ships and 7000 men would force Chiang to come 
to terms over North China. But the Generalis- 
simo could not acquiesce as he did in 19382. On 
the 14th fighting continued, with the Japanese 
warships and trench mortars firing steadily upon 
the Chinese positions, inviting replies from Chi- 
nese artillery and planes which, despite cloudy 
weather, endeavored to bomb the Japanese flag- 
ship Izwmo and other vessels lying in the Whang- 
poo river, only a few hundred yards from 
the Bund. Whether by mistake or accident, sev- 
eral Chinese bombs intended for these ships were 
dropped in the most populous part of the Inter- 
national Settlement, killing 1142—mostly Chinese 
—and injuring 1400 more. Eighteen foreigners 
were killed, including three Americans. The 
Americans and the British, thoroughly aroused 
by this bombing, protested strongly to the Nan- 
king government, which tendered an apology. It 
was quite clear, however, that so long as Japan 
continued to use the International Settlement as a 
basis of military operations, the 37,000 foreign- 
ers in Shanghai would remain in grave danger. 
While Japan rejected British and American re- 
quests that Shanghai be neutralized, it moved the 
Izumo to the other side of the river. On August 15 
Tokyo formally declared that “Japan’s forbear- 
ance has reached its limit. We are compelled to 
take drastic action to chastise the violence and 
outrage of the Chinese army.” On the next day 
the Japanese forces began a concerted attack 
against the Chinese in Shanghai, by means of 
planes, warships and troops, and a fierce battle 
is now raging. 

The diplomatic representatives of the United 
States are making strenuous efforts to protect or 
evacuate the 4000 Americans living in Shanghai, 
being assisted by 39 warships and 1050 marines. 
A similar policy is being adopted by other foreign 
powers. Meanwhile, the spread of hostilities be- 
tween China and Japan undoubtedly increases the 
danger of a general world war. So long as Soviet 
Russia, the foreign power most vitally affected, 
remains aloof, the conflict probably will not 
spread. But if Soviet Russia acts, then Germany, 
bound to Japan by the anti-Communist agree- 
ment of November 1936, may be tempted to strike 


in Europe. RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


THE BRAZILIAN NAVY EPISODE 
Widespread opposition at home and abroad 
caused Secretary Hull on August 13 to withdraw 
his proposal, submitted to Congress a week ear- 
lier, for leasing to Latin American states over-age 


= Page Two 








—— 
—_ 


and decommissioned destroyers. The resolution, 
presented by Senator David I. Walsh, chairman 
of the Naval Affairs Committee, authorized the 
President to “lease destroyers to the governments 


of the American republics under such terms and 


conditions as he may prescribe,” compensation 
being “the total cost of marine insurance on the 
vessels involved for the entire period of the lease,” 
This general resolution was inspired by a desire 
to lease six destroyers to Brazil, to be used only 
for training purposes in peacetime, subject to re. 
call at any time by the United States. 


Apparently fearing German penetration in this 
area, Secretary Hull wrote to Senator Walsh that 
“the desire on the part of some nations for access 
to raw materials and the forceful action taken by 
those nations to consummate these desires have 
made Brazil, a country of vast territory and rela- 
tively small population, particularly apprehen- 
sive.” Under the general leasing scheme the Navy 
Department would be enabled to keep many of 
its 160 over-age destroyers in existence as auxili- 
ary ships without the cost of maintenance. Ameri- 
can shipbuilders would be aided in so far as the 
plan formed an opening wedge for new construc- 
tion on behalf of Latin American republics. The 
plan was designed furthermore to augment Amer- 
ican diplomatic prestige by expanding the “good 
neighbor” policy into the naval field. 

Opposition arose immediately in the Argentine, 
where Foreign Minister Saavedra Lamas attacked 
the plan as violating the London naval treaty of 
1936, which stated that no signatory “shall, by 
gift, sale or any mode of transfer, dispose of any 
surface vessels of war or submarines in such a 
manner that such vessel may become a surface 
vessel or a submarine in any foreign navy.” He 
declared that if any danger to Brazil exists, it 
should be met through consultation under the 








Buenos Aires agreements. Moreover, the lease of | 


destroyers to Brazil, it was argued, would upset 
the naval balance in South America and begin a 
costly arms race. American newspapers pointed 
out that the United States itself might be danger- 
ously involved if a leasing state refused to return 
its ships in event of war, or if it employed them to 
repress revolution. The Berlin press was reported 
as vigorously resenting the insinuation of Secre- 
tary Hull that Germany had imperialist designs 
on Brazil. 


The withdrawal of the leasing proposal marked 
not only a retreat by the State Department, but 
at least a temporary set-back in the improved re- 
lations of the United States and Latin American 
republics, evoking disappointment in Brazil and 
hostility in the Argentine. 

JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 43, Aucust 20, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lusiie Bugit, President; Estumr G. Ocpgn, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dgan, Eéitor, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Fore 


— 
case 





