



— 


and. 
ela. 
the 
Ipal 
ece. 
has 
OMm- 
atin 
ave, 
ican 
hich 
> in- 
ally 
the 
ad a 
edi. 
ther 
ting 


rob- 
e in 
- oil 
new 
tput 
the 
inst 
1an- 
met 
t in 
62,- 
rom 
loss 
arly 
for 


ubt- | 


ined 
r, is 
hich 
s of 
ex: 
5 of | 
only 
out 





yer, 
[um- 


ffer- 


tional 


ditor. 








REIGN POLICY BULLETIN ra 
F Entered as - 
; tati urrent international events by the Research Staff class matter December 
Sal fo ae ‘ Hi ’ : 2, 1921, at the Post 
eio0! LIBRARY Subscription, Two Dollars a Year Office at New York, 
NBRAL N. Y., under the act 


wiv. OF MBOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 









of March 3, 1879. 














You. XVIII, No. 44 


AvuGustT 25, 1939 





—_— 


EUROPE IN RETREAT 
by Vera Micheles Dean 
$2.00 
. a handbook for all who would look behind 


today’s headlines." —Yale Review. The revised edition 
(July 1939) throws new light on post-Munich events. 


FPA members ordering through Headquarters receive a 10% discount. 


General Library 
University of Michigan 
Mich. 


Ann Arbor, 











EUROPE MOVES TOWARD A SHOWDOWN 





HE announcement that the Soviet Union would 

conclude a non-aggression pact with Germany 
on August 23 has thrown the European picture into 
complete confusion. Coming hard on the heels of 
a Soviet-German trade pact, it indicates that the 
Kremlin has at last decided not to cooperate with 
Franco-British efforts to organize a united front 
against further aggression by Hitler. Reassured by 
Soviet neutrality, the Reich can now proceed with 
its plans to force an early showdown with Poland. 
During the past week 250,000 German troops are 
reported to have been massed along the Polish 
frontier in Slovakia. In lurid colors the German 
press has been painting the persecution of Poland's 
“defenseless” German minority, thousands of whom 
are said to be fleeing to the Reich. In both official 
quarters and the press a compromise is no longer 
held possible; Germany now wants not only Dan- 
zig, but the Polish Corridor as well. 


POLAND IN A VISE. Germany is disposing its 
military forces so as to inflict a smashing defeat on 
Poland. From Pomerania it threatens to move across 
the Corridor, severing Warsaw from its access to 
the sea; from East Prussia, which is today an armed 
camp, it is in a position to strike at the capital; and 
from the Bohemia-Moravia Protectorate German 
troops can surround Polish Upper Silesia and push 
on to Poland’s new industrial and arms-manufactur- 
ing center situated about 100 miles from the fron- 
tier. Another invasion could be attempted from 
Slovakia, although only a few passes lead across the 
high Carpathian and Tatra mountain ranges into 
Poland. The German army in Slovakia might, in 
fact, prove more useful in a campaign against Hun- 
gary and Rumania. Should war break out, Germany 
would immediately have to establish control over 
all of southeastern Europe which it plans to use as a 
teservoir of foodstuffs and raw materials. Despite 





denials from Budapest, little doubt remains that 
Count Csaky, Hungary's Foreign Minister, has 
agreed to put the country’s small army, railways and 
economic resources unreservedly at the disposal of 
the Axis powers. 

Surrounded on almost every side, the Poles are 
now in a precarious plight. Able to put two million 
well-trained men in the field, they neither needed nor 
wanted the Russian army to fight on its soil. But 
both Warsaw and London realized that Poland's 
staying power would be impaired in the end by lack 
of adequate reserves of war supplies and its weak- 
ness in tanks and airplanes unless the Soviet Union 
was prepared to cover these deficiencies. Now that 
this possibility is apparently ruled out, Poland must 
rely on its own scanty resources. With the example 
of the Czechs before their eyes, the Poles may decide 
to fight anyway, hoping that the British and French 
may be forced to intervene and, in the ensuing 


struggle, wear Germany out through a long war of 
attrition. 


MORE “APPEASEMENT”? In London and Paris 
news of the Soviet-German pact was received with 
dismay, the more so because it came while British 
and French missions were still in Moscow discuss- 
ing terms of military cooperation. The factors 
prompting the Kremlin’s sudden about-face are 
shrouded in mystery. Unquestionably Moscow te- 
mained — or claimed to be — skeptical of Britain’s 
sincerity. The Soviet government apparently re- 
sented London’s unwillingness to support without 
qualification any Russian efforts to counteract “in- 
direct aggression,” although it is difficult to see how 
Britain could have given Moscow carte blanche to 
intervene in the Baltic states against their expressed 
will. Under these circumstances the Kremlin evi- 
dently decided to stand aside, supremely confident 
that Russia’s own defenses and the vastness of its 












territory would provide ample protection against 
possible invasion 7 Germany. 

Despite its new agreement with the Reich, the 
Soviet Union is unlikely to give Berlin much direct 
assistance. In the trade accord concluded on Au- 
gust 20, it has agreed to supply Germany during the 
next two years with raw materials valued at 180 
million marks, but this amount represents only a 
very small proportion of German requirements. 
Moreover, Germany has had to give an undertaking 
to furnish 200 million marks worth of machines 
against credits extending over seven and a half 
years. In the end, however, this agreement may pave 
the way for much closer cooperation between two 
countries whose régimes resemble each other in many 
respects. 

Whether Moscow’s “perfidy” will induce Britain 
and France to retreat from their commitments in 
Eastern Europe is still uncertain. At any rate it will 
probably strengthen those forces who wish to com- 
promise the German-Polish conflict without resort 
to war. This time offers of “appeasement’”’ may come 
from the Pope or from the conference of the Scan- 
dinavian and Low Countries which King Leopold of 
Belgium suddenly called on August 21. Yet any 
attempt to “appease” Germany now would only be 
interpreted in Berlin as a sign of weakness. Germany 
already has made clear that a conference could 
have but one purpose—to arrange the peaceful 
transfer of Danzig, and perhaps the Corridor, to 
the Reich. It could not appease the appetite of the 
Axis powers for more Lebensraum, but would 
simply encourage them to pursue with even greater 
vigor their present policy of threats and violence. At 
this time it would therefore be suicidal for Britain 
and France to abandon their new course of resistance 


tO aggression. JOHN C. DEWILDE 


TOKYO CONFERENCE NEARS COLLAPSE 

Differences between Japan and Britain regarding 
the more fundamental issues at stake in the Tokyo 
negotiations now threaten to disrupt the month-old 
conference, which has been conducted on the basis 
of the Craigie-Arita formula of July 24 recogniz- 
ing Japan’s “military necessities” in China. Ambas- 
sador Craigie’s express refusal on August 18 to en- 
gage in bilateral discussion of Japan’s economic de- 
mands affecting North China constituted the first 
determined step taken by Britain in the Tientsin 
dispute. Recent consultations with the United States 
and France, the results of which have been kept 
strictly secret, apparently fortified Britain’s decision 


Page Two 








—— 
— 


to reject Japan’s pressure for extensive concessions 
in the Far East. . 

Japan’s diplomats have succeeded in winning 
merely a few opening skirmishes at the Tokyo cop. 
ference. Britain agreed to surrender the four Chinese 
allegedly implicated in the murder of a customs 
official of the Japanese-dominated government ip 
North China. It was also prepared to admit the Jap. 
anese to a certain amount of participation in the 
policing of the British Concession at Tientsin. Japan's 
negotiators then demanded that Britain surrender 4g 
million worth of silver deposited by the Chinese na. 
tional government in the Tientsin Concession, and 
prevent the Chinese national currency from circu. 
lating within Concession limits. Contending thar 
these demands affected the interests of all power 


in China, the British government took time for dip. | 


lomatic soundings at Paris and Washington. The 
net outcome was Britain’s refusal of August 18 tw 
engage in bilateral discussion of such economic is. 
sues with Japan, although the possibility of further 
talks was not ruled out provided that the views of 
“all interested powers” were taken into account 
For its part the Japanese Foreign Office insisted— 
on August 21—that economic questions at Tientsin 
were of purely Anglo-Japanese concern, and rejected 
participation of third parties in the discussion. 
These statements have not closed the door to 
further negotiations. The relatively mild tone of the 
Japanese Foreign Office reflects a caution induced by 
an unwillingness to risk solidifying the Anglo- 
American front in the Far East. It is now the turn 
of the Japanese army to apply further pressure in 
China. Severe floods at Tientsin have forced sus- 
pension of the blockade, but new possibilities of 
serious difficulty have arisen at Shanghai and Hong- 
kong. Following a shooting affray at Shanghai on 
August 19, in which two Chinese policemen of the 
local “‘puppet”” government were killed by a British 
sergeant, Japan’s military and naval commanders 
met to plan their course of action. At Hongkong, 
meanwhile, Japanese military occupation of border 
areas on the mainland raised fears that a blockade 
might be declared against the Colony. Fuel for 4 
continuance of Japan’s guerrilla campaign against 
the Western powers thus lies ready to hand all along 


China’s coast. T. A. BIsson 


The Far East in World Politics, by G. F. Hudson. New 
York, Oxford University Press, 1939. $3.00 
A new edition of an able summary of Far Eastern 
politics during the past century. The final chapter has 
been enlarged and rewritten to include the events of the 
current Sino-Japanese war. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 44, AuGust 25, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Legr, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office «at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


jw 181 





F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








FC 


Ani 


— 
VoL. . 
— 


\ 





