








1 steps 
in Em 


barter 
eN OC 
nlikely 
OVINE 
> grant 
merely 
nt. On 
be able 
1 food 
ng if 


ommit 
ywevel, 
lomacy 
ent of 


cal ob 


‘ONE 








; ink gold 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Ap 


‘ oe es ws 
git ii '* 
~ ~ J 4 *4+CL Ean 


ll iy, 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XX, No. 25 


— 


Apri 11, 1941 





GERMANY INVADES YUGOSLAVIA AND GREECE 


ey 'S invasion of Yugoslavia and Greece 
on April 6 opened a new phase in the European 
war, involving the whole Balkan peninsula in hostil- 
ities and enhancing the importance of the Mediter- 


| ranean as a theatre of conflict. Chancellor Hitler’s 


proclamation of war, which followed by a few hours 
the announcement in Moscow of a treaty of friend- 
ship and nonaggression between Yugoslavia and the 
Soviet Union, placed entire responsibility for the ex- 
tension of hostilities on Britain, ‘the greatest war- 
monger of all time.’’ Denouncing the new Yugoslav 
government of General Dusan Simovitch as a “band 
of rufans,”’ Hitler promised to fight on until “the 
last Briton has found his Dunkerque in Greece.” 


MILITARY POSSIBILITIES. Although the re- 
ports of military operations in the Balkans are meager 


| and vague, Germany is apparently seeking at the out- 


set to divide the Yugoslav army, to drive a wedge 
between Yugoslavia and Greece, and to capture 
Salonika. Yugoslavia is reported to have mobilized 
more than a million men, of whom perhaps 700,000 
are effectives, and to have disposed its six armies (or 
amy corps) as follows: two along the Sava and 
Danube rivers west and east of Belgrade, two near 
Nish and Skoplje farther south, one along the Al- 
banian frontier, and one in reserve near Serajevo. 
Since the great plain extending across the north- 
western part of the country and surrounding Bel- 
grade is vulnerable to invasion, initial German suc- 
cesses may be expected. The government, which has 
established a new capital in the south, plans to with- 
draw its troops gradually to the mountainous area. 
During the World War, the Serbian forces were not 
driven out of these extremely rugged mountains until 
late 1915, after which the remnants of the army es- 
caped through Albania to Corfu and then assembled 
later at Salonika. By striking quickly at Belgrade, 
Nish and Skoplije, the Germans probably hope to shat- 
tet the Yugoslav forces before they can be consol- 


idated to attack Albania and assist Greece. Ger- 
many was reported, moreover, to have sent four 
Tyrolean divisions into Italy to help defend ‘Albania. 

To meet Germany's expected offensive against 
Greece, Great Britain for many weeks has been for- 
tifying the island of Lemnos, strengthening the 
Greek air defenses, and concentrating men and ma- 
terial near Salonika, Greece’s key port near the mouth 
of the Vardar river on the Aegean Sea and an Allied 
base throughout the World War. In addition to con- 
voying an estimated three divisions into Salonika, 
Britain is said to have landed fully equipped troops 
at Yugoslav ports on the Adriatic. If these reports 
are true, Britain may place bases on the Dalmatian 
coast for invading Albania and striking directly at 
Italy. For the present, probably the most important 
task confronting Britain and its Allies is the defense 
of the Struma river, which runs southward through 
Bulgaria and Thrace, entering the Aegean about 
halfway between the ports of Salonika and Kavalla. 
The Nazis were reported on April 8 to have reached 
the Aegean, seeking to divide the Turks and the 
Greeks, secure a foothold for striking at Salonika, 


and perhaps discourage Turkey from entering the 
war. 


PROBLEMS FOR GERMANY. Yugoslavia’s re- 
sistance creates many new problems for Germany, 
which had hoped to avoid hostilities in the Balkans, 
not only because of possible danger to its vital sup- 
plies of foodstuffs and raw materials, especially Ru- 
manian oil, but also because of its reluctance to create 
an ‘eastern front.” [itler, who in Mein Kampf criti- 
cized the Kaiser for fighting simultaneously in the 
West and East, had avoided such encirclement until 
Italy's ill-fated campaign in Greece gave Britain its 
first opportunity to regain a foothold on the Conti- 
nent. When Yugoslavia, whose railways were needed 
for any German attempt to oust British air and naval 
forces from Greece, finally rejected Berlin’s demands, 














Hitler failed for the first time to gain his ends by 
diplomacy alone. Yugoslavia’s ability to maintain its 
national unity and spirit of resistance were due in 
part to the action of Vladimir Matchek, leader of the 
Croat peasant party, who agreed on April 3 to enter 
the Simovitch government as Vice-Premier—appar- 
ently in return for greater autonomy for Croatia and 
wider Croatian influence in the government. 


The reaction of neighboring countries to the new 
Balkan conflict may create additional difficulties for 
Germany. Suspicion and dissatisfaction were aroused 
in Hungary on April 3, when the veteran Premier, 
Count Teleki, committed suicide, presumably because 
he had been confronted with a German ultimatum 
for collaboration in the attack on Yugoslavia, with 
which Hungary had signed a treaty of friendship last 
December 12. Far more significant repercussions may 
occur in Turkey, which has repeatedly warned that it 
will defend the Straits and its ‘‘zone of security in 
Europe’’—but without defining that zone—and has 


Page Two 








i 
Ls 


engaged in preliminary joint defense conversations 
with Britain, Greece and Yugoslavia. The Soviet. 
Yugoslav friendship and nonaggression treaty ap. 
nounced on April 6 and the veiled pro-Yugoslav atti. 
tude of the Moscow press suggest, moreover, that the 
Soviet Union may use its diplomatic influence againg 
the Axis. 

BRITAIN’S AIMS. For Great Britain success og 
the eastern front is vital, since only by holding its 
position in the Mediterranean can Britain continye 
its blockade of the Continent, divert Nazi troops and | 
airplanes from Western Europe, and maintain the | 
prestige that is so important a factor in warfare. Brit 
ain’s chances of resistance in the critical months 
ahead, when renewed air raids and submarine cam. 
paigns may make the margin between victory and 
defeat exceedingly narrow, will be profoundly af 
fected—as in the World War—by the turn of events 
in the Balkans. 

JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





BRITAIN SEEKS TO STABILIZE AFRICAN FRONTS 


The difficulties faced by British and Allied forces 
in the Balkans, where men and matériel in great 
quantity are needed for a successful drive against 
the Nazis, is reflected in recent developments on 
two African fronts. In Libya the British have re- 
treated before superior German-Italian forces, while 
in East Africa they are rushing to complete the cap- 
ture of the remaining Italian armies, so that some 
additional troops may be released for the Balkan 
campaign. 

Contrary to the widely held impression that Hitler 
would not risk sending important contingents to 
Africa, where communication lines across the Medi- 
terranean might be interrupted by the British navy, 
it is now established that two or three Nazi divisions, 
including mechanized units and supported by aircraft, 
are now operating in Libya. These units (which the 
British hint may have been brought in with French 
connivance) serve to stiffen the remnants of the 
Italian army, numbering from 50,000 to 100,000. 


With part of the Imperial Army of the Nile al- 
ready sent to Greece, the British were forced to yield 
Benghazi on April 3 and Derna, 175 miles to the east, 
on April 8. Although the early withdrawals in Libya 
were described by the British as strategic in nature, it 





What pcoblems loom on Japan’s domestic 
horizon? Read: 


JAPAN’S “NEW STRUCTURE” 
by T. A. Bisson 


25¢ 


April 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 











is now apparent that the Axis forces threaten Egypt | 
Britain may have to withdraw troops from Greece 
to protect the Suez Canal, which remains the keystone 
of Britain’s defensive structure in the eastern Medi- 
terranean. 


BRITISH ANTICIPATE COLLAPSE IN EAST | 
AFRICA. With the capitulation of Addis Ababa 
on April 6, the Italians in East Africa are left with 
only two centers of resistance—Massawa in Eritrea 
and Gondar in the northern Ethiopian highlands. 
British, Allied, and patriot forces now hold all of 
Italian Somaliland, most of British Somaliland, half 
of Eritrea, and half of Ethiopia, and they expect to | 


complete their conquest soon. 


British leaders have already begun to discuss the 
future of Ethiopia, and in their plans for reconstrue 
tion in East Africa may be discerned the outlines of 
some of the peace aims which the British Cabinet has 
steadfastly refused to formulate. Attempting to em 
courage the Ethiopians to revolt against Italy, the 
British Foreign Office on July 11, 1940 declared that 
Emperor Haile Selassie’s régime would be recognized 
as the lawful government of Ethiopia and that the 
country would be assured of its independence when 
the war was won. However, subsequent evasive pro 
nouncements of Cabinet spokesmen and suggestions 
in British conservative journals that Italy should be 
allowed to retain Ethiopia if it made a separate peace 
led British liberals to fear that Ethiopian freedom 
might be sacrificed in a move for appeasement. 

The government's position was clarified on Feb 
ruary 4, 1941, when Mr. Anthony Eden, then Foreign 
Secretary, stated that Britain would welcome the ft 
appearance of an independent Ethiopian state with 





ations 
OViet- 
‘YY an. 
V atti. 
at the 
Sainst 


CSS On 
ng its 
ntinue 
DS and 
in the 
>. Brit. 
10nths 
> Cam- 
Yy and 


lly af. 


events 


EEN 


Egypt. 
reece 
ystone 
Med- 


EAST 





Ababa / 


t with 
Eritrea 
lands, 
all of 
d, half 
pect to 


iss the 
nstruc 
ines of 
ret has 
to ef- 
ly, the 
-d_ that 
nized 
vat the 
> when 
ye pro 
estions 
uld be 
> peace 
‘eedom 
rent. 

n Feb 
‘oreign 
the fe 
‘e with 








ee 
— 





Haile Selassie as its ruler. But, in view of the re- 
tarded political and social development of the peoples 
of Ethiopia, it was deemed necessary to provide the 
Emperor with outside “assistance and advice.” The 
character of this aid is to be determined by interna- 
tional agreement at the close of the war. 

Although critics may brand “assistance and advice” 
as a cloak for British control, it must be admitted 
that Ethiopia cannot be expected to stand unaided in 
the community of nations for some time to come. The 

oples of the country differ in background and de- 
velopment. Amharas, the Coptic Christian tribe, have 
dominated Ethiopia in recent decades from their 
homes in the central highlands. They have treated 
as feudal serfs the Moslem Somalis and pagan Gallas 
living in the periphery of their kingdom. Haile 
Selassie was only beginning to introduce modern 
forms, strengthen the central government, and 
abolish slavery when his country was conquered by 
Italy in 1936. Out of the confusion caused by two 


Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: THE BALKAN CAMPAIGN 
Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 

Date: Sunday, April 13, 1941 

Time: 2:15 p.m., E.S.T. 

Station: NBC, blue network 











wars and five years of Italian occupation, the Em- 
peror must attempt to organize a government which 
will be able to fulfill its obligations to its own people, 
to the neighboring British and French colonies, and 
to the 200,000 colonists who were brought over from 
Italy. 

The British are faced with the problem of striking 
a nice balance in granting independence to Ethiopia 
and yet retaining a measure of control. All of native 
Africa and the Near East will be closely watching the 
evolution of British policy in Ethiopia, and their fu- 
ture attitude toward Britain will be conditioned by 


its success or failure. Louis E. FRECHTLING 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


| Behind God’s Back, by Negley Farson. New York, Har- 


court, Brace, 1941. $3.50 


Mr. Farson has written a revealing account of an ex- 
tensive journey throughout Africa. He discusses with con- 
siderable penetration the problem of the Union of South 
Africa, British, French and Belgian colonial policies, and 
has much to say about German colonists in the Reich’s 
former colonies. 


Wartime Control of Prices, by Charles O. Hardy. Wash- 
ington, Brookings, 1940. $3.00 
An invaluable treatment of a subject which is likely to 
assume growing importance in the future. The author dis- 
cusses in a lucid manner the problems involved in con- 
trolling prices, and throws a revealing light on our experi- 
ence during the last war. 


The Democratic Ideal in France and England, by David 
Thomson. New York, Macmillan, 1941. $1.25 


A brief, historical analysis of the democratic conception 
of government and society which has emerged in Britain 
and France in the last 250 years. In spite of widely dis- 
similar institutions, the author points out, both countries 
haye been governed according to the same liberal principles. 


The Mongol Empire, by Michael Prawdin. New York, 

Macmillan, 1940. $5.00 

An English translation, by Eden and Cedar Paul, of a 
recent notable history of the Mongols and their empire, 
originally published in German. While concentrating 
mainly on the great figures of Jenghiz Khan, Kublai 
Khan, and Tamerlane, this work is a consecutive study of 
the rise and decline of the Mongol empire and its differ- 
ent parts since the twelfth century. 


| /apanese Expansion on the Asiatic Continent, by Yoshi S. 


Kuno. Vol. II. Berkeley, University of California Press, 

1940. $4.00 

In this study, the second of a three-volume work, Dr. 
Kuno covers the Tokugawa Shogunate (1603-1867), in- 
cluding a summary of internal developments in the “se- 





clusion” period most directly related to Japan’s later 
expansion. A rich selection of documentary translations 
is again included in this volume. 


An Encyclopedia of World History, by William L. Langer. 
Boston, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1940. $5.50 


This revised and modernized version of Ploetz’s Epitome 
of History has been prepared by Dr. Langer with the as- 
sistance of fifteen specialists in various fields. The scope 
has been greatly enlarged by the addition of non-European 
countries, and nearly every line has been rewritten, al- 
though the dating system has been mainly retained. An 
indispensable reference work, both for dates and succinct 
digests of events. 


The Army Way, by Philip Wylie and William W. Muir. 
New York, Farrar and Rinehart, 1940. 75 cents. 

The ABC’s of the 1.D.R., by Paul Brown. New York, Mac- 
millan, 1940. 50 cents 


The first of these booklets describes Army life for the 
new soldier and gives him helpful pointers; the second is 
a simplified, illustrated explanation of the Army’s current 
infantry drill regulations. 


Scandinavia: The Background for Neutrality, by Alma 
Luise Olson. Philadelphia, Lippincott, 1940. $2.50 


A discursive story of people, life and politics in the 
Northern Countries—Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Iceland 
and Finland. 


Toward a New Order of Sea Power: American Naval Pol- 
icy and the World Scene, 1918-1922, by Harold and Mar- 
garet Sprout. Princeton, N. J., Princeton University 
Press, 1940. $3.75 


Admirable and exhaustive as a historical treatise, this 
second volume of a distinguished series on American naval 
policy includes a most stimulating analysis of the problems 
of American sea power. The Sprouts’ thesis that technolog- 
ical advances in sea and air warfare have strengthened the 
defensive position of the United States is particularly 
relevant today. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 25, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Streer, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


a 


APRIL 11, 1941, 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHe.tes Dgan, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Incorporated. National 


Two Dollars a Year. 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 




















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Apr. 7.—In a tense atmosphere created by Ger- 
many’s invasion of Yugoslavia and Greece, official 
Washington has moved swiftly to deal with compli- 
cations attending the long-threatened Balkan hostil- 
ities. Decisions on policy are being taken with both 
Europe and the Far East in mind. Conflict in south- 
eastern Europe raises new problems with regard to 
the shipment of American war supplies; at the same 
time, the possible repercussions of the Balkan strug- 
gle on Japan’s course in Asia must also be considered. 


THE BALKAN HOSTILITIES. After conferring 
with the President and State Department advisers, 
Secretary Hull issued a scathing denunciation of 
Germany's “barbaric invasion” of Yugoslavia on 
April 6. In line with this country’s policy of “helping 
those who are defending themselves against would-be 
conquerors,” he stated, the American government “‘is 
now proceeding as speedily as possible to send mili- 
tary and other supplies to Yugoslavia.” This state- 
ment apparently takes the place of the neutrality 
proclamation customarily issued in previous cases 
when the war had spread to new areas. 


The problem of shipping tonnage was doubtless 
uppermost in a lengthy conference held on April 6 
between the Yugoslav Minister, Constantine Fotitch, 
and Under-Secretary of State Sumner Welles. A re- 
cent Cabinet meeting had explored the possibility of 
shipping war materials to Yugoslavia on eight Yugo- 
slav merchant vessels now in American waters. On 
April 4, moreover, the President forecast imminent 
action on the broader question of altering the Ex- 
ecutive proclamation, under the Neutrality Act, which 
forbade American shipping to enter the Red Sea 
area. Since the Neutrality Act prohibits American 
ships from carrying munitions to belligerents, how- 
ever, it may prove necessary to obtain Congressional 
approval amending the Act in this respect. 


FAR EASTERN MOVES. Meanwhile, during the 
visits of Japan’s Foreign Minister, Yosuke Matsuoka, 
to Berlin, Rome and Moscow, a clearer pattern of 
Anglo-American cooperation in southeast Asia has 
emerged. In mid-March, as Matsuoka left Japan for 
his tour of the Axis capitals, two squadrons of Amer- 
ican warships, totaling 4 cruisers and 9 destroyers, 
reached New Zealand and Australia on ‘good-will 
visits.” Tumultuous welcomes greeted the officers 
and crews of the American vessels in Auckland, 
N. Z., and in Sydney and Brisbane. The implied warn- 


ing to Japan was strengthened when, on March 
the Navy Department, which had originally sta 
that the vessels would immediately return to the 
Honolulu base, announced that no further informa 
tion on their destination would be divulged. 


The first official contacts between ranking British 
and American commanders in the Far East were e. 
tablished on April 2-3 at Manila, when Air Chief 
Marshal Sir Robert Brooke-Popham, commander-ip. 
chief of British forces in eastern Asia, conferred with 
Admiral Thomas C. Hart, commander of the Amer. 
ican Asiatic fleet, Major General Douglas MacArthur, 
the Philippine Commonwealth's military adviser, and 
Major General George Grunert, commander of 
American forces in the Philippines. The subjects un- 
der discussion were not officially disclosed, but it is 
understood that the general problem of defense co- 
ordination in the Manila-Singapore zone was cap. 
vassed. Following Sir Robert Brooke-Popham’s te 
turn to Manila on April 8, after a brief trip to Hong. 
kong, the conferences were resumed—including, in 












addition, the Netherland Foreign Minister, E. N. 


van Kleffens, who had reached Manila by clipper | 


from Honolulu. 


Decisions now being taken in Washington with re 
gard to military aid to China, following the retum 
from Chungking of the President's special envoy, 
Lauchlin Currie, round out this picture of stronger 
action in the Far East. Reports indicate that 10 
American planes, with accompanying technical pet 
sonnel, are being made available to the Chinese gov 
ernment. Of these some 30 pursuit planes have al 


ready been sent, while a number of long-range bomb | 


ers, capable of making a non-stop return flight from 
China to Japan, may soon be on the way. It is also 
understood that Mr. Currie, during his stay in Chung 
king, impressed upon the Chinese officials the de 
sirability of reaching a settlement of the serious com 
flict between the central authorities and the Chinese 
Communist leaders. 


Thus, although it seems unlikely that Foreign Mit | 


ister Matsuoka has made any hard-and-fast commit 
ments at Berlin, or received much encouragement 
from Moscow, Washington and London have ap 
parently cleared the decks for any emergency which 
may arise in the Far East. Recent changes in the Jap 
anese Cabinet, reflecting a more moderate outlook ia 
Tokyo, indicate that the likelihood of a Far Easter 
crisis this spring is diminishing. 
T. A. BIssON 


= 
Qe 


-. 








