











nce in | 
SSigny, 
w days | 
ne. ) 
d—the | 
. Sixty- 
26,000 | 
ue, ate 
ponded 
on the } 
e Axis. 
ice and 
» board | 
he last 
IOTT 


DS 





) Moresby. With the battle approaching its climax, 


NOV 27 42 


PERIVUILA!. KUUM Entered as 2nd class matter 


@BNEKAL LIBRARY venereal Library 
univ. oF 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 








Vor. XXII, No. 6 NOVEMBER 27, 1942 
ALLIED POSITION IN FAR EAST IMPROVED BY AFRICAN CAMPAIGN 
EARS that the progress of American forces in This activity constitutes not only a threat to Australia 

North Africa might be accompanied by defeat and Port Moresby on southern New Guinea but also 
in the Solomons have proved unwarranted. Japan an effort to protect Japan’s military position in the 
must be expected to return to battle—but weaker for conquered Indonesian archipelago. 

the loss of one battleship, a heavy cruiser or second WHICH FRONT COMES FIRST? Our successes 


battleship, 8 cruisers, 6 destroyers, 8 troop transports, 
4 cargo vessels, and from 20 to 40 thousand men in 
the great naval struggle of November 13-15 with 
units of the American fleet. Following these blows 
to the enemy and early reports of effective land ac- 
tion by our troops on Guadalcanal, Secretary of Navy 
Knox declared on November 20: “I think it is fair 
to say that our hold on the island is very secure.” 
TABLES TURNED IN NEW GUINEA. At the 
same time, Australian and recently arrived American 
ground forces in New Guinea are pressing the foe 


have for the moment reduced rumors and criticisms 
relating to the United Nations position in the Pacific, 
but when new difficulties arise—as they inevitably 
will—further protests against placing major empha- 
sis on war in the West may be expected. According 
to these objections — which often seem a wartime 
version of pre-war isolationism*—the Japanese are 
far more dangerous to the United States than the 
Nazis and must therefore be dealt with at once as 
the chief enemy, so that they will have no time to 
consolidate their gains. Otherwise Japan may take 
close to his northern coastal base at Buna, which was many years to defeat or, it is sometimes asserted, may 


the starting point of last summer’s Japanese drive win in Asia despite a United Nations victory in 
through the Owen Stanley Mountains toward Port Europe. 


It is certainly dangerous to ignore the menace of 
Japan or to believe that destruction of the Nazis will 
automatically end the war in the Far East. In fact, 
it is necessary for the United Nations right now to 
redouble their efforts to mitigate China’s supply 
difficulties, to take steps toward the settlement of 
the political problems presented by India, and to 
These developments lay the ground for consolida- —_— prepare for the earliest possible counteroffensive in 
tion in the southern Solomons and further offensive Burma, so that the Burma Road may be reopened. 
action. Among the important Japanese bases in the Yet it is also true that the heart of the Axis indus- 
general region are: Salamaua and Lae up the New trially and psychologically lies in Europe, and that 
Guinea coast from Buna; Buin on Bougainville three of the four major Allies can at present deliver 
island in the northern Solomons; and, most signifi- their most powerful blows in the West. Japan, on 
cant, Rabaul on New Britain—but to move against the other hand, is separated from us by appallingly 
any of them will not be easy. In addition, it has been long supply lines, and any victory over it would be 
apparent for some time from the regularity of Allied hollow indeed if a major concentration on our prtob- 
air raids that the Japanese have been building uy lems in Asia should enable Hitler in the meantime 
strong positions on the island of Timor, hundreds to win, or at least effectively consolidate his posi- 


General MacArthur is leading the Allied troops in 
the field in an effort to drive the enemy into the sea. 
On the night of November 19, Allied bombers sank 
a light cruiser and destroyer near Gona, and three 
days later another destroyer. On November 24 the 
capture of Gona from the Japanese was announced. 


of miles west of New Guinea and 300 miles from ‘ . 
the nearest point on the northwest Australian coast lity ballon Nocera ba ee eee 


Policy Bulletin, November 6, 194 











————————— SSS. Page Two 


tion. Victories in Europe, however, can be of the 
greatest value in improving our position in the Far 
East. 

This is clearly indicated by possible Far Eastern 
repercussions of the campaign in North Africa. If 
the United Nations are able once more to send metr- 
chant ships through the Mediterranean—avoiding the 
long detour into the South Atlantic and around the 
Cape of Good Hope—increased quantities of sup- 
plies will flow to India and other eastern areas. At 
the same time, the threat of a German-Japanese pin- 
cers move against the Middle East and India—about 
which so many fears were expressed last summer— 
is vanishing into thin air. The danger to India re- 
mains, but if the attack comes it will be from only 
one direction. In addition, the disintegration of the 
Vichy régime appears to have had beneficial effects 
among the French in Japanese-controlled Indo-China. 
The Tokyo radio has remarked on “the general at- 
mosphere of tension caused by the American inva- 
sion of North Africa,’ and Berlin has reported ar- 
rests of de Gaullists in the former French colony. 
At a later date, when our Far Eastern land offensive 
begins, the fact that Frenchmen are fighting on our 
side in the West may have important repercussions in 
this area. 

CHINA APPLAUDS AFRICAN MOVE. The 
psychological effects of the African campaign are by 








_—, 
——— 


no means negligible. On November 6, when action 
was as yet confined to Egypt, General Ho Ying-chin, 
China’s War Minister, telegraphed his congratula. 
tions to the British Middle Eastern Commander-in. 
Chief and declared that the victory in Egypt would 
prove the turning point in the strategy of the United 
Nations. On November 9, after news of the Ameri. 
can landings had been received, the Chinese press 
jubilantly hailed the move. The leading newspaper, 
Ta Kung Pao, expressed the opinion that, as a te. 
sult, more favorable conditions were developing for 
the invasion of Burma. 

To appreciate these reactions fully, it must be te. 
membered that ever since Pearl Harbor the Chinese 
have felt cruelly disappointed over setbacks suffered 
by the United Nations. They have longed for some 
major Anglo-American move in conjunction with 
Russian resistance, which would indicate that, dur. 
ing the many years of their single-handed struggle, 
it was not a mistake to think the acquisition of allies 
would foreshadow the defeat of Japan. Therefore, 
the fact that North Africa is thousands of miles 
from the Far Eastern front is less important to them | 
than the knowledge that their partners are at last 
on the offensive. They realize that, although the path 
is hard, successful drives against Tokyo’s European 
accomplices will be followed by decisive blows | 


at Japan. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER | 





————— 


BITTER STRUGGLE AHEAD IN NORTH AFRICA 


As the Allied offensive in French North Africa 
moved into its third week, it became clear that the 
decisive fighting still lay ahead. Apparently one Al- 
lied force had already moved across Tunisia to 
Sousse, cutting off Bizerte and Tunis in the north, 
while another column had struck south in the direc- 
tion of Tripoli. But on November 23 there was no 
indication that these were decisive moves or that 
the British 1st Army with its American and French 
contingent had yet made a major attack on the 
Bizerte-Tunis area where, according to the Axis 
radio, Rommel had taken over command of strong 
Axis forces. With Allied commanders wisely refusing 
to divulge their plans by exact announcements of 
preliminary operations, the real military situation in 


PEE EEE ES SSS SSS SS 


H.PA. Christmas Gift Suggestions 


Gifts to be read, re-read and shared as a living record of 
the world in which we live. 
Regular Membership .....cccccccccscrceneneensenne $5 
Associate Membership ......ccccccscuesseneneesec $3 


Special Subscription to Headline Books 
(10 issues) ........... $2 


An attractive Christmas card will announce each gift. 





7 = = = + ~*~. 


} 
Tunisia remained obscure. All signs pointed, how- 
ever, to a longer and harder fight than had been | 
expected. 


The picture in Libya was somewhat clearer. At last 


reports the Afrika Korps had reached El Agheila | 


after a three-day rear-guard battle with advance units | 


of the British 8th Army at Agedabia. It seemed quite 
certain that the Nazis would take advantage of the 


natural defenses of El Agheila before falling back > 


to the even stronger defensive position of Tripoli. In 


any case, it can be expected that the Afrika Corps will | 
put up a determined resistance before the battle for | 


Tripoli is won by the Allies. Their supply lines 
have continued to grow shorter, while British lines 
have become so extended that the 8th Army is de 
pending on transport planes for many of its supplies. 
At the same time, the Fighting French forces, re- 


portedly on their way across the Sahara from Lake | 


Chad, can hardly play a decisive role in view of the 
light equipment they must necessarily use. In the 
last analysis, a speedy decision in both Tripolitania 
and Tunisia will depend more than anything else on 
the air strength each side can bring to bear, especially 
in the triangle between Sicily, Sardinia and Tunisia. 
By using his strategic reserves, Hitler may be able to 
concentrate as many as a thousand planes in this 
area, which means that Allied air forces, even with 





——e 


action 
-Chin, 
atula. 
ler-in. 
vould 
Jnited 
.Meri- 

Press 
paper, 

a fe 
1g for 


be te. 
1inese 
ffered 
some 

with 
, dur 
aggle, 
allies 
efore, 


miles | 


them 


it last | 
> path | 


opean 
blows 
GER 


how- 
been 


At last 
gheila 
> units 


| quite 


of the 
+ back 


oli. In | 


ys will 
‘le for 
lines 


1 lines | 


is de 
pplies. 
es, re- 
| Lake 
of the 
[In the 
litania 
‘Ise on 
ecially 
unisia. 
ible to 
n this 
n with 








ee. 








the use of Malta and the newly won bases in North 
Africa, may be pressed to the utmost to maintain the 
air supremacy necessary for quick victory. 


AXIS COUNTER-MOVE EXPECTED. If Hitler 
intends, however, to make an all-out effort to main- 
tain a position in North Africa and not to use Axis 
forces in Tunisia and Tripolitania merely for a hold- 
ing action, it seems clear that he will have to bring 
about a major diversion of Allied strength. A giant 
pincers through Turkey in the east and Spain in 
the west would, if successful, close around the Allied 
pincers now threatening the Axis in the middle Medi- 
terranean. It is extremely doubtful, however, if Hit- 
ler has the strength for such a move at present. In 
the east, a Russian counteroffensive, one wing of 
which by November 23 had swept westward far be- 
yond the Don River, has cut the two railways which 
were supplying the Nazi Army in Stalingrad and now 





| threatens the Axis position not only in that city but 
also in the Caucasus. A blow through Turkey to the 
_ Middle East at such a time, is probably out of the 
| question. Much more likely is a Nazi advance 
| through Spain, aimed at closing the western gate- 

way of the Mediterranean to the Allies. Even if 
| Franco decides to oppose such a move—and he was 
| reported on November 20 to have said he would 
| accept aid from the other side if either Axis or Allies 
attacked—it could almost certainly be made at less 
| cost and with the prospect of more rapid and decisive 

strategic results than any major action at the eastern 
end of the Mediterranean. 


PROTESTS ABOUT DARLAN ANSWERED. 
While precautions are undoubtedly being taken to 
counter either or both of these moves, the present job 
of the Allies in North Africa is to clear Axis forces 
from the whole southern coast of the Mediterranean. 
| The decision of General Eisenhower and his Ameri- 
can-British staff to use Darlan was undoubtedly made 
| in the belief that the rapid conquest of Tunisia was 
| essential for fruition of Allied plans, and that serious 
, French resistance from the rear was likely unless Ad- 
mitral Darlan, as well as General Giraud, could be 
persuaded to join forces with the Allies. Possibly it 
was made also with the knowledge that Darlan 
would bring all of French West Africa, with the in- 
valuable base at Dakar, over to the Allied side. Al- 
though this decision involved political dangers which 
were the'cause of such loud protests in Britain that 
press censorship has prevented American correspond- 
ents from reporting their full strength, President 
Roosevelt's assurance on November 17 that arrange- 





= —_—— - 


—E 


Page Three = 








——= 





ments with Darlan are temporary should dispel any 
fears that the price paid for the French Admiral’s sup- 
port will prove too high. It should also be a guarantee 


that the presence in North Africa of Pierre-Etienne - 


Flandin and Pierre Pucheu, French rightists and Nazi 
sympathizers, does not herald the setting up of a pro- 
fascist French government there. 

At the same time, the fear that Anglo-American 
intervention in Spain would bolster fascism in that 
country is probably unwarranted. This fear is based 
on the assumption that Franco is in a position, should 
he so wish, to resist the Nazis if they invade Spain. 
With most of the leaders of his army under Nazi 
influence and Serrano Sifier on the new national 
council of the Falange party, anything more than 
token resistance to an Axis attack seems improbable, 
even if Franco should now believe in ultimate Allied 
victory. It is possible, of course, that Franco might 
permit Allied resistance to the Nazis on Spanish soil. 
But whole-hearted support for the Allies in Spain, in 
the event that they are forced to counter an Axis 
move there, is much more likely to come from the 
Spanish people than the Franco government. 


HOWARD P. WHIDDEN, JR. 





The United States and the Far East: Certain Funda- 
mentals of Policy, by Stanley K. Hornbeck. Boston, 
World Peace Foundation, 1942. $1.00 


A very brief, purely formal recapitulation of American 
Far Eastern policy up to Pearl Harbor, written by a State 
Department official. 


Price Control: The War Against Inflation, by Erik T. H. 
Kjellstrom, G. A. Gluck, Per Jacobsson, and Ivan Wright. 
New Brunswick, N. J., Rutgers University Press, 1942. 

2.50 

A study of Sweden’s experience with price control since 
1939, with parallel surveys of the British, Canadian, and 
Swiss systems. 


Geopolitics: The Struggle for Space and Power, by Robert 
Strausz-Hupé. New York, Putnam, 1942. $2.75 
A somewhat long-winded recapitulation of the conclu- 
sions of the pseudo-science used by the Nazis to justify 
their territorial expansion. 


People Under Hitler, by Wallace Deuel. New York, Har- 
court Brace, 1942. $3.50 


This report on the German Home Front by a former 
‘Berlin correspondent of the Chicago Daily News combines 
careful observation of the facts and the people with a clear 
vision of the ruthless war aims of Nazi leaders. It should 
greatly help Americans to understand Nazi Germany and 
its leaders. 


What Does Gandhi Want? by T. A. Raman. New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1942. $1.25 
An Indian journalist discusses Gandhi’s pacifist views 


through extensive quotations from the nationalist leader’s 
writings and public statements. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 6, NoveMBER 27, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRaNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MicHEeies Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


| 181 








Washington News Letter 

















Nov. 24.—The Anglo-American invasion of 
French North Africa has focused world attention on 
Spain. German troops are reported to be massing 
along Spain’s northern frontier while to the south, 
across the Mediterranean, Spanish Morocco is sur- 
rounded by the forces of the United Nations. Spain 
is thus in a veritable nutcracker and, with Hitler ob- 
viously planning some counterstroke against the Al- 
lies, its jealously guarded neutrality is now more 
jeopardized than at any previous time in this war. 

General Francisco Franco answered the threat to 
Spain’s neutrality on November 18 by ordering par- 
tial mobilization. This action, it was stated, was a 
measure of prudence, intended to “insure our keep- 
ing away from the conflict and to strengthen our de- 
fense, our integrity, and sovereignty and at the same 
time to preserve peace in our territories.” At the 
same time Franco is reported to have informed both 
the Axis and the Allies that Spain would immedi- 
ately accept aid from the other side, if any of its sea 
and air bases were seized. This message came on the 
heels of a dispatch from Ankara, stating that the 
Spanish dictator had refused to grant such bases to 
Germany. Hitler in any case is apparently displeased 
with Franco, as indicated by the failure of the Nazi 
Foreign Minister, Joachim von Ribbentrop, to wel- 
come the new Spanish Ambassador on his arrival in 
Berlin. 


FRANCO PLEDGES NEUTRALITY. Renewed 
assurances of Spain’s intention to maintain absolute 
neutrality in the war were given by Juan Francisco 
de Cardenas, Spanish Ambassador in Washington, to 
Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles on Novem- 
ber 19. According to Secretary of State Hull, these 
assurances were proffered voluntarily by the Spanish 
government, and were not in response to an inquiry 
by the United States. They reinforced the pledge of 
neutrality that General Franco had given President 
Roosevelt on November 14. - 

In informed quarters in Washington Franco's 
protestations of neutrality are regarded as sincere. 
The Spanish leader's sympathies for the Axis are 
notorious, but it is pointed out here that if his pro- 
Axis leanings did not induce him to launch half- 
starved Spain into war in the autumn of 1940 when 
Hitler seemed a certain victor, Franco is hardly 
likely to do so now when the Fuehrer’s prospects 
are relatively bleak. 

LAVAL RULES VICHY. Meanwhile, on the other 


[am eG csORY ° 


side of the Mediterranean, in metropolitan Franeg 
Marshal Pétain virtually abdicated on November 1g 
by empowering Pierre Laval to promulgate laws and 
decrees under his own name. At the same time the 
Marshal reinstated Laval as his constitutional suc 
cessor in place of Darlan. Pétain’s transference of 
powers to Laval was interpreted here as meaning 
that this pro-Nazi politician was now planning to 
take what was left of the Vichy régime, lock, stock, 
and barrel, into the Axis camp. It was considered 
likely that a declaration of war by Laval on the 
Allies might be preceded by a peace treaty, by which 
Germany would promise to leave France territorially } 
intact, save for the cessation of Alsace and Lorraine. 
As a result of Laval’s advent to power, Vichy no | 
longer controls any part of the French empire. On 
November 23 Admiral Francois Darlan broadcast 
over the Algiers radio that Governor-General Pierre 
Boisson had placed himself and the whole of French } 
West Africa, including the strategic port of Dakar, 
under Darlan’s orders. The same day Secretary of 
State Cordell Hull announced in Washington that a 
political and economic accord had been reached with | 
Admiral George Robert, French High Commissioner, | 
concerning disposition of the French West Indies, 
which include Martinique, Guadeloupe, and French | 
Guiana—an accord so satisfactory that no United 
States occupation of these colonies was necessary. 
Mr. Hull made it clear that the agreement was | 
reached with Admiral Robert as the ultimate French | 
authority in the Caribbean and entirely independent 
of Vichy. This accord marks the successful conclusion } 
of tedious negotiations begun last May by Admiral | 
John Hoover and Samuel Reber of the State De | 
partment and, although full details of the agreement 
have not been published, it is understood to provide, | 
among other things, for the immobilization of the | 
French warships stationed there and for American 
supervision of communications to and from the 
islands. The entrance of French West Africa into 
the Allied fold places the strategic base of Dakar 
at the disposal of the United Nations; removes the — 
threat that this base might have been used by the | 
Germans; and turns over to the Allies a number of 
French submarines and other naval units in the 
harbor of Dakar. These developments mean that the 
French empire, except for Indo-China, is now con- 
trolled either by the United Nations or by Frenchmen 
cooperating with them. JoHN ELLIoTT 








—————— 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


<i 


a ee ee ee ee ee | 


