










# Lei \N\ J 


O; 
tion 


a 


ress 
t of 


arms 
cted 
oun- 

for 








nter: | 





apaL LIBE 


‘AREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





You. XVIII, No. 48 


SEPTEMBER 22, 1939 





— 


For background on the European war, read: 


GERMANY’S EXPANSION IN EASTERN EUROPE 
ECONOMIC MOBILIZATION OF GREAT BRITAIN 
EUROPE’S DIPLOMATIC TUG OF WAR 
AMERICAN DEFENSE POLICIES 
THE NEUTRALITY ACT OF 1937 


ECONOMIC PROBLEMS OF U.S. NEUTRALITY IN WARTIME 


SPECIAL OFFER—6 Foreign Policy Reports for $1.00 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


OCT 3 1939 











General Library 
University of Wichigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 








| 





EUROPE IN 


UPHEAVAL 





by VERA MICHELES DEAN 


Mrs. Dean has just returned from a two-month’s trip to Europe. 


USSIA’S invasion of Poland on September 17 

came as a shock to people in Western countries 
who still clung to the illusion that the U.S.S.R. 
would abstain from intervention. For the moment, 
it makes little difference whether Russia is acting in 
concert with Germany, or attempting to insure its 
own interests against future German encroachments. 
The immediate effect, in either case, is to throw 
Eastern Europe, from the Baltic to the Black Sea, 
into a veritable witches’ cauldron from which it can 
emerge only in completely altered shape. Poland’s 
incapacity to resist the swift motorized advance of 
the German and Russian armies is a terrible warn- 
ing to Hungary, Rumania, Yugoslavia and Bulgaria, 
which are even less prepared than Poland for a mili- 
tary conflict with either or both of their formidable 
neighbors. What may now be reasonably anticipated 
is a division of spheres of interest between Germany 
and Russia, with the Reich probably asserting its 
control over Hungary, Rumania and Yugoslavia, 
while Russia invokes the doctrine of ‘blood broth- 
ershood”” in Bessarabia, the Baltic countries and 
Finland, all of which formed part of the Russian 
Empire before 1918. As the last vestiges of the Ver- 
sailles status guo crumble under the double impact 
of Germany and Russia, Eastern Europe appears on 
the point of reverting to the status of 1914. 


To those familiar with the realities of the Russian 
Situation, it had long been obvious that the Soviet 
government, disgruntled with the dilatory tactics of 
France and Britain, might ultimately make some sort 
of deal with Germany; and that, once such a deal 
had been made, Europe would be in mortal danger 
of disruption. The fulfillment of these expectations 
came as a surprise to only two groups: those who, 
on the Left, had believed that Russia’s foreign pol- 


icy was shaped solely by ideological considerations 
of hatred for fascism; and those—including Britain's 
rulers — who with equal blindness believed that 
Nazism would save Europe from communism. Now 
the ideological smoke screen laid down by the false 
antithesis of fascism versus communism has been 
lifted; and the two revolutionary powers are face to 
face with those European states, both neutrals and 
belligerents, which still desire to preserve some rem- 
nants of the political and economic system left 
standing by the first world war. To speak of a Rus- 
sian “betrayal” is to reveal a fundamental miscon- 
ception of Soviet aims. The ruling group in Russia, 
predominantly nationalist and anti-Western in sen- 
timent, is motivated not by considerations of ide- 
ology but of Russia’s national interests pure and 
simple. Just as Russia’s interests, after 1933, dic- 
tated collaboration with the Western powers against 
Hitler, so they dictated rapprochement with Ger- 
many after Munich, where France and Britain 
showed they were both reluctant to resist Nazism 
and eager to exclude Russia from European councils. 


DANGERS OF RUSSO-GERMAN DEAL. The 
immediate dangers of Russia’s deal with Germany 
were obvious from the start. Germany, which has 
just obtained access to the coal and other raw ma- 
terials of Poland, threatens to draw on the Soviet 
Union for the additional supplies it will need in 
prosecuting war on the western front. The spectre 
of a British naval blockade has thus lost much of its 
menace, and the striking power of the British navy 
against Germany has been correspondingly reduced. 
Countries east of the Rhine which had accepted 
British guarantees of their independence—Rumania, 
Greece and Turkey—are not only severely shaken by 
Poland’s tragic experience but fear Soviet encroach- 
ments, which France and Britain may not be in a 
position to check even if they are ready to become 

































































eR aus BEI 




















involved in war with the U.S.S.R. Now that the 
remnants of Poland’s routed armies are confronted 
with the Russian invader, Germany can transfer the 
bulk of its eastern divisions to the west, where they 
will bolster up its defenses against Franco-British 
attack. 


But these immediate difficulties are overshad- 
owed by a far greater danger for the Western pow- 
ers. Fascism and communism, born in countries 
which had remained outside the main currents of 
the French Revolution, now threaten to destroy 
the institutions and ideas developed by the West in 
the nineteenth century. Great as are the differences 
in their historical and social setting, fascism and 
communism have one thing in common: contemptu- 
ous hatred of capitalism and democracy, symbolized 
for them first and foremost by the British Empire. 
The new totalitarian imperialism challenges not only 
the internal structure of the Western countries, 
based on such concepts as individual liberty and 
private property, but also their control of colonial 
possessions. Most disturbing of all, Germany and 
Russia assert in unison that they are fighting not for 
selfish national interests, but to overthrow the yoke 
of “democratic plutocracy,” and defend “oppressed” 
minorities or “blood brothers” in states betrayed by 
“rotting ruling classes." The Western powers, 
which in 1914 proclaimed themselves defenders of 
democracy against autocracy, can thus be easily 
maneuvered into the position of die-hard reaction- 
aries determined to maintain the status quo at home 
and abroad. 


Unfortunately for the success of the Allied cause, 
these arguments—now that they are advanced by 
both Nazis and Communists — are bound to find 
listeners in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, whose 
peoples have long been ripe for revolution and have 
lost faith in the ability or even desire of the West- 
ern democracies to build a new world order. Austria, 
Czechoslovakia, Spain are so many milestones on 
the road along which France and Britain have re- 
treated from their professed international ideals. 
At a moment when the two Western democracies are 
straining every nerve to wage the war they finally 
found it impossible to avert, it would be worse than 
futile to indulge in criticism of their past actions. 
But the fact remains that, having first failed to re- 
construct the post-war world on a new plane, France 
and Britain were also defeated on the old plane of 
power-politics by their blind incomprehension of 
Hitler’s and Stalin’s intentions. 


ITALY’S NEUTRALITY HELPS GERMANY. 
As a result of this double error in the game of power 
politics, the Allies have begun the second world 
war under the most adverse possible circumstances. 
Russia’s ‘neutrality’ had already dealt a stunning 


== _ Page Two 





























SS 


blow to all hopes of creating an eastern front againg 
Germany. But neutrality has also proved a refy 
for all other countries, great and small, with the te 
sult that so far the war has reduced itself to a basic 
test of strength between Germany, on the one hand 
France and Britain on the other. The neutrality of 
Italy and the small European countries, while tem. 
porarily localizing the war, actually works to the 
advantage of Germany, whose lines of supply 
through Eastern Europe, the Balkans and across the 
Baltic remain undisturbed. Particularly advantage. 
ous for Germany is the neutrality of Italy, which 
would otherwise have provided a springboard for q | 
French attack on Germany. As long as Italy remains 
neutral, it will be difficult, and probably impossible, 
for France and Britain to persuade the Balkan coup. 
tries—which otherwise might have felt threatened 
by Italian expansion—to enter the war on their side 
Moreover, if the Allies want to do more than fight | 
a war of attrition on the western front, they will be 
forced to attack Germany across the territory of one 
or more neutral countries. In fact, it may be expected 
that Germany will do all in its power to invite Allied 
violations of its neighbors’ neutrality, which would 
furnish Nazi propaganda with a strong talking-point | 
comparable to the German invasion of Belgium in 
1914. 


Great as are the present odds against the Allies, | 
Europe is in such a state of convulsion that all pre- 
dictions are hazardous. Even such an apparently | 
disastrous development as the Soviet-German pact| 
bears within it the seeds of possible advantage for | 
France and Britain. This pact served the immediate 
purpose, for Germany, of leaving Poland at the 
mercy of the Reich, and for Russia of inflicting re 
venge on France and Britain for their action at 
Munich. But neither dictator can have any trust in| 
the other. It will take much time, and considerable 
effort by German technicians, to develop Soviet re 
sources to the point where they can supply Ger- | 
many’s needs to any adequate extent. And closer 
contacts between Germans and Russians, until now 
carefully insulated against knowledge of the out | 
side world, may produce incalculable explosions in 
both countries. 








It is with such imponderables that the Allies must | 
reckon as they continue their preparations for a wat | 
which thus far has been primarily a war of defense, 
and consider the possibility of a peace offer by Hitler. 
Can or should the Allies accept such an offer? It} 
may still be assumed that Hitler would prefer 0 | 
avoid a long-drawn-out war with the West if he can 
obtain peace on his own terms—which would cet- 
tainly involve exclusion of France and Britain from | 
Europe east of the Rhine and redistribution of col: 
onies. And nothing would please either Germany 


—_— 


or R 


peth 
Far 
dica 
Naz 
disp 


feel 
and 


os 


— 
Linst 
Fuge 
> te. 
asic 
ang 
y of 
tem. 

the 
Pply 
; the 
‘age 
hich 
Or a | 
lains 
ible, 
oun. 
ened 
side, 
fight | 
ll be 
“one 


cted 





llied 
ould 
int | 
n in 


llies, | 
pre- | 
ently | 
pact | 
for | 
diate | 

the 
x fe: 
n at 
st in | 
-able 
t re- 
Ger- 
loser 
now 
out: 
1S in | 


| 





must | 
war | 
nse, 

itler. | 
-? It | 
r to | 
Can | 
cer: | 
‘rom 
col- | 
nany 








————— 
EEE 


or Russia so much as the prospect of imposing a 
humiliating peace on Britain in Europe, paralleled, 

thaps, by an equally humiliating settlement in the 
Far East. What has happened in Poland clearly in- 
dicates that, unless peace is promptly effected, the 
Nazis will not hesitate to use all means at their 
disposal to bring the Allies to their knees. Many 

ple, witnessing the havoc wreaked in Poland, 
feel that it would be better to preserve human lives 
and property, even under foreign dictatorship, as 


JAPAN SEEKS NEW BASIS 


Although Premier Nobuyuki Abe’s statement of 
policy stressed concentration of Japan’s efforts on 
the war in China, it is apparent that the new Jap- 
anese Cabinet is moving on a broad front to lessen 
the vulnerability of its international position. The 
truce effected with the U.S.S.R. on the Mongolian- 
Manchoukuo border coincides with tentative sound- 
ings at Washington looking toward an improvement 
of Japan’s relations with the United States. All doors 
are being kept open as the Cabinet moves cautiously 
forward to establish new and firmer bases for 
Japan's foreign policy. Aside from the trial balloon 
at Shanghai affecting revision of the foreign defense 
sectors of the International Settlement, the Japanese 
government has not yet attempted to capitalize on 
the increased Anglo-French weakness in the Far 
East. At the same time, the new Cabinet has studi- 
ously maintained its diplomatic relations with Ber- 
lin, despite the first spurt of indignation over Ger- 
many’s “‘betrayal.’’ The Japanese military-economic 
mission, originally sent to Europe to strengthen the 
anti-Comintern pact, spent most of its time sightsee- 
ing in Italy; on September 16, however, General 
Juichi Terauchi, head of the mission, left Rome for 
a visit to Berlin. 


THE SOVIET-JAPANESE TRUCE. Premier Abe 
will undoubtedly exploit the armistice concluded 
between Japan and the Soviet Union on Septem- 
ber 15 as the first ‘‘victory’’ in the new Cabinet’s 
diplomatic campaign. For Japan, however, the im- 
mediate gains are confined to fending off the threat 
—never very serious—of a major clash with the So- 
viet Union. The terms of the truce are similar to 
those which followed the Changkufeng hostilities 
of a little more than a year ago. After meeting severe 
feverses in the recent fighting on the border, the 
Japanese forces have accepted the existing battle 
line as the de facto frontier pending the results of 
a joint demarcation commission. Acceptance of these 
terms was dictated by two considerations: Soviet 


= Page Three =a 








was done by Czechoslovakia, than to have them de- 
stroyed beyond repair in a war from which neither 
side can expect to emerge unscathed. While this 
view might find some support in France and Britain 
once Germany has carried war to their soil, for the 
moment the prevailing mood of the French and 
British is one of grim determination to fight Ger- 
many to the bitter end, in the belief that life on a 
continent dominated by German Nazis would in any 
case be unendurable. 


FOR FOREIGN POLICY 


military successes in the actual fighting, and the in- 
creased strength which the U.S.S.R. deployed in the 
Far East as a result of the Soviet-German treaty of 
non-aggression. 


These considerations should also be borne in mind 
when it comes to estimating the larger results which 
may flow from the truce. Even Japanese sources 
unite in discounting reports that a non-aggression 
pact with the Soviet Union is under discussion or is 
being contemplated. If, nevertheless, Japan did seek 
to obtain such a treaty, the U.S.S.R. would hold the 
whip hand and could virtually dictate its terms. 
Under these conditions, it is difficult to see how 
Japan could obtain the one concession which would 
be really worth while: cessation of Soviet military 
assistance to China. It remains to be seen whether 
this hurdle is higher than some of those which have 
been leaped during recent weeks. 


Obviously, the threat of a Soviet agreement con- 
stitutes a card which Japan may attempt to play 
against the Western powers in order to force con- 
cessions in China. France and Great Britain, in any 
case, can oppose little further resistance to Japan's 
activities, unless they are strongly supported by the 
United States. The latter's position is more crucial 
than ever for the future of the Far East. Washing- 
ton holds two advantages: the increased freedom of 
action conferred by expiration of the Japanese- 
American commercial treaty next January, and the 
enhanced dependence of Japan on the American 
market as a result of the European conflict. It may 
be taken for granted that the efficacy of these ad- 
vantages in preventing further Japanese encroach- 
ments on the interests of the Western powers in 
the Far East will soon be put to the test. For the 
present, however, there is no warrant for believing 
that Japan has moved appreciably closer to a solu- 
tion of its vital problem—final settlement of the 
war in China on its own terms. 

T. A. Bisson 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 48, SEPTEMBER 22, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lrgt, Secretary; Vera MicHgELEs DEAN, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Dis: 


Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


SEPT. 18.—As Washington anxiously awaits the 
opening of the special session of Congress this week, 
every advance indication points to a “full and free” 
debate lasting at least a month or six weeks, and 
possibly, if other issues are injected, until the regular 
session convenes in January. 


THE ARMS EMBARGO. None of the develop- 
ments in Europe have yet altered the Administra- 
tion’s determination to press its program for repeal 
of the arms embargo. Soviet intervention in Poland, 
which profoundly influences the character of the 
conflict in Europe, will inevitably have its effect on 
Washington. But at this stage the only discernible 
result here is a stiffening of the lines on both sides 
of the issue of neutrality revision. 

The President and his advisers are still confident 
that they can muster a safe majority for repeal. If 
the forecasts given to Mr. Roosevelt last week hold 
good, he is assured of ample support in the House, 
and at least one or two additional votes in the Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee, which postponed con- 
sideration of neutrality revision in July by the nar- 
row margin of 13 to 12. On the strength of such 
forecasts, the Administration hopes to avoid a 
repetition of the stalemate which prevented the issue 
from reaching the Senate floor last summer, and to 
hasten the final vote. 

Yet despite these predictions, the outcome is far 
from certain and there is ample evidence that the 
debate will not be confined to the arms embargo 
but will range over the whole field of foreign, and 
possibly domestic, policy. The ground for the op- 
position stand was prepared last week in the speeches 
of Senators Borah, Vandenberg and Bennett Champ 
Clark — unexpectedly aided by Lindbergh — which 
sought to represent the movement for repeal of the 
arms embargo as a move to enter the war. Senator 
Borah argued that to lift the embargo now war is 
in progress would “unquestionably constitute inter- 
vention in the present conflict in Europe.’ While 
Colonel Lindbergh made no reference to the em- 
bargo, his radio address was welcomed by the non- 
interventionists as an important contribution to their 
cause. 

Just what the Administration proposes to substi- 
tute for the arms embargo has not been revealed, 
although it is taken for granted that some form of 
cash-and-carry will be suggested. At the moment, 
its chief concern is to meet the charge of taking 


sides and establish a strong case for “traditional! 
neutrality based on international law and Americap 
practice. The State Department is pressing its cop. 
tention that the existing law is a “false and illogical 
delusion”: illogical, because it bars the export of 
arms while permitting the sale of all other kinds of 
war materials; false, because it runs counter to our 
own interests and waives historic neutral rights 
which we have insisted upon in the past. 


NEUTRAL RIGHTS. The case for traditional 
neutrality was presented by Secretary Hull in a 
formal statement on September 14, serving notice 
on European belligerents that the United States “has 
not abandoned any of its rights as a neutral under 
international law.” The restrictive measures taken 
in accordance with domestic legislation, he asserted, 
“do not and cannot constitute a modification of the 
principles of international law.’” On the contrary, 
“this government, adhering as it does to these prin. 
ciples, reserves all rights of the United States and 
its nationals under international law, and will adopt 
such measures as may seem practical and prudent 
when those rights are violated by any of the bel- 
ligerents.”” 

But the central issue in the special session goes 
far beyond either neutral rights or the arms embargo. 
It involves the question of what, in the long run, 
are the vital interests of the United States. The| 
President and his State Department advisers are 
convinced that our vital interests would be jeopar- 
dized by the reduction of Great Britain and France 
to the status of second-class powers. They are deeply 
concerned by the adverse conditions under which the 
Allies are now compelled to fight. If Hitler's an- 
ticipated peace offer is rejected by the Allies, as they 
believe it will be, they expect a long war — pos 








sibly lasting from three to five years—in which the 
outcome may be determined by the ability of the| 
Allies to purchase airplanes and essential war sup | 
plies in the United States. Our interests, they insist, | 
demand that we furnish such war supplies on a cash 
and-carry basis, as permitted by the rules of inter | 
national law. 

The President's opponents in Congress are equally | 
convinced that our best interests will be served by | 
keeping out of war, and that the basic premises on| 
which the Administration is proceeding will lead t| 
military intervention if and when Great Britain and | 
France are threatened with defeat. These basic 
premises on both sides constitute the major obstacle 
to unity in American foreign policy. W.T. STONE | 





to a 
Fuel 
ern | 
his 

host 
chill 
the 

Min 
tion 
curr 
the | 
and 


Pret 


| Wh 


tem! 
sion 
tion 
peo 
ject 


it h; 
unc 
littl 
The 
tion 

and 
Hit 
mat 


Get 
mai 


Eas 


RE 


jus 





