ice that 
ance in 
. of the 


v of the 
that he 
ice was 
¢ might 
= entire 
sponsi- 
on is a 
ilations 
vhether 
eans at 


uld be 
the po- 
> hand 
nament 
prevent 
ns and 
Hitler” 
to de- 
nuch a 
t is of 
ic back- 
people 
1ony — 
ices. It 
justice 
‘ONE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XVIII, No. 27 


AprIL 28, 1939 


—_—_ 


POLAND: KEY TO EUROPE 
by Raymond Leslie Buell 
$3.00 


An up-to-the-minute study which answers dozens of vital 
questions, and shows the background of Poland’s place 
in world affairs. The only complete and authoritative in- 
terpretation of the tinder-box of Europe. Published by Knopf. 


—_ 


FPA members ordering through Headquarters receive a 10% discount 


wAY 4 1939 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 


—_—~ 


| 


= — 


BRITAIN ADOPTS CONSCRIPTION 


HILE Chancellor Hitler drafted his reply to 

President Roosevelt, to be delivered before 
the Reichstag on April 28, the British government 
tushed its diplomatic and military defenses in prep- 
aration for war. Since March 15, when Hitler en- 
tered Prague, Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain 
has virtually reversed the course of Britain’s post- 
war foreign policy, and altered his own definition 
of “appeasement.” The British answer to the occu- 
pation of Czecho-Slovakia has taken many forms: 
the grant of guarantees to countries in Eastern Eu- 
rope and creation of a new “grand alliance’; 
mobilization of the Mediterranean fleet; improve- 
ment of civilian defense; and preparation of a new 
expeditionary force for the Continent. To carry out 
the latter objective, in many ways the most important, 
_the British Cabinet has enlarged the Territorial 
Army, established a Ministry of Supply, and intro- 
duced military conscription. The recent appointment 
of Lord Lothian as Ambassador to the United States 
fepresents a supplementary move, designed to in- 
crease American good will. 


THE EXPEDITIONARY FORCE. The crisis of 
| last September proved conclusively that if Britain 
| and France were to check the axis powers, they must 
| be prepared to do three things: blockade Germany 
| in the North Sea and Italy in the Mediterranean; 
' withstand the initial air bombardment and launch 
} an effective counter-attack; and mobilize overwhelm- 


ing land forces both west and east of Germany. The” 


British, who were either unable or unwilling to un- 
dertake this triple-play in September, are now pre- 
paring — despite conciliatory protestations — to en- 
circle Germany by land and sea. The crucial factor 
in this maneuver, the creation of an expeditionary 
force to defend the French and Belgian frontiers, 
was postponed until March 8, when the War Min- 


ister, Mr. Hore-Belisha, announced that Britain was 
organizing 19 divisions of 300,000 men—13 from 
the territorials and 6 from the regular army—for 
cooperation with the French army. On March 29 
Mr. Chamberlain indicated that 32 divisions would 
be prepared. The Territorial Army, whose 
establishment totals 130,000 men, will be raised 
immediately to a war footing of 170,00), and 
doubled in size by the recruitment of 13 1ew di- 
visions of 170,000 men. The Territorials 4 be also 
include an additional 100,000 men for anti-Sircraft 
work, and 10,000 for coastal defense operatgns. 


THE MINISTRY OF SUPPLY. Since this « 
ment of Britain’s military establishment is 
sible without greatly increased production 
and munitions, Mr. Chamberlain has created @ Min- 
istry of Supply. The new Ministry, long advocated 
by Winston Churchill and other Conservative dissi- 
dents, will be headed by Mr. Leslie Burgin, formerly 
Minister of Transport and highly regarded as an 
administrator. The government, which had postponed 
the creation of such an organization to avoid dis- 
location of industry, has granted the Ministry power 
to secure priority for army orders over normal busi- 
ness. The work of the Ministry will be limited for the 
present to army supplies, since production for both 
the navy and air force is proceeding satisfactorily. 


OTHER DEFENSE MEASURES. The Minister of 
Civil Defense, Sir John Anderson, reported on 
April 8 that 280,000 steel shelters had been distrib- 
uted, sufficient for 1,500,000 people, and that pro- 
duction would soon reach 80,000 shelters a week. 
The government claims that production of both 
airplanes and anti-aircraft guns has remedied the 
unpreparedness of last September. Although exact 
figures are unobtainable, one estimate indicates that 
Britain now has between 2,000 and 3,000 first-line 


ee Se ag en Se an a a ee 
r - = —_ 


planes for home defense, and—more important—is 
producing at least 400 planes a month. The ship- 
building industry provides more visible results, for 
virtually an entire new fleet is on the ways. New 
vessels will be delivered during the next fiscal year 
at the rate of one a week, while 43 warships were 
added to the navy during 1938-1939. 

RESORT TO CONSCRIPTION. Until this week, 
the Chamberlain government had dodged the most 
dangerous political issue in its rearmament pro- 
gram. Both leading Conservatives at home and 
Britain’s allies on the Continent had demanded 
military conscription as proof that Britain intended 
to carry out its promises, while the German press 
had ridiculed the Chamberlain Cabinet for its weak- 
ness in continuing volunteer recruitment. The Prime 
Minister, who previously declared that he would 
not adopt conscription without public approval 
through a general election, hesitated to touch a ques- 
tion which divides both Parliament and his own 
party. The Labor party bitterly opposes a measure 
which it believes will destroy the trade unions and 
introduce a Tory dictatorship, while many Conserva- 
tives dislike further disorganization of the heavy 
industries, especially the export trades, on which 
British economy depends. The mobilization of men 
for both military and individual service will neces- 
sarily prove a slow process, particularly with regard 
to instruction and equipment. 

The controversy over conscription indicates the 
importance of domestic politics in British foreign 
policy. Mr. Chamberlain is apparently determined to 
fight in person the general election which is expected 


DEMOCRACIES’ “ENCIRCLEMENT” DRIVE SLOWS DOWN 


The sudden return of Sir Nevile Henderson, the 
British Ambassador, to Berlin on April 24 indicates 
that the Chamberlain government is making a final 
effort to prepare the ground for some agreement with 
the Nazis, while warning them that intransigent 
Opposition to a rearmed Britain may mean disaster. 
Sir Nevile, an avowed proponent of “appeasement,” 
had been recalled to London on March 17, when 
Prime Minister Chamberlain expressed his sharp dis- 
approval of the destruction of Czecho-Slovakia. His 
return will be construed by the smaller states of Eu- 
rope as evidence that efforts are being made to mod- 
erate the tone of Hitler’s Reichstag speech. Until they 
are assured they will not be offered up as a sacrifice in 
return for still another “settlement’”’ between Britain 
and the fascist powers, these states are unlikely to 
cooperate further in completing the half-built edifice 
of collective resistance to Nazi aggression. 


The prevailing feeling of insecurity and lack of 
confidence in Britain’s support have already been 
revealed by the answers of minor powers to Hitler's 


a Page Two 


o,f 
a 


this year, but is unwilling to play his trump card— 
inclusion of Eden and Churchill in a War Cabiner— 
until the eve of the election. To defer to the Edep. 
Churchill group at this point would be an admission 
of defeat for Mr. Chamberlain, while the rivalry be. 
tween Eden, Simon, and Hoare for the Premiershj 
would inevitably split the Cabinet. The decision to 
introduce conscription, as a vigorous warning to 
Hitler, represents the furthest step that Mr. Cham. 
berlain can take short of reorganizing his Cabinet, 


THE LABOR PARTY. Fortunately for Mr. 
Chamberlain, the Opposition is even more hopelessly 
split than his own party. The Liberals are too fey | 
and too divided to menace the Conservative majority, 
while the Labor party is rent by the quarrel between | 
its Executive and Sir Stafford Cripps. As leader of 
the younger Labor party members who are willing 
to combine with both the Liberals and the Com. 
munists to form an anti-Chamberlain “popular | 
front,” Sir Stafford Cripps in January submitted a 
memorandum to the Labor constituencies, proving 
that a straight party victory is impossible. The Ex. 
ecutive Committee, dominated by conservative trade 
union leaders and by Socialists who fear “dilution” 
of the party, promptly expelled Sir Stafford from | 
the party. No compromise has been reached so far, 
even though many local groups are forming ‘‘popular | 
fronts” for election purposes. In the absence of any 
united opposition, it would appear probable that Mr. 
Chamberlain's political power will continue unchal- 
lenged except within his own party. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


inquiry whether they considered themselves menaced 
by Germany and had asked or known in advance of 
President Roosevelt's intercession. These questions 
could be parried in only one way by nations terrorized | 
as a result of German-Italian aggrandizement. The 


ironical chorus of “‘no’s’’ from capitals engaged in | 


extraordinary military preparations was slightly tem- 


pered by Rumania’s declaration that it did not see | 
how any one could feel secure in Europe at the pres- | 


ent time; by a Dutch statement that, in case of war, 
the Netherlands must be prepared to face every 


possibility; and by references from Switzerland, , 


Belgium and Lithuania to the guarantees they had 
received from Germany and other states. 


MUSSOLINI REPLIES TO ROOSEVELT. In | 


tense anticipation of the Fuehrer’s next move, 
Europe gave little heed to the first official Italian 
comment on the Roosevelt appeal, contained in a 
speech by Mussolini on April 20. The Duce, ridi- 
culing all “‘messianic’’ messages, asserted that Italy's 
preparations for a world exposition in 1942 pre- 


— 
 card— 
biner— 
e Eden. 
Mission 
alry be. 
niershi 


ision to 
ning to 

Cham. 
Cabinet, 
or Mr. 
pelessly 
too few 
na jority, 
Detween 
ader of 
willing 
e Com- 
popular 
nitted a 
proving 
The Ex. 
ve trade 
ilution” 
rd from 
| so far, 
popular 
> of any 
that Mr. 
unchal- 


FREEN 


menaced 
vance of 
juestions 
rrorized 
nt. The 
raged in 
tly tem- 
not see 
the pres- 
of war, 
ce every 
rzerland, 
hey had 


3LT. In 
t move, 
| Italian 
1ed in a 
ice, ridi- 
at Italy's 
942 pre- 


—_— 
—_ 


cluded intention of attacking any one. It was there- 
fore unjust, he continued, to “attempt to place 
nations of the axis on the seat of the accused,” and 
patently absurd to guarantee existing frontiers 
without first taking into account “pyramidal errors of 
geography.” As for multilateral conferences, the cer- 
tainty of their failure increased with the number 
of conferees, particularly when the United States 
retained “its customary rdle of distant spectator.” 

This foretaste of the critical reception awaiting 
the Roosevelt appeal has not interrupted the efforts 
of both blocs in Europe to secure as many allies as 

ssible before the approaching dénouement. Rome 
and Berlin have been particularly active in the Bal- 
kans, where Yugoslavia, hemmed in on three sides 
by the military and naval power of the axis, appears 
unable or disinclined to withstand pressure forcing 
its adherence to the anti-Comintern pact. Conversa- 
tions concluded at Venice on April 23 by the Yugo- 
slav Foreign Minister, Alexander Cincar-Marko- 
vitch, and Italian Foreign Minister Count Galeazzo 
Ciano, foreshadow a Hungarian-Yugoslav non- 
aggression agreement in which Hungary would re- 
nounce its territorial demands against Belgrade in 
return for special guarantees for Yugoslavia’s Hun- 
garian minority. Yugoslavia would thus become a 
virtual satellite of the axis. 

Meanwhile, the Anglo-French effort to forge a 
ting around the axis powers has been meeting with 
dificulties. True, Prime Minister Chamberlain 
hinted on April 18 that military conversations were 
under way with the guaranteed powers, and that 
Holland, Switzerland and Denmark were included 
in the list. British sources also intimated that assur- 
ances had been given to Turkey, although that coun- 
try, ostensibly fearing the reaction in Berlin, refused 
to permit announcement of any pledge and carefully 
preserved a balanced policy by awarding to German 
companies a contract for a $10,000,000 naval arsenal 
on April 20. Rumania, too, has exhibited reluctance 
to move entirely into the Anglo-French orbit: a group 


Page Three 


of Rumanian experts arrived in Berlin on April 24 
to complete the German-Rumanian trade agreement 
of March 23 just as a British economic mission 
reached Bucharest. British negotiations with the So- © 
viet Union, moreover, still give no sign of a breach in 
the wall of distrust separating the two powers. In 
responding to the British proposal for limited Soviet 
assistance against attack by Germany, the U.S.S.R. 
has demanded a blanket commitment by Britain and 
France against all aggression, providing for mutual 
aid in case of hostilities in the Far East, and imple- 
mented by definite military obligations. There is no 
evidence that Britain or France intend to give such 
sweeping guarantees, no matter how great their 
eleventh-hour need for Soviet assistance. 

WAR OR MILITARY DICTATORSHIP? It is 
an open question how long the current period of 
tension can continue unrelieved. The return of Sir 
Nevile Henderson, who will soon be followed by his 
French colleague, Robert Coulondre, is already 
viewed as an indication that the nerves of the Nazis 
have again proved steadier than those of their op- 
ponents. Britain, with France in its wake, may once 
more shy away from a show-down with the revision- 
ist powers. In that case, Europe would not be con- 
vulsed by war, but neither would it enjoy the blessing 
of peace. By press barrages which intimidate neigh- 
boring states and by ostentatious military displays the 
axis powers may succeed in extending the sphere of 
their conquests. War may be avoided indefinitely 
by clever manipulation of these weapons, but the 
militarism they engender everywhere may prove, in 
the long run, almost as undesirable as armed con- 
flict itself. Davin H. PoprEr 
MRS. DEAN BROADCASTS ON HITLER SPEECH 

On Friday evening, April 28, Mrs. Dean will par- 
ticipate in a round table discussion of the speech 
Hitler delivers the same day to the German Reichstag. 
This discussion, arranged by NBC, will be broadcast 
over WJZ on a coast to coast hook-up. For exact 
time, consult your newspaper. 


THE F.P.A. 


Secret Armies: The New Technique of Nazi Warfare, 
by John L. Spivak. New York, Modern Age Books, 1939. 
50 cents. 

A survey of the activities of fascist agents and propa- 


gandists, particularly in Mexico, Panama and the United 
States. 


Through Embassy Eyes, by Martha Dodd. New York, Har- 
court, Brace, 1939. $3.00 


The daughter of an anti-fascist American Ambassador 
to Germany gives an intimate account of her family’s 


BOOKSHELF 


experiences and of her complete disillusionment during 
the course of four years spent in the Nazi Reich. 


The Rape of Palestine, by William B. Ziff. New York, 

Longmans, Green, 1938. $3.50 

An extreme Jewish nationalist, whose point of view is 
not shared by a large majority of his co-religionists, pre- 
sents a biased and in many respects inaccurate history of 
the national home in Palestine. The author makes vitriolic 
attacks on the British, on the recognized Zionist leaders, 
and on democratic and progressive principles generally. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 27, Aprit 28, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMoOnp Lgstrg BugELL, President; DororHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MicHEerzs Dgan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


a 181 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


peed bingy 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Aprit 24.—In the brief interval between President 
Roosevelt's message of April 15 and the reply from 
Chancellor Hitler on April 28, Washington has 
experienced a momentary release from the tension 
of recent weeks. On the surface, the worst fears have 
subsided and faint hopes have begun to revive. But 
beneath the surface hopes and fears are held in 
check, as both Congress and the Executive study the 
future alternatives and consider—somewhat more 
calmly than last week—the implications of the 
American initiative. 

THE POSITION IN CONGRESS. Congress has 
been slow to grasp the meaning of the President’s 
intervention, and is reluctant even now to accept its 
political consequences. To most Washington ob- 
servers, however, it is reasonably clear in this transi- 
tion stage that Congressional opinion is not yet pre- 
pared to accept the responsibility for either of the 
two courses on which the Administration may be 
compelled to embark—peaceful adjustment of the 
Status quo of intervention on the side of Britain and 
France. 

If by some miracle Hitler should open the door 
to peaceful negotiation, the President would find it 
exceedingly difficult to commit the United States to 
any program of economic readjustment in Europe. 
He could appoint an American delegation to a dis- 
armament or economic conference, provided that 
political questions—as he himself suggested—were 
left to the European powers. Even assuming that the 
President had a plan for assuring economic justice, 
he could scarcely go beyond the limits of the recipro- 
cal trade program and the stabilization agreement 
without encountering serious obstacles at home. For 
not only is Congress opposed to political commit- 
ments, but it is unprepared for any economic settle- 
ment which calls for the assumption of permanent 
political responsibilities in Europe. 

On the other hand, while Senator Borah now 
concedes that American public opinion has already 
taken sides in the impending conflict, and that strict 
neutrality is probably impossible, Congress has not 
yet accepted two of the primary assumptions on 
which the President is proceeding. These are, first, 
the assumption that our own vital interests are di- 
rectly involved and, second, that the United States 
can prevent the outbreak of war by throwing its full 
diplomatic and economic weight behind Britain and 
France. Nothing that has happened during the past 


fortnight has altered Congressional opinion on these 
two points. Although Congress has actually author. 
ized nearly two billion dollars for national defense, 
and is prepared to vote unlimited funds for defense 
of the Western Hemisphere, it is still reluctant to 


endorse any policy which may, in its opinion, lead to | 


military intervention in Europe or the Far East. 
THE EXECUTIVE POSITION. These important 


reservations cannot obscure the fact that the Execy. | 


tive position has been materially strengthened in 
relation to Congress. As a result of his peace offer to 


Hitler and Mussolini, the President has temporarily | 


silenced those critics who had loudly condemned his 
previous attacks on the dictators, and has cut the 
ground from under advocates of an American nev- 
trality policy. If the offer is rejected, or even parried 
by Hitler, the way will be paved for revision of the 
existing Neutrality Act, at least to the extent of 
permitting the export of arms and war material to 
Britain and France. 

The Executive also extended its powers in other 
directions last week, when the House voted to ex- 
tend for two years, or until June 30, 1941, the Presi- 


dent’s authority to change the gold content of the | 


dollar and continue the operations of the $2,000,- 
000,000 stabilization fund. Passed by a record vote 
of 225 to 158, the measure was sent to the Senate 
with only one change in the present law—a proviso 
that the Treasury Department’s annual report on 
the stabilization fund be sent to Congress as well as 


to the President. Coupled with other new powers in | 


the hands of the Executive, such as the Export 
Import Bank, the Securities and Exchange Commis- 


sion and the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, ' 


this new extension implements the financial diplo- 
macy which the Administration is prepared to em- 
ploy in the coming struggle for power. 


In weighing its position on the eve of Chancellor | 


Hitler’s Reichstag speech, however, the Administra- 
tion is faced with one major uncertainty. This is the 
possibility that Prime Minister Chamberlain is pre- 
pared to make another appeasement effort. If Hitler 


rejects the President’s offer, the Administration is | 
prepared to go to Congress with a program of eco- | 


nomic measures short of war, combined with a 
pledge that American troops will not be sent to 
Europe. But if Mr. Chamberlain makes a new ap- 
peasement offer to the dictatorships, the President 
may be faced with the uncomfortable choice of either 
opposing British policy or participating in another 
Munich. W. T. STONE 


