| 


CE 
mber |, 
le voters 
this o¢ 
>rnment, 
civilians 
electoral 
00k the 
ion with 
arrive ip 
> Greeks 
iting the 


wing Its 


LANCE 
ssia and 
ajor fac. 
-d States 
changes 
W ashing. 
to “hold 
ther that 
egic and 
pport of 


izes that 
y joining 
: govern. 
s formed 

received 
nced that 
archy did 
- because 
- bulwark 
ed States 
forces in 
splays of 
W/ ashing- 
er to im 
n the po 

As yet, 
of aiding 
ldition to 
he Greek 
Greece 4 
rt-Import 
1 tapped, 
il person- 
y because 
nts since 


TADSEL 


PEKIGHICAL Koe* 


GENERAL LIBRARY 
waty, oF mice 


OCT 1 0 198 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library Sa 
University of Wichican 


Ann Arhor. Mtchican 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


You. XXV, No. 51 


Ocrosser 4, 1946 


STALIN'S PEACE ASSURANCES REFLECT INTERNAL PROBLEMS 


TALIN’S answers of September 24 to a series of 

questions posed by Alexander Werth, Moscow 
correspondent of the Sunday Times of London, rep- 
resented an attempt to assure the Russian people 
that they are not, as would sometimes appear from 
a perusal of the Soviet press, in imminent danger 
of foreign encirclement and another war. It is neces- 
sary, said Stalin, to distinguish sharply between “the 
noise” about a new war and “the real danger of 
war’ which, he added, ‘does not at present exist.” 
Even more significantly, Stalin minimized the threat 
of atomic bombs which, he asserted (contrary to the 
views generally held by Western scientists) ‘‘are 
intended for intimidating weak nerves” but “can- 
not decide the outcome of war.” This emphasis on 
the indecisive character of a weapon which in West- 
etn countries has been pictured as catastrophically 
destructive is clearly intended to dispel such fears 
as may have been generated among Russians by re- 
ports that have filtered in about the havoc wrought 
at Hiroshima. 


RUSSIA’S WAR-WEARINESS. Stalin’s effort to 
alleviate fear of war among the Russians at a time 
when spokesmen for the U.S.S.R., Yugoslavia and 
the Ukraine are voicing suspicions about the West- 
ern powers, indicates accurate appraisal of the mood 
of let-down and fatigue which the Russians, like 
other war-tired peoples, have experienced since the 
termination of hostilities. If there is one point on 
which all observers returning from Russia agree, it 
is that the Russian people are profoundly weary of 
War, are anxious to obtain some of the bare neces- 
sities of life they have had to do without during 
the grim years of successive Five-Year plans and 
war, and fervently hope that the clouds of another 
war will soon disappear from the horizon. Yet these 
weary people must be kept keyed up for unremitting 


labor in the coming years of reconstruction, with 
few immediate rewards in terms of material satis- 
faction. Stalin’s previous statement about “capitalist 
encirclement”’ on February 9, 1946, on the eve of 
elections, may have been an expression of the views 
he then held about world affairs. More probably it 
was intended as a goad to give fresh stimulus to 
people who must go on with the disheartening tasks 
of clearing rubble, rebuilding towns and villages, 
and reconstructing shattered industries and farms 
while suffering from food shortages that have caused 
American experts to wonder how Russia will carry 
on when the aid it has been receiving from UNRRA 
ceases the first of the year. It would be a mistake to 
exaggerate reports of food riots and of unrest in 
various parts of the U.S.S.R., particularly in the 
Ukraine, long noted for its nationalist spirit. But 
apparently Stalin, who in the past has displayed con- 
summate skill in appraising the temper of the people 
in moments of crisis, feels the need for a “breathing- 
space.” He has therefore told the Russians that he 
does not think “the ruling circles of Great Britain 
and the United States could create a ‘capitalistic en- 
circlement’ of the Soviet Union even if they wanted 
to do this, which, however, we cannot affirm.” 


NO IMMEDIATE CHANGE IN POLICY. This 
does not mean, however, that Russia is about to re- 
cede from the positions to which it had advanced in 
Europe and Asia during the year of readjustment 
when all the victors were seeking to define their 
foreign policy objectives. Recrimination continues 
between Russian and American zones of occupation 
in Austria and Korea. Stalin has demanded the with- 
drawal of American forces from China. On the 
issues of free navigation of the Danube, the 
United States is reported to have yielded to 
the adamant Russian view that the strategic river 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


oooNT=lle—————_—SX! Page Two 


should be controlled solely by Danubian countries— 
although in the matter of trade a clause providing 
for most-favored-nation treatment was inserted into 
the Rumanian treaty at Paris over Moscow’s ob- 
jections. Nor has Moscow relaxed its demands on 
Turkey, warning the Turks in a note bearing the 
same date as Stalin’s statement that they must not 
turn to non-Black Sea powers for support against 
the U.S.S.R. The Russian representative on the scien- 
tific committee of the United Nations Atomic En- 
ergy Commission did sign the report of the com- 
mittee, but his colleague in the Economic and Social 
Council expressed strong views in opposition to 
Britain and the United States on a wide range of 
problems, including refugees and proposals for re- 
construction of European economy. The United 
States, for its part, has announced that units of the 
American navy will remain in Mediterranean 
waters. 

Stalin’s statement will play an important part in 
the debate on foreign policy now proceeding in this 
country—those who favor a policy of conciliation 
pointing to it as evidence of peaceful intentions on 
Russia’s part, those who favor “toughness” insist- 
ing that the Kremlin match words with deeds. A 
study of what the Russians themselves are writing 
about the trend in world affairs since V-E Day in- 
dicates several points worth bearing in mind when 
we judge Russia’s policy. The Russians are gen- 
uinely convinced that they made a major contribu- 
tion to the winning of the war in Europe, not only 
in terms of man-power and economic losses, as is 


— 
——— 


readily admitted in other countries, but also jy 
terms of ideas which, they contend, helped to loose, 
the grip of pro-Fascist elements on the Axis satel. 
lites as well as on some of the liberated Allied 
countries. They consequently feel entitled to de 
mand a share of world power commensurate with 
what they regard as their wartime contributiog 
Meanwhile, they believe that the United States ang 
Britain have not always been on the side of ant) 
Fascist forces in Europe, and that the attitude of 
the Western powers on such questions as Franq 
Spain, the pace of agrarian reform, the nationaliza 
tion of industries, and so on, has retarded the 
progress of what they call ‘democratic’ forces og 
the continent. 

Genuine, too, appears to be the belief expressed 
by Russian spokesmen that, had President Roose 
velt lived, the United States would have followed, 
different course toward Europe, and particularly to 
ward Russia. Since supporters of Mr. Wallace hay 
also taken this view, it is highly important that the 
Washington administration should furnish the pub 
lic such evidence as may be available concerning 
the views Mr. Roosevelt may have held about Russia 
before and after Yalta. Information on this point 
would help us to decide whether Mr. Byrnes, who 
took over the administration of a policy that had 
been in the making for a number of years, has dis 
regarded the wishes of the late President or ha 
adapted them to a situation that may have begun 
to alter before his death. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


RUSSIA QUESTIONS UN PROPOSALS FOR EUROPEAN RECOVERY 


Twice during the past week the Russian delegate 
to the UN Economic and Social Council, Nikolai I. 
Feonov, rejected proposals calling for international 
action in the solution of Europe’s economic prob- 
lems. On September 25 he flatly rejected the recom- 
mendations of the Council’s Temporary Subcom- 
mission on the Economic Reconstruction of Devas- 
tated Areas, which outlined a program of mutual 
assistance for the continent, including the creation 
of a permanent European Economic Commission. 
Again, on September 27, in reply to a United States 
proposal that the question of the free navigation of 
the Danube be acted on by an international confer- 
ence, he objected to joint action. In both instances 
the position taken by Russia follows the views ex- 
pressed by Molotov and Vishinsky when world eco- 
nomic problems were under consideration at the 
Paris Conference.* 

RUSSIA’S OBJECTIONS. That Russia favors a 
policy of economic nationalism modified only by ex- 
clusive, bilateral agreements was indicated in Mr. 
Feonov’'s criticisms of the program outlined by the 
Council's experts. Their suggestion that an economic 


*Foreign Policy Bulletin, August 23, 1946. 


commission for Europe be set up to coordinate and 
integrate the various national programs of recon 
struction was misinterpreted by the Soviet delegate 
as being a plan to transform Europe into a self 
contained unit. The economists, however, had n0 
such object in view, and their factual findings reveal 
that any attempt to create a closed economy in Ev 
rope would be futile. What they did emphasize was 
the necessity of a return to multilateral trade at the 
earliest possible moment. The Soviet delegate ob 
jected to the report’s criticism of bilateral pacts 
contending that these treaties contributed in an in 
mediate and practical way to the work of recom 
structing the continent’s economy. The usefulness 
of such bilateral agreements as an emergency devict 
was conceded by the authors of the report, who as 
serted nevertheless that economic logic and the les 
sons of experience proved that multilateral trade 
was indispensable to the prosperity of Europe. These 
views were not shared by Mr. Feonov. Concerning 


the question of external credits for European recom | 


struction, he argued that the report’s recommends 
tions, if carried out, would interfere with the eco 
nomic independence of some nations. Since the cout 


— 


tries see 
gational 
posed E 
to their 
outside 
ing this 
the Uni 
might u 
in the b 
RUSS 
dations 
Feonov., 
complet 
urgent 
wrough 
parallel 
fact thé 
if they 
and sh 
sion’s | 
theoret 
ited th 
the rep 
lief pre 
lions oO 
nutritic 
country 
remark 
For 
much « 
omy 0: 
the m. 
and eq 
to be 
nique 
clusion 
barter 
need | 
ent su 
their 1 
der th 
might 
tions, 
their 
ample 
States 
comm 
will r 
trade 
EU) 
With 


cow's 


FOREIG 
Headqua 
Dean, E 
Please al 


=> 


——— 


also ig 
to loosen 
xis satel. 
d Allied 
d to de 
rate with 
tribution, 
tates ang 
of anti 
titude of 
Ss Frang 
tionalizg. 
tded the 


OLCes Op 


x pressed 
it Roose 
lowed 4 
ularly to 
lace have 
that the 
the pub 
mncerning 
ut Russia 
his point 
nes, who 
that had 
has dis 
t or has 
ye begun 


DEAN 
Y 


nate and 
yf recon 
delegate 
> a self 
had no 
gs reveal 
y in Ev 
1SiZeE Was 
Je at the 
gate ob 
al pacts, 
Nn an im 
f recon 
sefulness 
cy device 
who as 
| the les 
al trade 
ye. These 
ncerning 
in reco 
nmenda- 
the eco 
he cout 


tries seeking aid would have to turn to the Inter- 
gational Bank either directly or through the pro- 

sed European economic commission, decisions as 
to their needs, he contended, would be made by an 
outside agency and not by the country itself. In tak- 
ing this position, he undoubtedly had in mind that 
the United States, as the principal supplier of credits, 
might use its lending power to offset Soviet influence 
in the borrowing nation. 


RUSSIA’S URGENT NEEDS. Other recommen- 
dations of the report were also rejected by Mr. 
Feonov, who insisted that the experts had failed 
completely to offer practical remedies for Europe's 
urgent economic needs. Given the destruction 
wrought by the Germans in Russia, which has no 
arallel elsewhere unless it be in Poland, and the 
fact that millions of Russians need immediate help 
if they are to have a bare minimum of food, clothing 
and shelter, it is understandable that the commis- 
sion’s recommendations appear to Feonov as too 
theoretical. Foreign correspondents who recently vis- 
ited the Ukraine and White Russia have confirmed 
the reports of UNRRA observers that when the re- 
lief program is terminated the first of the year, mil- 
lions of Russians will suffer dire hardship and mal- 
nutrition. Although the USSR is potentially a rich 
country, for the time being at any rate it is, as Stalin 
remarked to Donald Nelson, ‘‘a very poor nation.” 

For that reason Russia is in no position to offer 
much economic assistance to the war-ravaged econ- 
omy of Europe; instead, it must seek from Europe 
the maximum possible supply of food, materials 
and equipment if its economic reconstruction is not 
to be unduly prolonged. The most efficient tech- 
nique for its purposes, it has discovered, is the con- 
clusion of bilateral trade pacts which are essentially 
barter deals. But since Russia's trading partners also 
need large imports of goods that it cannot at pres- 
ent supply, they must turn to the West; otherwise 
their reconstruction programs may bog down. Un- 
der the circumstances Russia fears that its influence 
might be undermined in neighboring European na- 
tions, which must perforce maintain and develop 
their economic ties with the West. Thus, for ex- 
ample, Poland joined with Britain and the United 
States in proposing a permanent European economic 
commission, admitting that its reconstruction needs 
will require return to the principle of multilateral 
trade and credit assistance from the West. 

EUROPE AND THE GERMAN ECONOMY. 
With Russia severely weakened by the war, Mos- 
cow's objections to any suggestion that economic 


Page Three 


recovery in Europe requires a revival of German 
economy must be regarded as commonsense concern 
for the future security of the USSR. Nor for that 
matter is Russia willing to approve any attempt to 
create a federation of European states, such as was 
suggested by Mr. Churchill in his speech in Zurich 
on September 19, when he called for a Franco- 
German partnership as the first step. The Council’s 
experts did not discuss the place of Germany in the 
economy of the new Europe, although they were 
instructed to consider this problem. 


Their failure to do so was explained by the fact 
that no reply had been received to their request that 
the Allied Control Council furnish data on the future 
foreign trade of Germany. The German problem, 
however, was brought before the Council by the 
British delegate, Philip J. Noel-Baker, who stated 
that more would have to be “done and said” about 
Germany. To this the Ukrainian delegate, Dr. Lev 
Medved, replied that the German question had al- 
ready been decided at Potsdam, and that he would 
fight any attempt to relate the subject to the Coun- 
cil’s deliberations on Europe’s economy. Yet sec- 
tions of the experts’ report dealing with particular 
countries contain frequent references to the need 
for a solution to the German question, if economic 
recovery in Europe is not to be delayed. The per- 
sisting stalemate among the Big Four on Germany, 
with the resulting threat of a divided Europe, jeop- 
ardizes the possible effectiveness of any program to 
facilitate reconstruction in the devastated areas. 


HAROLD H. HUTCHESON 


American-Russian Rivalry in the Far East: A Study in 
Diplomacy and Power Politics, 1895-1914, by Edward H. 
Zabriskie. Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 1946. $3.50 
A well-documented study of a little known period in the 

relations of the United States and Russia. 


Unwritten Treaty, by James P. Warburg. New York, Har- 

court, Brace, 1946. $2.00 

A plea for the free flow of information across national 
boundaries and the elimination of psychological warfare. 
Dealing with one of the basic freedoms, Mr. Warburg has 
presented a frankly argumentative book, with some analy- 
sis of the OWI program during the war and of the suc- 
cesses and failures of Allied propaganda. 


Hitler’s Professors, by Max Weinrich. New York, Yiddish 
Scientific Institute, 1946. $3.50; paper, $3.00 
A noted scholar, the research director of YIVO, traces 
through Nazi books, periodicals, pamphlets and documents 
the part German scholars played in developing the race 
theory and in planning the destruction of Jews in Germany 
and the mass extinction of the Poles. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 51, Ocrossr 4, 1946. 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; HELEN M. DaccerTT, 
Dean, Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., 
Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Executive Secretary; VERA MICHELES 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. Four Dollars a Year. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Six Dollars a Year 


Sy 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter eri 


WILL HARRIMAN CARRY ON WALLACE PLANS FOR TRADE WITH RUSSIA? 


By appointing W. Averell Harriman, former 
American Ambassador to Britain and war-time en- 
voy to Russia, as Secretary of Commerce on Septem- 
ber 21, President Truman has attempted to do more 
than merely end the cabinet crisis precipitated by 
the recent Byrnes-Wallace controversy on foreign 
policy. By naming a man who is expected to enjoy 
popularity with members of Congress, the Presi- 
dent has also tried to promote smoother relations 
between the legislative branch of the government 
and the Commerce Department, whose budget was 
slashed on July 1 partly because of the personal an- 
tagonism of a number of Congressmen toward Mr. 
Wallace. Above all, Mr. Truman has sought to 
eliminate the friction that existed, during Mr. Wal- 
lace’s term of office, between the State and Com- 
merce Departments on American foreign economic 
policy. 

DISAGREEMENT ON RUSSIAN LOAN. Un- 
der Mr. Wallace’s leadership the Commerce Depart- 
ment took the position that the United States should 
grant Russia a loan on a strictly commercial basis 
and should not use its economic power for the pur- 
pose of inducing Russia to modify its restrictive 
trade arrangements in eastern Europe. In his letter 
to President Truman on July 23 setting forth his 
views on foreign policy, Mr. Wallace declared that 
“the question of a loan (to Russia) should be ap- 
proached on economic and commercial grounds,” 
since in this way the United States would be able to 
demonstrate that it “is not attempting to use its 
economic resources in the game of power politics.” 


On the other hand, the State Department, which 
drafted the three notes Washington has sent to 
Moscow concerning a possible six billion dollar loan, 
has maintained that such a loan should be granted 
only after a satisfactory agreement has been reached 
with Russia regarding Soviet trading practices 
which run counter to American foreign economic 
policy. Although the exact terms laid down by the 
United States in its last note, dated June 13, have 
not been revealed, they apparently include modifi- 
cation of Russia’s bilateral trade agreements with 
various European countries, and acceptance by Mos- 
cow of a plan for the international control of the 
Danube. Despite recent unofficial indications that 
the Kremlin would welcome a loan, no reply has 
yet been received from Moscow, presumably because 
the Soviet Union is unwilling to grant the United 


States larger trading opportunities in eastern Europe 
—at least at this moment, when the Russians are 
deeply conscious of their inability to compete with 
American exports. 


OUTLOOK FOR SOVIET-AMERICAN TRADE 
Whether expansion of Soviet-American trade will 
be urged as insistently by Mr. Harriman as it was 
by Mr. Wallace also remains an open question. The 
former Secretary of Commerce, who believed that 
discussion of long-range economic problems might 
help to clear away political misunderstandings and 
develop mutually useful trade, had arranged—with 
the cooperation of the State Department—to send 
two members of his staff to Moscow during July 
and August to conduct preliminary economic con 
versations. These two representatives, E. C. Ro 
and Lewis Lorwin, recently returned to Washing. 
ton, and on September 19 announced that the Rus. 
sian officials in the Ministry of Foreign Trade and 
the Soviet Chamber of Foreign Commerce had dis 
played keen interest in projects for closer economic 
relations with the United States. The Russians 
pointed out, however, that Soviet industry was still 
in the process of reconversion and reconstruction, 
and as a result their export surplus during the next 
two or three years would be too limited to permit 
them to make any plans for trade expansion. Ney 
ertheless, the Commerce Department’s mission ap 
pears to have helped clear the ground for more active 
Soviet-American economic cooperation. Further steps 
in this direction will depend not only on the pace of 
Russia’s economic recovery, but also on whether the 
United States government is willing to compromise 
with Russia’s restrictive trade policy in eastern Eu 
rope and the Balkans. 

WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


Just published— 


THE RUHR: OBJECT OF ALLIED RIVALRIES 
by Winifred N. Hadsel 


INFLUENCE OF ARMED FORCES ON US. 
FOREIGN POLICY 
by Blair Bolles 


25c. each 


FOREIGN Po.icy REPorRTS are issued on the 1st and 15th 
of each month. 


Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, 3. 


1918 


I 


a. 
Vou. X- 


—_—_—— 


Y.S.- 


ie 
ing 
propos 
Energy} 
opinio 
States 
atomic 
made 
Barucl 
WA 
Presid 
Russiz 
on Ov 
ber 1, 
the A 
First, 
negot 
tive, 
have 
packa 
the U 
bomb 
bomb 
natio 
their 
fissio 
into 
Wall 
prop 
cisior 
Bé 
rand 
in hi 
lace’: 
whic 
lace 


*Fos 


