



ial 
or. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 





Vout. XV, No. 40 JULY 31, 1936 





CLASH IN THE PACIFIC 
By T. A. Bisson and R. A. Goslin 


This brief book analyzes the possible theatre of war in 
the Pacific, points out the interests of the Powers in 
China and explains the conflict with Japan. 


Clash in the Pacific was mailed to F.P.A. members on 
July 6. 


HEADLINE BOOK No. 5 


25 cents paper 35 cents board 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under che act 
of March 3, 1879. 











Library of Congress 


Divigser of Acsésstons 


Washinzton, D. C. 











CIVIL WAR 


IN SPAIN 





SPANISH chapter in the social revolution 

now sweeping the world opened on July 17 
when the Spanish Foreign Legion, commanded by 
General Francisco Franco, launched a _ revolt 
which promptly won control of Spanish Morocco 
and then passed over to the Peninsula. News- 
paper reports have been most confusing, but it 
appears that the rebel troops, comprising about 
half the army and supported by many peasants, 
small bourgeois and adherents of the monarchy 
and church, soon occupied about half the country. 
A rebel army led by General Mola marched to- 
ward Madrid, but was repulsed in the Guadarra- 
ma mountains on July 27. Although the govern- 
ment forces, which include the majority of the 
Civil Guard, the navy and the airforce, have now 
taken the offensive, the outcome of the revolt is 
still uncertain. The government places its own 
casualties during the first ten days of the revolt 
at 19,000, and rebel losses bring the probable total 
to more than 30,000. 


To meet this crisis President Azafia appointed 
a new Prime Minister, Giral Pereira; while the 
government distributed arms to about 50,000 
Marxist militiamen and broadcast appeals releas- 
ing soldiers from allegiance to rebel officers. Gen- 
erally the industrial workers, both men and 
women, have rallied to the Republic’s defense in 
one of the bloodiest civil wars in Spanish history. 

Although popular sympathy in the democratic 
countries is with the Spanish Republic, the respon- 
sibility for this crisis must to a certain extent rest 
on the Left coalition which has been in power 
since the February elections. Despite the elec- 
toral pact supposedly uniting the Left Repub- 
licans and the Marxist groups, the coalition has 
been rent by growing disunity. Although the 
Marxist groups hold 100 seats in the Cortes, they 
have refused to participate in the cabinet, which 
has been controlled by the Left Republicans. The 
Marxists, in turn, have been split into three sec- 





tions—the relatively conservative Socialists, led 
by Indalecia Prieto, who favor participation in a 
reformist cabinet; the extremists, led by Largo 
Caballero, who demand a communist revolution; 
and the Communists proper. In addition, a strong 
anarcho-syndicalist movement, led by Angel Pes- 
tafia and dominating the National Confederation 
of Labor, has insisted on direct action. Caballero’s 
efforts to unite the Socialists, Communists and 
Syndicalists into a proletariat front met with 
failure. 


During the five months preceding the outbreak 
of the present revolt, Spanish workers under Syn- 
dicalist and Communist leadership engaged in a 
series of strikes which almost paralyzed Spain’s 
economic life. In April the National Confedera- 
tion of Labor called a general strike in Madrid to 
protest against the “excesses” committed by the 
Fascist Leagues. More recently, thousands of 
workers went on strike in the construction and 
clothing trade industries. Altogether, in the 
month beginning June 16, 145 new strikes were 
called. In a number of cases the Socialist unions 
agreed to accept the findings of arbitration courts; 
but Syndicalist agitators insisted on a continuance 
of direct action. 


Meanwhile, a series of political murders were 
committed by both Socialists and Fascists. Be- 
tween February and July, 234 persons were 
killed and nearly a thousand wounded in political 
brawls, and numerous churches were burnt. 
A climax was reached on July 13 with the assas- 
sination of José Calvo Sotelo, outstanding Right 
leader, by members of the Assault guards, a 
branch of the government forces, in retaliation 
for the murder of a guard officer the previous 
night. The government, which on April 4 had 
suppressed the Fascist Leagues and had attempt- 
ed to round up Fascist agitators, proved power- 
less to maintain order. Instead of allowing a pub- 
lic debate on the Calvo Sotelo murder, it adjourned 
































































the Cortes, whereupon the Conservative opposi- 
tion announced their permanent withdrawal. 

Whether victory goes to the Republic or the 
rebels, the future of Spain is not bright. A tri- 
umph for the Right would undoubtedly bring into 
power a repressive régime lacking the will to 
make needed reforms and sympathetic to Ger- 
many and Italy. Moreover, should a Rightist 
Spain grant a naval or air base to either Ger- 
many or Italy, the balance of power in the 
Mediterranean would be upset, to the detriment 
of democratic France and Britain. 

On the other hand, if the Republic wins, the re- 
formist government headed by President Azajfia 
will probably be forced to give way to a Commu- 
nist régime dominated by the workers. Should 
the Marxist and Syndicalist groups succeed in 
forging their unity in the heat of battle and in 
tasting military victory, it is doubtful that they 
will lay down their arms until the social revolu- 
tion is completed. They may be strong enough to 
destroy the present economic structure of the 
country; but it remains to be seen whether they 
will be able to erect a communist state in a coun- 
try whose people are distinguished by the most 
extreme individualism in the world. 

The danger of foreign intervention to repress 
communism in Spain may prove even greater than 
in the case of Soviet Russia. Communist propa- 
ganda from Spain might be carried on against the 
Carmona dictatorship in Portugal, the British 
base in Gibraltar and the international city of 
Tangier, and penetrate from Spanish Morocco 
into the remainder of North Africa. Britain, 
which is bound to Portugal by the alliance of 1661 
and is vitally interested in Gibraltar, can hardly 
be indifferent to such developments, and even 
France might find it difficult to remain aloof if its 
North African Empire were thus threatened. 


On July 25 the French cabinet decided “not to 
intervene in any manner whatever in the internal 
conflict in Spain.” The French government, how- 
ever, may legally sell arms to the Spanish au- 
thorities, so long as it has not recognized the insur- 
gency of the rebels. It has already been charged 
that Paris and Moscow are extending aid and 
sympathy to President Azafia, and that Berlin 
and Rome are assisting the rebels. Five nations 
—Britain, France, Italy, Germany and the United 
States—have sent about 40 warships to Spanish 
waters, ostensibly for the purpose of evacuating 
their nationals. Skillful diplomacy may be neces- 
sary to prevent the Spanish civil war from de- 
veloping into an international conflagration. 

RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


Page Two 








IN SEARCH OF A NEW LOCARNO 
After some preliminary skirmishes regarding 
the scope and value of a three-power Locarno con- 
ference, the Prime Ministers and Foreign Minis- 


ters of Britain, France and Belgium held a one-f 


day meeting in London on July 23. In the diplo- 
matic exchanges which preceded this meeting 
France had refused to yield to Italy’s demand for 
German participation, while Britain had insisted 
that conversations between the three World War 
allies should do nothing to wound Nazi suscepti- 
bilities or prejudge a five-power conference. The 
official communiqué, reflecting the British view, 
stated that all European countries should seek a 
general settlement, which could be achieved only 
by “the free cooperation of all the powers con- 
cerned,” and that nothing ‘‘would be more fatal to 
the hopes of such a settlement than a division, ap- 
parent or real, of Europe into opposing blocs.” 
The three governments agreed to hold a five-power 
conference as soon as convenient, for the purpose 
of negotiating a new Locarno agreement and re- 
solving, “through the collaboration of all con- 
cerned,” the situation created by Germany’s re- 
occupation of the Rhineland. Should progress be 
made at this conference, the discussion might be 
so broadened as to facilitate, ““with the collabora- 
tion of other interested powers, the settlement of 
those problems the solution of which is essential 
to the peace of Europe.”’ Pending conclusion of 
a new Locarno, the March 19 agreement by which 
Britain promised to aid France and Belgium in 
case of German aggression remains in force. It 
is also understood that Britain concurred in the 
French thesis that a general European settlement 
should protect the interests of the Soviet Union 
and the Little Entente. 

The London communiqué, which indicates that 
Britain, France and Belgium are ready to open 
discussions with Germany on terms of equality, 
has produced a good impression in Berlin; while 
Britain’s decision, on July 27, to terminate the 
Mediterranean pact against Italy, opens the way 
to Italian participation in the proposed confer- 
ence. The real question is whether, when this 
conference moves from specific Locarno to general 
European problems, Nazi Germany will agree to 
negotiate with Soviet Russia or clarify its inten- 
tions in Eastern Europe. Should Hitler demand 
Soviet exclusion from European councils and a 
free hand in the East, the Socialist government of 
France might be forced to choose between col- 
laboration with Britain, Germany and Italy in a 
purely Western settlement, or closer ties with the 
Soviet Union, at the risk of further alienating the 
pro-German and anti-Soviet sections of British 
opinion. VERA MICHELES DEAN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 40, Jury 31, 


1936. Published weekly by che Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lesiie BUELL, President; EstHmr G. OGpEN, Secretary; VERA MicHELES Dean, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


ey TARTRATE RER TOUS 





— 


eee 











