ailing 
dicate 
ire on 
eared 
ccord- 
-volu- 
lected 
1 Al 
how- 
there 
n will 
gress, 
talled 
ormu- 
| may 
vardly 
nacho 
Presi- 
ration 


ly 14, 
sta by 
‘amon 
Aside 
terfer- 
st was 
ar-cut. 
- been 
ignift 
. Both 
25 and 
pear 
oncies. 
90D 


|FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 


9% Office at New York, 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated (940 a Mak es 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. , AL nm 
PERIODICAL ROE D 
GENERAL LIBRARY SECOND CLASS MAIL 
Vou. XIX, No. 40 JuLY 26, 1940 UNIV. OF MIGH. 
AMERICA’S CHOICE TODAY Gesieral Library 
by W. T. Stone and the F.P.A. Research Staff 
Cataclysmic events have brought the Western Hemisphere to the University of Michigan 
threshold of fateful —— This pamphlet examines the far- 
reaching contingencies that may arise, and analyzes the military, 
political and economic problems which may confront the United Ana Arbor, Michigan 
States in the event of a German victory. 
July issue of World Affairs Pamphlets . . . 25 cents 
F.P.A. members will receive this pamphlet | 
BRITAIN CLOSES BURMA ROAD 


An's decision to close the Burma road for 
a period of three months beginning July 18, 
within which London hopes that a Sino-Japanese 
peace settlement can be arranged, has already led to 
significant changes in the Far Eastern scene. At 
Tokyo a new Japanese Cabinet, more nationalistic 
and more inclined to align Japan with the Fascist 
axis, has taken office. At Chungking the Chinese 
authorities fear that an effort is being made to coerce 
them into signing a Japanese-dictated peace—al- 
though London disclaims any such intention. Mean- 
while, Washington gives no indication that these 
new developments will modify the poiicy it has fol- 
lowed throughout the Sino-Japanese conflict. 

The increased difficulties China must face as a 
result of the closing of the Burma road are con- 
siderable. Yet it would be premature to conclude 
that Chinese resistance will collapse automatically 
or in the near future as the result of a reduction of 
military supplies. Most of China’s munitions are 
manufactured locally, and some stocks of heavy 
munitions have been accumulated. The war in China, 
now in its fourth year, bids fair to remain the chief 
obstacle to Tokyo’s program of territorial aggrandize- 
ment in other areas of the Far East. Even were 
certain of these areas to succumb to Japan as a re- 
sult of French or British weakness, they could not 
be firmly held so long as one million or more Jap- 
anese troops were bogged down in China. A Sino- 
Japanese ‘‘peace’’ settlement which confirmed pres- 
ent Japanese gains in China would, in fact, free 
Japan’s economic resources and man power for ef- 
fective consolidation of a “new order” in East Asia 
embracing the whole of the South Seas region. What 
is more important, coercion of nationalist China by 
the Western powers at this time would strengthen the 
friendly ties now existing between China and the 
Soviet Union — a development that might mark a 
historic turning point in the Far East. 


THE ANGLO-JAPANESE AGREEMENT. To- 
kyo’s demand that Britain halt traffic on the Burma- 
Yunnan highway, originally presented to the British 
government on June 24, had followed immediately 
on Japanese diplomatic successes at Tientsin and in 
Indo-China. Early in July Britain sent a preliminary 
reply, evidently negative in character, but Tokyo 
urged the British government “to reconsider’ and 
this request was transmitted to London on July 9 
by the British Ambassador, Sir Robert Leslie Craigie. 
Formal confirmation of the agreement, first reported 
on July 12, was given to Parliament on July 17. 
Opposition to this “appeasement’’ gesture mani- 
fested in Parliament, as well as criticism expressed 
in the United States, apparently caused the Prime 
Minister to present a report to Commons on the fol- 
lowing day. 

The Anglo-Japanese agreement, as outlined by 
Mr. Churchill, was restricted to trade matters af- 
fecting Burma and Hongkong; mention of a peace 
settlement was not connected with the actual terms 
of the agreement. These stated that the Burma gov- 
ernment had agreed to suspend for a period of 
three months the transit to China of gasoline, trucks 
and railway material, as well as arms and ammuni- 
tion. Shipment of the same goods was to be pro- 
hibited in Hongkong. The Prime Minister, in de- 
fending the agreement, declared that it was neces- 
sary to remove Anglo-Japanese “tension” at a time 
when the Empire was “engaged in a life or death 
struggle.” The agreement was “temporary,” he 
stated, and it was hoped that within this period of 
three months a Sino-Japanese settlement could be 
achieved. Britain wished to improve its relations 
with Japan and to see “a free and independent fu- 
ture” assured to China; it was prepared, after peace 
was concluded, to negotiate with the Chinese gov- 
ernment for revision of treaties affecting extrater- 
ritoriality and foreign concessions. 


EFFECTS IN THE FAR EAST. The Japanese 
Cabinet which concluded this agreement resigned on 
July 17, and Prince Konoye, Premier of Japan’s first 
war cabinet in 1937-38, was given Imperial author- 
ity to form a new government. Overthrow of the 
Yonai Cabinet was precipitated by the resignation 
of the Army Minister, General Shunroku Hata, and 
was accompanied by newspaper statements advo- 
cating a more vigorous foreign policy. Yosuke Mat- 
suoka, the new Foreign Minister, has firmly sup- 
ported the army's expansionist program and for some 
years has headed a Fascist party in Japan. 

Prince Konoye’s efforts to organize a totalitarian 
party were still in process when the sudden over- 
throw of the Cabinet occurred. Actual formation of 
the new party has not yet been announced, and old- 
established habits may tend to delay its emergence. 
In foreign policy, the Konoye Cabinet will seize 
every opportunity for further expansion which the 
European war may present. Closer ties with Ger- 
many and Italy will be fostered. Additional moves 
against Britain, invited by the surrenders already 
made to the former Cabinet, are a distinct possibility. 

At Chungking, on July 17, the Foreign Office 
spokesman characterized Britain’s agreement with 
Japan as “unfriendly and unlawful.” He emphatically 
stated that Chinese resistance would continue, and 
this point was strongly reaffirmed by the Chinese 
Foreign Minister, Wang Chung-hui. 

THE AMERICAN POSITION. A considerable 


Page Two 


— 
——— 


divergence in the British and American viewpoints 
became apparent on July 16, when Secretary Hull 
issued a statement at Washington which pointedly 
condemned the Anglo-Japanese agreement. He de. 
clared that the American government has a ‘legit 
mate interest in the keeping open of arteries of 
commerce in every part of the world” and considers 
that agreements such as those taken in regard to the 
Burma Road and the Indo-China Railway ‘would 
constitute unwarranted interpositions of obstacles tp 
world trade.” Along the Burma-Yunnan route, jt 
should be noted, pass not only munitions for Ching 
but also large shipments of tung oil, antimony and 
tungsten to the United States as repayment for $45, 
000,000 of American credits to China. 


In response to Secretary Hull’s statement, reports 
from London declared that Washington had been 
informed in advance of the situation which had de. 
veloped, but had not indicated that it was prepared 
to adopt measures in the Far East strong enough to 
make the agreement unnecessary. London dispatches 
also stressed the ‘‘ambiguous’’ position of the United 
States, which objected to the Anglo-Japanese agree. 
ment but was itself supplying the bulk of Japan's 
imports cf war materials. Although the American 
fleet has been retained in the Pacific, there is at pres 
ent no other indication of the course which this 
country may follow in the Far East. 


T. A. Bisson 


BRITAIN REJECTS HITLER’S PEACE BID 


Chancellor Hitler's “last appeal” to the British 
people for a “common sense peace,” delivered in his 
Reichstag speech on July 19, was briefly rejected by 
Lord Halifax, British Foreign Secretary, in a speech 
broadcast on July 22. The German Chancellor ad- 
dressed Britain as a victor speaking to an already 
vanquished country, which he expected to sue for 
peace without specifying the terms of the ultimate 
settlement he might have in mind. He reiterated that 
he had never desired war with Britain or the de- 
struction of the British Empire. He said he felt only 
“disgust” at the thought of a fight to the finish, 
which kept him from his principal task—the build- 
ing of “‘a state with a new social order and the finest 
possible standard of culture’’—but that British ‘‘poli- 
ticians” had “only a single cry . . . that the war 
must go on.’ As in previous appeals to other coun- 
tries, Hitler tried to arouse the British people against 
their government, hinting that the British cabinet 
would take refuge in Canada, leaving the people to 
endure “unending suffering and misery.” He also 
warned the British that any hopes they might en- 
tertain regarding German-Russian estrangement 
were unjustified, because relations between the two 
countries has been “finally established,” and their 


respective spheres of influence defined. To Hitler's 
appeal Lord Halifax answered: ‘We shall not cease 
fighting until freedom for ourselves and others has 
been secured.” 

BRITAIN’S INTERNAL UNITY. The extent to 
which Hitler’s “last appeal” may serve to divide the 
British people and produce the kind of internal split 


which in one continental country after another ma- | 


terially aided Nazi victories, depends both on the 


domestic situation in Britain, and on its govern: | 


ment’s appraisal of the support it might obtain from 
the European continent and from overseas. Some of 
the British leaders who had advocated ‘‘appease- 
ment” (and, according to Hitler, deserve praise, not 


Samuel Hoare, is serving as British Ambassador in 
Madrid, where he is reported to have received peace 
proposals from Nazi sources. But these leaders, fat 
from having the approval of the British people to 
whom Hitler was appealing, have been publicly dis- 
avowed, and replaced, in key posts like the Ministries 
of Labor and Supply, by representatives of the 
“people” such as Ernest Bevin and Herbert Mor 
rison. That these changes in the personnel of the 
cabinet have immeasurably increased public confi 


—— 
— 


dence an 
the belief 
cator, wh 
Times On 
ing not t 
way of | 
will have 
successfu 
ernment | 
Meanv 
British c: 
be furnis 
pied by 
dicated | 
ment, wl 
be assen 
special n 
Netherla 
German 
Netherla 
been art 
German 
that crit 
is being 
but also 
are dem; 
Axis po 
the conf 
brought 
gaty ap) 
ciliatory 
cently, s 
while T 
envenon 
unless I 
German 
the con 
a shred 
cept to 


Isolated 
Alfrec 
A pen 

domestic 

former 

Buell p 

political 


~ | relation: 
blame), remain in the cabinet, and one of them, Sit | 


fusion « 
urges n 
offers a 
world a 


The W 
4th e 
A tin 

ence va 

—_ -—- 

FOREIGN 

Headquar 

Entered a: 


Eso 1g 


Jnited 
igree- 
ipan’s 
erican 

pres- 
1 this 


ON 


itler's 
cease 
rs has 


ent to 
le the 
L split 
© ma 
nthe 
»vern- 
from 
me of 
pease- 
e, not 
m, Sif 


jor in | 


peace 
‘s, far 
ple to 
ly dis- 
istries 
£ the 
Motr- 
of the 
confi- 


— Page Three 


dence and strengthened Britain’s internal unity is 
the belief of R. H. Tawney, Laborite writer and edu- 
cator, who in a letter published by The New York 
Times on July 21, argues that the British are fight- 
ing not to defend capitalism or imperialism, but a 
way of life they all have in common. This unity 
will have to be broken down either by threats or 
successful invasion before the present British gov- 
ernment sues for peace. 

Meanwhile, from the European continent the 
British can expect only such incidental aid as may 
be furnished by unrest in the territories now occu- 
pied by the Germans. That such unrest exists is in- 
dicated by reports that a Norwegian rump parlia- 
ment, which was to ratify a Nazi régime, could not 
be assembled owing to popular opposition; that 
special military courts have been established in the 
Netherlands to try persons accused of insulting the 
German people and nation, and that prominent 
Netherlanders, including colonial officials, have 
been arrested in retaliation for the detention of 
German residents in the Dutch East Indies; and 
that criticism of the Pétain government in France 
is being expressed not only by the German press, 
but also by French political groups in Paris which 
are demanding new men and new ideas. Nor are the 
Axis powers finding it altogether easy to reconcile 
the conflicting interests of small countries they have 
brought into their sphere of influence. Thus Hun- 
gaty appears to be disgruntled by Germany’s con- 
ciliatory attitude toward Rumania which, until re- 
cently, seemed favorable toward France and Britain, 
while Turkey is alarmed by German attempts to 
envenom its relations with the Soviet Union. Yet, 
unless Britain succeeds not merely in fending off a 


| German invasion, but in reasserting its influence on 


the continent, the small countries which still retain 
a shred of independence will have little choice ex- 
cept to move into either the German or the Russian 


camp. This “choice,” carried out under Soviet military 
control, was made in favor of Russia by Estonia, 
Latvia and Lithuania which, in the elections of 
July 14 and 15, voted to be incorporated into the 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. 

AMERICAN PARTY PLATFORMS. From the 
United States Britain can expect little beyond sym- 
pathy during the interim period which must elapse 
between the political conventions and the November 
elections. Isolationist and pacifist sentiments were 
at least as strong and vocal in Chicago as in Phila- 
delphia, and the platforms of the contending parties 
vie with each other in their professions of peace, 
their desire to avoid war outside the Western Hemi- 
sphere, and their determination (which may prove 
incompatible with a policy of peace) to defend this 
hemisphere and the Monroe Doctrine. What the 
Presidential nominees will do with these platforms 
once they are elected is another question. Mr. Will- 
kie, in a number of public pronouncements preced- 
ing his nomination, had indicated that he believed 
the Allies were this country’s first line of defense, 
and should be given all possible aid short of war. 
Mr. Roosevelt, in his acceptance speech on July 20, 
brushed aside his party’s platform and said he did 
not recant “‘the sentiments of sympathy with all free 
peoples resisting . . . aggression or begrudge the 
material aid that we have given them,” and ex- 
pressed the hope that, should the government next 
January pass into “untried hands,” they “will not 
substitute appeasement and compromise with those 
who seek to destroy all democracies everywhere, in- 
cluding here.” Whatever may be the personal senti- 
ments of the two Presidential candidates, however, 
they do not provide concrete assistance to Britain, 
whose decision whether or not to heed Hitler’s “last 
appeal” will have to be reached solely on the basis 
of its own appraisal of the international outlook. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Isolated America, by Raymond Leslie Buell. New York, 
Alfred A. Knopf, 1940. $3.00 

A penetrating analysis of the relationship between the 
domestic and foreign policies of the United States, by the 
former President of the Foreign Policy Association. Mr. 
Buell provides a critical study of recent economic and 
political trends, and a comprehensive survey of our foreign 
relations since the World War, concluding that our con- 
fusion of thought has left us dangerously isolated. He 
urges mediation in the Asiatic and European wars, and 
offers a program for future reconstruction and a new 
world association. 


The World Since 1914, by Walter Consuelo Langsam. 
4th ed. New York, Macmillan, 1940. $5.00 


A timely revision of a text which is practically a refer- 
ence vade mecum. 


Shanghai: City For Sale, by Ernest O. Hauser. New York, 
Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1940. $3.00 


Highlights of Shanghai’s history during .re century of 
its modern existence, written with dash and flavor. 


Economic Warfare, by Paul Einzig. New York, Macmillan, 
1940. $1.90 


The facile author ranges over all the economic problems 
of the war, often indulging in rather glib generalizations. 
Part of the book is already outdated. 


Japan’s Case Examined, by Westel W. Willoughby. Balti- 
more, The Johns Hopkins Press, 1940. $2.50 


A useful study of Japan’s aims and policies in China, 
the validity of Japan’s case, and the recent Far Eastern 
policy of the United States. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 40, Juty 26, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lager, Secretary; Vera MicHELEs Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JuLy 22.—As Congress returned to Washington 
this week after recesses taken for the political con- 
ventions, the Administration began detailed presen- 
tation of the next steps in its giant defense program. 
On July 20 President Roosevelt signed the two- 
ocean navy bill authorizing a 70 per cent increase 
in fleet tonnage. Two days later Secretary Knox and 
other Navy officials began their testimony before a 
House Appropriations Subcommittee, where they 
urged approval of estimates of $936,000,000—about 
$178,000,000 to start the new program and the re- 
mainder for other projects. War Department spokes- 
men, headed by Secretary Stimson, were scheduled 
to appear before the Subcommittee immediately af- 
terward to seek $3,911,995,000 for Army equip- 
ment for a force of 2,000,000 men. 


The Army and Navy requests are being made 
pursuant to the President's message of July 10 urg- 
ing “total defense’’ and pledging that American 
men would not be sent “to take part in European 
wars,” although they would repel aggression against 
the United States and the Western Hemisphere. Of 
the funds envisaged in the message, $2,161,441,957 
is to be spent by July 1, 1941, while $2,686,730,000 
is obligated for future expenditure in the form of 
contract authorizations. Since more than $5,000,000,- 
000 has already been made available for defense re- 
quirements in regular, supplementary, and deficiency 
appropriation bills passed in the last few months, 
the total national provision for military purposes in 
the fiscal year 1941 should exceed $10,000,000,- 
000. This figure almost equals the record of $11,- 
011,387,000 appropriated for the World War fiscal 
year 1918. 


THE TWO-OCEAN NAVY. The broad objective 
sought by the Navy Department in the naval ex- 
pansion act is security against any possible com- 
bination of hostile fleets, even if they should attack 
simultaneously in both oceans. For this purpose, full 
equality with all potential enemies is not necessary, 
because the effectiveness of attacking vessels is 
diminished as the distance from their bases increases. 
The strength now considered essential for two- 
ocean defense, as compared with the existing fleet, 
is indicated in the following table. The ‘‘two-ocean’”’ 
figures include ships now in service, as well as the 
1,325,000 tons of vessels authorized in the act of 
July 20, and about 137 vessels of almost 900,000 tons 
now under construction. 


Types Built 1940 The “Two-Ocean” Nay 
No. Tonnage No. T onnage 

Battleships 15 464,300 35 1,281,800 
Aircraft carriers 6 134,800 20 460,600 
Cruisers 37 328,975 88 956,374 
Destroyers 237 300,280 378 617,060 
Submarines 102 102,060 180 231,866 

Totals 397 1,330,415 701 3,547,700 


According to Senator Walsh, chairman of the 
Senate Naval Affairs Committee, the ‘earliest time’ 
for completion of the program is 1946; but despite 
large appropriations for the expansion of shi 
building facilities, many observers doubt that % 
enormous an undertaking can be finished by tha 
date. Whether it will be adequate depends, first, on 
the disposition of the French, British, German and 
Italian fleets; second, on future political relation. 
ships among the great naval powers; third, on the 
speed with which the nation controlling Europe’ 
shipyards constructs new men-of-war; fourth, on the 
fate of bases in the Western Hemisphere; and 
finally, on the effect of technological advances on 
naval warfare, especially as regards aviation. 

SHIPS VERSUS PLANES. Proponents of ait 
power have criticized the program because of whai 
they term its disproportionate emphasis on naval 
strength which cannot be completed until long after 
the present emergency is past. They point out that 
the new law authorizes the expenditure of $4,010; 
000,000 on ships and only $600,000,000 on addi. 
tional naval planes. Whatever the ultimate ratio 
between naval aviation and surface vessels, how: 
ever, it should be noted that Congress has provided 
for a rapid expansion of naval air strength. An ad 
approved June 15, 1940 authorized an increase in 
the number of naval planes to 10,000; the creation 


of facilities to train 16,000 naval aviators; and the 


construction of additional naval air bases, both con 
tinental and overseas. The ultimate cost of the air 
craft included in this act is estimated at $1,150, 


000,000, while approximately $1,100,000,000 will | 


be needed for bases, equipment, and the training 
of personnel. The naval expansion law of July 20 
moreover, raises the authorized limit of naval planes 
from 10,000 to 15,000, with a stipulation that this 
total may be exceeded if, in the President's judg 
ment, it is not sufficient for defense needs. 

Under the circumstances, it is hardly accurate t0 
maintain that naval aviation is being disregarded 
The fact is that Congress has authorized as matj 
ships and planes as the country is physically able t0 
construct today. Davip H. PoppER 


| 
| 


FOR 


An inter p 


H/ 


—————— 


Mr. True 


N | 
mc 
tive Me 
America 
of achie 
democra 
impact < 
inter-An 
beyond 
though 
the fou 
First M 
after th 
vana mi 
far mo: 
Americ: 
ward in 
machins 
whethe 
ment tl 


The 
Monroe 
the par 
strumet 
the Ar 
lish a 
nomic 
does n 
evolvec 
contrar 
the pre 
ern He 
nomic 
lar cor 
left qu 
prints 


