———————- 


mbers 
posal 
nting 
mers. 
ontro] 

Bank 


ll the 
il un- 
y eVvi- 
ly in- 
1e bill 
cerns 
ie law 
1 civil 
on the 
» bor- 
of the 
vern- 
ed to 
g ad- 
up to 
5 and 
1 fur- 
iment 
th the 
t only 
| sub- 
ve to 
s ob- 
lewed 
ist be 


les of 
ely to 
unch- 
gram 
y be- 
ot has 
franc. 
to de- 
policy 

eco- 
vern- 
10 Op- 
rikes, 
wage 
ig the 
ution. 
)posi- 
2 and 
iment 
rerely 


LDE 


Bi Sete Sa 


121i aisle nl cata slbbetel oe 


serrata ti 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


Vou. XV, No. 43 


AucusT 21, 1936 


CURRENTS OF WORLD RECOVERY 
by Winthrop W. Case 


This report reviews the industrial recovery since 1932; 
the capital and consumers’ goods industries; unemploy- 
ment; the lag in international trade; the effects of the 
Ottawa agreements; readjustments in the price structure; 
currency depreciation; exchange control; the future of the 
international gold standard and economic nationalism. 


fugust 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Entered as second 
lass marter December 

1921, at che Post 
Othce at New York, 
N. Y., under che act 
of March 3, 1879. 


A MONTH OF CIVIL WAR 


IN SPAIN 


T the end of the first month of civil war heavy 

fighting is still in progress throughout Spain 
and anxiety is still unrelieved throughout Europe. 
On the military front, first reports of decisive 
rebel victories on August 14 and 15 have proved 
premature. The actual junction of General 
Franco’s southern forces and the columns of 
General Mola, operating from the north, has ap- 
parently not yet been achieved. Despite rebel 
victories in Granada, Merida and Badajoz, near 
the Portuguese border, the long-delayed rebel 
drive on Madrid is still hampered by lack of com- 
munications and the inability of Fascist troops 
to hold territory behind their own lines. Fight- 
ing on both the northern and southern fronts is 
becoming increasingly bitter, casualty lists are 
mounting and mass executions are being per- 
petrated by both sides. 


Meanwhile, the efforts of France and Great 
sritain to negotiate a binding non-intervention 
agreement have met with little success as Ger- 
many and Italy raise further reservations and 
war materials continue to flow into Spain. On 
August 11 twenty heavy German Junker bombing 
planes and five pursuit planes manned by German 
military pilots were delivered to rebel headquar- 
ters in Seville. Despite an official communiqué 
issued by the British government on August 15 
warning British citizens not to “assist either side 
in Spain,” British as well as German, Italian, 
French aud Polish airplanes have been reported 
in the service of General Mola’s northern armies. 
The inadequacy of prohibitions which permit ex- 
port of “civil aircraft” while forbidding trade in 
“arms and ammunition” has been further demon- 
strated by the apparently easy conversion of com- 
mercial equipment by both sides. 

The United States, which had not been formally 
invited to join the European non-intervention 
agreement, clarified its position on August 11 in 
a public statement which affirmed the intention 


of Washington to remain completely neutral. But 
the difficulties of neutrality, even with the ad- 
vantages conferred by 3,000 miles of ocean, were 
evident in the official warning, which pointed out 
that the existing act “has no application in the 
present situation since that applies only in the 
event of war between and among nations.” Ameri- 
can traders are legally free to sell war materials 
to either side. On the other hand, the administra- 
tion announced as “its well established policy” a 
determination to “scrupulously refrain from any 
interference whatsoever in the unfortunate Span- 
ish situation” and to use its moral influence to 
secure observance of this policy by the American 
people. 
Presidential Foreign Policy 

While President Roosevelt undoubtedly had the 
Spanish situation uppermost in his mind at Chau- 
tauqua, his speech of August 14 did more than 
emphasize the determination of the United States 
to avoid being drawn into war. Mr. Roosevelt 
outlined the chief objectives of American foreign 
policy at a time when, in his own words, “a dark, 
modern world faces wars between conflicting eco- 
nomic and political fanaticisms in which are in- 
tertwined race hatreds.” 

Denying that we are isolationist “except in so 
far as we seek to isolate ourselves completely 
from war,” he offered in effect a regional policy 
of international cooperation on the American con- 
tinent combined with American neutrality in a 
major European war. The good-neighbor policy 
had been advanced, he said, in the hope that its 
“practical application . . . will be borne home to 
our neighbors across the seas.” Should it fail 
to achieve this worthy purpose, neutrality—uni- 
lateral or collective—will be the American answer 
to war in Europe. Whether he has in mind 
a reaffirmation of neutral rights in which the 21 
American republics will join, the President did not 
say. But he made it clear that the executive should 


be free to meet each situation as it arises. Re- 
ferring to existing legislation, he declared “the 
effective maintenance of American neutrality de- 
pends today, as in the past, on the wisdom and de- 
termination of whoever at the moment occupy the 
offices of President and Secretary of State.” In 
the end peace will depend upon “day to day de- 
cisions.”” While the good-neighbor policy and the 
Hull trade program—which the President strong- 
ly supports—may help to promote peace, it will 
not be easy to escape those “economic and po- 
litical fanaticisms,” even in our own hemisphere. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 


BEHIND THE SPANISH REVOLT 
by Marguerite Ann Stewart 


BARCELONA, August 10—The observer in Spain 
today is impressed with the fact that the familiar 
label of Communist on the government side and 
Fascist on that of the insurgents is not a wholly 
accurate description of the alignment of forces. 
The Madrid government, with its all-Republican 
cabinet, is nominally in complete control; but it is 
influenced powerfully by the organizations of the 
Popular Front which swept it into power in the 
February election. These consist of the Republi- 
can, Socialist and Communist parties and the pow- 
erful Socialist General Union of Workers, in coop- 
eration with the Marxist United Workers Party 
(Trotskyite), and the anarchist organizations, 
Iberian Anarchist Federation and National Work- 
ers Federation, especially strong in Catalonia. 


In the rebel camp, the admittedly Fascist 
groups, Gil Robles’ Catholic Action and the Span- 
ish Renovation parties, fight side by side with 
various reactionary elements—Monarchists, Carl- 
ists, land barons, nobility, clergy and financiers. 


In Catalonia, only, the trade unions and Left 
political organizations play a dominant role in the 
shape of an anti-Fascist militia—a military com- 
mittee on which are represented all organizations 
of the Popular Front. This is largely the result 
of the incompetence of the Catalonian government. 
For weeks before the outbreak of the revolt, the 
workers’ political and labor organizations had 
warned the government of the imminence of a 
Fascist uprising by high army officers. They 
charged that this clique aimed to seize control of 
the country and install José Calvo Sotelo, Mon- 
archist leader of the Fascist Spanish Renovation 
party, as dictator of Spain. In Barcelona, as in 
Madrid, working-class organizations of the Popu- 
lar Front pleaded for arms to defend the Republic 
against the revolt which they were certain would 


Page Two 


come no later than August or September. The gov- 
ernment, however, refused to heed their warnings. 


When the revolt broke out on July 18 the work- 
ers were practically without arms. They went 
into the streets bare-handed and it was not until 
they had seized several munition depots that they 
were able to suppress the outbreak. Fighting 
continued furiously in the streets and plazas of 
the city for two days, when the rebels were dis- 
armed and order was rapidly restored in the 
whole of Catalonia. This contrasted with the 
situation in Madrid where arms were distributed 
to members of the Popular Front groups and the 
CNT on Saturday, July 18, when the news was 
received of the premature revolt in Morocco. 

The assassination of Sotelo six days before the 
uprising removed the central figure of the plot 
and was doubtless an important factor in destroy- 
ing the precision necessary to its success. 

Only after seeing the wretched poverty of the 
working classes and peasants can one appreciate 
the reasons for the cruelty and bitterness of this 
struggle and the stubborn determination to over- 
throw the feudalism which chains the country to 
the 16th century. In a nation preponderantly 
agricultural, 3,000,000 landless agricultural work- 
ers earn from 14 to 60 cents a day; 67 per cent 
of the land is owned by 2 per cent of the land- 
owners. In recent years hundreds of factory 
strikes and property seizures have occurred as 
unrest grew and social relief did not materialize. 
Though the demands for better conditions were 
voiced in the elections of 1931 and 1935, Azafia 
has been cautious in the matter of reforms. Even 
the Popular Front program which swept him and 
his Republican cabinet into power in February 
has existed largely on paper. Not until the pres- 
ent crisis have they adopted the long-promised 
reforms to strengthen the morale of the civilian 
population. Within the past fortnight rents under 
$30 a month have been reduced by 50 per cent in 
Madrid; in Barcelona, wages under $70 a month 
have been raised 15 per cent, a 40-hour week has 
been inaugurated, and rents have been reduced 
25 per cent. 

It is noteworthy that all these reforms have 
been brought about by constitutional means. The 
leaders of the so-called radical parties insist that 
their aim at this stage is not to foment a social 
revolution but to achieve a democratic form of 
government for Spain. They emphasize the fact 
that they are now fighting with bullets against 
reactionary elements which would keep Spain in 
the feudalism which the people overwhelmingly 
repudiated by their votes last February. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 43, AuGust 21, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Sereet, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lesiig BUELL, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Ome Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


em ed ed et et OO 


