NS 
enators, 
1g to an 7 
of Pres. 
whether — 
election, © 
uisville 
sllective © 
rvation- 
, Roose- 
yractice, 
ublican 
1ational 
ed that 
ressmen 
termine 


_ 


siipeabnpieaeeiae 


1e dele- | 
commit 
scheme, 
the dis- 
et dele- 
nferees | 


1e Rus- 
Dowers, 
ncil of 7 
ion the 
nal dis- 
Amer- 
uncil’s 
1d with 
that a 
n from 


[ASTE. 
th dis- 
old the 
ought | 
united 
ible is 
} advo- 
Russia 
e close 
‘ion by 
United 
+ advo- 
n how- 
to the 


LLES 


DS 


General Library 


Entered as 2nd class meat’ec 
University of Michiga 


Ann Arbor, Wich. 


BCT 16 1944 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


VoL. XXIII, No. 52 


~ Ocroper 13, 1944 


ACTS NOT WORDS WILL BE TEST OF DUMBARTON OAKS BLUEPRINT 


HE admittedly tentative Proposals for the Estab- 

lishment of a General International Organization 
to be known as the “United Nations,” formulated 
by representatives of the United States, Britain, 
Russia and China during the Dumbarton Oaks con- 
yersations held in Washington between August 21 
and October 7, are bound to be received with mixed 


| feelings. So much poignant hope had been placed 


during the grim war years in the possibility of estab- 


} lishing an international organization that would pre- 
}vent similar holocausts in the future that the draft 
W charter made public on October 9 will be viewed 
| by many as falling short of their expectations. And 


those who have feared that the Big Four would, at 
least in the first instance, create a great-power direc- 


} torate whose authority in matters of security would 


have to be acknowledged by the smaller nations will 
feel that the charter confirms their fears. 


THE POSSIBLE VS. THE DESIRABLE. In judg- 
ing the published results of Dumbarton Oaks, how- 
ever, it is only fair to bear in mind that not all the 
goals which seem desirable in relations between na- 
tions are, in practice, attainable today. The very fact 
that the United Nations are still far from having 
won the war either in Europe or Asia gives far more 
weight to the possession of military power than 
would be the case once hostilities are over. And no 
one can deny that if the influence of a nation is to 
be judged in terms of military power—leaving out 


DINNER FOR PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT 


The Foreign Policy Association will give a din- 
ner in honor of the President of the United States 
on Saturday, October 21, at eight o’clock, at The 
Waldorf-Astoria. The subject of discussion will be 
“The Foreign Policy of the United States.” Mem- 
bers are urged to make their reservations at once, 
since the number of tickets is limited. 


all considerations of its peacetime contribution to 
civilization—then the United States, Britain and 
Russia are obviously the countries whose decisions 
affect most profoundly both the course of the wat 
and the character of the peace. Of the three, Russia 
is reported to have placed the strongest emphasis on 
the necessity of leaving major decisions concerning 
world security to the great powers. This is due at 
least as much to its uninhibited bluntness in ap- 
praising international relations as to any peculiar 
attachment on its part to the prerogatives of a great 
power. For the United States and Britain have not 
hesitated, when the occasion presented itself, to act 
on the assumptions expressed by Russia. 

According to the Dumbarton Oaks proposals, 
then, the keystone of the projected international or- 
ganization will be the Security Council, composed 
of five permanent members—the United States, 
Britain, Russia, China, and France “in due course” — 
and six non-permanent members to be elected by a 
General Assembly composed of all the United Na- 
tions, whose functions, as defined in the charter, will 
be primarily advisory. In addition, there are to be a 
Secretariat, an International Court of Justice, an 
Economic and Social Council (to consist of repre- 
sentatives of eighteen nations elected by the General 
Assembly for three years), and “such subsidiary 
agencies as may be found necessary.” 

UNANSWERED QUESTIONS. The charter thus 
outlines, in skeleton form, an international organiza- 
tion whose very lack of elaborateness gives it a de- 
gree of flexibility which could make it adaptable to 
the unforeseeable eventualities of the post-war 
period. It makes no pretense to completeness. There 
are many blank spots to be filled out—of which two 
are most important: first, whether a permanent mem- 
ber will have the right to vote in cases when it is 
charged with having committed aggression; and, 
second, the agreement by which the members will 


——_— 
— 


specify the armed forces they will place at the dis- 
posal of the United Nations organization, and the 
circumstances under which their delegates on the 
Security Council will vote concerning the use of such 
forces. Both questions involve the issue of sovereign- 
ty, and can be expected to cause far-reaching dis- 
cussion, especially in the United States. 

The feature of the proposed organization which 
will concern the general public most, however, is 
that it could easily be transformed into a dictator- 
ship of the four great powers which—on the plea of 
preserving peace—could, if they wanted to, enforce 
their will on weaker nations. Such a possibility is 
strengthened by the provisions for regional security 
arrangements, which each of the great powers could 
invoke to dictate the terms of security within adjoin- 
ing areas that would then become spheres of influ- 
ence under another name. Moreover, Russia’s re- 
luctance to accept a proposal that a great power 
charged with aggression should abstain from voting 
when its case is being considered by the Security 
Council—as suggested by China—will be interpreted 
by smaller nations as a portent that the great powers 
will consider themselves exempt from the restrictions 
on aggressive action which they intend to enforce on 
others. 

These doubts and fears are well justified, and 
may lead many people to dismiss the Dumbarton 
Oaks document as mere sugar-coating for another 
Concert of Powers—this time not for Europe alone, 
as in 1815, but for the world, to be administered by 
methods which, for all their modern streamlining, 
will be those of Metternich. If we are to look at the 
situation without illusions, however, we must recog- 
nize that the operation of any international machin- 
ery that may be devised will depend on the sense of 


Page Two 


TT 
—a 


responsibility of the great powers, and on thei 
willingness to have it work not only when it is to 
their own advantage, but also when it is to the ad. 
vantage of the international community as a whole. 
No blueprint, no matter how realistic, will of itself 
generate such spirit of collaboration. But if such 
spirit does exist, it can put even the most inferior 
machinery to work. The desire for collaboration will 
not be tested by the formulation of any given docu 
ment or even by its acceptance on the part of any 
given government. It will be tested by the measure 
of agreement that the United Nations will reach on 
controversial issues, of which that of Poland—pre- 
sumably on the Churchill-Stalin agenda in Moscow— 
is the most urgent. 

It may prove just as well that the United 
Nations charter raises no high hopes, and does 
not lend itself to sentimental oratory about eternal 
peace. For this should make us all aware that 
if we, and the people of the other United Na 
tions, do not want international organization to be- 
come merely an instrument for the selfish designs of 
the great powers, then we shall have to press unremit- 
tingly for altered attitudes toward relations be 
tween nations. It will depend on our concerted efforts 
whether the proposed organization becomes merely 
a military alliance, or an agency which will “facili. 
tate solutions of international economic, social and 
other humanitarian problems and promote respect 
for human rights and fundamental freedoms.’ And 
we must never forget that the alternative to at least 
some kind of international organization, no matter 
how inadequate, is a policy of each one for himself, 
and the devil take the hindmost—whose predictable 
outcome is another world war. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


INTERNAL WEAKNESSES CRIPPLE CHINA’S WAR EFFORT 


The world witnessed last week the ironic spectacle 
of a Chinese military spokesman rebuking the British 
Prime Minister for overestimating the contributions 
of the United States to China’s war effort. In an ad- 
dress of September 28 to the House of Commons 
Winston Churchill expressed regret that, despite 
“lavish American help,’ China had suffered severe 
military setbacks, including the loss of important air- 
fields. “It is,” he said, “‘one of the most disappointing 
vexations.”” On October 2 a spokesman for the 
Chinese Military Council in Chungking, while prais- 
ing the activities of Major General Chennault’s air- 
men as well as American efforts to bring in supplies, 
referred to the United States Fourteenth Air Force 
in China as ‘‘so small it would hardly be credited if 
it could be disclosed,” and stressed China’s lack of 
military equipment. The following day President 
Roosevelt declared that the United States is now -de- 
livering to China more than 20,000 tons of supplies 
a month by air, as compared with 2,000 about a year 


ago. He described this American aid as epochal in 
character, in view of the difficulties that had to be 
overcome. 

WHO IS LETTING CHINA DOWN? Each of 
these statements on China’s supply situation displays 
one facet of the truth, for the efforts of the United 
States to send aid to China have been vigorous and 
far-reaching, at the same time that the quantities de- 
livered have been extremely small in relation to 
China’s needs. But the cause of controversy does not 
lie in the facts themselves, which are well understood 
by the governments concerned. What is at issue is the 
responsibility for China’s current military disintegra- 
tion. Washington and London imply that the respon- 
sibility cannot be placed on them because they are 
doing their maximum under the conditions imposed 
by the war with Germany and Japan’s favorable geo- 
graphic position. Chungking counters with the state 
ment that this maximum is not sufficient to enable 
China to hold the Japanese. The question, then, is 


—=: | 
on their 
| it is to) 
> the adi: 
a whole } 
of itself 
if such 
- inferior 
tion will 
en docu 
t of any 
measure 
reach on 
nd—pre- 


[oscow—" 


United’ 
nd does) 
t eternal 
‘are that 
ited Na- 
yn to be 
esigns of 
unremit- 
‘ions be 
ed efforts 
Ss merely 
l ‘‘facili- 
cial and 
e respect 
ns.”” And 
> at least 
Oo matter 
himself, 
edictable 


DEAN 


xochal in 


ad to be 


Each of 
| displays 
ie United 
rous and 
itities de- 
lation to 
does not 
iderstood 
sue is the 
isintegra- 
ie respon 
they are 
| imposed 
‘able geo- 
the state- 
to enable 
, then, is 


— 
— 


whether Japan’s blockade of China is the main factor 
behind its recent successes in that country. 

Even the most cursory investigation reveals that 
much more than the blockade is involved in China's 
present crisis. It is the testimony of a host of foreign 
observers that the weakness of the Chinese Central 
armies arises not merely from lack of equipment, im- 
portant as this deficiency is, but also from such 
internal conditions as the mishandling of troops, 

litical differences among generals, widespread dis- 
content with methods of conscription, popular dis- 
satisfaction with the corrupt behavior of many mili- 
tary leaders, and Chungking’s failure to use to the 
full machinery available for war production. Cer- 
tainly it is not the fault of any outside power that, 
according to a recent estimate, only one out of every 
twenty Chinese conscripts reaches the front lines, or 


# that men are picked up at random on the streets by 


armed officials and impressed into the army. Nor are 
China’s allies responsible for the sharp disagreements 
among local generals which contributed to the seizure 
of Changsha last June. 


THE LESSON OF HONAN. The internal short- 
comings of Chungking’s military organization al- 
ready had been revealed in northern Honan province 
in May, when a Japanese force not exceeding 100,000 
men broke up and defeated Chinese divisions con- 
taining seven times as many troops. At the very 
beginning of the Honan campaign a large ptopor- 
tion of the trucks available to the Chinese military 
were used for the evacuation to Sian of the families 
and possessions of army officers and civilian officials, 
while oxen and ox-carts essential to the existence of 
the local peasantry were commandeered for military 
transport. This, it should be noted, was done to the 
very peasants who in 1943 suffered one of thé worst 
famines in China’s recent history, partly because the 
army at that time insisted on collecting grain taxes 
even though drought had created a serious food 
shortage. 

The fruits of these years of mistreatment of the 
Honan peasantry were finally reaped when the Chi- 
nese armies began to disintegrate under Japanese at- 
tacks. The Chinese peasants—perhaps incited by local 
pro-Japanese elements—actually disarmed their own 
soldiers—first individually, then in groups. Accord- 
ing to one estimate, the peasants took away 50,000 
tifles from the troops under Tang En-po, the top 
Chinese general in the area, and raised the reaction- 
ary slogan, “Better the soldiers of Japan than the 
soldiers of Tang En-po.” Apparently, Chungking’s 
political authority broke down when its military posi- 


Page Three — 


—— 


tion was weakened, and the local population was at 
last able to give vent to its long-suppressed feeling of 
bitterness. 

CRITICISM INSIDE CHINA. It is sometimes 
suggested that American criticism of conditions in 
Chungking territory is equivalent to hostility toward 
China. But the fact is that China is seething with 
internal criticism— as the recent session of the 
People’s Political Council indicated—and that frank 
appraisals of existing conditions by foreign writers 
are merely a pallid reflection of what millions of 
Chinese are themselves thinking and saying. The 
Honan campaign and ensuing military defeats proved 
an enormous shock to the Chinese public and brought 
forth a flood of protests against the evils that had 
helped to weaken the country. Chinese critics of their 
own government are naturally well aware of the diffi- 
culties created by the Japanese blockade, but do not 
consider this an excuse for leaving undone things 
that China can do for itself or permitting unsatisfac- 
tory internal conditions to continue, 

Today Chungking is facing the most serious crisis 
of the war. Not since the seizure of the Generalissimo 
at Sian in December 1936, when rebellious officers 
insisted on the abandonment of appeasement and the 
launching of resistance to Japan, have Chiang and his 
government had to deal with such deep-seated popu- 
lar dissatisfaction. As China’s outstanding national 
leader, Chiang Kai-shek now faces decisions of cru- 
cial importance concerning the government’s policies 
and the men who are. to carry them out. For criticism 
is well-nigh universal and extends into the Kuomin- 
tang itself where conservative businessmen and bank- 
ers find themselves standing together with liberal 
intellectuals against machine bosses who personify 
corrupt, oppressive administration. In this internal 
struggle, responsible foreign criticism and advice are 
welcomed by forward-looking Chinese. They realize 
that unless China undergoes an internal reorganiza- 
tion making for greater efficiency and democracy, 
their country may emerge from the war in so weak 
and disunited a condition as to be unable to rally 
its strength rapidly or to play a significant role in 
world affairs. They also recognize that discussion of 
these problems by Americans is as much in China's 
interest as our own, since the duration of the war 
with Japan and the future peace of the Far East will 
be affected by current developments in Chungking. 
At the same time they desire—as do all Americans— 
the earliest possible increase in Allied military aid on 
the China front. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(This is the first in a seri f articles on conditions in Ghina.) 


POREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 52, Ocropsr 13, 1944, Published weekly by the 


Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Legr, Secretary; Vara Micueies Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> 181 


Produced ander union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Ee ne a ee ae oe es 


oe 


EE Pe TL ET Te — =. ee 
. = cai re 
a aa 


Washington News Letter sae 


WILL NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY IMPEDE UNRRA’S WORK? 


The foremost political problem besetting the 
United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Adminis- 
tration, now almost a year old, is how to accomplish 
its job without infringing on the sovereignty of mem- 
ber nations. The use of UNRRA requires interna- 
tional collaboration, first in providing adequate as- 
sistance to former enemy nations—notably Italy, to 
which the UNRRA Council, at its second session held 
in Montreal from September 15 to 26, voted to con- 
tribute $50,000,000 worth of supplies. Second, co- 
operation among many nations is essential in dealing 
with the problem of displaced persons. In Germany 
alone, UNRRA estimates, 8,000,000 civilians from 
other countries will need assistance in returning to 
their homes. Third, only through international col- 
laboration will it prove possible to obtain the great 
stocks of food, clothing and medicines required for 
relief of the liberated areas in Europe and Asia. 

The shortage of shipping and the scarcity of many 
of the goods urgently needed have so far made it im- 
possible for the Combined Production and Resources 
Board and the Combined Food Board to allocate sup- 
plies in the desired amounts except in a few cate- 
gories. Some supply measures have been taken. For 
example, UNRRA is making arrangements with 
Canadian authorities for the production of woolen 
textiles. Canada, Newfoundland and Iceland may sup- 
ply fish. It may prove desirable, however, to continue 
food rationing in the United States, and perhaps 
Britain, in order to fill overseas relief needs as the 
period of military relief, planned to last about six 
months, draws to a close in each liberated country. 

YUGOSLAVS RAISE AN ISSUE. Whatever may 
be the source of relief, the nations which need sup- 
plies seek control over their distribution. On August 


21 Sir Arthur Salter, Deputy Director General of 
UNRRA, said: “We are essentially there to help 
the constituted authorities and not to replace them!’ 
That has been UNRRA’s policy since its creation af 
Atlantic City in November 1943. On March 9, 1944 
UNRRA decided to support proposals of individu 
governments for separate purchases of relief sup 
plies, provided that such buying would not “‘interfe 
with the Administration’s own efforts to bring abou 
the creation of reserves which will be availab 
wherever and whenever the need arises.” Norwa 
the Netherlands, Belgium, and the French Committ 
of National Liberation have proposed advance pu 
chases. By contrast, it was reported that Marsha 
Tito and Dr. Ivan Subasich, Prime Minister of t 
Yugoslav government-in-exile, had reached comple 
accord regarding a number of matters, including t 
proposal to obtain assistance from UNRRA. 


Yet on October 2 the Free Yugoslav Radio af 
nounced that the Yugoslav Committee of Nations 
Liberation (controlled by Tito) had refused to accep 
UNRRA assistance because, the radio said, the 
agency wanted to distribute relief in Yugoslavi 
through its own machinery rather than through the 
“already established organs of the people’s author 
ity.” This difference could be easily mended, for the 

licy enunciated by Salter stressed the use of “al 
ready established organs.” It is possible, however 
that the Yugoslav problem will remain open unti 
the Soviet Union makes a decision on the extent te 
which it will.cooperate with UNRRA in the rehabil 
itation of its own devastated areas and in the relief 
of United Nations countries of Eastern Europe, 


BLAIR BOLLES 


Statement of the Ownership, Management, Circulation, Etc., 
Required by the Acts of Congress of August 24, 1912 and 
Marc 1933, of 


Foreign Policy Bulletin 
Published weekly atc New York 16, N. Y. for October 1, 1944. 
State of New York, County of New York, ss. 


Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State and county aforesaid, 
personally appeared Vera Micheles Dean, who, having been duly sworn ac- 
reat aw and -— that she is the tor of the FOREIGN 
POLICY BULLETIN. and that the following is, to the best of her knowledge 
and belief, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the afore- 
said publication for the date shown in the above ion, wired by the 
Act of A 24, 1912, as amended by the Act of March 5. 1933, em- 


bodied in ion 537, Postal Laws and Regulations, printed on the re- 
verse of this form, to wit: 


1. That the names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing edi- 
tor, and business managers are: 


Publishers—Foreign Policy Association, Inco: ated, 22 East 38th Street, 
New York 16, N. ¥ Tr 


Editor—Vera Micheles Dean, 22 East 38th Screet, New York 16, N. Y. 
Managing Editor—None. 

Business Managers—None. 

2. That the owner is: 

Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, the principal officers of which 


FOR VICTORY ° 


are: Frank Ross M , President; Dorothy F. Leet 
22 East 38th Screet, New York 16, N. Y 
Treasurer, 70 Broadway, New York 4, N. Y. 


3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holdef 
owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages) 
or — securities, are: 

one. 


fe Secretary; both of 
-; and William A.’ Eldridg 


4. That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owne 
stockholders and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stock 
holders and security holders as they appear upon the books of the company 
but also, in cases where the stockholder or security holder appears upon the 
books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, the n 
of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting, is given; als@ 
that the said two paragraphs contain statements embracing affiant’s full 
knowledge and belief as to the circumstances and conditions under whic 
stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of the 
company as trustees hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that ofy 
a bona fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any othely 
person, association, or corporation has any interest, direct or indirect, in they 
said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by her. 

FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated. 
By VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editorm 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 28th day of September, 1944. 


{Seal} CAROLYN E. MARTIN, Notary Publicf 
New York County, New York, County Clerk’s No. 87, New York Count? 
Reg. No. 164-M-5. (My commission expires March 30, 1945.) ; 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


