7 


| 


> United 
umanian 
ritain in- 
e second 
Nations 
> of Ru 
> issue of 
ilkans. 
tht of an 
rrival of 
nat fron. 
40 when 
rn Buko. 
united in 
soldiers 
Killinger 
who has 
ania sup. 
ry in the 
rabia and 
ar disap. 
ssarabian 
Lumanian 
ive made 


y, is first 
en. This 
Maniu— 
tands for 
‘ime Min- 
-r formed 
past three 
ider close 
Rumania 
ir Charles 
shington, 
ed States, 
n-Russian 
axim Lit 
ed States. 
ray break 
e Russial 
hes, radio 
n intensi 
 'Transyk 
1a Award 
uld speed 
close the 
n country, 
BOLLES 


1943 


PBRIGDICAL ROR 
GENERAL LIBRARY 
. waely. of mic 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIII, No. 7 


DecEMBER 8, 1943 


SEIZURE OF GILBERTS ADVANCES WAR OF ATTRITION AGAINST JAPAN 


, a lightning seizure of the Gilbert Islands in the 
Central Pacific by American marines who, after 
landing on November 20, required little more than 
three days to complete an extremely difficult task, has 
led to much conjecture concerning future offensive 
strategy against Japan. This is according to pattern, 
since each previous island attack on the Far Eastern 
front—such as New Guinea, Guadalcanal and Munda 
—has produced similar speculation about the spot 
at which American commanders intended to direct 
the next blow. In every case, however, the subsequent 
action has not come as rapidly as press comment had 
led the public to expect, and the most striking gains 
derived by our forces have arisen from the imme- 
diate operation rather than from any quick move be- 
yond the territory occupied. The New Guinea offen- 
sive, for example, served first of all to preserve the 
original Australian foothold on that island and to 
protect northern Australia, while the Guadalcanal 
campaign helped prevent the Japanese from directly 
threatening our Southwest Pacific supply route. These 
were the immediate, tangible results that Americans 
pethaps did not fully appreciate. The more spec- 
tacular, long-term possibilities—such as taking Ra- 
baul on New Britain—are still in the process of being 
realized. 

VALUE OF THE GILBERTS. Consequently, be- 
fore asking: “After the Gilberts, where do we go 
next?” it may be wise to inquire how the possession 
of these islands improves our military position. The 
answer is that coral atolls, such as Makin and 
Tarawa, will furnish valuable airfields from which 
land-based planes can protect shipping and fleet op- 
erations and that our supply route to the Southwest 
Pacific will be shortened by hundreds of miles, since 
we will be able to follow a less circuitous course than 
heretofore. This, in effect, means an increase in the 
dumber of ships available for Pacific sea-lanes. 

While seizure of the Gilberts has brought us closer 


to the Japanese-controlled Marshalls, and to Ocean 
and Nauru Islands, it must be noted that the distance 
from the Gilberts to these objectives is considerable— 
190 nautical miles from Makin to the southern- 
most Marshalls, 240 from Tarawa to Ocean, and 400 
from Tarawa to Nauru. Moreover, while the Jap- 
anese have been in the Gilberts only since Pearl Har- 
bor, they have had an opportunity to develop and 
fortify the mandated Marshalls since 1919. In view 
of the severity of the fighting in the Gilberts—espe- 
cially on Tarawa, where from three to four thousand 
Japanese exacted a heavy toll before being wiped 
out—a considerable pause is likely before further ad- 
vances are attempted from our newly won bases. 
Construction work will have to be undertaken, men 
and supplies prepared, and the lessons of the Gilbert 
operations assimilated. 

WILL THE JAPANESE FLEET FIGHT? For 
some time the United States Navy has been unable 
to make contact with the enemy fleet, but it is now 
being suggested that the Tokyo admirals may feel 
forced to come out for a slugging match, to protect 
their Central Pacific island positions. Certainly the 
dream of such a naval showdown has animated most 
American and British discussions of Pacific strategy 
for the past quarter of a century. And it is perhaps 
significant that on November 24 the Tokyo radio, in 
a Japanese-language broadcast presumably intended 
for home consumption, declared that the invasion of 
the Gilberts “presages a real, decisive battle of the 
fleets.’ The statement added that “the strategic signi- 
ficance of the present American counteroffensive is 
extremely great... .” 

While such a sea battle may occur, there would 
appear to be no absolute necessity for the Japanese 
to risk it at the present time. The island path from 
the Gilberts to the Japanese homeland is a long one, 
and from Tokyo's point of view it might be more pru- 
dent, under current conditions, to make us pay dear- 


$ 
. 
i 
i 
if 


——_—_————sssssss PageTwo 


ly for each new island we take than to stake its fleet, 
perhaps lose, and thereby lay its whole Central Pa- 
cific flank open to assault. Besides, if, as some ob- 
servers suggest, the feeble air defense of the Gilberts 
_ indicates a general weakness of the Japanese air 
forces, then it would not seem wise for Japan to risk 
the loss of its fleet in a naval battle in which air 
power would very likely play an important—perhaps 
a decisive—part. 

STRATEGY OF THE WAR IN ASIA. Although 
his statement drew little comment, it may be of more 
than passing significance that on November 23, while 
the Gilbert operations were still incomplete, Admiral 
Chester W. Nimitz, Commander-in-Chief of the Pa- 
cific Fleet, declared: “my opinion is that Japan will 
be defeated from China.” In this connection he point- 
ed to China’s “reservoir of personnel and the pos- 
sibility of airfields in easy striking distance of 
Japan. . . .” Many factors may have combined to pro- 
duce these remarks, but Admiral Nimitz was perhaps 
attempting, in part, to place the Gilbert operations 
in proper perspective, i.e., as one contribution to a 
struggle that will not be settled by the American 
Navy alone. Future developments on the Chinese 


CRITICISM OF CANOL RAISES PROBLEM IN U.S..CANADIAN RELATIONS 


Although the $134,000,000 Canol project financed 
by the U.S. War Department in the Canadian North- 
west is not likely to be “junked now,” in accordance 
with Petroleum Administrator Harold L. Ickes’ rec- 
ommendation of November 22, its future is far from 
clear and its post-war disposition may raise a number 
of difficult issues in American-Canadian relations. 

Canol is more than an oil pipeline and a refinery. 
It is a group of projects related to the Alaska High- 
way, to the air route to Siberia, to Catel (the tele- 
gtaph and wireless system servicing the area), and 
to the entire defense of Alaska. It provides for de- 
velopment of the oil fields near Fort Norman on the 
Mackenzie River, and construction of a 600-mile 
pipeline to transport crude oil from these fields to 
Whitehorse, Yukon, a midway point on the Alaska 
Highway. At the same time, a dismantled Texas re- 
finery is being reassembled at Whitehorse to process 
gasoline and other petroleum products, and pipelines 
are being constructed to carry gasoline from White- 
horse to Skagway, Alaska, at the head of the Inland 
Passage; to Fairbanks, northern terminus of the 
Highway; and to Watson Lake at the border of the 
Yukon and British Columbia. 

As Under Secretary of War Patterson explained to 
the Truman Committee, the Canol venture was con- 
ceived soon after Pearl Harbor to meet the Japanese 
threat to Alaska. Since defense of the area was large- 
ly dependent on air power and there was no assur- 
ance that the Navy could keep the sea-lanes open for 
tankers, it was decided that new oil resources must 


front could clearly be of the greatest significance fo, 
the defeat of Japan. Especially after the defeat y 
Germany, actions on the continent of Asia—as we 
as in the Pacific—will dwarf all Far Eastern oper, 
tions up to the present time. 


We are still engaged essentially in a war of atts 
tion in the Far East, holding on at most points ani 
attempting at others to improve our positions fy 
the future. That the Japanese have grave cause fy 
concern is indicated by the marked increase in oy 
pressure on them from many directions during th 
past year. But if ultimate victory over Japan seem 
assured, this is not primarily because of what hy 
been done in Asia, but because of the brighteniry 
prospects in the West, arising from the continuing 
Soviet offensive, the operations in Italy, the groy. 
ing air attacks on Germany, the improved politic 
relations of the leading United Nations, and the pos 
sibility of an early invasion of western Europe. Only 
when these and other factors have combined to bring 
about the defeat of the Nazis will full-scale actiog 
be possible against Japan. 


LAWRENCE K. ROsINGER 


be developed near Alaska regardless of cost. In Apri 
1942, after hurried investigation, a project for e 
panding output of the Fort Norman oil fields wa 
initiated, with the expectation that it would be pos 
sible to draw 3,000 barrels a day from the field. The 
development is now nearing completion. The pipe 


line from Norman to Whitehorse is scheduled fo} 


operation by January 1944, the refinery at White 
horse is expected to go into production in May, ané 
the other pipelines are either already completed o 
nearly so. Output of 20,000 barrels of crude oil a day 
is now anticipated, although it may not be possible 
to take advantage of this increase, since the White 
horse refinery was designed to handle only 3,00 
barrels daily. In view of Mr. Patterson’s disclosure 
that, after reconsideration of the project in July 1943, 
the United States General Staff determined it should 
be completed to provide support for an air offensive 
against Japan, it seems unlikely that the venture will 
be abandoned, even though the Japanese withdrawal 
from the Aleutians has undoubtedly reduced the 
need for it. 

POST-WAR SETTLEMENT. Mr. Ickes’ recom 
mendation that Canol be scrapped or that, alterns 
tively, this country retain a permanent peacetit 
share of the Norman oil, occasioned considerable 
surprise in Ottawa. Not only was the project undet 
taken at the insistence of the U.S. Army, but agree 
ments with the Canadian government were nego 
tiated through regular State Department channels 
The terms of the arrangement, as laid down in # 


= 


excha 
finery 
ernme 
contra 
pipeli 
Amer: 
dian | 
chase 
equip! 
ernm<¢ 
Defer 
equal 
Oil C 
the N 
Sin 
witho 
consi 
a wal 
basis, 
press 
seek t 
equip 
revert 
the w 
nectic 
nent 
High 
It i 
port 
Unite 
sharit 
consi 
devel 
any ¢ 
tablis 
dang 


—_ 
—_— 


Page Three — 


caieiemenell 


cance fy} exchange of notes, provided that the pipelines and re- ment put on a sound basis, the cost of maintaining 
lefeat gif finery remain the property of the United States gov- war-built projects in this area should not be beyond 
—as wel] emment during the war and be operated for it under the means of Canada, and the material gains made as 
MN Opers contract. At the close of hostilities the value of the a result of military pressure should prove of benefit 
pipelines and refinery are to be established by an to both countries. 
of ail American and a Canadian appraiser, and the Cana- Howarp P. WHIDDEN, JR. 
i wal dian government is to have the first option to pur- 
nts . 
tions fo, chase the rae “_ 0 ee nana — — the Singapore Is Silent, by George Weller. New York, Har- 
eee equipment should not be dismantled by either gov- court Brace, 1943. $3.00 
Ol ernment without the approval of the Permanent Joint An interesting account of the fall of Singapore, served 
© 1 Ol Defense Board. Post-war oil rights are to be shared UP With geopolitical trimmings. As usual, geopolities _ 
ring the in bow the Canadi d the I : the effect of separating us from our allies. The author 
an a equally by the Cana lan government an the Imperial lieves that we must take over “a chain of heavy and perma- 
Cems} il Company, a Canadian corporation now operating nent American bases in Southeast Asia,” making of the 
what ha field British a junior partner. He also fears Russian influence 
| the Norman field. se ae 
ghtening , he United in this area. Unlike some other geopoliticians, however, he 
nitinuing Since the Unite States — although apparently considers that Japan will remain our enemy. 
. without the Petroleum Administrator . knowledg 1 Served on Bataan, by Juanita Redmond. New York, Lip- 
e grow 
oliticl considered the Canol development justified solely as pincott, 1942. $1.75 
J ’ a war expenditure, and it was undertaken on this Story of the medical side of war with the Japanese by an 
! - On basis, it seems no more likely that Washington will — nurse bead spied? erga and Corregidor. Marked 
‘ re ; . n in ; 
A b My press Ottawa for revision on this than that it will vile s wena “ ; 
Aes an seek to revise agreements whereby all but the movable ee ee oy H. G. Quaritch Wales. New erm, 
le action : : eg? ; ; , ; oe 
equipment on American-built air bases in Canada A British writer examines with sober understanding two 
reverts to the Dominion six months after the close of of the primary developments in Southeast Asia over a 
SINGER | the war. Difficulties are much more probable in con- period of years: the decline of imperial prestige and the 
ti with th int t of rise of native nationalism. He has faith in the ability of 
[ONS necuon Wi e main enance, as part of a perma- the people of Asia to rule themselves and urges “a basic 
| nent North American defense System, of the Alaska change in our attitude” toward them, to make future co- 
In Apt] Highway, Canol, Catel and the air bases. operation possible. 
t for ex It is doubtful whether Canada will be able to sup- Miracle in Hellas, by Betty Wason. New York, Macmillan, 
elds wa} port these projects; it is also doubtful whether the 1943. $2.75 
1 be ‘ ; 7 “e - ° Gives the story of Greece under Nazi occupation with 
“eld a: United States will wish to share this expense without great admiration for the brave role played by he saan 
1eid. int} sharing control—which Canadians in turn would ‘ a ac Sete Gu 
The pipe} consider an infringement of their sovereignty. Two - yay Raw nny a A 1943. $2 0 ee 
luled fr developments, however, might do much to remove Many of his broadcasts and speeches, plus a discussion 
t White any danger of friction over this matter: first, the es- of a power peace. 
May, and} tablishment of a world security system in which no Fightin’ Oil, by Harold M. Ickes. New York, Knopf, 1943. 
pleted of} danger threatened in the North Pacific; second, the $1.75 
oila diy economic growth of Northwestern Canada and _ The entertaining controversialist tells clearly — war- 
' possible Alaska along the lines envisaged in a program of the perene seg a point of vantage as Petroleum Admin- 
¢ White} National Resources Planning Board. With defense ae ae ee 
ly 3,000) “heeds reduced to a minimum and economic develop- Soot belie 3 aud Diver. New York, Appleton-Century, 
a An account of fifteen Indian states and their rulers. The 
uly 19 : JUST PUBLISHED—an analysis of the pivotal materiel poorenes See 6 ee ee 
it shoul} | position of the Dominions — Canada, Australia Orinese or hes desire to me all Intis boriaeiy a 
offensive New Zealand and the Union of South Africa — in Federation : 
nture will the strategy of the United Nations. , 
: To All Hands: An Amphibious Adventure, by John Mason 
ithdraval) | THE DOMINIONS LOOK TO THE FUTURE Brown, Lieutenant, USNR. New York, Whittlesey 
luced the by Gwendolen M. Carter House, 1943. $2.75 
25 Admiral Kirk’s discernment was justified when he chose 
5’ recom Cc the urbane former drama critic to serve as eyes for below- 
+ alterna December 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS decks men and to describe the action of which they were 
: . REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. so large a part. The daily talks are the epitome of serious- 
peacetime siti tit « eediiias: tie ness done with a light touch, while photographs and 
‘derable Subscription $5; to FPA members, $3. siestelean eth anette 
nsidera ceatchan nbd Ginlietin, 
ect undet FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 7, DgcEMBER 3, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
but agreeg Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
g 
re nese second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
c ah one month for change of address on membership publications. 
annels . . , 
ch ‘a - F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
ywn in a 


Ge 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


Nov. 29.—On November 27, the day after Senator 
Hugh Butler of Nebraska offered his critical report 
to Congress on the United States’ Latin American 
policy, Colombia declared war on Germany. This 
action was a forceful comment on the ignorance dis- 
played in the Senator’s findings after a two-month 
visit to the American republics. Butler said that the 
United States, by “boondoggling” programs, was 
creating contempt and enmity for us in the nations 
to the south. He reported that this country had spent 
$6,000,000,000 in the other Americas in wasteful 
New Dealish undertakings. The Butler report, per- 
haps the most energetic criticism of United States 
hemisphere policy ever made, ignored the historical 
and geographic reasons for that policy. 


The Good Neighbor and continental solidarity 
policies introduced under the Roosevelt Administra- 
tion are logical contemporary corollaries of the idea 
that underlay the enunciation of the Monroe Doc- 
trine 120 years ago. The objective of this country’s 
Latin American policy is to safeguard the United 
States and its institutions, and the war has shown its 
soundness. All the Republics with the exception of 
Argentina have helped the United States in the con- 
duct of the war. They have contributed to the secur- 
ity of the Panama Canal. They have provided us 
with invaluable raw materials, one example being 
the Latin American fiber from which rope is made, 
and for which in the past we were dependent on 
regions now under Japanese control. They have given 
us air and naval bases from which the United States 
and its Latin American allies have attacked the 
U-boat menace. Above all, the Good Neighbor pol- 
icy helped eliminate any possible German threat to 
South America from Dakar, which lies across a rela- 
tively narrow span of the South Atlantic from Natal, 
Brazil. 


HIGH COST OF WAR. The essence of the But- 
ler complaint is that the United States is paying too 
high a price for the collaboration of the other Amer- 
ican republics against the enemy. The view in Wash- 
ington is that, in the absence of that collaboration, 
the United States would have been forced to expend 
a far larger sum to finance forced military occupa- 
tions to save a number of Latin American countries 
from Axis penetration. As to the exact sum expended 
Nelson Rockefeller, Coordinator of Inter-American 


Affairs, says it is $600,000,000, and Chairman Me. 
Kellar of the Senate Appropriations Committee de. 
clares it to be $2,207,000,000. Both figures are far be- 
low the $6,000,000,000 mentioned by Senator Butler, 
but the issue basically is not how much was spent but 
whether the price of victory can ever be too high. 


That extravagance could have been avoided in the 
conduct of a wartime hemisphere policy is hardly 
credible. Findings of the Senate Truman Committee 
and other groups show it has been unavoidable at 
home, and reports of newspapermen who recently 
toured the Amazon Basin reveal a distressing failure 
in the costly attempt to promote rubber cultivation in 
the interior of the South American continent. The 
quarrel last summer between Vice President Wallace, 
chairman of the Board of Economic Warfare, and 
chairman Jesse Jones of the Reconstruction Finance 
Corporation was a Washington sensation; Wallace 
held that the United States should follow a liberal 
policy in buying strategic materials in South America, 
while Jones argued for a banker's policy of getting 
needed goods at favorable prices. As an illustration 
of the thesis that when goods are vital price is no 
concern, Wallace pointed to the Jones hold-up of the 
program to purchase Latin American quinine, essen- 
tial for guarding the health of American troops in 
tropical climates. 


A CONTINUING POLICY. The Good Neighbor 
policy to which Senator Butler objects existed long 
before the war. It was built on the basis of the Mon- 
roe Doctrine and the Pan-Americanism born in the 
Administration of Benjamin Harrison. It was solidi- 
fied by the meetings of the American Republics at 
Montevideo in 1933, Buenos Aires in 1936, Lima in 
1938, Panama in 1939, Havana in 1940, and Rio de 
Janeiro in 1942. Until the fall of France, the financial 
expenditure of the United States on promotion of 
this policy was limited almost wholly to Export-Im 
port Bank loans, on which $62,000,000 was outstand- 
ing on June 30, 1940. The continental solidarity pol- 
icy has not been a complete success in keeping out 
of Latin America European commercial and propa: 
ganda interests inimical to the United States; but it is 
a success in that thirteen Latin American republics 
are our active allies and six others have broken rela- 
tions with the Axis. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


91. 


ae 


VoL. : 


—————— 


7, 
Th 


Chiar 
try as 
the h 
tober 
strip 
resto! 
as M 


