m return 
recall of 
the State 
p. Up to 
1e€ worst 
ffice. He 
snch and 
ich” col- 
offensive 
he mere 
ent of a 
German 
ge fora 
1¢ Reich 
1evitably 
ton and 


y's part, 
y to pre 
, certain 
ining fe 
informa: 
occupied 
» to dis- 
ons with 
ions vic- 
cut the 
sed first 
lity of a 


LIOTT 


% University of 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


Llba Bishop Entered as 2nd class matter 
asides De 


Mia}. 


4 mais . re 3 ~ peep 
o-- tee we y 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vor. XXI, No. 41 


—_—_ 


JuLy 31, 1942 


WOULD SECOND FRONT JEOPARDIZE SUPPLIES TO RUSSIA? 


IERCE fighting in the region of the lower Don 
and German success in gaining strong positions 
across that key river bring into sharp focus the im- 
portance of Allied supply lines to Russia. Lack of 
sufficient equipment to meet the Nazi armies on 
equal terms undoubtedly accounts in large measure 
for the Russian withdrawals, and emphasizes the 
need for increased help to the Soviet war machine. 
Figures on the supplies reaching Russia from the 
United States, Britain, India and Australia are na- 
turally a military secret, but it is possible to piece 
together a picture which indicates the magnitude 
of the help being sent the embattled Russians by 
their allies. Raw materials, including aluminum, 
copper, tin, lead, wool and jute, as well as Ameri- 
can and British planes, tanks, trucks and _artil- 
lery, are flowing into Soviet ports in increasing 
quantities. For some months half of the current 
British tank production has been sent to Russia, and 
the Vichy radio recently reported that British tanks 
had been in action on the Kharkov sector in “con- 
siderable numbers.” American-made Douglas attack 
bombers are playing an increasingly important part 
in the battles now raging along the Don. 

THE NORTHERN ROUTE. Allied supplies reach 
Russia by three routes: the northern route to Mur- 
mansk and Archangel; the southern route through 
the Persian Gulf to Iran; and the Arctic route across 
the top of the world to the Siberian port of Dik- 
son. The first of these, covering a distance of rough- 
ly 1,500 miles from Britain, has been the most im- 
portant to date. The ports of Murmansk and 
Archangel, in conjunction with several smaller ports 
on the White Sea, are reported capable of handling 
15,000 tons daily. From these ports supplies can 
teach the central front by several routes: from Mur- 
mansk by rail to Soroka, and then via Plesetsk to 
Moscow; from Archangel by rail to Moscow via 
Vologda, or by the Northern Dvina River to Kotlas, 


and then by rail to Moscow via Kirov. The northern 
supply line, however, is seriously threatened by 
German control of Norway and Finland. From 
Petsamo, Murmansk has been subjected to devastat- 
ing bombing, and from Narvik, Tromsé, and Ham- 
merfest constant attacks are launched on Allied 
convoys making the perilous passage through ice 
and fog, or under the midnight sun, to Russian 
ports. Recent reports indicate that heavy losses have 
been sustained in this area by American and British 
vessels. 


PERSIAN GULF ROUTE. The second route, 
around the Cape of Good Hope to the Persian Gulf 
—a sea voyage of roughly 11,000 miles from Brit- 
ain and 12,000 from New York—is open to sub- 
marine attacks in the South Atlantic and the Indian 
Ocean. It seems likely, however, that at least 3,000 
tons of supplies are being unloaded daily in the 
Persian Gulf ports of Bandar Shahpur, Bushire and 
Basra. ‘The British-Russian condominium over 
Iranian transportation has permitted a rapid expan- 
sion of both port ‘facilities and rail and road com- 
munications. The key line in this new system is the 
Trans-Iranian Railway, a marvel of engineering 
skill completed by the Iranian government in 1938, 
which links Bandar Shahpur via Teheran with 
Bandar Shah, a port some 900 miles away on the 
southeastern corner of the Caspian Sea. To relieve 
the strain on port facilities at Bandar Shahpur, the 
port of Bushire on the eastern shore of the Persian 
Gulf has been joined to Teheran by motor road, 
over which trucks loaded with war supplies leave 
daily for Russia. The gap in the rail line from Te- 
heran to Julfa has in all probability been closed by 
now. Thus rail communication—albeit of different 
gauges—would be provided through to the southern 
Caucasus. Less important is the route from Basra 
by rail through Iraq to Erbil and thence by road to 
Tabriz near the Russian border. Fears that the Cas- 


— —— Page Two — 
pian merchant fleet might not be able to handle the mighty Yenisei River, up which supplies can be} 20,00( 
flow of goods seem to have been unwarranted, but shipped to the Trans-Siberian Railway at Krag] and Vv 
falling water levels in the Caspian are causing noyarsk, there to be transshipped either east g,} Serbia 
trouble in loading the supplies which leave Bandar west. Dikson is about 3,000 miles from Scotland} Dw 
Shah for Baku, Krasnovodsk, Astrakhan and and 5,000 miles from Seattle, and offers a port safe} countt 
Guriev, from which ports they can be taken respec- from air attack, to which goods could be shipped ig} Chetn 
tively to the middle Caucasus, to Russian Turkes- increasing quantities from Britain as well as Amer} have : 
tan, to the lower Volga, and to the Urals. Of some ica should the ports of Murmansk and Archangel | these 
importance, too, is the supply line opened up from be destroyed by enemy bombs. If this route were to} the g 
India via Baluchistan to Russian Turkestan. From be supplemented by a warplane ferry service from} traffic 
Zahidan, terminus of the Baluchistan railway which Alaska, and a new “Burma Road” connecting Ed.} neces: 
runs from Karachi, a first-class port on the Indian monton, Canada, with the railhead at Irkutsk jp} their 
Ocean, a motor road runs north in eastern Iran to Siberia, by motor road and ferry, supplies might! Most 
Meshed and thence into Russian Turkestan, where reach the Soviet armies of Siberia as well as the; stroye 
it joins the railway running from Krasnovodsk to armies of the Urals. and « 
Bokhara and on eastward. This route might become But perhaps the greatest problem in connection} stage: 
of great importance if the lines to the Caucasus and with sending supplies to Russia is raised by the ex- and * 
the Caspian communications should both be cut off pected opening of a second front in Western Europe,} recen’ 
by German advances. Can America and Britain spare the military equip-} Saraje 
THE ARCTIC ROUTE. Russia’s extensive Arctic ment and the shipping now being used to help Russia} wipe: 
shoreline provides the third and safest supply line if they are to open a second front? Undoubtedly} dred 
to the Soviet armies. Long considered closed to the Russians will want supplies as well as a second PA 
winter traffic, this route is apparently now kept open front, and if both can be made available, so much querc 
the year round by powerful Russian icebreakers. the better. If not, the timing of any diminution the S 
Since July 1941 it is reported to have carried half as of shipments to Russia will be of crucial importance} or 
many supplies as the southern supply line through The military Strategists in Washington and London the h 
Iran, and it is rapidly being expanded. The key port are doubtless seeking a solution to this double. - 
in northern Siberia is Dikson at the mouth of the barreled problem. Howarpb P. WHIDDEN, JR. } to It 
YUGOSLAV GUERRILLAS URGENTLY NEED ALLIED AID » 

One of the most striking passages in the radio President Roosevelt. The official joint statement} Daln 
address delivered by Secretary of State Hull on published on that occasion stressed the special friend-} mon: 
July 23 is that in which he declared that all nations ship of the American people for Yugoslavia, and} Princ 
must win political freedom, economic betterment referred to the “spontaneous and unselfish will to} has | 
and social justice by their own efforts. “It is impos- victory’ shown by General Mikhailovich and his} rulec 
sible,” he said, “for any nation or group of nations guerrilla warriors. Pave 
to prescribe the methods or provide the means by THE CHETNIKS. After the Nazis had conquered] “ety 
which any other nation can accomplish or maintain Yugoslavia, between 80,000 and 100,000 Yugoslay! War 
its own political and economic independence, be soldiers retreated to the mountains of Serbia, Bosnia, | Emp 
strong, prosper and attain high spiritual goals.” But, Montenegro and Herzegovina, to continue the strug-| Slav! 
he added, “it is possible for all nations to give and gle for the independence of their country. For over} Play 
to receive help.” fifteen months these patriots, known as ‘‘Chetniks,’ Croz 
A good example of what Mr. Hull had in mind have fought the Axis despite physical isolation and} 
is the master lend-lease agreement signed by the great inferiority in numbers and armaments. From} Utz 
United States with Yugoslavia on July 24, shortly the forests and mountains where they have taken have 
before young King Peter II paid a farewell visit to refuge, the Chetniks have constantly harassed the} "P° 
Axis forces, striking at garrisons, supply depots and} °™ 

lines of communication, forcing Germany and Italy} 

ANNOUNCING— to divert troops and matériel they badly need on the} slav 

ee ee Russian and African fronts. These guerrilla opera the 
tions have proved so successful that the German com: } tary 

1942-43 Season mand has had to transfer several divisions to Yugo-| take 

October 3 January 16 slavia. The leader of the Chetniks, the almost as 

October 31 February 6 legendary General Draja Mikhailovitch, has beet} j.4 
cuties 33 March 13 appointed Minister of War to the Yugoslav gow} ‘on 
December 12 April 10 ernment-in-exile at London. In January 1942 it was} a@p 

reported that his forces had regained control of some 


—= 


can be 
at Krag. 
east of 
Scotland 
ort safe 
upped in 
is Amer. 
tchangel 
were to 
ice from 
ting Ed. 
kutsk ip 
>s_ might 
1 as the 


Nnection 
y the ex. 
| Europe, 
‘'Y equip. 
lp Russia 
loubtedly 
a second 
sO much 
minution 
portance, 

London 

double. 


aN, JR. 


tatement 
il friend: 
ivia, and 
1 will to 
and his 


onquered 
Y ugoslay 
., Bosnia, 
he strug: 
For ovef 
hetniks,” 
ition and 

From 
ve taken 
issed the 
pots and 
and Italy 
-d on the 
la opera: 
nan com- 
to Yugo 
> almost 
has been 
lav gov 
i2 it was 
| of some 


ee, 
_ — 


20,000 square miles of Yugoslav mountain territory, 
and were even issuing passports for “Unoccupied 
Serbia.’ 

During recent weeks, reports have reached this 
country of several important attacks launched by the 
Chetniks, in which the Axis troops are believed to 
have suffered many thousands of casualties. One of 
these occurred on the shores of the Danube, where 
the guerrillas sought to disrupt vital German oil 
trafic. The Germans were said to have found 
necessary to send Hungarian gunboats to rescue 
their forces. Other battles were fought along. the 
Mostar-Sarajevo railway, where the guerrillas de- 
stroyed several bridges; in the Kozara mountains; 
and on the Sava river. The Chetniks have also 
staged destructive hit-and-run raids as far as Zara 
and Trieste on the coast of Italian Dalmatia, and 
recently ambushed an Italian military column near 
Sarajevo. In reprisal, Italian bombers have virtually 
wiped out a group of villages, killing several hun- 
dred men, women and children. 


PARTITIONING OF YUGOSLAVIA. The con- 
uerors, meanwhile, have divided the Kingdom of 
the South Slavs (Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) into 
several sections. The real control, however, rests in 
the hands of the Germans. The most northern area, 
Slovenia, has gone in part to Germany, and in part 
to Italy. The latter also received the Dalmatian 
coast on the Adriatic Sea, and the territory around 
the strategic bay of Kotor, at the southern end of 
Dalmatia. Croatia itself was set up as a hereditary 
monarchy under Italian protection, with an Italian 
Prince, the Duke of Spoleto, as its King. The Duke 
has never set foot in his realm. The new state is 
tuled by a puppet government headed by Ante 
Pavelitch, chief of the U stasha, a Croat terrorist so- 
ciety supported by Italy and Hungary. Before World 
War I, Croatia was a part of the Austro-Hungarian 
Empire. Since its inclusion in the new state of Yugo- 
slavia by the peace treaties, its population had 
played the part of the enfant terrible in the Serbo- 
Croat-Slovene family. After the confinement of their 
extremely popular leader, Dr. Matchek, by the new 
Ustasha government, however, the Croat peasants 
have made peace with the other Slav groups and are 
reported to be leaving their villages in increasing 
numbers to join the Serbian guerrilla fighters. 

Meanwhile, Hungary occupied northeastern Yugo- 
Slavia; and once Bulgaria had taken part of Serbia, 
the rest of that area was placed under a German mil- 
itary governor. It is there that the fiercest resistance 
takes place. Montenegro also has been set up as a 


Page Three 


midget “independent” state, administered by a pup- 
pet government. 

In spite of their courage and endurance, it is evi- 
dent that the isolated Chetniks cannot continue their 
struggle endlessly against the fifteen Axis divisions 
which are reported to have been sent to crush them. 
Their casualties are high, and they need supplies of 
all kinds. With the conclusion of the new lend-lease 
agreement, the Yugoslav government-in-exile will 
probably be able to obtain supplies for the Chetniks, 
but there is practically no method of shipment except 
by plane from Africa or the Near East. Unless the 
United Nations can find a way of supplying this 
active anti-Axis front, Yugoslav guerrilla warfare 
may soon be ended by starvation or total destruction. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


China Builds for Democracy, by Nym Wales. New York, 
Modern Age Books, 1941. $2.50 


An inspiring account of the Chinese industrial coopera- 
tives, which have created a new life for thousands of 
China’s workers and produced an increasing supply of 
munitions and equipment for the nation’s armed forces. 


Economic Shanghai: by Robert W. 


Barnett. $2.00 


Legal Problems in the Far Eastern Conflict, by Quincy 
Wright, H. Lauterpacht, Edwin M. Borchard and Phoebe 
Morrison. $2.00 


French Interests and Policies in the Far East, by Roger 

Levy, Guy Lacam and Andrew Roth. $2.00 
Italy’s Interests and Policies in the Far East, by Frank M. 

Tamagna. $1.00 

New York, Inquiry Series, Institute of Pacific Relations, 

1941. 

These additions to the indispensable Inquiry Series 
throw light on further aspects of the Far Eastern question. 
Robert W. Barnett has prepared a thorough discussion of 
the economic disabilities suffered by Shanghai since 1937, 
covering labor, industry, currency and finance, and com- 
merce and shipping; his discussion concludes with a sug- 
gestion as to the possibilities which lie before the city in 
the longer future. Students of international law will find 
in the second of these studies a careful analysis of the 
principal legal problems raised by China, the Sino-Japanese 
war, and the “non-recognition” issue. The last two studies 
present the detailed facts and an analytical interpretation 
of the French and Italian positions in the Far East. 


Hostage to Politics, 


War and Diplomacy in Eastern Asia, by Claude A. Buss. 
New York, Macmillan, 1941. $5.00 
A comprehensive review of the economic interests and 
diplomatic policies of the major and minor powers in the 
Far East, with an analysis of the collapse of the collective 
security system in the Pacific. 
Our Hawaii, by Erna Fergusson. New York, Knopf, 1942. 
$3.50 
Tropic Landfall: The Port of Honolulu, by Clifford Gessler. 
New York, Doubleday, Doran, 1942. $3.50 
Both books about the mid-Pacific “isles of beauty” have 


much history and understanding of the native people 
mingled with interesting descriptions of present-day life. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 41, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
second-class matter December 


Beis 


Jury 31, 1942. 


FRANK Ross McCoy, President ; 
2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Dorotny F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered as 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


Juty 27.—The belief that a second front will 
have to be opened this year perceptibly gained 
ground in Washington during the past week. It is 
generally recognized that something must be done to 
keep Russia in the field as an effective military force. 
Nor did it require the visit of Maxim Litvinov, 
Soviet Ambassador in Washington, to the White 
House on July 21 to call attention to the precarious 
position of Marshal Semyon Timoshenko’s armies. 
The present Nazi offensive in the Don basin threat- 
ens to cut the bulk of the Red armies off from the 
Caucasus whence they are estimated to draw any- 
where from 75 to 90 per cent of their oil supplies. 
If the Germans succeed in achieving this objective, 
they will have eliminated Russia as a serious mili- 
tary factor and isolated the Angio-American bloc 
from its most powerful ally. Even if this did not 
necessarily mean that Hitler had won, it is generally 
agreed that it would result in prolongation of the 
war by years and in an increased toll of hundreds of 
thousands of American and British lives. 


THE SHIPPING BOTTLENECK. But although 
most people admit the desirability of opening a 
second front, even expert military opinion is seri- 
ously divided as to its feasibility. The big question 
mark, of course, is the shipping problem. The Ger- 
mans are believed to have between twenty and 
thirty divisions on garrison duty in Western Eu- 
rope. These divisions are composed of older men, 
but are nevertheless of good quality and well-trained. 


A second-front operation, if it is to attain its pur- 
pose of relieving pressure on the Russians by di- 
verting a considerable proportion of Nazi troops 
from the eastern front to the West, must succeed in 
making one or more large bridgeheads on the Eu- 
ropean continent and in holding them for a con- 
siderable time. 


Military experts believe that an invasion army 
of at least 500,000 men will be needed to attain the 
desired results. Allowing ten tons of shipping for 
every soldier landed, together with his equipment 
and supplies, some 5,000,000 tons of shipping will 
be required for this task alone. This is an enormous 
amount of tonnage in view not only of the toll now 
being taken of shipping by Axis submarines in the 
Atlantic and along the Murmansk route, but also 
considering the shipping losses the Allies must ex- 
pect to sustain from the formidable Luftwaffe in 
the course of such a major operation. Of course, it 
is conceivable that Anglo-American military lead- 
ers might dispense with traditional landing opera- 


tions and rely largely on an air invasion by means of 
gliders and air transports. The Nazi conquest of 
Crete revealed what possibilities lie in the exploita. 
tion of modern methods of warfare. 


ADMIRAL LEAHY’S NEW JOB. To be success. 
ful; a sea-borne invasion of the continent, generally 
admitted to be the most difficult of all military op. 
erations, requires the closest coordination of land 
sea and air power. For this reason, the unprecedented 
appointment of Admiral William D. Leahy on 
July 21 by President Roosevelt as “chief of staff to 
the commander-in-chief of the army and navy” js 
regarded as unusually significant. Admiral Leahy’s 
new job does not establish the unified command be. 
tween the two services which has been so crying a 
need ever since Pearl Harbor, but it is hailed ip 
official circles as the first step in that direction. 

Speculation on the nature of Admiral Leahy’ 
post has run all the way from that of mere adviser 
to the President to that of the holder of real com 
mand as coordinator of the Army Chief of Staff and 
the Navy Chief of Naval Operations. The Army and 
Navy Journal, authoritative organ of the fighting 
services, states editorially that the latter view 
“substantially correct,” and remarks that the ‘vey 
title ‘chief of staff’ taken in the sense in which tt 
applies to the army’s ranking officer connotes real 
command.” 


Admiral Leahy is peculiarly qualified for his ney 
duties, not only because he enjoys the confidence of 
the President, generally believed himself to be 4 
strong partisan of the second front idea, but because 
he also possesses the confidence and esteem of both 
the Army and the Navy. A former chief of naval op 
erations from 1937 to 1939, Admiral Leahy ren 
dered invaluable services to his country last yeat 
when, as American Ambassador in Vichy, he succeed 
ed in preventing Marshal Pétain from adopting 
“all-out” collaboration with Hitler. 

Having lived in unoccupied France for eighteen 
months, Admiral Leahy has had the opportunity of 
acquiring first-hand knowledge of the French “V 
column that is expected to rise the moment Anglo 
American forces land on the continent. It may bt 
recalled that, shortly after he returned to the United 
States from France early in June, an unnamed ate 
thority was quoted as saying that the “damndest 
fifth column the world has ever seen’ was impatient 
ly waiting in France for this hour to strike. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


Britis 
not s 
tion, 
mate! 
Will: 
tion 
of w: 
that 
winte 
mitte 
to su 
tériel 
Allie 
Russi 
cal a 
Britis 
on M 
of So 
attitu 
whicl 
Roos 
W 
Situat 
Sia ai 


