






‘erms 
many 

pre- 
lieve 
cratic 
viliat- 
adier 
night 
2zech 
ed to 
ould 
in the 
irmer 
ber 3 
» that 
, the 
yn of 
gree- 
these 


pre- 


e fu- 
rents. 
facts 


» of a 


lrawn 
vorted 


com- 
es to 
sitate 
eople 


-d in 


every 


NE 








Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


\ 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 





Vor. XVII, No. 51 


OcToBER 14, 1938 





ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF REARMAMENT 
by William T. Stone 
An attempt to estimate the cost of the rearmament 
race to date, and an analysis of the effect of such 


expenditures on the civil budgets and social services 
of democracies and dictatorships alike. 


October 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents each 


rt 





a: ae 

PERIODICAL ae class pain: December 
GENERAL LIBRAR 2, 1921, at the Post 
UNIV. oF micH. Office at New York, 


N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











THE NAZI 


STEAMROLLER PUSHES EAST 





A$ the German army, like an inexorable steam- 
roller, gradually moved into the five zones of 
Czechoslovakia which it was to occupy between Oc- 
tober 1 and 10, Europe tried to adjust itself to the 
seismological changes precipitated by what Mr. 
Chamberlain has described as “peace in our time.” 
In the general tide of relief which followed post- 
ponement of war, the Munich accord was over- 
whelmingly, if apprehensively, accepted by the 
peoples of France and Britain. Neither Mr. Cham- 
berlain nor M. Daladier encountered any formidable 
opposition in their respective Parliaments, sum- 
moned merely to ratify a fait accompli. In the final 
vote on October 6 Mr. Chamberlain received the 
support of a majority of his Conservative followers, 
threatened with a purge at the next elections if they 
failed to toe the line. The most effective criticism of 
the Munich accord came not from the Labor and 
Liberal parties, handicapped by their previous ad- 
vocacy of pacifism, but from the handful of Con- 
servatives opposed to the Chamberlain policy, like 
Duff-Cooper, Eden and Churchill. Mr. Chamberlain 
assured the country that he was not planning either 
a general election or national conscription. He 
warned the British, however, not to relax their re- 
armament efforts; indicated that a revised armament 
program would be submitted to Parliament when it 
reconvenes on November 1; and tried to salve the 
British conscience by arranging a loan of 50 million 
dollars to Czechoslovakia, which had appealed for 
an international loan of 150 million. 


Meanwhile Germany, without any sacrifice on its 
part, acquired a territory the size of Belgium, with 
a population of 4 million, nearly one million of 
whom are Czechs. The international commission set 
up to delimit the Czech-German frontier, consisting 
of Baron von Weiszaecker, Secretary of State of the 
German Foreign Office, and the British, French and 





Italian Ambassadors in Berlin, assigned to Germany 
territories exceeding the terms of Hitler's Godesberg 
memorandum, which had “shocked” Mr. Chamber- 
lain. The Godesberg map had envisaged two groups 
of areas — those unquestionably German by heavy 
majorities, which were to be immediately occupied 
by German troops; and “questionable” areas, in 
which the German majority varied around 50 per 
cent, and where plebiscites were to be held by No- 
vember 25. The international commission has con- 
ceded to Germany all territories whose population is 
over 50 per cent German, apparently abandoning the 
idea of holding plebiscites in doubtful areas, and 
making no provision for the large Czech enclaves 
which will now be included in the boundaries of 
Greater Germany. It also accepted the German de- 
mand that the Godesberg plebiscite areas—now be- 
ing occupied without a plebiscite—should be deter- 
mined, following the method adopted in the Saar, on 
the basis of population figures of October 28, 1918, 
when the Czechs and Slovaks proclaimed their inde- 
pendence from Austria-Hungary. The 1918 figures 
were based on the census of 1910, when the Czechs 
were a subject minority restricted to a few provinces, 
and had not settled, as they did after 1918, through- 
out Sudetenland. 

In addition, Germany is reported to demand rep- 
arations from Prague for “injustices inflicted by the 
Czechs on the Sudetens since 1918.” If the Czechs 
are forced to pay reparations, the British loan to 
Prague may turn out to be a gift to Germany. Nor 
has any provision been made to compensate the 
Czech government or Czech individuals for property 
costing millions of dollars which, under the Munich 
accord, must be left undamaged in the occupied ter- 
ritory. The Munich negotiators were equally improvi- 
dent about the status of non-Nazi German refugees 
from Sudetenland, who have streamed into the in- 














terior of Czechoslovakia. These refugees have met 
with scant welcome from Prague, which has no desire 
to serve as a refuge for Germans whose presence 
might subsequently be used by Hitler as a lever to 
obtain further cession of “German language islands’’ 
in Czech territory. 

Confronted with “peace” terms such as could only 
be imposed ou a vanquished country, Czechoslovakia 
is stoically attempting to salvage what it can from 
the wreckage. President Benes, vilified by Hitler in 
his Nuremberg and Sportspalast speeches, resigned 
on October 5 to facilitate reorientation of his coun- 
try’s policy. This reorientation must, perforce, be in 
the direction of economic collaboration with Ger- 
many, on which Czechoslovakia now depends for 
coal, ison and other raw materials it formerly ob- 
tained from Suderenland. To effect this transition, 
M. Chvalkovsky, former Minister to Berlin and 
Rome, was appointed Foreign Minister on October 6. 

In an attempt to forestall Hungary’s demand for 
a plebiscite in Slovakia, which extreme Hungarian 
revisionists hope to detach from Prague, General 
Syrovy enlarged his Cabinet to include three Slovak 
Ministers; granted a large measure of autonomy to 
Slovakia; and appointed Dr. Joseph Tiso, leader of 
the Slovak party, Prime Minister for that region. Dr. 
Tiso has also been given the delicate task of nego- 
tiating a settlement with Hungary. These negotia- 
tions threaten to be complicated by the demand of 
Warsaw and Budapest for a common frontier, which 
could be obtained only if Czechoslovakia ceded 
Carpatho-Ruthenia—which demands autonomy with- 
in the Czechoslovak state—to Hungary. On this 
point Prague may obtain unexpected help from Ger- 
many, which has no desire to see Poland and Hun- 
gary join forces to resist German expansion. 

‘That Germany would lose no time in consolidating 
its position in Eastern Europe and the Balkans was 
indicated by the visit of Dr. Funk, Reich Minister of 
Economics, to Belgrade, Sofia and Ankara, where 
Nazi economic penetration has already made great 
strides. On October 7 it was announced that Ger- 
many had extended a credit of 150 million marks to 
Turkey for the purchase of industrial and military 
equipment and materials for public works. This new 
move along the Berlin-to-Bagdad road is particularly 
striking in view of the fact that, until recently, Kemal 
Ataturk had been regarded as anti-German. 

Meanwhile, at the other end of the Rome-Berlin 
axis, Italy continued to support the claims of Poland 
and Hungary against Czechoslovakia, in the hope, 
apparently, of using these countries as a counter- 
weight to German expansion. The announcement on 
October 8 that Italy would withdraw from Franco 
Spain troops which had served for eighteen months 
—estimated at 10,000—was thought to indicate that 





Page Two — 





— 


a compromise settlement of the Spanish question 
was about to be broached by the four-power direc. 
torate set up at Munich. This withdrawal, however, 
apparently does not include aviators and technicians, 
who have been far more valuable to Franco than 
Italian troops; and will probably be recompensed by 
Franco-British recognition of Franco’s belligerent 
status. 


That coexistence with an enlarged Germany will 
prove no bed of roses for France and Britain was 
indicated by Hitler's speech at Saarbruecken on Oc- 
tober 9, when the Fuehrer, far from being appeased 
by the Munich concessions, once more denounced the 
“Jewish-international world enemy’; expressed his 
desire for peace, but also his dislike of the democratic 
régimes in France and Britain, which might bring to 
the helm leaders like Eden or Churchill, whom he 
detests; and announced that he would continue con- 
struction of fortifications in the West with ‘‘increased 
energy.” Nazi ambition, like appetite, grows by what 
it feeds on. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


STORM WARNINGS IN PARIS 
by David H. Popper 
Mr. Popper has just returned from France. 


As France returns to a peace-time basis — after 
spending 8 billion francs for a mobilization which 
served no apparent purpose—it is beginning to make 
the comprehensive mental readjustment necessitated 
by France's new position in Europe. Having devital- 
ized its eastern European alliances, the country must 
reconcile itself to following even more closely than 
hitherto in the wake of Britain. It must strive to re- 
tain the good graces of the Fascist dictatorships by 
discarding the outworn remnants of League of Na- 
tions ideology, and making the best possible bargain 
with Germany and Italy regarding the spheres of 
influence into which they may choose to penetrate. 
As a concrete step in this process of “appe 
the French government has apparently alre: 
cided to recognize the Ethiopian conquest by ac- 
crediting an Ambassador—probably André Francois 
Poncet, now stationed at Berlin—to the King- 
Emperor at Rome. The Quai d'Orsay, moreover, 
appears to be awaiting only a token withdrawal of 
Italian troops, and diminution of Socialist opposition 
at home, before it recognizes the belligerent status 
of General Franco in Spain. 


There is little doubt that, in September 1938, the 
Daladier-Bonnet policy of peace by concession faith- 
fully reflected the preponderant weight of French 
public opinion. From the point of view of the man 
in the street, avoidance of war was a far more de- 
sirable goal than the salvation of Czechoslovakia. 
Neither the small group of Right-wing dissenters, nor 
the articulate but distrusted Communists, succeeded 





—. 
———e_ 


Stion 
direc. 
ever, 
cians, 

than 
ed by 


erent 


r will 
1 Was 
n Oc. 
eased 
d the 
d his 
cratic 
ng to 
m he 
> COn- 
eased 
what 
AN 


after 
which 
make 
itated 
vital- 
must 
’ than 
to re- 
ps by 
f Na- 
irgain 
"es of 
trate. 
ié@nt 
7 ac- 
ancois 
King- 
eover, 
val of 
sition 
status 


8, the 
faith- 
‘rench 
e man 
re de- 
vakia. 
rs, nor 


-eeded 











in persuading the country as a whole that the crisis 
had its larger aspects. Only a government unafraid 
to take a strong and decisive lead could have done so. 
That the task would have been relatively easy is 
proved by the virtual: unanimity with which the 
French nation responded to the mobilization appeal 
during the few days in which it believed that its 
safety was at stake. But the ultimate capitulation— 
however joyfully greeted as a release from weeks of 
tension and anxiety—cannot fail eventually to in- 
crease the spirit of perplexity, disillusionment and 
discontent which pervades France. This development, 
coupled with continued economic stagnation’ and 
social strife, may provide a fertile breeding-ground 
for authoritarian movements. 

Some observers believe that a trend in this direc- 
tion is already noticeable in French politics. They 

int out that parliamentary consideration of the 
Czechoslovak situation, not permitted until after the 
Munich conference and then only: under stringent 
limitation of debate, was more a plebiscite than a 
policy-determining process. Moreover, the Popular 
Front—which had checked the growth of Fascist or- 
ganizations in France but had gradually lost cohesion 
—was seriously split on October 4, when the Com- 
munists deserted their Left-wing associates in Par- 
liament and voted their disapproval of Premier 
Daladier’s foreign policy. On October 5, too, the 
Communists opposed Daladier unsuccessfully (the 
Socialists abstaining), when they protested against 
granting him full decree powers for a second time, 
until November 15, to redress the financial situation. 
Increasingly frequent resort to this crisis device of 
“full powers” reflects the growing need for the re- 
inforcement of executive authority in France; and 
the Radical Socialist and conservative majority 
which accorded full powers to Daladier foreshadows 
a swing of the political pendulum back to the Right. 

It remains to be seen whether the present govern- 
ment can devise measures which are more than mere 
palliatives to remedy the economic malaise from 
which France is now suffering. The Premier is al- 
most certain to revalue the nation’s gold reserve—a 
bookkeeping operation producing a profit of over 
30 billion francs, to be applied principally to reduc- 
tion of advances totaling 50 billion from the Bank 
of France to the Treasury. He may also float a “peace 
loan” repayable in foreign currencies to bolster the 
French exchequer. To carry out its plea for “perma- 
nent mobilization for the service of the nation,” the 
government may go so far as to demand a “national 
contribution” in the form of free labor service from 


Page Three 





———— 





the poor and higher income taxes from theyrich. It 
may even be forced to resort to further devaluation 
and measures of exchange control, despite its’ pledge 
to avoid such steps. 


Drastic sacrifices of this type, and a further cur- 
tailment of economic freedom, are undoubtedly 
necessary if France is to continue its rearmament on 
a scale sufficient to assure its national defense. The 
political battle of the autumn will be fought on the 
issue of how these sacrifices are to be apportioned 
among the various income groups of the population. 
If the Left refuses to approve the Daladier decrees, 
the Premier will probably seek the consent of the 
Senate to dissolution of the Chamber and new elec- 
tions. This extraordinary procedure, employed only 
once in the history of the Third Republic, may pos- 
sibly produce a loosely united front of Communists, 
Socialists and Right-wing elements dissatisfied with 
the course of French foreign policy. Thus the French 
political system may be subjected to unprecedented 
strains in the next few months: and the outcome of 
the French experience may not be without pertinence 
for the future of the United States. 





Statement of the Ownership, Management, Cireulatien, Etc., 
Required by the Acts of Congress of August 24, 1912 and 
March, 3, 1933, of 


Foreign Policy Bulletin 
Published weekly at New York, N. Y. for October 1, 1938. 
State of New York, County of New York, ss. 
Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State and county aforesaid, 


personally qouns Vera Micheles Dean, who, having been duly 
cording to law, d and says that she is the 

POLICY BULLETIN, and that the following is, to the best of her 
and belief, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the afore- 
said publication for the date shown in the above coptien. by the 
Act of August 24, 1912, as amended by the Act March 3, 1933, em- 
bodied in Section 537, Postal Laws and Regulations, printed on the re- 
verse of this form, to wit: . : : 

1. That the names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing edi- 
tor, and business managers are: 

Publishers—Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 8 West 40th Street, 
New York, N .Y. 

Editor—Vera Micheles Dean, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 

Managing Edisoe—Nooe- 

Business Managers—None. 

2. That the owner is: a : 

Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, the principal officers of which 
are: Raymond Leslie Buell, President; Dorothy F. Leet, Secretary; both 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y.; and William A. Eldridge, Treasurer, 
70 Broadway, New York, N. Y. : 

3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holders 
owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, 
or other securities, are: 

None. 

4. That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners, 
stockholders and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stock- 
holders and security holders as they appear upon the books of the company, 
but also, in cases where the stockholder or security holder ‘ upon the 
books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation the name 
of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting, = also 
that the said two paragraphs contain statements embracing *s full 
knowledge and belief as to the circumstances and conditions under which 
stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of the 
company as trustees hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of 
a bona fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any other 
person, association, or corporation has any interest, direct or indirect, in the 
said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by her. 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated. 
By VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 

Sworn to and subscribed before me this 21st day of September, 1938. 
{Seal} CAROLYN E. MARTIN, Notary Public. 


New York County, New York, County Clerk’s No. 77. Reg. No. 9-M-270. 
(My commission expires March 30, 1939.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 51, Ocrossr 14, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lustig BUELL, President; DornotHy F. Leer, Secretary; VERA MiIcHELEs DEAN, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


GEEZ 181 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Oct. 10—Hindsight is much easier than foresight. 
Ten days after the event, it is easy enough to say what 
America should have done in the final hour of crisis. 
It is not difficult for columnists and commentators 
to show that American intervention made us a party 
—by implication at least—to the injustice done at 
Munich. It is possible to point out the dangers of an 
ambiguous policy, which sought to use the influence 
of the United States without accepting responsibility 
or) without making commitments. But in passing 
judgment on the Administration's action, it is well 
to remember that the President and Mr. Hull did 
not have the advantage of hindsight. On Septem- 
ber 27 they had no advance knowledge of what 
would happen in the show-down. They were com- 
pelled to act on the basis of probabilities, rather than 
certainties. They were also compelled to operate un- 
der definite limitations imposed by our constitutional 
system of checks and balances, and underlined by the 
temper of Congress and American public opinion. 

The Lessons of Munich. This does not mean that 
nothing is to be learned from the lessons of the past. 
No one in Washington will deny today that Ameri- 
can foreign policy has been profoundly affected by 
the terms of the Munich settlement. No one seriously 
questions the assertion that our domestic life may 
be affected—directly and perhaps quickly—by the 
consequences of what has happened in Europe. But, 
at this juncture, responsible Washington officials are 
not drawing final conclusions, or passing judgments, 
or making predictions. They are waiting to see what 
happens before elaborating decisions for the future. 
They are watching London and Paris even more 
closely than Rome and Berlin. 

If Mr. Chamberlain is undeterred by his experi- 
ences at Berchtesgaden, Godesberg and Munich, and 
still pursues his objective of appeasement by conces- 
sions to the dictators, Washington will stand strictly 
aloof, at least until the results of this policy become 
apparent. Should a broader four-power settlement 
actually lead to appeasement — which many here 
doubt — Washington would then be prepared to co- 
operate in economic and military disarmament. On 
the other hand, if Mr. Chamberlain's policy merely 
postpones the conflict and leads to another crisis 
within a few months, with the distribution of col- 
onies as the issue, Washington will undoubtedly be 
more than a passive spectator on the sidelines. For, 
as Walter Lippmann pointed out, our own security 


in the Western Hemisphere has rested on the strength 
of the British imperial system. As long as Britain 
controlled the seas, no continental power could ef- 
fectively challenge the Monroe Doctrine or contem- 
plate intervention in Latin America. But should 
British supremacy be challenged, the United States 
would be compelled to take active steps to bolster its 
own military and naval defenses in the Western 
Hemisphere. 


New Policies Foreshadowed. Whatever the course 
of events in Europe, the results of the Munich settle- 
ment are certain to be reflected in domestic as well 
as foreign policies, and in demands for further re- 
armament and the strengthening of inter-American 
ties. Evidence of the current trend is to be found in 
many quarters. During the past week Washington 
observers have taken note of the following items: 

1. A proposal for the largest naval appropriation in 
peace time is now before the Bureau of the Budget. 
While details have not been made public, it is believed 
that the funds for new naval construction will be ex- 
panded to include work on six capital ships already 
authorized under the Vinson Act of 1934 and the Naval 
Expansion Act of last year, as well as three new light 
cruisers and one aircraft carrier. 

2. Inauguration of the new “Good Neighbor” mer- 
chant fleet service to the east coast of South America, 
while projected long before the European crisis came to 
a head, is made the occasion for a renewed plea to the 
nations of the Western Hemisphere to strengthen their 
mutual economic and cultural ties. Assistant Secretary 
of State George S. Messersmith, speaking in New York 
on October 6 on the eve of the sailing of the $.S. Brazil, 
underscores the significant face that the new service is 
operating under the auspices of this government. 

3. Im announcing an extensive reorganization in the 
Department of Agriculture, it is revealed that the Ad- 
ministration is planning to subsidize the consumption 
of surplus cotton and other agricultural products at 
home, rather than increase export subsidies. While this 
important development does not run counter to the Hull 
trade program, it emphasizes the foreign trade problem 
which confronts the Administration in more acute form 
as a result of the Munich accords. 


A more immediate result of the Munich settlement 
is the necessity for revising the trade agreement con- 
cluded with Czechoslovakia only a few months ago. 
Experts are already at work checking the products 
formerly exported by Czechoslovakia but now in 
German territory. If the remainder of Czechoslovakia 
is able to exist as an independent state, Washington 
will be prepared to conclude a new agreement grant 
ing additional concessions to compensate for those 
lost by the German occupation. W. T. STONE 





