





-EMS. 


>m of 
red of 
n and 
Icome 
King 
pically 
Turks 
shing- 
1 from 
inter: 
should 
system 
which 
in the 
Ss, may 


signed 
t Views 
is im 
ington, 
s have 
where 
ies the 





litical | 
bstitute | 


ncerted 


ncerted | 


ommis | 


yn, and 


> 


ishment 
yr unity 


)LLES 
943 








General Library 


MARIGVDILAL wetpes a 
‘ VARY Sie tonws t f neti 
“oalv. UF Bice University of Mehigan oct 18 1943 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 


FOREIGN 


POLICY BULLETIN 





An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vor. XXII, No. 52 


Ocrosmr 15, 1948 





JOINT RESPONSIBILITY OF UNITED NATIONS KEY TO POST-WAR SECURITY 


D IVERSE as are the specific items that could be 
included in the agenda of the three-power 
conference in Moscow, they will all fall under the 
same general heading: the search for security against 
war once the present conflict is over. Today few in the 
United Nations would dispute the French thesis of 
the inter-war years—whose reiteration by French 
statesmen caused the British and Americans to ac- 
cuse France of unbridled militarism—that security 
must precede disarmament. Few believe that, with- 
out armaments, the United Nations could preserve 
the fruits of victory. But when all has been said 
and done, the question still remains of how to use 
the industrial and military power that will in- 
dubitably be at the command of Britain, Russia and 
the United States in such a way as to give assurance 
of safety not only to each of the three great powers 
alone, or to the three combined, but also to all the 
other nations whose efforts will make victory 
possible. 


CAN EXPANSION GIVE SECURITY ? One way 
—a tried and tested way—in which nations have 
sought to protect themselves against aggression in 
the past has been to establish control over the ad- 
joining territories of weaker neighbors, either by 
incorporating them outright within their own fron- 
tiers, or by claiming that they come within their 
sphere of influence. Russia’s occupation of the Bal- 
tic states in 1939 is an example of the first practice; 
joint Anglo-Russian occupation of Iran in 1941 is an 
example of the second. 

Quite aside from the question whether such prac- 
tices are compatible with the lip-service all United 
Nations governments have been paying to democracy 
and the rights of small nations and national minori- 
ties, it still remains to be proved that they can assure 


| the security even of the great powers. The idea that 


mere extension of territory is in itself a form of 
Protection against aggression dates back to the period 


ee 


when wars between nations were waged primarily 
on land, and it seemed advisable to place as much 
land space as possible between oneself and one’s 
potential opponent. But the development of the air- 
plane as a weapon is invalidating this concept, and 
will invalidate it even more in the future. Hitler 
achieved tremendous expansion of German territory 
—but his land “fortress” is exposed to bombing 
from the air. And so will the territories of any other 
great powers who seek security in expansion. Mere 
acquisition of land or spheres of influence is an- 
other version of the Maginot Line. It creates the il- 
lusion of security without coming to grips with the 
reasons why nations go to war. 


THREAT OF TERRITORIAL FREE-FOR-ALL. 
Should Britain and the United States, through a de- 
sire to placate Russia or to express their appreciation 
of the part the Russians are playing in the war, agree 
to the acquisition by the U.S.S.R. of territories along 
its borders, without any guarantee of the rights of 
individuals in these areas, that would be the signal 
for a free-for-all territorial scramble. Then Britain 
could, with equal justification, claim that protec- 
tion of its lifeline through the Mediterranean neces- 
sitates retention of the Italian colonies it has occu- 
pied in Africa, and even acquisition of bases in 
Sicily, Sardinia, and Greece. Then, too, there would 
be nothing to prevent the United States from in- 
sisting that we must control all the islands.in the 
Pacific, and possibly other areas in Asia, to guard 
this country against future aggression by Japan. The 
race for territorial spoils would be on—with only 
one predictable outcome: another, and even more 
deadly, war between the victors in the present conflict. 

NEED FOR JOINT RESPONSIBILITY. At the 
same time, it is clear that Britain and the United 
States cannot merely reject Russia’s demand for se- 
curity through control of adjoining territories. They 
must propose a workable alternative which they in- 








———~—~—~—~—~>~>~oooi__——sssSSaan==SSSssS_——— PageTwo a6qCqnmaeaeE=E]q_]_—SSSan]_easEsS=S=amamaEeaaee 


tend to support with all the power at their disposal. 
An alternative, which is gradually taking shape in 
the form of concrete measures of Allied coopera- 
tion, has been described as “joint responsibility” for 
Europe. This is another phrase for international col- 
laboration, with proper emphasis on the responsi- 
bility that rests on the great powers for making 
international machinery work, not only for their own 
benefit, but for the benefit of all. 

Such collaboration, to be effective, must rest on 
’ gecognition by the great powers that they will be 
unable, single-handed, to achieve their own protec- 
tion in the future, even if their peoples were willing 
to forego indefinitely any improvement in living 
standards and any advance in human welfare for the 
sake of maintaining after the war national military 
establishments commensurate with their wartime 
needs. The great powers must also face the fact that 
their own security will increase in direct ratio to the 
~sense of security and stability they can give to the 
small nations, whose fears and discontents would 
otherwise be a constant source of concern to the 
great powers themselves, and a potential danger to 
world stability. But neither must the small nations 
again seek to play the role of “irresponsibles,” or 
seek illusory refuge in neutrality, or allow them- 
selves to become pawns of one or other of their more 
powerful neighbors. 

No one would claim that this alternative to an- 
other balance of power through spheres of influ- 
ence system can be easily or promptly worked out. 
Mutual suspicions and recriminations are bound to 


FAMINE IN INDIA WEAKENS BASE FOR BURMA INVASION 


The mass starvation now occurring throughout 
Bengal province, including its capital at Calcutta, 
will inevitably have repercussions on British-Indian 
relations as well as on India’s effectiveness in the 
war. Bengal, containing an important part of the 
country’s modern industry, as well as some 60 mil- 
lion people, stands next door to Burma and is un- 
doubtedly slated to play a significant role in the 
recovery of that territory from the Japanese. Con- 
sequently, more than humanitarian interest attaches 
to the British Broadcasting Company’s statement of 
September 18 that there is not a village in the prov- 
ince in which the inhabitants are receiving as many 
as two meals a day. With regard to Calcutta— 
India’s largest center, with a population of more than 
2,000,000—the Provincial Food Minister estimated 
a week later that 50 persons were dying of starva- 
tion every day. And on September 29 alone, 197 
persons in that city were reported dead from lack of 
food—an indication of the growing seriousness of 
the famine. Cholera was also said to have broken out 
in a number of places. 

WHAT ARE THE REASONS? Many factors are 
mentioned_in discussions of the food crisis: shortage 


persist, and every step forward may be followed 
backsliding. But the important thing is that, at the 
Moscow conference, the three great powers should 
make a clear choice between the alternatives, should 
set their course in one direction, instead of the 
other. Then many of the doubts and anxieties tha 
hang like a pall over the battlefields could be dis. 
pelled, giving us all a clearer vision of the future, 
Then, too, the key problem of what to do about | 
Germany would assume new meaning. For we might | 
begin to see—as the Russians already appear to see 
—that to make Europe safe from renewed German 
aggression we should strive not so much to weakep 
Germany (this could not be done permanently) but 
to strengthen the continent, and the world, through 
post-war mutual political, economic and military aid / 
among the United Nations. Such aid, which in war. 
time can bring the defeat of Germany, could ig | 
peacetime literally neutralize its resurgence, as well | 
as the expansionist intentions of any other potential 
aggressor. 

No one who knows or is capable of imagining the 
physical and moral havoc wrought in Europe by four | 
years of conflict, no one who has experienced or | 
witnessed the agony of war partings and war losses, 
can believe that any stone will be left unturned at the | 
Moscow conference in trying to prevent the recur- 
rence of such havoc and such agony. 





VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(This is the last in a series of articles on the 


outlook for the future in Europe.) 


of transport facilities; hoarding of food grains; loss 
of India’s normal import of 1,500,000 tons of rice 
from Burma; unwillingness on the part of provinces 





—~3~ oO. ee ee: &® Cr Oo a 


mao © 


_— 


a i a oe -_ oF hs he Oe oe lO 


—- i, Lh 66cm 


with surplus grain to make supplies available for) . 


Bengal and other deficit areas; the decline in Ben- 
gal’s rice crop last winter from 9,000,000 to 7, 
000,000 tons as a result of cyclones, floods and fas} 
of Japanese invasion; the use of food from India to 
feed the armed forces at home and abroad, as well | 
as refugees from Burma; and maladministration on 


the part of the Indian government. Clearly, there i) 


no shortage of explanations, but it would appear that 
the main question now being asked, both in Britain 
and India, is why the Central administration, headed 
by the Viceroy, did not long ago adopt measutes 


I 


( 


adequate to meet a situation that was obviously ap | | 


proaching. 

The chief defense offered by the government i 
that the Central authorities in New Delhi have been 
unable to act effectively because of the selfish oppo 
sition of certain Indian provincial officials and that, 
in any case, the Bengal administration is respon 
for food distribution in its territory. But, according 
to a New York Times dispatch from London of | 





— 
od by 
t the 
10uld 
hould 
E the} 
5 that | 
© dis. | 
uture, | 
about 
mi ; 
to see | 
“rman | 
eaken | 
r) but | 
rough 
ry aid 
1 Wat 
ild in 
s well | 
tential | 


ry four 
ced or | 


losses, 


at the 
recut- | 


a 


EAN 


1S; loss 
of rice 
OVINCES |) 
Sle for } 
n Ben- | 
to 7; 
d fears 
ndia to |) 
as well 
tion of 
there is | 
ear that 
Britain 
headed 
easures | 


asly ap | 





ment is 


ve been? 


h oppo 
nd that, 


onsible | 
cording 
don on 











— ——— 
October 8, this explanation is not accepted by the 
British public which is “deeply shocked” at the 
famine reports. One may surmise that many English- 
men who have looked forward to friendly relations 
with post-war India, on the basis of independence 
or Dominion status, are afraid that what is happen- 
ing in Bengal will bring new bitterness into a sit- 
uation already filled with antagonism. The official 
analysis, moreover, is rejected on the ground that 
if, as the government maintains, India is not ripe 
for self-rule during the war, then Britain cannot 
disavow responsibility for running the country 
properly. 

JAPANESE PROPAGANDA IS BUSY. Not the 
least important aspect of the situation is the use to 
which it is being put by the Japanese short-wave 
radio. Subhas Chandra Bose, former nationalist 
leader who went over to the Axis several years ago, 
has been broadcasting an offer of 100,000 tons of 
tice to be delivered to India from Japanese-occupied 
territory as soon as Britain is ready to accept. This 
shrewd suggestion is said to be having some effect. 
Indian propagandists working for Tokyo are also 
predicting that the Japanese-organized “Indian In- 
dependence Army” will shortly go into the field on 
the India-Burma frontier. 

When a situation has become as bad as that in 
Bengal, there is no simple solution. The best that 
can be done for the starving is to bring in larger 
supplies of food from neighboring areas and for- 
eign countries as rapidly as possible. In a long-term 
sense, action is needed against hoarding landlords 
and profiteering merchants. Popular participation 
could be very helpful in this connection, for in a 
country where a decentralized village economy still 
bulks large, the local peasant will be better informed 





= Page Three 

















than any outside administrator about those who are 
responsible for raising prices and withholding stocks 
from the market. Such popular support, however, can 
be mobilized only under nationalist leadership, i.e. 
as the result of a settlement between the government 
and the main Indian groups. This is one reason why 
new British-Indian discussions are necessary, if India 
is to furnish a sound war base and play its full part 
in the struggle with Japan. 
LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 





Food and Farming in Post-War Europe, by P. Lamartine 
Yates and D. Warriner. New York, Oxford University 
Press, 1948. $1.25 


Excellent short survey of Europe’s farming conditions 
and outline of a program for rehabilitating the peasantry. 
Among the proposals are water power development on a 
regional basis, abolition of the strip system, creation of 
new industries, and long-term credits from abroad. 


Reflections on the Revolution of Our Time, by Harold 
Laski. New York, Viking, 1943. $3.50 


Prominent English socialist analyzes trends since World 
War I and concludes that “either political democracy must 
be the master of economic monopoly or economic monopoly 
will be the master of political democracy.” He insists that 
the drift of American experience has been in much the 
same direction as Europe’s, requiring the United States 
to establish a “planned democracy.” 


The United States Navy, by Carroll Storrs Alden and 
Allan Westcott. New York, Lippincott, 1943. $5.50 


America’s Navy in World War II, by Gilbert Cant. New 
York, John Day, 1943. $3.75 


The Navy Reader, by Lt. William Harrison Fetridge. New 
York, Bobbs-Merrill, 1943. $3.75 
Three interesting books on the Navy. The first is a com- 
prehensive history by professors at Annapolis; the second 
a correspondent’s account of important battles after Pearl 
Harbor; and the third an anthology designed to acquaint 
the reader with all aspects of the U.S. Navy today. 





Statement of the Ownership, Management, Circulation, Etc., 
Required by the Acts of Congress of August 24, 1912 and 
March 38, 1933, of 


Foreign Policy Bulletin 


Published weekly at New York, N. Y. for October 1, 1943. 
State of New York, County of New York, ss. 


Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State and county aforesaid, 
personally jeune Vera Micheles Dean, who, having been duly sworn ac- 
cording to law, deposes and +. that she is the Editor of the FOREIGN 
POLICY BULLETIN, and that the following is, to the best of her knowledge 
and belief, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the afore- 
said publication for the date shown in the above caption, required by che 
Act of August 24, 1912, as amended by the Act of March 3, 1933, em- 
bodied in Section 537, Postal Laws and Regulations, printed on the re- 
verse of this form, to wit: 

1, That the names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing edi- 
tor, and business managers are: 

Publishers—Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 22 East 38th Street, 
New York 16, N. ¥. - 

Editor—Vera Micheles Dean, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 

Managing Editor—None. 

Business Managers—None. 

2. That the owner is: 

Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, the principal officers of which 





are: Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorothy F. Leet, Secretary; both of 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y.; and William A. Eldridge, 
Treasurer, 70 Broadway, New York, N. Y. 


3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holders 
owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, 
or — securities, are: . 

one. 


4. That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners, 
stockholders and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stock- 
holders and security holders as they . yo upon the books of the company, 
but also, in cases where the stockholder or security holder appears upon the 
books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, the name 
of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting, is gree also 
that the said two gerecraphs contain statements embracing *s full 
kav lode? and belief as to the circumstances and conditions under whi 
stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books 
company as trustees hold stock and securities in a capacity other than 
a bona fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any 
person, association, or corporation has any interest, direct or indirect, in 
said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by her, 

FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated. 
By VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 27th day of September, 1943. 


{Seal} CAROLYN MARTIN, Notary Public. 
New York County, New York, County Clerk’s No. 87, New York County 
Reg. No. 164-M-5. (My commission expires March 30, 1945.) 


et ote 


g 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 52, Ocroper 15, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHeces Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


ne month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


ee 181 



























SSSA hat ot 


VS ace Ew 


ee 


BER Pree ha SN 


Washington News Letter Nad | 


4 


4 
4 











.@ 
 & 








a a 


Oct. 15.—Since the United States Senate is ex- 
pected to influence the nature of the peace that 
follows this war, the world listens closely to the 
comments of the five Senators who recently com- 
pleted a two-month, 43,000-mile trip around the globe 
to Allied fighting fronts outside Russia. They have 
made statements critical of this country’s Allies— 
Great Britain and Russia—and of this country’s 
diplomacy. Coming almost on the eve of the con- 
ference among the U.S. Secretary of State, the British 
Foreign Secretary, and the Soviet Foreign Commissar, 
their criticisms raise questions in United Nations re- 
lations which will disturb the Ministers’ meeting. 
The Senate also is certain to consider their criti- 
cisms when it acts on a foreign policy resolution, 
but time may weaken the effect of the comments. 


TRAVELERS CAREFULLY CHOSEN. The five 
Senators left Washington amid doubts of their col- 
leagues that they would accomplish anything use- 
ful. Senator Clark of Missouri recalled that the 
House Naval Affairs Committee visited France in 
1917 and learned little about the warfare in Europe. 
Senator Lucas of Illinois announced he would not 
vote to appropriate a dime for the trip. Majority 
Leader Barkley chose the five after discussing the 
matter with Secretary of War Stimson, General 
George C. Marshall, Army Chief of Staff, and Sen- 
ate Minority Leader McNary. Barkley disclosed his 
list on June 30: Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachu- 
setts and Albert B. Chandler of Kentucky, of the 
Military Affairs Committee; James M. Mead of New 
York and Ralph O. Brewster of Maine, of the Tru- 
man Committee; and, as Chairman, Richard B. 
Russell of Georgia, of the Appropriations Commit- 
tee. Chandler, Mead and Russell are Democrats; 
Brewster and Lodge, Republicans. Chandler, how- 
ever, sometimes votes against the Administration. 

The War Department financed the trip and sup- 
plied the plane in which the men traveled. The five 
reached England on July 31. They subsequently vis- 
ited Africa, India, China and the Southwest Pacific. 


CRITICIZE BRITISH. The travelers made known 
their findings through press conferences on Septem- 
ber 29 and 30, and through executive sessions of the 
Senate on October 7 and 8. Aside from purely mili- 
tary observations, they had six principal criticisms: 
1. The British have been stingy in using their Middle 
Eastern petroleum resources for the war while the 
United States has supplied oil to areas close to the 
Middle East fields and refineries. 2. The British have 


. American lives by letting the United States use § 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943_ 


out disclosing that the material came from the Unit 
States. 3. British news agencies monopolize battle 
credits for British forces. 4. United States p 
ganda abroad is misleading and ineffective. 5. United 
States diplomacy is inferior to the British. 6. The 
United States suffers from lack of a positive foreign” 
policy. : 
Lodge said that Russia could change the “whole 
character” of the war in the Pacific and save a million 


handed on lend-lease supplies to third countries | 


berian coastal bases against Japan, but the other four 
travelers objected to this remark. 

In sum, the five Senators exhibited marked ne 
tionalistic tendencies in their attitude toward forej 
affairs. They advocated that the United States ti 
steps to retain rights after the war in airfields built 
by this government around the world during the 
war, and to obtain rights to strategic bases far from 
our continental shores, They reported that the United 
States was overgenerous in lend-lease help. 7 
plainly believe the United States should play a wo 
role after the war, but they apparently believe it 
should play the role alone. Their published com 
ment nowhere indicates a wish for a close post-wat 
partnership arrangement among the United Nations 

The sense of international aloofness was 
further expression by Chairman Connally of the 
Senate Foreign Relations Committee. During the 
October 8 secret session of the Senate, he defended 
his committee’s delay in reporting a foreign poli 
resolution, despite the five Senators’ complaint that 
absence of a policy was harming us vis-a-vis the 
British. A day later the Associated Press reported 
that one result of the five Senators’ reports was 
strengthen opposition to a foreign policy declati 
tion “in advance of a statement of post-war intet 
tions by Britain and Russia.” BLA BOLLES 





JUST PUBLISHED! 


What Future for Italy? 


by C. GROVE HAINES, Professor of History, and 
Director of Area and Language Studies of the Armed 
Service Program at Syracuse University. 


25c 
October 1 issue of FoREIGN Poticy REPORTS 


REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. ' 

















ry 








