rner W. 
uted to 
of iso- 


A dminis- 


- United } 


nt. The 
on De. 


| 


yer their | 


ment by | 
- he had | 


1 Rio of 


ngton, a | 
on aimed | 


r nations 
er repub- 
*hman as 
» Admin- 


interna ) 


3 Oppost- 


a broad- 
ehabilita- 
ires were 
motives 
ketbooks 
ity from 
in mind 
nt of the 
10 told a 
n in New 
fighting 
or for a 
handouts 
LLIOTT 


NDS 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 9 


DECEMBER 18, 1942 


BURMA—NEXT MOVE !N FAR EASTERN STRATEGY? 


— seahdraabl of the Navy Knox’s statement of 
December 8 that we have destroyed between 
1,000,000 and 1,500,000 tons of Japanese merchant 
shipping—possibly one-fourth of the enemy’s entire 
re-war merchant tonnage — explains his previous 
prediction that “the time is actually close when the 
Japanese forces in the occupied islands of the Pacific 
will suffer from lack of replacements in manpower, 
weapons, ammunition and medical supplies for the 
lack of ships to transport them.” These declarations 
underline the fact that the past year’s operations have 
reduced Japan’s maritime superiority in the western 
Pacific. 

LAND VICTORIES NEEDED. Yet Japan is not 
only a great sea power, but holds land positions rang- 
ing from long-established bases in Korea and Man- 
churia down the China coast to Indo-China, Thai- 
land, Burma and Malaya. Destruction of shipping, 
however successful, will be useful chiefly in facili- 
tating future Allied army movements on the con- 


_ tinent of Asia, for island operations in the southwest 


_ Pacific are only part of our necessary strategy. A land 
rence on | 


front, it is true, already exists in China, but cannot 
serve as a base for a major offensive until adequately 
supplied. Increasing attention is therefore being 


' given to the feasibility of invading Burma, both to 


reopen the Burma Road and to disrupt Japan’s efforts 
at consolidating its position in southeast Asia. 
Allied military leaders have been considering this 


_ problem for many months, but plans for a Burma 


campaign are necessarily subordinate to the needs 
of the Soviet and African fighting fronts. As early 
as last May, General Stilwell, who had commanded 
Chinese troops in Burma, declared: “We got run out 
of Burma and it is humiliating as hell... . If we go 
back properly proportioned and properly equipped, 
we can throw them out.’’ At that time, however, an 
Allied offensive was a dream of the future, and the 
only practical question was whether the Japanese 


would strike next at Australia, India or Siberia. In 
mid-October it was announced that General Wavell, 
Commander-in-Chief in India, had just returned 
from inspection of the Indo-Burma frontier, having 
entered Burma itself, where some Allied troops re- 
mained. A few days later British, American and 
Chinese generals conferred in New Delhi. Since then 
Allied planes have been active over Burma, Japanese 
planes have attacked Indian bases, and minor con- 
tacts with enemy patrols inside the Burma border 
have been reported. 

BURMA DRIVE NOT EASY. The difficulties of 
a Burma offensive are considerable, for the roads 
from India are poor, and coastal invasion requires 
naval superiority in the Bay of Bengal. The supply 
problem is also enormous, both because of the length 
of ocean transport routes and the primary emphasis 
on other areas dictated by United Nations military 
strategy. Moreover, it is impossible to say whether 
enough shipping has been and would be available for 
building up and replenishing stocks of equipment 
and supplies in India. Particularly crucial is the ques- 
tion of time, since torrential monsoon rains in the 
Calcutta-Rangoon area begin in May, making it nec- 
essary to start an invasion some months earlier, so 
that important positions can be seized in Burma be- 
fore it becomes necessary to dig in. 

In all calculations political questions must receive 
careful attention, for no offensive can be launched 
from India unless orderly conditions prevail there. 
Last summer and fall a relatively small number of 
persons—apparently the main body of the nationalist 
movement took no part in the campaign of violence 
—-seriously disrupted the already overburdened In- 
dian railway system. At the present moment India 
seems quiet, but a bitter residue has been left by 
the antagonisms of the past eight months, and it 
would be unwise, in the absence of an agreement 
between Britain and the Indian nationalists, to over- 


look the danger of future outbreaks. It will be re- 
called also that when the Japanese were overrunning 
Burma, they received the aid of a small, but signifi- 
cant and well-organized section of the Burmese pop- 
ulation—10 per cent, according to the estimate of 
the British commanding officer. It would be desir- 
able, before initiating an offensive, that the Allies 
develop some program for obtaining greater sup- 
port from the people of Burma, in order to simplify 
the problems of the campaign. 

OUR ADVANTAGES. On the other hand, certain 
circumstances favor an invasion of Burma. The In- 
dian Army—including chiefly Indian troops, but also 
significant numbers of British soldiers—now totals 
about 1,500,000 men, of whom at least several hun- 
dred thousand should be effective fighters despite the 
rawness of the newer recruits and the dispatch of 
many seasoned Indian soldiers overseas. To these 
must be added small numbers of Chinese and 
American troops—as well as the Chinese armies in 
Yunnan province which, operating on Burma's north- 
eastern border, could, in effect, maintain a sec- 
ond front for the forces moving from India. Fur- 
thermore, despite the shortcomings of Indian in- 
dustry, that country is an important industrial base 
—one which is next door to Burma rather than, like 


Page Two ———_ 


_ for, should they consider it sound strategy, they ce, 


— 
Japan, thousands of miles away. While Japan's com, 
munications would be shorter than ours for trans 
porting new tanks, planes, and oil, there are jy) 
numerable lesser items of war which we could mog 
easily send to the front. 

The answer to the problem of our taking the of 
fensive in Burma lies in the quantities of supplig 
and equipment we can accumulate in India and jy 
future military developments on the fronts in the 
West. Here it would be unwise to overlook the pos | 
sibility that the Japanese may be the first to strike 


tainly have the strength for an attempt against eag. 
ern India, not to mention a further push into Yup| 
nan. In fact, according to a Chungking report, ~ 
6,000 Japanese troops assumed the offensive jg 

Yunnan province on December 6, but were sooq| 
obliged to retreat. Two things are clear, however 

that our position in the India-Burma area has im?) 
proved considerably this past summer and fall, and 

that, whether or not the United Nations initiate q 

Burma offensive this winter, Allied strategy in the| 
Far East requires such a move at the earliest possible 

moment, provided that our offensives in the Europea 

theater are not endangered. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


TURKISH NEUTRALITY AIDS UNITED NATIONS 


The increased control of the Nazi party over the 
German Army, indicated by the announcement on 
December 10 that Gestapo-trained General Kurt 
Zeitzler had been appointed Chief of Staff, and by the 
recent transformation of Gauwleiters from mere party 
leaders into military commissioners seem to be part 
of Hitler's preparations for defensive warfare. Al- 
though these moves do not exclude the possibility of 
some spectacular Nazi drive into neutral territories 
bordering on the Mediterranean, the Turkish gov- 
ernment apparently feels more free than hitherto 
to express its friendship for the cause of the United 
Nations. On December 12 dispatches from Ankara 
reported a forthcoming Turko-Soviet nonaggression 
pact containing a pledge by the United States to in- 
tervene between Turkey and Russia in the event of 
their disagreement. This accord, by removing one 


For a survey of the resources, politics, government 
and economy, as well as the strategic role of this 
little-known but enormous Territory, read— 


Alaska: Last American Frontier 
by Beka Doherty and Arthur Hepner 


25c 


December 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
Reports are published on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5 a year; to FPA members $3. 


of the main causes of friction between Turkey and 
the United Nations, would thwart the efforts of the 
German Ambassador to Ankara, Franz von Pape, 
to keep Turkey completely out of the Allied camp, 
Until now the Ankara government has mistrusted 


Moscow 's post-war ambitions in the Balkans, and the 


Russians have disapproved of the Turks’ nonaggres | 


sion treaty with Germany, signed in 1941 on the eve 
of the Russo-German war. 

TURKEY’S ATTITUDE TOWARD ALLIES 
From the point of view of the Ankara government 
there are important reasons why a friendly neutral 
ity toward the Allies is desirable at this time. First 


of all, both Britain and the United States are now | 


more able than Germany to furnish the modern wat 
equipment needed by the Turkish Army of approxi- 
mately a million men. Earlier in the war it was the 
Germans who were able to send more because ot 
their large production of armaments and their shorter 
transportation lines. More recently, however, the 
Germans have experienced difficulties in industrial 
production, as well as shortages in rolling stock and 
inland shipping, because of the demands of the Rus 
sian front. Britain and the United States, on the 
other hand, have been increasingly able to spare loco 
motives, destroyers, submarines, planes, trucks and 
guns for Turkey. Although transportation through 
the Mediterranean remains nearly impossible, another 
route has been developed—a route based on the fa 


—_ 
—_— 


mo} 
ma: 
Oc 


anc 


-~_ = . = 


—=—= 


aN’S Com. 
for trans 
re are in 
duld More 


1g the of 
E suppl 
lia and jg 
rts in the 
k the pos 
: to Strike 
, they Cer. 
ainst east. | 
into Yup. 
ort, about 
ensive ip 
Vere soon 
however: 
a has im- } 
fall, and} 
initiate | 
‘ey in the} 
st possible 
European 


SINGER | 
| 
urkey and | 
rts of the | 
on Papen, 
ied camp. | 
mistrusted | 
is, and the 
lonaggres: | 
yn the eve 


ALLIES. } 
»vernment 
'y neutral 
‘ime. First | 
$ are now | 
odern wat 
f approxt } 
it was the | 
yecause of 
eir shorter 
vever, the 
industrial 
stock and 
f the Rus- 
5, on the 
spare loco 
rucks and 
n through 
le, another 
on the fa 


— 
— 


mous Berlin-to-Bagdad scheme devised by the Ger- 
mans before 1914. Supplies coming via the Indian 
Ocean arrive at Basra harbor, on the Persian Gulf, 
and are transferred to the Bagdad-Istanbul railroad, 
which was finally completed in July 1940. Lack of 
shipping space still handicaps the British and Ameti- 
cans, however, and the requirements of Turkey 
greatly outruns available supplies. 

The Turks need not only weapons of war, but the 
equally important weapon of food. In prewar days 
Turkey exported 100,000 tons of wheat a year, but 
since mobilization in 1939 the Army consumes nearly 
300,000 tons a year and Turkey is now obliged to 
import wheat for the civilian population. Shortages 
have been felt principally by the poorer classes, for 
whom bread is the main staple. Realizing that wheat 
is essential to Turkey’s welfare, Prime Minister 
Sukru Saracoglu made arrangements in 1941 under 
which Britain, Argentina and the United States sent 
more than 100,000 tons of cereals during the past 
year. The American government has offered to pro- 
vide far more than this amount if Turkey could 
undertake its own transport, but thus far the Turks 
have been able to secure very few grain ships. 

A third reason for Turkey’s friendliness toward 
the United Nations is the Ankara government's fear 
of the Germans. This distrust is due partly to mem- 
ories of the last war and, more recently, has been 
increased by the Nazis’ unscrupulous pillaging of 
Europe and the belief that a Nazi victory would re- 
sult in Turkey's loss of independence. Germans who 
have acted against the interests of Turkey have been 
expelled at various times during the past three years, 
and last August the Turks refused to accept a contract 
for Krupp armaments because it involved German 
technicians to service them. 

ALLIES NEED TURKEY’S FRIENDSHIP. From 
the point of view of the United Nations, too, friend- 
ship with Turkey is an essential factor for success 
of the Allied war in the Mediterranean. For the past 
three years armed Turkey has barred the German 
route to the Middle East and continues to serve as a 
bulwark for Syria, Iraq, Iran and the Caucasus. 
Turkey has also been an economic asset to the Allies. 
The most coveted Turkish product is chrome, indis- 
pensable for cutting tools and armor plate. Since 
1938 the total output of Turkish chrome ore has 
gone to Britain for repayment of the British credits 
used in building the iron and steel works at Karabuk. 


*See E. S. Hediger, ‘‘Allies and Axis Struggle for Neutrals’ Raw Materials,”’ 
Foreign Policy Bulletin, October 16, 1942. 


Page Three 


On several occasions Germany has requested that it 
be allowed to purchase chrome, but the Turks have 
refused because of their previous agreement with . 
Britain.* After January 15, 1943, however, on ex- 
piration of the agreement with Britain, half of the an- 
nual output will be sold to the Germans provided 
armaments are delivered in advance. But by that date 
the United Nations’ supply of chrome is expected to 
be substantially increased by the recently developed 
mines in Montana and California, as well as by addi- 
tional supplies from South Africa and Cuba. 
Despite the many reasons for close relations be- 
tween Turkey and the United Nations, there is no 
basis for the belief that the Turks will switch from 
the neutrality they have consistently maintained since 
1939 to active participation in the war. Military un- 
preparedness, economic difficulties, and the lack of 
any territorial ambitions make them anxious. to re- 
main at peace. If, however, war should prove neces- 
sary for the maintenance of their independence, the 
Turks would undoubtedly fight against any power 


attempting to invade their territory. 


WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


A Layman’s Guide to Naval Strategy, by Bernard Brodie. 
Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1942. $2.50. 
An analysis of the role of naval operations in modern 

warfare, with special emphasis on events since 1939. 

Stressing the importance of all arms for victory, the 

author rejects extreme theories of air power. He also dis- 

cusses various aspects of naval theory, the composition of 
modern fleets, and the tactics of naval action. Altogether, 

an indispensable introduction to the subject, based on a 

simple, yet scholarly approach. 


The Tools of War, by James R. Newman. 
Doubleday, Doran, 1942. $5.00 
Non-technical description of weapons used in land, sea 

and air warfare, with emphasis on their historical de- 

velopment. 


Garden City, 


Foreign Devil, by Gordon Enders. New York, Simon and 

Schuster, 1942. $2.50 

Fascinating account of the author’s life in India, Tibet 
and China, ranging from descriptions of native life to the 
story of Mr. Enders’ work as adviser to the Panchan 
Lama of Tibet. One particularly interesting observation: 
“T learned the profound truth that the mystery of 
the East is that there is no mystery. These men and 
women are like ourselves. There are rascals in the East as 
there are in the West. There are men of good will every- 
where. Variations of custom and habit and diet are the 
only barriers which stand between us, and these are super- 
ficial things.” 


Assignment to Berlin, by Harry W. Flannery. New York, 
Alfred A. Knopf, 1942. $3.00 
Despite the disadvantage of taking over Shirer’s post, 
Mr. Flannery brings out interestingly many details of an 
unpleasant stay in Germany. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 9, DscemBER 18, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; ™orotHy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under che Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Pw 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


W. ashington News Letter 


Dec. 14.—The clash between “idealism” and ‘“‘real- 
ism” is exemplified most strikingly in French North 
Africa where those who regard the war as a purely 
anti-Fascist crusade are horrified by our collaboration 
with Admiral Francois Darlan, the erstwhile collab- 
orationist. In the view of the United States govern- 
ment, however, military considerations are paramount 
for, as Secretary of State Cordell Hull said on Decem- 
ber 2, the American military authorities are too busy 
winning the war to worry about the politics of the 
occupied countries. Winston Churchill speaking be- 
fore a secret session of the House of Commons on 
December 10, seems to have taken pretty much the 
same stand and to have brought Emanuel Shinwell, 
one of his sharpest Laborite critics, to remark after- 
wards, “I do not like the Darlan set-up, but when 
you are at war, you cannot afford to pick and choose 
your associates.” 

Many Americans think mistakenly that the United 
States military authorities “installed” Darlan in 
North Africa. The truth is that the Americans found 
Darlan so firmly entrenched in North Africa that 
they accepted his collaboration to save the lives of 
thousands of American soldiers which otherwise 
would have had to be sacrificed in fighting the 
French Army. Originally, General Dwight D. Eisen- 
hower planned to set up General Henri Giraud 
as head of the French administration in North Africa. 
This scheme had to be quickly scrapped, because the 
Americans found that if they desired the coopera- 
tion of the French officials and the French Army, 
they had to act through Darlan. 


THE “TEMPORARY EXPEDIENT.” President 
Roosevelt has described the working arrangement 
with Admiral Darlan as a “temporary expedient.” 
The French have a proverb which says that nothing 
lasts so long as the provisional. This may prove to 
be the case in the affaire Darlan. With the Axis forces 
offering stubborn resistance in the Tunis triangle, 
the Anglo-American Army is in no position to court 
more trouble by taking on the French troops as well. 
Collaboration with Darlan has enabled us to com- 
plete the occupation of Morocco and Algeria in a 
few days and to assure the safety of our long lines 
of communications. The French authorities maintain 
internal order while Darlan brings over to the Allied 
side an army of 300,000 men, some of whom are 
already fighting the Axis in Tunisia. 

While the Office of War Information is annoyed 


FOR VICTORY ° 


that its broadcasts to Europe are banned by the 
Moroccan Radio, Washington hears that General) 
Eisenhower is highly pleased with the results of hig 
arrangement with Admiral Darlan. In the eyes of the 
American military authorities, the acquisition of 
Dakar as a naval and air base for the United Na. 
tions, which was announced by General Eisenhower 
on December 7, by itself justifies cooperation with 
the former Vichy Vice Premier. Working in agree. 
ment with Darlan, the Americans have been able 
to effect a bloodless conquest of this important 
base. The advantages of Dakar in the hands of the 
Allies are numerous and have been often pointed 
out, but doubtless the most important just now is 
the immense shortening of our supply lines to the 
African theatres of war that it makes possible. In ad- 


dition, the Allies acquire the French naval units at | 
Dakar, including the damaged 35,000-ton battleship, 


Richelieu, and three 7,600-ton cruisers. 


FEARS OF THE FIGHTING FRENCH. Two 
arguments are usually raised against the Darlan 
arrangement. The first was voiced by General 
Georges Catroux, Fighting French leader, in his 
broadcast from London on December 7 when he 


urged Washington to sever all connections with the | 
man who is “best compared to the legendary horse of | 


Troy.’ The second is the fear of the Fighting French 
that our collaboration with Darlan means consolida- 
tion of the Vichy régime, first in North Africa and 


subsequently in France. Mr. Hull, however, assured | 


Adrien Tixier and Admiral Thierry d’Argenlieu, 


Fighting French commissioners in Washington and | 
the Pacific, respectively, on December 8 that the | 


United States would not permit Darlan to impose on 


the French people a post-war régime contrary to their 


wishes. 
JOHN ELLIOTT 


A TIMELY REMINDER TO MEMBERS 


THAT the tax law of the United States exempts 
from income taxes 15 per cent of each citizen's in- 
come if given to tax exempt philanthropies. The 
Foreign Policy Association is one of these tax exempt 
organizations. It has no endowment, and a large pro- 
portion of its operating expenses must be met through 
contributions from individuals who believe in its re- 
search work and educational program. Any gift you 
may wish to make before December 31 will be deeply 
appreciated. 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


— 


