t Union, 


ry to day 
egic ma- 
revision 
0 longer 
ores are 
yved sec- 
ree cents 
the con- 
; Reserve 
e was to 
ners. 


the Bo- 
entinian, | 
ipparent- 


ould not | 


ce of the 
sted that 
epublics. | 
a, which 
in Peru, 
a strong 
intry, the 


> positive 
recognize 
sers have | 


| 
' 


dence on 
\rgentina 
s imports 


and lin: ; 


30LLES 


V DS 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


FEB 2 1944 


y of Ut ahs De 
~~ “4S an Let 
ary 


Dersny 
WALES w. os 
” rr a "HOD 


= 
“Olvoresr, 
-Sit 
Ann Arbo 
“54 ad 
“We ’ 
’ Mich. 


5. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


VoL. XXIII, No. 15 


JANUARY 28, 1944 


POLISH ISSUE HIGHLIGHTS NEED FOR CONSULTATIVE MACHINERY 


LLIED advances toward Rome and Russia’s suc- 
cessful northern drive should serve to place in 
proper perspective the regrettable bickering that has 


| threatened to develop among the three great powers 


on whose united military and political action de- 

nds not only the liberation of Europe’s conquered 
millions, but their own survival. As casualties mount 
—and of the three powers Russia has suffered in- 
finitely greater loss of life than either Britain or the 


, United States—and the possibility of inflicting de- 


feat on the Germans appears less remote, it is only 
human that the three governments should reassess 
both the position in which their respective countries 
will be left at the close of hostilities in Europe, and 
the attitude each may take toward post-war Europe. 
It would be a tragedy, however, if through misunder- 
standing or blundering this process of reassessment 
should drive a wedge between Britain, the United 
States and Russia, and nullify the results of the 
Moscow and Teheran conferences. 


RUSSIA’S TERRITORIAL OFFER FAIR. Nor 
can it be regarded as anything but a misfortune that 
the first test of the professions made at these confer- 
ences should have to be the Russo-Polish conflict 
over Eastern Poland, one of the most ancient and 
perplexing territorial conflicts on the continent. In 
the midst of the verbal scrimmage precipitated by 
this issue, it may be useful to review several points 
taised by the contestants. First of all, it should be 
said that Russia’s proposal, as expressed in its Janu- 
ary 11 declaration, to reconsider the Ribbentrop- 
Molotov frontier settlement of 1939 and to adopt 
the Curzon Line as the basis of negotiation with the 
Poles was a fair offer,* especially considering the 
fact that the Soviet government is at present in a 
position to dictate the terms of a settlement that 
might be far less advantageous for Poland. While 


"Vera Micheles Dean, ‘‘Russia Proposes Polish Border Settlement,”’ For- 
eign Policy Bulletin, January 14, 1944. 


the Curzon Line would be unacceptable to extreme 
Polish nationalists, more liberal Poles have expressed 
in the past their readiness to see the sections of 
Eastern Poland inhabited mainly by White Russians 
and Ukrainians pass into the hands of Russia, leaving 
Poland with a more homogeneous population. The 
territorial issue, therefore, does not appear to be 
insoluble. 

POSITION OF POLISH GOVERNMENT. What 
the Polish government in London finds objectionable 
—and here it is in a position to enlist sympathy both 
among British and Americans—is that the Kremlin's 
offer to negotiate about the boundary is coupled with 
denunciation of that government, and simultaneous 
praise for the work of the Union of Polish Patriots 
in Moscow. No one familiar with Poland’s internal 
situation before the German invasion would contend 
that the Polish government as now constituted is 
unanimously favorable either to enlightened political 
and economic institutions or to wholehearted col- 
laboration with Russia. It is, in fact, a coalition that 
includes representatives of practically every impor- 
tant group in pre-war Poland, with the exception of 
Nazi-minded elements on the Right and Communists 
on the Left. It is entirely conceivable that Peasant 
and Socialist party leaders in the Polish government 
would prefer to see reactionary elements eliminated 
from their ranks. Yet even they may justifiably feel 
that such changes should come as a result of their 
own decision or demands from the Polish under- 
ground, not of pressure on the part of Russia. 

Moreover, it is by no means a foregone conclusion 
that mere elimination of reactionary elements would 
of itself satisfy Russia. Communist organs in the 
United States have denounced Socialists in the Polish 
government with as much vigor as reactionaries. It 
is understandable that Russia should want to see in 
Poland, after the war, a government friendly to its 
interests. The United States, too, prefers to have 


a Ee 


Tl, ee aS 


—___————>__>_—>~xzx{[—_™@={_x——eE—_oseeEEe_—_—_—e~_—_—E=_—— Page Two —_—— 


friendly governments in the neighboring countries 
of Central and South America. But if the United 
States should try to force existing governments out 
of office, and meanwhile help to set up substitute 
régimes on its own territory, would some of our com- 
mentators who find Russia’s arguments wholly con- 
vincing take the same view of this country’s con- 
duct? As a matter of fact the United States, within 
recent weeks, has set an example of the procedure 
that might be followed in a very similar situation. 
The coup d’état that took place in Bolivia on Decem- 
ber 20 is regarded by the Washington Administra- 
tion as the work of elements inimical to the United 
States and the United Nations. This country could 
have unilaterally refused to recognize the new Bo- 
livian régime, thus exerting political and economic 
pressure on Bolivia. It has preferred, instead, to con- 
sult with the other countries of Central and Latin 
America concerning this matter. In consequence, its 
decision of January 24 to withhold recognition re- 
flects the views of all states members of the Pan 
American Union, with the exception of Argentina, 
which has already granted recognition. 

Some Americans have justified Russia’s attitude 
toward the Poles by saying that, if Russia should be 
asked to abandon its claims to Eastern Poland, this 
would be tantamount to asking the United States to 
return California to Mexico. This argument does not 
carry much conviction. It is, of course, true that if 
we should go back into the mists of history few na- 
tions today have an incontrovertible legal right to 
all of their territory. But the point is that in many 
instances where controversies either once existed, or 
may eventually arise, they do not happen to exist 
today. The English no longer claim suzerainty over 
Normandy, nor do the Mexicans demand California. 
Where no conflict exists, it would be far-fetched, to 
say the least, to stir one up just for the sake of apt 
analogy. The point is that a controversy does exist 
between Russia and Poland both about Eastern Po- 
land and about the composition of the Polish gov- 
ernment in London, and the immediate problem is 
how this controversy can be adjusted with the least 
detriment to the relations of the United Nations. 


Eastern Poland might well prove no different from 


——— 


PROCEDURE AT ISSUE. Moscow alone ¢ap 
say whether it considers the controversy as strictly 
a matter between itself and Poland—or, even more 
strictly, between itself and the Union of Polish Pq. 
triots—or is willing to have Britain and the United 
States assist in the renewal of relations between Rys. 
sia and the Polish government in London, as pro. 
posed by the Poles in their statement of January 14 
The end result of a United Nations discussion of 


bilateral Russo-Polish negotiations—for the Curzon 
Line had been approved in 1919 by France, Britain 
and the United States as leaving within the boun- 
daries of Poland populations regarded as ethnolog. 
ically Polish. What is at stake, then, is not the actual 
settlement of the border conflict, but the procedure 
by which the settlement is reached. If the procedure | 
should be the imposition by Russia, a great power, | 
of its will upon a weaker neighbor—no matter how | 
many difficulties that neighbor may have caused Rus. | 
sia in the past—then the hopes aroused by the Mos. | 
cow and Teheran conferences will be snuffed out; | 
and the small countries of Europe will have little | 
to look forward to except transition from Hitlers 
brutal diktat to the possibly more benevolent, but | 
nevertheless tangible, dictation of one or other of | 
the great Allied powers. 


If, on the other hand, as must be hoped, the pro- 
cedure followed in this test case should be that of 
joint consultation—similar to United Nations con- 
sultations about Mediterranean affairs and Pan-| 
American consultations in the Western Hemisphere | 
—then the small countries could feel a considerable 
measure of assurance that their interests will not be | 
arbitrarily disregarded in the post-war settlement. To , 
make such assurance really effective it is essential that 
the United Nations should create, at the earliest 
possible opportunity, an international organization 
on the lines adumbrated by the Moscow accord. The 
existence of such an organization would hold out 
to all nations, including Russia, the hope that peace ; 
can be garnered from victory. 


I 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


WAR REVIVES PLANS FOR ARAB FEDERATION 


The possibility of an Arab federation, reminiscent 
of T. E. Lawrence’s endeavors in World War I, is 
forecast by the series of conferences recently held be- 
tween Egypt and representatives of the Arab states 
in the Near East. The final meetings were concluded 
on January 13, 1944. Dispatches from North Africa 
also indicate the rise of a Moslem movement to unify 
Tunisia, Algeria and French Morocco in a Western 
Arab empire. 

ARAB POST-WAR PLANS. Current discussions 
are concerned with a proposed committee to repre- 


sent the Arab world at the peace conference, and an | 


Arab Congress may be held shortly for the purpose 

of organizing such a committee. Egypt and Iraq have | 
played the leading part in the present conversations, | 
the former acting as host to delegates from the’ 
various Arab states, while Iraq—the only Arab na- | 


tion actually in a state of war with the Axis—has } 


suggested that a committee now be appointed to rep | 
resent the Arab world at the peace conference. 

The great powers have shown increasing interest in 
this area. Russia’s main supply route passes through 


=— 


the | 
States 
the 
collat 
of Ja 
nomi 
the T 
that . 
positi 
effect 
set-Uf 
terest 


erati 
natic 
tickli 
ever) 
any 
prob 
of u 
inate 
the | 
Tl 
socie 
of u 
the 1 
very 


al 


—— 
One can 
S Strictly 
‘en more 
olish Pa. 
e United 
een Rus. 
, aS pro. 
luary 14, 
iSSiOn of 
ent from 
4 Curzon 
, Britain 
1e boun- 
thnolog. 
1e actual 


rocedure 
rocedure 
t power, : 
tter how | 
sed Rus- 
he Mos- 
fed out; 
ve little 
Hitler's 
lent, but | 
other of 
the pro- 
- that of 
Ons con- 
id Pan- 
nisphere } 
siderable 
il not be 
nent. To } 
itial that 

earliest 
nization | 
ord. The | 
101d out | 
at peace } 


| 


DEAN 


, and an | 
purpose | 
raq have | 
>rsations, | 
rom the | 
Arab na- 
xis—has } 
d to rep. 
Ce. 
nterest in 
_ through 


a —— 
the Middle East, while Britain and the United 
States are jointly concerned in the administration of 
the Middle Eastern Supply Center. Anglo-American 
collaboration in this sphere was stressed in the report 
of James M. Landis, American Director of Eco- 
nomic Operations in the Middle East, made before 
the Truman Committee on January 17. Pointing out 
that Britain has maintained its dominant economic 
position in that region, Landis urged that changes be 
effected in the joint Anglo-American Middle Eastern 
set-up to assist and promote American trading in- 
terests. 

BASIS OF ARAB UNITY. The Middle East, not 
unlike the Balkans, has been striving for political and 
economic union, but has been hitherto frustrated by 
frontier quarrels, minority problems, and religious 


| differences. Arab unification, simple in theory, be- 


comes extremely difficult to achieve once detailed 
problems are confronted. The Arab world has, at 
most, cultural unity, with a basic language and re- 
ligion. Political aspirations have thus far moved in 
the direction of separatism, although the spirit of a 
larger Arab nationalism has been in evidence since 
the last war. This is particularly true in the North 
African area. Today, however, plans for Arab fed- 
eration are concerned more exclusively with the Arab 
nations in the Near East. But even there the very 
ticklish problem of leadership presents itself, for 
every Arab ruler can lay claim to pre-eminence in 
any such political reorganization. The paramount 
problem of minorities is also an obstacle to any plan 
of unity. In this respect, the Jewish question dom- 
inates all others. With it is bound up the problem of 
the future of Palestine. 


The economic and social backwardness of Arab 
society as a whole tends further to jeopardize hopes 
of unity. Striking cultural differences exist between 
the nomad populations and the settled farmers. The 
very marked divisions between the ruling elite and 


PageThree 


For a survey of twenty-five years of the general 
attitude and policy of the Catholic Church, as well 
as a record of the Vatican’s relations with Italy, 
Spain, Germany and the U.S.S.R., READ— 
FOREIGN POLICY OF THE VATICAN 
by Sherman S. Hayden 


25c 


January 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
Reports are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


the Arab communities at large also emphasizes the 
lack of cohesion among the Arab peoples. The Arab 
nations are historically countries of economic scarcity. 
The level of consumption is normally low, and the 
economic development of the area can only progress 
on the basis of united action. In a federation Syria 
and Iraq may become the food producing areas 
while Palestine could become the industrial center, 
drawing on the rich oil reserves of the region. In the 
future, regional irrigation projects as well as trans- 
portation development will necessitate closer coop- 
eration. Today the war has produced serious eco- 
nomic dislocation and inflation in the Middle East, 
as elsewhere. While shortages, hoarding and prof- 
iteering appear as internal problems to each country, 
in reality each state is involved with its neighbor and 
with the great powers now at war. 

GREAT POWERS AND ARAB WORLD. Tem- 
porarily at least, Allied interest in this region re- 
volves about the Middle Eastern Supply Center.* 
The MESC has undertaken certain long-term read- 
justments, notably the rationalization of production 
in this area, which anticipate greater interdependence 
of the countries as a unit. This very valuable experi- 
ence in economic cooperation may foster the goal of 
Arab unity. 

The great powers are implicated in Middle East- 
ern affairs not only because of present economic and 
military problems. Britain has long had vital political 
and strategic interests in this area, as witnessed by its 
alliance with Egypt and its special relationship to 
Palestine. The British government has given no hint 
as to what attitude it will take regarding the Jewish 
question in the Near East; nor have any public prom- 
ises or proposals been made thus far to the Arabs at 
large. It is generally assumed, however, that Britain 
is in favor of closer ties between the Arab states but, 
at the same time, will continue to protect the Jews 
in Palestine and other minorities. 

Further negotiations for Arab federation will not 
rest on a sound basis until the British government 
and the other great powers make clear their post-war 
intentions in this area. The interest of the great pow- 
ers may well prove decisive, Allied economic ar- 
rangements and the political organization ultimately 
agreed upon by the United Nations will play a de- 
termining part in plans for an Arab federation. The 
action taken toward political unity within the Arab 
world must be placed in this broader framework. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


*See Howard P. Whidden, Jr., ‘‘MESC Holds Promise for Future of Middle 
East,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, September 24, 1943. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 15, JANUARY 28, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F, Leet, Secretary; VERA MiIcHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


One moath for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


1 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


JAN. 24.—Public criticism of Spain by British and 
Russian spokesmen has left the Administration out- 
wardly unmoved, but recent Spanish aid to Germany 
has shaken its confidence that the Allies have gained 
the upper hand in Spain. During the past week 
the State Department directed Ambassador Carlton 


* Hayes in Madrid once more to make representations 


to the Spanish government concerning the continued 
presence of Spanish troops on the German side in 
Russia and the activities of Axis agents in Spain. 
BRITISH AND RUSSIANS OUTSPOKEN. The 
Soviet Embassy Bulletin of January 13 attacked the 


German hands. Spain’s formal neutrality fulfills the 
first aim. The second aim had seemed more or less 
achieved until Germany concluded the debt arrange. 
ment with Madrid. The Nazis had been consistently 
short of pesetas, and Spain had refused to sell op 
credit. The United States and Britain, whose com. 
mercial companies in Madrid cooperate closely, haye 
managed to keep between them a peseta balance 
large enough to meet their wartime needs. United 
States exports to Spain of oil and food—which have 
increased during the war years—have supplied us 
with pesetas. 


191 


boi 8 

| ul “Spanish government, declaring that Spanish troops 
were helping the Germans against the Red Army on 

a sector of the Volkhov front; a Spanish air squad- 

ron, regularly receiving replacements, was fighting 

on the eastern battle line; Spanish police had arrest- 


U.S. GOVERNMENT NOT ALARMED. Despite 
recent diplomatic reverses, Washington does not con. 
sider the swing of Spanish policy toward Germany 
extensive enough to precipitate a crisis in our rela. 
tions with Spain. General Franco’s policy suggests 


% 


whi 
ed persons distributing the press bulletins of the that he hopes to preserve Spanish neutrality and, at pec 
British Embassy in Madrid; and Spain was sending the same time, perpetuate his régime. The first aim} wa 


strategic materials to Germany. Amplifying the Bul- 
letin, the Moscow radio on January 18 reported that 
General Franco’s announcement that he had recalled 
Spain’s “Blue Division” from the eastern front was 
“a downright lie and one that will deceive nobody.” 

On January 19 British Foreign Secretary Eden also 
publicly criticized the use of Spanish soldiers against 


explains his tactics of trying to please now the Allies, 
now the Germans. The second aim is believed te-} the 
sponsible for recent liberal gestures by the Franco | 
government, whose dictatorial restrictions haves 
caused increasing opposition on the part of the Span-} — ¢h¢ 
ish people. 

At Christmas time the Spanish government freed 


oy 
i 
las) 


e 
Russia. He told the House of Commons that he had 3,200 political prisoners. It has also reestablished the ) a 
“informed the Spanish government through the right of Spaniards to appeal to the courts from gov-, ty 
Spanish Ambassador to London of the most serious ernment decisions. Moreover, on December 20, at the } pic 
effect which this continuing unneutral assistance to first national congress of Falangist provincial secre} pe 


our enemies in this struggle against our allies must 
have on Anglo-Spanish relations now and in the 
future.” British opinion had already been aroused 
against Spain by the explosion of a bomb in a ship 
carrying oranges from a Spanish port to England. 

Further indications of Spanish assistance to Ger- 
many is given by the report that Berlin has agreed 
to liquidate the debt Spain incurred for German aid 
to Franco during the civil war, in return for a credit 
in Spain equivalent to 100,000,000 Reichsmarks, or 
about 400,000,000 pesetas. This move was a blow to 
the United States and Britain because it provides 
Germany with funds for the purchase of large quan- 
tities of wolfram, mercury and pyrites from Spain. 

Spain depends on this country for many of 
its wartime imports, and this dependence affects its 
policy toward the United States. American policy 
toward Spain has had two main objectives: to pre- 
vent Germany from using Spain as a military base, 
and to keep the country’s strategic materials out of 


FOR VICTORY ° 


taries, José Luis Arrese, Falangist secretary, an- 
nounced that the government was relaxing restri¢} fp 
tions on the press and was ordering the Falange} he 
Militia—the fascist-type soldiery—into the regular} jy 
army. Any move curbing the Falange is well received | 
in Washington and London because this group is 4 ; 
center of fascist, anti-democratic intrigue that has}  f, 
recently committed outrages against both the United} ay 
States and Britain. In November Falangists broke) 
into the British consulate at Saragossa. The Spanish | 4 
government, first disclaiming responsibility, later | — ¢ 
apologized. On December 18 two members of the ;  ¢| 
Falange broke into the American consulate in Valen-} 
cia, tore pictures from the wall and made anti-Amet- pe 
ican speeches to visitors at the consulate. Four days 
later the Spanish Foreign Ministry expressed regret a3 
to Ambassador Hayes for the Valencia incident, and |g 
José Luis Arrese apologized in the name of the} 4 
Falange organization. h 

BLAIR BOLLES p 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS tl 


