


at 
er 


Id 
ad 
y- 
m 
on 








UNiy. oF 


—1945 


PSHIODICAL Room 
GENERAL Line sry 


G 
eneral Library Entered as 2nd class matter 


U $i 
Aiversity of Uichtzen 
Ann Arbor, Mich 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIV, No. 30 


———— 


May 11, 1945 





GERMANY DEFEATED—BUT GERMAN PROBLEM REMAINS 


W ASHINGTON.—' ‘Whoever lights the torch of war 
in Europe can wish for nothing but chaos,” said 
Adolf Hitler on May 21, 1935. The awful truth of 
that comment oppresses Germany today, when the 
European phase of the war whose torch Hitler lit 
on September 1, 1939 ended with unconditional sur- 
render by the Germans on May 7. Hitler has be- 
queathed to the world a wasteland. Since the mes- 
sige of National Socialism has proved empty as well 
as repulsive, Germany is a political desert. The war 
has violently wrenched and partially destroyed the 
foundations of its economy. Desolation spreads out 
from Germany over the whole of Europe through 
destroyed cities and hungry populations. The end of 
the war forces on the victors the grave problem of 
feconstructing a peaceful and prosperous civiliza- 
tion on the chaotic continent. 

THE FUTURE OF GERMANY. The Allies’ pol- 
icy toward Germany itself will in a considerable de- 
gree determine the nature and effectiveness of that 
meonstruction. The character of the future Germany 
will be affected not only by the development of affairs 
within the Reich but by the territorial settlements 
which the Allies arrange with respect to Germany. 
The proposal for the division of Germany into three 
independent parts now has little backing from the 
governments in Washington, London or Moscow, but 
Germany's neighbors are sure to annex portions of 
the defeated country. The Yalta Agreement of Feb- 
fuary 12 provided that Poland be compensated in 
German territory for the areas awarded to Russia; 
Fast Prussia, Silesia and perhaps a considerable por- 
tion of Pomerania and the Mark Brandenburg to 
the Oder River will be lost to Germany in this east- 
ern settlement. In the west Germany is likely to lose 
the whole territory west of the Rhine. In the south 
there is a possibility that Austria will be awarded 
a portion of Bavaria. 


This series of partitions would reduce Germany's 
economic importance for Europe and weaken its 
ability to restore a war-goods industry. It would 
cost Germany two of its important raw materials re- 
gions, the Saar and Silesia, both of which are also 
industrial areas. It would reduce drastically the in- 
dustrial potential of Germany if the partitions were 
coupled with the establishment of an international 
control over the factory-rich Ruhr region. The restor- 
ation of industry in eastern areas which Germany 
probably will lose is already under way. The Moscow 
radio on April 26 reported that coal and zinc ore was 
being mined in the Buethen district, Upper Silesia, 
under Soviet control, and that “thousands of German 
workers” were employed in a machine tool factory in 
Liegnitz, Lower Silesia, as well as at a weaving mill 
in Sorau. 

At the same time, the partitions could create new 
problems should the annexationists inspire German 
irredentism. Fear of such consequences stayed the 
Allies from separating the Rhineland from Germany 
in 1919. But today Rhineland industrialists are 
said to favor separatism as a means of protecting 
their capital investment. Transfer of populations 
might allay the irredentist spirit, but the strain on a 
dismembered Reich would be severe if it received 
all the Germans from the areas of partition. It is 
questionable how long the world would support a 
policy encouraging economic deterioration in Ger- 
many; on February 22 London “‘financial circles” ex- 
pressed alarm at the prospect of inflation in the 
Reichsmark, several million of which are held by 
the Allies as a result of expenditures in areas the 
Nazis once occupied, 

The Allies have yet to decide on the economic fu- 
ture of Germany. Dr. Rudhard Duisberg, manager of 
the Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Frankfurt 
a.-M., said on April 7 that German industry could 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


MAY 1 6 104g i) 





Sree rte ee 


NS ee 





7 
“32 
. 
+ 
' 





make a quick recovery after the war if the Allies 
permitted it. The Yalta Agreement declared that the 
United States, Britain and the Soviet Union were de- 
termined to “eliminate or control all German industry 
that could be used for military production.” Whether 
to eliminate or control is a difficult choice. The 
United States government is undetermined about its 
own attitude, although it is reported that the Cabinet 
committee on Germany favors the Morgenthau plan 
for removal of German heavy industry. However, 
President Truman at his press conference on May 2 
professed ignorance about the standing of the “Mor- 
genthau Plan.” The decision about German repara- 
tions will also determine to some degree the nature of 
Germany's post-war economy. The Yalta Agreement 
authorized a commission on reparations and Presi- 
dent Truman has appointed Edward Pauley as the 
American member, but the group has not yet begun 
to act. 

GERMAN POLITICAL PROBLEM. The present 
temper of the governments of the United Nations 
presages a long political watch over Germany. 
Representative Andrews, Republican of New York, 
disclosed on May 5 that the United States Army 


FRAMING OF UNITED NATIONS CHARTER PROCEEDS DESPITE FRICTIONS 


SAN FraNcisco.—Now that the four main com- 
missions of the Conference — General Provisions, 
General Assembly, Security Council, and Judicial 
Organization—are hard at work in an attempt to 
reconcile the amendments to the Dumbarton Oaks 
proposals submitted by the various nations, and to 
incorporate them into a Charter, the political clashes 
of the opening days can be seen in better perspective. 
The most realistic way to appraise these clashes is to 
think of this Conference as what, in essence, it is— 
a political convention. As we know from our experi- 
ence with the conventions of Republicans and Demo- 
crats, such gatherings are invariably marked by be- 
hind-the-scenes maneuvers, struggles that end in 
compromises, and occasionally episodes which in 
private life would be regarded as sharp dealing. 

NO MORAL ISSUES RAISED. In the clash over 
Argentina neither side could lay claim to moral prin- 
ciples. The Latin American countries considered that 
they had an obligation to Argentina to press for its 
admission into the United Nations organization once 
it had signed the Act of Chapultepec and declared 
war on the Axis. By no means all of them approve 
of the Farrell government. But they are determined 
there should be no intervention by the United States, 
or any other country, in their internal affairs—and 
were ready to give Argentina the benefit of this pol- 
icy. Other considerations, too, entered the picture. 
The Latin Americans regard Argentina as a counter- 
weight to the United States. For that very reason, it 
was politically difficult for this country to oppose 


Page Two 








intended to keep 350,000 to 400,000 men jg 
Europe to police occupied territory. The manner of 
the war’s ending prepares the way for the accom. 
plishment of two Yalta political aims—'to destro 
German militarism and Nazism.” Allied terms fo; 
the cessation of hostilities will demand the disband. 
ment of the German armed forces, which defeat has 
demoralized, and the breaking-up of the Germap 
General Staff. These moves, in addition to the par. 
titions, would suspend the influence of the Prussiag 
Junker class, which thrice in a century has pushed 
Germany toward major wars. The problem of the 
victors will be to oversee Germany in such a manner 
that Junker influence is eliminated and National §p. 
cialism does not revive. An unnamed American A 
officer said on May 3 that a German democracy would 
have to be built through leaders from the political 
prisoners in horror camps like Buchenwald, from 
whose number on May 1 the new mayor of Weimar 
was chosen. The most important need in German 
is that the four occupying powers—the United States, 
Britain, Russia and France—agree on a common ¢co- 
nomic and political policy. The outlook for peac 
depends on their unity. BLAIR BOLLEs 


Argentina’s admission. At the same time, many Latin 
Americans still feel hostile toward Russia, and even 
non-practicing Catholics among them continue to 
stress the “‘godlessness” of the Soviet government 
The Latin Americans, if left to their own decisions, 
would have opposed the admission of the Ukrainian 
and White Russian Soviet Socialist Republics. They 
voted for it because they had been informed that the 
United States had obligated itself at Yalta to bad 
Russia’s request for the entrance of these republic 
into the UNCIO. But in return they expected other 
nations present to vote for Argentina. 

Russia’s position in opposing Argentina would 
have been far stronger if it had not linked the issue 
with that of seating the Warsaw government. Mr. 
Molotov was on firm and popular ground when he 
questioned the character of the Farrell government 
in his ironical address to the Conference on April 30. 


But others, with equal plausibility, could question 


the representative character of the Warsaw régime 
What is more important, Mr. Molotov had told ser 
eral of the Latin American delegates over the preced 
ing weekend that he would vote for Argentina if they 
voted for Warsaw. The Latin Americans refused t0 
be pressured, and some of the strongest words ad 
dressed to Russia since 1941 were those of Colom 
bian Foreign Minister Lleras Camargo. 

CLASH CLEARED AIR. So far as can be deter 
mined at the present time, this clash had beneficial 
results. Mr. Molotov, unaccustomed to the tactid 
of parliamentary opposition, took the decision of tht 








\| 


comr 
State 
tries 
chall 
they 
Unit 
sues 


itself 
natic 
grea 
not | 
volv: 
emnn 
has 
influ 
tion 

full; 
outy 
leart 
natic 
Rus: 
nati 
feel 

that 

ticip 


ican 
Arg 
bety 
in | 
mer 
inte 
ack 


dra 
onc 
ity. 
froi 
firis 
wa: 
bitt 
ne\ 
pat 
to | 





BPrFaeaBFEFBBeoeraoas il 


BE 


BES 


“b So 


INS 
atin 
even 
2 to 
lent. 
Ons, 
nian 


t the 
back 
blics 
ther 


‘ould 
issue 
Mr. 


ment 
il 30, 
s tion 


pime. 


1 sev. 
eced: 
- they 
ed to 
is ad 
dom: 


deter: 
oficial 
-actic 
of the 

















—7_™ 


Conference with good grace. But he humorously 
commented that the Latin Americans and the United 
States voted as one bloc—intimating that the coun- 
tries south of us were acting as satellites. This has 
challenged the Latin Americans to demonstrate that 
they are by no means always in accord with the 
United States, and may vote differently on other is- 
sues that come up in the future. 

Russia, for its part, is in the process of adjusting 
itself to the methods and responsibilities of an inter- 
national organization where small nations as well as 
great ones must have a voice if the organization is 
not to become a great-power dictatorship. This in- 
volves adjustments on the part of the Soviet gov- 
emment that should not be minimized. Russia 
has reached a high-water mark in both power and 
influence, and it wants to maintain that posi- 
tion in the post-war period. But to do this success- 
fully it will have to develop at least some of the 
outward restraints Britain and the United States have 
learned to regard as necessary in relations with other 
nations. The best thing that can happen is to have 
Russia become so intimately associated with other 
nations in an international organization that it will 
feel ever-growing responsibility for the success of 
that organization. For this reason Mr. Molotov’s par- 
ticipation as co-chairman of the Conference should 
be welcomed. 

THE TWO POLICIES OF U.S. From the Amer- 
ican point of view, the most striking aspect of the 
Argentine episode was the distinction it revealed 
between our policy in Latin America and our policy 
in Europe. In Latin America, according to govern- 
ment spokesmen, we are against intervention in the 
internal affairs of the American republics, and we 
acknowledge the practical difficulties of establishing 


Page Three 





= 








democratic institutions among peoples who are still 
economically undeveloped, and to a considerable 
extent illiterate. In Europe, we have now recognized . 
the need to accept political responsibility for the 
results of our military operations. This means, in 
practice, a policy of intervention—preferably in con- 
cert with Russia and Britain, as agreed at Yalta—in 
the internal affairs of some nations, accompanied by 
insistence that they should adopt democratic insti- 
tutions. Actually, as this Conference has amply 
demonstrated, the closer the United Nations come 
together, the more difficult it is to draw a sharp divid- 
ing line between internal and external policies. 

In a Conference which in spite of a few dramatic 
high spots got off to an unusually good start, the 
least happy role is probably that of France. The 
French took so long to formulate their position—and 
then only in very negative terms—that they at first 
had little influence on the main negotiations. It was 
a mistake for France to have declined a place among 
the sponsoring powers. Now, however, France's po- 
sition has been strengthened by its inclusion, at its 
own request, in the highest policy meetings of the 
convening powers. 

But in spite of frictions inevitable in any gather- 
ing of human beings, the work of framing the Char- 
ter of the UNCIO is well under way. The end of 
the war in Europe makes it imperative for all to 
get ready the tools of peace. As Commander Stassen, 
who is emerging as the key figure in the United States 
delegation, has said, we must keep our sights high, 
and not allow ourselves to be distracted by details. 
The new Polish crisis, bad as its effect is bound to be 
on American and British public opinion, is not ex- 
pected to jeopardize the work of the Conference. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


LIBERATED ITALY TACKLES COMPLEX PEACE ISSUES 


For a moment Italy held the stage during the last 
dramatic convulsions of the European Axis. Now 
once more it has retreated into comparative obscur- 
ity. So it was during the whole Italian campaign, 
from the landing in Sicily in July 1943 until the 
firing ceased May 2, 1945. The “forgotten front,” it 
was called. Yet the fighting, which was among the 
bitterest and most difficult of the European war, 
never ceased. Nor did the problems of Allied occu- 
pation and administration, or of Italian adjustment 
to the tragic consequences of war, fail to accumulate. 
Misfortune and difficulty in the Italian peninsula 
were concealed from most of us only because the 
center of greatest danger was elsewhere. This may 
well happen, too, in the days of peace ahead. But 
issues will be there in abundance, and the way in 
which they are met by the Allies and the Italian 
people themselves will be important in the shaping 
of a stable European order. 


It is not yet possible to estimate what remnants 
of political Fascism will have been left behind. They 
are doubtless small and will continue to grow stead- 
ily smaller as the Partisans of the North proceed with 
summary justice. Reports of reprisals in the Milan 
area alone during recent days range from one to five 
thousand. In any case, the Duce of Fascism is gone, 
a fact so fully documented that no doubt can be cast 
upon it. There will be no myth of a “second coming” 
to hold his scattered followers together. They are 
leaderless, discredited, and totally defeated. It re- 
mains to be seen how many of the more fanatical 
adherents will escape punishment or how many, if 
any at all, will be able to insinuate themselves into 
the new, emerging régime. 

It was fortunate for Italy's economic future that 
the conquest of the North was effected so speedily 
and under such circumstances that the German forces 
were unable to commit acts of sabotage such as had 








Hi 


ee 





characterized their earlier, orderly retreats. Here in 
the fertile valley of the Po are the richest agricultural 
lands of Italy; and here too are the great industrial 
centers, such as Milan and Turin, and the great com- 
mercial cities of Genoa and Venice. The damage 
wrought by Allied bombing and by enemy action, 
although undoubtedly extensive, still leaves the bulk 
of the economy substantially intact. This will speed 
recovery for the whole peninsula, although the prob- 
lem of recovery will long remain acute. 

POLITICAL CONSEQUENCES OF VICTORY. 
At least some of the political consequences of victory 
in Italy can be measured now. Several months ago 
Prime Minister Bonomi indicated that his govern- 
ment would retire when the North had been liber- 
ated. Discussions are already in progress between the 
Bonomi Cabinet and representatives of the Com- 
mittee of Liberation of the North. There will un- 
doubtedly be a reorganization, if not a totally new 
government, and, if one may judge from the earlier 
activities of the Committee, whatever compromise 
is made will be in the direction of the Left. This Com- 
mittee, like its counterpart in Rome, is made up of 
six parties, although in the North the Republican 
party takes the place of the conservative Democracy 
of Labor party. The concentration is definitely on the 
Left, a fact confirmed as recently as the middle of 
April, when it was announced that the Christian 
Democratic party in the North had agreed to close 
collaboration with the Communists and Socialists. In 
Rome the Christian Democrats have taken the middle 
ground and are a conservative force. 

Whatever the changes in the government, two im- 
portant political questions will claim the attention 
of the Italian people during the next several months. 
The first is the future of the Savoy dynasty. Crown 
Prince Umberto, Lieutenant General of the Realm, 
has clung tenaciously to his prerogatives and seems 
disposed to stage a strong fight for preservation of 
the monarchy. His recent appearance at Bologna, 
where he was apparently well received, and at Milan, 
where an attempt was made on his life, indicate an 
effort on his part to test public sentiment. It is too 
early to estimate this accurately, although the tide 
continues to flow in the direction of a republic. 

The second question will be that of elections for 
a Constituent Assembly. The government at Rome 
has been planning for these for some time. But elec- 
tions can scarcely be conducted in the very near 
future, and certainly not until the Allied authorities 








Page Four es 





are prepared to permit them. In passing, it might be 
noted that when they do come, women will for the 
first time in Italian history have the right to vote 
in national elections. 


ITALO-YUGOSLAV RELATIONS. Important as 
the economic and political problems of Italy will 
be in the immediate future, they are scarcely more 
delicate or dangerous than the problem of Italo. 
Yugoslav relations. From the time Fascist Italy en. 
tered the war on the side of the Axis, Yugoslav av- 
thorities have been laying claim to the territory of 
Venezia Giulia. This region, east of the Isonzo, in. 
cluding the ports of Trieste and Fiume, was acquired 
by Italy after much dispute at the end of World 
War I. Its population is mixed Italian and Slavic, 
with the Italians predominant in the cities and the 
Slavs predominant in the hinterland. So mixed are 
the populations that an exact ethnographic boundary 
which would satisfy both peoples cannot be drawn; 
and both lay claim to it on economic and historic as 
well as ethnic grounds. 

Italian leaders at Rome have expressed alarm mote 
than once at the official pronouncements of Marshal 
Tito indicating Yugoslavia’s intention to annex this 
territory. These fears were particularly marked when, 


during the first week of May, an official communiqué / 


from Tito’s headquarters announced that Trieste and 
Fiume had been captured by Partisan forces. The 
Italian government protested this action and called 
on the Allies to administer the region until both the 
Yugoslav and Italian peoples could give expression 
to their wishes. British forces under Lieutenant Gen- 
eral Freyberg occupied Trieste on May 2 and effected 
the surrender of German forces there. This action, in 
turn, evoked a strong protest from Marshal Tito. 
The problem of Trieste is extremely delicate and 
will require the highest qualities of statesmanship 
for its solution. It is the outlet for a deep hinterland 
which is neither Yugoslav nor Italian, and as an im- 
portant port it will be essential to the Allies as long 
as the policing of Europe is necessary. It is an intense- 
ly Italian city, although the surrounding country is 
Slavic, and it may be assumed that its disposition will 
profoundly influence Italian national sentiment. On 
the other hand, the oppressions which the Slavs en- 
dured during Fascist administration and later during 
military occupation will undoubtedly steel the deter- 
mination of Tito’s government to secure its control. 


C. Grove HAINES 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 30, May 11, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Laegt, Secretary; VERA MicHELES Dean, Editor. Entered a 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


> eae 








19: 





