enator 


N; and| 
larger | 
defend | 
ngenc 
war. 

ons of 
se and| 
proved | 
United 
ransfer 
sphere 
r Non. 
des for 
in the 
ealizes 
on. the 
at this 
armed 
W any 


$$ pr0- 
| more 
at Ad-| 
y have 
th full 
em of 
indus | 
jations 
5 is to 


re this 


[LDE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XIX, No. 35 


JUNE 21, 1940 


| How did Germany gear its economic machine 
| for war? Read: 


GERMANY’S WARTIME ECONOMY 
by JOHN C. deWILDE 


25¢ 


June 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Offce at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


JUN 9 — 


General Library 


University of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 


DICTATORS SHAPE EUROPE’S DESTINY 


gue TRIUMPHALE meeting of Hitler and Musso- 

lini at Munich, oft June 18, ushers in a new era 
for Europe. Seldom in history have two men held the 
destiny of so large an area in their hands. Only Brit- 
ain and the Soviet Union remain as European coun- 
terweights to the axis powers. Striking relentlessly 
with the full weight of the mechanized German 
army, Adolf Hitler had beaten down French resist- 
ance and apparently ended for the present all large- 
sale military operations on the continent. The vir- 
tual collapse of the French forces was signalized by 
an appeal for “honorable” peace terms, disclosed on 
June 17 in a radio address of the newly appointed 
French Premier, Marshal Henri Philippe Petain, who 
had assumed office on the preceding night. Cessation 
of hostilities followed a last-minute British offer of 
organic union with France, which came much too late 
to be effective. 

With national approval, the British government 
now continues the struggle alone. According to an 
authoritative statement from London on June 16— 
which presupposed continued blockade operations by 
the French as well as the British navy—Britain still 
telies on sea power and the superior economic re- 
sources of its empire and the United States to turn 
the tide in the end. Yet it is likely that Germany, with 
vast new areas open to Nazi exploitation, will forge 
a far more self-sufficient economy than it has ever 
before enjoyed. The British blockade seems destined 
to be perforated with increasing effectiveness on the 
north, south and east. And Britain, no matter how 
strongly fortified, becomes extremely vulnerable to 
submarine attack on its shipping, and air raids against 
its ports and communications, conducted from bases 
in the Low Countries and northern France. 


THE FRENCH DEBACLE. The subjugation of 
the French was completed with appalling rapidity, 
in only twelve days of military operations. While the 
Allies were still disorganized by the impact of the 


disaster in Flanders, the German forces wheeled 
southward on June 5 against a defense position hast- 
ily prepared along the rivers Somme and Aisne, link- 
ing with the Maginot Line at Montmédy. The great- 
est advances were first made along the coast by the 
German right wing, which faced the single British 
division remaining on the continent. Avoiding the 
strategic error of 1914, when the German troops 
turned east of Paris in their march and thus exposed 
a flank to the Allies, the Reich’s motorized contin- 
gents swept down to the Seine, which was reached 
at a point east of Rouen by June 10. Hammer blows, 
moreover, pushed the French back in the center, so 
that converging German units occupied Paris on June 
14. The city itself was not defended. 

Despite its psychological importance, the fall of 
the French capital was only incidental to the chief 
objective of the invader: the destruction of the French 
armies as a fighting force. Seeking new defense lines, 
General Weygand’s weary troops fought dogged 
rear-guard actions as they fell back toward the Loire. 
They could not, however, resist the blows of their 
numerically superior opponents, estimated at 150 di- 
visions or more than 2,000,000 men and equipped 
with an overwhelmingly preponderance of airplanes 
and mechanized material. As France sued for peace, 
the Germans had completely encircled the Maginot 
Line, which had been largely drained of its defending 
troops to save them from capture and assist their 
hard-pressed comrades in the south. Nazi. forces 
closed the ring at Pontarlier on the Swiss border, 
while others attacked the Maginot forts directly by 
crossing the Rhine and advancing from the Saar re- 
gion. The German air force, almost unopposed at the 
end, ranged far over France and wreaked havoc in 
the temporary capital at Tours and among innumer- 
able refugees on the roads. 

DESPERATE POLITICAL MANEUVERS. The 
increasing seriousness of the French military situation 


Se Soe eter eee ee 


——$—$— 


France on June 15, pledged redoubled effort to meet 
the material needs of the Allies as long as they resist, 
but pointed out that only Congress could make mili- 
tary commitments. 

So rapid was the military dénouement, however, 
that these assurances proved of little value. After pro- 
longed Cabinet discussions, Premier Reynaud and his 
associates resigned on June 16 to clear the way for a 
government which would conclude an armistice. The 
new régime, headed by the 84-year-old veteran Mar- 
shal Petain, with Camille Chautemps as Vice-Premier, 
included military and naval chieftains as heads of the 
defense ministries, and other officials who had held 
posts in the two Reynaud governments formed since 
March 21. The best known French proponents of 
“appeasement”—MM. Pierre Laval, Georges Bonnet 
and Pierre-Etienne Flandin—did not assume office, 
but may of course be available for that purpose after 
a peace settlement has been concluded. 

CONTINENTAL EUROPEAN REORIENTA- 
TION. Meanwhile, as Italy waited for French terri- 
tory to drop in its lap, other countries took steps to 


Page Two 


was reflected in the desperate measures taken by the 
Allied leadership. After a brief sojourn at Tours, the 
Cabinet of Premier Paul Reynaud took refuge in Bor- 
deaux. Answering French pleas, the British govern- 
ment, which was at first resigned to the impossibility 
of sending additional troops to France, announced 
on June 13 that home defenses would be reduced to 
aid its ally; and on the fallowing. morning it pro- 
claimed the “indissoluble union” of the two empires 
and Britain’s determination to pursue the struggle “in 
France, in this island, upon the ocean and in the air 
wherever it may lead us.” M. Reynaud sought further 
moral support in two appeals to President Roosevelt 
on June 10 and 13, in which he requested “clouds of 
war planes.” The President's response, cabled to 


—_—..., 
—<—— 


adjust their positions to the new hegemony of the 
axis powers. On June 14 the Spanish government, 
abandoning neutrality for “non-belligerency,” occy. 
pied the international zone of Tangier, across the 
Strait from Gibraltar and within artillery range of the 
British stronghold. Turkey, although bound to the 
Allies by mutual assistance pacts covering the Medj. 
terranean, did not engage in hostilities but severed 
commercial relations with Italy, signed a trade pact 
with the Nazis on June 13, and likewise remained 
“non-belligerent.’”” The Soviet Union strengthened 
its grip on the upper Baltic and its defenses against 
the Reich by invading Lithuania on June 15, and Lat. 
via and Estonia two days later. It charged that the 
three countries had violated their mutual assistance 
pacts with the U.S.S.R. by concluding a military al- 
liance—viewed as “profoundly dangerous and men- 
acing” to Soviet security. 

These developments, occurring within a brief space 
of a few days, illustrate the breathtaking speed with 
which Europe is obliterating the pattern impressed 
upon it by the Paris Peace Conference in 1919. Under 
the new order, it would appear that the continent may 
eventually be dominated by two or three great pow- 
ers, of which Nazi Germany will be the strongest. 
But control of Europe involves control of its over- 
seas empires as well. Extension of the struggle to 
this sphere would be of direct concern to the United 
States, whose defense plans must now take into ac 
count conditions in areas as widely separated as West 
Africa and the Far East. Even the establishment of a 
pro-fascist government in France would raise serious 
problems regarding the future of French colonies in 
this hemisphere. Hence the conclusion of land war- 
fare on the continent offers no assurance of tran- 


quillity for the United States. 
Davip H. Popper 


WILL JAPAN STRIKE IN ASIA? 


Although Tokyo still continues to move cautiously 
in the Far East, there is growing evidence that Ger- 
man military successes in Europe are having pro- 
nounced repercussions on Japanese policy. Accom- 
panying the current military campaign in the upper 
Yangtze valley are statements indicating Japan's in- 
terest in the status of Shanghai, Indo-China, and the 
Netherlands Indies. Formal adherence to the policy 
of “non-involvement” in the European war is main- 
tained in Cabinet declarations, but the pressure for 
an advance into southeast Asia is increasing among 
military circles at Tokyo. In the Far East, as well as 
Europe, the United States is thus facing critical de- 
cisions. 

WAR FRONTS IN CHINA. After meeting severe 
reverses in northern Hupeh province during May, 
Japanese forces launched a new drive along the 


» upper Yangtze river. The occupation of Shasi and 


Ichang, river ports about 100 miles above Hankow, 
was successfully effected by June 12. Chinese forces 
have since counter-attacked in this region, and the 
final outcome of the campaign must still be awaited. 
Yet Japanese vessels can now supply the troops at 
Ichang, which gives reason to believe that the city can 
be held. The occupation of Ichang severs certain in- 


terior Chinese lines of communication and facilitates | 


bombing attacks by Japanese planes on China’s south- 
western provinces. Above Ichang, however, the 


gorges of the Yangtze begin, so that there is little | 


possibility of a Japanese drive against Chungking. 
Permanent Japanese occupation of Ichang, like that 
of Nanchang, would constitute an annoying factor in 
the Chinese scheme of defense, but it would not affect 
the continuance of that defense in any vital respect. 

Since the end of May, when the clouds which covet 
Chungking most of the year lifted, Japanese bombing 


——_— 
lanes have 
raids on th 
than 100 pl 
tense of str: 
constitute a 
increased 
evacuation 
casualties h 
ing official 
have suffer 
ican gunbo 
Three days 
State Depa 
statement 
pulation 
ernment 0} 
demn such 


NEW F 
the success 
prospect tk 
are likely | 
tional sit 
Japan’s fa 
less able 
Asia, anc 
move aga 
sions in tl 
Japanese | 
Indo-Chin 
the Forei; 
gravity” f 
troops hac 
Nanking 
ing the v 
ships bel 
mand ad 


stationed 
concessio: 


The tw 
and the § 
to a forw 
cal Euroy 

| Japanese 
success, t 
| by the § 
| Mongoli 
| It is unli 


| to Ching 
| ened, bu 
tude tov 
develops 
Soviet-A 
the case 


FOREIGN 
Headquarter 
Entered as | 


is 


——— 
— 


Janes have carried out a series of destructive air- 
raids on the Chinese capital. These raids, with more 
than 100 planes engaged at times, have made no pre- 
tense of striking at military objectives, but apparently 
constitute a systematic effort to level the city. Despite 
increased Chinese precautions, including partial 
evacuation and greater numbers of dugouts, civilian 
casualties have been severe. Foreign quarters, includ- 
ing official residences, embassies and church missions, 
have suffered heavy damage; on June 16 the Amer- 
ian gunboat Ttuila narrowly escaped a direct hit. 
Three days earlier, as the result of inquiries at the 
State Department, Secretary Hull had issued a formal 
statement deploring ‘ruthless bombings of civilian 

pulation,”’ and declaring that the people and gov- 
emment of the United States ‘wholeheartedly con- 
demn such practices.’ 


NEW FACTORS IN JAPAN'S POLICY. Despite 
the successes won on the upper Yangtze, there is no 
prospect that Japan’s military commitments in China 
are likely to decrease in the near future. The interna- 
tional situation, however, is clearly changing in 
Japan's favor. With France eliminated, Britain is 
less able to preserve the status guo in Southeast 
Asia, and the temptation grows at Tokyo to 
move against the rich-Anglo-French-Dutch posses- 
sions in the Far East. On a single day, June 13, the 
Japanese Army ‘“‘warned” the French authorities in 
Indo-China to discontinue alleged support of China; 
the Foreign Office at Tokyo viewed with “extreme 
gravity” reports, denied at Batavia, that 2,000 British 
troops had landed in the Netherlands Indies; and the 
Nanking régime issued a formal statement demand- 
ing the withdrawal from China of troops and war- 
ships belonging to Britain, France and Italy—a de- 
mand addressed particularly to the defense forces 
stationed at Shanghai, Tientsin, and other foreign 
concessions along the coast. 


The two most powerful neutrals—the United States 
and the Soviet Union—remain the greatest obstacles 
to a forward Japanese move. Yet here, too, the criti- 
cal European situation is working in Japan’s favor. 
Japanese diplomacy is seeking, with some measure of 
success, to neutralize the Soviet Union, as suggested 
by the Soviet-Japanese agreement on the disputed 
Mongolian frontier area signed at Moscow on June 9. 
It is unlikely that the U.S.S.R. would give up its aid 
to China, where Soviet interests are directly threat- 
ened, but it might well adopt a noncommittal atti- 


| tude toward a Japanese southward advance. Such a 


development, however, might be forestalled by a 
Soviet-American agreement on Far Eastern issues. In 
the case of the United States, Japan may reckon that 


Page Three 


the crisis in Europe will eventually force a withdrawal 
of the American fleet from the Pacific. Under these 
conditions, unless a Soviet-American agreement ex- 
isted, the last major obstacle to the spread of Japanese 
aggression into the South Seas would have dis- 
appeared. 

CHOICES FOR AMERICAN POLICY. In the 
circumstances which have now developed, it seems 
unlikely that the United States can long avoid a de- 
cision on the policy which it is to pursue in the Far 
East. The choice lies essentially between an effort to 
compromise with Japan, or a policy of firm resistance. 

The former course was supported by Senator Van- 
denberg on June 9 when he declared that he favored 
an attempt “to write a new commercial and political 
treaty with Japan.” This program would clearly in- 
volve an effort to reach a compromise with Japan on 
the issue of China, in the hope that concessions thus 
made would forestall a Japanese move southward. 
To the extent that such action strengthened Japan’s 
position in China, however, it would free Tokyo's 
hands for an advance in another quarter. In view of 
Japan’s attitude toward the Nine-Power Treaty, it is 
difficult to. see how a new paper pledge would exert a 
restraining effect, especially if Japan felt that condi- 
tions were ripe for a drive into southeast Asia. In this 
region lie the resources—oil, tin and rubber—which 
alone can make the Japanese empire economically 
self-sufficient. Recent examples in Europe suggest that 
concessions would encourage rather than restrain 
Japan’s expansionist ambitions. 

The second choice would require a determined ef- 
fort to strengthen the obstacles which have thus far 
prevented Japan from engaging in a new military ad- 
venture. The American defense program has already 
held up shipments of machine tools to Japan. A new 
defense law authorizes the President to curtail the ex- 
port of munitions and war supplies, and it is reported 
that scrap iron will be the first of such materials to 
be embargoed. Additional aid could be given China, 
particularly in the form of credits to support the 
Chinese currency. These measures might be further 
strengthened by a Soviet-American agreement pledg- 
ing both parties to the maintenance of China’s inde- 
pendence and the status quo in southeast Asia. 

There are certain risks attached to this policy, 
which would tend to increase American commitments 
in the Far East at a time when it may be necessary to 
have our hands free to deal with developments in 
Europe. It can be strongly supported only so long as 

the United States is able to keep the fleet in the Pa- 
cific. Yet it offers perhaps the last prospect of pre- 
venting a complete American withdrawal from the 


Far East. T. A. BIsson 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 35, Jung 21, 1940. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lugr, Secretary; Vera Micue.tes Dean, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


EBZw |81 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

JUNE 17.—The collapse of. French resistance has 
caused Washington to re-assess the immediate conse- 
quences in terms of American foreign policy and 
move swiftly to bolster the military, political and 
economic defenses of the Western Hemisphere. While 
President Roosevelt's pledge to send “materials and 
supplies in ever increasing quantities and kinds” still 
holds for Britain, its effect is infinitesimal in stem- 
ming the tide of German military might. For the 
future, Washington is basing its diplomatic moves 
on a cold calculation of the state of our own mil- 
itary preparations in relation to the needs of this hem- 
isphere and the rapidly changing situation in Europe. 

FATE OF BRITAIN’S FLEET. The question most 
often heard during the past few days is what will 
become of the French and British fleets? What hap- 
pens to the French fleet—now in the Mediterranean 
—may be determined within the next 48 hours, but 
what becomes of the British fleet in the coming weeks 
and months is a matter of the greatest concern to 
this country. Three possible contingencies are being 
discussed: first, that Britain will send the navy to 
Canada; second, that the fleet will be scuttled; third, 
that it will be turned over to Germany. 

From the point of view of Great Britain, any of 
these courses would mean the end of British sea pow- 
er as such. Surrender of the British fleet would give 
Germany, Italy and Japan: command of the seas 
throughout the world. Destruction of the British 
navy would leave Germany and Italy supreme in 
Europe, Japan in the Far East, and the United States 
in the Western Hemisphere. Transfer to Canada 
would give the United States (with the British fleet) 
undisputed naval supremacy. outside the narrow 
waters of Europe and Asia. 

From the point of view of the United States, our 
defense position would be. perilous only if the British 
navy were turned over to Germany. In that event our 
navy would be outweighed three to one by the com- 
bined fleets of the European powers, and nearly four 
to one if Japan is included. To match such naval 
power would cost this country 10 billion dollars in 
new ship construction alone, and a continuing arma- 
ment budget of from 10 to. 12 billion dollars. To 
build such an armada would require five or six years 
at the very least. 

On the other hand, transfer of the British navy to 
Canada would compel the United States to reach im- 
mediate political decisions of the utmost magnitude. 
In that event the United States would have to decide 


at once: (1) whether to join Great Britain and cop. 
tinue the war with the Dominions (with Canada be. 
coming the center of the British Commonwealth), oy 
(2) to use the new naval strength to bargain for the 
best peace terms possible, with Canada as an inde. 
pendent nation in the Western Hemisphere. W hateve 
choice we might make, undoubtedly the United States 
would have to assume responsibility for the mainte. 
nance and upkeep of the fleet. Canada has neither the 
bases, the shipyards nor the money to maintain a na 
of this size. We would either have to buy the fleet or 
enter an alliance with Canada whereby the two navies 
would be operated under joint command. 

Our decision on continuing the war would be dic. 
tated necessarily by military factors, first of which 
is our ability to conduct large-scale operations over 
seas. If France had been able to hold out, it is con. 
ceivable that the New World might in time have 
heeded Winston Churchill’s call to “set forth to the 
liberation and rescue of the old.’ But with the sur. 
render of France, and with Germany’s mechanized 
legions in control of the entire continent, it is folly 
to expect a military expedition to rescue Europe. Even 
assuming we had full command of the sea and air, it 
would require years to raise, equip and transport an 
expeditionary force of the size required. 

The maximum which the United States could do to 
aid Britain would be to employ the bargaining power 
of the British fleet in Canada to secure the least disas- 
trous peace terms outside of Europe. Within the con- 
tinent of Europe, nothing we could say or do would 
have any effect on Hitler's peace terms. It would 
not be possible to “save” England from economic ot 
even political domination by Germany. But with the 
British and American fleets controlling the seas, we 
might be able to reduce the harshness of the peace 
and preserve something from the wreckage of the 
British Commonwealth of Nations. From our own 
self-interest, we are vitally concerned in the fate of 
both Canada and the entire Western Hemisphere 
With the fleet on this side of the Atlantic, we could 
assure the defense of the Western Hemisphere, to 
gether with Canada and the other American nations. 
We would be in a position to deal on equal terms 
with a united Europe dominated by Germany and, 
perhaps, to influence the terms of a peace settlement 
in the Far East. 


Whether the people of the United States are pre 
pared to shoulder the responsibilities for maintait 
ing a pax Americana is for them to decide. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 


FORE! 


An inter preta 


FOR 


Vou. XIX, 
ee 
THE Ef 


A discuss 
of the Br 
also on t 
self-gove 


Headline Boo 


RANCI 
humili 
French del: 
offered by 
German d 
took place 
forest of C 
the Allies 
quished fo 
Pétain als« 
ting Franc 
powers. T 
midnight 
FRANC 
terms imp 
as had b 
are resolv 
solini ex: 
concessior 
paign ag: 
more tha 
coast on 
Ocean. WV 
virtually 
German 
mandeer 
facilities. 
and Cors: 
The Fren 
of southe 
without 
occupatic 
French 
mobilize: 
troops a 
Maintend 
craft anc 
and lan 
Must be 


