





ures 
Ber- 
Jean 
y of 
and 
tored 
many 
> ban 


time, 
need 
> first 
ment 
v Sta- 
1g fe 
zation 
ques- 
as Se 
orges 
. both 
1 Pro- 


ng as 
irit of 
rench- 
cently 
> Brit 
news- 
> that 

posi- 
traitor 
2 only 
1e slo- 
"pub 


emy— 


OTT 


aS 





FOREIGN 


APR 3 1943 


Genera) Library Entered as 2nd class matter 
pERUvICAL 229 ““*"Orelis os Ninn: 
BAL LIBKARE Pe *©0. San 
way. oF Al Te ‘7 Arbor. Mich 


POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





You. XXII, No. 25 


Apri. 9, 1948 





ee 


eae renewal on March 25 of the Soviet-Japanese 
treaty regulating Japanese fishing in Siberian 
waters has caused little concern in the United States. 
The New York Times, for example, calls the action 
“a matter of annual routine,” declaring that it “does 
not denote ‘appeasement’ of Japan, and neither the 
Russians nor the Japanese will so construe it.” Al- 
though Tokyo has held these fishing rights since 
Tsarist days, the U.S.S.R. has in recent years re- 
duced the number of areas open to Japanese fisher- 
men and has raised the rents. But any effort to ex- 
dude Japan completely would almost certainly be a 
prelude to war. 

SHOULD THE U.S.S.R. FIGHT JAPAN? Criti- 
cism is occasionally heard concerning Soviet policy 
on the ground that neutrality toward Japan does not 
fit in with the general position of the United Na- 
tions. Sometimes the point is made that “if Russia 
wants a second front in Europe, she should be will- 
ing to open one in Asia’”—or that, in return for 
lend-lease supplies, Moscow should go to war with 
Tokyo. Such appeals to emotion overlook two of 
the chief strategic realities of the struggle against 
the Axis: that Britain and the United States long 
ago decided to concentrate on defeating Germany 
frst, and that the Soviet Union is at present the 
main force wearing the Nazis down. 

Clearly, if the U.S.S.R. had been fighting Japan, 
the great Soviet winter offensive against the German 
amies could not have been launched, the North 
African campaign would probably have been im- 
practicable, and the present opportunities for in- 
vading the continent of Europe would hardly exist. 
At the same time, it is an illusion to think that the 
amount of Soviet strength available in the Far East 
an tip the scales against Japan. A Soviet-Japanese 
wat while Germany is still fighting could result 
only in an unfortunate dispersal of United Nations 
military power. Sometimes, it is true, the suggestion 





SOVIET-JAPANESE PEACE AIDS UNITED NATIONS 


is made that the U.S.S.R. should simply allow Amer- 
ican planes to use Siberian bases against Japan, but 
under present circumstances this would plainly re- 
sult in a Soviet-Japanese war. Nor is there reason to 
think that enough planes are available to make such 
a move effective. 

JAPAN’S INDEPENDENT POLICY. But why 
does Japan avoid attacking in the north, if such a 
move would aid Germany and impede the United 
Nations? The answer seems to be that Japan, un- 
like Italy, acts first of all on the basis of its own 
interests and is not a mere satellite of the Nazis. 
Despite the general harmony of interests between 
Hitler and the Japanese military, there are issues on 
which the latter would be unwilling to follow Ger- 
many’s leadership—especially since the two coun- 
tries, through geographical circumstances, are 
obliged to wage somewhat separate wars. 

This is indicated by the fact that for some time 
Japan has permitted Soviet vessels to carry quan- 
tities of lend-lease supplies from the Pacific coast 
of the United States to Siberian ports. It is also 
rumored that Japan has sold valuable raw materials, 
such as rubber and wolfram, to the Soviet Union. 
Such developments, far from constituting a cause 
for Allied suspicion of the U.S.S.R., point to a gap 
in Axis unity that it is not in our interest to close. 
These differences within the Axis, even if only tem- 
porary, permit the strengthening of the Soviet front 
against Germany and thereby indirectly aid the fight 
against Japan itself. Tokyo, of course, is aware of 
this last point but, at least at present, considers it 
less important than keeping out of war in the north. 

U.S.S.R. INFLUENCES FAR EAST. The ex- 
istence of peace with Japan does not mean that the 
Far Eastern military situation is not being influenced 
by the Soviet Union. On the contrary, Japan is known 
to maintain a number of its finest divisions in Man- 
churia and Korea as a counterweight to the Soviet 


np 1 PR AEA 





/ 


2 a 








————=——==——S___>—>— 


army, air force and submarine fleet in the Far East. 
Soviet supplies, although reduced in quantity since 
the war with Germany, have also played a consider- 
able part in bolstering Chinese resistance. Moreover, 
there is reason to think that increased aid, whether 
of Soviet or American origin, is already, or will soon 
be, reaching China over the northwest highway from 
the U.S.S.R. Late in March, for example, San Fran- 
cisco newspapers quoted the Chief of Canada’s Pa- 
cific Command as saying that “supplies are going 
via Alaska to China and Russia.” Even if flown 
direct, planes going to China would have to cross 





Page Two 








es 
ee, 


Soviet territory, but a glance at the map will sug. 
gest the possibility of such supplies being landed jp 
the U.S.S.R. and carried in from there. This would 
certainly tie in with the considerable development 
of China’s northwestern areas in the past half-year, 

It is impossible to say whether Japan will long 
permit the United Nations to reap the benefits of 
Soviet-Japanese neutrality, but while this situa. 
tion continues it should be recognized as represent. 
ing a genuine disadvantage for the Axis of which we 
must make maximum use. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


RENEWAL OF TRADE AGREEMENTS FIRST POST-WAR REQUIREMENT 


Speaking before the Chamber of Commerce of 
the State of New York on April 1, Sumner Welles 
said that the “acid test” of our willingness to share 
in the tasks of post-war reconstruction would be 
whether Congress renewed the Reciprocal Trade 
Agreements Act of 1934 before it expires on June 12. 
Our allies, he suggested, will see in this decision a 
clear indication of our future intentions, and until 
it is made they will have grave doubts about Ameri- 
can policy. This frank declaration by the Under 
Secretary of State gave a clue, it was felt in Canada, 
to the caution with which Anthony Eden spoke of 
future collaboration among the United Nations when 
he addressed the Canadian Parliament the same day. 
Several Canadian papers pointed out that, until Con- 
gress makes it clear it will back the Administration 
in its post-war objectives, the other United Nations 
can only wonder if the United States will follow the 
same course as in 1919. 


ASSURANCE AGAINST TRADE WAR. The 
Trade Agreements Act was passed—largely through 
the influence of Secretary of State Cordell Hull— 
at a time when American policy and that of other 
countries consisted of cut-throat trade warfare, each 
country seeking to benefit itself at the expense of 
others. This trade anarchy was a part of the general 
anarchy in international affairs out of which devel- 
oped the Second World War. The Hull program, 
authorizing the President to negotiate reciprocal 
agreements reducing tariffs and other trade barriers, 





GLOBAL WAR IN MAPS 
Set of 12 maps - $1.00 


Reproductions (19"x24”) from recent Headline Books 
covering all theatres of war and both Americas. Included 
are maps of the United Nations; Allied and Axis Supply 
Lines; Alaska; The U.S.S.R.; Japan and the Pacific; Australia 
and New Zealand; India; Africa; Near and Middle East; 
Central and South America. 


Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 East 38th Street, New York 











represented the one real effort to check these de. 
structive tendencies in trade, and to put the world 
back on a sane basis of multilateral trade based on 
equality of treatment. If renewed, it will provide. 
large measure of assurance against repetition of the 
widespread policies which, after the last war, led 
to economic war rather than economic cooperation. 

More than this, the principles of the trade agree. 
ments program have already become an integral part 
of commitments made by the United States and a 
growing number of the United Nations. In Article 
VII of the Master Mutual Aid (Lend-Lease) Agree. 
ment of February 23, 1942, the United States and 
the United Kingdom agreed to seek joint action di- 
rected ‘‘to the elimination of all forms of discrimina- 
tory treatment in international commerce, and to the 
reduction of tariffs and other trade barriers; and in 
general to the attainment of all the economic ob- 
jectives set forth in” the Atlantic Charter. To dis- 
card the Hull program would be to discard these 
principles—which were embodied in the lend-lease 
agreements on the intiative of the United States— 
and leave our allies in doubt as to whether any of 
our brave words about the post-war world will 
ever be translated into deeds. 

RENEWAL IN NATIONAL INTEREST. By 
Congressional renewal of the Trade Agreements Act 
before June 12 of this year, the United States would be 
enabled to pursue a policy not only in accordance with 
its commitments, but also in harmony with its own 
best interests. From 1934 to March 1943 agreements 
have been concluded with 26 foreign countries—in 
Latin America, in Continental Europe and in the Brit 
ish Commonwealth. Normally, commerce with these 
nations amounts to two-thirds of total United States 
foreign trade. The trade agreements with them meat 
that we have given economic substance to our Good 
Neighbor policy, and that we have broken through 
the trade barriers surrounding many European cout 
tries and the British Empire. Since 1934 there has 
been a marked advance in United States foreign trade 
—notably in exports—and this can be traced in pat 
at least to the operation of the Hull program. Iti 











cout 
prez 
mai 











It 


in 
uld 
ent 


“ar, 


‘ion. 
ree 
part 
id a 
ticle 
yree- 
and 
a di- 
1ina- 
> the 
din 
: ob 
dis- 
these 
lease 
tes— 
ry of 
will 


. B 
s Act 
ld be 
with 
- own 
ments 
s—in 
> Brit 


States 
mean 


rough 
cout 
re has 
trade 
n part 
.. Its 





= 





icularly significant that our exports to trade 
agreement countries have increased much faster than 
our exports to non-agreement countries. This was 
tue before the war broke out in Europe in 1939, 
and has been even more true since. The trade pro- 
gam undoubtedly constitutes a solid foundation for 
ssumption of mutually beneficial trade when victory 
jswon. At that time many of our agricultural and 
industrial producers will need foreign markets, while 
American producers and consumers will need raw 
materials and other products from abroad. 


) The continuance of wartime restrictions on trade 
in the transition period immediately following the 
end of hostilities may well limit the area in which 
trade agreements can be effective and necessitate in- 
ternational action of a more dynamic character to 
bring about the expansion of world trade. Relief and 
thabilitation at this time will probably have to be 
on the basis of lend-lease. Moreover, as a result of 
the war profound changes will take place in the 
economies of all nations. A highly industrialized 
@untry like Britain, which has long imported the 
greater part of its foodstuffs, may feel it wise to 
maintain a war-expanded agriculture; while a coun- 


THE F.P.A. 
A Study of War, by Quincy Wright. Chicago, University 
of Chicago Press, 1942, 2 vols. $15.00 
A 1300-page encyclopedia on war by a well-known expert 
om international relations. Volume I measures the impact 
of war on human society from earliest times to the present; 
volume II discusses the causes of war and its control in 
the future. A book for considered reading and reflection. 


Germany’s Master Plan—The Story of Industrial Offen- 
sive, by Joseph Borkin and Charles A. Welsh. New York, 
Duell, Sloan & Pearce, 1943. $2.75 


A fascinating account by two experts of how German 
tartels, armed by patents, launched a world industrial 
ifensive which until Pearl Harbor gave them control over 
the production of artificial rubber, light metals, plastics, 
synthetic quinine and other war materials. Documented 
but not technical in language. 


The Silent War, by Jon B. Jansen and Stefan Weyl. Phila- 
delphia, Lippincott, 1943. $2.75 


Two German Social Democrats, who must necessarily 
write under pseudonyms, give a gripping account of the 
battlefield inside Germany on which anti-Nazis have been 
struggling for a decade against Hitler, and indicate the 
shape revolution might take in the Reich. 


The Future of Industrial Man, by Peter F. Drucker. New 

York, John Day, 1942. $2.50 

A counterpart of Mr. Drucker’s previous book on eco- 
homic totalitarianism under war conditions, The End of 
Economic Man. This new and stimulating study of the in- 
dustrial society of today, especially in the United States, 
develops original approaches to a free society when peace 
tomes. The author urges that we decide now on what 
principles that society shall be based. 


Page Three 











try like China, which in the past has exported 
primary products in return for manufactures, may 
be expected to expand the consumer-goods industries 
which now supply many of its needs. But, in spite 
of these developments, it seems clear that the long- 
run task of reconstruction can be achieved only on 
the basis of two-way trade, and that the reciprocal 
trade program could play a large part in promoting 
a revival of the world’s commerce. 

As Mr. Welles said in his New York speech: 
“There is no question whatsoever that both in the 
interest of American prosperity and living standards 
and in the interest of creating conditions conducive 
to peace, we must foster trade with other countries.” 
The trade agreements program is a minimum re- 
quirement if we are to achieve these objectives. Its 
abandonment at the present time, or the adoption 
of crippling amendments, might well mark rever- 
sion to the extreme protection which did so much 
to aggravate the depression of 1929-32, and prevent 
achievement after the war of the economic objectives 
of the Atlantic Charter, the United Nations Declara- 
tion and the lend-lease agreements. 


HowaArbD P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


BOOKSHELF 


Let the People Know, by Norman Angell. New York, 
Viking Press, 1942. $2.50 


Answers the average busy citizen’s questions about the 
causes of the war and the kind of peace we are fighting 
for. A persuasive brief for collective security. 


War Words, by W. Cabell Greet. New York, Columbia Uni- 
versity Press, for Columbia Broadcasting System, 1943. 
$1.50 
In these days of war, when unfamiliar names must trip 

from the tongues of even casual speakers, this simplified 

dictionary is invaluable. 


Japan Rides the Tiger, by Willard Price, New York, John 
Day, 1942. $2.50 


A popularly written survey of the Japanese people and 
Empire, with the accent on Japan’s preparations for ag- 
gression in various parts of Asia. The author believes that 
one of Japan’s chief difficulties is the absence of true mod- 
ernization, with the sixteenth century background still 
dominating twentieth century affairs. 


Into the Valley: A Skirmish of the Marines, by John 
Hersey. New York, Knopf, 1943. $2.00 
A vivid, eye-witness account of a small segment of the 
fighting on Guadalcanal, told by a writer who spent two 
weeks on the island. Gives a strong sense of the reality 
of war. 


Prelude to Victory, by James B. Reston. New York, Alfred 
A. Knopf, 1942. $2.00 
Trenchant exposition of facts about the war and their 
implications for America which too many of us have not 


really grasped even now. One of the ablest correspondents 
speaks his mind. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 25, Apri, 9, 1943. 


One month for change of address on membership publications. 


Ses 





Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micueigs Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow ar least 


Incorporated. National 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 














Washington News Letter 














Apr. 5.—The two international conferences 
which, as announced here last week, will be held in 
the United States this month mark a modest begin- 
ning in the process of converting the United Nations 
from a literary expression into a political reality. On 
April 1 Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau re- 
vealed that representatives of the Allied nations 
have been asked to come to Washington for dis- 
cussions on post-war currency stabilization. The fol- 
lowing day Secretary of State Hull said that 38 
nations had been invited to attend a meeting to be 
devoted to post-war food problems. This food con- 
ference, which is to open April 27 and at which Russia 
and China have already announced their intention 
of being represented, will be the first general gath- 
ering of the United Nations. 

At the food conference the delegates will take up 
the least controversial of all the problems now fac- 
ing the Allies. It should not unduly tax the resources 
of statesmanship to reach agreement on some 
scheme for feeding the liberated populations after 
the military power of the Axis has been broken. But 
Washington hopes that, if an accord is arrived at on 
this comparatively simple subject, it will open the 
door to the settlement of thornier issues. In his 
speech at Toronto on February 26 Under Secretary 
of State Welles, in proposing a joint study by the 
United Nations of problems under the general head- 
ing of freedom from want, suggested that this work 
might lead to the finding of “common denominators.” 

TWO QUESTION MARKS. At present the two 
chief obstacles to attainment of this result appear to 
be uncertainty (1) in the United States regarding the 
future intentions of the U.S.S.R., and (2) in the 
other United Nations regarding the future inten- 
tions of the United States. 

It is difficult to say just how far the recent visit of 
Anthony Eden, British Foreign Secretary, succeeded in 
dissipating suspicions rampant in some quarters in 
Washington that the Soviet government intends to 
gobble up so much territory in Eastern Europe after 
the war as to nullify the principles of the Atlantic 
Charter. It is noteworthy, however, that Adolf A. 
Berle, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State, who is popu- 
larly supposed to be the head of an anti-Soviet bloc 
in the State Department, declared in a speech at 
Reading, Pa. on April 4 that the “great structure of 
a reorganized and peaceful world must inevitably 
rest” on four powers, namely the United States, 
Britain, Russia, and China. He said that in his judg- 


FOR VICTORY °* 





ment the Soviet government would not become “the 
victim of any urge to seize great additions to her 
already huge empire.” 

President Roosevelt at his press conference og 
March 30, commenting on the Eden visit, declared 
that the United Nations had achieved 95 per cent 
of complete unity. He did not specify what points 
were included in the other 5 per cent, but presum- 


ably the question of Russia’s future European fron. | 


tiers bulked large in the agenda of disagreement, 
Probably the best way to settle this matter would be 
through direct contact between the President and 
Premier Stalin. It was significant that at this same 
meeting with newspapermen Mr. Roosevelt intimated 
that he still hoped for an opportunity to meet Stalin, 
thus indirectly renewing an invitation originally ex- 
tended just before the Casablanca meeting with 
Mr. Churchill in January. 

THE “ACID TEST.” But if Russia is ‘‘an enigma 
wrapped in mystery,” our own ultimate attitude to- 
ward post-war international cooperation has the 
other United Nations guessing. Mr. Welles forcibly 
called attention to this fact in his address in New 
York on April 1 concerning renewal of the Recipro- 
cal Trade Agreements Act. 

The question of renewal of this Act, under which 
Mr. Hull has negotiated trade treaties with some 
26 nations in the past nine years, is next on the cal- 
endar of the House. Despite the fact that this Act 
was one of the few sane measures taken during the 
decade of international madness that preceded the 
outbreak of the present war, its fate is now hanging 
in the balance—as a large group of Republicans and 


Western Democrats are known to be lined up against | 


it. Since deeds speak louder than words, the vote of 
Congress on the Trade Agreements Act, even more 


than the adoption of a purely academic resolution by | 


the Senate on our readiness to participate in a post- 
war international organization, will be regarded by 
our allies as indicative of our future course of action. 
If Congress refuses to accept such a small measure 
of economic cooperation as this Act represents, the 
other United Nations will have good reason to sus- 
pect that the ultra-nationalist forces in this country 
will once more pull the United States back to a po- 


sition of political isolationism after this war as they } 


did in 1919. And once this suspicion takes root it 
the minds of our allies, it is scarcely an exaggera- 
tion to say that we will have lost the peace before 
we have even won the war. JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





(af 
gra 





Vou 


—s 


ma 
par 
cha 


Cay 
pre 


els 


its 





