M csieeal 





Lc \ 


by 
led 
ug- 
pan 
ture 
hur 
mil. 
icy. 
ties 

di- 
hite 
hich 
ash- 


t of | 


Sur- 


LD 
y to 
ions 
rted 
sug- 
ance 
ain- 


slete 


spite 
Nn on 
ene- 
neet- 
; 


“ican | 
cific 


con- 
stant 
ared 

the 
irter. 
Pres- 


yreat 


won. 
Care- 


yw is | 


) the 
J are 


t the 


from | 


ES 





{> a 
VOUS sa} aa 
* Mhovany 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Un 
"fee Ss ° ‘y 2) P4 Ay at 
, “4Cilgon PURiGwiea, ve 
"" Arbor wp, : SMNERAL tines ds 
. Z © e teeny as° * te” oe 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 














——— 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vout. XXIV, No. 51 


OcTOBER 5, 1945 





LONDON STALEMATE REVEALS HURDLES CONFRONTING PEACEMAKERS 


WASHINGTON.—The Administration in Washing- 
ton does not share the gloomy disappointment that 
characterizes most newspaper reports and comment 
on the meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers 
in London. It cannot be denied, however, that the 
sessions of the Council, which opened on Septem- 
ber 11, produced no agreement on any of the issues 
which were considered by the Foreign Ministers of 
the United States, Britain, the Soviet Union, France 
and China. The London meeting seriously raised the 
question whether peace settlements can be achieved 
by any means other than a conference restricted to 
the Big Three. For, despite Foreign Commissar 
Molotov’s agreement that France and China could 
be present at all sessions and that France should 
vote on the Italian peace treaty and the French plan 
for the control of the Ruhr, he later withdrew his 
consent to this arrangement. The Potsdam agree- 
ment, according to Mr. Molotov, excluded France 
and China from treaty discussions since they had not 
been armistice signatories. When the United States, 
Britain and France refused to accept this view, the 
meeting reached an impasse, and compromise pro- 
posals offered by Mr. Byrnes and Mr. Bevin failed 
to break the stalemate. Yet despite this disappoint- 
ing situation, none of the Allies has shown an in- 
clination to abandon international councils in favor 
of a lone-wolf policy. 

MUTUAL SUSPICIONS. Since the United Na- 
tions conference for world organization held last 
spring in San Francisco, the powers have been 
plagued by an impossible paradox—a belief that 
world affairs can be managed partly by the formula 
of Great-Power equal cooperation and universal re- 
sponsibility, and partly by the old balance-of-power 
formula. Continued reliance on a contradictory 
set of policies, national and international, would 
assure the failure of future conferences and destroy 


the doctrine of cooperation. Sharply aware of this 
possibility, the State Department probably will op- 
pose unilateral acquisition by this country of the 
islands formerly mandated to Japan. The conference 
of the Foreign Ministers of the American Republics, 
to open at Rio de Janeiro on October 20, may be used 
by the State Department as an occasion for seeing 
to it that the Act of Chapultepec is geared into an 
international system. 

Secretary of State James F. Byrnes left for the 
London meeting determined to press for solutions to 
problems by formulae of international cooperation. 
Nevertheless, he fed the controversy between the ad- 
vocates of single-handed and cooperative action by 
letting it be known that he favored permitting Italy 
to administer its former African colonies as trustee 
for the United Nations. Later Byrnes reversed his 
position, and the draft memorandum on Italy, pre- 
sented to the meeting by the United States on Sep- 
tember 15, therefore adhered strictly to an interna- 
tionalist formula. It urged that Libya and Eritrea be 
granted their independence after a 10-year trustee- 
ship period under an administrator appointed by the 
Trusteeship Council and assisted by an advisory com- 
mittee of seven, including an Italian representative. 
For Italian Somaliland, a similar arrangement was 
proposed, but without any fixed date for inde- 
pendence. 

CONFUSED INTERNATIONALIST THINK- 
ING. Demonstrations of faith in the United Nations 
formula at the meeting in the Lancaster House ball- 
room were insufficient to allay suspicions so long as 
strong mistrust existed outside Lancaster House. The 
United States and Britain found it difficult to accept 
in full faith the Soviet espousal of cooperation when 
Moscow newspapers were objecting to Western criti- 
cism of the one-party régimes in Bulgaria and Ru- 
mania as undemocratic. The U.S.S.R. also found it 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 








NR Fae LOM PM ce 











difficult to rest its hopes for security on cooperation 
with Britain and the United States at the very time 
strong voices in France and Britain were advocating 
creation of a Western bloc of states and as long as 
the United States hesitated to share its atom bomb 
secret with the Soviet Union. Retention of this secret 
Strikes the Russians as evidence either of fear of 
Russia or of bad intentions toward that country. 

The United States, as a matter of fact, has grow- 
ing confidence in its ability to get along with Russia, 
but dispatches from London report profound British 
apprehension. The weekly commentary distributed by 
the official British Information Services for Septem- 
ber 28 proposes that the United States and Britain 
act together to withstand Soviet diplomacy. Soviet- 
British mistrust at London was intensified by the 
seeming eagerness of the Russians to retain unmo- 
lested their influence over the affairs of the eastern 
European countries and by British anxiety to main- 
tain a special position in the Mediterranean and 
Red Seas. 

British concera was prompted primarily by Soviet 
Foreign Commissar Molotov’s press conference state- 


, Ment on September 18 that the Soviet Union was 


interested in Eritrea and Tripolitania. The Soviets 
further disturbed the British by proposing the ex- 
clusion of France and China from matters relating 
to southeastern Europe, although the powers ac- 
cepted on September 15 the Soviet request that the 
Council hear the representatives of Poland, the 
Ukraine and White Russia on the Italian settlement. 
Russia’s entrance into Mediterranean affairs may 
have been doubly forceful because—despite the as- 
sumption in the San Francisco charter that each great 
power has an interest in the affairs of every region— 
the Western nations have been extremely reluctant 
in consulting the Russians on questions like Tangier 
and Syria. 


The Council meeting puts the United States in the 
position of being the only power able to improve 
Anglo-Soviet relations and lead the world into a 
policy of true cooperation. However, at a time when 
the world most needs American leadership, this coun- 


Page Two 








— 
— 


try’s influence is in danger of declining. The United 
States displays little idealism in its present approach 
to world affairs, and already lacks the outstanding 
military strength it possessed only seven weeks ago 
when Japan agreed to surrender. The widespread de. 
sire of American soldiers in Germany to get out of 
the Army, together with the vagueness of the Admin. 
istration program for maintaining the Army and 
Navy in considerable peacetime strength, deepen 
Britain's reluctance to demonstrate more faith in the 
U.S.S.R. Other governments begin to wonder whether 
United States lack of interest in military matters wil] 
not soon be followed by a declining interest in for. 
eign affairs. President Truman noted this possibility 
when, at his press conference of September 25, he 
stressed the danger in a return to isolationism. 

MEETING ARRANGED IN HASTE. A techni 
cal hazard in the way of a successful Council meeting 
was the haste with which it was arranged. It opened 
so soon after the Potsdam Conference, which created 
the Foreign Ministers’ Council, that none of the dele. 
gations had time to prepare adequately for the talks, 
Aside from a draft on Italy, Secretary Byrnes took 
to London only a set of general principles applicable 
to any situation but explicit for none. There was no 
agenda beyond the Potsdam agreement that the 
Council would discuss treaties of peace for Italy, 
Bulgaria, Hungary, Rumania and Finland. The re. 
sulting atmosphere of vagueness in Lancaster House 
heightened the mistrust and uncertainty which dark- 
ened the meeting. 

Yet the delegations looked ahead to ultimate 
agreement on matters they could not settle in Lon- 
don, and the Foreign Ministers agreed to send 
their deputies to Istria to study further the prob- 
lem of Trieste, on which the Soviet Union and the 
United States advanced clashing proposals. They ar- 
ranged for the establishment at a coming meeting in 





Washington of a commission to guide policy for the 
occupation of Japan. The meeting demonstrated 
again that extraordinary patience on the part of both 
officials and peoples is an essential quality in for- 


eign relations. BLaiR BOLLES 


WHAT CHANCE FOR EFFECTIVE HEMISPHERE ACTION IN ARGENTINA? 


As reports of a mounting crisis in Buenos Aires 
reach the United States, it daily becomes more evi- 
dent that the only alternative to civil war in Argen- 
tina is decisive international action to dislodge the 
Farrell-Per6n government. That the Argentine im- 
broglio has assumed such unusual importance in the 
international scene is perhaps due to the fact that 
the world has seldom seen so striking a spectacle 
of a people and a government standing embattled 
against each other. Now that an abortive revolution 
has given the government an opportunity to move 
against its opponents—those innocent of any part 


in the “revolution” as well as those directly involved 
—it has become clear to what lengths Vice-President 
Perén and his followers are willing to go to preserve 


power. The wave of arrests which followed the dis- | 


covery on September 25 of General Arturo Rawson's 
plans for an armed uprising was calculated not to 





— aoe 


deprive Argentina of all political, business and in- 
tellectual leadership, as it first threatened to do, 


but to strike terror to the heart of the opposition, 
which showed its strength and representative char- 
acter in a remarkable street demonstration of half a 
million persons on September 19. Perhaps the 











ate 
on- 
ond 
ob- 
the 


rin 
the 
ted 
oth 
for: 


\? 
ved 
ent 


rve 


dis- 


yn's 
* to 
in- 


do, | 


ion, 
1ar- 
if a 
the 





mee 
— 





development of greatest significance in these last 
hard months has been the conversion of the con- 
servative privileged classes to the opposition. Thus it 
was not only the leaders of radical opinion in Argen- 
tina who were being sought for imprisonment by the 

lice but such leaders as the presidents of the Rural 
Society, the Stock Exchange, and the Industrial 
Union; former Foreign Ministers Carlos Saavedra 
Lamas and José Maria Cantilo; and the rectors of 
fve national universities. To the extent that this 
may signify the willingness of conservative elements 
in Argentine society to cooperate with the left in 
establishing a stable and progressive government, it 
is a fortunate circumstance for the post-Perdén era. 


FROM PASSIVE TO ARMED RESISTANCE? 
With the accession of the powerful Radical party to 
the democratic front, the ranks of the opposition are 
united. Yet there is little that can be done to bring 
about government reform through ordinary political 
channels owing to the reimposition of the state of 
siege prohibiting freedom of press and assembly, 
and to the restrictions placed on political parties by 
the Electoral Statute, announced on August 1, under 
which the state can control their organization. 
However, the calling of a combined general strike 
and lockout is contemplated, which would so 
completely paralyze the economic life of the nation 
that the military would have to hand over the gov- 
ernment to the Supreme Court. Under Argentine law 
that institution would then be required to call elec- 
tions within 90 days. Only the optimists in the op- 
position believe, however, that the government 
would tolerate a strike without resort to arms; and 
there are those, like the Argentine labor delegates to 
the World Trade Union Conference, who talk open- 
ly of armed rebellion as soon as the united demo- 
cratic forces can make concrete plans. Argentina’s 
conscript army, in the last analysis, holds the key to a 








peaceful internal solution of the existing impasse. 
| The opposition may base its hopes for the successful 
| outcome of the strike in the anticipated reluctance of 


Page Three 





Recent issues of FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS 
include— 


| FUTURE OF THE JAPANESE MANDATED 
ISLANDS, by William C. Johnstone 


GREECE: THE WAR AND AFTERMATH 
by L. S. Stavrianos 


THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE OF 
THE UNITED NATIONS—with Text of Statute 
by Philip C. Jessup 


ROOSEVELT’S FOREIGN POLICY 
by Blair Bolles 


| | THE SAN FRANCISCO CONFERENCE—with Text 
of Charter, by Vera Micheles Dean 


25¢ each 


REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 




















the enlisted man to take up arms against his own 
people in a cause for which he can have no personal 
sympathy. 


CHAPULTEPEC—POSSIBLE FORMULA. 
While the Argentine people must be the chief pro- 
tagonists in the events leading to a change in govern- 
ment, there are indications today that they would be 
less hostile to the idea of active intervention by the 
United Nations than was the case a few months ago 
when the situation did not look so dark. This sug- 
gests the advisability of re-examining inter-American 
policy toward Argentina in the light of the Farrell- 
Perén government's omission to implement its obli- 
gations under the Act of Chapultepec, and involves 
deciding whether the actions of that government are 
of purely domestic significance or constitute a threat 
to hemisphere security. If this language has the ring 
of familiarity, it is because the problem has not to 
this date been confronted and dealt with effectively. 
The failure of the Mexico City policy to stamp out 
Axis influences in Argentina has been admitted, and 
a more realistic approach is promised by the fact that 
Assistant Secretary Braden returned from Buenos 
Aires convinced that there is an ‘extremely danger- 
ous’ Nazi element which has been organized into a 
“vast Nazi-Fascist espionage network,” the existence 
of which is confirmed by official statements of the 
government itself. 


Mr. Braden has emphasized his view, based on 
first-hand acquaintance with the Argentine scene, 
that the people of that country are the best insurance 
against an extension of the underground Axis men- 
ace and should be given ample encouragement to 
settle the situation themselves. If, however, the pres- 
ent impasse should give way to civil war, the Act of 
Chapultepec offers a formula by which the American 
nations may act immediately to isolate Argentina 
from diplomatic and economic communication with 
the rest of the continent. On October 20 the Amer- 
ican Republics will convene at Rio de Janeiro to con- 
sider the question of drafting the Act of Chapultepec 
into permanent treaty form. Before that time it must 
be decided whether Argentina, as a signatory to the 
Act, shall attend a conference in which its own situa- 
tion will be in the foreground as the possible test 
case of a new regional security system. It is unlikely 
however, that the American nations will agree on 
the advisability of imposing sanctions on the recalci- 
trant member of the hemisphere union, if only be- 
cause of the practical economic considerations in- 
volved. A year ago, a similar attempt was abandoned, 
chiefly because of the urgent need of the United 
Nations for Argentine foodstuffs. Its wheat and beef 
shipments are no less vital today as Europe faces 
starvation. To find other ways of eliminating the 
very real danger to inter-American unity and peace 








TALLEST PERE ARE OEE 


SESSA ROSE 


= 


fe EP, WS: F 
Ss 


age Pore a ten maha 


eine 


ep ca eas AY 


IRS: SoSIE! hee leein ts ehte se ot 


ee sip, 


ents oe Seep EY, age 

















that the Buenos Aires government represents, with- 
out sacrificing the good will of the Argentine people, 
will severely test the statesmanship of the new men 
in the State Department charged with the direction 
of Latin American affairs. Ours Houmes 
FRANCE PROHIBITS GOVERNMENT OPIUM 
MONOPOLIES IN INDO-CHINA 


The French Provisional Government informed the 
Acting Secretary General of the League of Nations 
on July 13, 1945, that it ‘‘confirms the principle of 
absolute prohibition of opium smoking in all terri- 
tories in the Far East under French authority. This 
declaration refers in the first place to Indo-China.” 

Thus, France joins with the Netherlands and Great 
Britain in ending an ancient evil which has caused 
friction for a hundred years between European pow- 
ers and China. The unequivocal declaration by Great 
Britain in the House of Commons, November 10, 
1943, “that His Majesty's Government have now de- 
cided to adopt the policy of total prohibition of 


THE F.P.A. 


Against These Three, by Stuart Cloete. Boston, Houghton, 
Mifflin, 1945. $3.50 
The story of South Africa’s modern beginnings, woven 
about the careers of three dominant and vigorous men— 
Paul Kruger of the Boers; Cecil Rhodes, the imperialist; 
and Lobengula, the last of the Kaffir Kings. 


Claims to Territory, by Norman Hill. New York, Oxford 
University Press, 1945. $3.00 


While this book offers no solutions for frontier disputes 
arising out of World War II, Mr. Hill analyzes the 
nature of conflicting territorial claims and reviews the 
procedures available for settling such controversies. 


The Sinews of Peace, by Herbert Feis. New York, Harper, 

1944. $2.50 

The former adviser on economic affairs to the State 
Department offers in this well written book his analysis 
of future international economic problems. Great stress is 
laid on the reciprocal trade agreements policy of the 
United States, but Mr. Feis points out that each nation 
must accommodate its national aims to the greater necessi- 
ties of an international economic system. 


Solution in Asia, by Owen Lattimore. Boston, Little, 
Brown, 1945. $2.00 


An expert on Far Eastern affairs offers a highly stimu- . 


lating survey of the issues that face us in Asia. The many 
brilliant insights into current problems and their back- 
ground make this “must” reading. 


The United States in a Multi-National Economy, by Jacob 
Viner and others. New York, Council on Foreign Rela- 
tions, 1945. $2.00 


These essays contain statements by outstanding author- 
ities on international trade and finance, post-war shipping, 
the colonial problem and treatment of Germany. 


Page Four 


BOOKSHELF 








—— 
—, 


opium smoking in the British and British protected 
territories in the Far East which are now in en 
occupation,” and the Netherlands Government's de. 
laration “‘to take all necessary measures for the dis 
continuance of that habit . . . in the whole area of 
the Netherlands Indies, which measures will include 
the abolition of the Opium Monopoly,” leave only 
Portuguese Macao, Thailand and the territory form. 
erly held by Japan outside this progressive plan, 
now that France has taken its place with the other 
great powers in this matter. 

American opinion is watching with sympathetic 
interest French plans for a new relationship between 
France and Indo-China, plans which include projects 
for increasing public health services and improving 
labor standards. Suppression of the government |i- 
censed shops for sale of smoking opium will give an 
immediate tangible proof that the French govern. 
ment is sincerely interested in the physical and social 
welfare of the inhabitants. 


HELEN HOWELL MooruHeap 


Foreign Affairs Bibliography: A Selected and Annotated 
List of Books on International Relations, 1932-1942, 
New York, Council on Foreign Relations, 1945. $6.00 


Any one who wishes to follow international relations 
during this critical ten-year period can find a wealth 
of important references here. It is especially useful for 
libraries. 


Problems of the Postwar World, edited by Thomas C. T. 
McCormick. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1945. $3.75 


This symposium, prepared for the most part by members 
of the faculty of the University of Wisconsin, covers three 
wide fields: future economic problems, governmental af- | 
fairs, and international relations. Subjects treated range 
from domestic questions like unionism, taxation and eduv- 
cation to a discussion of America’s foreign policy toward 
Germany, Russia and Britain. 


Economic Lessons of the Nineteen-Thirties, by H. W. 
Arndt. New York, Oxford University Press, 1944. Is- 
sued under the auspices of the Royal Institute of Inter- 
national Affairs. $3.75 
A review of the national economic policies of the United 

States, Britain, France and Germany during and after the 

critical years of world depression. The author also briefly | 

examines international economic action taken during the 

inter-war period. ° 





| 
| 
The House of Europe, by Paul Scott Mowrer. Boston, 
Houghton, Mifflin, 1945. $3.75 
Interestingly written observations by a most interested 
“inhabitant” of Europe’s house from 1910 to 1933, while 
head of the Paris office of the Chicage Daily News. 


Europe Since 1914 in Its World Setting, by F. L. Benns. 
New York, Crofts, 1945. $6.00 


A thorough revision of an extremely valuable guide to 
significant events of a memorable period. | 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 51, Octoper 5, 1945. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National | 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MicHELes Dean, Editor, Entered a | 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


oS | 5! 





191 


\2| 


ing | 
by L 
who 
our 

decl 
eign 
back 
is st 


mar 
crit 
cata 
coll 
\ 
sess 
pro 
of 
in | 
trez 
tas] 
ber 
tor 
ene 
set 
sig 


dir 
fur 
iS 
no 
to 

si0 





