——<<< 


e con- 

fraud 
pres. 
devel. 


erican 
f met. 
rever- 
timate 
ne de. 
Amer. 
n that 
issued 
of its 
coast, 
hilean 
aining 
ipport 
hilean 
 pres- 
> Nazi 
| more 
id na- 


Latin 
asures 
Lemis- 
States 
uction 
ports, 
e ma- 
ne 28, 
of the 
, CON 
ild be 
ipping 
would 
Brazil. 
erican 
shing- 
res for 
little, 
ficient 
ht. 


PER 


York, 


perman 
t Afri- 
fort of 


National 
Davip H. 
3, 1879. 


A% Udivers ity of Nich 


Ure A Lf ant, Sishep Entered as 2nd class matter 
) be 


. 
, we 
“4507) + Wy pe ms an 


Ann Arbor Wich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXI, No. 38 


—_—_ 


JuLy 10, 1942 


FIVE YEARS OF CHINESE RESISTANCE 


le years ago, on July 7, China began its national 
resistance to Japanese aggression, undertaking a 
struggle which may well rank with the American 
Revolution in significance as well as duration. In 
the summer and autumn of 1937 the world at large 
did not understand that it was witnessing the end 
of an era in Chinese history, for attention was still 
focused on China’s weaknesses in industry, transpor- 
tation, rural economy, education, political unity and 
national development. Time has shown the greater 
importance of other, less easily observable, factors: 
the movement toward modernization, the decrease 
of internal dissension and, above all, the rising anti- 
Japanese national spirit of the Chinese people. 
WAR TESTS UNITY. This spirit has enabled 
China to meet an unending series of problems, both 
of internal and foreign origin. In 1937-38, the first 
year of war, the question was whether and by what 
methods to continue resistance after the loss of the 
economic capital at Shanghai and the political capi- 
tal at Nanking. The answer was found in the 
sorched-earth policy, guerrilla warfare, the reorgan- 
ization of the Central Armies, and the development 
Of the military and political strategy of “trading 
space for time.” In 1938-39 the capital at Hankow 
was lost, Wang Ching-wei deserted to the enemy, 
and a period of stalemate and attrition set in. China 
faced a most severe test of its purpose. It met this 
test by constructing a great base for further re- 
sistance in the hitherto backward Southwest, build- 
ing up the economies of the provinces of Szechwan, 
Yunnan, Sikang, Kwangsi and Kweichow, establish- 
ing new highways, railways, and radio and air com- 
munications, and linking the whole area with the 
outside world by completion of the Burma Road. 
During the first two years of war, China’s inter- 
national relations were relatively simple, since the 
thief problem was to appeal for aid to foreign coun- 
tries not themselves involved in active warfare. In 


1939-40, however, the Soviet Union and Germany 
signed a nonaggression pact, Britain and Germany 
became involved in war, and the United States 
adopted a policy of anti-Axis neutrality. China now 
faced the problem of securing support from coun- 
tries that were seemingly following sharply divergent 
policies. In order to maintain satisfactory relations 
with Germany and Italy and, at the same time, pro- 
mote anti-Japanese collaboration among the non- 
Axis powers, Chungking avoided taking sides in the 
European war, while indicating clearly its desire for 
a world-wide anti-Axis bloc. 

PACIFIC WAR ADDS TO PROBLEMS. The 
year 1940-41 began under very difficult circum- 
stances. The fall of France had already cut the rail- 
way link with the outside world via Indo-China. 
Soon Great Britain closed the Burma Road to. es- 
sential supplies for a three-month period. The politi- 
cal situation in China gradually deteriorated, reach- 
ing its lowest point in the winter of 1941, when the 
Chungking government sought to disband the guer- 
rilla New Fourth Army in the Yangtze valley. Al- 
though an open break was avoided, relations be- 
tween the government and the Communists have 
remained tense. Meanwhile, Japan extended its’ 
power in Indo-China and concluded a neutrality pact 
with the U.S.S.R. 

The German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941 
had the effect of bringing together once more 
the three nations which China hoped to secure as 
allies against Japan. Moreover, the United States, 
the British Empire and the Netherlands took long- 
awaited steps toward severing trade relations with 
Japan. But the outbreak of the Pacific War was fol- 
lowed by a series of Japanese victories in Southeast 
Asia, which deprived China of its Burma Road 
supply route and the financial contributions of the 
overseas Chinese, and exposed it to new Japanese at- 
tacks. Internally, the economic situation grew in- 


creasingly serious. Prices, which had risen consider- 
ably in previous years, skyrocketed in the absence 
of effective controls—and hoarding became more 
and more common. 


CHINA'S SPIRIT. In the perspective of five years, 
it appears that the decision to continue resistance 
has, at each critical point, made it possible for the 
country to surmount the various obstacles of the 
time. Without forgetting for a moment the impor- 
tance of material achievements for the prosecution 
of the war, China’s spirit may be regarded as its 
chief asset in the course of resistance. It is this un- 
broken spirit that has made possible the adoption 
of a successful defensive strategy, the internal eco- 
nomic reconstruction of the western provinces, the 
development toward democracy within the guerrilla 
areas, and the emergence of many of the charac- 
teristics of a true national state. Despite all weak- 
nesses, the Chungking government is the strongest 
administration the Republic has seen. It represents 
the greatest political unity and centralization China 
has known in the last generation—and, perhaps, in 
all its history. Beyond this, it has developed an ac- 
tive foreign policy, has established China as one of 
the “Big Four” of the anti-Axis world, and has in- 


Page Two 


et 
es 


dicated its awareness of the world-wide significance 
of China’s development toward full independence 

By engaging an important part of Japan’s armed 
forces, China has made a contribution to the freedom 
of other nations not yet equalled by the aid it has 
received. It is only natural that in recent months the 
Chinese people and government have exhibited q 
growing national consciousness and an increased de. 
termination to judge critically the actions of the 
other United Nations, particularly where China 
itself is affected. They look with concern at the un. 
solved political problems of India, and follow most 
carefully every statement of the Indian nationalist 
leaders as well as every British action, such as the 
enlargement on July 3 of the Viceroy’s Executive 
Council, and the appointment of an Indian Defense 
Minister and two Indian members of the War Cab. 
inet. They are disturbed by new difficulties in obtain. 
ing supplies as a result of Japan’s success in cuttin 
China off from the rest of the world. They are also 
anxious to be treated with complete equality in the 
councils of the United Nations. Yet, more important 
than any of these problems is their resolution to con- 
tinue the struggle, for the Chinese realize that this is 
the only road to their own freedom. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


NAZI DRIVE IMPERILS SOUTHERN RUSSIA 


As the Germans intensify their drive into south- 
ern Russia, and continue to threaten the Suez Canal, 
the United Nations are fast approaching the zero 
hour long predicted for this summer. The fall of 
Sevastopol, admitted by the Russians on July 5, de- 
prived the U.S.S.R. of its principal remaining naval 
base in the Black Sea, and gave the Germans com- 
mand of the Crimea, springboard for an attack on 
the Caucasus. The Germans have lost no time in 
pressing their advantage in Russia. On July 7 the 
Germans reported capture of Voronezh, on the 
Moscow-Rostov railway. Here, as in the Crimea, 
the main objective of the Germans is the oil of the 
Caucasus. Should Russia lose its supply of oil, the 
highly mechanized Russian armies would be placed 
in a perilous position, and so would Russia’s 
mechanized collective farms. The Nazis hope to an- 
nihilate Russia’s offensive power, or at least immo- 


With the vast international machinery now being 
forged, can we achieve a workable union? For an 
appraisal from the point of view of post-war re- 
construction, read: 


MACHINERY OF COLLABORATION BETWEEN 
THE UNITED NATIONS by Payson S. Wild, Jr. 


25c¢ 


July 1 issue of ForeicN Poticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


bilize the Russians, and thus, at one stroke, avoid 
another winter campaign in Russia and release 
troops for operations in Western Europe. The Ger- 
mans still enjoy superiority in war material on the 
Russian front, where they are making large-scale 
use of their air force, whose exact location during 
the past few weeks had mystified Allied observers. 
The Russians may be expected to continue thei 
stubborn and courageous resistance, but American 
public opinion should be prepared for Russian te- 
treats into the interior of the country, unless Britain 
and the United States succeed in diverting German 
forces to Western Europe. The Russians claim that 
German losses on the eastern front—killed, wound: 
ed and captured—total several million. Responsible 
observers in this country place the number of dead 
at over a million—as compared with the figure of 
337,342 officially announced by the Germans last 
week. (The German figure includes only dead and 
missing, and does not mention men wounded of 
captured. ) 

BRITISH STRIKE BACK IN EGYPT. The suc- 
cess or failure of Nazi plans will depend not only on 
events in Russia, but on other fronts as_ well, 
especially in Egypt. Hard-pressed British soldiers, 
who lost 50,000 killed, wounded or captured in the 
present campaign, with great loss of war material, 
temporarily turned the tide of battle last weekend 
at El Alamein, 70 miles from the British naval base 


— 


at Alex 
crews, ¢ 
from th 
Army h 
as suftic 
Shou 
wrest C 
they w< 
over th 
this the 
cussion 
has bee 
were ac 
over, if 
Alexan 
this ha 
Pierre 
laborat 
not av: 
Vichy 
men at 
for use 
NA; 
Perhar 
cesses 
have | 
threate 
regard 
tually 
Navy | 
lacks 
naval 
the Br 
down 
As 
that te 
with < 


cessful 
attem] 
mans 
Medit 
the In 
line f 
Persia 
and ) 
off fre 
mome 
the oi 

Mr 
the L: 
July < 


—— —— Page Three 


ficance} at Alexandria. Reinforced by American planes and 

dence | crews, and by fresh contingents of troops rushed in F.P.A. Radio Schedule 

armed} from the Near and Middle East, the British Eighth Subject: NEW MOVES ON FAR EAST FRONT 

eedom} Army held off the Germans, but was not regarded y-acag nrg ois 

it has} as sufficiently strong to drive them back into Libya. Ai ae i E.W.T., over Blue Network 

ths the Should the Germans capture Alexandria and We regret to announce that, because of a rearrange- 
ited a\ wrest control of the Suez Canal from the British, ment in the Blue Network's programs, the FPA’s “Amer- 
sed de-y they would be in a position to establish domination yo teage jars tee be temporarily discontinued 
of the! over the eastern Mediterranean. British defeat in 


China | this theatre of war might also have disastrous reper- 
the un-j| cussions among the Arabs, and in Turkey, which 
Ww most | has been acting on the assumption that British forces 
ionalist | were adequate to meet the German onslaught. More- 
as the} over, if the British fleet should be withdrawn from 
ecutive | Alexandria (German sources claimed last week that 
Defense | this had already been done), General Franco and 
ir Cab. } Pierre Laval would feel more free than ever to col- 
obtain: | laborate with Hitler. While specific information is 
cutting} not available on this point, it is reported that the 
ite also} Vichy government aided the Nazis by transporting 
in the} men and equipment across France to French Tunisia 
portant} for use in Libya and Egypt. 


concern about what are regarded .s disastrous mis- 
takes in leadership. In the United States, where opin- 
ion tends to swing from extreme optimism to ex- 
treme pessimism, British setbacks aroused even more 
outspoken comment. The real weakness of the Brit- 
ish is not lack of courage among soldiers or civilians, 
who have successfully withstood many grueling 
tests, but the consistent tendency of British military 
and political leaders to underestimate the strength 
and determination of the Axis powers. All the stric- 
tures made against British officials, however, apply 
with equal force to the United States. The United 


Nations, or rather certain of their leaders, have yet 
to con} NAZI ATTEMPTS TO CUT SUPPLY LINES. to learn that they are confronted by desperate ene- 


t this is Perhaps the most far-reaching result of Nazi suc- mies who will not stop at any sacrifice in terms of 
cesses in Africa is that Germany, whose victories men and material to achieve their ends. The striking 
NGER J}have hitherto been won primarily on land, now thing is that the people of Britain and the United 
threatens to outmaneuver the British in what was States have sensed this more clearly than some of 
oil regarded as Britain’s element—the sea. Without ac- their leaders. Their growing desire to make all-out 
‘rele tually entering into major clashes with the British sacrifices to win the war—and the peace after the 
1 Gal Navy in the Mediterranean—for which the Axis still war—must be harnessed to the war effort before the 
yee a lacks sufficient strength, in view of Italy's heavy United Nations can find the road to victory. 
7e-scll naval losses—the Nazis are systematically depriving VERA MICHELES DEAN 
" dus wm _— and = bases, and are whittling FPA PRESIDENT HEADS MILITARY COMMISSION 
°1 down their lines o 
—.. .. , General Frank R. McCoy, President of the Foreign 
; A similar effort to break down the supply lines % tent: os a 
e their aye! Policy Association, will be absent temporarily in 
r that tenuously connect Britain and the United States eB = a 
merican} : Washington, due to his appointment by President 
with other United Nations has already been suc- . i Fi 
sian fe- 9 , Roosevelt as head of the military commission to try 
+. , cessfully made by Japan in China, and is now being 2 / 
Britain ; Peake . the eight recently captured Nazi saboteurs. 
Serman | ‘tempted by Germany in Russia. Should the Ger- . 
mm that | @a%S succeed in establishing control over the eastern NEW RESEARCH STAFF MEMBERS 
woul Mediterranean, and penetrate into the Red Sea and The Association announces with pleasure the ap- 
sonsifill the Indian Ocean, they could sever the new supply pointment to the Research Department of Howard 
of dell line from the United States to Russia through the P. Whidden, Jr., research associate on the British 
cure i Persian Gulf, served by American bases in the Near Empire, and Lawrence K. Rosinger, Far Eastern 
as a and Middle East. The Russians might thus be cut specialist. Mr. Whidden has studied in Canada and 
ANIS le ° ° ° i. ° . ° 
od a off from the United Nations in this area, at the very in London, and received his Ph.D. from Harvard 
‘ded or | Moment when they face a crucial test for defense of University, where he taught from 1940 to 1942. Mr. 
1c : _ . . 
the oil of the Caucasus. Rosinger, the author of many articles on the Far East, 
"he aa Mr. Churchill, survived sharp British criticism of has done extensive work with the Institute of Pacific 
only a the Libyan disaster, winning a vote of confidence on Relations and has been on the staff of the India Gov- 
— july 2, although the British press reflected growing ernment Trade Commissioner’s Office, New York. 
soldiers, 


1 ‘ the FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 38, Juty 10, 1942. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 
qd in Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretar) 
naterial, Popper, Associate Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921 
Three Dollars a Year. 


veekend Suis 
val base 


Association, Incorporated. National 
Vera MICHELES Dean, Editor; Davi H. 
, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


_ JuLty 6.—The British reverses in Libya have com- 
pletely dissipated the earlier feeling of easy com- 
placency observable in Washington that the war 
would be won this year without undue effort on our 
part. It is now generally recognized that the conflict 
will be long and grim, and that the United Nations 
will be doing exceedingly well if, at the end of the 
year, they have succeeded in holding the Axis powers 
on approximately their present positions. This senti- 
ment was voiced by Senator Josh Lee of Oklahoma 
who said in the course of a debate in the Senate on 
the fall of Tobruk that “we have been too optimistic 
all along,” and that we “might just as well face the 
facts” that the United States must lay plans for a 
war of a minimum duration of five years and for the 
raising of an army of 10,000,000 men. 

To one who lived in Paris during the winter of 
1939-40, there is a striking similarity between the 
facile optimism that prevailed in the French capital 
during the first months of the war and the com- 
placency that was so evident in Washington this 
spring. Life went on much as usual in Paris during 
the first year of the war, the blackout was a joke, 
rationing was scarcely applied at all, and during the 
winter people danced at the night clubs of Mont- 
martre and Montparnasse just as in peacetime. The 
fashionable hotels of Washington reflect the same 
atmosphere of gaiety now, and the war seems as re- 
mote to Washington today as it did to Paris in the 
autumn of 1939. 


In those days Paul Reynaud, the French Finance 
Minister, had the walls of Paris plastered with 
posters, showing in red the huge areas of the world’s 
surface controlled by the Allies and in black the tiny 
patch in Central Europe that Germany occupied. 
Below was the encouraging caption, “we will win, 
because we are the stronger.” Those placards 
seemed to Frenchmen a masterpiece of irony when 
the Nazi troops poured into Paris the following June. 

But in the days of what was then known as the 
“phoney war,” the Parisians had unthinking con- 
fidence that superiority in raw materials would win 
the war for them, just as many Washingtonians 
believed that the mere voting of huge appropria- 
tions by Congress and the turning out of vast quan- 
tities of war supplies by the nation’s factories would 
be sufficient in themselves to beat Hitler. Frenchmen 
had the same blind faith in the invulnerability of 
their Maginot Line that a great many Americans still 
have in the protection of the two oceans. Hitler de- 
liberately refrained from bombing Paris during the 


first eight months of the war, because he did not 
want to arouse the French from their apathy and 
make them war-conscious. It is a striking fact that 
until now the cities of the Atlantic seaboard haye 
not been submitted to the ordeal of air raids, al. 


though military experts admit that the Nazis could | 


bomb Washington and New York, if they desired 
to do so. 

The fall of Tobruk had in Washington the effect, 
to borrow Thomas Jefferson's simile, of a fire-alarm 
bell at midnight. Its lessons were obvious. Field 
Marshal Erwin Rommel had triumphed, despite ad- 
mitted British superiority in numbers of men and 


guns, because of abler leadership and the better | 


quality of his tanks. The battle of Libya provided 
convincing evidence that men and quality of equip- 
ment, not money, win battles. Coupled with the dan- 
gerous rise in shipping losses recently inflicted by 
Axis submarines off the American coast and the occu- 
pation of the outer fringes of the Aleutian islands by 
the Japanese, the German invasion of Egypt has had 
the effect of arousing Washington from its dream of 
false security and making it realize that the war can 
be lost unless the nation is prepared, as the French 
obviously were not, to wage total war. 
JOHN ELLIOTT 


[ JOHN ELLIOTT, who will contribute a W AsHING- 
TON News LETTER every two weeks, is a member of 
the Washington Bureau of the New York Herald 
Tribune. He has served with the London Bureau of 
the Herald Tribune, 1923-24; as its Berlin corre- 
spondent, 1926-35; as its Paris correspondent and 
European editorial manager, 1935-40; and as its cor- 
respondent in Vichy through 1941.—Ed. ] 


Behind the Urals: An American Worker in Russia’s City 
of Steel, by John Scott. Boston, Houghton, Mifflin Co, 
1942. $2.75 


The story of an American worker who witnessed the 
painful and costly construction of Magnitogorsk and other 
heavy industrial centers in the rich territory east of the 
Ural Mountains. The book discloses much interesting in- 
formation on the new Soviet industries, and bears the 
stamp of honest and objective reporting. 


Democracy’s Battle, by Francis Williams. New York, Vik- 
ing Press, 1941. $2.75 
A stimulating discussion of why democracy failed im 
central Europe, its weaknesses in Britain, and its future, 
written by a rising progressive British thinker. 


Our Enemy Japan, by Wilfred Fleisher. New York, Double- 
day, Doran, 1942. $2.00 


A distinguished and experienced Tokyo journalist, who 
also covered the Nomura-Hull negotiations in Washington, 
presents fresh and illuminating material on Japan—its 
politics, policies and personalities. 


Vou. X. 


_ 
in 
flercen 
as to 
Nazis 
sible t 
in the: 
divisic 
up to 
winter 
to spe 
ond f1 
ority 1 
some 
Ruma 
their « 
NA 
obvior 
more 


borde 
tories 
conqu 
Germ 
chine 
contr: 
indus 
Russi 
been 

been 

polic 
tweet 
the i 
temp 
Russ: 
| base 

signe 
mies 

and 1 
long 


