n 1933, 
ites and 
hom he 
> future 
resident 


te ina ; 


slem in 
epublics 
ne revo- 
el. The 
eported 
)gnition 
gs with 
O COOp- 
tter, its 
he case, 
by Avra 
na. 
nent of 
$ agents 
» Good 
ry Hull 
to, his 
; would 
»f Gen- 
follow- 
ontinue 


)LLES 


DS 


YUN 19 1944 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


‘ Fam > 3 
wa ge. 
: — : 
weet 


Ann Arbor, Michican sz 


General Library 


University of Michigan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIII, No. 35 


JuNE 16, 1944 


FRENCH POLITICAL ISSUES UNRESOLVED AS ALLIED ARMIES ADVANCE 


‘ THE invasion of France which, according to Al- 


lied military authorities is proceeding satisfac- 
torily; the advance of the Allies into northern Italy; 
the Russian offensive in Finland, launched on June 
9; and the visit of Polish Premier Mikolajczyk to 
Washington, where he arrived on June 5—all reveal 
the increasingly obvious fact that the United Nations 
have been less successful in solving the political than 
the military problems of invasion. This has proved 
particularly true in those areas of Europe where 
doubts exist as to the character and composition of 
the governments that may assume power following 
liberation from Nazi rule. 


U.S. POLICY ON FRANCE. President Roose- 
velt’s announcement on June 11 that he had invited 
General de Gaulle, now in London, to visit Wash- 
ington in the near future does not foreshadow any 
tadical change in this country’s policy toward France. 
This policy has been most recently expressed by Sec- 
retary of State Hull in his radio address of April 9, 
when he said that he and President Roosevelt were 
“disposed to see the French Committee of National 
Liberation exercise leadership to establish law and 
order under the supervision of the Allied Comman- 
der-in-Chief,”” General Eisenhower. Mr. Hull’s state- 


ment was implemented by General Eisenhower who, 


| in his proclamation of June 9 to the citizens of 


France, declared that “it will be for the French 
people to provide their own civil administration and 
to safeguard my troops by the effective maintenance 
of law and order.” He added that “members of the 


French Military Mission attached to me”—presum- 


ably representing the French Committee of National 
Liberation—‘‘will furnish assistance to this end.” 
Once victory has been achieved, he said, “the French 
people will be free to choose at the earliest possible 
moment, under democratic methods and conditions, 
the government under which they wish to live.” To 
dispel the latent fear that the Allies might use some 


‘‘collaborationists,” General Eisenhower said that 
“those who have made common cause with the 
enemy and so betrayed their country will be re- 
moved.” 

In spite of these declarations, many Americans 
continue to be puzzled by the reluctance of the Wash- 
ington Administration to recognize the French Com- 
mittee in Algiers, if not as the de jure government 
of France, at least as a provisional régime subject to 
review by the French people through freely-held 
elections. One explanation is that President Roose- 
velt has found it difficult to obtain the cooperation 
of General de Gaulle, who is not an easy person to 
deal with. Far more significant is Mr. Roosevelt's 
profound conviction, based on information he con- 
siders to be authentic, that there are many people in 
France who, while stubbornly hostile to the Nazis 
and to the Vichy régime, are not ready, for a variety 
of reasons, to accept General de Gaulle. Acting on 
this conviction, the President is said to feel that our 
future relations with France will be far more en- 
dangered by recognition of de Gaulle, and his arrival 
on French territory under our auspices, than by his 
non-recognition. This, clearly, is a matter of judg- 
ment and opinion. Only when France’s principal 
cities have been liberated, and the French people are 
free to make their views known without fear or 
favor, will it be possible to say whether the President 
has been correct in estimating what is admittedly a 
highly complex situation. Meanwhile, the United 
States has probably gone as far as is now practicable 
in giving the French Committee of National Libera- 
tion top priority, so to speak, to re-establish civilian 
administration in the wake of Allied invasion—sub- 
ject to the emergence of other patriotic groups which 
may not see eye to eye with de Gaulle. 


DISSATISFACTION IN ALGIERS. This only 
partial—and all too often grudging—acknowledg- 
ment of the role General de Gaulle has played since 


ua 


BS 
ih: 
; 
y! 

Af 

4 

ie, 

‘ta 
; 
way 
- 

; 
£An 
: 

4 BT) 
ve 
t 
ag. 
f 
aa 
aN 
: 
EE 
oe. 
‘ 
Le 
, 
id 
i 


ee ee oe ok 
= }—S-- a ee 6 
beaut re, ert a 


the darks days of June 1940 as spokesman for the 
Free French is understandably displeasing to the 
General and many of his supporters. The already 
tense situation has not been made any more easy by 
the sensitiveness of the French who, after suffering 
so + maaan from military defeat, are now eager 
to demonstrate their independence and recover their 
national prestige. Americans have not always been 
sufficiently aware of this sensitiveness, nor have they 
always displayed the infinite tact and patience re- 
quired under the circumstances. Now that the Allies 
are actually on French soil, it is also natural that 
General de Gaulle should want to assert as much 
authority as possible by declaring that his Committee 
is the Provisional Government of France, and by pro- 
testing—as he did on June 10—against administra- 
tion of liberated France by the Allied Commander- 
in-Chief. 

It is unfortunate that, owing to this deadlock, the 
United States and Britain were unable to work out 
with de Gaulle, in advance, the details of post- 
invasion civilian administration, as has been done 
in the case of Belgium, Holland and Norway. One 
of the many issues that may arise between the French 
Committee, which regards itself as trustee for the 
French people, and the Allied High Command, is 
the use of special Allied currency, which has not 
been sanctioned by the Committee, and which it 
threatens to repudiate. Another issue is the refusal so 
far of the United States to restrict expenditures by 
American troops in France. American soldiers draw 
much higher pay than their British and Canadian 
comrades and, unlike them, do not have part of their 

ay withheld at home. As a result, American troops 
in North Africa—as in other areas where they are 
stationed—have spent freely, thus causing a sharp 
rise in prices and the practical disappearance of many 
consumers’ goods, with consequent hardship and re- 
sentment on the part of French and native inhab- 
itants. General de Gaulle wants to prevent a similar 
development, on a much larger scale, in France, and 
it would have been a gracious gesture for the United 
States to have complied with his request. American 
military commanders, however, apparently fear that 
restrictions on the use of soldiers’ pay might lower 
the morale of their forces—and have chosen what 
they regard as the lesser of two evils. 


Page Two — 


POLICY TOWARD FINLAND AND POLAND. 
Complex and painful as are the issues at stake in 
our relations with France, they are at least subject in | 
some measure to decision by the United States. Far 
more delicate is the present state of our relations 
with Finland and Poland, both of which are now in 
the path of actual or potential Russian offensives, 
and are regarded by the U.S.S.R. as within its zone 
of strategic security. The United States which, unlike 
Russia and Britain, is not at war with Finland, ap- 
parently decided to place the Finns in the category 
of enemy belligerents following Helsinki’s decision 


to reject Moscow’s peace terms; and on June 10 the | 


State Department referred to the “pro-German sym. 
pathies of the Finnish government and its leaders.” 
Some observers believe that the Russian offensive 
may force the resignation of Premier Linkomies, 
whose government declined to make peace with 


Russia, and the establishment of a more conciliatory | 


régime. Caught in a cross-fire between two hostile 
great powers—Germany and Russia—the Finns, who 
have enjoyed traditional sympathy in this country, 
are paying the price paid by many other small na- 
tions for their inability to preserve freedom of action 
in a world at war. Similar difficulties face the govern- 
ment of Premier Mikolacjzyk, that claims to have the | 
support of the Polish underground, but has been un- | 
able to come to terms with Moscow which, mean- 
while, reiterates its desire for a strong, friendly Po 
land in the post-war world. 

Both the Finns and Poles know from bitter experi- 
ence that they can expect short shrift from the Nazis. 


But their centuries-old controversies with Russia do 


not promise them a happier post-war alternative, 


United States, can give them some assurance that 
they will be able to enjoy relative freedom once Ger- 
many has been defeated. Such freedom they can en- 


unless Russia, in collaboration with Britain and the | 


joy only if the great powers themselves feel secure | 


against the renewal of German aggression. The 
events of every succeeding day make it more and 
more clear that if the United Nations are to work 
out the problems of political strategy successfully, 


they must speed the creation of an international , 
organization which would offer some measure of | 


security to all nations, great and small. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


ITALIAN POLITICAL CHANGES POINT TOWARD DEMOCRATIC REVIVAL 


As Allied troops sweep north of Rome in pursuit 
of the routed Germans, the Italian political situation 
is entering a new phase. The more important posi- 
tion now secured by the six parties comprising the 
Committee of National Liberation suggests that they 
acted wisely last April, when they swallowed their 
distaste for the King and Premier Badoglio in order 
to win a greater voice in the settlement of Italian 


affairs. Recent changes also indicate that the Allies 


are allowing the Italian parties considerable leeway 
in reshaping the administration, even though the 
greater part of the country remains a theatre of wat. 

CHANGE WITHOUT CRISIS. The liberation of 
Rome on June 4 was followed by a series of signifi- 
cant events. On June 5, King Victor Emmanuel Ill 
withdrew from public life, in accordance with his 
promise of April 12 that he would retire when 
Allied troops entered Rome. Although not actually 


pressi 
that h 
the sl 
IT. 
brigh' 
fact t 
tule, : 
able 
Nazis 
Allie 
who | 
with 
Fifth 
north 
ized 
ceivir 
from 
conte 
a bac 
wher 


nd, ap- 
ategory 
lecision 
10 the 
in sym- 
aders,” 
ffensive 
komies, 
e with 
iliatory 
hostile 
1s, who 
ountry, 
all na- 
F action 
povern- 


ave the | 


een un- 
mean- 
dly Po- 


experi- 


- Nazis. 


ssia do 


mative, 


ind the | 


ce that 
ce Ger- 


Can en | 


secure 


n. The | 


re and 
9 work 


ssfully, 


ational , 


ure of | 


JEAN 


VAL 
leeway 
gh the 
of war. 
tion of 
signif 
uel Til 
ith his 
. when 
ctually 


ee. 


abdicating, the King designated his son, Crown 
Prince Humbert, as his Lieutenant General to ‘‘exer- 
cise all royal prerogatives.” On June 8, when Hum- 
bert, Badoglio and leaders of the six parties arrived 
in Rome from Naples, it became apparent that the 
continuance of Badoglio as Premier would be in- 


_ acceptable to the popular groups. 


Consequently, on June 9 Ivanoe Bonomi, 71-year 
old liberal chairman of the Committee of National 
Liberation in Rome, replaced Badoglio and set to 
work on the organization of a coalition government 
continuing the régime established at Salerno but on a 
broader basis. The new Premier, who had been ac- 
tive in politics in pre-fascist days and lived in retire- 
ment during Mussolini’s rule, declared that the pro- 
gram of his cabinet would be “to bring back de- 
mocracy to Italy, to do away with everything fascist 
and to see that the war effort continues.” While ex- 
pressing appreciation of Badoglio’s efforts, he stated 
that his government would not include “anyone with 
the slightest tinge of fascism.” 

ITALIANS AID OWN LIBERATION. The 
brightest aspect of the Italian domestic scene is the 
fact that, despite more than two decades of fascist 
tule, some sections of the Italian people have proved 
able to organize effective resistance against the 
Nazis. In Rome—as in Naples many months ago— 
Allied troops were welcomed by Italian guerrillas, 
who had already played a valuable role in interfering 
with German communications while General Clark's 
Fifth Army was approaching the city. Moreover, in 
northern Italy, guerrillas are engaged in well-organ- 
ized activity to drive out the Germans and are re- 
ceiving arms, explosives, food, clothing and money 
from the Allies. The Italian people, on whom much 
contempt was lavished because they fought badly in 
a bad cause, give evidence of knowing how to fight 
when the cause is their own. 

The Italian reaction against fascism and the Nazis 
helps to explain the spirit of President Roosevelt's 
tadio address of June 5 on the fall of Rome, when 


Page Three 


For a survey of the post-war objectives of Belgium, 
Czechoslovakia, France, Greece, the Netherlands, 


Norway, Poland and Yugoslavia, READ: 
POST-WAR PROGRAMS OF EUROPE’S 
UNDERGROUND 
by Winifred N. Hadsel 


25c 


FOREIGN Policy Reports, Vol. XIX, No. 17 
REPORTS afe issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


he said: “We want and expect the help of the future 
Italy toward lasting peace. All the other nations op- 
posed to fascism and nazism ought to help to give 
Italy a chance.” He indicated also that the Allies had 
planned carefully for economic relief in Rome and 
other liberated areas of Italy, hoping that such aid 
“will be an investment for the future.” There can be 
no doubt that smooth handling of Italian problems 
of livelihood by the Allies in cooperation with the 
Bonomi cabinet will make it much easier to deal with 
new political issues. 

THE ROAD AHEAD. It must be recognized that 
Italy is still only in the early stages of its reawaken- 
ing and that the thorniest problems of political unity 
and economic reconstruction remain to be faced. Yet, 
it is worth noting that the issue of the King, which 
loomed so large several months ago, seems no longer 
to stand in the way of governmental action. The 
future of the House of Savoy, however, appears in- 
creasingly doubtful, especially since the sections of 
the country where anti-monarchist sentiment 1s 
strongest still remain to be liberated. An indication 
of the current trend of feeling may be seen in the 
fact that the new cabinet, unlike the one established 
in Salerno, has taken an oath of loyalty to the nation, 
not to the throne. 

Only after the full liberation of the country—in- 
cluding the industrialized north with its densely pop- 
ulated, politically active cities—will it really be pos- 
sible to judge accurately the strength and character 
of the forces at play. Meanwhile, it is to be ex- 
pected that the Bonomi-cabinet will itself undergo 
reorganization as more and more of Italy is freed. 
The important fact today is that the incorporation 
of Rome into the territory reclaimed from the Nazis 
has taken place without a political crisis, although 
not without significant political changes. Whatever 
difficulties the future may bring, this is a good sign 
not only for Italy, but also for the Allies who, at a 
time of great battles, could ill afford to face the type 
of political crisis that existed several months ago. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


My Revolutionary Years, by Madame Wei Tao-ming. New 
York, Scribner’s, 1943. $2.75 
Absorbing autobiography of the wife of the Chinese 
Ambassador to the United States, covering the period 
from her participation in terroristic activity against the 
Manchus down to recent years. 


The Use of Presidential Power, 1789-1943, by George Fort 
Milton. Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1944. $3.00 
By describing how Presidents have acted in critical in- 

stances the author gives a good idea of the way in which 

constitutional powers have been interpreted. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 35, Jung 16, 


1944, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Legt, Secretary; Vera Micuetes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


One month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


ERP 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


i 


| 
;| 
| 
i | 
| 
ad 
q 


one ee ca ne “ a 
a 


ont a. 


ah - ene 


a ee eee 


Washington News Letter 


DEBATE OPENS ON FORMS OF WORLD ORGANIZATION 


The Administration will be faced during the com- 
ing presidential campaign with the problem of con- 
vincing the American people that its program for 
post-war organization of the world is safe and wise. 
Doubts are being expressed here and in Britain that 
lasting peace can be founded on the system of great- 
power control of world affairs through an executive 
council such as that advocated on May 23 by Prime 
Minister Churchill and thought to be supported by 
President Roosevelt. 

The American debate on the nature of collabora- 
tion is getting under way on the eve of conversations 
among representatives of the United States, Britain, 
Russia and China looking toward agreement on the 
great-power council method of world organization. 
These talks are expected to begin in July. Mean- 
while, the British Foreign Office is reported to op- 
pose Churchill's suggestion that three regional com- 
mittees responsible to the great-power council be set 
up to assist in preserving order—a committee for 
Europe, a committee for the Far East, and a com- 
mittee for the Americas. It is feared that, should 
such a committee be set up in Europe, it might de- 
velop into a balance of power arrangement. Some 
members of the British Foreign Office also ask how 
Canada, a British Dominion, would fit into an organ- 
ization of the American Republics. In the Far East, 
China is the only country available to control the 
committee, and it is thought that China may not be 
ready for such a task. 

REPUBLICAN SENATORIAL DOUBTS. To im- 
prove the prospects for adoption by this country of 
the Administration program, Secretary of State Hull 
has opened conversations with selected Democratic 
and Republican members of the House of Repre- 
sentatives headed by Speaker Sam Rayburn and 
Minority Leader Joseph W. Martin. These executive- 
legislative meetings followed talks between Mr. Hull 
and eight Senators who, President Roosevelt said on 
May 30, conducted themselves on a high level of 
non-partisanship during the discussion. 

However, the Administration’s hopes that the Sen- 
atorial talks would result in outspoken bi-partisan 
acceptance of the post-war program have not been 
realized. Alone among the Republican members 
of the Senatorial liaison committee, Warren Austin 
of Vermont has indicated approval of the Hull pro- 
posals. On June 6 he advocated immediate establish- 
ment of a world organization on the basis of an 
agreement among the United States, Britain, Russia 
and China. Other minority members of the commit- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


tee, Arthur Vandenberg and Wallace White, Repub. 
licans, and Robert M. LaFollette, Jr., Progressive, 
remain unconvinced that the program is workable, 
They declined Mr. Hull’s invitation to sign a state. 
ment approving the program. 


DEBATE IS FORECAST. While many leading 
political figures might oppose the Administration's 
program because they would oppose any form of 
collaboration, it is nevertheless true that a debate is 
developing among sincere friends of international 
action concerning the nature and purpose of col. 
laboration. The principal issue at stake is whether 
the international organization which the nations in- 
tend to set up will have a broad or narrow purpose. 

Admiral William D. Leahy, the President's Chief 
of Staff, indicated on June 5 that the Administration 
thinks the proposed world organization should have 
narrow objectives. In a speech at Mt. Vernon, Iowa, 
he said that the organization should be “‘simple and 
directed solely toward” preventing international war. 
He added that it should not be burdened with the 
extra tasks assigned to the League of Nations, which 
tried “to accomplish too many things in an approach 
to the millenium.” Leahy’s views run counter to 
those of Sumner Welles, former Undersecretary of 
State, who in an address in New York City on May 


18 deplored the failure of the United States, Britain 


and Russia to formulate a political agency represen- 
tative of all the United Nations. 

The Republican Convention undoubtedly will 
throw some light on the political effect of the cur- 


rent debate and perhaps influence the administration | 


in the international conversations. Senator Vanden- 
berg expressed the view on April 28 that the Re- 
publicans would stand on the Mackinac Resolution 
of last September, which stated the need for col- 
laboration so long as it does not impair this coun- 


try’s sovereignty. Gov. Thomas E. Dewey, leading ) 
candidate for the Republican nomination, spoke on 


April 28 in favor of international collaboration on a 
basis of equality among all the nations, while Lt. 
Comdr. Harold E. Stassen has advocated a broad in- 
ternational agency to accomplish a variety of objec- 
tives beyond the limited task of keeping the peace 
by force. The public statements of another candidate 
for the Republican nomination, Governor John 
Bricker, indicate that he favors the use of sovereign 
armies of the major states to enforce peace but 
Opposes an international police force. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


1918 


