


y 
J FOREIGN 


| Ann Arbor, Mich. 


POLICY BULLETIN 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


’ ~ “ 
Dr. William W. Bishop De 


% University of Michigan Library 


S 











- also An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
plied FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
e de. 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
mister ___ 
many | Vou. XX, No. 52 OcToBER 17, 1941 
ction, 
‘ GERMAN ARMIES AIM SMASHING BLOW AT MOSCOW 
> KUS- 


° that [N what Hitler has characterized as “the lase great, 
ed t) + decisive battle of the year” Germany's armies are 
ion i, | engaged in a powerful and desperate drive to cap- 
yf al] ture Moscow before the advent of the bitter Russian 
to the Winter. Heralded in the Fuehrer’s speech of Octo- 
ist he bet 3, the Nazi offensive has now been underway 
e only more than two weeks. In this crucial campaign the 
ports Germans are reported to be employing 3,000,000 
tok jp men as well as the major part of their air force and 
nansk mechanized divisions. At least four Nazi columns are 
ange advancing from the south, the southwest, the west 
miles and northwest in an effort to surround the Russian 
mile; capital, and to envelop and annihilate the main Soviet 
is stil] armies in a series of pincer movements. 
n may THE STAKES. In the bitter fighting now proceed- 
Vladi- ing, the stakes are large. Moscow is the administra- 
even | tive heart of the Soviet Union. It is the hub of 
by sa | Russia's vast railway network and the center of im- 
on the! portant munitions industries including, particularly, 
ranian| the manufacture of aircraft. Moscow has come to 
pli symbolize and epitomize Soviet Russia. Its fall might 
aul to} not only enable the German armies to overrun virtu- 
olume| ally all of European Russia, but would also deal a 
irpose. | severe blow to Soviet prestige and morale. 
Nazi forces have advanced steadily in spite of 
i stubborn resistance. While the German experience 
’) with Leningrad warns that the subjection of Moscow 
Be dit will be no easy task, Soviet authorities have not dis- 
‘ guised the seriousness of the situation. Despite opti- 
| Mistic statements in Washington and London about 
| the extent of American and British assistance that is 


inslate | 


ncour- 
battle 


ble a being, and will be, given, Soviet officials probably 
ial | tealize that the battle for Moscow must be fought 


~ almost wholly with Russian resources. Meanwhile, 
they are faced with another dangerous German thrust 
ations, in the south, where the army of Marshal von Rund- 
a stedt, supported by Hungarian, Rumanian and Ital- 

lan divisions, has been making rapid progress along 
LDE | the shores of the Sea of Azov. This Nazi drive is 


imperiling the Donets industrial basin and comes 
dangerously close to the important city of Rostov 
at the mouth of the River Don. Through Rostov 
runs the only rail connection between Russia and the 
Caucasus, which still produces 85 per cent of the So- 
viet Union's oil supplies. If this city falls into the 
hands of the enemy, the U.S.S.R. will be compelled 
to rely on the rather inadequate shipping facilities of 
the Caspian Sea for access to Caucasian oil. 

In view of the plight of the Soviet Union, the 
Russian Army paper, Red Star, has been calling on 
the British to launch a diversion on another front. 
In London, newspapers and the public have taken up 
the cry for “action” of some kind. Up to the present 
the British have confined their offensive to bombing 
attacks. While considerable damage has been done 
to Hamburg, Bremen and Kiel in northern Germany 
and to industrial centers in the Rhineland, the R.A.F. 
has apparently been unable to impair decisively the 
Reich’s industrial strength. Bombing objectives are 
distant and scattered, and the British still have an in- 
sufficient number of heavy, long-range bombers. Both 
Britain and the United States have concentrated too 
much on the production of fighter planes as well as 
light and medium bombers. They are now paying the 
penalty for failure to foresee the need for thousands 
of four-motored bombing planes. 

INVASION OF CONTINENT UNLIKELY. 
Under present circumstances it is difficult to conceive 
of a successful invasion of the continent. The Euro- 
pean coasts opposite Britain have unquestionably 
been heavily fortified by the Nazis, and could prob- 
ably be defended with relatively small forces. South- 
ern Europe may be more vulnerable to attack. The 
possibility of invading Sicily or some other part of 
Italy has long been discussed. The Italians are be- 
coming disgruntled about their part in the present 
war. Their share of the spoils has been insignificant. 
Croatia, which was to come under their jurisdiction, 























is actually run by and for the Germans. Italian sol- 
diers occupy Greece, but control is really vested in 
the German authorities at Athens. Italy has acquired 
only southern Slovenia and the poor and narrow 
Dalmatian coast. Italian resources are running low. 
Just this month, supplies of bread, potatoes, milk, 
clothing, and many manufactures have been dras- 
tically rationed. Yet as long as the expectation that 
Germany will win the war persists, the Italian gov- 
ernment and people will continue loyal to the Axis, 
if only to avert a worse fate. Thus any British attack 
would undoubtedly be resisted with all the strength 
that Italy can command. 


SHORTAGE OF SHIPPING AND MAN 
POWER. Above all, the British cannot muster 
enough shipping or man power to invade the con- 
tinent at any point. Although the recent increase in 
British fat and sugar rations testify to improvement 
in the shipping situation, it will probably be well 
along in 1942 before the present American construc- 
tion program can make available sufficient vessels 
for a large expeditionary force. Hundreds of ships 
would be necessary to transport an invading army 
and keep them supplied with foodstuffs and war 
material. Moreover, Britain’s experiences in Nor- 
way, Belgium and Greece constitute a serious warn- 
ing against undertaking anything on the European 
continent on an inadequate scale. To carry any prom- 
ise of success, an invasion will probably require a 
well-equipped army of at least a million men. There 
must be a guarantee that any bridgehead established 
on the continent can be steadily widened by pour- 
ing in more and more men and supplies. Today Brit- 
ain must defend the widely scattered outposts of its 
Empire with insufficient forces. As the London Econ- 
omist recently pointed out, there are only about three- 





SPECIAL OFFER—5 FPRs for $1.00 
U.S. DEFENSE ECONOMY: 
Labor Problems 


Transportation and Power 
Industrial Capacity 

Raw Materials Inventory 
Mobilization 


¥eayrr 


Page Two 








F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: THE RUSSO-GERMAN WAR 
Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 

Date: Sunday, October 19 

Time; 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T. 

Station: NBC, blue network 




















FPA FORUM 
Some of the speakers will be— 


Mrs. FRANKLIN D. RoosEVELT, Assistant Dir 
Office Civilian Defense 


DEAN G. ACHESON, Assistant Secretary of State 
SENATOR ELBert D. THOMAS 
REPRESENTATIVE THOMAS H. ELIoT 
NELSON A. ROCKEFELLER 

Time—Saturday, October 25 

Place—The Waldorf-Astoria, New York, N. Y. 


Reservations through the Foreign Policy Association, |p, 
corporated, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


ector, 





— 


quarters of a million men stationed in the Middk 
East, and approximately three to four times as mam 
in Britain. This discrepancy in man power betwee 
Britain and Germany will continue to handicap th 
British war effort and may be overcome only if the 
United States is prepared to use its army as well a 
its naval and industria! strength. 

In the next few months the degree of British pre 
paredness will be tested not by an invasion of th 
continent, but probably by developments on th 
North African front. Unless Britain can take ad 
vantage of Germany's preoccupation in Russia ané 
launch a successful attack on Libya, it may in th 
end find itself at a disadvantage also in North Africa 
If a shortage of men and material forces Britain ti 
remain idle until the Nazis can release troops and 
supplies for other fronts, it may become increasing} 
difficult to fight Germany with prospects of ultimati 
success. Britain and the United States cannot afforé 





to wait in relative inactivity in the expectation thal 
their combined resources will some day exceed thos| 


of Hitler. JOHN C. DEWILDE 





The European Possessions in the Caribbean Area, by R.2 
Platt, J. K. Wright, J. C. Weaver and J. E. Fairchilt 
New York, American Geographical Society, 1941. $1 
This work sets forth, in convenient form for referent! 

interesting facts concerning the government, histor 

physical geography, economy, social conditions and str 
tegic importance of the British, French and Netherlan 
possessions in the Caribbean area. 


Blitzkrieg, by S. L. A. Marshall. New York, Morrow, 194 
$2.00 | 
Some competent though now and then opinionated 0 

servations on the military lessons of Hitler’s 1940 cam 


paigns, with a warning to the United States that it is” 
peril. 


Caesars in Goose Step, by William D. Bayles. New York 
Harper, 1940. $3.00 


Brief biographies of the Fuehrer and the men about hit! 
written in lively style. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 52, Ocroser 17, 1941. 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





eo 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nang 
Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MicHELES Den, Bie 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 

F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








P/ 
HAD 
impCc 
on C 
admi 
ques 
been 
Pan 
the 
Aria 
quer 
rent: 
elev: 
effic: 
litics 
dent 
high 
Wa: 

T 
beet 
not 
six 
phil 
tota 
imn 
den 
wh¢ 
Am 
crez 
tho 
Sta 


pro 


tor: 
wh 
live 
dic 


a li 


mc 
of 
the 


be: 


lor 
fla 
re; 
mi 


WI 


Fo 


a 


tor, 


A In. 


iddle 


ween 
> the 
E the 
ll as 


| pre 
E the 
the 
> ad 
| and 
n the 
frica 
in t 
; an 
ing! 
ima 
iffor 
1 that 
thos 
DE 





RR 
rehild. 
$10 
rence. 
istory 
| stra 
erlani 


, 194 
ed ob) 


) can 
t is 2 


York 


at hit! 


= 
Bi 











TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA 


By JOHN I. B. McCULLOCH 








PANAMANIAN GOVERNMENT CHANGES 
HANDS. In the Republic of Panama, increasingly 
important in Hemisphere defense, a bloodless coup 
on October 9 brought an abrupt end to the year-old 
administration of President Arnulfo Arias, whose 
questionable sympathies and headstrong tactics had 
heen a source of very real concern to architects of 
Pan American solidarity. A 39-year-old physician at 
the time of his inauguration on October 1, 1940, 
Arias had studied in the United States, and subse- 
quently been exposed to conflicting ideological cur- 
rents in England, France, Italy and Germany. His 
elevation to the Presidency was secured through the 
eficient operation of a well-greased Panamanian po- 
litical machine, which made short work of the Presi- 
dential aspirations of Arias’ 1940 opponent, the 
highly respected international lawyer and long-time 
Washington resident, Ricardo Alfaro. 

The first major act of the Arias administration had 
been to force adoption of a new Constitution, which 
not only extended the President's term from four to 
six years, but gave expression to an economic 
philosophy both intensely nationalistic and pseudo- 
totalitarian. This brought the new Executive into 
immediate conflict with his own brother, ex-Presi- 
dent Harmodio Arias, a shrewd lawyer and politician 
who controls the influential newspaper, Panama 
American. On the international front as well, Arias 
created considerable confusion and suspicion. Al- 
though he was at length induced to grant the United 
States air-base facilities on Panamanian territory, 
other matters pending between the two countries 
proved difficult of solution in the hands of negotia- 
tors appointed by Arias. The Panamanian President, 
who was given to indiscreet remarks, meanwhile de- 
livered a succession of statements interpreted as in- 
dicating a latent sympathy for the Axis powers, and 
a less-than-cordial attitude toward the United States. 


QUESTION OF PANAMA REGISTRY. The 
most recent evidence of a fundamental divergence 
of thought between the Arias administration and 
the United States government appeared on Octo- 
ber 6. On that date the Panamanian Cabinet, with 
Arias presiding, decided that Panama would no 
longer permit merchant vessels operating under its 
flag to be armed, and would withdraw Panamanian 
tegistry from such vessels as defied the decision. This 
measure seemed likely to affect no less than 125 
U.S..owned ships (40 owned by the government) 


which sailed under Panamanian insignia. It was 


For more extensive coverage n Lati 


copy of this publication, write to the W 





adopted, moreover, at a moment when the Roosevelt 
Administration was moving energetically to amend 
or eliminate provisions of the neutrality law which 
restrict the operations of U.S. ships. 

The coup d’état of October 9 was precipitated by 
the action of the President himself, who—under his 
mother’s family name—suddenly departed for Cuba, 
apparently in anticipation of impending develop- 
ments. In his absence events in Panama succeeded 
each other with the precision of a well-conceived 
drama. Arias’ Minister of Government, Ricardo 
Adolfo de la Guardia, called the Cabinet together 
to announce that the government was temporarily 
without a head. The “first Presidential designate,” 
Minister of Education José Pezet (a close associate 
of Arias, later arrested), was passed over, and the 
Presidency was officially conferred on Ernesto Jaén 
Guardia, “second designate,” who had conveniently 
returned from Mexico ten days earlier. Jaén Guardia 
then formed a Cabinet and resigned, the Cabinet 
picking de la Guardia to succeed him. It is reported 
that Jaén Guardia will go to Washington as Am- 
bassador, replacing Carlos Brin. 

The extent to which the United States government 
was involved in, or cognizant of, this chain of events 
must probably remain a matter of conjecture. On the 
surface at least, U.S. civil and military authorities 
were completely detached and inactive. It seems un- 
likely, however, that they can have viewed the change 
of régime with anything but gratification. Appar- 
ently well regarded, de la Guardia has lost no time 
in putting his government on record as favoring a 
policy of intimate collaboration with the United 
States. Although Berlin and Rome have sought to 
exploit the incident as one more instance of Yankee 
imperialism, the sentiment of large sections of the 
Latin American press is probably suggested by an 
editorial in E/ Diario of Montevideo, Uruguay, 
which lauds the coup and goes on to speak disparag- 
ingly of certain republics that insist on maintaining 
neutrality, “which is inadmissible in the battle be- 
tween democratic and totalitarian lands.” 

A further dramatic development occurred on Oc- 
tober 14 when Dr. Arnulfo Arias, on his return to 
Cristobal, Canal Zone, surrendered to the Panama 
police, after the new government of Panama had 
announced he would be sent into exile in Costa Rica. 
Arias had previously said he was returning to 
Panama “to share political responsibility with his 
friends.” 


American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS, 4 bi-weekly newsletter edited by Mr. McCulloch. For sample 
ishington Bureau, Foreign Poi:cy Association, 1200 National Press Building, Washington, D.C. 





DEC 16 194 


Washington News Letter <A 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 13.—Two notable milestones marked the 
advance of American foreign policy last week, as the 
United States further reinforced its program of aid to 
countries resisting aggression. On October 9 Presi- 
dent Roosevelt sent an urgent message to Congress 
asking for authority to arm American merchant ships 
at once; the following day the House passed the 
second lease-lend bill, without a single major change, 
by a vote of 328 to 67. These moves depend, for their 
practical fulfillment, on U.S. shipping capacity, and 
give added importance to the revised shipbuilding 


to display sufficient voting strength to discourage the 
Administration from requesting, in the near fy 
permission to send American-flag vessels into combat 
areas and belligerent ports. ; 
The overwhelming majority recorded by the House § 
in favor of the $5,985,000,000 lease-lend bill, on 
October 10, does not provide a reliable indication of & 
how forces will line up in support of other Admin. # 
istration measures. Since Congress, by passing thee 
initial lease-lend bill in March, had already approved 
the basic policy involved, the current House de® 
bate centered chiefly on the amount to be appropri 


ated and the question of including the Soviet Union . 
program designed to provide this country with the among the beneficiaries of lease-lend assistance. On # 


largest merchant marine in its history. the latter issue, aid to Russia was approved by a vote 
AMENDMENT OF NEUTRALITY ACT. Presi- of 162 to 21. 


dent Roosevelt's message came after a delay of sev- SHIPBUILDING PROGRAM. In the last j 
eral weeks, during which Congressional and Admin- sis, the delivery of American goods to the Allies will B 
istration leaders discussed practicable means of re- probably depend on the size of the U.S. merchant 
vising the Neutrality Act to fit the changed interna- marine. Its available tonnage has been sharply re) 
tional situation which has developed since enactment duced during the war—from 8,076,879 gross tons in} 
of the existing legislation in October 1939. Although September 1939—by the sale of about 1,000,000 tons | 
the President specifically recommended repeal of to Britain and its allies up to the end of last year, 
only one section of the law—Section 6, which pro- the transfer of 1,300,000 tons to the U.S. Army and 
hibits the arming of American-flag ships engaged in Navy, and the registration of many U.S. vessels un ¥ 
foreign commerce—he urged Congress to “give der the Panamanian flag to escape restrictions of they” 
earnest and early attention’’ to correcting other Neutrality Act. At the same time, present defense} 
phases of the Act which, in effect, give “definite as- needs require the more rapid movement of a greatet 
sistance . . . to the aggressors.” The text of his mes- volume of goods. : 
sage left no doubt that the desired additional changes The Emergency Shipping Division of the Maritime} 
include abolition of clauses that prevent Ameri- Commission, which was set up to cope with these : 
can ships from carrying goods through combat zones problems, has been trying “to make one ship do the 
and to belligerent ports. work of two.” Of even greater long-term importance, J 
Failure to ask for prompt repeal of these remain- the construction rate of new vessels has been vastly}. 
ing provisions is apparently due to the Administra- accelerated. The revised building program calls for} 
tion’s unwillingness to face a showdown on foreign 1,200 ships (all types) of 13,500,000 deadweight 
policy with adamant Republicans and isolationist tons by the end of 1943. (Deadweight tonnage, the 
Democrats, who threatened formidable opposition to best criterion of actual cargo-carrying capacity, aver 
any amendment beyond removal of the ban on arm- _—_ages from 15 to 20 per cent more than gross tonnage} 
ing merchant ships. Although Wendell Willkie, on Keels have been laid or engines are being built for 
October 6, urged the Republican party to fight for about 400 of these ships, and contracts have been let 
outright repeal of the entire Act, many Republicans for 400 more. At present, 32 yards with 234 ways ale 
in Congress have never recognized Willkie’s leader- operating full time, and delivering about three ships 
-hip, and are rejecting his advice in the present con- a week. By mid-1942, when peak production will bey 
troversy. Looking toward the coming Congressional reached, vessels will be turned out at the rate of two f 
campaigns, they assert that the national elections a day. In view of the steady increase in United States) 
last November provided no clear-cut popular de- industrial production and the Administration's grow y 
cision on foreign policy, since both Presidential can- ing determination to insure delivery of America® 
didates advocated essentially the same course. The goods to the Allies, these merchant vessels may yeyy 
opposition forces are not expected to prevent speedy play a decisive role in the war. 
repeal of the armed ship prohibition, but they hope A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 











