ortant 
Repre- 
intro. 
nistra- 
xisting 
> allot- 
ers by 
ing cut 
reduce 
largely 
r cent, 
that he 
expose 
n com- 
riginal 
ILDE 


rticles, 
by the 
Years, 
ition to 
guages 
a keen 
and a 
e many 
states- 
ournal- 
ashing- 
Is were 
valued 
Yasa 
nee in 


heimer 
of the 
studied 
erhaps 
to her 
of the 
ive and 
under 
an Cor- 
as the 
ever 
vithout 
being 


he did, 
sire to 
she did 
> made 
anding 
‘or the 
monu- 


National 
N, Editor. 
ear. 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Vou. XVI, No. 30 


May 21, 1937 


ANGLO-JAPANESE RIVALRY IN SOUTHEAST ASIA 


by Ernest O. Hauser 


British, French, Dutch and Portuguese colonies are threatened 


x, « 


by Japan’s 


southern policy” of economic penetration. As the 


report points out, however, conditions in this area are entirely 


different from those which confronted Japan in Manchuria. 


To 


meet the changing situation in the East, Britain—which has a 
vital interest in the preservation of the status quo—has spent 
£10,000,000 in fortifying Singapore and is willing to spend an 


additional £70,000,000 on an Imperial Pacific Fleet. 
May 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Dr. William W. Bishop 


% University of Michigan Library 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 


DISSENSION PLAGUES SPANISH LOYALISTS 


HE cabinet crisis at Valencia, together with 

the earlier insurrection at Barcelona, have 
revealed anew the factional rivalries which seam 
Spain’s Popular Front. On May 15 Francisco 
Largo Caballero, left-wing Socialist and Premier 
since September 4, resigned from office. Two 
days later a new government was formed by Dr. 
Juan Negrin, a moderate Socialist, who had served 
in the outgoing cabinet as Minister of Finance. 
His ministry is composed of three Socialists, two 
Communists and four middle-class Republicans, 
including one leader from both the Catalan and 
the Basque regional parties. It thus represents 
all the groups in the previous cabinet, with the 
exception of the Anarcho-Syndicalists. The de- 
fense ministries are unified under the moderate 
Socialist, Indalecio Prieto. 

Two issues apparently brought the downfall 
of the Largo Caballero cabinet. The Communists, 
backed by the Left Republicans and some Social- 
ists, demanded a more unified and centralized 
war machine and sought to achieve this end by 
eliminating Largo Caballero. In addition, the un- 
successful Anarcho-Syndicalist revolt at Bar- 
celona had crystallized the determination of the 
other elements in the Valencia régime to reduce 
the influence of this faction. 

The Barcelona struggle which flared up on May 
4 was the result of long-smoldering friction in 
the autonomous government of Catalonia. Certain 
elements among the Anarcho-Syndicalists, in 
company with the semi-Trotzkyite P.O.U.M., had 
fought the tendency of the Socialists, Commu- 
nists and Republicans to give a win-the-war pol- 
icy right of way over proletarian revolution. They 
also opposed the government’s order to surrender 
their arms, which they believed would end their 
power of independent action. Following this 
Anarcho-Syndicalist revolt, the Valencia govern- 
ment on May 6 took over direct control of the 
Catalan army and police, thus markedly strength- 


ening its authority in the region. 

Behind these conflicts, some observers see in- 
ternational influences at work. Britain and 
France, acting through the Soviet Union, are be- 
lieved willing to grant increased support to the 
Valencia régime, in return for a pledge that radi- 
cal social revolution will not be carried through 
in the peninsula. The Communists, thus pictured 
as the Soviet agency in Spain, are apparently play- 
ing a more conservative réle than the left-wing 
Socialists. According to this theory the P.O.U.M. 
and the Anarcho-Syndicalists, standing at the ex- 
treme left, were first shorn of power, and now the 
Largo Caballero Socialists have suffered the same 
fate. Should a moderate republican government 
eventually result from this trend, grounds for 
German and Italian apprehensions regarding 
communism in Spain would largely be removed, 
and the prospects for international mediation and 
a negotiated peace would be materially improved. 

In the immediate future, however, Spain’s re- 
cent political conflicts may promote more effec- 
tive coordination of the Loyalist forces. The anti- 
Franco military campaign would then take on 
new aggressiveness. On May 17 the Barcelona 
government pledged an offensive on the Aragon 
front, as a move to weaken Rebel pressure on 
Bilbao. After a month and a half of effort, Gen- 
eral Mola’s troops, aided by Germans and Italians, 
had advanced some fifteen miles through the 
mountains of this northern area. By May 18 they 
were within eight or ten miles of Bilbao. The 
initiation of the offensive apparently caught the 
Basques by surprise, but their determined re- 
sistance has recently brought the Insurgents al- 
most to a standstill. Rebel superiority in air- 
craft has made it possible for their planes to 
bomb and machine-gun not only the opposing 
troops, but also the defenseless villages of the 
countryside. Destruction on April 27 of the 
“holy city” of Guernica, apparently by German 


planes, was particularly ruthless, and resulted in 
the reported slaughter of 800 men, women and 
children. The ferocity of this attack brought forth 
a widespread international protest. Nevertheless, 
General Mola’s forces have threatened to bomb 
Bilbao “without mercy.” When the Guernica in- 
cident was discussed in the London non-interven- 
tion committee on May 4, the German representa- 
tive, Joachim von Ribbentropp, justified this ac- 
tion on the ground of military necessity, and op- 
posed any ban on the bombing of undefended 


towns. CHARLES A. THOMSON 


THE BRITISH IMPERIAL CONFERENCE 


Turning from their arduous celebration of 
Empire unity at the coronation of George VI, the 
Prime Ministers of all the British Dominions 
save the Irish Free State met on May 14 for their 
first consultation on the Empire’s political and 
economic affairs since 1930. The agenda of 
the Conference, published on March 11, con- 
templates discussion in the broad fields of foreign 
affairs and defense; constitutional questions; and 
trade, shipping and air communications. Prime 
Minister Stanley Baldwin has conveyed the im- 
pression that the first of these subjects will be 
accorded the greatest emphasis. Questions re- 
garding the five-year preferential economic 
agreements concluded at Ottawa in 1932 are to be 
discussed separately between the individual gov- 
ernments concerned. 

This preoccupation with defense and foreign 
policy is due to two developments—the collapse 
of collective security, and attainment by the Do- 
minions of full equality of status with the mother 
country through the Statute of Westminster of 
1931. Britain now seeks to ascertain the attitude 
of the British Commonwealth in case the United 
Kingdom becomes involved in a European war. 
The tense international situation has also made 
it, necessary to consider the reaction of the Do- 
minions should the sea route through the Medi- 
terranean be cut during a conflict, or Japan con- 
tinue its expansion in Asia. It is in Britain’s 
interest to cement the ties binding component 
parts of the Commonwealth without demanding 
concrete commitments which might provoke in- 
tensification of isolationist sentiment in the Do- 
minions. Canada’s Liberal government, which 
has cultivated close relations with Washington, 
tends to favor a policy of collaboration with the 
United States in its attempt to insulate the West- 
ern hemisphere from war arising elsewhere in the 
world. Australia wavers between negotiation of 
an Asiatic non-aggression pact involving Japan 
and continuation of its policy of encouraging the 
re-enforcement of Singapore, maintaining Brit- 


— Page Two 


ee 
ee 


ish military power in the Far East, and de. 
veloping the air services to London. The Union 
of South Africa strives to prevent Germany and) 
Italy from making territorial gains in Africa, 
either by peaceful cession or by war. 

It is improbable that the conflicts between loca] 
geographical interests and the sentimental ties 
of Empire can be solved at the Imperial Confer. 
ence, or that the delegates will do much more than 
reaffirm the importance of defending imperia] 
communications. Concrete understandings may 
be reached, however, for the coordination of de 
fense measures and for greater military expendi- 
ture by the Dominions. Some observers predict 
the establishment of a permanent secretariat in 
London to facilitate consultation in a crisis, but 
it seems doubtful that the Dominions will accede 
to a plan for further concentration of a 
functions in Downing Street. 

Although the British government appeared in-| 
clined to throttle any discussion of imperial tariff 
preferences, the subject was brought to the at- 
tention of the Conference at its opening session 
when Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. Mackenzie 
King, appealed for liberalization of trade bar- 
riers along the lines followed by the Roosevelt 
administration. Canadian, British and American 
statesmen realize that the Ottawa agreements\ 
represent the outstanding obstacle to greater| 
economic collaboration between the United States 
and the British Commonwealth. These agree- 
ments have been of great benefit to the Domin- 
ions, and have somewhat increased British ex- 
ports to the Empire. They have, however, severe- 
ly affected other surplus producers of raw ma- 
terials and foodstuffs—notably Argentina and} 
Denmark, and to some extent the United States 
—and have hampered extension of the principle 
of freer trade from which Britain would have 
everything to gain. The British government ap-' 
parently does not wish, on economic grounds, to] 
turn back from the policy of tariff protection it! 
adopted five years ago. Observers hope, how-| 
ever, that the political advantages to be derived 
from closer collaboration with the United States 
in Europe and the Far East may impel London 
to come to terms with Washington, perhaps 
through a triangular trade agreement embracing 
Britain, Canada and the United States. 

DAVID H. POPPER 


M-xico Around Me, by Max Miller. New York, Reynal & 
ritchcock, 1937. $2.50 
A travel book with more emphasis on the author’s Te: 
actions than on the Mexican scene. 
Mexico: A Revolution by Education, by George I. Sanches | 
New York, The Viking Press, 1936. $2.75 
A sympathetic if uncritical survey of Mexico’s educa-| 
tional program. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 30, May 21, 1937. 


' 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National’ 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lusiim Bugit, President; EstHer G. Ocpan, Secretary; Vera Micueres Daan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


