





nik 


kly 


‘ish 
ian 









elt 


ion 


net 











- 


Aan Arb 


> 4 4 
é Univor.- 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
Bishop 
De 


5 


4. 
sity of Mente, 


or, Mich. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 14 


JANUARY 21, 1944 





TWO-FRONT WAR WILL IMPOSE FINAL TEST ON GERMAN RESERVES 


_— final preparations for the Anglo-American 
invasion of Western Europe nearing comple- 
tion and the Russian winter offensive gaining mo- 
mentum, the Nazis face the prospect of a two-front 
land war in which decisive victories can be inflicted 
on the German armies from two directions. A suc- 
cessful landing in northern France, coupled with con- 
tinued pressure from the east, will bring the war in 
Europe to a climax, for it will force the German high 
command to risk everything in an effort to stem 
Allied advances before they reach Germany itself. 
SOVIET GAINS NOT DECISIVE. Although 
Moscow announced on January 16 a new offensive 
in the north below Lake Ilmen—an offensive which 
may force the Germans to fall back to a line run- 
ning from Riga to the Pripet Marshes via the Dvina 
tiver—the most vital sector still appears to be in the 
south. The northern wing of the two-pronged offen- 
sive launched from Kiev several weeks ago has now 
passed Sarny in eastern Poland, and the southern 
wing threatens German rail lines at Vinnitsa and 
Zhmerinka. If the Red Army should cross the Bug 


| fiver and capture Zhmerinka, the German forces in 


the bend of the Dnieper would be almost entirely 


| cut off from the armies in Poland, and would un- 
_ doubtedly endeavor to retreat to the Dniester. Rus- 
| Sian confidence that they can force such a withdraw- 
| al, if not actually trap the southern German armies, 
, is indicated by the way in which Red Army leaders 
| have exposed the spearhead at Sarny and the thrust 


toward Zhmerinka to counterattack. 

But there is no evidence yet that the Germans 
have suffered a decisive defeat on this front. Al- 
though paying a heavy price in material, manpower, 
and exhaustion of their reserves, they have managed 
so far to keep their armies in being and avoid a dis- 
aster such as they suffered at Stalingrad. Until they 
have been forced back to crucial areas like the Ru- 
manian oil fields, Silesia and western Poland, they 


will probably attempt to save their armies at the ex- 
pense of territory. 

A CROSS-CHANNEL INVASION. Preparations 
for the invasion of western Europe are now under 
the direct supervision of General Dwight D. Eisen- 
hower, supreme commander of Allied forces in Brit- 
ain, who reached London over the week-end of Janu- 
ary 15-16 after conferring in Washington with Pres- 
ident Roosevelt and in Morocco with Prime Minister 
Churchill. Eisenhower will have as his chief of 
staff, Major General Walter B. Smith; as deputy 
commander, Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder; 
as director of air operations, Air Chief Marshal T. L. 
Leigh-Mallory; and as chief of naval operations, 
Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay. General Montgomery, 
in command of all British ground forces, will once 
more match wits with Marshal Rommel, while it 
seems likely that Lieutenant General Omar N. Brad- 
ley, commander of United States ground forces in 
the European theatre, will renew the duel with Rom- 
mel which began in Tunisia. It can be expected that 
Eisenhower will weld his Anglo-American staff into 
a smooth-running machine just as he did in North 
Africa. 

The Allied Expeditionary Force faces one of the 
most hazardous operations in military annals. The 
limited range of both fighter aircraft and landing 
barges will in all probability dictate a cross-channel 
invasion, which means a landing somewhere between 
the mouth of the Scheldt and the mouth of the Seine, 
probably in France because of the shore line and the 
presence of essential harbors. Other parts of the 
European coast from Denmark to the Pyrenees should 
not be entirely excluded, for a mass invasion far from 
the British base, impossible as it appears, might be 
attempted. Regardless of the spot chosen, invasion 
can hardly take place until late March or early April, 
when the weather will be favorable and Allied pre- 
ponderance in the air assured. 





ees Br” ‘ . 


a Se ee ee ee sal 


A Pete Oe NE io A St St ene 




















It need not be assumed, however, that the western 
Allies will concentrate all their forces on a single 
assault. The air offensive over Germany will prob- 
ably be stepped up, both to weaken German produc- 
tion and to draw off all possible fighter strength 
from the invasion area. At the same time, continued 
pressure can be expected in Italy, and probably one 
or more diversionary attacks against Norway, Den- 
mark, Brittany, southern France, or the Balkans. It 
is unlikely that large forces will be used in any such 
attack, however, since its primary purpose will be to 
draw off part of Germany's strategic reserves while 
the main attack is being launched. For, once a bridge- 
head is established, the chief purpose of the Allied 
forces will be not so much the reconquest of territory 
as the destruction of the German armies, and this 
will require a concentration of force which will for- 
bid extensive operations elsewhere. 

In Western Europe, unlike the eastern front, the 
German high command will not be in a position to 


= PageTwo 








retreat without jeopardizing an area vital both eg 
nomically and strategically, an area which belong 
to what has been called the “German heartland” 
Apart from Germany itself, this term is applied , 
territory which includes Denmark, the Low Coup, 
tries, northern France, Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hyp. 
gary, Rumania, northern Yugoslavia, and westem 
and central Poland. Loss of any of these areas would 
threaten Germany's ability to continue the struggle 
and it is expected that the high command will ris} 
decisive battles to defend them. If in the east th 
Russian armies reach vital areas of Rumania or Po 
land at the same time that Anglo-American force; 
move directly into northern France, decisive actions 
will develop on both fronts. The German Army’ 
ability to hold out will then depend largely on the 
strength of its reserves. When these are used up, | 
Allied victory will not be far off. 





HowarpD P. WHIDDEN 


DUTCH AND BRITISH PLEDGE END OF OPIUM SMOKING MONOPOLY | 


[The F.P.A. Opium Research Committee has been closely 
in touch with the developments discussed in the article be- 
low, and has played a useful part in bringing informed 
American opinion to bear upon the discussions —Editor. | 


The Netherlands government on October 1, 1943 
and the British government on November 10, 1943 
announced that opium-smoking under government 
license (the government monopoly system) will end 
in all Far Eastern territories which may be returned 
after the war to Dutch and British control. This 
change in policy removed a difference of opinion be- 
tween the two countries on the one hand, and China 
and the United States on the other, which has caused 
serious difficulty since the Hague Convention of 1912 
whenever international efforts have been made to 
advance the fight against the abuse of opium and 
dangerous drugs. 


RESULTS OF LEAGUE ACTION. The machin- 
ery of the League of Nations has proved effective in 
limiting the manufacture and controlling the com- 
merce in drugs made from opium. Even during the 
war, the controls established for peacetime conditions 
have remained in force in those areas of the world 
where the United Nations exercise administrative 
authority. The Drug Supervisory Body reports in its 
annual statement for 1944 that 53 countries out of a 
possible 71 have sent in advance estimates of their 
medical needs to this control body established under 
League of Nations’ auspices. 


But the next step in international progress—lim- 
itation of the planting of the opium poppy to supply 
only the medical and scientific needs of the world— 
has been delayed by the continuation of government 


monopolies for smoking opium. No definite figure 
for the amount of raw opium to be used by these 
monopolies could be determined until general agree 
ment was reached as to the rate of annual reduction 
and length of time during which they were to be con. 
tinued. No total for raw opium could therefore be 
settled upon, although the amount—400 tons—nec 
essary for manufacture into medicine and scientific 
uses was already known. The smoking-opium te 
quirements were the unknown X of the equation.) 
This X is now removed, as far as Dutch and British 
monopolies are concerned. In view of the united 
policy of the Allies, it is not probable that French) 
Indo-China or Thailand will continue the monopoly 
system after the war, nor is it likely that the monop- 
oly system will be continued in Formosa. What will| 
occur in Burma cannot be predicted until the whole | 
Indian situation is further clarified. | 








INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT POSSIBLE. 
The way is now open for an international agree-| 
ment between the principal countries which grow and| 
export the raw material—Turkey, Greece, Yugo | 
slavia and Iran—and the important drug-manufac | 
turing countries. It is hoped that a plan may be) 
evolved informally so that a draft convention can be | 
presented for consideration at the end of the wat. 
This is post-war planning in its most immediate and| 
practical aspect. 

The new policy by the Netherlands and Great| 


Britain is a concrete sign of a liberal and construc 


tive trend with respect to post-war colonial adminis 
tration, and augurs well for further decisions 


r te 
these areas HELEN HOWELL MOORHEAD 





\ 





BEFSI] 












ESE 5S = "-e 


ices 
Ons 
ny's 


, an 


yure 
nese 
ree. 
tion 
cOn- 
> be 
nec: 
tific 

re. 
ron. 
itish 
ited 
ench 
poly 
nop- 
will 


hole 








sreat | 


Linis- 
s if 

















PageThre 








THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Lend-Lease, by Edward R. Stettinius, Jr. New York, Mac- 
millan, 1944. $3.00 


An extremely interesting account of the origin and de- 
yelopment of lend-lease, told by the former Lend-Lease 
Administrator and present Under Secretary of State. In 
presenting the way in which mutual aid has been used 
to pool the war supplies of the United Nations, this book 
makes an important contribution to the history of World 
War II. Maps, charts, pictograms and photographs add to 
the interest and value of the volume. 


Jane’s Fighting Ships, 1942, edited by Francis E. 
McMurtrie. New York, Macmillan, 1943. $19.00 


Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft, 1942, compiled and edited 
by Leonard Bridgman. New York, Macmillan, 1943. 
$19.00 


Invaluable is the only word adequately characterizing 
these annual classics of naval and air developments. Par- 
ticularly useful right now because, despite the great diffi- 
culty of assembling the information in war years, they 
contain more accurate details than are to be found in any 
other single source. 


The Italian Conception of International Law, by Angelo 
Piero Sereni. New York, Columbia University Press, 
1943. $5.50 
A technical and apparently exhaustive study of value 

for the general student, showing the Italian origin and 

development of many international rules and procedures. 


A Steel Man in India, by John L. Keenan, with the col- 
laboration of Lenore Sorsby. New York, Duell, Sloan 
and Pearce, 1943. $3.75 
This is a different book on India—a fresh, vigorous ac- 

count of a quarter of a century spent in that country by a 

Gary steel man who became general manager of Tata’s, 

India’s largest steel plant. Mr. Keenan’s sympathetic, prac- 

tical approach throws considerable light on important 

aspects of the Indian problem. 


Soul of Russia, by Helen Iswolsky. New York, Sheed & 
Ward, 1943. $2.75 


A far from impartial history of Christianity in Russia 


by a Catholic writer who believes Communism has had no 
effect on the spiritual vitality of the Church. 


Free China’s New Deal, by Hubert Freyn. New York, Mac- 
millan, 1943. $2.50 
A factual discussion of the economic side of China’s war 


effort. The material, in large part based on official statis- 
ties, is presented both topically and by provinces. 





For a survey of twenty-five years of the general 
attitude and policy of the Catholic Church, as well 
as a record of the Vatican’s relations with Italy, 
Spain, Germany and the U.S.S.R., READ— 
FOREIGN POLICY OF THE VATICAN 
by Sherman S. Hayden 


25c 


January 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
Reports are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











Meet the Arab, by John Van Ess. New York, John Day, 
19438. $3.00 


Shrewd analysis, lightened by personal reminiscences, of 
the Arabs by a lifelong student and devoted friend of that 
people. 


A Literary Journey Through Wartime Britain, by A. C. 
Ward. New York, Oxford University Press, 1943. $2.00 
Places marred or destroyed by bombings described with 


charm and that love which so many feel for British literary 
landmarks. 


Czechoslovakia Fights Back. Washington, D.C., American 
Council om Public Affairs, 1943. Cloth, $3.00; paper, 
$2.50. 


Account of the effects of German occupation on the 
political, economic and religious life of Czechoslovakia 
based on the official sources of the government-in-exile. 


The Displacement of Population in Europe, by Eugene M. 
Kulischer. Montreal, International Labour Office, 1943. 
$1.50 
A careful preliminary survey of the uprooted peoples of 

Europe that is essential in understanding the immensity 

of the post-war resettlement problem. 


This Is Not the End of France, by Gustav Winter. London, 
Allen & Unwin, 1942. (Distributed in the U.S. by W. 
W. Norton, New York, 1943). $4.00 


One of the fairest and most interesting interpretations 
of French developments from Versailles to the capitula- 
tion of 1940. The author also assesses the forces at work 
for the restoration of a strong and republican post-war 
France. 


The Air Future, by Burnet Hershey. New York, Duell, 
Sloan and Pearce, 1943. $2.75 


An interesting account of the technical, political and 
economic aspects of international air transport, but scarce- 
ly deserving of its sub-title, “A Primer of Aeropolitics.” 


The Russian Enigma, by William Henry Chamberlin. 
New York, Scribner, 1943. $2.75 
Interesting interpretation of Russia’s historical develop- 
ment and the postwar outlook for Stalin’s régime at home 
and in international affairs by an author who knows the 
U.S.S.R. well. 


Crusade for Pan-Europe, by Richard N. Coudenhove- 
Kalergi. New York, Putnam, 1943. $3.50 
The first section of this book is an autobiography that 
gives an excellent picture of eastern Europe’s aristocracy 
before World War I. Most of the volume, however, is de- 
voted to the author’s Utopian plans for a federated Europe. 


The Pageant of Canadian History, by Anne Merriman 
Peck. New York, Longmans, 1943. $3.00 


A story of the land and people of Canada, written 
primarily for American readers who wish not a formal 
history, but a vivid picture of our northern neighbor. 


The Battle Is the Pay-off, by Ralph Ingersoll. New York, 
Harcourt, Brace, 1943. $2.00 
PM’s former editor, in this dramatic story of the prep- 
aration for his first war action and the actual battle, 


explains feelingly the reality of war to both soldier and 
civilian. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 14, JANUARY 21, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micue tes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


me month for change of address on membership publications. 


Bz 181 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





le 


Washington News Letter 














JAN. 17.—American continental solidarity has been 
strengthened by the steps taken by the nineteen 
anti-Axis republics to determine whether the Bolivian 
junta that seized power on December 29 has a fas- 
cist core. Perturbed by the animosity of the semi- 
fascist government of Argentina, these republics are 
developing an inter-American movement whose aim 
is to discourage all fascist parties and blocs. 

SOLIDARITY AGAINST FASCISM. Argentina 
has recognized the Bolivian régime, but the anti-Axis 
republics have displayed solidarity in their agreement 
not to do so until information has been exchanged, 
through the usual diplomatic channels, to ascertain 
if inspiration for the Bolivian revolution came from 
outside the country. This exchange—proposed by Al- 
berto Guani, Foreign Minister of Uruguay and chair- 
man of the Emergency Advisory Committee for Po- 
litical Defense—is nearing completion. 

Complementing the Guani proposal, Mexican For- 
eign Minister Ezequiel Padilla suggested on January 
12 that American diplomatic representatives confer 
on recognition of the Bolivian régime. Since Mexico's 
internal security is disturbed by the growing power 
of Sinarquismo— which Vicente Lombardo Tole- 
dano, head of the Confederation of Mexican Work- 
ers (CTM), has described as the fascism of Mexico 
—Padilla’s suggestion was obviously intended to 
convey to Mexican and other non-Bolivian fascists 
that the Americas are united against them. Another 
reason advanced for this recommendation is the 
need for repudiating the Estrada recognition doctrine 
—which has guided the country in recent years and 
provides for continuity of recognition when govern- 
ments change without reference to circumstances be- 
hind the change—if Mexico is to follow the course 
of solidarity. Since the informational exchange may 
provide sufficient >asis for deciding the next step the 
anti-Axis republics will take, Minister Padilla’s pro- 
posal has not yet been acted upon. 

Dr. Enrique de Lozada, the junta’s representative 
in Washington and its only friendly spokesman in 
this country, stated on January 15 that he approved 
the united American decision “to scrutinize the pos- 
sibility of foreign anti-United States infiltration in 
Bolivia.” A few days earlier—January 10—he stated 
that the junta’s sympathy toward democracy and the 
United Nations was indicated by accepting the pre- 
vious administration’s declaration of war against 
Germany, cutting off quinine exports to Argentina, 
restoring the civil liberties suppressed by the Pefia- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





randa government, declaring it would hold free 
elections in May according to the constitutional term, 
restoring the legal rights of Jewish organizations, and 
taking steps toward recognition of the Soviet Union, 

Because of the former friendship of some mem- 
bers of the Villaroel government with Nazis and fas. 
cist Argentinians, the State Department doubts the 
sincerity of these declarations. On January 7 Secte. 
tary of State Hull said that information available in 
Washington “increasingly strengthens the belief that 
forces outside of Bolivia and unfriendly to the de. 
fense of the American Republics inspired and aided 
the revolution.” The ‘‘forces’” he had in mind were 
Argentinian. 


Meanwhile, the United States has from day to day 
been reducing its purchases of Bolivian strategic ma- 
terials, and has suspended negotiations for revision | 
of our tin contract with Bolivia—which is no longer 
our sole source of tin now that African ores are 
available. The revised contract, in its approved sec- 
tions, provided for an increase of about three cents 
a pound in the net price of tin. Although the con- 
tract did not specifically direct it, the Metals Reserve 
Company had understood that this price rise was to 
be passed on as a wage increase to the tin miners. 


NEXT STEPS? The problem raised by the Bo- 
livian revolution is inter-American and Argentinian, | 
rather than Bolivian. Mr. Hull’s statement apparent | 
ly was a warning that the United States would not | 
recognize the junta, and the general acceptance of the | 





Guani informational exchange plan suggested that 
Mr. Hull was stating the views of nineteen republics. 
In order to combat the régime in Argentina, which | 
Washington suspects of plotting coups in Peru, | 
Chile and Paraguay in order to fashion a strong | 
South American bloc unfriendly to this country, the | 
United States is also contemplating a more positive | 
move than the passive decision not to recognize | 
President Villaroel. Mr. Hull and his advisers have 

discussed tentatively the imposition of a general em- | 
bargo on trade with Bolivia and Argentina, which | 
might cause the overthrow of both Villaroel and | 
President Pedro Ramirez of Argentina. But the | 
United Nation’s wartime economic dependence on 

Argentina—Britain’s beef contract with Argentina | 
runs until September, while the United States imports | 
large quantities of Argentine wool, hides and lin ; 
seed—complicates the making of decisions. 


’ 


BLAIR BOLLES 











191 


> _ |e 


proF 
thre: 
on 7 
penc 
mill 


finit 


, Uni 


feat 
hurr 
bott 
will 
the 

It w 
stan 
shot 
Stat 
Mo: 


can 
the 
ence 
ove: 
per] 
the 
this 
rais 
Saic 


Mo 
the 
Pol 
fact 


mig 


. nt, 
eign 


