— 
10sen 
Stitu- 
f the 


1 the 
-esen- 
y and 
when 
etter 

is $0 
stions 
ution 


hung. 
- Very 
1 Na- 
rty at 
ns at 
nsoli- 
- fact, 
nists, 
Route 
n 95, 
Mao’s 
senta- 
Id be 
meas- 
areas, 
cratic 
2-con- 
of the 
unity 
coali- 
| may 
cipate 


'-Kuo- 
hung: 
er of 
cratic 
consti- 
Carson 
eague 
t San 
s that 
ately.” 
wang, 
1as at 
| con 


GER 

Nations! 
ntered & 
y at leas 


PERIUDICAL KEGF 
GENERAL LinKABy 
GHIV. oF Mie? 





Genera) 


Ann Beha. 


JUN 1 3 1943 


Library Entered as 2nd class matter 


*Y of UWichigan 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
| FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIV, No. 34 


June 8, 1945 





—_———— 


LEVANT CRISIS REVEALS CLASH OF INTERESTS IN MIDDLE EAST 


he Syrian crisis provides not only an object 
lesson for the United Nations at San Francisco; 
it also strikingly reveals the decline of French pow- 
et in the Levant and Britain’s desire for greater in- 
fluence in that area. General de Gaulle has explained 
that his own order for the withdrawal of French 
troops from the fighting in the Levant came before 
Prime Minister Churchill’s peremptory cease-fire re- 
quest of May 31. But Franco-British relations have 
suffered a severe setback, and it is now doubtful 
whether the French government will accede to the 
British desire to deal with the matter at a tripartite 
London conference composed only of French, British 
and American representatives. On the contrary, in 
his press conference of June 2, de Gaulle clearly 
indicated his preference for a five-power meeting to 





discuss not only the problems of Syria and the 
Lebanon but those of the entire Middle East. Pursu- 
ing his aim of broadening the discussions, de Gaulle 
met on June 4 with the Russian, British and Ameri- 
can Ambassadors in Paris. This action was in line 
with the suggestion made in the Soviet note of June 1. 

FRANCO-SYRIAN DISPUTE. Difficulties in the 
Levant are not new for France, but its position as 
the mandatory power has been especially precarious 
since 1936. The Blum government carried on nego- 
tiations at that time to terminate the mandates and 
arrange an alliance with Syria and the Lebanon. The 
French Chamber of Deputies refused to ratify the 
treaty, however, and France entered the European 
war with the dispute hanging fire. After France's 
capitulation in 1940, French officials in the Near 
East chose to follow the Vichy régime. In 1941 
British and Free French forces occupied Syria and 
promised the mandates early independence, although 
the exact nature of the pledge has proved a moot 
question. Since that time both France and Britain 
have granted recognition to the two states on condi- 








tion that France be accorded special privileges sim- 
ilar to those held by Britain in Egypt or Iraq. The 
United States and Russia, by contrast, have recog- 
nized the full independence of the former mandates. 

Syrian and Lebanese officials have argued at length 
that they are unable to negotiate a final treaty with 
France unless fully possessed of their sovereign 
rights. Once their sovereignty has been recognized, 
the two states might offer France certain rights with 
respect to the protection of its cultural interests, but 
none apparently with respect to military bases or 
economic concessions. Within the past year, France 
has relinquished control of most administrative posi- 
tions in both states. In the Lebanon, however, French 
authorities summarily arrested local officials in No- 
vember 1943 for passing domestic legislation con-_ 
trary to French wishes. In both Syria and the Lebanon 
France has retained control of the security troops 
stationed in the region, and it is on the plea of re- 
deploying troops to the Far East that France has, in 
fact, strengthened these forces in recent months. 

France's claim that it must safeguard its route to 
Indo-China by a privileged position in the Levant 
is similar to Britain's claim that it must hold the 
Empire life line by maintaining its position in Pal- 
estine. Aside from these strategic interests, the eco- 
nomic resources of the Middle East attract the keen 
attention of all great powers. After World War I 
France sought the Syrian mandate largely to obtain 
access to the petroleum fields of the Mosul area. 
In a world of new power relationships—dependent 
as never before on oil for industrial as well as mil- 
itary purposes—the de Gaulle government has only 
followed a natural course by seeking to retain pre- 
dominant influence in Syria. 

ARAB LEAGUE SUPPORTS SYRIA. The Levant 
crisis also raises the question of the attitude that may 
be taken by the newly formed Arab League, whose 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 











oe 
Ltyigeag 


peer 


TS laa UR Gott 5 
a 


r 

ie 

if 
* 


pee 


— aaa Page Two 


charter was announced on March 22. Although 
membership is limited at present to nations in the 
Near East, the League’s attitude must perforce con- 
cern France whose North African possessions are so 
closely related to the Arab states in nationalist sym- 
pathies, religion and culture. Syria and the Lebanon 
have played an active part during the past two years 
in laying the foundations for the Arab League, and 
when they became deadlocked with the French, the 
League gave its support to the two Arab countries. 
The League’s Council, originally scheduled to meet 
for the first time late this summer, hurriedly con- 
vened in Cairo on June 4 to decide its future course 
in the Syrian ee. The League is also vitally con- 
cerned with the future of Palestine and opposes Zion- 
ist plans for the creation of a Jewish Commonwealth. 
Britain’s support of the Arab League, therefore, 
raises far-reaching questions not only about Arabs 
but also about the disposition of the Palestinian 
mandate. 

GREAT POWERS INTERVENE. The prompt re- 
action of the United States and Russia to the Levant 
dispute clearly shows the new interest these two 
great powers take in the affairs of a region where 
neither had an active concern in the past. America’s 
strategic interests, like those of Britain, are involved, 


PUBLIC CRITICISM FORCES U.S. TO REVIEW POLICY ON ARGENTINA 


As the military government of Argentina enters 
its third year, the United States seems no more. cer- 
tain of its policy toward Buenos Aires than in the 
days immediately following the June 4, 1943 revolu- 
tion. Although the long-withheld official recogni- 
tion has been accorded and Argentina has been ad- 
mitted to the UNCIO, the State Department, con- 
fronted by widespread criticism of its policy here 
and reports of a veritable reign of terror in Buenos 
Aires, has now been compelled to adopt a less cordial 
attitude toward Argentina. The reference made to 
that country by Secretary of State Stettinius in his 
San Francisco broadcast on May 28 indicated that the 
State Department’s method of dealing with the 
Argentine problem has been revised, if not actually 
changed. Since then, warnings from Washington 
have been countered by suave assurances from 
Buenos Aires that every international commitment 
would be fulfilled. In the course of this diplo- 
matic exchange, Mr. Spruille Braden, newly ap- 
pointed Ambassador to Argentina, stated that one of 
our mutual obligations ‘is to make effective our fer- 
vent adherence to democracy and to the principles 
and purposes of the Atlantic Charter.” 

CONFUSION OF VIEWS ON ARGENTINA. 
Hitherto, a wide divergence has existed between the 
views expressed by the State Department, on the 
one hand, and public opinion as reflected in the press, 
on the other, regarding the precise nature of the con- 








—= 


for the Mediterranean route will prove invaluable 
in transporting men and supplies from Europe's t¢. 
cent battlefields to those of the Far East. American 
oil interests, poised for further exploitation of the 
Middle Eastern reserves, are also concerned with the 
role of France in that area. Our support of Church. 


ill’s note to de Gaulle, expressed by President Tr. | 


man on May 28, should be interpreted not as a threat 
to the French but as a sign of the growing importance 
of the Middle East to our national security. 


The Soviet Union alone among the great powers 
has pointed to some of the larger problems at stake 
in the Middle East. Here, as in Europe, the Soviet 
Union has placed itself in an advantageous public 
position. By stating that the dispute demands the co. 
ordinated action of all the great powers, Russia js 
merely repeating the views previously expressed by 
many American and British observers. For most of 
the tangled issues of the Middle East cannot be solved 
without full cooperation on the part of all the 
powers now interested in the area. If such coopera. 
tion cannot be achieved, friction will persist, and the 
Arab League may then become the tool of any power 
willing to back Arab demands in a given crisis. 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


ditions which Argentina should be asked to fulfill if 
it is to be regarded as a member in good standing of 
the hemisphere family. The American people, guided 
by the strongly worded attacks of President Roose- 
velt and Cordell Hull against the internal “Fascist” 
régime of that country, had assumed that the Farrell 
government would have to square its internal meth- 
ods—as well as its foreign policy—with the aims 
and objectives of the United Nations. Under Secte- 
tary Stettinius, however, the State Department re- 
treated from the position taken by Mr. Hull, and 
took the stand that, to win United States recognition, 
the Farrell government should declare war on the 
Axis and clear the country of all centers of Axis in- 
fluence. The new “team” in the Department has 





stated on numerous occasions that, in its dealings . 


with Latin American nations, it would seek to up 
hold the principle of nonintervention—a policy ap- 
plauded by Pan-Americanists. In theory, this position 
has the advantage of consistency: for we can hardly 
ask of Argentina what we do not ask of Brazil, 


Paraguay, or the Dominican Republic, to name a few | 


Latin American countries with undemocratic régimes. 
Yet, in practice, any action undertaken by Washing: 
ton in a region where our political and economit 
interests are deeply rooted assumes the character of 
intervention, favoring one faction against another, of 
one country against its neighbor. The United States, 
by recognizing the military régime of Argentina, 





- te ooo Ce -ae ace oe ae Se 





wers 
Stake 
Oviet 
ublic 
1e CO 
sia is 
od by 
st of 
olved 
| the 
/peta- 
d the 


ower 


AN 


A 
fill if 
ng of 
uided 
.00S€- 
scist” 
arrell 
meth- 
aims 
Secre- 
nt fe- 
, and 
ition, 
n the 
iS in- 
t has 


alings | 


O up 
ap 
S1ti0n 
vardly 
3razil, 
a few 
zimes. 
shing- 
nomic 
ter of 
1er, Of 
States, 
ntina, 














-_ 


has, in this instance, helped a shaky government to 
maintain itself in power, against the will of its 

ple and to the ultimate detriment of relations 
between the Argentines and ourselves. 

U.S. OBJECTIVES NOT ACHIEVED. The most 
unfortunate aspect of the matter is that Washington 
has not achieved even its limited objective. It has not 
succeeded in completely eliminating Axis activities 
or in fostering the semblance, at least, of peaceful 
government in Buenos Aires. The Farrell régime, in 
return for a paper declaration of war, was accorded 
recognition and—against the expressed wishes of 
Russia—a seat at the United Nations Conference. 
By this over-hasty action we lost our political weapon 
of pressure, alienated on this question our most 

werful ally, and gave the Colonels’ government a 
blank check to pursue its reactionary policies un- 
hampered by outside interference. 

Now that chilling reports come from Buenos Aires 
of “conditions worse than those encountered in Fas- 
cist Italy’—information which Washington must 
have had in its possession for some time—the State 
Department may find cause to regret its recent policy 
toward Argentina. But the only means we now have 
to further the application of democratic principles 
in Argentina is our economic bargaining power. It is 
reported, without confirmation, that our export 
quotas to Argentina are being reconsidered. 

BUENOS AIRES PROMISES ELECTIONS. The 
fact that the United States may belatedly attach con- 
ditions to the full resumption of relations with Ar- 
gentina probably accounts for the promulgation on 
June 1 of the long-promised statute of political par- 
ties. For although the decree has been ready at least 
a month, its publication was postponed until the 
moment when Vice President Perén, with his cus- 
tomary acumen, judged it necessary once more to 


_ placate international opinion. The statute establishes 


a Federal electoral court, whose power extends to 
each province through provincial electoral judges. 
The court is empowered to authorize or prohibit the 
organization of political parties and the appointment 
of their leaders, to scrutinize membership lists and 
expenditures, and to intervene in intra-party disputes. 
Party leaders are to be elected by direct, compulsory 
and secret ballot; and their campaign expenditures 
are not to exceed $2,500. While the original draft 


DISPUTE OVER VETO WILL NOT 


SAN FRANCISCcO.—The Charter emerging from the 
United Nations Conference on International Organ- 
ization is still incomplete after six weeks of meet- 
ings, but its general nature is already clear. Decisions 
tentatively reached preserve the fundamental prin- 
ciple of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals—that secur- 
ity can be best achieved by the military might of a 
limited number of great or potentially great states 


Page Three 








excluded civil servants and illiterates from 
membership, the decree as finally published elim- 
inated this provision. Should Perén encourage the 
formation of a new party, which would then “draft” - 
him as Presidential candidate, it is clear that he 
could derive considerable support from these groups. 

Many Argentines would agree that the malpractices 
of the past were in no small degree responsible for 
the tragic failure of Argentine democracy. But, if 
administered by the present régime, it will simply 
lead to the resumption of machine politics formerly 
employed by the Conservative party. What makes it 
clear that this decree is but another example of the 
government's delaying tactics is the fact that it will 
not become effective until August 1. Political parties 
will not be able to organize before the first of No- 
vember. This they cannot do, in any case, until the 
ban on political activities is lifted and the “war 
emergency” declared at an end. Since December 16, 
1941 Argentina has been under a state of siege 
which suppresses individual guarantees, freedom of 
opinion and the right of assembly. Between now and 
the end of the year, therefore, the military régime 
will doubtless attempt to quell dissident elements 
and rally its shaken Army support. 

RESISTANCE ALONG THE RIVER PLATE. 
Despite the apparent hopelessness of their position, 
the pre-revolution political parties, now functioning 
underground, are perhaps better organized and more 
active today than ever before. On February 15 in 
Montevideo, Conservative, Radical, Socialist and Com- 
munist party leaders formed a Junta of Resistance 
and pledged themselves to cooperate for the reinstate- 
ment of normal constitutional government. That po- 
litical unity has been achieved is a notable step, the 
more so when it is recalled that the failure of the 
democratic parties to work together in 1943 gave 
the nationalists power by default. The leadership of 
the Junta resides in the Montevideo exiles; but 
throughout Argentina, according to a recent “com- 
muniqué” issued by the underground to the Latin 
American delegates at San Francisco, there is a large 
cooperating movement, composed of a cross section 
of the Argentine people, including Army men. This 
movement calls itself “Free Fatherland,” and de- 
clares it will not stop at violence to rid the country of 


the Colonels. Outve HoLMEs 
JEOPARDIZE UNCIO CHARTER 


combined in what amounts to an alliance. The big- 
power alliance, in turn, is made the core of an organ- 
ization where the weak will have an opportunity to 
influence the strong by persuasion, if they can, 
through public discussion in the General Assembly, 
and to further the development of humanitarian 
standards through the Economic and Social Council. 
The unity of the great powers on the issue of the 





7) 


be 

yy 

> % 
iz 
H 
A it 


rs < 
ete ty cata 


er bee 


~ " " “Td 
iW tatmap et Ye 
Ta gee ae 








essential nature of the organization has not been 
shaken by disagreements among themselves over 
questions like trusteeship. The delegations of the 
United States and the Soviet Union have been most 
firm in supporting the alliance principle. 

CONFLICT AT SAN FRANCISCO. The smaller 
nations have concentrated their efforts during the 
first six weeks of the Conference on attacking the 
alliance principle in two ways. They have challenged 
the Yalta Agreement of February 12, which recog- 
nizes the privilege of any one of the five major 
powers—the United States, Britain, the Soviet Union, 
France and China—to veto any step in either the 
peaceful or forceful settlement of a dispute; and, 
second, they have tried to strengthen the other agen- 
cies of the proposed organization, such as the Eco- 
nomic and Social Council and the Court. This 
struggle has been an outstanding feature of the Con- 
ference, where the active lesser states have tried to 
create an organization in which sovereign nations of 
unequal size and strength would have relatively 
equal authority. 

Thus far the lesser states have gained no essential 
victory. For practical purposes the Court is, in the 
Charter’s embryonic form, a secondary agency, sub- 
ordinate to the political and military control of the 
Security Council. Amendments have been adopted in 
committee that elevate the Economic and Social 
Council to the role of a ‘principal organ’ but, since 
the Council remains restricted by the concept of sov- 
ereignty, it can only recommend action to the mem- 
ber states. The General Assembly retains the power 
only to debate and to suggest; the most it can become 
is the world’s sounding board. The key institution of 
the alliance, the Security Council, retains at the end 
of six weeks the authority the Dumbarton Oaks pro- 
posals assigned to it orginally. The five permanent 
members of the Security Council are the Big Five 
which make up the alliance. Their firm determination 
to safeguard the alliance principle explains their 
unyielding reluctance to abandon the Yalta Agree- 
ment on the privilege of “veto” as its opponents call 
it, or the “unanimity rule’’ as it is described by its 
defenders. While a world organization of sovereign 
nations with equal powers might function by major- 
ity or two-thirds rule, alliances of nations function 
only by common agreement or else fall apart. Secre- 
tary of State Stettinius emphasized this side of veto- 
unanimity in his address of May 27, when he said: 
“The five permanent members of the Security Coun- 
cil have at their disposal an overwhelming propor- 


Page Four 





— 
—— 





tion of the men and material necessary to enforce 
peace. .. . What happens if one of the five perma. 
nent members embarks on a course of aggression and 
refuses to recognize the machinery of the World 
Organization? . . . Another world war has come, 
vote or no vote, and the World Organization has 
failed.” 


EXTENSIVE GREAT POWER CONTROL. The 
crisis between Syria and France has given the dele. 
gates here a sense of urgency about their business, 
and to some degree has furnished the prod to action 
which might have been provided long ago by the 
United States. The Conference has lacked leadership, 
Delegates of the principal powers consider it wiser, 
however, to permit full discussion now rather than to 
invite the bitter reproach later that the Charter was 
hurried through. Yet despite the impetus given by the 
Levant crisis, the end of the Conference seems far 
away. New disagreement among the major allies 
themselves developed on May 29, when the Soviet 
Union, in opposition to Britain, requested the aboli- 
tion of restrictions on the transfer of League man- 
dates to the new world organization. The lesser pow- 
ers are still struggling not only against a rigid inter- 
pretation of the veto, but also against a great-power 
veto on amendments to the Charter. A proposal of the 
United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and China 
would authorize the calling of a convention to con- 
sider amendments at the instance of the Assembly 
but only with the approval of the Security Council— 
presumably voting by the unanimity rule. On May 30 
the Soviet Union indicated the great powers’ desire 
to maintain operational control of the organization 
in the hands of the permanent members of the Secur- 
ity Council when it objected to a Netherlands-Aus 
tralian interpretation that the Assembly could reject 
any candidate whom the Security Council might 
nominate as Secretary General of the organization. 


BLAIR BOLLES 





Gold and the Gold Standard, by Edwin W. Kemmerer. New 
York, McGraw Hill, 1944. $2.50 


This book presents a brief history of the gold standard, 
with special emphasis on its use before and after World 
War I. The author presents a plan for its revived use after 
World War II. 


Colonies, by Eric A. Walker. Cambridge, England, Univer- 
sity Press, 1944. $1.25 


In this brief volume the author seeks to explain the 
colonial policies of Britain, France, the Netherlands, the 
United States and the U.S.S.R. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 34, Jung 8, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Pelicy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MicHeLes Dran, Editor. Envered 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


AI 181 








19 





