ON. 
e of 
f, it 
dual 

the 
3ress 
Cog: 

the 
stern 
fear 


| the / 


oday 
mer- 
ainst 


“med 
uest 

$ ap | 
‘eS 


deh 
But 


y by | 


ni 
sian 
Nazi 
Hit- 
aken 
ition 
r the 
s be- 
that 
ffect 
wing 
e ob 


nt in 


NE 


Entered as 2nd class matter 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XX, No. 49 


—_ 


SEPTEMBER 26, 1941 





§ the Russo-German war enters its fourth month, 
the Soviet military situation appears to warrant 
little optimism. In the northwest the German noose 





about Leningrad is being slowly but inexorably 
tightened. In the Ukraine Moscow has admitted the 
fall of Kiev, first announced by Berlin on Septem- 
ber 19, and the German army is making steady 
progress toward the Donets industrial basin, east of 
the Dnieper River. Farther to the south another 
German thrust is said to have cut off the Crimea with 
its important naval base at Sevastopol. 

Despite fierce Russian resistance the capture of 
Leningrad, the second largest Soviet city, seems now 
only a matter of time. The Leningrad area accounts 
for 10 to 12 per cent of Soviet industrial production, 
including almost a fifth of the machine tool output. 
It contains not only important consumers goods in- 
, dustries, but also the well-known Red Putilovets 
| plant, reputed to be the largest munitions factory in 
the U.S.S.R. Close to Leningrad lies Kronstadt, the 

} only remaining naval base which can supply the 

Russian fleet operating in the Baltic Sea. With Lenin- 

grad and Kronstadt in their hands, German troops, 
) provisioned by sea, would be free to make an east- 
watd drive toward Moscow. 








| CONQUEST OF THE UKRAINE. Up to the 


present the most important German gains have been 
made in the Ukraine. The broad Dnieper River, 
which checked the advance for some time, has now 
been crossed at numerous points. The capture of 
) Kiev, with its population of 846,000, is not so im- 
portant of itself, because the city has few war indus- 
ities. At the same time, however, German thrusts 
fom Konotop and Kremenchug have apparently 
isolated a large body of Russian troops east of Kiev. 
Another column, proceeding from Kremenchug, is 
approaching Kharkov, a city of 809,000 which is 
the center of the Ukraine’s heavy industry. The Ger- 
mans are evidently aiming at the rapid conquest of 








GERMANY STRIKES AT VITAL SOVIET INDUSTRIES 


the Donets industrial region with its rich coal mines 
and vital metallurgical industries. 

The German armies, however, cannot stop. with 
the seizure of the entire Ukraine. They must drive 
past the city of Rostov toward the Caspian Sea in 
order to cut off assistance to Russia through Iran 
and to secure the rich oil resources of the Caucasus. 
Germany was forced to stand by while Russian and 
British troops completed occupation of Iran on Sep- 
tember 19 following the abdication, three days 
earlier, of the recalcitrant Riza Shah Pahlevi. Yet 
before Iran becomes a corridor of supply for the 
Soviet Union, German forces hope to drive a wedge 
between the two countries. Such a campaign is also 
dictated by the Nazi need for oil, which can be satis- 
fied only in the Caucasus. The gasoline and petrole- 
um stocks of the German army and air force must be 
replenished, and the collective farms of the Ukraine 
cannot be exploited without oil for tractors. 

A BLACK SEA CAMPAIGN? To achieve their 
objectives in southern Russia the Germans may 
to attack both by land and sea. The whole Black 
Sea area, together with the Turkish Straits, is ac- 
cordingly assuming greater importance. On Septem- 
ber 11 the Kremlin accused Bulgaria of permitting 
its seaports to be used as bases for Axis submarines 
and warships, and of allowing German and Italian 
forces to concentrate on its soil in preparation for 
landing operations in Soviet Crimea. Despite the 
traditional sympathies of the Bulgarian people for 
Russia, the Sofia government appears to be drifting 
into war with the Soviet Union. The Axis will find 
it difficult, however, to undertake naval operations 
in the Black Sea unless Italian warships can be sent 
through the Dardanelles and the Bosporus to coun- 
teract the present preponderance of the Soviet fleet. 
Under the Montreux Convention of 1936 no bel- 
ligerent warships may be permitted to pass through 
the Straits. Recently Ankara denied reports that Bul- 





es OL + ae a “re 


CTE a Et re ES SO 


er 


RR HoeF PaO STS 








= Page Two 





garia, which technically is still a non-belligerent, had 
requested the Turkish government to permit the 
transit of a number of war vessels which had pre- 
sumably been bought from Italy. The Axis powers, 
however, may soon press Turkey for active or pas- 
sive cooperation with their campaign against Soviet 
areas adjacent to the Black Sea. 

Even if Germany continues to be successful in its 
war on Russia, it has no assurance that it can compel 
the Soviet Union to cease fighting or that it will be 
able to capitalize on the industries and natural re- 
sources of the conquered territories. Although the 
loss of the Ukraine would undoubtedly be a serious 
blow to the U.S.S.R., the newer industrial regions 
in the Urals and Asia could continue to supply a 
Soviet army on a modest scale. Sverdlovsk in the 
Urals is the, center of an industrial area producing 
iron and steel, copper, petroleum and chemicals. 
Farther east, in the heart of Asia, lies the Kuznetsk 
basin with its important coal deposits and growing 
metallurgical industry. In the Far East the Soviet 
armies can draw part of their supplies from another 
great manufacturing center at Khaborovsk. Yet 
shortages will undoubtedly develop, and the fighting 
strength of the Russians may be seriously impaired 
unless foreign help can be sent via the Near East 
or Vladivostok. 


GERMANY’S DIFFICULTIES. Up to the pres- 
ent Germany has conquered a vast area in Euro 








— 
——$) —— 





plies in occupied countries, the Reich has Senerally | to the 
fallen heir to deficits, since most of the Overpopy. | a cons 
lated European continent has depended on overses | to red 
trade for part of its food and raw materials, aj | the G 
though Germany is now conquering a country with } the n¢ 
enormous natural resources, it may be a long tim, ) defen: 
before this wealth can be effectively utilized | lin. A 
strengthen the Nazi war machine. German expej.| depen 
ence with the Ukraine in 1918 indicates that a large | comm 
army of occupation may prove necessary to overcom, | Indo 
passive resistance; and the “scorched-earth” Policy { not b 
followed at present by Soviet armies will necessitate ) tablisl 
extensive reconstruction and repairs. or Inc 


Meanwhile, Germany itself has become poore | > of 
instead of richer. It is entering the third winter of | J@P4 
war with decreased food supplies. The reduction jg | #04. 
the meat rations made effective this summer must be | ‘hat ! 
continued, and rationing of potatoes, the chief Ge. ; 9 4" 
man staple, may have to be inaugurated. The dearth | Du 
of textile raw materials is likely to bring furthe | dition 
curtailment in clothing allowances. The German | may 
people, however, may bear these sacrifices willingly ) “mod 
so long as they remain convinced of their ability, in \ ingto 
the long run, to capitalize on the potentialities of { ment 
European Russia. For this reason it is all the more) peror 
important that Britain and the United States do | isters 
everything possible to accelerate their war effort | tion 
now, if they want to defeat Hitler. Time may no ) to th 


longer work to the advantage of the British and \ was! 








without acquiring large new sources of foodstuffs their allies. | ing J 
and raw materials. After exhausting available sup- JoHN C. pEWinpe | «rate 
, Suets 

TOKYO GAUGES BALANCE OF POWER | Impe 


While the Japanese-American discussions are 
marking time, developments on the European battle- 
fronts have again emphasized the uncertain basis on 
which these negotiations rest. Following the recent 
German advances in the Ukraine, the Tokyo authori- 
ties have begun to adopt a stiffer attitude toward the 
Soviet Union. On September 18 the Japanese gov- 
ernment protested the alleged sinking of a Korean 
ship by Soviet mines nearly three weeks earlier. On 
the next day, the departure for Moscow of some 50 
family members of the Soviet Embassy staff in Tokyo, 
including the wife of the Ambassador, Constantin 
Smetanin, gave additional evidence of growing ten- 
sion in Soviet-Japanese relations. The announcement 
that Japanese forces in southern Indo-China, ad- 





For an analysis of the probable effect of removal 
of U.S. duties on major Latin American com- 
modities, READ: 


TOWARD FREE TRADE WITH LATIN 
AMERICA by Constant Southworth 


25¢ 








October 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 





joining the Thailand frontier, will hold large-scale | by F 
maneuvers on September 29-30 also strikes a warn ) Scho 
ing note from that quarter. . math 

Although these events do not necessarily presage | "V® 
an immediate Japanese attack on Siberia or Thailand, | * SY 
they point to the fact that Tokyo does not intend to | “" 
permit the negotiations with the United States to tie | 
its hands, much as it might like to resume trade on ) °° 
the old terms. They also serve to discourage too great | on 
reliance on the possibility that the moderation dis such 
played by Tokyo or the recent changes in Japan's plan 
army organization will greatly alter the essentiall | T 
opportunist course of Japanese foreign policy. | poli 


ARMY REORGANIZATION IN TOKYO. En | - 
peror Hirohito’s assumption of direct command of ) an 
the Japanese army on September 11 has been gen) 4 
erally interpreted as a move to support a moderate 
foreign policy by curbing the army extremists, a 


though it might also be considered a preparatory step | 


esta 
fror 


— 


toward a possible extension of l’ar Eastern hostili: | ror: 
ties. A new General Defense Headquarters has been 
established under the active command of General 


Otozo Yamada, who will be personally responsible 








rer 








cale | 
af: ) 


sage | 
and, } 
d to 
) tie 

>On 
reat 
dis- 

ans | 


all | 
| 


Em: | 
1 of ) 


gen 
rate | 
al | 
step 





— 
——— 





to the Emperor. Since General Yamada is reportedly 
a conservative, it is expected that the shift will tend 
to reduce the influence of pro-Axis commanders on 
the General Staff. On the other hand, the powers of 
the new Defense Headquarters are restricted to the 
defense of Japan proper, Korea, Formosa and Sakha- 
lin. As many of the more extreme assertions of in- 
dependent authority have originated among officers 
commanding the troops in Manchuria, China and 
Indo-China, it appears strange that these forces have 
not been brought under command of the newly es- 
tablished Defense Headquarters. It is in Manchuria 
or Indo-China, for example, that independent action 
by officers in the field could most readily involve 
Japan in incidents that might quickly get out of 
hand. The obvious interpretation would seem to be 
that the Tokyo authorities are especially fearful of 
an army coup d’état on the home front. 

During recent weeks there have been several ad- 
ditional moves in Japanese domestic politics which 
may be designed to strengthen an impression of 
“moderation” while the conversations with Wash- 
ington are taking place. Preceding the announce- 
ment of the new Defense Headquarters, the Em- 
peror honored Premier Konoye and his Cabinet Min- 
isters at a palace luncheon tendered “in apprecia- 
tion of the outstanding services rendered by them 
to the State.” On September 17 a similar luncheon 
was held at the Imperial Palace for 20 of the rank- 
ing Japanese admirals, who generally favor a mod- 
erate course in foreign policy. Earlier, Admiral 
Suetsugu, an extremist who headed a section of the 


| Imperial Rule Assistance Association, was replaced 


by Fumio Goto, a bureaucrat of the conservative 
school. The conflict within Japan has also been 
marked by inflammatory speeches from representa- 
tives of army and civilian extremist circles, as well as 
a strong memorandum to the Premier sponsored, 
among others, by Mitsuru Toyama, head of the no- 
torious Black Dragon Society. Mass meetings have 
been held in Tokyo under the auspices of Tohokai, a 
Fascist party headed by Seigo Nakano, although 
such political groups have been theoretically sup- 
planted by the Imperial Rule Assistance Association. 

TOKYO SEEKS AN OPENING. Neither the 
political strife in Japan nor the current diplomatic 
negotiations can offer any certain guarantee that 
Japanese foreign policy will henceforth choose the 


| path of caution and moderation. Japan’s ties with 
| the Axis are the inevitable outcome of its effort to 


establish a “Greater East Asia,” which must be built 
from territories controlled by China, Britain, the 


Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: PROSPECTS IN SOVIET-GERMAN 
WAR 


Speaker: John C. deWilde 

Date: Sunday, September 28 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T. 
Station: NBC, blue network 














United States, the Netherlands and the Soviet Union. 
Tokyo has concentrated in Indo-China and Man- 
churia the forces which may be utilized to strike the 
next blow. It will carefully estimate the shifts in 
the balance of power as a pragmatic guide to action. 
The course of events on the Russian battlefronts is 
an important factor in these calculations. For the 
present, Japan’s advance has been halted by a set of 
concrete obstacles—the trade embargo, the Anglo- 
American-Dutch defense preparations in southeast 
Asia, China’s firm resistance, and the Soviet armed 
forces in Siberia. The Far Eastern defense front must 
be further unified and strengthened if Tokyo is to 
be denied the opening it seeks. T. A. Bisson 





The Armed Forces of the Pacific, by Capt. W. D. Puleston. 
New Haven, Conn., Yale University Press, 1941. $2.75 


An expert comparison of the organization and strength 
of the Japanese and American navies. The author analyzes 
the problem of a naval clash in Far Eastern waters, and 
concludes that the superior weight of the American fleet 
(including, however, 15 battleships) would guarantee vic- 
tory. 


Arsenal of Democracy, by Burnham Finney. New York, 
McGraw Hill, 1941. $2.50 
An extremely lucid and helpful book on the industrial 
side of national defense which should aid in clarifying 
popular thinking on this subject. 


Europe and the German Question, by F. W. Foerster. 
New York, Sheed & Ward, 1940. $3.50 
The author treats Hitlerism as a typical German mani- 
festation and concludes that the German nation as a whole 
must do penance for its sins at the conclusion of the war. 


Why France Lost the War, by A. Reithinger. New York, 
Oskar Priest, 1940. $1.25 
The underlying causes of the French collapse considered 
under the headings of declining population, and economic 
and political decay. 


My Boyhood in Siam, by Kumut Chandruang. New York, 
John Day, 1940. $2.00 
A delightfully intimate picture of Siamese family life, 
with revealing glimpses of local customs and traditions. 


The Maori People Today, edited by I. L. G. Sutherland. 
New York, Oxford University Press, 1940. $4.00 


An excellent survey of the status and problems of the 
Maori people. Prepared by a group of specialists, includ- 
ing a distinguished Maori scholar, the volume constitutes 
an outstanding contribution to modern anthropology and 
the history of New Zealand. 





stilt | FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 49, SEPTEMBER 26, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


eral | 
sible 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicueLes Dagan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Br 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





SE ay oe 4 


Meet ite tee 


nh St LE Seat 


ed DO hi eS © 


Washington News Letter 























WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


SEPT. 22.—Administration leaders, admitting the 
gravity of Russian reverses in the Ukraine and the 
lag in transfer of lend-lease materials to Britain, 
turned their attention this week to the immediate 
problem of speeding deliveries across the seas in time 
to meet the urgent needs of countries resisting Nazi 
aggression. 

LEND-LEASE REPORT. On the basis of data 
submitted to Congress on September 15 in President 
Roosevelt's second quarterly report of progress un- 
der the Lend-Lease Act, the problem appeared 
formidable. The report concedes that actual lend- 
lease deliveries have been disappointingly small, 
despite the fact that more than 614 of the first 7 
billion dollars has been “allocated,” and over 314 
billion legally “committed.” According to the Presi- 
dent’s accounting, the total of all defense articles 
transferred and defense services rendered amounted 
to $486,721,838 during the six-month period, as 
compared with only $75,000,000 transferred during 
the first three months. A further breakdown, how- 
ever, reveals that actual expenditures have come to 
only $388,912,000, while exports of lend-lease car- 
goes have not exceeded $190,447,000, over half of 
which represents agricultural, industrial and other 
commodities. More than 95 per cent of the cargo 
shipments have gone to the United Kingdom, the 
Middle East and Africa. 

The prospect for increased deliveries during the 
next few months, however, is not as dark as these 
figures would indicate. As the President pointed out 
in his report, lend-lease shipments are not the only 
materials which have been moving from the United 
States. In fact, much larger deliveries are being made 
under contracts placed by Britain and other coun- 
tries prior to the Lend-Lease Act. Thus, since the 
beginning of the war, about $4,400,000,000 worth 
of goods has been exported to the British Empire 
alone, and monthly exports to the United Kingdom 
and Canada are running close to $200,000,000. 

The request for a new lend-lease appropriation 
of $5,985,000,000, submitted to Congress on Sep- 
tember 18, will have no effect on the rate of deliv- 
eries in the immediate future, but is intended solely 
to prevent any interruption in the flow of aid due to 
lack of funds for future allocation. The appropria- 
tion, if approved, will finance the program through 
June 30, 1943, and leave the President free to extend 
aid to any country whose defense he considers vital 


to the security of the United States. | 

AID TO RUSSIA. While there is nothing in the 
terms of the original act or the new appropriatioy 
bill to prevent the extension of lend-lease aid to th} ‘wma 
Soviet Union, it is apparent that the Administratiog 
is planning a separate approach to the problem ot | 
financing Russian aid. The decision not to includ. } 
Russia in the lend-lease framework for the time be. 
ing was taken after consultation with Congressiona | Vo: 
leaders, who anticipated possible political repercus | 





| 


F 





sions in the debate on the new appropriation bill 
Despite the critical importance of Russia’s stanj 
against the Nazi war machine, there remains a strong T 
anti-Communist bloc in Congress which may insis E 
on specific exclusion of the Soviet Union from lend. | °U"! 
lease aid. inde| 
While the Administration is committed to th) °" 
licy of aid to Russia, the scope of its separate pro | 5!Y 
Policy Of a , pe P pro: | 
gram has not yet been fully revealed. In answer to | have 


reports from London expressing concern over the} “°° 
recent Soviet reverses and the need for increased aid | ‘S™ 
from Britain and America, Secretary Hull gave a} ™° 





surances at his press conference on September 19 that | ““* 
the United States was thoroughly aware of the need m 
for prompt and effective assistance. In other quar | 
ters, it was pointed out that credits amounting to| /**8 
$60,000,000 have already been released to the Sovie ) “" 
Union, and that further financial aid would be forth | “°" 
coming from the R.F.C. and other loan agencies this 
Last August the U.S. Treasury advanced $10,000,000 | Peg 
against gold to be shipped from the Soviet Union | ~ 
within 90 days. On September 17 the Federal Loan | ss 
Administrator announced that the Defence Supplies) "™ 
Corporation had contracted to purchase $100,000, po 
000 of strategic materials from the U.S.S.R. and had | 5° 
agreed to pay half of this sum prior to delivery. } 
While Washington officials famiuar with Soviet | = 
needs recognize that these advances will be insufficient / 1 
to replace the heavy losses suffered by the Russiat | °° 
forces, they assume that additional funds will be} “ig! 
forthcoming when the United States and British mis chic 
sions to Moscow report directly on ways and means ) Bar 
of transporting cargoes. Before leaving London las , '" 
week, W. Averell Harriman, head of the Americat hen 
delegation, announced that agreement had beet | low 
reached with the British on immediate measures, pte} P* 
sumably including reallocation of American ship und 
ments to Britain. Despite these assurances, howevet, ) dist 
there is little evidence that a heavy flow of supplié ) the 
can be organized for several weeks at least. = 
W.T. Stone | ™ 











