—= 


-Argen. 
id Uru. 
definite 
thereby 
35. 


a fron. 
e River 
its con- 
gra, to 
m here 
rs will 
> eighty 
largely 
ally the 
il fields 
satisfies 
A clantic 
Rivers, 
guaran- 
Puerto 
ort, Bo- 
onstruct 
ort. 
oid in 
nature, 
ye taken 
and in 
r of the 
lidity of 
ceeding 
of final 
inced, 


ould no 
| further 
nificance 
1acy has 
ken the 

One 
Ly 12 of 
, raising 
es which 
any, fol- 
ical and 
1 against 
an clear- 
of pur 
it Brazil 


designed 


‘ical and 


)MSON 


1. National 
EAN, Editor. 


BECOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XVII, No. 40 


Juty 29, 1938 


—_—_ 


A SPECIAL COMBINATION OFFER—$2.00 
for 
6 Headline Books and 4 World Affairs Pamphlets 


“The Puzzle of Palestine,” Headline Book which be- 
gins this subscription, will be followed in August by 
the World Affairs Pamphlet, “America Looks Abroad.” 


(FPA membership covers both these series.) 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 


AUG 2 1938 


2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


General Library 


University of Wichigan 


Ann Arbor. Wich. 


BRITAIN MEDIATES 


| 


IN CZECH CRISIS 


“\ a result of the visit of the King and Queen of 

England to Paris, the “common will” of France 
and Britain has been strengthened and European 
tension somewhat relieved. The extent to which the 
alliance has been cemented may be gathered from 
the statement on July 24 of Hore-Belisha, British 
War Minister: “It looks as though the two general 
staffs are one. The French Tri-Color and the British 
Union Jack seem as one flag.” 


The Paris conversations symbolized by the royal 
visit may have averted a new crisis over Czechoslo- 
vakia; they seem also to have delivered a blow to 
the German and Italian effort to drive a wedge be- 
tween Britain and France. Evidently Mussolini's 
effort to secure British recognition of Ethiopia 
before the withdrawal of Italian troops from 
Spain has met with defeat. Indeed he finds himself 
confronted with another condition, for Viscount 
Halifax, British Foreign Secretary, apparently as- 
sured France that Britain will not put into effect its 
agreement with Italy until Mussolini has signed an 
agreeméMt with Paris. 


On the eve of the royal visit to Paris, Hitler's 
personal emissary, Captain Wiedemann, held a 
private conversation with Viscount Halifax in Lon- 
don, in which he said that Hitler desired to achieve 


| a peaceful settlement of all outstanding questions. 


Prior to this visit a series of reports indicated a 
worsening of the relations between Berlin and 
Prague, but the German press attack ceased as 
Wiedemann and Ambassador von Dirksen proposed 
to Halifax British mediation in the negotiations now 
taking place between the Prague government and 
the Sudeten Germans. After discussing the proposal 
with the French ministers, Britain accepted, and on 
July 25th it was announced that Lord Runciman, 
conservative of the old-school who is opposed to 


colonial concessions to Germany, would proceed to 
Czechoslovakia as “adviser.” Since Prague has re- 
luctantly acquiesced in this move, a new crisis has 
been temporarily averted. It will now be more difh- 
cult for the Czech Parliament to enact a minority 
statute which the Sudeten minority opposes. 


In accepting this task of mediation Britain has vir- 
tually assumed responsibility for the fate of Czecho- 
slovakia. The Chamberlain government is well aware 
that if the Czech question leads to war, Britain 
inevitably will be drawn in as a result of its alliance 
with France. Britain wishes to do everything possible 
to settle the question without war, and there is an 
influential group in London willing to acquiesce 
in Germany's designs on Czechoslovakia provided 
they can be realized by peaceful means. The danger 
in British mediation is that the Benes government 
will be maneuvered into accepting a form of auton- 
omy for the Sudetens which will eventually destroy 
the independence of the country. In view of the 
British record in Spain and its acquiescence in the 
absorption of Ethiopia and Austria, world opinion 
will watch the forthcoming negotiations with a criti- 
cal eye. 


Despite the evident danger in this situation, Hit- 
ler's willingness to regard the Czech question as 
international rather than an exclusively bilateral 
question is an important step in the direction of mod- 
eration. The task of compromising the exigencies of 
Czech independence with German demands will 
prove extremely difficult. For the moment, neverthe- 
less, Europe has been given a breathing space. It 
was the initiative of Herr Stresemann which led to 
the Western Locarno agreements of 1925. If one is 
optimistic, he may hope that from the present initi- 
ative a Central European Locarno may be eventually 
concluded. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


U.S. URGES MEXICO TO ARBITRATE 


Secretary ‘Hull’s note of July 21 suggesting that 
the issues raised by Mexico's land program be sub- 
mitted to arbitration served to clarify United States 
policy, not alone on this question, but also, pre- 
sumably, on the petroleum dispute. As a basic plank 
in its social revolution, Mexico has sought to break 
up the great estates and return the land to the people. 
In applying this program, the holdings of many 
Americans have been seized without payment of 
“adequate, effective and prompt compensations,” as 
the note pointed out. Citing statistics which hitherto 
had been carefully guarded, Secretary Hull declared 
that from the time seizures began in 1915 until 
August 30, 1927—the final date for claims filed be- 
fore the General Claims Commission—some 161 
“moderate-sized” American properties had been ex- 
propriated, but that to date “not a single claim has 
been adjusted and none has been paid.” Since 1927 
additional landholdings of medium size, valued by 
the American owners at $10,132,388, have been 
taken without compensation. 

While expressing sympathy with Mexico's pro- 
gram for social betterment, Secretary Hull argued 
that the purposes of this program “are entirely un- 
related to and apart from the real issue under dis- 
cussion,” which was defined as whether “the prop- 
erty of American nationals may be taken by the 
Mexican Government without making prompt pay- 
ment of just compensation.” He declared flatly: “The 
taking of property without compensation is not ex- 
propriation. It is confiscation. It is no less confisca- 
tion because there may be an expressed intent to 
pay at some time in the future.” The note further 
contended that expropriation without prompt and 
adequate compensation was contrary to accepted 
practices of international law and violated the Good 
Neighbor policy, which was essentially reciprocal 
in character. 

Charging that the Mexican government, although 
professing support of the principle of compensation, 
had not observed this principle in the case of lands 
taken from American citizens, the United States pro- 
posed arbitration of the question “whether there 
has been compliance by the Government of Mexico 
with the rule of compensation as prescribed by in- 
ternational law” in the case of American lands 
seized since 1927, ‘and if not, the amount of, and 
terms under which, compensation should be made 
by the Government of Mexico.” It was suggested that 
recourse be had to the Inter-American Arbitration 
Treaty of 1929. Before arbitration can proceed under 


Page Two 


———_—— 
this agreement, the parties must reach an agreement 


both as to definition of the question to be arbitrated, 
and organization of an ad hoc tribunal. 


The arbitration proposal offers a course by which 
the United States can defend the rights of its na. 
tionals abroad and maintain its record of insistence 
on the observation of international commitments. 
At the same time, the decision to use legal means 
rather than diplomatic pressure or economic coer. 
cion minimizes the danger of a hostile reaction 
from Latin America. The note confronts Mexico 
with a difficult choice. If it accepts arbitration, with 
the possible consequence of a decision prescribing 
immediate compensation, it will be forced to slow 
down its whole social prog-am. For it seems prob- 
able that the principles involved in such a ruling on 
the land seizures would be applicable also to the 
expropriation of the oil properties and of rail 
roads both for Americans and other nation 
Mexico refuses arbitration—and it might it Ot 
the unwillingness of the United States to recognize 
the validity of the 1911 arbitral award, which 
favored Mexican claims to the Chamizal section of 
El Paso—the Cardenas régime may lose American 
friendship and possibly forfeit the financial aid re 
sulting from the silver purchase program, as Senator 
Key Pittman, chairman of the Senate Foreign Rela 
tions Committee, warned on the day following the 


Hull note. CHARLES A. THOMSON 


} 


The United States in World Affairs, 1937, by Whitney H. 
Shepardson in collaboration with William O. Scroggs. 
New York, Harper, 1938. $3.00 

Political Handbook of the World, 1938, edited by Walter H. 
Mallory. New York, Harper, 1938. $2.50 


Two valuable publications of the Council on Foreign Re 
lations. The former—the sixth of a series—is devoted 
chiefly to the evolution of the United States’ “neutrality” 
policy in the face of the Spanish rebellion and the Far 
Eastern conflict, and to the problems raised by Mexico's 
social revolution and by Fascist intrigue in South America. 


In general, the Roosevelt Administration's foreign policy 
is approved. The Political Handbook is a compact refer 
ence work on the political systems and p: vali of all 


countries and of several internationa! organizat 


Swedes in America,, edited by A. B. Benson and Naboth 
Hedlin. New Haven, Yale University Press, 1938. $3.00 
Compiled to coincide with the Swedish-American Ter- 

centenary celebration, this brings together in one volume 


the interesting story of the large part taken in American 
life by those of Swedish background. 


Republican Hispanic America: A History, by Charles Ed 
ward Chapman. New York, Macmillan, 1937. $3.50 
A companion to the author’s earlier volume Colonial 

Hispanic America. To a brief and somewhat disjointed 

treatment of the history of this area as a whole, is ab 

tached an extensive appendix presenting in summarized 
form the histories of the individual republics. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 40, Jury 29, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Leste BuBELL, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Béiton 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


a> '81 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


An in 


August 


Ji 


a dec 
relati 
borde 
its dri 
Japan 
front, 
force 
strug: 
Japan 
nese 
count 
tactic 
Japar 
rate « 
the Y 
with 
areas 
dowr 
of a 
Chen 
Un 
Japat 
Sovie 
kufet 
tier, 
Japat 
July 
the p 
the i 
porti 
Shige 
repo: 
to ‘‘f 
Com 
wher 
muni 


