to achiey 
Processes,” 
mplaceng, 
Amedlil 
arged with 


nued appli 
mber 15 jj 


ler Genen 
3 


LOSINGER 


McCOY 
‘icy Associa 


PRRIGOICAL “ 


SHABRAL LIBRAS" 
Baty. OF mice 


APR 2 6 04, 


neral Librargontered as 2nd class matter 


oO 
© 
ae | 


~~ e¢ 2 '* 
rersity of Wich! 


t rr ~ 
eet we vat y VY 


FOREIGN 


POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 27 


Aprit 19, 1946 


RIGHTIST VICTORY MUST NOT ACT AS BRAKE ON JAPANESE DEMOCRACY 


neral Fran} 
l, 1946, ow 
.and Amer 
on. Gener 
of the As» 
n the Boar 


lency of th 
bership ha 


ches has in | 


as include 
ar, the Phil 
was militar 
f-of-Staff to 
9; Director 
f the Amer 
Chief of th 
in 1927-2% 
iation Com 
F the Lytton 
a Doctor of 
Ids the Dis 


eral McCoy, 
elf as chie 


its chairman, 
okesman for 
mber of th 
's liaison be 
the title d 


>y Robert # 


ic document 
internationd 
linating nor 
peared. 


= 


rated. Natiool 


MICHELES DEX 
Dollars a Yea 


is results of Japan’s first post-war election in- 
dicate that conservatism remains the dominant 
theme in Japanese political life. Of the 466 members 
of the new Diet elected on April 10, the two con- 
servative parties, the so-called Liberals and Progres- 
sives, captured 139 and 91 seats, respectively, the 
Social Democrats 92, the Cooperatives 16, the Com- 
munists 5, independent candidates 84, and various 
minor parties 38, while one seat requires a second 
balloting. Since many of the independents are close 
to the Progressives, and the Social Democrats are 
in the main very moderate, it is evident that the con- 
servative victory is overwhelming. 

The results are not surprising, since it was not to 
be expected that within seven months of defeat the 
Japanese would embrace liberal views, casting off 
tendencies indoctrinated in them over many years 
of militaristic rule. This fact is all the more under- 
standable because the officials with whom our occu- 
pation forces have been dealing, from the Emperor 
and the Prime Minister down to the prefectural 
governors and local leaders, represent the more 
conservative groups in Japanese society. The Tojos 
and other overt warmakers have been removed and 
in many cases are awaiting punishment, but their 
Japanese successors are still far to the Right. This 
can be seen from the unwillingness of the present 
Shidehara cabinet to give more than lip-service to 
General MacArthur's directives on industrial and 
agrarian reforms. 


FREEST JAPANESE ELECTIONS. Despite some 
manifestations of campaign violence and the super- 
vision of the election by the Shidehara cabinet with- 
out representation of other elements, the balloting 
was unquestionably the freest in Japanese history. 
Not only was an exceptionally wide range of views 
presented to the voters, but women used the ballot 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


for the first time, and the voting age was reduced 
from twenty-five years to twenty-one. Of the 36,- 
000,000 registered voters—more than twice as many 
as in any previous Japanese election—70 per cent 
went to the polls, a notable figure. Yet it must be 
recognized that the elections, considered in relation 
to their background, were not entirely free. For ex- 
ample, the rural housewife who voted for the first 
time, but cast her ballot in accordance with the 
“directives” of the local political boss, exercised a 
freedom that is still somewhat illusory. 


With the results of the election before us, two 
main alternatives—or some combination of them— 
seem to be open: (1) to accept the vote as a healthy 
expression of the long-term desires of the Japanese 
people and to deal with the new cabinet as if it 
were virtually a genuine government, or (2) to re- 
gard the results largely as an early “poll” of Jap- 
anese sentiment that imposes no obligations on us. 
Taking the first course would have the effect of 
weakening the authority of the occupation” furces 
and laying the basis for a premature end of the 
occupation, with all the dangers of militaristic re- 
surgence that this would involve. The second course 
would be more likely to maintain the occupying 
authority intact, in fact as well as in principle, in- 
dicating clearly to the Japanese people that we ex- 
pect them to go much further along the road of 
democratic evolution. 


The meaning of these alternatives can be illus- 
trated by the case of Ichiro Hatoyama, head of the 
Japanese Liberal party, which won the largest num- 
ber of seats in the election. Should Premier Shide- 
hara be unsuccessful in current maneuvers to retain 
his position, Hatoyama might succeed him. Yet 
Hatoyama is the man who wrote a book some years 
ago, praising Hitler and Mussolini and declaring 


Law 


OY oe Perce: ta og na bn 


. Se 


a ae 


anus 


pean 


“ 
a 
a 
! 
4 


- ~ 


EPR 


— 


en 


fF 


ee te A Sei OI 


China unfit for self-government. The extent of his 
Opposition to Japanese aggression on the continent 
is indicated by his desire to end the China war on 
the basis of China’s giving Japan six northern prov- 
inces. It is clear that, while Hatoyama is different 
from Tojo, persons of his type cannot be expected 
to develop a new Japan. 

IS JAPAN READY FOR A CONSTITUTION? 
The new Diet is expected to give early considera- 
tion to a new draft constitution issued by the Shide- 
hara cabinet with General MacArthur's approval. 
This draft, which differs markedly from the old 
Japanese constitution, provides for a monarchy un- 
der an Emperor shorn of his governmental powers. 
It also renounces war for all time and pledges to 
Japanese citizens various rights, including—in addi- 
tion to the usual clauses concerning freedom of 
speech, press, assembly, etc.—guarantees of an equal 
education, academic freedom, collective bargaining 
for workers, the right to work, and freedom from 
“discrimination in political, economic or social re- 
lations because of race, creed, sex, social status, or 
family origin.” The Diet, consisting of two elective 
bodies—a House of Representatives and a House 
of Councilors—is to be “the sole law-making au- 
thority,” and the cabinet is to be responsible to the 
Diet. 

While many features of the constitution are im- 
pressive, it is difficult to see why it is necessary to 
adopt a definitive governmental charter at this time. 
Generally speaking, if a democratic constitution is 
to be lasting, it should proceed from a considerable 
body of popular experience and should give legal 
expression to achievements already registered in 
what promises to be enduring form. The United 
States constitution, for example, undoubtedly owes 


Page Two 


— 
—— 


much of its success to the fact that it was the produg 
of many years experience in the art of self-govem, 
ment in the colonial legislatures. By comparison, the 
seven months of Japanese development under the 
occupation appear too short to justify constitutional 
action. It would seem best simply to junk the olf 
constitution and to establish on a tentative basis 
such new administrative forms as are necessary fo, 
the functioning of the governmental machinery, 


It is quite proper, for example, for General Head. 
quarters, through its day-to-day directives, to deny 
the Japanese the power to wage war, or to insist op 
the extension of freedom in Japan. But to pretend 
that a constitution renouncing war or guaranteeing 
academic freedom represents the dominant outlook 
of the country today is to encourage complaceng 
in the United States about the state of affairs ip 
Japan. Moreover, adoption of the draft constitution 
would place an unnecessary stamp of approval on 
the institution of the Emperor, thereby prejudicing 
the future establishment of a Japanese republic, 
should the Japanese ultimately wish such a govern. 
ment. 


Recent developments therefore emphasize the im- 
portance of keeping the Japanese political situation 
fluid and not committing ourselves to groups or poli- 
cies that would act as a brake on further moves to- 


ward democracy. We are dealing in Japan not with | 


free allies, but with a people who are still in the 
shadow of militarism, despite the progress they 
have been making. In such a situation we should 
not shirk our responsibility by imagining that the 
position we occupy is one of neutrality rather than 
active intervention. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


NEW PLAN FOR GERMAN ECONOMY HINGES ON CENTRALIZED CONTROL 


In accordance with the Potsdam Protocol of last 
July, the Allied Control Council has submitted a 
plan determining the amount and character of in- 
dustrial equipment not required for the German 
peace economy and therefore available for repara- 
tions. This plan, which was submitted on March 28, 
would reduce the level of industry as a whole to 
about 50 to 55 per cent of the 1938 prewar level, 
excluding building and building materials indus- 
tries. The guiding principles for reparations and the 
level of German postwar economy were given in the 
Potsdam Protocol; in applying these principles, how- 
ever, differences developed in the Council with the 
result that the plan contains compromises. But these 
compromises were such as to make the plan coin- 
cide generally with the United States’ point of view, 
which favored a greater reduction in steel capacity 
than the British wanted, but less than that desired 
by Russia. 

ELIMINATION OF WAR POTENTIAL. The 


Protocol envisaged for Germany a “production and 
maintenance of goods and services required to meet 
the needs of the occupying forces and displaced 
persons in Germany and essential to maintain in 
Germany average living standards not exceeding the 
average of standards of living of European coun- 
tries.” The reductions specified in the plan have 
this objective; and they are intended simultaneously 
to destroy German war potential and to make Ger- 
many self-supporting. The amount of capital equip- 
ment available for reparations is therefore deter- 
mined indirectly. The plan bans entirely some in- 
dustries, including armaments, as well as fourteen 
specific industries which were an integral part of 
the war economy, as for example, synthetic gaso- 
line, oil, rubber, and ball and roller bearings. A 
second group of industries is to be reduced dras- 
tically. Included in this group is steel, vital in both 
war and peace. Steel capacity is set at 7,500,000 
ingot tons, which may be further reduced; but ac 


——— 


tual st 
ingot t 
also be 
puts fis 
cals, d) 
duced, 
ineeri 
industr. 
will cc 
examp! 
Germa 
will be 
instrun 
consun 
stay of 
proved 
marks, 
of foo 
ceeds « 
marks. 
costs ¢ 
cupatic 


distrib 
inat 
of the 
mind 
policy 
requir 
ductiv 
war, | 
which 
maint 
for tl 
want 

perio. 
of liv 
and 

were 
gover 


FORE! 
Headqi 
Editor, 
Please 


=> 


——= 


€ produg 
'f- govern, 
rison, the 
inder the 
titutional 
< the olf 
tive basis 
Ssary for 
hinery, 
ral Head. 
, to deny 
Insist On 
> pretend 
ranteeing 
t outlook 
nplaceng 
affairs in 
nstitution 
roval on 
‘ejudicing 
republic, 
a gover: 


e the im- 
situation 
S OF poli- 


noves to- 


not with } 


ill in the 
ress they 
re should 
that the 
ther than 


SINGER 


NTROL 


ction and 
1 to meet 
displaced 
untain in 
eding the 
‘an coun- 
lan have 
taneously 
ake Ger- 
tal equip- 
re deter- 
some if- 
fourteen 
| part of 
tic gaso- 
urings. A 
ced dras 
1 in both 
7,500,000 
|; but ac 


a 
eVGOouuu0™™ 


tual steel production shall not exceed 5,800,000 
ingot tons. Tonnages for nonferrous metals have 
also been scaled down, and maximum annual out- 

ts fixed. Similarly, basic chemicals, pharmaceuti- 
cals, dyestuffs, and synthetic fibers are greatly re- 
duced, as are machine tools and light and heavy en- 
gineering trades. A third group comprises those 
industries which will be retained, and some of which 
will contribute to maximizing agriculture, as for 
example, agricultural machinery. Moreover, since 
Germany cannot become a closed economy, exports 
will be necessary. Accordingly, optics and precision 
instruments, coal, potash, and certain other light 
consumer-goods industries are to become the main- 
stay of the new economy, and provide exports. Ap- 
proved imports planned for 1949 are to be 3 billion 
marks, the same as exports. Payments for imports 
of food and fodder will be a first charge on the pro- 
ceeds of exports, and are not to exceed 1.5 billion 
marks. The remaining 1.5 billion marks will cover 
costs of raw materials, transport, insurance and oc- 
cupation expenses. 

U.S. POLICY ON REPARATIONS. United 
States policy on reparations has, among other things, 
provided that German war potential be eliminated 
and that capital goods removed from Germany be 
distributed among the non-enemy nations of Europe 
in a manner to hasten the restoration and raising 
of their standards of living. Moreover, having in 
mind the fiasco of World War I reparations, our 
policy has been averse to any proposals which would 
require long-term reparations, with German pro- 
ductive capacity to meet them and, as after the last 
wat, United States funds. By the same token, a plan 
which leaves the Germans insufficient resources to 
maintain themselves would be unacceptable to us 
for the obvious reason, again, that we would not 
want to make good their food shortages for a long 
period. Nor would we desire the German standard 
of living so lowered as to cause famine, pestilence 
and disorder. Agreements covering these points 
were incorporated in the Potsdam Protocol, and 
poverned the work of the Council in drafting its 
plan. The Protocol made no provision for long-term 
feparations, the amount of which would in any 
event be directly affected by later decisions on plant 
removals. Given the drastic removals contemplated 
in the Control Council plan, it is not likely that any 
fecurrent reparations will be possible. 

CAN GERMANY BE MADE SELF-SUPPORT- 
ING? The United States, Britain and, to a lesser 
extent, France are now furnishing Germany food, 


Page Three 


seeds and various other supplies. An important 
question, therefore, is whether the new plan will 
enable Germany to pay its way. Admittedly, certain 
of the assumptions underlying the plan are de- 
batable, in particular the expectation that Germany 
will become a single economic unit, in accordance 
with the Potsdam Protocol. Economic unification 
is vital to the success of the plan; for if Germany is 
not so treated, the lack of coordination between 
the zones, with their diverse resources, will frustrate 
any efforts to compel the Germans to sustain them- 
selves. The March report by the American Military 
Government states that economic conditions in our 
zone have deteriorated steadily “for want of imple- 
mentation of the common policy and economic co- 
ordination for the whole of Germany.” To date, 
central administrative agencies have not been set 
up. Furthermore, agreement has not been reached 
on the Ruhr and the Rhineland. 

THE REACTION IN LONDON. Reports from 
London indicate growing dissatisfaction in official 
British circles with the Potsdam agreement, and 
the idea is being unofficially broached that at the 
coming meeting of the Foreign Ministers the en- 
tire German problem be reviewed, or a date set for 
a new conference to recast the agreement. Absence 
of central control would continue to accentuate the 
difficulties of economic administration in the west- 
ern zone, and would in fact make impossible any plan 
whereby the Germans are to be self-sustaining. In 
any event, economic demobilization of Germany 
will cost us something; we should strive for policies 
which will moderate these costs. From a strictly 
political point of view, however, it may be desir- 
able to subsidize the new German economy. Mean- 
while, we are attempting to democratize the Ger- 
mans on 1,200 calories a day, while in the Russian 
zone, where agricultural resources are greater, the 


ration is 1,600. Haro_p H. HuTCHESON 


NEW RESEARCH STAFF MEMBER 

The Association announces with pleasure the ap- 
pointment to the Research Department of Harold 
H. Hutcheson. Mr. Hutcheson received his B.A. at 
the University of Richmond, studied at the Univer- 
sity of Edinburgh, and received his Ph.D. at Johns 
Hopkins University. He has taught economics at 
Connecticut College for Women, and at Princeton 
and Johns Hopkins universities. During the war he 
served as Lieutenant-Commander in the U.S. Naval 
Reserve. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 27, Apri 19, 1946. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 


Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; Dorotuy F. Leger, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, 


Editor, Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


is: 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


aera 


Bo 
an mene 


, 
. 
” 
. 


" 
ri 
0 5 


Sree 


Washington News Letter 


DIPLOMATIC REVERSES RAISE QUESTIONS ABOUT U.S. POLICY 


Efforts made by the United States in recent months 
to influence affairs in various countries, notably Ar- 
gentina, Spain, Iran and Yugoslavia, have failed. 
The unsatisfactory consequences of our interventions 
call for a change in the conduct of our foreign 
policy. While United States foreign policy is based 
on the recognition that we have world-wide respon- 
sibilities in maintaining the peace, we have not yet 
hit on the diplomatic technique that will best guide 
us toward this goal. 

POLICY TOWARD ARGENTINA. Our short- 
comings in the conduct of foreign policy are appar- 
ent in our relations with Argentina. On February 11 
the State Department published a Blue Book which 
accused that government of having aided Germany 
during World War II, and of failing to carry out 
treaty pledges made at Rio de Janeiro in 1942 and 
at Mexico City in 1945 to repress German influences 
in Argentina. The publication date suggested strong- 
ly that the United States hoped to deter Argentines 
from voting in the presidential election of Febru- 
ary 24 for Colonel Juan Perén, the power behind the 
Farrell government. 

On March 28 Perén’s victory was assured. He 
won by 1,478,028 votes to 1,210,665 for his op- 
ponent, Tamborini. That victory was not in itself a 
complete rebuff to the United States, which in- 
tended to require that Perén rid himself of the Nazi 
influences described in the Blue Book before we 
would sign a treaty providing for mutual defense of 
the hemisphere to which Argentina would also be 
signatory. The other American Republics, how- 
ever, overwhelmingly indicated their willingness to 
sign such a treaty with the new, legally constituted 
Argentine government. Unless the United States 
was to become isolated in inter-American affairs, a 
fundamental review of its Argentine policy seemed 
necessary. 

In recognition of Perén’s victory, the United 
States on April 2 informed the Argentine govern- 
ment that it had appointed George S. Messersmith 
Ambassador to Argentina, to fill the post left pur- 
posely vacant since last August when Spruille 
Braden was named Assistant Secretary of State. Lest 
Argentina consider this nomination a complete 
abandonment of the policy which led us to publish 
the Blue Book, the State Department on April 8 
indicated that it would sign a hemisphere treaty 
with Perén provided he carries out existing treaty 
pledges to eliminate Axis influences. This condi- 
tional announcement was aimed primarily at Lud- 
wig Freude, Perén’s intimate adviser, whom the 


—— ee 


Blue Book described as leader of the Nazi German 
colony in Buenos Aires. But President Truman’s ad. 
dress to the Pan American Union on April 15, call. 
ing for inter-American solidarity against the threat 
of atomic warfare, was interpreted by Latin Ameri. 
cans as further evidence that the United States was 
modifying its Argentine policy. 

OTHER REBUFFS. Developments in other quar. 
ters also disclose the United States’ inability to 
achieve its immediate aims in international rela. 
tions. On March 4 the State Department issued a 
set of documents captured in Germany which de. 
picted General Franco as an active Axis collaborator 
who had given Germany and Italy military help 
during World War II. At the same time the United 
States, France and the United Kingdom called on 
the Spanish people to oust Franco by peaceful 
means. Yet Franco still controls Spain, while in the 
central Mediterranean area United States interfer. 
ence has also been rebuffed. On April 2 the United 
States, in an unusual judicial intervention, requested 


Yugoslavia to permit U.S. soldiers to testify on be { 


half of General Draja Mikhailovitch, whom the 
Yugoslav government has accused of collaborating 
with the enemy. On April 5 this request was refused. 

On March 25 Secretary of State Byrnes told the 
United Nations Security Council that this country 
supported the right of Iran to accuse Russia of in- 
terfering in Iranian affairs in a manner that threat. 
ened world peace. While on April 4 the United 
States and other members of the Council accepted 
Russia’s assurances that it would withdraw its troops 
—the chief instrument of intervention—from Iran 
by May 6, Russia nevertheless solidified its eco 
nomic and political relationship with Iran a day 
later by obtaining a tentative promise of an oil con- 


cession and by freezing, for practical purposes, the. 


autonomy of Azerbaijan. Thus Russian interference 
in Iran continues on a firm basis despite our desire 
to terminate it. 

To strengthen our diplomacy in the Westem 
Hemisphere, many Senators suggest that the United 
States act only through established channels for 
inter-American cooperation and abide by the wishes 
of the majority. Perhaps our world-wide diplomacy 
would gain if we resorted to the United Nations 
whenever we feel it desirable to intervene in at 
other’s affairs and would seek, in our representa 
tions to the United Nations, to get at the roots of 
problems abroad rather than deal with surface 
manifestations. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


AE RER rer pe — 


191 


