ttem 

O dismis. 
Protests 

“uropean 

ut Latin 

llaborate 

mispher 


RE. The 
to Latin 
’ Clear in 
effect, a 
the new 
to indi- 
nisphere, 
ate, who 
y of the 
etary of 
Control 
of Com- 
America 
of this 
h-needed 
m. which 


effective 
e failure 
ves of to 
the ma- 
g confu- 
; applied 
e Soviet 
access to 
t of ma 
nied for 
var ata 
presum- 
is camp. 
assets in 
licenses 
- the ma- 
govern 
etroleum 
to leave 
ines and 


cate that 
rjectives, 
Ly match 


STONE 


a 
QDICAL RO® 
Par! AL LIBRARY 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Genera) . 
~ ary 
Vary 
«Va + z 
"TS.ly Of rane 
A *Crlgag 
in Arbdop 


tre 
+ Sich? 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XX, No. 41 


Aucust 1, 1941 


—_— 


PACIFIC CRISIS LOOMS AS JAPAN OCCUPIES INDO-CHINA 


At the risk of inviting further retaliation by the 
United States, Great Britain and the Nether- 
lands Indies, Japanese armed forces are consolidat- 
ing the gains won by Tokyo’s agreement with Vichy, 
formally announced on July 26, and are proceeding 
this week to fortify and garrison the newly acquired 
bases in Indo-China. Under the terms of this agree- 
ment, providing for the “joint defense” of France's 
largest Asiatic possession, the Japanese have taken 
over the important airfield at Saigon, the deep na- 
tural harbor at Cam Ranh Bay—only partially devel- 
oped as a naval base—and are sending troops to 
key points along the Thailand and Chinese border. 

The strategic implications are apparent, for the 
occupation of Indo-China places Japan’s armed forces 
within striking distance of Malaya, the British and 
Dutch East Indies and the Philippines. From Cam 
Ranh Bay it is only 725 miles to Singapore, keystone 
of the British defense structure in southeast Asia, 
and only slightly farther to the American naval sta- 
tion at Cavite in the Philippines. Moreover, Japan is 
ina position to threaten Burma and the vital artery 
over which aid from the Western powers reaches 
Free China. Potentially, Tokyo benefits economically 
by this addition to its “greater East Asia co-prosper- 
ity sphere,” as Indo-China has a normal export sur- 
plus of 1,500,000 tons of rice, and ships abroad 
tubber, tin, coal and metal ores. 

WORLD-WIDE REPERCUSSIONS. Reactions to 
Japan’s bold step southward were immediate and 
far-reaching, indicating that the democracies had an- 
ticipated this move and, for almost the first time, 
were prepared to act in concert. 

1. The United States, taking the initiative with 
President Roosevelt's Executive Order of July 25, 
promptly froze Japanese funds in the same way that 
German and Italian assets were impounded on 
June 14. Chinese funds were included in the new 
freezing order to control accounts belonging to 


Chinese institutions dominated by Japan. The finan- 
cial offensive was supplemented by a decree nation- 
alizing the armed forces of the Philippines and plac- 
ing them, as well as United States army units, under 
an integrated Far Eastern Command entrusted to 
General Douglas MacArthur, military adviser to 
the Commonwealth government since 1935. 

2. Following Washington’s lead, the British gov- 
ernment on July 26 applied a similar freezing order 
to Japanese funds within the Empire and denounced 
the Anglo-Japanese commercial treaty of 1911, the 
Indian-Japanese trade agreement of 1934, and the 
Burmese-Japanese agreement of 1937. Although the 
first treaty will not legally terminate for a year, and 
the others for six months, their provisions are largely 
nullified by the restrictions on financial transactions. 
On the same day, Canada applied financial controls 
corresponding to those of the United Kingdom. 

3. Besides impounding Japanese funds on July 28, 
the government of the Netherlands Indies suspended 
operation of the agreement of November 12, 1940, 
by which Japan obtained 1,800,000 tons of petroleum 
annually in addition to its normal purchases of 494,- 
000 tons. Batavia intimated that smaller quantities 
of oil might be released to Japan if Great Britain 
and the United States agreed. 

U.S. POLICY. Washington’s economic sanctions 
were preceded by a final effort to head off Japan’s 
imminent descent on Indo-China. On July 24 Presi- 
dent Roosevelt, in a remarkably frank talk to a 
civilian defense group, explained that this govern- 
ment had allowed oil exports to Japan during the 
past years to keep the Japanese from striking at the 
East Indies oil fields. “It was very essential from 
our own selfish point of view of defense,” he said, 
“to prevent a war from starting in the South Pacific,” 
so that the democracies could continue to obtain 
rubber, tin and food products from that area. The 
President implied that the policy would be scrapped 


————— Page Two 


if Japan persisted in its aggressions. On the same 
day, Acting Secretary of State Sumner Welles for- 
mally warned Japan that the occupation of Indo- 
China would “bear directly upon the vital problem 
of our national security,” for the American govern- 
ment “can only conclude that the action of Japan 
is undertaken because of the estimated value to 
Japan of bases . . . primarily for purposes of further 
and more obvious movements of conquest in the 
adjacent areas.”’ 

When Tokyo failed to heed this warning, Washing- 
ton lost no time in imposing its freezing order, which 
blocked Japanese assets in this country estimated at 
$138,000,000. While the order was couched in 
sweeping terms, State Department officials were re- 
luctant to discuss the possibilities of a complete em- 
bargo on sales of oil and gasoline to Japan. In re- 
sponse to a eres Mr. Welles replied guardedly 
that every individual transaction with Japan would 
be considered on its own merits before a license was 
granted or refused. Apparently Washington did 
not intend to bring an immediate end to commercial 
intercourse or to close the door to diplomatic nego- 
tiations. At the same time Washington is in a posi- 
tion to bring increasing pressure on Tokyo by utiliz- 
ing its new licensing provisions and strengthening 
its military establishment in the Far East. 

The Administration’s reluctance to apply an all- 
out embargo may be based on considerations wider 
than the Pacific. Assuming that a blockade of Japan 
would mean a “shooting war,” the United States 
would be involved in a major conflict in the Far 
East—exactly the result Berlin hopes to attain by 
encouraging Japan’s provocative moves. The Nazi 
High Command admits that the invasion of Russia 
has been slowed up, and may take months to com- 
plete. Meanwhile, Britain continues to dominate 


—= 


the air in Western Europe and shipping losses jy 
June declined to 330,000 tons, which combine t, 
make its prospects brighter than at any time sing 
April 1940. American aid, which has been an jp, 
portant factor in achieving these results, might be 
dangerously impaired by a Pacific war. Such a cop. 
flict, moreover, would seriously affect the America 
industrial system, which depends on southeast Agia 
for 86 per cent of its rubber and 87 per cent of its 
tin. While stockpiles and other sources of these vital 
products would prevent an immediate shortage, the 
defense program would be hampered by militay 
operations in that area. 


CAN JAPAN STOP? These larger considerations 
do not obscure the fact that the democracies, especial. 
ly the United States, are committed to a strong course 
of action if Japan persists in its encroachments jp 
southeast Asia. The challenge to Japanese aggression 
enunciated last week is more pointed than any state. 
ment of policy made by the Western powers since the 
invasion of Manchuria in 1931. Further Japanese 
moves toward Singapore and the East Indies will 
apparently be met by more severe economic sanctions, 
imposed even at the risk of war. 


Tokyo dispatches indicate that some important 
Japanese circles understand the meaning of the re 
cent statements issued by Washington and London 
The sharp decline of the Japanese stock exchange 
and the elaborate explanation given to the Japanese 
public evidence the surprise and concern of officials 
over the Western powers’ firm stand. If the mod 
erate element in Tokyo—representatives of big bus: 
ness and some Navy officers—can exercise a restrait- 
ing influence on the Cabinet, the situation in the Fa 
East may continue in its present state. If not, a show. 


down seems imminent. Lours E. FRECHTLING 


UNITED FRONT STRENGTHENED IN LATIN AMERICA 


Several noteworthy developments have accentu- 
ated the series of recent economic and political 
moves to maintain a solid inter-American front 
against Axis activities in the Western Hemisphere. 
The economic developments center chiefly around 
the United States blacklist of July 17, while the 
significant political moves have originated in Latin 
America. 


For a penetrating analysis of one vital factor in 
the crisis looming in the Pacific, read: 


CHINA’S NATIONAL FRONT 
by T. A. Bisson 


25¢ 


July 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


UNITED STATES BLACKLIST. President Roose 
velt’s blacklist order, prohibiting further United 
States business transactions with 1,833 Latin Ameti 
can firms which were ‘‘deemed to be acting for the 
benefit of Germany or Italy or nationals of those 
countries,” has evoked widespread comment in the 
other American republics. While the initial response 
was generally favorable, there have been indications 
that some Latin American countries expect to have 
a hand in any future economic measures pertaining 
to the entire hemisphere. In Havana President Ful 
gencio Batista appointed a commission to study the 
blacklist and determine how Cuba could cooperate 
most effectively with the United States. In Brazil and 
Mexico the list was welcomed as an instrument fot 
wresting economic controls from foreigners and thu! 
carrying forward the nationalization of busines 
Far-reaching economic effects on Latin Americal 


— 


econon 
Vicent 
Ameri 
down” 
over b 


establi: 
strong 
restralt 
spokes 
countr! 
could 


In a 
cations 
by a f 
ments 
some 
countr: 
threate 
owing 
industt 
domes 
not iss 
accomy 
et nat! 
the lis 
mercia 
solve | 
govern 
over th 


POL 
paralle 
ments | 


| govern 


appear 
eign a 
Hemis; 
of sieg 
dismis: 
Wend! 
agents 
posed 
unrest 
cated 
the D 
gated 
Wend! 


FOREIGN 
Headquart 
Entered a 


ei: 


——= 


losses in 
mbine to 
ME since 
N an im. 
might be 
ch a con. 
A mericap 
Cast Asia 
=nt of its 
hese vital 
tage, the 

military 


derations 
| especial. 
Ng course 
ments in 
g gression 
any State: 
since the 
Japanese 
dies will 
sanctions, 


m portant 
yf the re 
London. 
exchange 
Japanese 
£ officials 
the mod. 
big busi: 
1 restrain 
n the Far 
t, a show- 


ITLING 


nt Roose 
c United 
in Amefi 
524 for the 
of those 
nt in the 
| response 
ndications 
t to have 
ertaining 
dent Ful- 
study the 
cooperate 
3razil and 
iment fot 
; and thus 
business. 
America 


— 


economy were foreseen by the Mexican labor leader 
Vicente Lombardo Toledano, who urged that Latin 
American workers “impede the immediate closing 
down” of blacklisted firms until they could be taken 
over by the various governments and their assets 
made available to the several national economies. 
While voicing fear of United States financial domi- 
sation of the Western Hemisphere, Dr. Lombardo 
raised the new move as “excellent, and justified” 
by the Axis threat. In Chile and Peru, where well- 
established German and Italian firms exercise a 
trong influence on economic life, reaction was more 
restrained; government and Chamber of Commerce 
spokesmen assumed the attitude that, since their 
guntries are neutral in the European war, they 
ould not recognize the validity of the blacklist. 


In a number of Latin American countries compli- 
ations have arisen because the blacklist was issued 
by a foreign power, and not by the local govern- 
ments under which the firms are incorporated. In 
sme cases, notably the small Central American 
countries, enforcement of the trading restrictions 
threatens to work hardships on local populations, 
owing to the fact that Germans control certain key 
industries—such as coffee-cleaning plants—on which 
domestic prosperity depends. Since Washington did 
not issue a detailed statement in Latin America to 
accompany the blacklist, it has not been clear wheth- 
et native business men who continue to deal with 
the listed firms will be subjected to ruinous com- 
mercial sanctions by the United States. To help re- 
solve this confusion, most of the Latin American 
governments may eventually find it necessary to take 
oer the operation of Axis-dominated concerns. 


POLITICAL MOVES AGAINST AXIS. Several 
parallel political moves by Latin American govern- 
ments emerge as significant. Foremost is the Bolivian 
government's vigorous action in suppressing what 
appears to be the boldest attempt yet made by for- 
tign agents to foster revolution in the Western 
Hemisphere. The proclamation of a nation-wide state 
of siege on July 19 was quickly followed by Bolivia's 
dismissal of the German Minister to La Paz, Ernst 
Wendler, and by an extensive round-up of German 
agents and pro-Nazis whom the government ex- 
posed as implicated in the Putsch. The widespread 
unrest in certain districts of the republic was indi- 
ated on July 22 in the revolt of 4,000 Indians in 
the Department of Cochabamba, apparently insti- 
gated as a mass protest against the dismissal of 
Wendler. As the government arrested 12 Indian 


‘ee 


Page Three 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: OIL AND THE FAR EAST 
Speaker: Louis E. Frechtling 
Date: Sunday, August 3 
Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 

Station: NBC, blue network 


leaders and quickly restored order, it revealed that 
the projected Putsch had been discovered by inter- 
ception of a letter to Minister Wendler from the 
Bolivian Military Attaché in Berlin, Major Elias Bel- 
monte Pabon, alleged pro-Nazi who aspired to the 
Bolivian Presidency and was especially popular in 
the Departments of Cochabamba and Santa Cruz. 


Bolivia was promptly supported by its neighbor- 
ing republics and by the United States. On July 21 
Acting Secretary of State Sumner Welles assured 
Bolivian President Pefiaranda that the United States 
would give full assistance if Bolivia’s ousting of the 
German Minister resulted in an international inci- 
dent. The Chilean government, in permitting Herr 
Wendler to pass through Chile on his return to 
Germany, has refused to let him go outside the city 
of Antofagasta, the desert port where he will be 
detained pending his required departure for Ger- 
many at the first opportunity. 


Argentina has also undertaken determined action 
against German activities. The most noteworthy 
measures were the July 23 raids on Nazi party head- 
quarters and five other alleged pro-Nazi organiza- 
tions. In these raids, initiated by a Chamber investi- 
gating committee similar to the Dies Committee, 
great quantities of Nazi records and documents 
were seized, and 15 persons were taken from Na- 
tional Socialist headquarters for questioning. Follow- 
ing a strong official protest by the German Ambassa- 
dor in Buenos Aires, the Argentine Foreign Min- 
istry has requested that some of the seized material 
be returned, but the Argentine Chamber has formal- 
ly supported its committee’s action, and declared 
that the group is not required by law to give up the 
documents. Despite the apparent unwillingness of 
the executive branch of the Argentine government 
to offend Germany, the Chamber's strong stand may 
yet force a showdown. The prompt United States 
support of Bolivia, in any case, has left no doubt 
that Washington is prepared to back up any Latin 
American government in maintaining a united front 
against the Axis in this hemisphere. 


A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 41, AuGust 1, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VerA MicHEeLtes Degan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Pow 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Ce 


EDs, 


a 
pe < 


: 


TS Be ee 


RI ee EE 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JuLyY 28.—With the freezing of Japanese assets 
in the United States, the Administration on Friday 
further extended its activities in the field of eco- 
nomic warfare. This significant action, as well as 
many controversies regarding the whole armament 
program, suggested once again the need for more 
centralized control over the “home front.” The 
United States is rapidly approaching the critical 
stage of its rearmament program, with military and 
civilian production beginning to compete for raw 
materials, plant and labor. The lack of an over-all 
agency of direction, similar to the War Industries 
Board under Bernard Baruch in the World War, 
was demonstrated last week by at least two develop- 
ments: the open clash between Leon Henderson and 
William S. Knudsen over curtailment of automobile 
production; and completion of a new tax bill by the 
House Ways and Means Committee. 

AUTOMOBILE PRODUCTION. The clash of 
personalities and policies within the defense organ- 
ization in Washington was evidenced by the an- 
nouncement of Mr. Henderson on July 19 calling 
for a 50 per cent reduction in the production of pas- 
senger cats and light trucks during the next 12 
months. Several days later Mr. Knudsen asserted 
that such a drastic curtailment was highly undesir- 
able because defense industries would be unable to 
absorb the displaced labor immediately. After Presi- 
dent Roosevelt had declared on July 26 that any 
differences over the degree of curtailment could be 
ironed out, automobile producers arranged to confer 
separately with OPACS and OPM on July 29. 

Whatever the ultimate decision reached, the lack 
of centralized direction and the existence of many 
different agencies with overlapping authority was 
strikingly illustrated by this incident. Practically all 
critics agree on the need for a new “Baruch board” 
that could handle procurement, now divided between 
the Army and Navy, and priorities. This need was 
recently underscored by two factors: the statement of 
Under Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson on July 
15 that only 15 per cent of American productive 
capacity is being devoted to defense work; and the 
revelation of OPM on July 26 that six firms have re- 
ceived 31.5 per cent of all Army and Navy orders. To 
create some supreme economic council is more easily 
said than done, however, for the new defense mo- 
bilization reflects the larger struggles of class, region 
and industry within the nation. The person or group 


which directs defense production gains virtual coq 
trol over the whole national economy. Presiden 
Roosevelt reportedly has not yet found an outstand. 
ing administrator who could effectively represen, 
both capital and labor. The combination of William 
S. Knudsen and Sidney Hillman as co-director of 
OPM, designed to fulfill the function of a “coalj. 
tion” such as achieved in Britain under Prime Mip. 
ister Churchill, is hampered by the conflict between 
the A. F. of L. and the C.I.O. 


THE NEW TAX BILL. The new revenue measure 
which was introduced in the House of Represents. 
tives on July 28 by the Ways and Means Committee 
illustrated not merely the lack of coordination be. 
tween governmental organs but also the unwilling. 
ness of Congress to face the implications of the de. 
fense program. When the Committee began its work 
in April it anticipated—in accordance with the Presi. 
dent's budget message — that expenditures in the 
1941-42 fiscal year would total $17.5 billion and rey. 
enue $8.3 billion. Agreeing with Secretary Morgen. 
thau that about two-thirds of the expenditure—$1146 
billion—should be met by revenue, the Committee 
struggled to find $3.5 billion in new taxes, only to 
discover that 1941-42 expenditures were estimated 
on June 1 at $22.2 billion, while additional author 
izations of $8 billion were passed by the House on 
July 28. The new and increased taxes—including 


$1,322,900,000 from corporations, $1,152,000,000 | * 
| tinues 


from individuals, and $1,054,300,000 in miscellane- 


ous excise taxes—were therefore completely inade | 


quate before they even reached the floor of the House. 
While fiscal policy is one of many functions re 
served exclusively by the Constitution to Congress, 


in recent decades increasingly close collaboration be-| 


tween the Executive and Legislature has been re 
quired, especially for any reduction in expenditures 
The failure of the Administration to support Se 


retary Morgenthau’s suggestion for the elimination / 
of a billion dollars in non-defense expenditures, and | 
to take the lead in broadening the income tax bast, 
indicates that finance is not yet regarded, as in Great 
Britain, as an integral part of the defense economy. | 
With government expenditures greatly increasing) 
civilian purchasing power while the defense prografl 


curtails the supply of civilian goods, the danger 0! 
price inflation becomes imminent. The present ta! 
bill meets only a small part of next year’s deficit and 
fails to siphon off the excess purchasing power tht 
may lead to hardships created by uncontrolled prices 
JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


Church 
States 1 


) thinkin 


States | 
to prep 
fenses 
1939. § 
or acti 
evitabl. 


, warm 


the cot 
Germa: 


measur 
sible | 
United 

THE 
Preside 
of war 
inet an 
derives 
from t 
avoid 
erty th 
Admin 
be disa: 
ever cc 
contro. 
tional | 
sions ¢ 
country 
past fe 
effectiv 
is at st 


