



ties 
1 to 
ead, 
23. 
eral 
orm 
tide 
vor- 
con- 
r by 


erve 
usal 
ated 
eral 
the 
anu- 
risis 
nod- 
the 
con- 
1ong 
omi- 
nov- 
icers 
icies 
. for 


par- 
ated 
ber. 
e the 
opre- 
yr its 
era- 
lists. 
by a 
ngth 
vern- 
yn in 
- the 
dual 
army 
Cab- 
home 
gov- 
oO re- 


is 





National 
Editor. 
r. 


aR IO! 
ANE |: 


INL — 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
08 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


geyet™ 


git 





Vou. XVI, No. 21 





MarcuH 19, 1937 
no 





— 


March 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


THE GERMAN ECONOMIC DILEMMA 
by John C. deWilde 


Despite superficial indications of a prosperous boom, economic 
conditions in Germany are far from sound. While the German 
people are unlikely to starve and a financial collapse does not 
appear imminent, economic isolation has created severe stress 
and strain. There are probably only two ways out of the present 
dilemma—forcible territorial expansion or reintegration in the 
world economy. Which alternative will Germany adopt? 


25 cents 


MAR 23 193! 





gored N. ¥., 
: yicne™ of March 3, 1879, 














arsitd © 


ch- 
ee wi 











a 


has fallen short of that accorded the Rebels. 





ITALIAN OFFENSIVE 


TT 


IN SPAIN 





TALIAN troops apparently formed the spear- 
head of General Franco’s fifth drive to capture 


Madrid, which opened on March 8. The offensive 
was launched on the Guadalajara front, about 
60 miles to the northeast of the erstwhile capi- 
tal. 
campaign of encirclement, whose ultimate pur- 
pose is to force the fall of Madrid by cutting it off 
from the rest of Loyalist Spain. 
days of the assault, the Insurgents made a maxi- 
mum gain of twelve miles. 
forces rallied and on March 14 it was announced 
that the attackers had been driven back, losing 
the village of Trijueque, and leaving behind in 
their flight artillery and ammunition, food and 
clothing. The Loyalists captured some 250 Italian 
prisoners. 
these operations as the first phase in what may 
prove to be the most powerful offensive yet 
launched by the Rebels in their five-month siege 
of the city. 


It was regarded as another step in the Rebel 


In the first three 


Then the government 


Military observers generally viewed 


The Italian prisoners taken by the Loyalists 


testified to the presence of at least 30,000 to 46,000 
Italian troops in the present Rebel offensive. 
sponsible sources had earlier estimated that 


Re- 


15,000 Italians took a leading part in the capture 


of the southern port of MaAalaga, which fell on 
February 9. The Italians now far outnumber the 
Germans, whose total contribution to the Rebel 
cause is placed by observers at 12,000 to 15,000, 
and who so far have not taken part in active fight- 


ing to any considerable degree. Foreign volun- 


teers estimated at from 20,000 to 35,000 have also 


re-enforced the government troops. But aid re- 
ceived by the Loyalists, both in men and material, 
The 
government suffered a serious blow when the 
Mar Cantdbrico, carrying some three million 
dollars’ worth of munitions and supplies from the 
United States and Mexico, was captured in the 
Bay of Biscay on March 8 by the Insurgent 


cruiser Canarias. Rebel sources declared that the 
vessel, which sailed from the United States just 
before extension of the neutrality legislation to 
civil conflicts, was taken with its valuable cargo 
to the port of Ferrol. 


On March 18 Juan Alvarez del Vayo, Loyalist 
Foreign Minister, addressed a note of protest to the 
League of Nations, and to the London non-inter- 
vention committee through Anthony Eden, British 
Foreign Secretary. This note formally accused 
Italy and Germany of waging an undeclared war 
in Spain and charged that the presence of foreign 
troops was a “scandalous violation” of interna- 
tional law and of the League Covenant. The Lon- 
don committee had approved a ban on foreign 
volunteers to become effective on February 21, but 
some Italian contingents were reported to have 
landed at Cadiz as late as March 6. Ignoring 
these alleged violations, the committee continued 
its efforts to inaugurate an international patrol 
of Spain’s land and sea frontiers which would 
prevent the entry of both arms and fighting men. 
Establishment of the naval cordon, originally set 
for March 6, was finally carried out on March 13. 
Inspection of the land frontiers, in which 180 
observers will participate along the French bor- 
der and some 130 on the Portuguese border, is 


expected to become effective within a few days. . 


In the naval patrol German and Italian warships 
have been assigned to guard the coastline under 
Loyalist control while British and French vessels 
will watch the coastline in Rebel possession. The 
board administering the patrol is headed by Vice 
Admiral van Dulm of the Netherlands, with an- 
other Dutchman, a Dane and a Briton serving as 
patrol officials. On March 11 Premier Francisco 
Largo Caballero declared that his government 
would resist any attempt by the international 
patrol to interfere with Loyalist ships carrying 
arms. 


Meanwhile the State Department had become 


























































OO Page Two 


the target of criticism in connection with its de- 
clared “policy of non-involvement and scrupulous 
impartiality with regard to the conflict in Spain.” 
In a statement issued on March 11 Secretary Hull 
reiterated the determination of the Department to 
refuse passports for travel in Spain, even to per- 
sons forming relief and medical units. A wave 
of protests brought a shift in this policy, and on 
March 13 the Department consented to issue pass- 
ports to “physicians, nurses and necessary at- 
tendants of bona fide medical and relief missions.” 
Loyalist supporters in this country have also at- 
tacked a provision in the McReynolds neutrality 
bill, now under debate in Congress, which would 
make unlawful not only loans or credits to any 
government engaged in civil strife, but also the 
act of soliciting or receiving contributions “for 
any such government, or political subdivision.” 
The difficulty of matching neutrality in sentiment 
with neutrality in legislation is already becoming 


apparent. CHARLES A. THOMSON 


CENTRAL EUROPE CHECKS THE NAZIS — 


The past few weeks have witnessed several 
decisive checks to the recently intensified Fascist 
drive for power in central and southeastern Eu- 
rope. They have also revealed the extent to which 
Germany and Italy are pushing their penetration 
into the economic and political life of the small 
powers in the Danubian basin. 


In Czechoslovakia the government on Febru- 
ary 22 reached an agreement with the German 
minority which grants practically all the demands 
of the three German “activist” parties and sets 
up real cultural autonomy for the three million 
Czech Germans. This agreement was reached in 
spite of Konrad Henlein’s refusal to participate 
in the negotiations on behalf of his Nazi-influ- 
enced Sudetendeutsche party, on the ground that 
only territorial autonomy could satisfy the two- 
thirds of the Czech German population which his 
party represents. The government’s new policy 
is a reaffirmation of the principle that the Ger- 
mans can be accepted by the Czechoslovaks as a 
second Staatsvolk, but only within the political 
and territorial framework of the Czechoslovak 
state. 


Meanwhile, strenuous Nazi efforts to break up 
the Little Entente and the Balkan bloc have met 
with strong resistance. The press of Germany 
and Poland has been conducting a virulent cam- 
paign against the alleged Sovietization of Czecho- 
slovakia, with the object of detaching Rumania 
and Yugoslavia from their Little Entente ally. 
The chief pretext for this attack, now that the 





a, i 
——— 





myth of Soviet airdromes on Czech territory has 
been exploded, is a book written last June by Jan 
Seba, Czech Minister to Bucharest, on The Little 
Entente and Soviet Russia in World Politics. This 
book was first brought to public attention in 
January by an anonymous pamphlet containing 
purported translations and charging that Seba’s 
sympathetic analysis of Soviet history revealed 
him as a Bolshevik propagandist. Interpellations 
in the Rumanian parliament coupled this anti- 
Entente campaign with a recent demonstration 
of the Fascist Iron Guard at the funeral of two 
of its members who had been killed in Spain. The 
diplomatic incident created by the presence of the 
German and Italian Ministers at the funeral was 
settled on March 9, when Rumania accepted the 


explanations of Berlin and Rome that their repre- 
sentatives’ action was purely personal. The goy- 
ernment has taken drastic action tg curb Fascia 
activity, in particular by closing all! the univers? 


ties, but the outcome of Rumania’s interna! strug 
gle is still in doubt. 

Thus far the Little Entente remains intact. 
While not yet disposed to accept the French 
offer of a collective security pact modeled on the 
Franco-Czechoslovak treaty, it continues to 
strengthen its economic and political collabora- 
tion. The Balkan bloc, too, ended the February 15 
meeting of its Council in an atmosphere of cor- 
diality, despite fears of a break-up created by 
the Bulgaro-Yugoslav pact* of January 24. The 
Council agreed that the pact was not contrary to 
either the letter or the spirit of the Balkan entente. 

The Rome protocol powers have also had to face 
new evidence of Nazi penetration. Hungary last 
week found it necessary to take measures against 
systematic infiltration of Nazi cells in vital organs 
of the government, although official Budapest de- 
nied the existence of a conspiracy. Austria 
emerged from the stormy visit of Baron von Neu- 
rath on February 15-18 without capitulating to 


Nazi demands, but German distrust of Chancellor 
Schuschnigg’s official references to possible Haps- 
burg restoration continues to delay the collabora- 


tion of the two powers envisaged in the accord of 
July 11, 1936. HELEN FISHER 





*Cf. ‘‘Franco-British Overtures to Germany,’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, 
January 29, 1937. 





Hitler over Russia? by Ernst Henri. New York, Simon 
and Schuster, 1936. $2.50 
An ingenious account, hovering between fact and Marx- 

ist fantasy, of a hypothetical attack on the U.S.S.R. by 

Germany and its supposed allies. 


Asia Answers, by Ralph Townsend. New York, Putnam’s, 
1936. $3.00 
A justification of Japanese conquest in China. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 21, Marcu 19, 1937. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Screet, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lasits Bueit, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES Dean, Eéitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., umder the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


National 








ust men oh Ole oe tot oe. CO ee Ge 





