





































atin 
1res 
nis- 
ates 
tion 
rts, 
ma- 

28, 

the 
con- 
| be 
ing 
yuld 
azil. 
ican 


ing- 


| for 


ttle, 
‘ient 


‘ork, 


‘man 
A fri- 
rt of 


tional 
mp H. 
1879. 


sal Shoe Bishep Entered as 2nd class matter 


A wikiecatly ‘of Michieos- «4. 
| *CNigan Library 
Ann Arbor Mich. 5 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 38 


—_—_ 


Juuy 10, 1942 





FIVE years ago, on July 7, China began its national 
resistance to Japanese aggression, undertaking a 
struggle which may well rank with the American 
Revolution in significance as well as duration. In 
the summer and autumn of 1937 the world at large 
did not understand that it was witnessing the end 
of an era in Chinese history, for attention was still 
focused on China’s weaknesses in industry, transpor- 
tation, rural economy, education, political unity and 
national development. Time has shown the greater 
importance of other, less easily observable, factors: 
the movement toward modernization, the decrease 
of internal dissension and, above all, the rising anti- 
Japanese national spirit of the Chinese people. 
WAR TESTS UNITY. This spirit has enabled 
China to meet an unending series of problems, both 
of internal and foreign origin. In 1937-38, the first 
yeat of war, the question was whether and by what 
methods to continue resistance after the loss of the 





economic capital at Shanghai and the political capi- 
pe ‘at Nanking. The answer was found in the 
sxorched-earth policy, guerrilla warfare, the reorgan- 
| ization of the Central Armies, and the development 
Of the military and political strategy of “trading 
space for time.’ In 1938-39 the capital at Hankow 
was lost, Wang Ching-wei deserted to the enemy, 
and a period of stalemate and attrition set in. China 
faced a most severe test of its purpose. It met this 
test by constructing a great base for further re- 
sistance in the hitherto backward Southwest, build- 
ing up the economies of the provinces of Szechwan, 
Yunnan, Sikang, Kwangsi and Kweichow, establish- 
ing new highways, railways, and radio and air com- 
munications, and linking the whole area with the 
outside world by completion of the Burma Road. 
During the first two years of war, China’s inter- 
National relations were relatively simple, since the 
thief problem was to appeal for aid to foreign coun- 
tries not themselves involved in active warfare. In 








FIVE YEARS OF CHINESE RESISTANCE 


1939-40, however, the Soviet Union and Germany 
signed a nonaggression pact, Britain and Germany 
became involved in war, and the United States 
adopted a policy of anti-Axis neutrality. China now 
faced the problem of securing support from coun- 
tries that were seemingly following sharply divergent 
policies. In order to maintain satisfactory relations 
with Germany and Italy and, at the same time, pro- 
mote anti-Japanese collaboration among the non- 
Axis powers, Chungking avoided taking sides in the 
European war, while indicating clearly its desire for 
a world-wide anti-Axis bloc. 

PACIFIC WAR ADDS TO PROBLEMS. The 
year 1940-41 began under very difficult circum- 
stances. The fall of France had already cut the rail- 
way link with the outside world via Indo-China. 
Soon Great Britain closed the Burma Road to, es- 
sential supplies for a three-month period. The politi- 
cal situation in China gradually deteriorated, reach- 
ing its lowest point in the winter of 1941, when the 
Chungking government sought to disband the guer- 
rilla New Fourth Army in the Yangtze valley. Al- 
though an open break was avoided, relations be- 
tween the government and the Communists have 


remained tense. Meanwhile, Japan extended its’ 


power in Indo-China and concluded a neutrality pact 
with the U.S.S.R. 

The German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941 
had the effect of bringing together once more 
the three nations which China hoped to secure as 
allies against Japan. Moreover, the United States, 
the British Empire and the Netherlands took long- 
awaited steps toward severing trade relations with 
Japan. But the outbreak of the Pacific War was fol- 
lowed by a series of Japanese victories in Southeast 
Asia, which deprived China of its Burma Road 
supply route and the financial contributions of the 
overseas Chinese, and exposed it to new Japanese at- 
tacks. Internally, the economic situation grew in- 



































Page Two —. |} 
creasingly serious. Prices, which had risen consider- dicated its awareness of the world-wide significance} at Al 
ably in previous years, skyrocketed in the absence of China’s development toward full independence } crews 
of effective controls—and hoarding became more By engaging an important part of Japan’s armed} from 
and more common. forces, China has made a contribution to the freedom} Army 

CHINA'S SPIRIT. In the perspective of five years, of other nations not yet equalled by the aid it has} as su 
it appears that the decision to continue resistance received. It is only natural that in recent months the} Sh 
has, at each critical point, made it possible for the Chinese people and government have exhibited a| wrest 
country to surmount the various obstacles of the growing national consciousness and an increased de. they 
time. Without forgetting for a moment the impor- termination to judge critically the actions of the! over 
tance of material achievements for the prosecution other United Nations, particularly where China} this t 
of the war, China’s spirit may be regarded as its itself is affected. They look with concern at the un- | cussi 
chief asset in the course of resistance. It is this un-  S°!ved political problems of India, and follow most] has b 
broken spirit that has made possible the adoption —— every statement of the Indian nationalist | were 

: eaders as well as every British action, such as the | over, 
of a successful defensive strategy, the internal eco- | Wace | 
. enlargement on July 3 of the Viceroy’s Executive | Alex 
nomic reconstruction of the western poevanees, the Council, and the appointment of an Indian Defense} this 
development toward democracy within the guerrilla Minister and two Indian members of the War Cab- } Pierr 
SCR, and the emergence of many of the charac- inet. They are disturbed by new difficulties in obtain: } labor 
teristics of a true national state. Despite all weak- _ ing supplies as a result of Japan’s success in cutting | not : 
nesses, the Chungking government is the strongest China off from the rest of the world. They are also} Vich 
administration the Republic has seen. It represents anxious to be treated with complete equality in the} men 
the greatest political unity and centralization China councils of the United Nations. Yet, more important} for u 
has known in the last generation—and, perhaps, in than any of these problems is their resolution to con- N 
all its history. Beyond this, it has developed an ac- tinue the struggle, for the Chinese realize that this is} p.., 
tive foreign policy, has established China as one of the only road to their own freedom. a 
the “Big Four’ of the anti-Axis world, and has in- LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER } have 
NAZI DRIVE IMPERILS SOUTHERN RUSSIA thres 

As the Germans intensify their drive into south- bilize the Russians, and thus, at one stroke, avoid 6 * 
ern Russia, and continue to threaten the Suez Canal, another winter campaign in Russia and release 3 ; 
the United Nations are fast approaching the zero troops for operations in Western Europe. The Ger- “ 
hour long predicted for this summer. The fall of mans still enjoy superiority in war material on the a 
Sevastopol, admitted by the Russians on July 5, de- Russian front, where they are making large-scale * 
prived the U.S.S.R. of its principal remaining naval use of their air force, whose exact location during a 
base in the Black Sea, and gave the Germans com- the past few weeks had mystified Allied observers. a 
mand of the Crimea, springboard for an attack on The Russians may be expected to continue their ha 
the Caucasus. The Germans have lost no time in stubborn and courageous resistance, but American a : 
pressing their advantage in Russia. On July 7 the public opinion should be prepared for Russian te- a 
Germans reported capture of Voronezh, on the treats into the interior of the country, unless Britain | om 
Moscow-Rostov railway. Here, as in the Crimea, and the United States succeed in diverting German om 
the main objective of the Germans is the oil of the forces to Western Europe. The Russians claim that om 
Caucasus. Should Russia lose its supply of oil, the German losses on the eastern front—killed, wound- “a 
highly mechanized Russian armies would be placed ed and captured—total several million. Responsible m 
in a perilous position, and so would Russia’s observers in this country place the number of dead ;.. 
mechanized collective farms. The Nazis hope to an- at over a million—as compared with the figure of ir 
nihilate Russia’s offensive power, or at least immo- 337,342 officially announced by the Germans last - 

week. (The German figure includes only dead and . 

With the vast international machinery now being missing, and does not mention men wounded of 7 

forged, can we achieve a workable union? For an captured. ) y 

appraisal from the point of view of post-war re- BRITISH STRIKE BACK IN EGYPT. The suc } , 

conctruction, read: cess or failure of Nazi plans will depend not only on | »"y 

MACHINERY OF COLLABORATION BETWEEN events in Russia, but on other fronts as_ well, july 

THE UNITED NATIONS by Paysen S. Wild, Jr. especially in Egypt. Hard-pressed British soldiers, } — 

25c¢ who lost 50,000 killed, wounded or captured in the _ 

July 1 issue of ForzEiGN Poticy Reports present campaign, with great loss of war material, “. 

REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. temporarily turned the tide of battle last weekend 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. at El Alamein, 70 miles from the British naval base 














10st 
list 
the 
tive 
nse 
~ab- 
ain: 
ting 
also 
the 
tant 
[On- 
is is 


void 
ease 
5ef- 
the 
cale 
ring 
ers. 
heir 
ican 
. £e 
tain 
man 
that 
ind- 
sible 
lead 
e of 
last 
and 
1 of 


suc: 
y on 
vell, 
1ers, 
_ the 
rial, 
cend 
base 








— 
_- 





at Alexandria. Reinforced by American planes and 
crews, and by fresh contingents of troops rushed in 
from the Near and Middle East, the British Eighth 
Army held off the Germans, but was not regarded 
as sufficiently strong to drive them back into Libya. 

Should the Germans capture Alexandria and 
wrest control of the Suez Canal from the British, 
they would be in a position to establish domination 
over the eastern Mediterranean. British defeat in 
this theatre of war might also have disastrous reper- 
cussions among the Arabs, and in Turkey, which 
has been acting on the assumption that British forces 
were adequate to meet the German onslaught. More- 
over, if the British fleet should be withdrawn from 
Alexandria (German sources claimed last week that 
this had already been done), General Franco and 
Pierre Laval would feel more free than ever to col- 
laborate with Hitler. While specific information is 
not available on this point, it is reported that the 
Vichy government aided the Nazis by transporting 
men and equipment across France to French Tunisia 
for use in Libya and Egypt. 


NAZI ATTEMPTS TO CUT SUPPLY LINES. 
Perhaps the most far-reaching result of Nazi suc- 
cesses in Africa is that Germany, whose victories 
have hitherto been won primarily on land, now 
threatens to outmaneuver the British in what was 
regarded as Britain’s element—the sea. Without ac- 
tually entering into major clashes with the British 
Navy in the Mediterranean—for which the Axis still 
lacks sufficient strength, in view of Italy’s heavy 
naval losses—the Nazis are systematically depriving 
the British of naval and air bases, and are whittling 
down their lines of supply. 

A similar effort to break down the supply lines 
that tenuously connect Britain and the United States 
with other United Nations has already been suc- 
cessfully made by Japan in China, and is now being 
attempted by Germany in Russia. Should the Ger- 
mans succeed in establishing control over the eastern 
Mediterranean, and penetrate into the Red Sea and 
the Indian Ocean, they could sever the new supply 
line from the United States to Russia through the 
Persian Gulf, served by American bases in the Near 
and Middle East. The Russians might thus be cut 
off from the United Nations in this area, at the very 
moment when they face a crucial test for defense of 

e oil of the Caucasus. 

Mr. Churchill, survived sharp British criticism of 
the Libyan disaster, winning a vote of confidence on 
July 2, although the British press reflected growing 


Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: NEW MOVES ON FAR EAST FRONT 
Speaker: Lawrence K. Rosinger 
Date: Sunday, July 12 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 
We regret to announce that, because of a rearrange- 
ment in the Blue Network's programs, the FPA’s “Amer- 


ica Looks Abroad” series will be temporarily discontinued 
after the July 12 broadcast. 











concern about what are regarded -.s disastrous mis- 
takes in leadership. In the United States, where opin- 
ion tends to swing from extreme optimism to ex- 
treme pessimism, British setbacks aroused even more 
outspoken comment. The real weakness of the Brit- 
ish is not lack of courage among soldiers or civilians, 
who have successfully withstood many grueling 
tests, but the consistent tendency of British military 
and political leaders to underestimate the strength 
and determination of the Axis powers. All the stric- 
tures made against British officials, however, apply 
with equal force to the United States. The United 
Nations, or rather certain of their leaders, have yet 
to learn that they are confronted by desperate ene- 
mies who will not stop at any sacrifice in terms of 
men and material to achieve their ends. The striking 
thing is that the people of Britain and the United 
States have sensed this more clearly than some of 
their leaders. Their growing desire to make all-out 
sacrifices to win the war—and the peace after the 
war—must be harnessed to the war effort before the 
United Nations can find the road to victory. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FPA PRESIDENT HEADS MILITARY COMMISSION 

General Frank R. McCoy, President of the Foreign 
Policy Association, will be absent temporarily in 
Washington, due to his appointment by President 
Roosevelt as head of the military commission to try 
the eight recently captured Nazi saboteurs. 


NEW RESEARCH STAFF MEMBERS 

The Association announces with pleasure the ap- 
pointment to the Research Department of Howard 
P. Whidden, Jr., research associate on the British 
Empire, and Lawrence K. Rosinger, Far Eastern 
specialist. Mr. Whidden has studied in Canada and 
in London, and received his Ph.D. from Harvard 
University, where he taught from 1940 to 1942. Mr. 
Rosinger, the author of many articles on the Far East, 
has done extensive work with the Institute of Pacific 
Relations and has been on the staff of the India Gov- 
ernment Trade Commissioner’s Office, New York. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 38, Juty 10, 1942. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
PoppER, Associate Editor. 
Three Dollars a Year. 


wisi 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; VERA MicHELES Dean, Editor; Daviw H. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


National 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





es 


pater BE st 3 








Washington News Letter 














_ JuLy 6.—The British reverses in Libya have com- 
pletely dissipated the earlier feeling of easy com- 
placency observable in Washington that the war 
would be won this year without undue effort on our 
part. It is now generally recognized that the conflict 
will be long and grim, and that the United Nations 
will be doing exceedingly well if, at the end of the 
year, they have succeeded in holding the Axis powers 
on approximately their present positions. This senti- 
ment was voiced by Senator Josh Lee of Oklahoma 
who said in the course of a debate in the Senate on 
the fall of Tobruk that “we have been too optimistic 
all along,” and that we “might just as well face the 
facts” that the United States must lay plans for a 
war of a minimum duration of five years and for the 
raising of an army of 10,000,000 men. 

To one who lived in Paris during the winter of 
1939-40, there is a striking similarity between the 
facile optimism that prevailed in the French capital 
during the first months of the war and the com- 
placency that was so evident in Washington this 
spring. Life went on much as usual in Paris during 
the first year of the war, the blackout was a joke, 
rationing was scarcely applied at all, and during the 
winter people danced at the night clubs of Mont- 
martre and Montparnasse just as in peacetime. The 
fashionable hotels of Washington reflect the same 
atmosphere of gaiety now, and the war seems as re- 
mote to Washington today as it did to Paris in the 
autumn of 1939. 


In those days Paul Reynaud, the French Finance 
Minister, had the walls of Paris plastered with 
posters, showing in red the huge areas of the world’s 
surface controlled by the Allies and in black the tiny 
patch in Central Europe that Germany occupied. 
Below was the encouraging caption, “we will win, 
because we are the stronger.” Those placards 
seemed to Frenchmen a masterpiece of irony when 
the Nazi troops poured into Paris the following June. 

But in the days of what was then known as the 
“phoney war,” the Parisians had unthinking con- 
fidence that superiority in raw materials would win 
the war for them, just as many Washingtonians 
believed that the mere voting of huge appropria- 
tions by Congress and the turning out of vast quan- 
tities of war supplies by the nation’s factories would 
be sufficient in themselves to beat Hitler. Frenchmen 
had the same blind faith in the invulnerability of 
their Maginot Line that a great many Americans still 
have in the protection of the two oceans. Hitler de- 
liberately refrained from bombing Paris during the 





first eight months of the war, because he did not 
want to arouse the French from their apathy and 
make them war-conscious. It is a striking fact that 
until now the cities of the Atlantic seaboard haye 
not been submitted to the ordeal of air raids, al. 
though military experts admit that the Nazis could 
bomb Washington and New York, if they desired 
to do so. 

The fall of Tobruk had in Washington the effect, 
to borrow Thomas Jefferson's simile, of a fire-alarm 
bell at midnight. Its lessons were obvious. Field 
Marshal Erwin Rommel had triumphed, despite ad- 
mitted British superiority in numbers of men and 
guns, because of abler leadership and the better 
quality of his tanks. The battle of Libya provided 
convincing evidence that men and quality of equip- 
ment, not money, win battles. Coupled with the dan- 
gerous rise in shipping losses recently inflicted by 
Axis submarines off the American coast and the occu- 
pation of the outer fringes of the Aleutian islands by 
the Japanese, the German invasion of Egypt has had 
the effect of arousing Washington from its dream of 
false security and making it realize that the war can 
be lost unless the nation is prepared, as the French 
obviously were not, to wage total war. 

JOHN ELLiotr 


[JoHN ELLIOTT, who will contribute a W AsHING- 
TON News LETTER every two weeks, is a member of 
the Washington Bureau of the New York Herald 
Tribune. He has served with the London Bureau of 
the Herald Tribune, 1923-24; as its Berlin corre- 
spondent, 1926-35; as its Paris correspondent and 








— 
VOL. . 
——— 


T; 


flerce 
as to 
Nazi 
sible 
in th 
divis 
up t 
wint 
to Sf 
ond 
ority 
som 
Run 
thei: 

N 
obv: 
mor 
bors 





European editorial manager, 1935-40; and as its cor- 
respondent in Vichy through 1941.—Ed. | 





Behind the Urals: An American Worker in Russia’s City 
of Steel, by John Scott. Boston, Houghton, Mifflin Co., 
1942. $2.75 
The story of an American worker who witnessed the 

painful and costly construction of Magnitogorsk and other 

heavy industrial centers in the rich territory east of the 

Ural Mountains. The book discloses much interesting in- 

formation on the new Soviet industries, and bears the 

stamp of honest and objective reporting. 


Democracy’s Battle, by Francis Williams. New York, Vik- 
ing Press, 1941. $2.75 
A stimulating discussion of why democracy failed in 
central Europe, its weaknesses in Britain, and its future, 
written by a rising progressive British thinker. 


Our Enemy Japan, by Wilfred Fleisher. New York, Double- 
day, Doran, 1942. $2.00 
A distinguished and experienced Tokyo journalist, who 
also covered the Nomura-Hull negotiations in Washington, 
presents fresh and illuminating material on Japan—its 
politics, policies and personalities. 


tori 
com 
Get 
chit 
con 
ind 
Ru: 
bee 
bee 











