has not” 
e repre) 
y States 
his con.” 
‘fourteen 
‘inciples 
bscribed 
arter in 
hington 
untry to 
on Feb- 


*tte said 
art Jap- 
declara- 
not the 


nda has 
‘ision to 
was not 
ig. And 
ons that 
d by the 
t that in 
and the 
king ter- 


it, would 
Fourteen 
e United 
d unmis- 
t the full 
+, includ- 
branches, 
sht avoid 
Tersailles, 
an Presi- 
1 of the 


ate how 
ice Pearl 
through- 
of State 


LAN J 


> 7 , © 
ai bl orary 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


tiversity of Wichigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 


FEB 19 1943 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


: 
t 
; 
{ 
i 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vor. XXII, No. 18 


FEBRUARY 19, 19438 


eet ROOSEVELT’S report to the nation 
on February 12, and Prime Minister Churchill's 
speech to the House of Commons the previous day, 


) reveal a new unity of purpose and planning in the 


United Nations’ prosecution of the war. Although 
a supreme war council representing the United States, 
Britain, Russia and China was not established at 
Casablanca, there is good ground for confidence that 
the coming Allied offensives in both Europe and 
Asia will be based on increasingly close military col- 
laboration and political understanding. 

MILITARY UNITY. The appointment of Gen- 
eral Dwight D. Eisenhower to supreme command 
of Allied operations in North Africa highlights this 
development. It indicates a degree of military col- 
laboration between American, British and French 
s forces which should assure not only victory in the 
North African theatre, but continued unity of com- 
mand in the invasions of the Continent which have 
been promised for 1943. It suggests further that, if 
American and British armies ever operate on the 
same front with Russian forces—for example in the 
Balkans—a unified command should also be possible 
there. 

Equally reassuring is the fact that the Casablanca 
discussions have been carried forward in Chungking 
by General Arnold, head of the United States Army 
Air Force, and Field Marshal Dill, British member 
of the Combined Chiefs of Staff. The nature of the 
discussions with Chiang Kai-shek is revealed both 
by Prime Minister Churchill’s emphasis on the open- 


ting class 
4, called 
not even 
ts liberty, 
the world 


LLIOTT 


NDS 


ing of the Burma Road, and by President Roosevelt's 
| assurance that the United States does not contem- 
| plate “inching” forward from island to island in the 
| Southwest Pacific, but is preparing rather for action 
in the skies over China and Japan as part of decisive 
Operations which will drive the Japanese “from the 
soil of China.” The prospective meeting of General 
MacArthur and Field Marshal Wavell will un- 


| 


ALLIED POLITICAL UNITY LAGS BEHIND MILITARY COLLABORATION 


doubtedly involve plans for realization of these ob- 
jectives. That Russia, too, may soon be taking part 
in the discussions begun at Casablanca is suggested 
by unconfirmed reports that Soviet military and naval 
chiefs are on their way to Washington. 

While these developments may not lead to the 
establishment of a supreme war council on the model 
of World War I, or even to the inclusion of Russia 
and China in the Combined Chiefs of Staff plan 
set up early in 1942 for military collaboration be- 
tween the United States and Britain; they do mark a 
great step forward in giving unity of direction to 
the United Nations war effort. Those who urge still 
closer collaboration should remember that effective 
cooperation by a war coalition has never been 
achieved quickly or easily, and that it was not until 
April 1918, when Foch was put in supreme command 
of Allied forces on the Western Front to prevent 
final disaster, that a step comparable with Eisen- 
hower’s appointment was taken in the First World 
War. 

POLITICAL UNITY NEEDED. If less progress 
has been made in bringing about Allied political 
unity, the American President and the British Prime 
Minister have made it clear that Axis efforts to 
divide Russia from the other United Nations will 
be unavailing. They not only emphasized that the 
United Nations are one in the prosecution of the 
war to complete victory, but brought Anglo-Ameri- 
can policy closer into line with Stalin's insistence 
that this war is against Hitlerite Germany, not the 
German nation. While reiterating their aim of “un- 
conditional surrender” and their demand that guilty 
Axis leaders be brought to trial, both called atten- 
tion to the fact that this does not mean that the 
people of the Axis nations will be made to suffer for 
their leaders’ crimes. 

The threat to Allied unity growing out of political 
decisions in North Africa has also been lessened by 


President Roosevelt’s statement on the future of 
France and his clarification of Article 3 of the At- 
lantic Charter. Reaffirming the principle that ‘from 
the people and the people alone flows the authority 
of government,” he declared that once the enemy 
had been driven from France, the people would be 
represented by a government of their own popular 
choice. And to those who feared that the Allies might 
support Quislings and Lavals in post-war Europe, 
he gave assurance that such a policy would not be 
tolerated. Indeed, he denied, in effect, that Nazi, 
Fascist or ‘Japanese warlord” forms of government 
could ever be legitimate, and asserted that the right 
of self-determination included in the Atlantic Char- 
ter did not carry with it the right of any government 
to enslave either its own people or the peoples of 
other nations. 


But, encouraging as the “Casablanca reports” of 
President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill 


Page Two — 


are, much still remains to be done if unity is to be 
maintained and an enduring peace established. Mijj- 
tary collaboration, however close, will not be enough, 
Speeches in Washington, London, Moscow, and 
Chungking will not reconcile the conflicting interests 
which are beginning to disturb good relations be. 
tween the United Nations, and are already being 
exaggerated by irresponsible American politicians, 
These differences can be reconciled only if the 
peoples of the United Nations—and particularly the | 
United States and Britain — are prepared to view 
them with enlightened good will, and if the govern. 
ments are prepared to advance even further in their 
collaboration by the conclusion of definite political 
agreements looking to the post-war world. It is to be 
hoped that the support given by Under Secretary 
of State Sumner Welles on February 12 to such agree- 
ments is a move in this direction. 


HowarpD P. WHIDDEN, Jr. 


FAIR LABOR CONDITIONS IN LATIN AMERICA REQUIRED FOR WAR EFFORT 


Disquieting signs of unrest have recently appeared 
among the industrial workers of Latin America. In 
Bolivia tin ore production was for a time hard-hit 
by a strike in the mines, and Mexican workers en- 
gaged in the mining of various strategic minerals 
have threatened to strike in order to gain higher 
wages. Fortunately, these moves so far have not 
had any detrimental effect on the war effort of the 
United Nations. Their possible resurgence repre- 
sents a threat to the output of indispensable raw 
materials, however, and maintenance of peaceful 
relations between management and workers is as im- 
portant for the war program in Latin American 
countries as in the United States. 


LABOR’S PLIGHT IN LATIN AMERICA. The 


heating in the bitter cold nights of the high Andes. 
They work 12 hours a day for wages that correspond 
to about 10 cents in American money. Unable to buy 
enough food for a decent diet, they chew coca leaves, 
containing a narcotic, to keep themselves going dur. 
ing their long working hours. These low standards 
are by no means restricted to miners. The workers 
employed in other Bolivian trades are not much 
better off, as figures taken from the official statistics 
recently published by the Confederation of Latin 
American Workers indicate. According to these al} 
culations, the average purchasing power of workers| 
in twelve standard trades represents only one- 
twenty-fifth of that of workers in comparable trade} 
in the United States. As a case in point, a Bolivian 


by th 


livin, 
befo! 
the « 
cline 
in CC 
still 

work 


| by th 
| Unic 


dusti 
whet 
com} 
unre: 
itabl 
man 
in dc 
whil: 
boon 
be e 
privi 
patel 
cond 
as a 


was 


Guad 


f 
‘I 
Iie 


REPoRTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. Careful estimates, however, have fixed the over-d 
Subscription $5.00; to F.P.A. members, $3.00. 


+3 situation of Latin American industrial workers, worker is able to buy only 14 —— of bread with} do 
me. aS a group, is in no way comparable to that of the money pe te - ree . _ — 7 a ona 
ise workers in the United States. Generally speaking, responding United States worker can buy 18 poum there 
E their level of existence is not much higher than that The situation in Bolivia, of course, does not serve) strug 
io of peons, or landless agricultural laborers. Few are as an exact yardstick for the measurement of condi > 
t's organized along modern lines, and the great major- tions throughout Latin America. In several countrit} eyjti: 
AE ity live on a mere subsistence level. Most of the the standard of living, especially of white workers i. 
ie Bolivian miners are Indians, who dwell in mud huts is decidedly better. Moreover, there are in all thes} — p, 
RY without any kind of sanitation and without any countries small numbers of highly skilled industria] 4 , 
f employees who receive relatively good pay. But, by twen 
% For a description of the machinery set up in 1917- and large, the income of the great majority of Latia oe 
I 18, an appraisal of its value, and an analysis of American workers and landless farm laborers, 4 powe 
ay — with the coming of the Armistice, group which may represent three-fourths of the tottl be d 
he population of our sister-republics, is too low to pet Al 
Wed Why Allied Unity Failed in 1918-19 mit them to buy anything but the bare necessiti] 
et by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. of life. FORE! 
% 25¢ No entirely reliable study of the total incomes os 
i H eitiiiciie Leithins 06 Henman Peete Devers the 130 million Latin Americans has yet been madt} oe m 
1 


——— 
— <= 


figure at some $15 billion a year. This represent] ae 


—— 
is to be 
ed. Mili. 
enough. 
yw, and 
interests 
tions be. 
ly being 
liticians, 
y if the 
larly the 
to view 


> govern- 
- in their 
political 
t is to be 
Secretary | 
ch agree- 


EN, JR. | 


FORT 


h Andes, | 
respond 
le to buy 
ca leaves, | 
oing dur-| 
standards 
» workers 
ot much 
statistics 
of Latin 
these cal- 
- workers 
nly one. 
le trades 
Bolivian 
read with 
ile a cor 
3 pounds 


not serve 
of condé 
countriés 
workers, 
all these 
industrial 
y. But, bf 
» of Latif 
borers, @ 
F the totl 
ww to per 
necessitié 


income @ 
een made 
e over-all 
represens 


———— 
— 


including the wealthy, only slightly over $100 per 
person. By way of comparison, the present national 
income of the United States is estimated at well over 
$100 billion for approximately the same number of 

ple. Even if war expenditures are eliminated, and 
only civilian United States consumption—estimated 
by the National Resources Planning Board at $55 
billion a year—is taken into account, the difference 
remains staggering. 

INCREASE IN COST OF LIVING. The cost of 
living, which was already growing in Latin America 
before the war, has risen at a much higher pace since 
the outbreak of hostilities and the subsequent de- 
dine, due mostly to shipping difficulties, of trade 
in commodities for civilian use. Wages, however, 
still lag behind, thus aggravating the plight of the 
working classes. Figures published in January 1943 
by the Mexican Miners’ and Metallurgical Workers’ 
Union, for instance, show that wages in their in- 
dustries have risen but 29 per cent since 1935, 
whereas the cost of living has risen 89 per cent. Should 
compensating increases in wages fail to be granted, 
unrest among Latin American workers will inev- 
itably increase. Suspicion is already widespread that 
many industrial concerns are reaping a large harvest 
in dollars due to the demand for strategic materials, 
while the workers are not benefiting from the war 
boom. Whether justified or not, this impression can 
be eradicated only by fair treatment of the under- 
privileged workers in these countries. The recent dis- 
patch of a United States commission to study labor 
conditions in Bolivia is to be welcomed, therefore, 
as a step in the right direction. On February 14 it 
was announced from La Paz that the commission 


THE F.P.A. 


Guadalcanal Diary, by Richard Tregaskis. New York, Ran- 

dom House, 1948. $2.50 

An American reporter who landed on Guadalcanal on 
August 7 with the first group of marines, and remained 
there until late September, tells the story of the early 
struggle with the Japanese. The author’s style is simple 
and direct, and there is a minimum of emphasis on him- 
self. The picture of American fighting spirit and of diffi- 
culties that had to be faced is impressive. 


What about Germany? by Louis P. Lochner. New York, 
Dodd, Mead, 1942. $3.00 
A distinguished American newspaper man, who lived for 
twenty-one years in Germany, fourteen of which he served 
as chief of the Associated Press in Berlin, makes no at- 
tempt to underestimate the carefully prepared striking 


| power of Nazism at home and abroad. At the same time, 


he does not surrender the hope that the German people 
can be ultimately reintegrated into the community of 
nations. 


Page Three 


had already obtained promises from corporation 
representatives to cooperate in the improvement of 
conditions of workers and from labor leaders not to 
interrupt the production of tin ore. 


TIME FOR A CONSTRUCTIVE LABOR POL- 
ICY. It is obvious that the time is ripe for the adop- 
tion of a clear-cut policy of protection for Latin 
American labor working on United States orders. The 
hundreds of millions of dollars of United States gov- 
ernment money poured into the industrial deveélop- 
ment of the Western Hemisphere in recent years 
must not contribute to widening the gap between 
the upper and lower classes in Latin America. On 
the contrary, this money should be used to make pay- 
ment of a living wage to the workers possible, or 
even compulsory. The need for establishing a sound 
labor policy now, in conjunction with the wartime 
development of Latin American industries whose 
products are needed by the war effort, has been re- 
peatedly stressed not only by labor representatives 
like Vicente Lombardo Toledano, head of the Con- 
federation of Latin American Workers, but also by 
responsible statesmen of South America. On Janu- 
ary 27, for instance, Dr. Eduardo Santos, former 
President of the Republic of Colombia, declared that 
“the exploitation of our wealth is not desirable, in- 
deed is not even admissible, except so far as it in- 
sures the benefit of the men and women of the whole 
of America.” Effective support by the United States 
of the efforts of Latin Americans to improve their 
economic status will be of the greatest value in 
promoting hemisphere solidarity. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


BOOKSHELF 


The Consumer Goes to War: A Guide to Victory on the 
Home Front, by Caroline F. Ware. New York, Funk and 
Wagnalls, 1942. $2.00 
Distraught purchasers trying to stretch the inelastic 

dollar find valuable suggestions on how to spend to their 

advantage while furthering the war effort. 


American Agencies Interested in International Affairs, 
compiled by Ruth Savord. New York, Council on Foreign 
Relations, 1942. $2.00 


A timesaver for all who have spent hours hunting data 
in scattered sources. The | of “discontinued and dor- 
nant” groups is especially helpful. 

Negroes in Brazil, by Donald Pierson. Chicago, University 


of Chicago Press, 1942. $4.50 


A carefully documented and attractively written scien- 


tific study of the Negroes in Brazil, their life, superstitions 
and relations with other races, written by a professor of 
sociology. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 18, Fesruary 19, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 


Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; VEra MicHELEs Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least 


’ F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


e181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor 


Washington News L ettet 


| 


Fes. 15.—When the United States entered World 
War I Woodrow Wilson, in his Message to Congress 
of April 2, 1917, proudly proclaimed that this coun- 
try desired “no conquest, no dominion.” And in 
1919 we offered one of the rare examples in history 
—a nation emerging victorious from a great war 
without having been enriched by the acquisition of 
a single inch of territory. It was the Japanese who, 
under a mandate from the League of Nations, ob- 
tained the highly strategic Caroline, Marianas and 
Marshall Islands from Germany, and later converted 
these Pacific islands into powerful naval bases, con- 
trary to their pledge not to fortify them. 


It is already abundantly clear that at the end of 
this war there will be no repetition on our part of 
the Wilsonian spirit of self-abnegation. Testifying 
before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on Feb- 
ruary 9, Secretary of Navy Frank Knox recom- 
mended that the United States start negotiations im- 
mediately for complete post-war control of island 
aerial and naval bases in the Pacific. “We are not 
avid for more territory, but we will be wise to in- 
sist on complete control of a sufficient number of 
bases in the Pacific to prevent another war of ag- 
gression in the near future.’ 


LEND-LEASE AS LEVER. Mr. Knox declared 
that extension of the lend-lease program, on behalf 
of which he was testifying, would be of material 
aid in obtaining such air and naval bases, and urged 
that the subject be taken up with our Allies now, 
“while we still have something to offer.” The Sec- 
retary did not specify what territories he had in mind, 
but it is easy to surmise that he was thinking of the 
island bloc in the Pacific consisting of the Caroline, 
Marianas, and Marshall Islands which—stretching 
roughly 3,000 miles east and west by 1,000 north 
and south—has become a veritable Japanese Gibral- 
tar, bristling with bases from which enemy naval and 
air squadrons sally forth to harass our far-flung lines 
of communication. It is also probable that Mr. Knox 
has his eyes on the Bonin group, which lies about 
midway between Japan and the mandated islands. 
Situated less than 600 miles south of Tokyo and 
Yokohama, the Bonin islands would provide an ad- 
mirable jumping-off place from which to bomb the 
Japanese into submission in the event they tried to 
evade disarmament clauses of the future peace settle- 
ment. 


But it is not only of Pacific bases that men in 


FOR VICTORY ° 


Washington are thinking these days. Two days after 
Mr. Knox spoke, Senator Millard E. Tydings of 
Maryland rose in the Senate to declare that Britain, 
as a ‘token of gratitude” for lend-lease aid, should 
transfer to the United States in ‘‘fee-simple” the 
island bases in the Western Hemisphere built by this 
country on a 99-year lease basis in return for 50 
over-age destroyers under an agreement concluded 
early in September 1940. Altough Senator Tyding’s 
speech was probably a trial balloon and was not 
immediately followed by legislative action, more 
will certainly come of his proposal, especially as 
“hearty agreement’’ with this Democratic suggestion 
was expressed by Republican leader, Senator Charles 
L. McNary of Oregon, who said that now was “the 
accepted time” to approach our Allies on the subject. 
It is also worth noting that during this debate Sena- 
tor Robert R. Reynolds of North Carolina urged 
that the Administration open negotiations for acqui- 
sition of Wrangel Island from Soviet Russia, 
whose claim to that Arctic island, officially raised in 
1926, has never been recognized by our government. 


TO KEEP THE WAR WON. President Roose- 
velt has more than once emphasized the point that 
when we have won the war we must keep it won. 
This means that the victors must retain strategic 
naval and air bases all over the world if they are to 
see that there is to be no recrudescence of Fascist ag- 
gression. The global character of this war has dem- 
onstrated the vital importance to the security of the 
United States—no less than Britain—of British con- 
trol of such key points as Suez, Gibraltar, Malta, 
and Singapore, as well as the supreme need for our 
maintaining possession of the Panama Canal and 
the Hawaiian islands. 


Some of these strategic points—for example, cet- 
tain of the Pacific islands and the West Indies— 
might be held in common by two or more of the 
United Nations. One port’ that seems destined to be 
governed by such a condominium is French-ruled 
Dakar, on the hump of Africa. Such a solution was 
suggested in the joint declaration issued by President 
Roosevelt and President Getulio Vargas: of Brazil 
at their meeting at Natal on January 28, when the 
two statesmen affirmed their determination to make 
sure that the coast of West Africa and Dakar shall 
“never again under any circumstances be allowed to 
become a blockade or invasion threat against the 


two Americas. JoHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


oD 
a4 
~” 
— 


