




AUG 2 3 1945 


Libs. i) ue 
Unt aa Entered as 2nd class matter — 
az vine bi 
Ve Of Of Pre q 
Anny A yt, “vas San Ri: 
9) Meas , TENGE AL Roem 
SH wry tLe 
Yop ARY 





|| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 




















rs An interpretation of current intinhadilonal events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 

orld FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 

tary 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 

re of | Vou. XXIV, No. 44 Aueust 17, 1945 

Gerfo 

sli]  WICTORY OVER JAPAN USHERS IN ACUTE PERIOD IN FAR EAST 

_ yr H Japan’s acceptance of unconditional sur- Domei, broadcast and later retracted an “imperial” 

an render on August 14, the Second World War communiqué reporting the launching of an offensive 
has passed into history. It was only after the gravest against the Allied armies “along all fronts.” Still 

On 4 Ss eae : bir ee 

‘ctor | indecision that Tokyo recognized the inevitability of more enlightening is the text of an editorial in the 


‘defeat, for behind the wall of secrecy that separates 
ry of japan from the rest of the world an intense political 
They struggle apparently went on between those leaders 
Ger. | Who considered it necessary to yield and others who 
* de wished to continue the war or, at any rate, to avoid 
ones| wiconditional surrender. The main factors respon- 
- eg, | Sle for the crisis were the use of the atom bomb by 
ie the United States and the entrance of Soviet forces 
Pots} ito Manchuria and Korea, where they have made 
three | Significant advances in a brief period of operations. 
ce jg | lnese two events were decisive for Japan’s military 
>tob situation, which was already highly precarious, be- 
uh, use they opened up the Japanese homeland to the 
possibility of early invasion, while immediately un- 
dermining the Japanese position on the continent 
of Asia. 

JAPAN’S UNITY SHAKEN. The Tokyo press, 
states | cording to the Japanese radio, has emphasized as 
1 the | Sever before the need for national unity and obedi- 
prac | me to the Emperor. This type of appeal to the 
atral. | People reflected the sharpness of differences within 
ta the government, for the call to unity could be the 
pli prelude either to unconditional surrender or to a 
and | ection of the Allied position. Apparently, in their 
ional | “Sperate internal conflict over the best way of meet- 
any's ing the current crisis, Japan’s rulers were anxiously 
nre | “ging national unity in the hope that whoever 
con | Merged victorious among the top clique would be 
wil ible to secure continued popular support. Yet, even 
many So authoritarian and repressed a nation as Japan, 
ante division among the leaders must have profound 
pre: ipreag throughout the general population. 

That the division was real is indicated by the fact 
hat on August 12 the official Japanese news agency, 


ever, 
many 
iving 


LES 





Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


newspaper, Yomiuri Hochi,; which warns against 
“the danger of internal split and conflict” and then 
declares: “In the first place the nation’s leadership 
must be one. The government is now called upon to 
maintain its unity and coherence; so is the Army.” 
THE EMPEROR AS AN OBSTACLE. The future 
of the Emperor has been the central theme of dis- 
cussion in the Allied world and apparently in Japan 
as well. The Anglo-American-Chinese ultimatum is- 
sued at Potsdam on July 26, and later subscribed to 
by the Soviet Union, was silent on this question, 
leaving a distinct possibility of the Emperor's being 
retained if other conditions were met. The terms of 
the declaration seemed to offer Japan more lenient 
treatment than Germany is receiving, but to permit a 
harsher interpretation at a later date. The ultimatum, 
in short, was sufficiently flexible to encompass the 
diverse viewpoints among and within the Big Four 
and to allow these attitudes to work themselves out 
toward a common solution in the course of time. 
The Allied views, already rejected by Japan, 
were reconsidered in Tokyo last week. The new 
Japanese reaction, as embodied in the note of August 
10 to the Big Four, was to accept the Potsdam ulti- 


matum “with the understanding that the said dec- - 


laration does not comprise any demand which preju- 
dices the prerogatives of His Majesty as a sovereign 
ruler.” This innocent-sounding proviso was immedi- 
ately interpreted in some quarters as being no more 
than a request that the Emperor be retained, and the 
view developed that, if the Japanese felt so deeply 
about their Emperor, we should not risk lengthening 
the war by insisting that he lose his throne. Before 
long, however, it was realized that “the prerogatives 


i os 





So SSS —— 




































Of At lfren Bm 


Sa th nl ESS 


bs Wt pee 


SI ee Ae cy)! 
cae net or 





—————— 











of His Majesty as a sovereign ruler” are identical 
,with the powers of the Throne under Japan's auto- 
cratic constitution and that Allied acceptance of this 
formula would seriously affect the completeness of 
victory. 

The constitution characterizes the Emperor as 
being “sacred and inviolable,” and his prerogatives 
include, among other powers, the right to deal with 
the most important matters of state by special ordi- 
mance without genuinely consulting the Japanese 
parliament; to be in supreme command of the Army 
and Navy; to declare war, make peace and conclude 
treaties; and to sanction laws and order them to be 
promulgated and executed. It is true that the Em- 
peror exercises his powers on the advice of the men 
around him, rather than on his own initiative, but 
this does not make his powers any the less far- 
reaching. 

BIG FOUR ESCAPE TRAP. Naturally, even if 
the Big Four had agreed to the Japanese proposal, 
Japan would not be allowed to maintain an army or 
navy or to exercise freedom of action under Allied 
occupation. It may be assumed that Japan’s rulers 
were aware of these facts. But they probably hoped 
to win two objectives, if our assent had been given— 
first of all, to secure our aid in maintaining their 
gtip on their own people; and, secondly, to establish 
a potential argument against our controls at a later 
date. For if conditions should at some time permit, 
they could use the phrase about prerogatives in argu- 
ing that particular measures of control constituted a 
violation of our pledge to respect the Emperor's 
rights. 

This trap was avoided through the note of August 
11 which Secretary of State Byrnes issued on behalf 
of the Big Four. According to the text, the Emperor's 
authority was to “be subject to the Supreme Com- 
mander of the Allied Powers, who will take such 
steps as he deems proper to effectuate the surrender 
terms.” The Emperor was to serve as an instrument 
of the Supreme Commander, while “the ultimate 
form of government of Japan” was to rest on “the 
freely expressed will of the Japanese people.” In this 
way the Big Four indicated their intention to make 
use of the Emperor to carry out and implement the 
surrender of the Japanese forces, but refused to make 
any long-term pledges. As in the case of the Potsdam 
ultimatum, the formula left many issues unsettled, 
for example, whether or not we would actively en- 
courage the Japanese people to establish a non-im- 
perial form of government. But the immediate effect 
of the Byrnes note was to take the Big Four safely 
over the hurdle shrewdly placed in their path when 
Japan submitted its surrender offer. 

ISSUES IN ASIA SHARPENED. Now that the 
Japanese government has yielded, accepting national 
defeat for the first time in its history, it will be- 


— Page Two 








——— 
ce 


come apparent that the abrupt termination of the 
war in Asia has intensified the problems of that 
gion. In the West, before V-E day, the war againg 
Nazi Germany moved gradually toward its concly. 
sion, so that many political issues were adjusted 
under the pressure of military necessity and the 
knowledge that the post-war period was approach. 
ing. Yet, even in these relatively favorable circum. 
stances innumerable questions remained unsettled, 
the Polish problem constituting a particularly good 
example. In Asia, on the other hand, there has 
been no prolonged period of preparation for peace, 
for the war has ended at a time when the line. 
up of the Big Four against Japan has just been 
achieved. As a result, of this premature birth of 
peace, the months following Japan's defeat will be 
unusually critical. This is especially true because the 
sharpness of the transition from war to peace will 
affect the economic and political equilibrium of many 
nations, including the United States, and in tum 
have repercussions on foreign policy. 


CHINA’S GROWING CRISIS. Perhaps the clear. | 


est example of the difficulties before us is to be 
found in China, where Russian armies have poured 
into Manchuria, the Chinese Communists are operat. 
ing in a vast region, largely in north and central 
China, and the forces of the Chungking government 
—the Central régime recognized by the powers— 
hold other extensive territories, chiefly in central, 
southern and western China. It has long been real- 
ized that, without a Chungking-Communist agree- 
ment, there would be sharp competition between the 
two to take over areas surrendered by the Japanese. 
But today there is a real danger that a victorious 
China will be split into two or more parts and that 
the great powers may be ranged on opposite sides. 
These issues are not insoluble by peaceful meth- 
ods, but the facts are unpromising. Since the early 
part of this year political differences between Chung- 
king and the Communists have been growing rapid- 
ly. Last month there were sharp military clashes be- 
tween the two on the frontiers of the Shensi-Kansu- 
Ninghsia Border Region, the main base of the Com- 
munist forces. On August 10 General Chu Teh, Com 
munist Commander-in-Chief, ordered his troops to 
disarm and accept the surrender of Japanese and 
Chinese puppet forces in their zones of operations. 
Two days later Chiang Kai-shek declared that 
Chungking had made thorough provisions for dis 
arming enemy troops and recovering lost territory. 
He ordered the Communists to “remain in their posts 
and wait for further directions,” stating that “all 
our troops are warned hereby never again to take it 
dependent action.” But in the absence of political 
agreement it seems most unlikely that this assertion 
of authority will have effect. It is important largely 
as an indication of the growing tension inside China, 














23 F il 


pas 
} 


BRR E S 


F228 


aC 


£ 


Bares s 


Baek 


fat: 
tral 
ent 


ral, 


ree- 


ous 
hat 


arly 


ng- 
Did- 


1SU- 
om 
om 
» to 
and 
Ons. 


ory. 
osts 
“all 


ical 
Hon 
zely 
ina, 








—_—_— 


as the day approaches when Japanese forces in China 
will give up their arms and when cities like Shanghai 
snd Peiping will again be free. 

It may properly be pointed out that the early end 
of the war will save many parts of Asia from the 
destruction involved in major campaigns to expel 
the Japanese. This means that economic facilities in 
Malaya, Indo-China, Thailand, the Indies and occu- 
pied China will remain relatively intact and that in 





Page Three 





— 





some respects the problems of reconstruction and 
relief will be eased. Nevertheless, the difficulties 
ahead are enormous, and nothing should be allowed 
to obscure the precariousness of the peace which 
the United Nations have won. To transform the peri- 
od before us from one of mere absence of war to a 
state of genuine peace will require all the intelligence 
and honesty of which men are capable. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


HOW WILL ATOMIC BOMB AND WAR AS A CRIME AFFECT U.S. POLICY? 


The dramatic use of the atomic bomb has shocked 
mankind into realizing that this newest weapon of 
war, unless rigidly controlled by the nations that 

ss its secret, can be used not only to shorten war 
—as was done in Japan—but can spell destruction 
for large areas of the world. Terrible as are the po- 
tentialities of the atomic bomb, we must not waste 
time in deprecating its use. Instead, we must be more 
determined than ever to prevent the recurrence of 
war. For once we admit, as some people do, that 


| war is natural or inevitable, then it becomes difficult 


to denounce any weapons, no matter how destructive 
ot horrifying, which may be used to prosecute it, 
and even to shorten the agony of modern warfare. 
Aggressive war itself is a crime; the particular 
weapons used to wage it at any given time in history 
are merely accessories after the fact. 

WAR MUST BE RECOGNIZED AS A CRIME. 
This is why the announcement on August 8 in Lon- 
don that representatives of the United States, Britain, 
Russia and France had accepted Justice Robert H. 
Jackson’s formula that war is a crime for which its 
instigators and perpetrators can be tried as war crim- 
inals is potentially as revolutionary and far-reaching 
in its implications as the discovery of the atomic 
bomb. Although thus far restricted to the European 
Axis countries, this concept could, if consistently ap- 
plied by the United Nations to any future aggressors, 
provide the safeguard we need against the abuse of 
mankind’s scientific genius for destructive ends. 

So far there has been real danger of our seemingly 
limitless capacity for invention and machine produc- 
tion hopelessly outrunning our capacity to control 
telations between nations. Social scientists have 
seemed timorous, barren of new ideas, and unduly 
addicted to conventional patterns as compared with 
their colleagues working in the laboratories of uni- 
versities and factories. In a series of agreements na- 
tions have feebly tried to humanize and regulate war 
—as if anything so essentially inhuman as war could 
be made tolerable in the machine age. True, the sig- 
natories of the Kellogg-Briand Pact of 1928 agreed 
to outlaw war as an instrument of national policy— 
but with so many reservations, explicit and implicit, 
as to invalidate that pact from the outset. Yet here 
was the seed the United ‘Nations War Crimes Com- 


mission is trying to bring to fruition. For as Justice 
Jackson has cogently argued, if war is outlawed, then 
those who provoke war are outside the pale of law, 
and should be treated as criminals. If war is recog- 
nized by mankind as a crime, and shorn of honor as 
it has already been shorn of glory, history may record 
our so far brutal century as a new era in human re- 
lations. 

WORLD ORGANIZATION NEEDED MORE 
THAN EVER. How will these two simultaneous 
discoveries—the atomic bomb and the concept of 
war as a crime—affect the foreign policy of the 
United States? The new bomb gives added evidence, 
if this were needed, that isolation is impossible. The 
long-range bomber, the use of V-1 and V-2 bombs 
and jet planes had already demonstrated the ineffec- 
tiveness of frontiers and static fortifications against 
attacks on a nation’s territory. Now the United 
States, Britain and Canada possess the secret of a 
weapon which could play havoc with-land and sea 
defenses, as well as with the industrial resources 
necessary to wage modern war. It is fortunate, from 
our point of view, that the secret is held by three 
democratic countries which, in modern times, have 
shown no predilection for militarism; and President 
Truman, in his broadcast of August 9, indicated that 
the three countries intended to keep their secret until 
adequate controls against its misuse had been de- 
vised. 

But the United States cannot prevent other coun- 
tries from pursuing similar scientific research, and 
arriving sooner or later at similar results. In fact, 
the use of weapons like the atomic bomb may cause 
interesting shifts in the balance of power worked 
out by the Big Three. For, as Brig. Gen. David 
Sarnoff, president of the Radio Corporation of Amer- 
ica, has pointed out, small nations skilled ia scientific 
research would have as deadly a power at their com- 
mand as the great nations, provided they were ready 
to make the necessary expenditures—and money in- 
vested in laboratories might seem to them a more 
productive investment than money spent on inevit- 
ably ineffective land, naval or air forces. It is there- 
fore more than ever in the interest of the United 
States—and the other great powers—to speed the 
establishment of a strong and responsible interna- 


————————— 


a 


> 2 eee < 


ee 


t 
1 
| 
i 
‘ 


—— 














i 
ay 
4 
ik 


ee ere eer, Te 
te eae re 


~: 


ks corte *. 


- 


oot Wer - 


oe oe. 


f 
y 
a 
4 











tional organization in which smaller nations would 
feel assured of protection against attack. 

OUR IDEALS MUST SHAPE POLICY. The dis- 
covery of the atomic bomb also enhances the need 
for the United States to harmonize its practices in 
foreign affairs more closely than in the past with its 
professed ideals. This country has the power to make 
itself feared. It can exercise its power constructively 
only if it succeeds in making itself trusted. The weak- 
ness of American foreign policy has been that, fre- 
quently, when faced with concrete situations, we 
have seemed to fall:short of our ideals, which have 
served as inspiration to other peoples. What are the 
roots of these ideals? The Swedish sociologist, Gun- 
nar Myrdal, looking dispassionately at the “Amer- 
ican Creed,” has pointed out that this country, born 
of revolution, has felt an instinctive sympathy for 
revolutionary movements elsewhere, especially in the 
colonies; that even the values we are conservative 
about—that we seek to conserve—are liberal values, 
and that Americans, more than any other people, 
think in moral terms and are concerned about social 
justice, even though we do not always achieve it at 
home. Our primary endeavor in the atomic age, the 
age when war may become punishable as a crime, is 
to translate these featutes of the American Creed 
into foreign policy. 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


What To Do With Japan, by Wilfrid Fleisher. New York, 
Doubleday, Doran, 1945. $2.00 


A compact summary of the main issues involved in deal- 
ing with a defeated Japan. The author belongs to the 
school which would preserve the institution of the Em- 
peror after Japan’s defeat. 


Omnipotent Government, by Ludwig Von Mises. New 
Haven, Yale University Press, 1944. $3.75 


The Austrian economist, Von Mises, expounds the argu- 
ment in this volume that increasing economic nationalism, 
which is so conducive to war, has been engendered by in- 
creasing government intervention in private economic life. 


Public Opinion and the Last Peace, by R. B. McCallum. 
New York, Oxford University Press, 1944. $3.50 


A study of public opinion in England over the last 
quarter-century with respect to attitudes concerning the 
treaty of Versailles and the changes which occurred in 
British thought about the last peace settlement. 


The Big Three, by David Dallin. New Haven, Yale Uni- 
versity Press, 1945. $2.75 


The main lines of Russian foreign policy, which are 
interpreted as following the course charted by the Tsars, 
are seen in conflict with basic British interests in the Far 
East, the Middle East and Europe. In the resulting strug- 
gle, the author believes, the United States will be forced 
to side with Britain against an expanding Russia. 


Page Four 








——— 
————eee 


Our task during the war years has been rendered 
difficult by the fact that the government of one of 
our principal allies, Britain, seemed averse to funda. 
mental change both in Europe and Asia; and that, ip 
trying to cooperate with Britain, we made it possible 
for Russia to become a mouthpiece for the changes 
we would otherwise have favored, or at least ac. 
cepted. This potential conflict between Britain and 
Russia made the position of the United States both 
ambiguous and lacking in inspiration for the peoples 
of Europe and Asia who hoped to find here leader. 
ship in the advancement of political and economic 
democracy. The victory of the British Labor party has 
removed an obstacle to the application of our ideals 
in foreign policy; and if the United States and Britain 
now jointly support individuals and groups through. 
out the world who try to root out Fascism, Russia 
will no longer be able to act as sole proponent of 
anti-Fascism. This equalization in the roles of the 
three great powers should greatly facilitate orderly 
democratic reform both in Europe and Asia. 

Scientists have shown us that nothing is impossible 
for those who have the will to succeed. There is no 
reason to assume that human relations are more sub- 
ject to limitations than scientific discovery. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The first in a series of two articles.) 


American Guerrilla in the Philippines, by Ira Wolfert. 
New York, Simon and Schuster, 1945. $2.75 


Leyte Calling, by Joseph F. St. John. New York, Vanguard 

Press, 1945. $2.00 

Dramatic stories of two young Americans who fought 
in the difficult guerrilla warfare prevailing in the islands. 
Wolfert tells, in his own highly literate style, of Lt. [iff D. 
Richardson’s experience as a major in the Filipino guer- 
rilla army after serving in the “expendables’” retreat 
from the Philippines. Howard Handleman tells of Lt. St. 
John’s exciting adventures. 


America’s Role in the World Economy, by Alvin H. Han- 

sen. New York, W. W. Norton, 1945. $2.50 

In this book, written for the average reader, the world- 
renowned economist presents the case for full employment 
in the United States and outlines the foundations for world 
economic security. The various international agencies— 
the Monetary Fund, World Bank, I.L.0., and others—are 
reviewed in simple terms. The crucial part which America 
must play in world economic revival after the war is 
fully explained. 


The Secret History of the War, by Waverly Root. New 
York, Seribner, 1945. 2 vols. $10.00 
Violently non-objective, bitter in denouncing State De- 

partment policy, this gigantic work is more sensational 


than “secret,” given to citing hearsay rather than accurate 
sources. 


191% 


| 


<i 
=} 
hs 


pe 


fact 

surre 
shre 
basi: 
the 

regt 
tanc 
thei 
pos: 
sim. 
Hig 
Adi 
obj 
alo 
con 
mo 


Ar 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 44, AuGust 17, 1945. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin). Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by unton labor 


Published week!) by 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lart, Secretary; VERA Micueies Dean, Editor. Envered a 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


the Poreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Three Dollass a Year. Please allow at leat 











