i, 


’ unfair 
apon in 
»red-na- 
the new 
hat the 
at the 


» Cham- 
rook on 
ey cities 
re fuses 
of the 
id com- 
he Cab- 
rrorists, 
yublican 
itly dis. 
rogram 
tish Out 
d under 
- bomb- 
ey serve 
ble may 
a Euro- 


REEN 


en, Yale 


ook pro- 
ry of the 
» detailed 
Workers 
Workers’ 
hout the 
>» seldom 


Hansen. 


’ the bus- 
pters ex- 
becoming 


yyle. Bos- 


lew Deal 
vernment 


nt of the 
York, Ox- 


economic 
es special 
ries lie in 
r and the 
statistical 


|. National 
BAN, Editor. 


“FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An irene! current international events by the Research Staff 


. bscription, Two Dollars a Year 
yo oe : 


POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y 


Vou. XVIII, No. 15 


—_— 


FEBRUARY 3, 1939 


SOVIET-JAPANESE RELATIONS: 1931-1938 
by T. A. Bisson 
In this report, Mr. Bisson analyzes the critical phases 
of Soviet-Japanese relations which have constituted such 


an important factor in Far Eastern politics since 1931. 


February 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents each 


FEB 16 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


“al Library 


Gene! 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Michigan 


STORM WARNINGS 


IN THE MEDITERRANEAN 


he fall of Barcelona on January 26, following 

a nerve-shattering series of Rebel air-raids, 
brought not only the Spanish civil war, but the whole 
European situation to a new climax. When civil war 
broke out in July 1936, both Rebels and Loyalists 
were receiving foreign aid—the former from Ger- 
many and Italy, the latter from France and the Soviet 
Union. Purchases of war material abroad by the 
Loyalists were entirely legitimate, since they repre- 
sented the legally elected government of Spain. Ac- 
cording to the rules of international law, German 
and Italian aid to General Franco, in rebellion 
against the existing government, represented illegiti- 
mate intervention in the internal affairs of Spain. 
While Nazi participation—under cover of non-inter- 
vention—consisted largely of technicians and air- 
planes, Mussolini openly sent well-equipped Black- 
shirt militia troops whose numbers were estimated at 
between 40,000 and 100,000. By contrast, the for- 
eigners who fought on the side of the Loyalists were 
individual volunteers, who went to Spain often in de- 
fiance of their own governments. Their numbers 
never exceeded 25,000 and, following the Loyalist 
decision in September 1938 to dispense with these 
volunteers altogether, most of them had been repatri- 
ated under surveillance of a League of Nations Com- 
mission. Hunger and lack of munitions, more than 
lack of military training and civilian demoralization, 
defeated the efforts of the Loyalists to hold back a 
Rebel offensive plentifully supplied with foreign air- 
planes, artillery and tanks. 

These facts were of course well-known to the gov- 
ernments of France, Britain and the United States. 
These governments, however, feared that assistance 
—even though legitimate—to the Loyalists might 
precipitate a conflict with Germany and Italy, which 
had repeatedly warned Europe that they alone were 
entitled to intervene in Spain. Moreover, their 
ostensible campaign against communism and athe- 


ism rallied to their support Catholic and anti- 
communist groups in the democratic countries— 
which apparently disregarded the fact that Nazi Ger- 
many has proved inimical both to private property 
and the Catholic Church. Under the circumstances, 
the policy of the three Western democracies was dic- 
tated primarily by the desire to avoid a general war 
over Spain, and to bring the conflict to an end as 
promptly as possible. Britain has continued to hope 
that, once the Spanish war was over, Italian troops 
would be withdrawn, and the status quo restored in 
the western Mediterranean. 

The problem now confronting France and Britain 
is whether Mussolini—with such support as he may 
receive from Hitler—is ready to fulfill their hopes 
of “appeasement.” While both Hitler and Mussolini 
have repeatedly denied that they expected to obtain 
territorial compensation in Spain, it is obvious that 
they did not expend men and material merely for the 
altruistic purpose of helping General Franco defeat 
the Loyalists. Many Germans are now entrenched in 
commercial enterprises and technical activities in 
Spain; exports of Spanish iron to Germany, of iron 
and copper to Italy, have markedly increased during 
the past year; Italy is reported to have established an 
air base on the island of Majorca, while Germany, it 
is rumored, has set up gun emplacements in Spanish 
Morocco directly aimed at Gibraltar. There is no 
particular reason why Hitler and Mussolini should 
now surrender the strategic and economic advantages 
they have obtained in Spain. The Western powers 
expect that General Franco, once he has consolidated 
his rule, may turn his Italian and German war ma- 
terial against his erstwhile allies. Unless he does the 
only peaceful way that France and Britain can rid 
themselves of the Italo-German menace in the Medi- 
terranean is to offer the axis powers adequate com- 
pensation elsewhere. The exact form this compensa- 
tion will take, and the methods the fascist powers will 


use to obtain it, are the principal questions on the 
European docket. 

That France and Britain are in no mood to bow to 
dictatorial demands directly affecting their own pos- 
sessions was the tenor of their official pronouncements 
during the past week. M. Daladier, in the Chamber 
of Deputies on January 26, declared that he would 
not “cede a single piece of our land or a single one 
of our rights.” Sir Samuel Hoare, British Home Sec- 
retary, warned the world on January 26 against be- 
lieving that Britain had “grown weary with age and 
feeble in power.” Mr. Chamberlain, speaking in 
Birmingham on January 28, expressed readiness to 
“satisfy, so far as we can, any reasonable aspirations” 
on the part of dissatisfied peoples, but said Britain 
was in far better condition to defend itself than last 
September. This statement was given emphasis by re- 
ports of rapid increase in British airplane produc- 
tion; a summons for voluntary registration for ‘‘Na- 
tional Service,’ offered as a democratic alternative 
to conscription; and reshuffling of the British Cab- 
inet, in which Sir Thomas Inskip, ineffectual Minister 
for Coordination of Defense, was relegated to the 
post of Dominions Secretary, and replaced by Lord 
Chatfield, energetic reorganizer of the British navy. 

The situation confronting France and Britain to- 
day differs from that of September on at least four 
important points. 

1. In September Germany was demanding terri- 
tory which did not belong to the Western powers, 
and lay outside their immediate sphere of influence. 
Large sections of the population in France and Brit- 
ain—by no means restricted to the ruling classes— 
felt no desire to fight in defense of alien territory on 
an issue which was far from clear. Today Italy is ex- 
pected to demand cession of French territory, for the 
defense of which public sentiment in France could be 
far more easily rallied than in the case of Czecho- 
slovakia. 

2. In September Hitler had skillfully placed 
France and Britain in a position where their inaction 
could avert a general war, while any action on their 
part in behalf of Czechoslovakia could be repre- 
sented to the German people as an attack on Ger- 
many. Today it is the dictatorships which must open 
the attack if they are to obtain their territorial objec- 
tives in Africa and the Mediterranean, and it is the 
democracies which are in the position of biding their 
time—with the conviction that time will work to the 
disadvantage of countries poor in money and raw 
materials. Hitler and Mussolini are aware of this dis- 
advantage, and the real danger of the situation is 
that they might feel impelled to strike at the Western 
powers while they still enjoy a margin of military 
superiority. 

3. If France and Britain had decided to fight Ger- 
many in September, they would have been confronted 


Page Two 


se 
ee 


by the difficult strategic problem of sending troops 
and war material across Germany in time to aver 
German annihilation of Czechoslovakia. Today, if 
attacked by Italy, France and Britain would have the 
advantage of fighting close to their home bases, with 
the prospect of inflicting on Italy at least as much 
damage as Italy can inflict on them. The unknown 
factor, of course, is the measure of support Hitler 
might be prepared to give Mussolini in return for his 
collaboration at Munich. A German attack on the 
Western powers, however, would make Germany 
vulnerable in Eastern Europe, where its control is 
by no means undisputed. 


4. In September no one could be absolutely cer- 
tain of the attitude of the German and Italian people 
in case of general war. The apathy displayed by both 


peoples during the Sudeten crisis, and their profound | 


relief at the prospect of peace, indicate that a general 
war for more distant objectives would not arouse 
popular enthusiasm. From now on, moreover, the 
fascist dictatorships—having isolated the U.S.S.R. 
and crushed “communism” in Spain—can no longer 
use fear of communism to divide public sentiment 
within the democracies and confuse the essential is- 
sue, which is that of a struggle between two groups 
of powers for control of strategic bases and economic 
resources. 


It is on this issue that American public opinion 
will have to focus in the days ahead if it is to avoid 
the many red herrings which will doubtless be drawn 
across the trail. The question is not merely whether 
it is preferable to have democracies or dictatorships 
dominating the European continent. The question is 
whether it is more expedient for the United States to 
have France and Britain in control of the Atlantic 
seaboard and the West African coast, or to allow 
Germany, Italy and Franco Spain—whose policies 
cannot but affect the Spanish-speaking countries of 
Latin America—to capture these positions. It would 
be equally illusory for Americans to demand that 
France and Britain take a ‘‘stand’”’ against Germany 
and Italy in which this country would be unprepared 


to participate. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


HITLER DEMANDS COLONIES AND TRADE 


Demands for colonies and greater participation 
in world trade, coupled with a reassertion of Ger- 
many’s community of interest with Italy, were the 
highlights of Chancellor Hitler’s address to the Ger- 
man Reichstag on January 30. For the rest, his ‘‘re- 
port on the state of the nation,” delivered on the 
sixth anniversary of his accession to power, consti- 
tuted a routine vindication of Nazi policies and ex- 
pressed the conviction that the German people would 
continue to follow the bold leadership which in the 

(Continued on Page 4) 


——eee, 
——— 


: tLOOps 
to avert 
oday, if 
have the 
eS, with 
aS much 
nknown 
t Hitler 
n for his 
- on the 
sermany 
yntrol is 


tely cer- 
n people 
by both 
rofound 
. general 
t arouse 
ver, the 
U.S.S.R. 
0 longer 
=ntiment 
=ntial is- 
> groups 
conomic 


opinion 
to avoid 
ve drawn 
whether 
itorships 
estion is 
States to 
Atlantic 
(0 allow 
policies 
atries of 
it would 
ind that 
sermany 


prepared 
DEAN 


"RADE 
icipation 
of Ger- 
were the 
the Ger- 
his ‘‘re- 
| on the 
*, consti- 
and ex- 
le would 
+h in the 


Washin gton News Letter 


————— 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

JAN. 30.—In the wake of Chancellor Hitler's speech 
to the German Reichstag, Washington observers are 
looking ahead to a period of continued uncertainty 
in Europe, accompanied on the domestic front by a 
sharp Congressional debate on the central issues of 
the Administration’s foreign policy. State Depart- 
ment officials, after a hurried first reading of Hitler’s 
speech, gave the impression of being more concerned 
by the impending Congressional debate than by the 
prospect of immediate developments in Europe. 

Ever since President Roosevelt's annual message, 
there has been great uncertainty about the attitude of 
Congress toward the new “positive” policy outlined 
by the Administration. Congress did not recoil at the 
suggestion of measures “short of war’ to curb ag- 
gressor nations, but neither did it indicate a readiness 
to repeal or amend the Neutrality Act. When the 
Senate Foreign Relations Committee met on January 
19, it deferred all action on neutrality legislation 
“pending the call of the committee” without even 
discussing any of the proposals for revision. This ac- 
tion, which passed almost unnoticed in the press, 
was of vital interest to the State Department, which 
had hoped that the Committee would take the initia- 
tive in framing a bill for revision of the existing 
Statutes. 

The same uncertainty surrounds the attitude of 
Congress regarding other measures in the positive 
program already initiated by the Executive. The na- 
tional defense program undoubtedly commands an 
overwhelming majority in both Houses, but there 
were and still are rumblings of opposition to the pro- 
ject for the development of Guam as a major naval 
base in the Western Pacific. The steps taken to aid 
China through the $25,000,000 credit granted by the 
Export-Import Bank are warmly approved by many 
Senators and Congressmen, but plans to extend the 
functions of the Bank as part of a general govern- 
ment loan program meet with suspicion and some 
hostility. 

The decision of the State Department not to lift 
the Spanish arms embargo, taken on the eve of 
Franco's capture of Barcelona, was also influenced, 
in part at least, by uncertainty about the attitude of 
Congress. Other factors were doubtless more impor- 
tant, and the chief reason advanced was that it was 
too late for any action by this government. The legal 
arguments advanced by former Secretary Henry L. 
Stimson in his letter to Mr. Hull apparently had little 


effect. But one consideration which influenced the 
final decision was the fear that any move to lift the 
embargo might precipitate a dangerous debate in 
Congress and the country, which would stir religious 
controversy and jeopardize the chances for general 
revision of existing neutrality legislation. The thou- 
sands of telegrams against lifting the embargo which 
poured in on Congress following appeals by leaders 
of the Catholic Church undoubtedly proved a de- 
cisive factor. 

Apart from the Spanish question, however, the Ad- 
ministration encountered no serious check in its for- 
eign policy until January 27, when a new issue was 
injected by the disclosure that President Roosevelt 
had authorized the purchase of a large number of 
American military airplanes by the French govern- 
ment. This disclosure came inadvertently, as the re- 
sult of an airplane crash in California which revealed 
the presence of a representative of the French air 
ministry on a new Douglas bomber designed to meet 
the latest specifications of the United States Army. 
An investigation, conducted behind closed doors by 
the Senate Military Affairs Committee, raised the 
question whether military secrets had been disclosed 
to foreign governments contrary to War Department 
regulations, and led to testimony by Secretary 
Morgenthau, Secretary Woodring, General Craig, 
chief of staff, and other high officials. While the tes- 
timony was not made public, reports circulated rap- 
idly on Capitol Hill to the effect that the War De- 
partment had opposed the grant of special privileges 
to the French mission, but had finally yielded to pres- 
sure brought by William C. Bullitt, U.S. Ambassador 
to France, through the intervention of the Treasury 
Department. Whatever the truth of these reports and 
other charges, there is little doubt that the investiga- 
tion has touched off a Senate inquiry which may ex- 
tend beyond the question of military secrets to the 
larger issue of foreign policy. 


There is no legal reason why France should not 
place orders for military airplanes in this country. 
American manufacturers are completing an order for 
400 war planes for Great Britain, and the State De- 
partment has authorized exports of military aircraft 
totaling $56,939,000 during the past year. Most of 
these shipments—which involve no violation of the 
Neutrality Act—have gone to Britain, France, China, 
the Netherlands Indies and South American coun- 
tries. It may be argued that, in view of the supremacy 
of German air power, the United States should, 
in its own interest, place its productive capacity at the 


disposal of the European democracies to restore the 
balance of power and prevent a repetition of Munich. 
It may also be contended, however, that, in taking this 
step, the United States is making an important com- 
mitment and embarking on a policy from which it 
cannot lightly retreat in case of war. 

While both arguments are heard in Congress, hesi- 
tation about endorsing Mr. Roosevelt's stronger for- 
eign policy has been heightened by the secrecy sur- 
rounding this transaction, and the failure of the Ex- 
ecutive to inform Congress. The effect of attempting 
to disguise an important and critical decision affect- 
ing the foreign policy of the United States as a 
normal commercial transaction—as the Administra- 
tion has done—may be to stiffen resistance to any 
modification of the neutrality laws. In any event, it 
has brought on a debate regarding the main objec- 
tives of the country’s foreign policy. W.T.SToNE 


HITLER DEMANDS COLONIES AND TRADE 
(Continued from Page 2) 


past had confounded not only foreign antagonists, 
but domestic “critics” and “feeble intellectuals.” 

The speech tended to confirm various signs that 
Hitler, for the first time, has adjourned his contem- 
plated “drive to the East’’ at the expense of Poland 
and the Soviet Union. This seeming shift in policy 
is attributable to two factors—the obvious difficulty 
of setting up a German-dominated Ukraine except at 
the expense of a war which Germany cannot afford; 
and the need to repay Mussolini for his invaluable 
support during the Czech crisis. 

It has become increasingly apparent since Munich 
that the Reich would have no easy task in mobilizing 
eastern Europe against the Soviet Union. Although 
the countries in this region cannot afford to antagon- 
ize Nazi Germany, with which they have close and 
natural economic ties, they have no wish to become 
the tools of an adventurous anti-Soviet policy. So far 
only Hungary has agreed to sign the anti-Comintern 
pact; even emasculated Czechoslovakia, hemmed in 
by the Reich and reduced almost to the rank of a 
German satellite, has successfully resisted pressure 
in this direction. Rumania—ruled by the firm hand 
of King Carol who has practically destroyed the Fas- 
cist Iron Guard—shows no disposition to join either 
the Soviet or the German camp. In this policy it is 
firmly supported by Poland, which realizes that the 
establishment of an “independent Ukraine’ would 
involve its own partial dismemberment. 

Under these circumstances the Nazis are confining 
their efforts to securing the “benevolent neutrality” 
of eastern Europe in the event of warlike complica- 


Page Four 


tions in the West. This explains the reaffirmation of 

the Polish-German pact by the German Foreign Min. | 
ister during his visit to Warsaw on January 25 and 
26, as well as Germany’s disinclination to press its | 
demands for the return of Memel, so long as the 

Lithuanian government does not interfere with the 

Nazi Directorate of that autonomous territory. The 

Reich must rely on central and southeastern Europe 

as a reservoir of foodstuffs and raw materials in time 

of war. It has even sent emissaries to Moscow in the 

hope of reviving the profitable trade it formerly en- 

joyed with the Soviet Union. In the first nine months 

of 1938 the U.S.S.R. took only one-half of one per 

cent of Germany's exports as against 10.9 per cent 

in 1932. It is perhaps not without significance that 

Hitler’s speech contained no derogatory reference to 

the Soviet government. 


Although the German Chancellor made no specific 
pledge to go to war in support of Mussolini's de- 
mands on France and Britain, he proclaimed, in an 
obvious reference to Italy, “that other nations have 
rights based on their strength and numbers, and we 
are determined to defend our common interests to- 
gether.” The Fuehrer is pressing Italy's claims not 
only because Germany may in the future again need 
Italian assistance, but also because his own personal 
fate as a dictator is closely linked with the fortunes 
of I/ Duce. Moreover, the Nazi government finds this 
a convenient opportunity to extract fulfilment of its 
own demands for colonies and commercial conces- 
sions. Germany's economic difficulties, Hitler argued 
in his speech, are caused by “‘over-population of our 
living space.” This “‘over-population” has been ag- 
gravated, rather than relieved, by the acquisition of 
Austria and the Sudeten territory, both of which have 
a proportionately larger deficit of raw materials and 
foodstuffs than the Reich. With a foreign trade bal- 
ance heavily adverse and reserves nearly exhausted, 
Germany must either push its exports or obtain more 
productive territory. While Nazi economists probably 
realize that the former German colonies can be of no 
immediate help in meeting the dearth of raw ma- 
terials, they may utilize this demand as a lever to 
overcome the growing disposition in Britain to fight 
Germany's barter trade methods. Seriously alarmed 
by the vulnerability of its economic situation, the 


FC 


An 


Satu! 


Reich government is trying to intimidate Britain, 
France, and even the United States, into acquiescing 
in an aggressive German trade drive. Any attempt to 
put pressure on Germany, Hitler warned, would find 
the country prepared for a “desperate economic 


struggle.” JOHN C. DEWILDE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 15, Fesruary 3, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lestig BugELt, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


E> 181 


Two Dollars a Year. 


