eing 
ional] 
Thich 

who 
eser- 
1936. 
ugh- 
stent 
yrces 
pans, 
juate 
ress 

The 
com- 
astic 
ality 


lajor 
ubli- 
trea- 
hem, 
eral 
their 
uties 
> the 

for 
that 
king 
rree- 
1 the 
fair” 
nion 
ency 
The 
h in 
nter- 
such 


— 
2» the 
rear 
nny, 
par- 
erats 
‘ther 
is to 
pub- 
tions 
0 so 
id as 
y to 


ER 


— 
Jational 


Editor. 


An interpretation 0} search Ste 
saksiliie One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


current international events by the 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


aff 


VoL. XV, No. 37 JULY 10, 1936 
THE NAZIFICATION OF DANZIG 
by Mildred S. Wertheimer 
The situation in the Free City of Danzig offers a sig- 
nificant test case of Nazi policy concerning Germans 
outside the Reich. 
June 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 


Entered as  second- 
class matter December 

1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
f March 3, 1879. 


vl 13 1939 


eriodical Division, 
ibrary of Congress, 


Washington, D. ¢. 


A FAREWELL TO SANCTIONS 


HE extraordinary League Assembly, sum- 

moned on June 30 at Argentina’s request, 
contented itself with acknowledging that 58 
League states had proved powerless to prevent one 
determined aggressor from subjugating a small 
and defenseless people. In an effort to win a 
sympathetic League verdict, Italy submitted a note 
to the Assembly on June 30 stating that slavery 
and forced labor in Ethiopia had already been 
suppressed; that the natives would not be com- 
pelled to perform military duties other than local 
policing and territorial defense; that religious be- 
liefs would be respected, and the free use of Ethi- 
opia’s languages guaranteed. Italy, moreover, 
would “consider it an honor to inform the League 
of Nations of the progress achieved in her work 
of civilizing Ethiopia.” 

Neither this note, nor the catcalls and jeering 
of Italian newspaper correspondents—subse- 
quently expelled from Geneva—prevented Haile 
Selassie from addressing the Assembly on June 30. 
In a moving speech the exiled Emperor described 
the horrors of Italian gas warfare, which had 
wrought havoc among the civilian population. He 
reviewed the course of the Italo-Ethiopian conflict, 
asserting that at the outbreak of war in October 
1935 the League states had assured him that “the 
resources of the Covenant would be employed to 
insure the reign of right and the failure of vio- 
lence.” He had placed “absolute” confidence in 
the League; had consequently made no prepara- 
tions for war; yet when Italy invaded Ethiopia 
had found it impossible to purchase arms from 
League states, which meanwhile did nothing to 
check the transportation of Italian troops and mu- 
nitions through the Suez Canal. Relying on 
League support, Haile Selassie had “personally 
refused” all proposals made by the Italian gov- 
ernment “if only I would betray my people and the 
Covenant of the League.”’ He concluded by asking: 
“What reply have I to take back to my people?” 


The Assembly’s reply, as delivered by the dele- 
gates of both great and small powers, showed that 
the Ethiopian question, long since regarded as 
dead, only awaited inconspicuous burial. Atten- 
tion centered on two issues: the prompt lifting of 
sanctions which, it was hoped, would permit Italy 
to join other League states in blocking German 
aggression; and reform of the League, to be 
achieved either by depriving it of all but consulta- 
tive functions and enlarging its membership to 
include the United States and other non-League 
countries—as urged by Denmark and the Nether- 
lands—or by bolstering up the general obligations 
of the Covenant with specific regional agreements 
for military assistance against aggression, as ad- 
vocated by France and the U.S.S.R. The Union 
of South Africa alone demanded continuance of 
sanctions against Italy. 

Disappointed by the Assembly’s avoidance of a 
clear-cut decision, the Ethiopian delegation on 
July 2 submitted two resolutions on which it asked 
the League states to vote “frankly and loyally, 
without ambiguity or subtlety of language.” The 
first provided for a proclamation by the Assembly 
that it would not recognize “any annexation made 
by force of arms”; the second for a recommenda- 
tion to League states that they guarantee a $50,- 
000,000 loan to be floated by Ethiopia under condi- 
tions fixed by the League Council. The Assembly’s 
steering committee shelved the first resolution, 
substituting for it on July 4 a statement declar- 
ing that it remained firmly attached to the prin- 
ciples of the Covenant and other diplomatic 
documents “excluding the settlement of territorial 
questions by force’’—thus leaving every League 
state to decide for itself whether it will recognize 
Italy’s conquest of Ethiopia. It also recommended 
the adoption of measures to bring sanctions to an 
end—which will be done on July 15—and invited 
League members to present before September 1 
any proposals they might wish to make regarding 


improvement of the Covenant. Ethiopia’s finan- 
cial resolution, submitted to a roll-call, was an- 
swered in the negative by 23 delegations, while 25 
abstained from voting. 

The immediate effects of the League’s acqui- 
escence in Italy’s conquest were forcibly brought 
home an hour later, when Dr. Arthur Greiser, 
Nazi president of the Danzig Senate, declaring 
that he spoke “in the name of all the German 
people,” defied the League Council, bitterly at- 
tacked Sean Lester of the Irish Free State, League 
High Commissioner, and demanded termination 
of League jurisdiction over the Free City. Fol- 
lowing his unprecedentedly insolent speech — 
which was greeted with enthusiasm by the Ger- 
man press—Dr. Greiser gave Mr. Eden the Nazi 
salute and, when this gesture provoked laughter, 
thumbed his nose at the press and public. Poland, 
which has charge of Danzig’s foreign relations, 
sought to minimize Greiser’s outburst, and indi- 
cated that it would not interfere with Danzig’s 
internal affairs provided its rights and interests 
in the Free City, guaranteed by the Versailles 
Treaty, were respected by Germany and the Dan- 
zig Nazis. The British, who at first had been 
inclined to let Poland handle the Danzig incident, 
later obtained the appointment of a League com- 
mittee composed of France, Britain and Portugal 
to watch the situation in the Free City, where the 
next blow at European peace is expected to fall. 

Yet in the light of Ethiopia’s experience, it may 
be doubted that League watchfulness alone will 
prevent Nazi Germany from securing Danzig or 
any other territory it may covet in Eastern Eu- 
rope. What started out, in October 1935, as a 
noble experiment to establish collective security 
by penalizing an aggressor, ended in July 1936 as 
a mad scramble of leading League states to cut 
their Ethiopian losses and win the aggressor’s aid 
against the threat of German expansion. The 
principal argument advanced at Geneva—that the 
end of Ethiopia’s resistance made further sanc- 
tions futile—would merely prove that force re- 
mains the decisive factor in international rela- 
tions, and that a strong and determined aggressor 
has nothing to fear once his victim has been sub- 
jugated. The so-called realism which appeared 
to demand Italy’s return to the Stresa front at 
any price overlooks one important reality—that 
the League’s refusal to press sanctions in this case 
has jeopardized in advance the success such mea- 
sures might have had in the case of German ag- 
gression. The Ethiopian affair reveals not the 
breakdown of League machinery—whose effec- 
tiveness depends entirely on the willingness of 
League members to make it work—but the bank- 


Page Two 


ruptcy of leadership in League states, and their 
reluctance to make substantial sacrifices for col- 
lective security. By condoning aggression in one 
quarter, the League has already encouraged it in 
another. To contend that peace can be achieved 
by making concessions to actual or potential ag- 
gressors is to establish a false premise. True, con- 
flict may be temporarily avoided by meeting the 
aggressor’s terms—which become more stringent 
with every concession. But such peace, which 
at best is no more than a precarious truce, can only 
serve as a prelude to war. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


JAPAN REJECTS NAVAL TREATY 


The tottering edifice of naval limitation by in- 
ternational agreement faces destruction as a result 
of Japan’s formal refusal, on June 29, to adhere 
to the London Naval Treaty of 1936. While the 
treaty may come into force without Tokyo’s ac- 
cession, Britain, France and the United States 
can scarcely be expected to maintain limitations 
with respect to gun calibres and tonnage of cate- 
gories unless Japan gives assurance that it 
will do the same. Japanese naval authorities, 
certain to lose in an unrestricted competition, may 
yet decide, for reasons of prestige, to observe the 
provisions of the treaty without directly adhering 
to it. It might thus survive intact, except for the 
clause which requires assent by Japan and Italy 
before April 1, 1937 if gun calibres on capital 
ships are to be limited to 14 rather than 16 inches. 

Japan’s action was preceded by a British move 
setting the stage for an upward revision of fleet 
tonnages when the 1930 Naval Treaty expires at 
the end of this year. That treaty stipulates the 
tonnage which each naval power shall possess on 
December 31, 1936 without specifying the limits 
which may be attained on prior or subsequent 
dates. Hence the powers have thus far refrained 
from dismantling a considerable volume of over- 
age tonnage in the lighter categories. Britain 
now plans to retain 40,000 tons of destroyers due 
for scrapping by invoking the “escalator clause” 
of the 1930 treaty, which permits certain tonnage 
increases after due notification if construction by 
non-signatory powers affects the signatories’ na- 
tional security. The United States—which in- 
sisted on this “legal” method of procedure and 
refused to conclude a special agreement sanction- 
ing the British move—will then have the right to 
retain an equivalent tonnage of its wartime 
destroyer fleet. Japan has already informed 
London that it desires to keep more than 20,000 
tons of over-age but useful submarines. 

DAVID H. POPPER 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 37, Juty 10, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMoONpD Lesiig BUELL, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MICcHELES Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


VoL 


July 


ea cr © 


