


rce- 
ble 
nts 
ver, 


eld 


ce” 
Dr. 
of 
ers, 
(im. 
not 
rre. 


use 
any 
visit 


had 


wed 


call 


cOn- 
No- 
'S$a- 
inal 
ing 
vOys 
con- 
lop- 
may 
ntly 
oth- 
will 
tate 

the 

the 

the 





le. Willian p Entered as 2nd class matter 
~RL¥G ty of Michigan Library 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 5 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vo. XXI, No. 8 


—_— 


DECEMBER 12, 1941 





JAPAN'S SURPRISE ATTACK OPENS PACIFIC WAR 


eG powerfully on December 7 in a 
surprise offensive, cleverly screened by the ne- 
gotiations still being conducted at Washington, 
Japanese naval and air forces gained initial advan- 
tages of considerable significance in the first stages 
of the Pacific war. The bombing raids on the 
Hawaiian islands—reminiscent of Japan’s previous 
attacks in the Sino-Japanese and Russo-Japanese 
wats of 1894 and 1904—preceded Tokyo’s formal 
declaration of war by several hours. The original 
orders for the attack, however, must have been is- 
sued at least a week earlier, in order to give the naval 
vessels, including submarines operating between 
Honolulu and San Francisco, time to reach their 
appointed stations. In retrospect, it mow appears 
evident that Tokyo deliberately utilized not only the 
negotiations at Washington but also the reinforce- 
ments sent into Indo-China to divert suspicion from 
its bolder intentions. 


THE FIRST BLOW. While the Japanese stroke 
has cemented American national unity as nothing 
se could have done and will thus exert a profound 
efect on the eventual outcome of the war, both in 
Europe and Asia, it is equally apparent that Japan 
has gained important strategic benefits by striking 
the first blow. Early reports indicate that the attack 
was driven home with a large measure of success. 
One ‘old battleship” was ‘‘capsized’’ and other 
vessels, probably cruisers and capital ships, ‘‘seri- 
ously hit.”” A destroyer was blown up and a con- 
siderable number of planes destroyed. The severity 
of these losses suggests that the surprise was 
complete, and that the attack caught many planes on 
landing fields and at least part of the fleet at anchor 
in the waters of the Pearl Harbor base. Dive bombers 
were apparently launched from one or more Jap- 
anese aircraft carriers, and large four-motored 
bombers may also have been flown from bases estab- 


lished in the Japanese mandated islands. 

While the first and heaviest assault was delivered 
against Hawaii, the full scope of the Japanese of- 
fensive covered an area ranging from Malaya to the 
waters off the California coast. With Japanese 
submarines obviously scattered widely over the 
Pacific, it may be expected that the toll of mer- 
chant and army transport vessels will steadily in- 
crease, at least until an effective convoy system has 
been arranged. Attacks on Guam, Wake and Mid- 
way islands have taken place, and one or more of 
these island outposts may be quickly lost. In the 
Philippines, army and navy posts have been bombed 
and Lubang island, 60 miles southwest of Manila, 
has apparently been captured. American marines in 
North China, numbering approximately 200, were 
interned, while at Shanghai a British gunboat was 
destroyed, an American gunboat seized, and the In- 
ternational Settlement occupied. 

In the Western Pacific, however, the Japanese 
forces concentrated their greatest offensive effort 
against Thailand and Malaya. Thailand, after brief 
resistance, had permitted the entry of Japanese 
troops, which then occupied strategic points on the 
Gulf of Siam along the narrow Thai peninsula ex- 
tending down to Malaya. At least two Japanese de- 
tachments had effected landings in northern Malaya, 
but these forces and their naval escorts, according to 
British reports, were being successfully checked. 
Both Singapore and Hongkong had suffered bombing 
raids, and direct attacks on these British strongholds 
were anticipated. 


THE STRATEGIC OUTLOOK. While the dras- 
tic attack on Hawaii has necessarily attracted major 
attention, and has raised searching questions re- 
garding the ease with which the American defenses 
were penetrated and surprised, there is little reason 
to believe that Japan can continue to hold the of- 











— Page Two 





fensive in the mid-Pacific for any length of time. 
The shock of the initial setback should create an 
attitude of redoubled watchfulness sufficient to pze- 
vent unpleasant surprises in the future. 

Far more significant, with respect to the . >a! out- 
come, are the engagements that have begu: ia 7" ai- 
land and northern Malaya. Here it is evident that 
the Japanese forces are striving with considerable 
determination to place land-based armies »°.n | 
striking distance of Singapore—the strategic key to 
Southeast Asia. In this case, again, their prelim‘nary 
successes have been considerable. As the formidable 
British land and air units in this area fully engage 
the Japanese forces, however, it may be expected 
that the latter’s overland advance will be halted at 
some point well north of Singapore. Meanwhile, the 
equally crucial struggle for control of the relatively 
narrow waters of the Gulf of Siam and the South 
China Sea will be reaching maximum intensity. The 
combined Anglo-American-Dutch air strength in 
this region, now buttressed by a British naval force 
including capital ships, should prove able to estab- 
lish superiority in Southeast Asia. Unless the Jap- 











—=>= | = 
China and Thailand may then find their lines yj} 2, 
supply from the homeland cut off and their military } jie I 
position increasingly untenable. “| on Sey 
Should the Japanese forces now threatening Singa. | yndert 
pore be defeated, however, only the first step toward! «onor 
an Allied victory would have been taken. Such 4} contra 
victory can only be obtained by a combination of} aot in 
factors, including an ironclad blockade of Japan, Japane 
the equipping of Chinese armies for a counter} sounc 
offensive, establishment of air bases within closer} many 
bombing range of Japan, and destruction of the Jap.| this c 
anese fleet. Before these results can be achieved, a} offcia' 
strong American fleet will have to enter Far Easter} decide 
waters, joining hands with the considerable Anglo. | subma 
American-Dutch naval force already in Southeast} frst 1 
Asia. Should the Soviet air, land and sea power in} Both | 
Siberia be drawn into the struggle, the defeat of | Germ: 
Japan will be made more certain and will come} of Fr 
much sooner. In many quarters, Japan’s entrance into | many’ 
the war has been viewed as a long-sought aim of| by de 
Hitler's, yet a coordinated and powerful Allied of. 3. 
fensive in the Pacific may lead to a Japanese defeat| ¢ p- 
that could swiftly turn the scales against Hitler in 





anese naval command is willing to risk its ships of Europe. art 
the line in this region, Japan’s land forces in Indo- T. A. Bisson spond 
WILL WAR IN PACIFIC HELP HITLER? been 


The first question that came to the minds of most 
Americans on hearing that Japan had attacked 
British and United States possessions in the Pacific 
was whether this new conflict would aid or hamper 
the Western powers in their struggle against Ger- 
many. 

In the new phase of the war that opened on De- 
cember 7, as on many previous occasions during the 
past two years, the factor of ume may assume para- 
mount importance. If American aid to Britain, in the 
form of tanks, airplanes and munitions, represents 
the margin between victery and defeat for the Brit- 
ish in Africa, then, in the short run, it may well be 
that this country’s preoccupation with the Far East- 
ern conflict will create fresh difficulties for Britain. 
But if the British, with the equipment they have so 
far obtained from the United States, should be able 
to hold the Germans in Africa, while the Russians 
maintain their resistance on the eastern front, then 
in the long run Japan’s attack—which brings the 
United States into the second world war with a united 





READ— 


America’s Naval Preparedness 

U.S. Defense Outposts in the Pacific 
Japan’s Drive into Southeast Asia 
China’s National Front 

The Netherlands Indies at War 


25c each or 5 for $1.00 


These five issues of FoREIGN Poticy Reports will give you 
the strategic and political facts behind the war in the Pacific. 











home front—may work against Hitler and his| adr 
allies. Among the many incalculables that may affect| the 
the situation are Vichy’s answer to Hitler's demand] tilly 
for use of the French navy; the action Germany may| side, 
take in support of its Axis partner, Japan; and the! Decer 
course Russia may follow in Europe and the Far| ad f 
East. may 
1. WHAT WILL VICHY DO? Scant informa-| val 
tion is as yet available regarding the interview that| 
Marshal Pétain and Vice Admiral Darlan had with| 
Marshal Goering at St. Florentin, in occupied France, | 
on December 1. It has been reported that Pétain| + y4 
had been willing to permit use by the Germans of| 
French bases in Africa, but had opposed use of the | Gern 
French fleet. The entrance into the war of Japan, | . 
which ranks third in naval power after Britain and] |. 
the United States, lends particular significance to| y.., 
Nazi negotiations with Vichy. So far as is knowa,| ¢,._ 
the French navy (as of January 1, 1941), consisted) y_, 
of one battleship, one aircraft carrier (stationed at| 4 
Martinique where, presumably it is under watch by| sep 
the United States Navy), 14 cruisers, 52 destroyers, 45. 
and 60 submarines. It has been recently reported that) 
another battleship, the Richelieu, which had bees Gali 
damaged during the British attack on Dakar ip 


- «| Men 
1940, has just been reconditioned. These vessels, if 


admi 
spoke 





—— 


placed at Hitler’s disposal, might prove formidable} tore 
weapons now that Britain and the United State Headg 
must divide their fleets between the Atlantic and the 
Pacific. 


Entere 
<2, 














= | Page Three = 





| 








soff 2. WHAT WILL GERMANY DO? Under Ar- 
tary } tide II] of the Axis tripartite pact signed in Berlin F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
on September 27, 1940, Germany, Italy and Japan ween re — ss —_— 
Nga-| yndertook to assist one another “with all political, Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 
vatd | gonomic and military means when one of the three Date: Sunday, December 14 
h a| wntracting powers is attacked by a power at present Time: 12-12:15 p.m. E.S.T., over NBC 
1 of not involved in the European war or in the Chinese- For station, please consult your local newspaper 











pan, | Japanese conflict.” While the German press has de- 
ater-| pounced the United States as a “‘warmonger,” Ger- 
Oset} many by December 9, had taken no action against 
Jap-| this country and, similarly, the United States was 
d, aj oficially at war only with Japan. Should Berlin 
tem | decide to act against the United States, unrestricted 
glo-| ubmarine warfare in the Atlantic might be its 
east | first move, accompanied by “all-out” war in Africa. 
t in} Both these operations would be greatly facilitated if 
t of | Germany could make use of the French Navy and 
ome} of French bases in North and West Africa. Ger- 
into | many’s decision on this score may, in turn, be affected army in the Far East, estimated at over a million 


1 of | by developments on the Russian front. men, as well as an air force and a fleet of submarines 
of! 3. WHAT WILL RUSSIA DO? While reports said to number between 70 and 100, b.sed on Vladi- 


undertook not only to fight the war until “complete 
destruction of the German invaders,” but to pro- 
mote after the victory “a new organization of inter- 
national relations on the basis of unification of the 
democratic countries in a durable alliance.” 

Under these circumstances, Americans must view 
with as much realism as possible the question of 
what Russia may do in the Far East—a question that 
can be frankly discussed now that Maxim Litvinov, 
Soviet Ambassador to this country, has reached 
Washington. The Soviet Union has an independent 








feat f Red Army successes against the Germans come vostok. At least a portion of the Far Exstern Army, 
¥ IM! from censored Russian communiqués, and cannot be however, has been diverted to the western front 
checked against reports of independent corre- against Germany, and now that the Germ. ns occupy 
N | sondents, Berlin has not denied that its troops have Russia’s principal industrial regions — the Ukraine 
_ been forced to retreat from Rostov, which the Nazis and the Donets Basin — the armies in the w st and 
his| had regarded as the gateway to the oil resources of in the east must both depend on the second. -y in- 
ffect| the Caucasus. Meanwhile, Turkey, which has care- dustrial base in the Urals for their supplies. For the 
1anq} fully abstained from military commitments to either time being, it would seem advisable from the point 
may| side, allowed it to be announced in Washington on of view of Russia and of the ABCD powers that the 
| the} December 3 that it has been receiving lend-lease Soviet Union should not scatter its forces, and should 
Fy:| aid from the United States since last May. This give single-handed attention to Germany. 
may open the possibility of Turkey's collaboration It is, of course, not out of the question that the 
with Russia and Britain in blocking further German Nazis, having decided to suspend major operations 
aa attempts at a drive toward the east. on the eastern front, may now focus their efforts on 
| The hazards of a winter campaign in Russia were Africa. There they might hope—if they obtain the 
with) sdmitted on December 8 by a German military “collaboration” of Vichy—to deliver a serious blow 
al spokesman in Berlin, who declared that the capture at the British Empire at the very moment when the 
=| of Moscow is not expected this year. This announce- United States must turn from the Atlantic to the 
: *'| ment, which must have seemed a cruel blow to the Pacific. This strategy of trying to separate potential 
| German people after the losses of lives and material allies, and of defeating each opponent separately, 
pas, wuffered on the eastern front, was made to coincide has been effectively used by the Nazis in the past. 
. »| with news of Japanese successes against the United Today it is being applied on a world, no longer 
States in such a way as to soften its impact on the merely on a European, scale. The vast pincer move- 
>W! German public. The Russians, meanwhile, have in- ment that is developing from the Mediterranean- 
re dicated that they are reorganizing their armed forces African front to the new front in the Pacific is di- 
h | | and their industrial resources east of Moscow in rected ultimately against the United States. But today 
| preparation for a spring offensive, and have cemented the Nazis, as well as the countries that oppose the 
ee their collaboration with the Polish Army which Axis, must fight on several fronts. And the trans- 
bell has been formed on Russian soil. On December 4 formation of the European war into a world war may 
. | Stalin and Premier Sikorski of the Polish govern- prove as great a test for Germany as for its opponents. 
< F ment-in-exile signed a declaration in which they VERA MICHELES DEAN 


a 





lable FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 8, DecemMBEeR 12, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
tates Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRaNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lget, Secretary; VERA MicHELEs Dgan, Editor. 
j th Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
Swiss Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 

F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Dec. 6.—Less than 24 hours after the Japanese 
attack on the United States the President and Con- 
gress had recognized that a state of war existed be- 
tween the United States and Japan. 


A week of intensive negotiation and consultation 
preceded the final break. On December 2, at the re- 
quest of the President, Japan was asked to explain the 
increased concentration of Japan’s armed forces in 
French Indo-China. On December 3 Secretary Hull 
outlined the course of the United States-Japanese 
conversations in a press conference statement which 
revealeci unsatisfactory progress. On December 6, 
followiig Japanese “explanations” concerning mili- 
tary coacentrations in French Indo-China, President 
Roosevelt dispatched a dramatic appeal to Emperor 
Hiroh to in which he termed the situation “a keg 
of dynamite” and urged the Emperor “to give 
thought in this definite emergency to ways of dis- 
pelling the dark clouds.”” No reply to this personal 


appeal was received before the first bombs fell over 
Hawaii. 


U.S. PROPOSALS. The American proposals, pre- 
sented to the Japanese on November 26 and rejected 
by them at the last moment, contained ten specific 
steps based on general principles of American 
foreign policy. These steps were as follows: (1) “A 
multilateral non-aggression pact among the British 
Empire, China, Japan, the Netherlands, the Soviet 
Union, Thailand, and the United States”; (2) an 

agreement to respect the territorial integrity of Indo- 
China and to prevent preferential economic relations 
with that country; (3) Japanese withdrawal of 
forces from China and French Indo-China; (4) rec- 
ognition of the Chungking government as the na- 
tional government of China; (5) an agreement to 
abandon extraterritorial rights in China. In return 
for these concessions to be made primarily by Japan, 
the United States undertook to negotiate a trade 
agreement with Japan based on the most-favored- 
nation principle and the reduction of trade barriers 
by both countries. In addition, the United States pro- 
posed that both governments take steps to remove 
freezing restrictions on each other’s funds, and to 
stabilize the dollar-yen rate. Finally, both govern- 
ments were to agree that no arrangement with a 





third power should conflict with the establishmey 
and preservation of peace in the Pacific. 

Tokyo replied that its “immutable policy’ was 
“to insure the stability of East Asia’’ and that 
the Chinese affair broke out “owing to the failure 
on the part of the Chinese to comprehend Japan’ 
true intentions.” The note charged that the United 
States and Great Britain had resorted to every pos | x 
sible measure “to obstruct the settlement of a gen.| —— 
eral peace between Japan and China, interfering 
with Japan’s constructive endeavors toward the 
stabilization of East Asia.” After reviewing the AS 
course of the conversations, the note concluded that V 
“it is impossible to reach an agreement through fur-} tlitar 
ther negotiations.” On receiving this reply, Secre-} ment 
tary Hull stated to the Japanese Ambassador, “‘I have} Pacific 
never seen a document that was more crowded with} one cc 
infamous falsehoods and distortions.” rodu 
tial bl 

REACTION IN LATIN AMERICA. Within 24} on An 
hours of the attack on Honolulu, half a dozen Latin} have : 
American republics had formally declared war on} the L 
Japan, and an overwhelming majority of the repub-| count 
lics had gone on record as favoring some form of} powet 
collaboration with the United States. Costa Rica was} now « 
the first to declare war: it was followed by Nic) they « 
aragua, Honduras, El Salvador, Haiti, Guatemala, | have | 
the Dominican Republic and Panama. On Decem-| the A 
ber 9, similar declarations were momentarily ex| Yel 
pected from Cuba and Mexico. Atlan 
ain, \ 














The most important move on the South Ameri 
can Continent proper was Argentina’s statement on 
December 8 that it intended to regard Japan’s attack ~_— 
as directed against the entire Western Hemisphere. 

It was expected that Argentina would issue a decree 
declaring the United States would not be considered | 
a belligerent power in its conflict with Japan and 
that therefore the government of Buenos Aires “will 
not make the customary declaration of neutrality. | 
Meanwhile, the President of Uruguay, Alfredo Bal- 
domir, urged his people i in a radio address to aban-| 
don the fiction of “neutrality.” From Bogota it was) , 
announced that Colombia would put its bases both 
on the Caribbean and the Pacific at the disposal of 
the United States. Peru—which, like Brazil, has 4] ; 

ity, ¢ 
sizeable Japanese population of its own and also has} |; h 
important Japanese commercial contacts—is reported n 
to have offered the United States “moral and spiritual 
solidarity.” 


mont! 


carion 
marir 


ine 
Vales 


woul 
Fren 


A.H. J. and J. 1. B. M. 








