he 


rol 


us 


109 
36- 
ive 
ev- 
340 


the 











the 
ith | 


ure 


ional 


ditor. | 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vout. XVI, No. 7 


DECEMBER 11, 1936 





“Headline Books” Christmas Package 
cAn ideal gift! 
Three Headline Books in an attractive cellophane-wrapped 
package—WAR DRUMS AND PEACE PLANS, DICTATORSHIP, and 


CLASH IN THE PACIFIC—together with a Christmas greeting from 
Dr. Harry Emezson Fosdick. 


This package, with your name enclosed, will be mailed for $1.00. 
Orders must reach the F. P. A. office by December 15. 














Dr. Will 


. E on rm: .% 

iam W@W. Bishop 
a 
wa 


co) 7 2 «, ~ ¢ vy 
*% University 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











| 


INCONSISTENCIES AT BUENOS AIRES 





N opening the Buenos Aires conference on 

December 1 President Roosevelt made a mov- 
ing address in which he condemned “the new 
fanaticism” in Europe, implied that it would be 
superseded eventually by the democratic prin- 
ciple, and expressed the view that the republics 
of the New World should help the Old World in 
averting war. In an address of December 5, 
Secretary Hull emphasized the danger of war in 
any part of the world, and declared that an end 
had to come to the unilateral violation of treaties. 


Following these addresses, which seemed de- 
signed to strengthen the unity of the democracies 
both in America and Europe, Secretary Hull sub- 
mitted to the conference a draft convention which 
would create a permanent inter-American con- 
sultative committee composed of the ministers of 
foreign relations of each American republic. 
This committee would take the initiative in re- 
minding parties to a dispute of their obligations 
under existing treaties (including the Anti-War 
pact and four inter-American agreements) and 
applying procedures of specific settlement. Dur- 
ing “cognizance” of a dispute by the permanent 
committee, the parties promise not to aggravate 
the controversy nor to take any military action. 
Should two states nevertheless go to war, the other 
American states, linked together through the per- 
manent committee, would impose an embargo on 
loans and the export of munitions. While those 
Latin American states which are members of the 
League may limit this embargo to the aggressor 
state, the United States and other non-members 
of the League would apply the embargo equally to 
all belligerents. 

While the convention is silent regarding em- 
bargoes against European or Asiatic belligerents, 
it apparently envisages close collaboration be- 
tween the American states for the purpose of 
developing a common attitude and joint action 
toward “preventing conflicts of any kind”—with- 


out limitation as to hemispheres. In agreeing to 
“consult” with the other American states in re- 
gard both to inter-American and non-American 
wars, the United States has taken a step forward. 
The one major weakness of the proposal which 
may prove its undoing is the provision that the 
United States and other non-members of the 
League shall embargo all belligerents. On No- 
vember 27 President Roosevelt declared at Rio 
de Janeiro that “we cannot countenance aggres- 
sion.” Yet the neutrality proposal would penal- 
ize the victim of aggression to the same extent as 
the state violating its obligations. If the Roose- 
velt administration, despite its enormous major- 
ity, does not feel strong enough to ask Congress 
for power to cooperate in a system of sanctions 
limited to the American continents, one cannot 
expect that it will take any effective steps to re- 
solve the European crisis. On the contrary, it 
would seem inevitable that once this machinery 
is established most of the Latin American states 
will follow the “neutrality” principles of the 
United States and dr...’ ay from the League. 
If the United States is unwilling to accept any 
obligations as to sanctions, then it should agree 
to omit from the convention all reference to treat- 
ing belligerents equally, leaving this question to 
be determined by domestic legislation or consulta- 
tion when the occasion arises. 


While Argentina is justified in asking whether 
the American neutrality proposal can be recon- 
ciled with the principles of jurisprudence to which 
it subscribes, the Buenos Aires government itself 
set a bad example when’on November 26 it re- 
newed an agreement with Britain providing for 
exclusive preferential import and foreign exchange 
quotas. In defense of its exclusive policy, Argen- 
tina may argue that the United States has failed to 
ratify the 1935 convention abolishing unnecessary 
quarantine restrictions upon Argentine meat. Nev- 
ertheless, while at Buenos Aires President Roose- 


ichigan Library 














—<—<—_—i—_{[{=$$@=$$_=_["__a_c_____ 





velt specifically promised to induce the Senate to 
approve this agreement, and he also expressed 
the hope that the United States and Argentina 
could soon make a trade treaty. It is regrettable 
that Argentina did not postpone decision on its 
agreement with Britain until after President 
Roosevelt had had an opportunity to carry out his 
promises. Resting upon the narrow principle of 
bilateral trade, the Argentine-British agreement 
constitutes a defeat for the Hull program. 

Dispatches further declare that Chile has recog- 
nized the Italian conquest of Ethiopia, and that 
Nicaragua and Guatemala have recognized the 
Franco régime. If the United States by its policy 
of embargoes is unconsciously injuring the de- 
mocracies of the world, these premature Latin 
American recognitions not only violate interna- 
tional engagements but offer open encouragement 
to the Fascist International. The results of the 
Buenos Aires conference will prove disappointing 
unless these inconsistencies are reconciled and 
positive steps taken to strengthen the principles 
of international organization and law. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


DOMESTIC ISSUES DISTURB FRANCE AND 
BRITAIN 

With Europe already in ferment grave domestic 
crises in France and Britain have added to the 
prevailing uncertainty. The French crisis is the 
outcome of a growing rift between the Com- 
munists and the cabinet. Not participating in 
the government, the Communists have felt in- 
creasingly free to assail it. In repeated speeches 
Maurice Thorez, secretary-general of the party, 
accused Premier Blum of capitulating before 
fascism at home and abroad. The domestic pro- 
gram of the Popular Front, he alleged, had not 
been carried out with sufficient vigor: the Fascist 
leagues were still permitted a surreptitious ex- 
istence while Communist meetings in Alsace- 
Lorraine had been prohibited; “reactionary” 
influences were allowed to sabotage economic and 
social reforms while little was done to check rising 
prices and “profiteering.” In foreign policy Blum 
was accused of yielding to Hitler and of partici- 
pating in a “blockade” against the loyalist Popu- 
lar Front government in Spain. The opposition 
of the Communists came to a head during a two- 
day debate on foreign policy in the Chamber of 
Deputies. Although the government received a 
sizeable vote of confidence—350 to 171—on Decem- 
ber 5, the Communist delegation abstained. Only 
with difficulty was Premier Blum dissuaded from 
resigning. While the cabinet remains in power, 
its future is by no means assured. It faces a pro- 


= Page Two 





—— 





longed debate on the budget which has been ge. 
verely attacked by the Right, the Center and ex. 
treme Left. 

In Britain the constitutional crisis came with 
dramatic suddenness. The names of the King 
and the American-born Mrs. Wallis Warfield 
Simpson had been repeatedly linked in the foreign 
press for some time, particularly since Mrs, 
Simpson had obtained an interlocutory divorce 
decree from her second husband on October 27, 
The British public, however, had remained largely | 
ignorant of the affair until it became known on 
December 2 that the Baldwin government was 
resisting the King’s wish to marry the American. 
The strong-willed monarch and the cabinet be 
came deadlocked, with King Edward insisting’ 
that his marriage was a private act on which he’ 
was not bound by the advice of his ministers, and | 
the cabinet equally determined to consider it a! 
public act which would seriously affect the stand- 
ing of the crown not only with the British public 
but with the dominions. Supported apparently by 
the dominions, Prime Minister Baldwin an- 
nounced in Parliament on December 3 that the 
government had declined Edward’s proposal to 
legalize a morganatic marriage which would not 
raise Mrs. Simpson to the rank of queen and would 
debar any eventual children from the succession. 
Most of the press, with the exception of the Bea- 
verbrook and Rothermere papers, a large majority 
of Parliament and the Church of England have 
rallied to the support of the government. Public 
opinion is sharply divided, with many of the 
younger people and working classes supporting 
the King either because of his defiance of conven- 
tion or because of his well-known sympathy with 
labor. 

Although the Liberal and Labor opposition in 
the House of Commons sympathize with the King, 
they are apparently supporting the government. 
They realize that the King’s marriage involves a 
larger issue— whether the will of the monarch 
shall prevail over the advice of the cabinet as the 
representative of Parliament. To yield to the 
King on this point may encourage the sovereign 
to exercise independent authority on other ques- 
tions as well. This danger is illustrated by the 
fact that Winston Churchill, a leading reactionary, 
has been trying to provoke a revolt against 
Premier Baldwin in the House of Commons, while 





the Fascists of Oswald Mosley are campaigning | 


actively for the King in the country. The final 
decision now rests with the King, but it appears 
that his cabinet will make him choose between 
marriage and the throne. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 7, Decumpgr 11, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasiiz Busit, President; EstHer G. OcpEn, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dsan, Editor. 
Gaotered as second-class mater December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








An 


VOL. 
C 


Dec 


cal 
det 
otk 
fac 
ne 
evi 


+ tt tipelininmaetinw aon oe 64 ees 





