JUN 22 1943 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


“" “euerai Lid ary 
4 renionie BRAK ¥ Jnive t cow . 
: cane y of Michie 
Ann Arbo Michto 
— SeColean 
at 
oat 
Mm FOREIGN POLICY BUDBE® 
opt 
sent An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
for FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
by 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
hat, | You. XXII, No. 35 JuNE 18, 1948 
the | 
tbe| ALLIES MUST RECKON WITH PROFOUND CHANGES IN EUROPE’S TEMPER 
la THE closer the Allies come to making a dent some- so short a time. Property as a source of power may 
one|> Where in the “fortress of Europe,” the more have become extinct in the conquered countries— 
lam. | suxiously they scan every scrap of news that comes although not, of course, for the Nazi conquerors— 
~wal |ftom the continent in the hope of discovering the just as the possession of ancient titles became extinct 
ents | temper of the men and women in occupied countries as a source of power in France after the revolution 
ng,” | whose aid is essential for the success of Allied in- of 1789. The ravages of Nazi occupation threaten to 
ap-jwasion. In a very profound sense the moral test that wipe out the middle class, from top to bottom, as 
- the|awaits the Allies upon landing in Europe promises the French Revolution laid low the monarchy and 
n an}? be far more searching, and more decisive for the aristocracy. Under these circumstances, some form 
hich} future of the world, than the military test of over- of collective economy, whatever may be its political 
any|coming Nazi resistance. label, appears far more likely in Europe after the war 
war,| It has long been surmised that, under the stress than the immediate restoration of private property— 
natejind strain of war and prolonged occupation, the and may, in fact, offer the only alternative to sheer 
was|temper of Europe’s conquered peoples has profound- anarchy. 
isive}y changed from that of 1939. But to what extent INTANGIBLES GAIN NEW WEIGHT. But 
has it changed, and in what direction? Is the pre- while the importance of material possessions has 
te in}dominant mood that of revolt against the Nazi yoke thus gone down sharply in the scales with which 
lied|—or of revolt, at the same time, against the ideas Europeans measure life today, the importance of 
ubli- jind practices of the world we had known before the intangible qualities—loyalty, integrity, courage—has 
, thé \utbreak of the war, and which fostered, or at least been going up. The liberated peoples, who have been 
ssage {did not prevent international conflict? subjected to terrible privations of mind and body, 
y for} DISAPPEARANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY. will not welcome restoration of political influence 


rocal 
Sena: 
on it 
it the 
f the 
it the 
vould 
dy to 
st- wal 
, beet 
give 


af 


OTT 


2S 


While no one can hazard a trustworthy opinion 
where so little direct information is available, sev- 
tal trends may already be detected in Europe. In the 
midst of suffering and terror such as have seldom 
len endured in history by the population of a whole 
®ntinent, values that were familiar and accepted by 
force of habit before 1939 have been revalued. 
Those who, at one time, exercised influence because 
hey had inherited or accumulated material posses- 
sions have been shorn of this influence through the 
mere fact of being dispossessed by the Nazis; while 


acquiescence have become necessarily suspect to their 
ttllow-citizens. By looting the conquered countries 
for the benefit of the Nazi war machine, Hitler has 
ptoletarianized Europe in a way in which the Com- 
Munists could not have dreamed to be possible in 


teh who did retain their possessions through Nazi 
aftet 


based solely on possession of property. But neither 
will they tolerate a naked steuggle for personal 
power among those of their leaders who, through 
the accident of fate or their own choice, are now 
living outside Europe. This was the meaning of the 
manifesto issued in Algiers on June 13 by the 
twenty-six Communist deputies escaped from France, 
who deprecated the continued controversies between 
de Gaulle and Giraud, voiced opposition to attempts 
by any one man to play the role of military dictator, 
and stressed the spirit of sacrifice that animates those 
Frenchmen who valiantly continue their unequal 
struggle at home against the Nazi conquerors. The 
Europeans, so far as can be discovered, have no de- 
sire to go back to the parliamentary bickerings and 
governmental vacillations of the pre-war period. But 
neither do they want to replace Hitler’s dictatorship 


by that of a native dictator, no matter how patriotic 
his motives. 

The moral crisis through which we are all passing 
or about to pass, in varying degrees, inevitably raises 
the question of why, again and again, so wide a gap 
occurs between popular intuition and aspiration, and 
the actual ormance of political leaders. It is 
understandable that all human beings who assume 
political responsibility should falter, at one time or 
another, through lack of vision, or lack of courage, 
or merely through fatigue. But while such falter- 
ings may be unimportant, or even hardly noticeable 
in time of peace, in critical periods like this they 
constitute a betrayal of the pitiful, the heartrending 
trust that people tend to place in those who claim the 
privilege of leading them. In a totalitarian state the 
leader can be arbitrary, changeable, violent, utterly 
indifferent to human misery—and survive, because 
he brooks no opposition. In a democratic society 
those who want to exercise political power can do 
so only at the risk of being constantly checked and 
scrutinized. Today all peoples, torn between hope 


UNITED NATIONS RELIEF AGREEMENT STRESSES COMMON EFFORT 


The proposed establishment, announced on June 
10, of a central agency to be known as the United 
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration 
(UNRRA), marks a positive step toward the 
creation of the first joint organization of all 
the United Nations and their associated powers. 
This should be an answer to people who have long 
complained that positive joint action was not forth- 
coming, and that the title “United Nations” re- 
mained merely a phrase. At the same time, this ac- 
tion is in line with the policy of gradualness known 
to be favored by President Roosevelt—a policy of 
solving specific problems according to existing needs, 
rather than launching at once a political organization 
of the United Nations. 

The draft agreement establishing UNRRA, drawn 
up through consultation between the United States, 
Britain, Russia, and China, is now being circulated to 
all the United Nations and associated powers. It will 
form the basis for discussion by an international con- 
ference which is expected to be held in the United 
States later this summer. 


AMERICA'S FOREIGN POLICIES: 
Past and Present 


25¢ 


This latest Headline Book tells the fascinating story of 
America’s growth and traces the historical conflict between 
cooperation and isolation which has waxed and waned 
throughout our history. 


Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 East 38th St., New York 16, N.Y. 


and cynicism, are more than ever on the watch fy 
possible betrayal of high professions by democraj 
Statesmen. 


Now that every move made by the United Natiog 
leaders is a matter of life and death not only for thy 
armies assembling on the periphery of Europe, by 
even more so for those within Europe, we are face 
by the supreme test of fulfilling the hopes placg 
in us by the conquered peoples. It is historically try 
as Pope Pius XII declared on June 13 to an aujj 
ence of 25,000 workers assembled in Rome from qj 
parts of Italy, that social revolution does not bring— 
in its immediate wake at least—salvation and justice 
But “the progressive and prudent evolution” urged 
by the Pope as the alternative will require the high. 
est quality of statesmanship on the part of the Unite! 
Nations — and a continent steeped in blood and 
suffering may not have the patience necessary fj 
evolution, unless the Allied leaders can give 
peoples implicit faith in the future. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


All the nations that become members of UNRR4 
are to be represented on the policy-making coundl 
Between sessions of the council a central committe 
composed of the United States, Britain, Russia ani 
China is to carry on the work. Upon the motion of 
the central committee the council is to select ; 
director-general. The director-general and his staf 
aided by a standing committee on supply, will hav 
the task of dealing with the practical problems 0 
food, clothing, and shelter, as well as public healt 
and repatriation, which are already worse than criti 
cal, and will demand prompt remedy as more and 
more territory is reclaimed from the Axis. 


SIZE OF THE PROBLEM. The telief crisis, in 
volving as it does all Europe and Asia, far exceets| 
that which confronted the American Relief Admin- 
istration headed by Mr. Hoover at the end of World 
War I. Nothing comparable to the present resettle) 
ment problem existed in 1919, and by the time 
World War II is over the period of general malnv 
trition will have been more prolonged than in 1914 
1918. A delay of several months such as then ut 
avoidably ensued—for want of sufficient advantt 
planning—before effective aid was given to Europt 
would be disastrous at this juncture. The fact tha 
people can be neither patient, reasonable, nor pe 
litically effective without the minimum decencies @ 
life needs no emphasis. Unless immediate and w9 
ible support on the part of the victors is forthcomisy 
on the morrow of liberation, one can expect wide 
spread breakdown in the form of political ape 
open antagonism, and even renewed strife, not ofl 
locally but throughout the Old World. 


Morec 
to begin 
famine ; 
reconqueé 
be ours 
therefore 
of relief 
structed- 
time wh: 
tion is u 

MUT 
tant to rf 
Europe : 
expected 
Santa C. 
hoped tt 
coming 
gram en 


| internati 


tration 

specifica 
each of 
their los 
the wor 
fleets of 
expect t 
and to « 
lease py! 
for a co! 


Moscow 
Hough 
Straig 

vineing ; 

ciated P 

obtainins 

the issue 

Africa. ( 


The Last 
lated 
Genne. 
This s 

anything 

men and 
selves ar 


Cordell | 
City, ] 
The re 

been ste 

cording 


Plans fo 
John 
1943. 
In the 

presenta 

jects is « 

_——- . 

FOREIGN 

Headquarte 


second-clas 
one month 


a 


1 fa 
Tati 


mutter 


ia and 
ion of 
lect ¢ 
> staff 
L have 
ms oi 
health 
n Crit 
re and 


Sis, if, 


xceeds| 


\ dmin- 
World 
esettle 
e time 
malnu- 
1 1914 
en Ut 
dvanct 
Burope 
ct that 


10f pe 


cies ol 
nd wi 
coming 
t wid 
apathy 


ot Oni 


Ee 


Moreover, we cannot wait for the end of the war 
to begin the work of relief. The stark reality of 
famine and privation must be met step by step as 
reconquest proceeds. The fate of Italy’s people may 
be ours to decide in a few weeks or months. It is 
therefore a hopeful sign that the necessary machinery 
of relief and rehabilitation is being seasonably con- 
structed—so that the United Nations may learn in 
time what to do, before the full crisis of reconstruc- 
tion is upon us. 

MUTUAL AID—NOT CHARITY. It is impor- 
tant to realize, particularly in the United States, that 
Europe is not asking for.charity. This country is not 
expected, as some would have us believe, to play 
Santa Claus to a hungry world. Indeed, while it is 
hoped that this country will have a major part in the 
coming reconstruction, the very essence of the pro- 
gtam envisaged in the draft agreement is that it is 
international in character. The expenses of adminis- 
tration and the burden of dispensing relief are 
specifically to be shared according to the ability of 
each of the participating nations. The Dutch, despite 
their losses, are still among the wealthy nations of 
the world. They and the Norwegians still control 
fleets of merchant ships. They, and other nations, 
expect to pay in money or goods for what they get, 
and to contribute what they can. As with the lend- 
lease program, a project has been created calling 
for a common effort in the interest of all. 


THE F.P.A. 


Moscow Dateline, 1941-1943, by Henry C. Cassidy. Boston, 

Houghton Mifflin, 1943. $3.00 

Straightforward and, for that reason, particularly con- 
vincing account of the war years in Russia by the Asso- 
ciated Press correspondent in Moscow, who succeeded in 
obtaining personal letters from Stalin stating his views on 
the issue of the second front and on the campaign in North 
Africa. Gives a vivid picture of life in wartime Moscow. 


The Last Days of Sevastopol, by Boris Voyetekhov. Trans- 
lated from the Russian by Ralph Parker and V. M. 
Genne. New York, Knopf, 1943. $2.50 
This small, grippingly written book conveys better than 

anything yet published the temper of Russia’s fighting 

men and women, and the quality of their faith in them- 
selves and in their own country. 


Cordell Hull: A Biography, by Harold B. Hinton. Garden 
City, Doubleday, 1942. $3.00 
The record of an American Secretary of State who has 
been steadfast rather than showy, acting constantly ac- 
cording to his reasoned belief in democratic decencies. 


Plans for World Peace through Six Centuries, by Sylvester 
John Hemleben. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 
1943. $2.50 
In the present search for durable peace this succinct 

presentation of the history of pre-League of Nations pro- 

jects is of interest. 


Page Three 


Nor is the program of relief and rehabilitation 
expected to last indefinitely. No plan for the perma- 
nent sustenance of one part of mankind at the ex- . 
pense of the rest could possibly be carried through. 
The purpose of the present agreement is to create 
machinery by which UNRRA could help devastated 
countries to help themselves, so as to restore normal 
living and normal trade as soon as possible. To make 
this feasible is the responsibility of the people who 
still have resources at their command in a world 
where so many have been reduced to a neat-starva- 
tion level. 

NO INFRINGEMENT OF SOVEREIGNTY. 
The relief and rehabilitation organization does not 
constitute a super-government. The draft agreement 
expressly provides that, where military operations 
still continue, or where military necessity may tfe- 
quire, its activities will be subject to military control. 
The precise relationship of UNRRA to the govern- 
ments of the nations in need of relief, once these 
governments have administrative authority over their 
territories, will have to be determined in each case 
through negotiations, with tact and statesmanship, 
according to the local situation and the temper of the 
people. If this pattern of joint enterprise is tried out 
and found workable, it may well set a standard for 
later and more extensive cooperation among the 
United Nations. 


SHERMAN S. HAYDEN 


BOOKSHELF 


This Is the Enemy, by Frederick Oechsner with Joseph 
W. Grigg, Jack M. Fleischer, Glen M. Stadler, Clinton 
B. Conger. Boston, Little, Brown, 1942. $3.00 


Examples of the vivid writing good journalists do under 
stress. Denny in prison camps, seeing every cruelty yet 
picking out certain decencies in the enemy; Beattie “freely 
passing” through gay and bitter days of war’s beginning, 
never missing news values; Lear in South America to 
check Nazi activity, passenger on a plane forced down in 
the desert, making an unforgettable story out of the fight 
against thirst and fatigue; Oechsner and his fellow- 
internees in Germany after America went into the war, 
carefully analyzing the Nazi régime out of their accumu- 
lated experiences. These correspondents give the kind of 
information the public wants to read. 


Mother Russia, by Maurice Hindus. New York, Doubleday 
Doran, 1948. $3.50 
Rambling and overlong account of Russia in the throes 
of war, the best parts of which, as might be expected 
from the author of Broken Earth and Humanity Uprooted, 
are the sketches of individuals, especially peasants, he en- 
countered during his trip last winter. 


The Philippines Calling, by Louis C. Cornish. Philadelphia, 
Dorrance, 1942. $2.00 


Description of the history and work of the Independent 
Church, a Protestant body in the Philippines. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 35, JuNgE 18, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Franxk Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micugtes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


= 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


. « 
’ 
: 


mn 


Washington News Letter 


JUNE 18.—The news of the fall of Pantelleria, 
outer bastion of the kingdom of Italy in the Medi- 
terranean, was used by President Roosevelt on 
June 11 as an occasion to summon the Italian people 
to overthrow Mussolini and the Fascist party. The 
President said that the acts of the Fascist régime did 
not actually represent the Italian people, and prom- 
ised the Italians that, once German domination had 
ended and the Fascist régime had been thrown out 
of office, it was the intention of the United Nations 
to see to it that Italy resumed its place as a respected 
member of the European family of nations. 

In making this statement, President Roosevelt was 
following the policy of Woodrow Wilson in World 
War I of going over the head of an enemy govern- 
ment and appealing directly to its people. That the 
American and British governments have agreed on 
a common policy with regard to Italy is indicated by 
the fact that Mr. Roosevelt's bid for a revolt of the 
Italians against their black-shirted masters consti- 
tuted an emphatic endorsement of a similar plea 
made by Churchill at the White House on May 25. 


NO IMMEDIATE ITALIAN UPRISING FORE- 
SEEN. It is not likely, however, that this campaign 
of “psychological warfare’ now being waged by the 
Americans and the British will be crowned with im- 
mediate success. It is, of course, true that the Italian 
people do not have their heart in this war. They 
were led into it by Mussolini in June 1940, when it 
seemed that Italy, to use Mr. Churchill’s phrase, 
could “pick up an empire on the cheap.” 

Since then the Italians have been sadly disillu- 
sioned. Their African Empire has been completely 
liquidated; their war casualties, according to official 
Italian estimates are placed at 633,251; their cities 
are now being destroyed by Allied air armadas; their 
Navy has been reduced in size by about 50 per cent; 
and what little military prestige Italy enjoyed has 
been entirely dissipated. 

Nevertheless, few in Washington believe that 
there is much possibility of a spontaneous popular 
uprising in Italy against Mussolini. Twenty years of 
Fascist rule and propaganda have virtually eliminated 
all opposition, and the dreaded secret police, OVRA, 
sees to it that the Italian masses remain in a state of 
political passivity. There is little doubt that the 
Italians would like to get out of the war, but they do 
not know how to extricate themselves from their 
plight. This is what Archbishop Spellman is reported 
to have told the exiled governments in London when 


FOR VICTORY ° 


he arrived there in May after his visit to Vatican City, 

The Italians would probably be ready to surrender 
unconditionally to the Americans and British, but they 
claim to be afraid of what the Russians, the Yugoslays 
and Greeks will do to them if they lay down their 
arms. Back in February Virginio Gayda, Mussolini's 
journalistic mouthpiece, intimated in Giornale 
d'Italia that Italy could, under certain circumstances, 
consider making a separate peace with Britain or 
the United States, but never with Russia. 


TWO SCHOOLS OF THOUGHT ON ITALY, 
In Washington, opinion is sharply divided as to 
the advisability of getting Italy out of the war. An 
influential school of thought in the State Depart- 
ment and the Army advocates leaving Italy to “stew 
in her own juice.” Members of this group argue that 
Italy is both a military and an economic liability to 
Germany, which must supply its ally with 12,000,000 
tons of coal a year sent across the Brenner Pass in 
trains that the badly bombed transportation system 
of the Reich can ill spare. It is pointed out that, if 
Italy yielded, the Allies would be faced with the 
obligation of sending food and coal to the Peninsula, 
and that these shipments would place an additional 
strain on the limited shipping facilities of the United 
Nations, thereby hampering future invasion opera- 
tions against the continent. Moreover, it is contended 
that Italy is useless as a base for military operations 
against the Reich because the Alps are an almost 
insuperable barrier between Germany and Italy. 

The other school of thought retorts that occupa- 
tion of Italy would open immense strategic possi- 
bilities to the Allies. Its members stress the fact that 
the Adriatic ports offer a gateway to the Balkans, 
and that northern Italy would provide excellent 
bases from which to bomb the industrial cities of 
southern Germany, which can be reached now only 
with difficulty by British and American bombers. 

But the psychological consequences of Italy's capit- 
ulation would far exceed the military gains, great 
as these are, according t) this school. It argues that 
the defection of Italy would mark the first break in 
the Axis front, and would therefore produce an 
effect comparable to the surrender of Bulgaria in 
World War I. The hoisting of the white flag by the 
nation in which Fascism was born would deal a ter- 
rific blow to Nazi morale, and would be regarded by 
the Germans and their satellite states as the har- 
binger of their own impending doom. 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


Sir At 
General « 
lithgow n 
military a 
ain's top- 
governme 
tice that t 
considerat 
templates 
uation uf 
been succ 

NEW 
The new 
in Octobe 
India’s w: 
his succes 
direct res 
against J 
arate Eas 
announce 
ment is m 
bined op 
British ar 
units—wi 

The in 
will be tc 
October f 
wrest con 
and for 
Which wi 
the Rang 
these las 
and Salw 
N0 possib 
British tri 
last two ° 
Tunisia ; 
ltranean 


