ie | 


large ag 
in quate 
zation Of 
avy, ad 
tion. The 
10s Aires 
> its gov- 
e way to 


Y We 
tates laid 
reference 
se South 
selves in 
> defense 
tina was 
e United 
plies that 
can coum 
icy was 4 
nference, 
American 


. the Cas 
jealously 
rica jeop 
ted States 
ighboring 
Aires of 
le of the 
w Argei- 
ports was 
elopment 
ist not be 
e United 
strategic 
iy Argent: 
oO getting 
terials as 
s country 
to clothe 
eturn, the 
f military 
ian goods 
quantities 
harboring 
onts on its 
laring the 
1 Harbor, 
go freely 
rilege that 
{LLIOTT 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. ¥ 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


“Op 
ni: ‘ ve 
wuseVersity of tre rave 

ea brary 
Ann Ar! 
roor., Mich 


Incorporated 


Vou. XXI, No. 43 


Aucust 14, 1942 


[N the cities and villages of India a major battle 
in the People’s War is in danger of being lost, for 
the arrest of Gandhi, Nehru, Azad and other leaders 
on August 9, a day after the All-India Congress Com- 
mittee adopted a civil disobedience resolution, marks 
a turning point from peaceful political controversy 
fo suppression and rioting. Whatever the course 
of events in weeks to come, one thing is clear: India 
can never become a true partner of the United Na- 
tions until peaceful discussion is resumed. 

Looking backward, one can now see that British 
policy toward India was settled at the time of the 
Cripps mission last March, and that London’s sub- 
sequent actions have been directed chiefly toward 
meeting the week-to-week development of national- 
ist activity and American opinion. When Sir Stafford 
presented his proposals, he declared significantly 
that, if they were rejected, there would be “neither 
the time nor the opportunity to reconsider this matter 
till after the war.’ With his return to London, the 
Congress Party leaders, amid doubts and differences 
bf opinion, began a desperate search for a policy 
combining realism and immediate self-rule; but, un- 
der the leadership of the unrealistic pacifist, Gandhi, 
they met with no success. The Madras leader, Raja- 
gopalachariar, thought the way out lay in making 
great concessions to the Moslem League, in order to 
heal one of the main sore spots in Indian politics. Re- 
ilizing that this would be rejected by the Congress 
Working Committee, he resigned from that body, 
but the great majority of important Congressmen, in 
the absence of a new British offer, considered the 
preservation of their own unity a primary concern. 

On July 3, when it was already clear that Gandhi 
was leading the Congress toward a new civil dis- 
obedience campaign, Britain enlarged the Viceroy’s 
Executive Council, named an Indian civil servant 
Defense Minister, and appointed another civil servant 
and the head of the Indian princes to membership 


UNITED NATIONS SUFFER SERIOUS SETBACK IN INDIA 


in the London War Cabinet. In mid-July the Con- 
gress Working Committee finally reached agreement 
on a resolution demanding immediate independence 
and warning that civil disobedience would otherwise 
result. On July 26, in a broadcast to the United 
States, Cripps attacked Gandhi very sharply and 
hinted at the possible use of force against the Con- 
gress. On August 4, the Indian government, charg- 
ing in effect that the Working Committee consisted 
of appeasers, published the text of a draft resolution 
submitted by Gandhi to that body toward the end of 
April. In this document, seized in a raid on Congress 
headquarters in Allahabad, Gandhi had said: “If 
India were freed, her first step would probably be 
to negotiate with Japan.” The Working Committee 
had, however, rejected Gandhi’s statement in favor 
of a resolution drawn by Nehru along different lines. 


After the British move, the Working Committee on 
August 5 substituted for its resolution of mid-July 
a new declaration, asking the “withdrawal of British 
nower so as to enable India to become an ally of the 
United’ Nations.” If granted independence, India 
would “wholeheartedly and unreservedly declare 
itself on the side of the United Nations, agreeing 
to meet the Japanese or any other aggressor with 
armed resistance.” This pledge, to which Gandhi 
presumably assented, was in effect a disavowal of 
pacifism in international affairs. Two days later the 
All-India Congress Committee convened in Bombay 
and heard Gandhi present a lengthy survey of the 
situation. On August 8 this body passed the Work- 
ing Committee’s substitute resolution of August 5, 
which, like the statement it replaced, called for civil 
disobedience if independence were not granted. 
Gandhi had, however, announced that he would send 
a letter of appeal to the Viceroy, and it was antici- 
pated that this would permit further discussion of 
relations between the Congress and Britain. The sud- 


den arrest of the Indian leaders ended this hope, at 
least for the moment. 

DIVISION WITHIN CONGRESS. One of the 
striking aspects of these events is the literalness with 
which Indian political pronouncements — including 
the demand for immediate independence—have been 
understood in London and the American press. There 
has been hardly a suggestion that Indian ‘politicians, 
like theif fellows in other countties, “might be’ will- 
ing to accept less than they demand in the heat of 
battle. This is the more surprising in view of the 
obvious disagreement within the Congress over 
Gandhi's dangerous and unrealistic policy, a dis- 
agreement which, it must be repeated, never emerged 
clearly into the open because, in the absence of 
British willingness to negotiate further, the moderate 
group did not feel that it had any program to offer 
as an alternative to that of Gandhi. 

During the first week of August the following 
significant events occurred: a labor member of the 
All-India Congress Committee gave notice of his 
intention to oppose the civil disobedience resolu- 
tion; the Bengal Branch Committee of the Indian 
Federation of Labor likewise expressed its dissent; 
B. R. Ambedkar, leader of the depressed classes and 
a recent appointee to the Viceroy’s Executive Coun- 


Page Two 


———— 
——<—< 


cil, asked that Gandhi ‘‘call a conference of ajj 
sections of Indian opinion’; Sir T. B. Sapru, ap 
important non-Congress moderate also suggested 
such a meeting, and Gandhi was reported w illing to 
attend; the chief whip of Congress in the Central 
Assembly was said to favor postponement of ratif. 
cation of the civil disobedience resolution until after 
the election of a new All-India Congress Committee 
in October. 

Yet, all these efforts and desperate suggestions 


failed, in the face of Congress intransigence and the }j 


absence of a sympathetic official policy designed to 
help the Indians find a way out of the impasse of 
civil disobedience, rather than to penalize them 
for their mistakes. Had a helping hand been ex. 
tended, it is quite possible that the Indian majority 
would have been able to bridge the gap of distrust 
that separates it from the objective it undoubtedly 
seeks: full and equal cooperation with the United 
Nations against Japanese and German aggression, 
This is also the goal of the United Nations. It must 
be hoped that, with the help of the United States 
and China, as well as the other Allies, Britain and 
India will again enter the stage of discussion and 
reach a working agreement. 
LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


NAZI PROPAGANDA SEEKS TO CAPITALIZE ON RUSSIAN SETBACKS 


While the United Nations took the initiative in 
the Solomon Islands, the German Army, pressed hard 
in the wake of the retreating Russians. By August 10 
the Germans had reached the foothills of the Cauca- 
sus Mountains, where the Russians were firing the 
oil-wells of Maikop, estimated to produce 7 per cent 
of the country’s total oil output. Reports from Lon- 
don placed Russian losses in killed, wounded and 
captured since June 1941 at more than 5 million, and 
Russian territory seized by the Nazis at 600,000 
square miles, with a pre-war population of 50 million. 

The German drive toward Transcaucasia, contain- 
ing Russia’s principal oil resources, estimated at 85 
per cent of total production, shifted the focus of the 
struggle from the European continent to the bridge- 
head of the Near and Middle East connecting Europe 
with India, itself a seething theatre of conflict, and 
Egypt. It coincided with a period of inactivity on 


For a survey of the intricate and difficult problems 
that lie behind the present crisis in India, READ: 


India’s Role in the World Conflict 


by Margaret La Foy 


25c 


May 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


the African front, where neither Field Marshal 
Rommel nor General Auchincleck appears to 
have sufficient men or material for offensive ac- 
tion. On this front the Germans are reported to be 
using their familiar tactics of ‘divide and conquer,” 
by creating the impression that they admire the Brit 
ish (to the detriment of Americans), or Australians 
and New Zealanders (to the detriment of the Brit 
ish), while casting aspersions on their own Italian 
allies. In similar vein, German propagandists have 
been taunting the Russians with queries regarding 
the whereabouts of British and American troops 
which were supposed to have opened a second front 
in Europe. 

WILL U.S. OPEN SECOND FRONT? A partial 
answer to these queries was given by Major General 
Mark Wayne Clark, commander of United States 
ground forces in the European theatre of war, who 
declared in an interview on August 9 that American 
troops in Britain are there for the express purpose 
of opening a second front. Many of those who have 
been calling for a second front probably do not re 
alize the amount of industrial production and meticu- 
lous military preparation required for the success 
of such an operation. Yet the belief is steadily gain- 
ing ground both in Britain and the United States 
that, no matter how hazardous the opening of 4 
second front might be at the present time, the hazard 
would be multiplied manyfold if Russia were al- 


———— 
———= 


nce of alf 
Sapru, an 
suggested 
willing to 
he Central 
t of ratifi. 
until after 
Committee 


uggestions 
ce and the 
esigned to 
impasse of 
lize them 
| been ex 
n majority 
of distrust 
idoubtedly 
he United 
ig gression, 
is. It must 
ited States 
sritain and 
ission and 


OSINGER 


.CKS 


| Marshal 
Dpears to 
ensive ac- 
rted to be 
conquer, ' 
e the Brit 
\ustralians 
f the Brit- 
wn Italian 
dists have 
regarding 
an troops 
cond front 


A partial 
or General 
ted States 
war, who 
American 
3S purpose 
who have 
do not re 
nd meticu- 
he success 
idily gain- 
ted States 
ning of a 
the hazard 
were al 


lowed to be knocked out of the war, and seasoned 
German troops were then transferred to Western 
Europe. 

Meanwhile, there are a number of signs indicating 
that the Nazis hope to take advantage of any. pause 
that may ensue between Russian setbacks in the 
Caucasus and the opening of a second front to press 
for a peace settlement which would leave all. of 
furope, including occupied Russia, under their con- 
trol. Various Nazi feelers in neutral countries are 
intended to convey the impression that second front 
operations are in any case hopeless, that Europe has 
acquiesced in Hitler's “new order,” and that Ger- 
many might now be willing to divide control of the 
world (but not of Europe), with other “master 
faces’’—presumably the British and Americans. An 
attempt would thus be made by the Nazis to use all 
of Europe as a bargaining-point in a deal of some 
kind among the great powers—much as, in earlier 
centuries, the great powers attempted again and 
again to reach settlements among themselves at the 
expense of so-called backward areas in Asia and 
Africa. 

BRITAIN’S REPUDIATION OF MUNICH. 
This line of Nazi propaganda, if left unanswered 
by Britain and the United States, might eventually 
ceate disaffection among the small nations of Eu- 
ope and other continents which are valiantly con- 
tributing to the war effort of the United Nations. In 
reply to such Nazi propaganda, the British government, 
on August 5, announced an exchange of notes be- 
tween Anthony Eden, British Foreign Secretary, and 
the Czechoslovak Foreign Minister, Jan Masaryk, 


As the Nazi troops move closer and closer to the 
Caucasus, the world is wondering how the German 
Army is still able to obtain the man power and mili- 
tary supplies necessary for such a gigantic effort. Up 
to 1941, Germany was able to conduct the war as a 
series of short Blitz campaigns interspersed with 
periods of economic recuperation. During these 
periods, its industries could create new stocks of 
weapons, fuel and ammunition for use during the 
next thrust, and transform the booty collected in the 
invaded countries into implements of war. But this 
phase of the war is over. Sporadic fighting has 
evolved into continuous warfare which offers few 
opportunities for economic recuperation. The Nazi 
economy must now be prepared to meet not only 
continued Russian resistance but, also, in ever in- 
creasing proportion, the impact of American arms, 
and the probable opening of a second front in West- 
ern Europe. And yet, the industrial plant of the Reich 
cannot have been greatly extended in recent months; 
moreover, many German workers have had to leave 


Page Three 


— 


declaring as invalid the Munich agreement of 1938 
under which the Czechs had been forced to cede 
Sudetenland to Germany. In its note the British 
government stated that, “at the final settlement of 
Czechoslovak frontiers to be reached at the end of 
the war,” it “will not be influenced by any changes 
effected in and since 1938.” 

This announcement is in harmony with the policy 
of the United States, which has steadfastly re- 
fused to make any commitments in advance about 
post-war boundaries. The Washington administra- 
tion, as indicated in repeated official pronounce- 
ments, believes that the close of military hostili- 
ties will be followed by a period of transition, 
when the first task will not be adjustment of con- 
troversial boundaries, but rehabilitation of occupied 
territories. During that period, it may prove neces- 
sary for the United Nations—and not merely for 
Britain and the United States—to exercise a form 
of “trusteeship” on behalf of liberated countries un- 
til they have regained a degree of political and eco- 
nomic stability which will permit them to consider 
the long-term problems of reconstruction in an at- 
mosphere of relative calmness. It is essential for 
Britain and the United States to demonstrate—not 
merely by words, but also by deeds—that they do 
not intend to replace the rule of the Nazi “master 
race” by any ‘master race” domination of their own. 
Only thus can they concretely answer Nazi propa- 
gandists who still try to advertise their “new order” 
as an alternative to the kind of order that the United 
Nations may establish in case of victory. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


GERMAN WAR NEEDS COMPEL ECONOMIC OVERHAULING 


their factories for the army, due to the heavy toll: of 
last winter’s Russian campaign. Under the pressure 
of these new needs, the German war economy had 
to be reorganized in order to increase output on the 
one hand, and save man power on the other. 
INDUSTRIAL RATIONALIZATION. The fun- 
damental setup of the Nazi economic system—con- 
trol of all industrial production by the Party, with 
the collaboration of the Army and big business—has 
been retained. The production of armaments, how- 
ever, has been centralized in the person of the re- 
cently appointed Minister of Armaments and Mu- 
nitions, Albert Speer, who took over this difficult 
job after the death of Fritz Todt, Germany's top 
engineer and builder of the Siegfried Line. Speer es- 
tablished a new Armament Council, whose-main task 
seems to be the coordination of the production of 
weapons in Germany and in the various European 
countries occupied by the Germans. All the informa- 
tion seeping through from these countries shows 
that their industrial plants are rapidly being adapted 


- ~~ 


i 


- a 


to work for the German war machine. A large-scale 
system of extensive subcontracting and spreading out 
of orders has been effected under official supervision. 
Regional German Procurement Offices have been 
established in almost all important cities of the oc- 
cupied countries. These offices organize special ex- 
hibitions of parts and goods needed by German firms, 
and even small manufacturers are invited to visit 
them. Since work on Nazi orders is often the only 
way to obtain raw materials and keep plants run- 
ning, many European factories, even in countries 
as distant as Estonia and Greece, are working for 
Germany. Thus the war contribution exacted from 
non-German countries is far from negligible. 

THE HUNT FOR MAN POWER. At the same 
time, the Nazi leaders are doing their utmost to free 
German laborers from the production process in 
order to transfer them to the armed forces. This 
object they hope to attain in two principal ways: in- 
creased efficiency in production, and further use of 
foreign labor in all activities connected with civilian 
production. New rules to this effect have been 
drafted. As the production of civilian goods long 
ago reached its minimum level, further curtailment 
is not possible. Nazi economists are therefore turn- 
ing to increased efficiency and concentration of in- 
dustry in order to free workers without reducing the 
output. Special committees of technical experts have 
been commissioned to study each branch of industry 
in order to prepare for the elimination of the less 
efficient individual producers. The manufacture of 
cigarettes, to give just one example, is to be concen- 
trated, in the future, in a few highly efficient fac- 
tories, while the others will be closed. Such a scheme, 
the Nazi experts have calculated, will free for other 
purposes nearly one-fourth of the twelve thousand 
or so workers employed in this activity. The same 
procedure is to be applied to all industries where 
further concentration is still possible. 

On the other hand, the Nazis are exerting stronger 
pressure than ever on the puppet governments of 
the occupied countries, as well as on Vichy France, 
to obtain the transfer of large contingents of work- 
ers from these countries to German farms and fac- 
tories. Already some three million aliens, not count- 
ing two and one-half million prisoners of war, are 
working in Germany. The Nazis hope that this num- 
ber will greatly increase in the near future. They will 
not hesitate to resort to compulsory drafting of un- 
employed man power all over occupied Europe, 
should the local authorities fail to induce sufficient 


Page Four —— 


In spite of the tremendous strain on German ip. 
dustry brought about by-the new production drive 
the system does not seem to be cracking. Moreover 
the Nazis will probably obtain some additional 
resources in the territories recently conquered jg 
Russia. Unless, therefore, the United Nations cag 
achieve wholesale destruction of factories and meang 
of communication by repeated mass bombings, the 
Nazi production machine, now extending over the 
whole of continental Europe, may be expected to con. wg 
tinue to deliver the goods needed by the Reichsweby, 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER | 


Return to the Future, by Sigrid Undset. New York, Knopf} Vor 
1942. $2.50 —_— 
With deep love and understanding the skilled novelist 

writes of Germany’s invasion of Norway. In so doing she ( 

shows clever judgment of the Gernien character. Her re- 

actions to what she saw in Russia and Japan while mL 

route to the United States are bound to arouse criticism . 

in many quarters, but her concern for human freedom ig 

genuine. 


Pri 
Underground Europe, by Curt Riess. N.w York, Dial a 
Press, 1942. $3.00 fh 


The Sixth Column, by Jan Masaryk and others. New York, 
Alliance Book Corporation, 1942. $2.50 me 
The two books describe the Nazis’ inhuman treatmeni|thr 

of the defeated but unconquered peoples of Europe, an’|jj¢ 

the varied ways in which the oppressed are fighting back 

Mr. Riess’s volume is more readable and dramatic, while 

the 13 authorities who contribute to The Sixth Columnjy ‘ 

present a detailed and documented record cf the Germat } jp, 
invasions and their aftermath. 


(0! 


tur 


‘al 

Action on All Fronts, by Ralph Ingerso'l. New York, Nz 

Harper, 1942. $3.50 the 
Penetrating observations made during a r-und-the-world ti 
trip in mid-1941, in the course of which th. editor of PM ~ 

inspected all the major war fronts. | £0] 


The Heart of Europe, by Denis de Rouger ont and Char vr 
lotte Muret. New York, Duell, Sloan a’ | Pearce, 1941. th 
$2.50 rey | tant 
A many-sided, first-hand study of th ,Swiss people, | ha, 

analyzing the qualities that have enabled em, so far, to bat 

weather Europe’s recurring crises. hin 


Sea Power in Conflict, by Paul Schubert. New York, Cow-| 4, 
ard-McCann, 1942. $2.50 
By including air operations over water in his definition}, 
of “the new sea power,” the author of this non-technical | "£ 
survey of modern naval organization and history implicit | ty 
ly defends the conservative viewpoint on naval strength to 
and functions today. ‘ : 


ste 


Will Germany Crack? by Paul Hagen. New York, Harper’s, 
1942. $2.75 
A survey of the German home front in wartime, by an di 
Austrian anti-Nazi with underground connections within }{h 
the Reich. He urges the Allies to enlist the support of 
progressive elements in Germany by a clearer statement 


contingents of workers to leave for Germany. of post-war intentions. bi 
se 

FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 43, Aucust 14, 1942. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National ‘ 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; VERA MicHELES Dean, Editor, Entered as p 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. re 
F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year ec 


a ae 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


