


ile 


‘at 


—2ii, 
TS, 
er. 
riet 
ful 
ind 


uf- 


ons 
be- 
ing 
sh- 
It’s 
ent 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XIX, No. 2 


NOVEMBER 3, 1939 





— 


For background on the situation in India, read: 


THE MILITARY PROBLEM IN INDIA 
A NEW CONSTITUTION FOR INDIA 
CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS IN INDIA 


AN AUTONOMOUS INDIA: THE ADMINISTRATIVE ISSUES 


25c each 
SPECIAL OFFER—4 Foreign Policy Reports for 75 cents 


—_ 





Woy « 
Vey y) 19 Entered as second- 
RIODICA! ROOM peter 
RA! ay Office at New York, 
TV. OF MICH. N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 








General Library 


Intvayrst} 2 
URIVErsil_y O42 


Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 








—_—_ 





! 


CANADA PUSHES WAR PLANS 





—— a military stalemate persists on the 
Western front, the entire British Empire con- 
tinues its preparations for war. As the most highly 
industrialized of the Dominions, Canada is now free 
to contribute wholeheartedly to the Empire cause, 
since the major obstacle to collaboration with Britain 
—the government of Maurice Duplessis in Quebec—- 
was removed in the provincial election of October 25. 
In 1936 Premier Duplessis had organized a coali- 
tion party—the Union Nationale—and overthrown 
the Liberal government, which had been in power 
for forty consecutive years. The recent victory of 
Adelard Godbout marks the return of the Liberals 
to power and strengthens their position in the fed- 
eral Parliament. 

The election was marked by a confusing mixture 
of domestic and foreign affairs, as M. Duplessis took 
advantage of the emergency and hoped to capitalize 
on Quebec’s traditional independence and reluctance 
to enter a European war. He claimed that the fed- 
eral government of W. L. Mackenzie King was 
using its wartime powers to encroach on provincial 
tights. Opponents of Premier Duplessis, who was 
often said to be supporting fascist organizations, 
charged that maladministration and financial reck- 
lessness were the real issues of the election, and 
probably won support from both the wealthy classes 
and the peasants by denouncing the large deficits of 
the past three years. 

The defeat of this once popular ‘“‘nationalist’’ 
leader indicates that the French Canadians will sup- 
port the Mackenzie King government during the 
war, since Quebec’s three members of the federal 
cabinet threatened to resign in event of a Duplessis 
victory. Being predominantly Roman Catholic, the 
French Canadians, who had long opposed partici- 
pation in any war overseas, were probably influenced 
in their vote by the Nazi-Soviet pact, which united 


the Vatican’s two major enemies. Despite the return 
of the Liberal party to power in Quebec, the Ottawa 
government is not expected to violate its promise 
that conscription will be avoided during the present 
war. Conscription, which provoked deep resentment 
in Quebec during the World War, was condemned 
in last week’s election not only by M. Duplessis, but 
also by M. Godbout, the victorious Liberal leader, 
and Paul Gouin, head of a third party. 


MILITARY PREPARATIONS. Canada’s pattici- 
pation in the war has been restricted thus far to 
precautionary measures, particularly with regard to 
defense of the Atlantic coast and shipping routes. 
Freed from any immediate danger in the Pacific by 
Japan’s decision to withhold support from Germany, 
Canada has concentrated its small fleet of destroy- 
ers and mine-sweepers in the Atlantic. In contrast 
to the World War period, when Canada sent 400,- 
000 men to Europe, the Ottawa government is ap- 
parently not preparing a large expeditionary force 
at present. It is reported that a division of about 
16,000 men will train in England during the winter. 
Even these initial and limited preparations have 
raised considerable discussion in the United States, 
largely because of Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh’s 
controversial radio address on October 13. In vig- 
orous phrases that aroused protests throughout 
Canada and Britain, Colonel Lindbergh argued that 
the Dominion was endangering the United States 
by its entrance into the European war. Since Presi- 
dent Roosevelt had guaranteed Canada’s territorial 
integrity in his Kingston address on August 18, 1938, 
it is not outside the realm of possibility that the 
United States may find its neutrality jeopardized by 
Canadian belligerency. 

The primary function of Canada in this war will 
probably be in the economic rather than the military 
sphere. As ‘Empire arsenal’’ Canada is expected to 

















—_———$_— 





provide airplanes, munitions and other products 
from factories that lie outside the German bombing 
range. Although it is estimated that Great Britain 
may spend up to $3,000,000.00C in Canada in event 
of a long war, the Chamberlain government has 
postponed large orders until it knows what products 
are most needed and what articles can be purchased 
in the United States. Canadian producers are torn 
between the desire to start work before the American 
neutrality issue is settled and fear of overexpansion 
in a conflict of unknown duration. Mining and man- 
ufacturing have already been greatly stimulated, 
however, by both Canadian and British orders. Cop- 
per producers, for example, have agreed to supply 
Britain with 420,000,000 pounds of electrolytic cop- 
per during the next year. Canadian farmers anticipate 
similar benefits, since their present wheat reserves 
—a carryover of 100,000,000 bushels and an esti- 
mated 1939 crop of 450,000,000 bushels—will find 
a large market in Great Britain. The most striking 
advance is expected in aviation, since Canada plans 
to expand production rapidly and to train over 25,- 
000 pilots annually from all Empire countries, at a 
cost estimated at $700,000,000 for the first year. 
ECONOMIC PROBLEMS. One outstanding un- 
certainty in Canada’s economic plans is the eventual 
réle of the United States. If the arms embargo is 
repealed, American munitions and aviation factories 
will also increase production for the Allies. If it is 
retained or other neutrality provisions prove too re- 
strictive, however, many American firms will prob- 
ably establish new plants in Canada or expand ex- 


INDIA ASKS FOR FREEDOM 


A series of resignations by the provincial minis- 
tries in British India representing the All-India 
National Congress, which began in Madras on Oc- 
tober 27, has brought the Indian constitutional issue 
to the forefront at a most embarrassing moment for 
the British government. The Congress party possesses 
a majority in eight of the eleven provincial legis- 
latures of British India. If Congress members con- 
tinue to hold their seats in these legislatures, while 
the ministries resign, a constitutional deadlock will 
ensue. The British governors of the various prov- 
inces will then be forced to bring their reserve pow- 
ers into play and rule by decree—a situation likely 
to produce widespread unrest and severe political 
strife. 

BACKGROUND OF THE CRISIS. The critical 
steps now being taken by the All-India Congress 
are motivated by certain immediate grievances, as 
well as by the disappointing nature of the constitu- 
tional reforms obtained after the World War. Dec- 
larations by the Congress party’s working commit- 
tee have expressed opposition on three current 


Page Two 








ee 
es 


isting enterprises. It was estimated in 1932 thy 
1,177 American controlled or affiliated companig 
in Canada employed capital amounting to $2,167, 
249,508. The 805 manufacturing companies included 
in this total employed capital of $833,293,135, and 
accounted for 24 per cent of Canadian factory pro. 
duction. Since many fields of production are domj. 
nated by American firms, Canada’s ultimate ego. 
nomic contribution to the war will to a considerable 
extent be decided in the United States. 


Perhaps the major wartime problem for Canada 
as for Great Britain, will be that of public finanee 
The Canadian government, like the British, enters 
this conflict with debt and interest charges many 
times greater than those of 1914. Anticipating , 
deficit of about $156,000,000 for the current fiscy| 
year, the Dominion has increased import and excise 
duties and introduced special taxation and sur 
charges, including an excess profits tax. Despite ap 
increase in national income and consequently in rey. 
enues, Canada may find that its wartime expenditure; | 








seriously affect an economy so dependent u 
international trade and investment. It is possible, of 
course, that Britain will be compelled to liquidate 
many British-owned Canadian securities and thus 
reduce the Dominion’s overseas debt. Canada, how. 
ever, will simultaneously be hampered in obtaining 
raw materials and manufactures from the United 
States on a cash-and-carry basis, since the Canadian 
dollar has already depreciated 10 per cent. 


| 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





issues: prolongation of the life of the Central 
Legislature for one year by decree, the Government | 
of India’s decision to enter the present European | 
conflict, and the dispatch of Indian troops to Egypt, 
Aden, Singapore and other points outside of India 
Since matters of foreign policy and defense are not 
subject to Indian legislative control, the All-India 
Congress regards the two latter decisions as measures | 


which “impose a war on India” against the will of } 


its people. In 1935 the Army Secretary, on behalf of | 
the Government of India, made a conditional pledge | 
that the Central Legislature would be consulted on 
the dispatch of Indian troops overseas; the recent 
movements of Indian troops, however, have beet | 
ordered without such prior consultation. 

During the World War, India dispatched approxi 
mately 1,338,620 combatant troops and non-com 
batant auxiliaries to the various battle fronts— 
roughly 178,000 more men than all the Dominions 
contributed together. Mahatma Gandhi himself 
aided in the recruitment of these Indian forces. The 
war losses of India aggregated 73,432 killed and 





gre 


fo! 
suc 


as Il 


$33.3 B R= 


ada 
Nice, 
ters 


g a 
Scal 
CCise 


uited 


dian 


ntral 
ment 


peaa j 


Bypt 
ndia. 
> not 
[india 


sures 


LL of | 


lf of 
edge 
d on 


ecent 


OX: 
com: 
Vo Boe 
nions 


nself 


and 








| 








—— 
—_—_ 





84,715 wounded. India’s direct contribution to the 
British war chest totaled nearly £150 million, while 
its subscription to the war loans was even larger. 
The Montagu-Chelmsford reforms of 1919, how- 
ever, made but partial provision for responsible 
government in the provinces, and two bitterly fought 
non-cooperation campaigns have since culminated 
in the Government of India Act of 1935, which has 
thus far resulted only in provincial autonomy. 


THE CURRENT CONTROVERSY. In mid- 
September the working committee of the Congress 
party, following a special session devoted to consid- 
eration of the problems raised by the war, issued a 
formal declaration of policy. This manifesto, con- 
stituting the party's war platform, condemned Nazi 
aggression, invited Britain to state its war aims, and 
suggested that India be granted full freedom in 
order that it might associate with Britain as an equal 
partner in the war. Commenting on the declaration, 
Mahatma Gandhi asked: “Will Great Britain have 
an unwilling India dragged into the war or a will- 
ing ally cooperating with her in the prosecution of 
the defense of true democracy?” The specific con- 
stitutional steps by which the All-India Congress 
proposes to obtain responsible government have not 
been reported. Since the Viceroy had already an- 
nounced on September 11 that the scheme of fed- 
eration envisaged by the Government of India Act 
would be postponed until after the war, the Con- 
gress party would presumably demand new elections 
to the Central Legislature of British India and the 
formation of a central government responsible to 
such a legislature. 

Toward the end of September Lord Linlithgow, 
the British Viceroy, instituted a series of private 
conferences with Indian leaders of all shades of 
opinion. The results of these discussions were 
summed up in a statement by the Viceroy, issued as 
a British White Paper on October 18, which con- 
stituted in effect a reply to the Congress party's 
manifesto. Its main items may be summarized as 
follows: 


“His Majesty’s Government have not themselves yet 
defined with any ultimate precision their detailed objectives 
in the prosecution of the war, and it is obvious that such 
definition can only come at a later stage of the campaign 
and that when it does come it cannot be a statement of the 
aims of any single ally.’ The Viceroy repeated and endorsed 
a previous declaration that the goal of British policy in 
India is that “India may attain its due place among the 
Dominions.” The federal plan of the 1935 act had been 
suspended for the moment, but when the time came for 
teconsidering it there would be further consultations ‘‘with 
a view to cooperation in framing any such modifications as 
May seem desirable.” At the end of the war, the whole 


Page Three 








scheme of the suspended 1935 act would be regarded as 
“open to modification in the light of Indian views.” , For 
the present, the Viceroy would immediately establish a 
“consultative group representative of all the major political 
parties in British India and of the Indian princes.” The ~ 
Viceroy would choose the committee from panels prepared 
by the parties and would invite it to meet under its own 
chairmanship. The purpose of these meetings would be 
the “association of public interest in India with the conduct 
of the war and with questions relating to war activities.” 

Mahatma Gandhi termed this statement “pro- 
foundly disappointing,” and the various provincial 
legislatures controlled by the Congress party passed 
formal votes of disapproval, preparatory to their 
resignations. In London, however, the Marquess of 
Zetland, Secretary of State for India, supported the 
Viceroy’s statement, and warned that the minori- 
ties of India had consistently asked for safeguards 
against “what rightly or wrongly they consider might 
be the consequences of an unfettered domination of 
the majority.”” The existence of racial and class di- 
visions in India was also stressed by Sir Samuel 
Hoare, who declared in the House of Commons on 
October 26 that “‘communal bitterness” represented 
the main obstacle to India’s “constitutional advance,” 
and that withdrawal from India would render Brit- 
ain “false to the pledges we have given in the most 
solemn words to the Moslems and other minorities 
and the European community.” On the other hand, 
Colonel Wedgewood Benn, former Secretary of 
State for India in a Labor government, condemned 
the Viceroy's report as “a clumsy document,” and 
declared India entitled ‘‘to be assured that the cause 
for which this country is fighting is also her cause 
—freedom.” Deprecating the communal issue, he 
proposed that a conference truly representative of 
all groups be summoned, and added that the task 
of the British delegation to such a conference should 
be “in broad terms to set a seal upon the agreement 
to which the Indians may come themselves.” 


The statements of Britain’s official leaders, which 
lay such great stress on the racial and communal divi- 
sions in India, constitute a direct challenge to Indian 
nationalism. Once the various communities of British 
India reach agreement on a common platform for 
immediate constitutional reforms, they will be in a 
position to exert virtually irresistible pressure on the 
British government. The latter, in turn, could find 
no more striking means of testifying to the demo- 
cratic character of its war aims than by indicating 
its readiness to grant dominion status to India, and 
opening discussions on concrete steps to execute 
such a pledge. 


T. A. Bisson 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 2, NovemMBer 3, 1939. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera Micugeres Dean, Editor. 


Incorporated. National 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


EQZ> 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 30.—The neutrality bill, which goes to the 
House this week following its final passage in the 
Senate on October 27 by a vote of 63 to 30, meets 
the Administration's primary demand for repeal 
of the arms embargo, but in most other respects re- 
flects the overwhelming Congressional demand for 
“mandatory” neutrality. If approved by the House 
without major changes, the bill will have an immedi- 
ate effect and important long-term consequences as 
well. 

CASH AND CARRY NEUTRALITY. One im- 
mediate effect will be to permit the export of more 
than $73,295,000 in arms and ammunition to the 
Allies, of which $71,795,000 represents airplane 
orders placed in this country by Britain and France 
before the outbreak of war, but held up by the ex- 
isting arms embargo of September 5. Additional 
orders will be limited only by the needs of the Allies 
and their ability to transport shipments and to 
finance cash payments to American manufacturers. 

The long-term effects are less apparent. In the 
Senate-approved form, the bill embodies a manda- 
tory cash-and-carry provision which forbids Ameri- 
can vessels from carrying any passengers or “any 
articles or materials” to any belligerent state. If 
British shipping should be seriously crippled by the 
German air and submarine campaign, this provision 
might prove almost as onerous to the Allies as the 
arms embargo. The measure also tightens the loan 
and credit prohibitions of the existing law, and 
eliminates the 90-day credit originally proposed in 
the Pittman bill. The main provisions in the Senate 
measure are: 

1. American vessels may not carry arms or any other 
materials to belligerent states. In effect, however, 
this prohibition applies only to European bel- 
ligerents, the bill expressly exempting ports in 
the Western Hemisphere, in the Pacific or Indian 
Oceans, the Bay of Bengal, the China, Tasman 
and Arabian Seas, and the South Atlantic. The 
same exemption applies to transportation by air- 
craft of mail, passengers or other materials in 
these areas. 

2. In addition, the President may forbid American 
vessels to enter ‘‘combat areas’’ as defined by him. 

3. Export of all goods to belligerent states must be 
preceded by transfer of title to a foreign govern- 
ment or national. With the exception of arms ex- 
ports, this provision does not apply to Canada. 





4. All loans and credits to belligerent governments 
are forbidden. This provision, however, does not 


exclude credits between private American cop. | 


cerns and private individuals or corporations jin 
belligerent countries. 


5. Other provisions carried over from the existing 
law, with only minor changes, include authori 


to restrict use of American ports by belligerent | 
submarines or armed merchantmen; restrictions | 


on travel by American citizens on belligerent 
ships; prohibitions against arming American 
merchantmen; and continuation of the Munitions 
Control Board. 


THE “CITY OF FLINT.” The incident involving 
the seizure of the American cargo vessel ‘‘City of 
Flint” by a German prize crew was cited in Congress 
last week as another reason for prompt action on 


the Administration’s neutrality bill. It was said that | 


this vessel, owned by the Maritime Commission and 
destined for a belligerent port with a cargo contain- 
ing an undisclosed amount of contraband, would 
not have been allowed to sail if the Pittman bill had 
been in force. In other quarters, however, it was 
pointed out that even under the Pittman bill, Ameri- 
can vessels may sail to neutral ports, and that simi- 





lar incidents are liable to occur if the vessel is carry- | 
ing contraband goods destined for ultimate delivery 
to a belligerent country. Since the outbreak of war | 


in September, at least 21 American ships have been 
detained by the belligerents (18 by the Allies), and 


in a number of cases the cargoes have been con- | 


signed to European neutrals. The absence of inci- 
dents is explained in part by the fact that the Allies 
have refrained from placing prize crews on Ameti- 
can vessels, and in part by the fact that the United 
States has not protested against the examination of 
American ships at Allied control stations. 


In the case of the “City of Flint,” the irritation | 
shown by the State Department is due less to the 


legal aspects of the affair than to the “lack of co- 
operation” reported by Ambassador Steinhardt in his 
efforts to secure information from the Soviet govern- 
ment. Behind this irritation lies a disquieting sus- 
picion that Russia’s relations with Germany are 
closer than hitherto revealed, and that the attitude 
of the Soviet Union toward the United States may 
have far-reaching effects on our relations in Europe 
and the Far East. 
W. T. STONE 








