


a to 


ei: 


Tee ore 


a8 


e of 


com: 


itain 
; the 
met: 
ages 
duce 
LLES 


Te A. 
*mTGORAL 
only. oe» ee. 


ge 
1yeRar’ / 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


University of Hichigan 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 








-* ¢ & 














An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





You. XXV, No. 36 


JUNE 21, 1946 





LABORITES REASSESS BRITAIN’S TRADITIONAL “INTERESTS ABROAD- 


T HE British Labor government was sustained in 

its policies both at home and abroad by the 
Labor Party Conference in Bournemouth on June 
10-12. On the domestic front what Prime Minister 
Attlee has defined as Britain’s version of socialism— 
social democracy with freedom—has now been in- 
augurated. But with respect to foreign policy, the 
government has been under intermittent challenge 
since the day it took office ten months ago. Foreign 
Secretary Bevin has faced much criticism from ex- 


| treme left-wing Labor party members, who at 


Bournemouth charged that he has not moved sufh- 
ciently leftward for a spokesman of a Labor gov- 
ermment. Once the resolutions of censure on foreign 
policy had been overwhelmingly defeated at Bourne- 
mouth, however, Mr. Bevin was able to depart for 
the Foreign Ministers’ meeting in Paris with the 
full backing of his party. Debates of the previous 
week in the House of Commons, moreover, had 
clearly indicated Conservative approval for the gov- 
emment’s foreign policy. 


IS BRITISH POLICY CHANGING? As yet there 
are but few straws in the wind to suggest that Social- 
ist doctrine plays a part in shaping Britain’s course 
in world affairs. Yet Mr. Bevin, in his own person, 
is a new type of personality in British diplomacy; 
and the conference appraisal did not come until 
after novel and untried directions in the foreign field 
had been mapped out by Britain. Evidence of Brit- 
ain’s adaptability to changing circumstances is re- 
vealed most clearly in the proposed withdrawal of 
British troops from Egypt and the cabinet mission’s 
offer for Indian independence, neither of which 
figured prominently in recent debates. Other pro- 
posals which the Foreign Secretary has touched on 
from time to time suggest that he intends to alter 
British policy significantly, although they are gen- 


erally lost sight of in day-to-day controversies. At 
one point in his Bournemouth speech he quoted a 
colleague who had said: ‘“‘Give me four or five years 
and then see what results can be produced.” Bevin 
would be the first to deny that he thought a real 
world parliament, of which he has spoken on sev- 
eral occasions, could be established in the next few 
years. But as the least strong of the Big Three, 
Britain believes its security could be best protected 
within a wider collective system. For this reason 
Labor’s support of the United Nations and its re- 
lated technical agencies can be expected to continue. 
Mr. Philip Noel-Baker, Minister of State, recently 
declared that Britain will uphold the UN and will 
turn to it for the solution of substantial issues. 
Britain’s approval of the United States plan for in- 
ternational control of atomic energy is in line with 
this policy. 

The dangers inherent in any breakdown among 
the Big Three were uppermost in Bevin’s mind when 
he addressed the Bournemouth delegates. Again and 
again he brought forward evidence to suggest that 
he had taken every means to find a basis of agree- 
ment with Russia so that the dreaded division of 
Europe might be avoided, but without success. Many 
of Bevin’s statements on British policy are not new. 
The desire for a united Germany, for an interna- 
tionalized port of Trieste with the city under Italian 
sovereignty, and for Russian approval of Secretary 
Byrnes’ 25-year treaty for the control of Germany 
parallel the policies of the United States. What 1s 
significant is that they were reemphasized on the eve 
of the Foreign Ministers’ conference in Paris. Even 
Bevin’s determination to reach decisions now, or 
devise other means for ending the war, is not unex- 
pected. But his candid remarks about the possibility 
of creating an effective economic and political bloc 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 
7 p 











————————————=—_—_—_— 








— ciuaeiean 


with France and other social democracies in West- 
ern Europe were revealing. Although the Foreign 
Office has deliberately refrained from fostering this 
bloc, Bevin’s inference that it would not be out of 
harmony with Socialist thinking indicates that Brit- 
ain may still turn toward such a grouping in the west. 

WHAT OF PALESTINE? This country’s reaction 
to Mr. Bevin’s statement of policy has been clouded 
by the furor aroused by his references to Palestine. 
Due to his blunt and tactless words about this prob- 
lem, action now being taken by the United States 
and Britain to canvass the technical requirements 
involved in transporting and settling 100,000 Jew- 
ish refugees from Europe in the Holy Land has been 
overlooked. Bevin’s charge that the refugees were 
not wanted in New York does not constitute rejec- 
tion of the plan of the recent Anglo-American Pal- 
estine Commission as long as negotiations continue 
with the Arab countries and with American officials. 
On the contrary, Mr. Bevin’s words may ultimately 
prove to have crystallized this country’s decision to 
assume a share of responsibility for the situation in 
Palestine. Almost entirely disregarded were other 
remarks made by the Foreign Secretary in connec- 
tion with Palestine’s future. He indicated that he be- 
lieves it is not only necessary to raise the standard of 
living of both Arabs and Jews in the mandate, but 
also that general economic improvements for the 
whole Middle East were imperative. This is evidence 
of a new trend in British policy toward the Arab 
world which has been evolving slowly since the Labor 
party came to office. With the increasing strength 
of the Arab League, and with Russia's desire to play 
a part in eastern Mediterranean affairs, it is only 
natural that Britain should seek solutions of prob- 





BARUCH PROPOSALS CHALLENGE NATIONS TO LIMIT SOVEREIGNTY 


The United States took a courageous step toward 
clearing the international atmosphere of the miasma 
of suspicion generated by the use of atomic bombs 
against Japan when Bernard M. Baruch, American 
representative on the United Nations Atomic Energy 
Commission presented, on June 14, this country’s 
15-point program for international control of atomic 
energy. Mr. Baruch’s proposals are based on the so- 
called Acheson Report, prepared under the direction 
of the Department of State and made public on 
March 16, which broke new ground for the building 
of international organization. 

CREATION OF ADA. In accordance with the 
principal suggestion contained in the Acheson Re- 
port, Mr. Baruch proposed the creation of an inter- 
national Atomic Development Authority which 
would be entrusted with wide powers of inspection 
over the development and use of atomic energy. 
The functions of the ADA would include collection 
of complete and accurate information on world sup- 
plies of fissionable raw materials, uranium and 


— _ Page Two 








—— 


lems there that will protect its strategic interests ang 
at the same time, meet the rising nationalist & 
mands and economic needs of the local peoples, 
NEW VENTURES — NEW PROBLEMS. Ty 
suggestion made by Bevin that in due course pe. 
haps all land in Palestine should be nationalize 
is the newest note struck in his entire speech— 
though it has been almost totally ignored. Yet j 
represents a Socialist approach to an overseas prob 
lem that may forecast the measures which the Bri 
ish government contemplates for its colonial areg 
proper. Nationalization of land in a mandated arg 
like Palestine raises many questions. Probably befor 
the issue is ever brought to a head, other steps will 
have been taken to transform Palestine into a United 
Nations trusteeship. Such Socialist ventures in the 
foreign field are not necessarily calculated to make 
Britain's policy any more palatable to either th 
United States or Russia, although for quite differen, 
reasons. Ideological disputes between Socialists an{ 
Communists will play an increasingly important role 
in Anglo-Soviet relations from now on, even shoul 
the Foreign Ministers succeed in drafting treaties of 
peace for large areas of Europe. Anglo-American te 
lations may also be subjected to serious stress and 
strain in the future as British internal reforms be 
come better known here. If, as many prominent 
Laborites fear, the United States embarks on an ip. 
flationary course which culminates in a depression 
then Britain may take action to avoid the disastrou } 
effects of such a slump on its own economy by fol 
lowing an economic foreign policy that might prove 
unwelcome to Washington. 





GRANT S. MCCLELLAN | 


(Britain's domestic situation will be reviewed in next week's article) | 


| 
thorium, and control of these materials; managerial 


control or ownership of all atomic energy activities 
potentially dangerous to world security; power to 
control, inspect and license all other atomic activi 
ties; the duty of fostering the beneficial uses of 
atomic energy; and research and development re 
sponsibilities “of an affirmative character intended 
to put the Authority in the forefront of atom 
knowledge and thus to enable it to comprehend, and 
therefore to detect, misuse of atomic energy.” 
Following establishment of the ADA, severe and 
certain penalties should be devised for any nation 
committing violations of international atomic cot 
trol, and individuals concerned with such violations 
should be held personally responsible for their at 
tions, in accordance with the principles laid down 
for the trial of war criminals at Nuremberg. Mt 
Baruch thus established a close link between the 
discovery of the atomic bomb and the simultaneous, 
equally far-reaching formulation of the concept at 





nounced by Justice Jackson, that individuals are tt 








— 


spons 
systet 
the L 
atom. 
and t 
ufact 
with 
Baru 
ai 
by C 
NI 
The 
contt 
closi 
enin; 
now 
ters 
how' 
imp 
even 
been 
obje 
the 
creat 
Atot 
fect 
tion: 


th: 






A ef |} 


a3 


Ea ers 


rent 


role 
ould 
es of 
n fe 

and 
s be 
inent 
n in 
S100, 
trous 
’ fol. 
OVE 





AN | 
tide) | 
Y | 
rerial 
vities 
er to 
ctivi- 
s of 
it re 
nded 
‘omic 
, and 


> and 
ation 

Con. 
tions 
ir ac 
Jown 

Mr. 








. the 
eous, 
it af- 
‘e fe 








eS a 
oO 





sponsible for acts that lead to war. Once an adequate 

stem of international control has been established, 
the United States undertakes to stop manufacture of 
atomic bombs, to ‘‘dispose”’ of its stockpile of bombs, 
and to turn over to the ADA the secret of their man- 
ufacture—which at present it shares in part only 
with Britain and Canada. This undertaking, Mr. 
Baruch was careful to point out, is subject to Ameri- 
can “constitutional processes’’—that is, to approval 
by Congress. 

NEED FOR INTERNATIONAL CONTROLS. 
The proposals of the United States open the way to 
control of the atomic bomb, whose use in the 
dosing days of the war has cast an ever-length- 
ening shadow over the tasks of peacemaking, 
now being tackled anew by the Foreign Minis- 
tes in Paris. As Mr. Baruch himself intimated, 
however, control of the atomic bomb is but one step, 
important as it is in the context of present-day 
events, toward the objective that for centuries has 
been eluding mankind—abolition of war itself. This 
objective can be achieved only through control by 
the international community over the factors that 
create frictions leading to war. If the work of the 
Atomic Energy Commission is persistently and ef- 
fectively pursued, it may set a pattern for interna- 
tional control over other raw materials that have 
been subjects of dispute between nations, such as oil. 
The gradual development and acceptance of such 
controls would offer the most promising approach to 
the eventual creation of world government on sound 
foundations of common action in the common in- 
terest. The thoroughgoing inspection of national 
resources and production in the field of atomic en- 
ergy, however, will at first prove difficult for all 
nations to accept—but most of all for Russia, which 
has been particularly suspicious of outside super- 
vision and inquiry. 

ATTACK ON VETO POWER. As Mr. Baruch 
forcefully pointed out, such controls as the United 
States suggests for atomic energy cannot be effec- 
tively applied if the Big Five retain the power to 





— 


Page Three aan 





veto action by the ADA, especially the punishment 
of violations. ‘“There must be no veto,” he said, “to 
protect those who violate their solemn agreements 
not to develop or use atomic energy for destructive 
purposes.” The American representative made it 
clear that he was referring to the veto power only in 
connection with atomic energy. Too often it is as- 
sumed in this country that Russia alone insisted on 
insertion of the veto power in the United Nations 
Charter. This is not true, since the Washington Ad- 
ministration had feared—understandably in the light 
of Woodrow Wilson’s experience in 1919—that the 
Senate might reject the Charter unless it assured the 
veto power to the United States. Now that some of 
the difficulties this special power reserved for the 
Big Five in the Security Council is apt to create have 
been revealed in the disputes over Iran and Spain, 
considerable opposition to its retention has devel- 
oped among the public here and in Britain; and 
leaders of both British parties have indicated their 
willingness to accept limitations on national sover- 
eignty for the sake of greater security. The Baruch 
proposals put up to all nations—but most of all to 
the United States and Russia—the question of how 
much longer great powers which officially express 
faith in international organization will insist on 
maintenance of unrestrained national sovereignty. 
Relinquishment of veto power in the field of atomic 
energy might set a valuable example for similar self- 
restraint by the great powers in other controversial 
matters that come within the scope of the Security 
Council. As Mr. Baruch said, “the solution will re- 
quire apparent sacrifice in pride and in position, but 
better pain as the price of peace than death as the 
price of war.” The issue is not one of our capacity 
to act—human beings have demonstrated capacity to 
make extraordinary exertions and take extraordinary 
risks in time of war—but of our will to make com- 
parable exertions and run comparable risks for the 
sake of preventing wholesale destruction, and of 
using our scientific knowledge for constructive ends. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


JOINT ECONOMIC AGENCIES PROMOTE EUROPE’S RECOVERY 


While public attention has been focused on the 
failure of the Council of Foreign Ministers to reach 
agreement on European peace treaties, economic re- 
construction on the continent has been proceeding 
steadily, revealing a degree of highly encouraging 
international collaboration. The basis for this co- 
Operation was laid by the Allied governments late 
in 1941, when a Committee on Postwar Require- 
ments was set up to plan for transition to a peace- 
time economy. 

INLAND TRANSPORT KEY PROBLEM. The 
Committee, proceeding on the sound assumption 
that Europe’s transportation system would be se- 


verely disrupted by military operations with a result- 
ing postwar breakdown in distribution of food and 
supplies, formed a Technical Advisory Committee 
on Inland Transport. This agency was created in 
November 1942, and prepared detailed estimates 
of probable transport requirements in Europe at the 
end of the war. It also drafted an agreement for an 
organization that could assume responsibility for 
coordinating transport facilities once these had been 
released by the Allied Army Commands. 
Accordingly, on May 8, 1945 — VE-Day — this 
draft agreement was put into force, with the forma- 
tion of a Provisional European Inland Transport 


| 


= — 














Organization. Its membership comprised representa- 
tives of the governments of Belgium, the Nether- 
lands, Norway, France, Luxemburg, Czechoslovakia, 
Britain and the United States. On September 27, 
1945 these eight countries, along with Russia, be- 
came parties to an agreement establishing a perma- 
nent European Central Inland Transport Organiza- 
tion. The new agency was created to continue con- 
sultation among its members; but its powers are 
limited to fact-finding and recommendations. What 
it does is to provide a central clearing system for 
priorities on repairs and traffic. Assistance is given 
member countries in arranging for imports of new 
equipment, as well as of materials for repairs of 
rolling stock, inland waterways, and other transport 
facilities. Allocation of transport equipment released 
by the armies is also a function of the committee. 


COAL FAMINE ANTICIPATED. It was known 
during the war that coal output had declined and 
that the advent of peace would find Europe con- 
fronted with a coal famine. The breakdown of trans- 
port was expected to prevent proper distribution of 
even the anticipated scant supplies. It was obvious, 
therefore, that without intergovernmental action 
there would be a competitive scramble for coal, the 
shortage of which wou!d act as a brake on economic 
recovery. Accordingly, during the latter part of 1944, 
creation of a European coal organization was dis- 
cussed by the United States, Britain and Russia. 
Complete agreement was not reached, since differ- 
ences developed over the relation of German coal 
deliveries to reparations. On May 18, 1945, how- 
ever, a conference was held in London, resulting in 
formation of a provisional European Coal Organ- 
ization, with members representing France, Britain, 
Belgium, Denmark, Norway, Greece, Luxemburg, 
the Netherlands, Turkey and the United States. 
Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia sent observers; 
Russia and Poland did not participate. On January 





Out this week— 


ATOMIC ENERGY IN INTERNATIONAL 
POLITICS by Harold C. Urey 
With text of proposals for control presented by Bernard 


M. Baruch at opening session of United Nations Atomic 
Energy Commission on June 14, 1946. 


25 cents 
June 15 issue of ForEIGN Poricy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 


Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 





Page Four =e 

















me ie 


4, 1946 an agreement, remarkable for its brevity, 
was signed, creating a formal organization. Poland | 
an important coal producer, shortly afterwards | 
became a member. 


The coal organization is a purely consultative and | 
advisory body. A subcommittee meets monthly to 
recommend allocation of coal imports. Estimates are | ] 
received of import requirements and coal produc 
tion in member countries. On the basis of these 
data the needs of members are weighed and bal: goum 
anced against supply estimates, with the result that | 
equitable distribution is arranged. A ready willing. | 
ness to cooperate explains the success of the plan, | 
Close liaison is maintained with the transport body, | 
since the coal shortage is in part a transport prob. | 
lem. 











VoL. 2 
OTHER ECONOMIC PROBLEMS FACED. The MU 
Department of State, which played an important | 
part in the formation of the transport and coal or. | D! 
ganizations, also urged establishment of a commit | 
tee to deal with general economic problems of Eu | meth 
rope, especially food and agriculture. At a meeting and i 
in London on May 28, 1945, the Emergency Eco pean 
nomic Committee for Europe was formed. Its mem shad 
bership consists of representatives of Belgium, Den- } consi 
mark, Norway, France, the Netherlands, Turkey, } whicl 
Greece, Luxemburg, Britain and the United States. | other 
Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia send observers. The | sides 
Committee is an advisory body created “‘to providea } signi 
place where European governments can consult to} jp 
gether and where they can raise questions of pro} per 
duction, supply and distribution which need to be 


a 





, gt assut 
discussed and considered on a common basis.” The} 9 ,, 
activities of EECE are closely coordinated with thos | f,,.,, 
of other emergency agencies. hon 


An important subcommittee of EECE is that on its st 
food and agriculture. It reviewed existing machinery | Med 
for allocation of foodstuffs in short supply, and} in § 
took immediate action to insure full harvesting of } to R 
1945 crops, as well as adequate preparation for) State 
planting in 1946. Surveys were made of farm ma} shar 
chinery and fertilizer requirements; in addition, the; tanc 
Committee arranged conferences on seeds, spoilage| stake 
of food, and use of insecticides. The experience and} asse1 
knowledge thus gained will prove invaluable to the} to w 
UN Food and Agricultural Organization. Similarly, | Cow 
information on the general European economic sit'| oppc 
uation compiled by EECE should enable the Eco fact 
nomic and Social Council to deal promptly with the} war 
problems of devastated areas. Fasc 
vent 
trad 





HAROLD H. HUTCHESON 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 36, JuNE 21, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationil of tl 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, 
Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Yeat 
Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


eRe ia1 


lost 
Ame 








