


eH Eel NN 


wer 
om- 
ince 


» de 
this 
y is \ 


ath- 
; of 
ter- 
idly j 
ttee | 





The | 
1 14 
our 


old | 
s of | 


at, 
y in | 
lab- | 
10se | 
New | 
heir 
; of 
fall 
any. 








oA General Library 


University of Wichigan 


APR 15 1944 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 





FOREIGN 





POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vor. XXIII, No. 26 


Apri 14, 1944 





HULL WELCOMES PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN SHAPING FOREIGN POLICY 


M&® HULL'’s address on American foreign pol- 
icy, broadcast on Easter Sunday, was an honest 


' and painstaking attempt to answer many of the 


anxious questions that have troubled the public mind. 
Its cardinal point—not always heeded by some ofh- 
cial spokesmen—was the recognition that our for- 
eign policy is ‘the task of focusing and giving effect 
in the world outside our borders to the will of 135,- 
000,000 people through the constitutional processes 
which govern our democracy.” It follows from Mr. 
Hull's own definition that the citizens of this demo- 
cratic society, in order to participate intelligently and 
effectively in such constitutional processes, must have 
a modicum of information not only about the basic 
principles of foreign policy—which Mr. Hull has 
stated on many occasions—but also on their applica- 
tion in practice. This Mr. Hull did on April 9 in a 
far more enlightening manner than had been done 
by any American official in the past three years. 
STRENGTH DETERMINES U.S. POLICY. From 
the bitter experience of the past decade the Secretary 
drew one lesson not yet sufficiently appreciated by 
the public: and that is that the influence and effec- 
tiveness of the United States in world affairs are in 


) direct ratio to its strength—not potential, but actual. 


If this country has had to make unpalatable compro- 
mises, that has been due not to sinister machinations 
on the part of the State Department or other govern- 
ment agencies, but often to sheer inability to imple- 
ment high-minded purposes with concrete action. 
Since our people were for a long time reluctant both 
to recognize the need for such action, and to make 
the adjustments that would have permitted it, the 
public must share with its elected and appointed 
tepresentatives the blame for past failures. The ques- 
tion left unanswered by Mr. Hull and other spokes- 
men is whether the government made sufficient use 
of the ample information at its disposal during that 
fateful decade to prepare the public for the shocks 


that were to come, Here really is the crux of the opera- 
tion of foreign policy in a democratic society. Should 
the government, necessarily better informed than 
the public, give the public a lead? Or should it wait 
for a groundswell in public opinion—inevitably far 
in the wake of events—before it acts? And to 
what extent will it prove possible to reconcile the 
views of the executive and of Congress on issues 
of foreign policy? These are not matters of 
partisan politics; and they deserve to be dis- 
cussed on the nonpartisan plane of national needs, 
on which Mr. Hull properly pitched his own analysis. 
For in the future, too, as the Secretary pointed out 
in discussing international organization, the United 
States will have to make grave decisions about the 
use of force—at that time, one must hope, for the 
preservation of peace. 

ORDER, BUT NOT REACTION. To the many 
questions raised by our policy in Europe the Secre- 
tary gave a long-overdue answer in terms other than 
those of immediate military expediency. He pointed 
out Europe’s crying need, after the war, for order 
in which its peoples can repair the ravages of war. 
No reasonable person familiar with the travail un- 
dergone by Europeans since 1914 could wish for 
revolution merely for the sake of revolution. What 
many had feared, however, was that the United 
States—and Britain—would regard order as synony- 
mous with restoration, and even with reaction, ir- 
respective of the wishes of the liberated peoples 
themselves. This fear Mr. Hull has endeavored most 
emphatically to dispel by declaring that “stability 
and order do not and cannot mean reaction.” Most 
significant of all, he stated that “it is important to 
our national interest to encourage the establishment 
in Europe of strong progressive popular govern- 
ments, dedicated like our own to improving the 
social welfare of the people as a whole.” This af- 
firmation had become urgently necessary after years 











of sterile, negative contemplation of the European 
scene, which bade fair to leave the Russians, with 
their dynamic faith in their own ideas and practices, 
as sole standard-bearers of the future on the con- 
tinent. 

Even now mere affirmation of principles will not 
be enough. It will be tested, again and again, by 
every measure we take or fail to take, But at least a 
course has been publicly set. And Mr. Hull’s state- 
ment on France, although it will not satisfy those 
who want recognition of the French Committee of 
Naticnal Liberation as the government of France, 
goes far to fill the vacuum that had hitherto threat- 
ened to develop in the wake of Allied invasion. Mr. 
Hull recognized the need for civil administration by 
Frenchmen—not by some Allied Military Govern- 
ment which would have put France on a par with 
one of the enemy countries. And he clearly indicated 
that such administration would be determined not 
by Allied military commanders who, through sheer 
necessity to maintain order, might have found it 
advisable to take over the Vichy administrative ma- 
chinery save for Laval and a few of his associates. 
On the contrary, with a clarity never before displayed 
on French affairs, he said that he and the President 
are “disposed to see the French Committee of Na- 
tional Liberation exercise leadership to establish law 
and order under the supervision of the Allied Com- 
mander-in-Chief,” and to give it “our cooperation 
and help in every practicable way.” This should go 
far toward removing a state of uncertainty that had 
begun to cast a dark shadow over Franco-American 
relations. 


In looking to the future, the Secretary left no 
doubt that the United States is committed to the 


Page Two 








es 
—es 


policy of working with other nations on the task of 
establishing an international organization concerned 
with political, economic and social problems, which 
would have force at its disposal. Such an interna. 
tional organization, he rightly said, must be based 
on an “enduring understanding” between the United 
States, Britain, Russia and China, as well as on co. 
operation among the other United Nations. He 
warned against looking to rigid formulas or detailed 
blueprints for solutions of rapidly changing prob. 
lems. And he announced that he was inviting bipar- 
tisan committees of the House and Senate to discuss 
with him the proposals so far framed with respect to 
international organization. 

Such discussion, which under our system of goy- 
ernment is essential for the effective operation of 
constitutional processes, is particularly needed in an 
election year, when political moves on the home 
front may be too easily misinterpreted as major shifts 
of public opinion on international issues. An ill- 


informed electorate can become a suspicious, and | 


hence a captious electorate. It is encouraging, 
therefore, that Mr. Hull should see in the demand 
for information on foreign affairs not mere idle 
curiosity, but genuine concern with the fate of the 
nation. As the Secretary has rightly said, the pro 


cedure of international negotiation is one “in which 


the people, who are sovereign, must not only educate 
their servants but must be willing to be educated by 
them.” The people have demonstrated unmistakably 
their desire to be educated. Their chief complaint so 
far has been the meagerness of the educational fate 
spread before them at the most critical period in 
modern times. 
VeRA MICHELES DEAN 


SOVIET-JAPANESE AGREEMENTS AID UNITED NATIONS 


The increasingly sharp tone adopted by the Soviet 
press in referring to Japan emphasizes the diplo- 


. matic defeat suffered by the Japanese on March 30, 


when they signed an agreement in Moscow giving 
up their oil and coal concessions in northern Sakhalin. 
The island of Sakhalin, lying north of Japan proper, 
parallels Russia's Far Eastern coast for some dis- 
tance. It was incorporated in Russian territory in the 
last century, but the southern half was ceded to 
Japan following the Russo-Japanese war of 1904- 
1905 and is known by the Japanese name of Kara- 
futo. The northern part, which remained in Russian 
hands, was occupied by Japanese troops in 1920 dur- 
ing the period of foreign intervention in Soviet terri- 
tory, and was not evacuated until 1925. Tokyo then 
received valuable oil and coal concessions for a period 
of 45 years, and it is these concessions which have 
now been surrendered 26 years before their expira- 
tion date. 

Certain details of the agreement are worth noting. 


The U.S.S.R. is to pay Japan 5,000,000 rubles for the 
return of the concessions, a sum which amounts to 
less than $950,000 at the official rate of exchange. 
Provision is also made for closing down the Japanese 
consulate-general at Alexandrovsk and vice-consul- 
ate at Okha—both in north Sakhalin—and the Soviet 
consulates at Hakodate and Tsuruga in Japan. Fin- 
ally, the Russians are to supply Japan with 50,000 
metric tons of oil annually from north Sakhalin on 
“customary commercial terms’ during five consecu- 
tive years “following the end of the present wat.’ 
According to a New York Times correspondent, it 
was stated authoritatively in Moscow that these sales 








: 


eee 


would not begin until the end of the Pacific war— | 


i.e., after the defeat of Japan. 

STRICT RUSSIAN TERMS. At the same time 
that an accord was reached on the concessions, the 
Soviet-Japanese fisheries agreement, whose renewal 
has hitherto been the subject of bitter annual wrat- 
gling, was extended for a five-year period. It has 














B&FSIT 


A 


Ba? TBSP Baar bASR il 


Ss 


yV- 
of 


ne 
fts 
ll 


nd | 


1g, 
nd 
dle 
he 
[0- 
ich 
ate 


bly 


are 


les 
i 


ime 
the 
wal 
an- 
has 





| 
| 
| 











—_ Page Three 


been characteristic of recent extensions of this pact, 
regulating Japanese fishing activities in Russian Far 
fastern waters, that the Russian terms have become 
increasingly severe. The present accord is no excep- 
tion to this rule. 


Japanese payments in 1944 have been raised 6 per 
cent above the rents of 1943, which were, in turn, 
4 per cent higher than those of 1942. Moreover, it is 
agreed that “until the end of this war” the Japanese 
may not fish ‘‘in certain fishing areas in the Far East 
established by the Soviet government in July 1941,” 
ie, shortly after the German invasion, when the 

sibility of a Japanese attack must have loomed 
large in the minds of Soviet leaders. The agreement 
also states that “‘fishing areas leased by Japanese 
subjects situated on the eastern coast of Kamchatka 
and in the Olutorski district are not to be exploited 
by Japanese lessees until the end of the war in the 
Pacific.’” Simultaneously, all restrictions on Soviet 
fishing in Russian Far Eastern waters—trestrictions 
which the U.S.S.R. agreed to in the twenties when 
ithad to tread softly in dealing with the Japanese— 
have been removed. 


GAINS FOR THE UNITED NATIONS. Now 
that the main provisions of the new agreements have 


- been given, it will be useful to summarize the result- 


ing changes in the situation in the North Pacific. 


1. From the Russian point of view, probably one 
of the most important features of the treaties is the 
fact that they abolish the last of the special foreign 
concessions on Soviet soil and the last of the restric- 
tions on Soviet freedom of action at home, arising 
from the period of intervention during and after 
World War I. 


2. The agreements will presumably increase the 
amount of oil and coal available to the Soviet Union 
in the Far East, especially since northern Sakhalin is 
the main Russian source of supply in this region. In- 
creased supplies of oil and coal in Sakhalin might 
have a slight, indirect effect on the quantities of these 





For a survey of post-war air routes, international- 
ization of the world’s airways, commercial air 
transit, allocation of routes, private or government 


ownership, and plane production, READ— 
NEW HORIZONS IN INTERNATIONAL 
AIR TRANSPORT 
by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


FOREIGN PoLicy REpoRTS, Volume XIX, No. 8 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















raw materials available to the Russians in the West. 

3. Although it is impossible to estimate the effect 
on Japan of the loss of oil and coal from north Sak- 
halin, the results will clearly be of some benefit 
to the Allies in the Far Eastern war. This is likely 
to be especially true later on, after the Japanese have 
been expelled from the oil fields of the Indies. 

4. Of particular significance is the exclusion of 
Japanese fishing boats from areas that could be of 
military value to Tokyo in observing developments in 
the Soviet Far East as well as in judging American 
activities in Alaska and the Aleutians, The clearing 
out of Japanese fishermen from these zones may 
be of considerable value to us in assuring the 
secrecy of future operations in the north Pacific. 

CASH ON THE BARRELHEAD. One point not 
sufficiently stressed in newspaper comment is the fact 
that the north Sakhalin concessions were. actually 
liquidated between March 15 and 25, preceding the 
publicly announced agreement of March 30. The 
Russians clearly were unwilling to accept a promis- 
sory note from the Japanese, and insisted that the 
oil and coal sites be surrendered before concluding 
the fisheries agreement. Why the Russians were care- 
ful to deal only on this basis is clear from their past 
experience. For the Soviet press has now revealed 
that upon signing the Soviet-Japanese Neutrality 
Pact of April 13, 1941, Tokyo promised to give 
up the concessions, but later reneged. The pledge, 
Moscow newspapers have pointed out in caustic 
terms, was presumably not fulfilled because the Jap- 
anese had too much confidence in the power of the 
German armies that subsequently invaded the 
U.S.S.R. Here it is interesting to observe that Izvestia, 
official organ of the Soviet government, has declared 
quite bluntly that Japan’s present amicability results 
from ‘‘the successes of the Red Army . . . and the de- 
velopment of the military operations of our Allies.” 

WILL RUSSIA FIGHT JAPAN? The agreements 
of March 30 naturally tell us nothing about whether 
the U.S.S.R. will ultimately go to war with Japan. 
Indeed, it may be surmised that the Japanese hope 
to insure continued peace with their neighbor by re- 
moving, as they have now done, some of the issues 
productive of friction in the past. Yet there is no 
doubt that the removal is being carried out at Japan’s 
expense and that the Russians are declaring more 
strongly than ever before their solidarity with the 
Allies in the war against Japan. That these develop- 
ments are appreciated in Washington and London is 
indicated by the favorable comment on the new 
treaties in dispatches from those Allied capitals. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 26, ApRit 14, 1944, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lzgr, Secretary; Vena Micueies Dean, Editor. Eatered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
= Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








aa), 


ans 5 


a 
“5 ite (aaa epee aD 


% 
; 








Washington News Letter 





peed bingy 











AprRIL 10.—One of the aims of the conversations 
which began over the Easter weekend in London be- 
tween British representatives and an American dele- 
gation headed by Under Secretary of State Edward 
R. Stettinius, Jr., is to reach agreement on applica- 
tion of the Atlantic Charter. One of the principal 
problems in our foreign policy today is to define the 
Charter in practical terms which our major allies 
will accept, and the American public will approve. 
In his broadcast of April 9 Secretary of State Cordell 
Hull said that “the Charter is an expression of funda- 
mental objectives,’ not ‘‘a code of law from which 
detailed answers to every question can be distilled by 
painstaking analysis of its words and phrases.” 


CHARTER OF HOPE. When President Roose- 
velt and Prime Minister Churchill made the Charter 
public on August 14, 1941, they intended it as a 
promise to peoples under Hitler's yoke of a better 
life in a post-war society governed by just principles. 
That it continues to serve this high purpose the Axis 
itself frequently acknowledges by the ridicule it 
heaps on it. When Mr. Hull included the Charter 
among his seventeen points of American foreign pol- 
icy on March 22, the Nazi-controlled Transkontinent 
Press reported: “The attempt to represent the At- 
lantic Charter as still existing could not succeed in 
view of the well-known tendencies of Moscow's pol- 
icy and the clearly visible capitulation of London 
and Washington to Soviet aspirations.” The Axis has 
made clear, by the arbitrary and brutal character of 
its own “new order,” that it cannot match the Char- 
ter’s promises of self-determination, security, and 
freedom. 

Twice in recent days the Transkontinent Press has 
been proved wrong in its contention that the Charter 
is dead. On March 30 Prime Minister Churchill told 
the House of Commons that “the Atlantic Charter 
and its principles remain our dominating aim and 
purpose.” On April 3 Foreign Commissar V. M. 
Molotov stated that Russia would force no changes 
from the outside in “the social structure of Rumania 
as it exists at present.” 

The Charter’s post-war effectiveness, however, will 
depend on agreement among the United Nations as 
to its precise meaning. Did the signatories assume a 
retroactive obligation when they pledged that “their 
countries seek no aggrandizement, territorial or 
other’? The Soviet Union—which subscribed to the 
Charter by signing the United Nations Pact at the 
White House on January 1, 1942—claims the Baltic 


FOR VICTORY ° 





Republics and the eastern territories of the pre-war 
Polish Republic, regions annexed after Germany 
started the war but before the Charter was signed, 
Will the United States agree with Churchill and Brit. | 
ish Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden that the Charter 
does not apply to the enemy in its ban on territorial 
changes ‘‘that do not accord with the freely expressed 
wishes of the peoples concerned’? How will the 
pledge of the signatories that they will ‘‘respect the 
right of all peoples to choose the form of govern. | 
ment under which they will live’ be carried out—for 
example, in the controversial case of Eastern Poland? 
Beyond the need for clarifying the meaning of the 
Charter’s sweeping words lies the greater question 
of how the victorious Allies will interpret the Char- 
ter’s general philosophy. The Charter’s brief eight 
paragraphs set forth three principal goals: political 
freedom for nations on a basis of self-determination; 
“freedom from fear and want” for “all men in all 
the lands”; and “the fullest collaboration between 
all nations in the economic field with the object of 
security for all, improved labor standards, economic 
advancement and social security.’ While the Char 
ter's third paragraph states that the signatories “wish 
to see sovereign rights and self-government restored 
to those who have been forcibly deprived of them,” 
the London Times on March 20 argued that “the 
division of Europe today into 20 or 30 sovereign and 
independent units is incompatible with the military | 
security and economic well-being of the European 
peoples.”” How can this view be reconciled with the 
promise of self-determination and sovereignty? 


CHARTER A STAKE IN ELECTIONS. Whether 











the Charter ever becomes effective will depend above | 


all on the 1944 Presidential elections in the United | 
States. The isolationists and “nationalists” who op- 





pose the Charter found encouragement last week in | 


the failure of Wendel! Willkie, outstanding inter- 
nationalist among candidates for the Republican 
nomination, to win a single delegate in the Wiscon- 


sin primary of April 4. It is too early, however, to | 


interpret the failure of Mr. Willkie, who on April 5 
withdrew from the political campaign, as a return to 
isolationism. The candidates and platforms chosen by 


the major parties at their conventions this summer | 


will tell more fully whether the international or the 
isolationist idea will prevail for the time being in the 
United States. 


BLairR BOLLES 


(The third in a series of four articles on American foreign policy.) 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 











191 


—_ 


VOL. 


| 
ernt 
arra 
the 
on | 
bet 
han 
had 
dur 
wol 
ern 
wo 
istt 
Th 
to 
hac 
an 
Ge 


set 


N 


ul 


tr 
, te 


sl 





