






10n; 





ation ) 
yr at 
/ash- / 
will f 
os by 
then 


= 


ntion | 
have 
\dopt 
31100 | 
O ac: 
utive 
OSE: | 
oting } 
shift 
f the 


a ee ETE 


rican 








Entered as 2nd class matter 


ve 


-~ wwe 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 3 


NOVEMBER 7, 1941 





WORLD FACES PROBLEMS UNSOLVED IN 1918 


, ine twenty-third anniversary of Armistice Day 
finds the world in the midst of an even more 
profound convulsion than that which gripped it just 
before November 11, 1918. The United States is not 
yet actively engaged in the “shooting war’’ which, 
according to President Roosevelt’s Navy Day speech 
of October 27, has already started, but it has long 
been waging economic war on many fronts against 
both the Axis powers and Japan. With the exception 
of Britain, which maintains lines of defense on many 
far-flung fronts, all the European countries that had 
benefited by the first world war, as well as several 
erstwhile neutrals, have been conquered by Ger- 
many. Russia, knocked out of the war in July 1917, 
on the eve of the Bolshevik revolution which pre- 
ceded the Armistice by one year, is once more 
locked in a death struggle with Germany on a battle- 
ground made familiar by the headlines of 1914-18. 
In the Far East Japan, which 23 years ago was an 
ally of the Western powers, is seeking to end its 
10-year-old struggle with China, and weighs the ad- 
visability of plunging into the general conflict; while 
in the Near East Turkey, in 1918 an ally of Ger- 
many, attempts, like Japan, to maintain a “wait and 
see” attitude and, like Japan, has indicated that it 
would be willing to act as a mediator. 


Today, when the Nazis control the entire Euro- 
pean continent and dominate its Atlantic seaboard, 
while the British still command the high seas, the 
war threatens to develop into a stalemate between 
land and sea power, much as it did in 1917, before 
the entrance of the United States. Again, as in 1917, 
the question is whether this stalemate can be termi- 
nated in favor of Germany's enemies by long-con- 
tinued blockade of the continent, or will have to 
be broken by a military showdown with the Reich. 
To this question no one, not even the best-qualified 
military experts, can give a definite answer, since 
the outcome of the war hinges not only on man 


power and material resources, but also on those re- 
sources of the spirit which can neither be weighed 
nor measured. 


WAR RAISES PROBLEMS OF PEACE. Mote- 
over, as in 1914-1918, the Western powers cannot 
ignore the profound changes in sentiment and out- 
look wrought in Europe and elsewhere by the con- 
flict itself. When people sometimes say, in Britain 
and the United States, that it is premature to talk 
of post-war conditions until the war has been won, 
they often forget that the future peace is being al- 
ready forged on the anvil of war. Much turbulent 
water has flowed under the bridge since 1918. Many 
leaders who had seemed on the point then of build- 
ing a new world are dead, discredited, or living in 
exile. Many of the institutions that the first world 
war had still left standing, like tree-stumps after 
a forest fire, have been swept away by the second 
conflagration. Yet the problems that confronted the 
world in 1918, altered as they may be in form, re- 
main in substance the problems of our times. We are 
still groping to discover the procedure by which we 
could provide free access for all countries to the raw 
materials and markets of the world on terms of 
equality. We are still studying the possibility of im- 
proving relations between backward and advanced 
countries, which we call imperialism, in such a way 
as to pool the resources of all advanced powers— 
their labor, capital and managerial skill—in the 
common task of making backward countries ad- 
vanced, and raising the living standards of their 
peoples. We still wonder how, in case of Nazi de- 
feat, we could integrate Germany into the European 
community of nations, so that the continent—and 
the world—might benefit by the talents of the Ger- 
man people without having to fear its militaristic 
ambitions and its aspirations to the position of 
“master-race.’” We are still at a loss to know how to 
prevent the recurrence of wars—some people believ- 


x 


a 











ing that it is enough to create new machinery (a re- 
organized League of Nations, or a Federal Union of 
democracies, or regional federations linked by an 
international body), and others becoming daily more 
convinced that what we need is not new machinery, 
but a new philosophy of life which would set in 
motion whatever machinery seems most practicable 
at the end of the war. 

While the Western World is not yet by any means 
united in its conception of this new philosophy, the 
belief is gaining ground that the peace settlement of 
the future must be concerned less with boundaries 
and political formulas, or even markets, colonies and 
raw materials, than with human welfare, until re- 
cently the forgotten element in the international 
equation. The slogan of ‘‘making the world safe for 
democracy,” which genuinely stirred the emotions of 
millions of men a quarter of a century ago, lost its 
significance principally because people began to re- 
alize that a world which had not provided a ma- 
jority of its inhabitants with a safe margin of ex- 
istence would not long be safe for political democ- 
racy. The emphasis today has been shifted from the 
task of making the rest of the world safe for the 
political institutions developed in the Western coun- 
tries, to the more dynamic, and far more exacting 
task, of adapting these institutions, both on the na- 
tional and international plane, to the altered social 
and economic conditions of a mass-production era. 
The purpose is not so much to teach other people 


Page Two 








i 
——— 


\\ 


the United States have been so fortunate as to de} i 
velop during the past century. This objective was! pla 
long ago expressed by the American poet of democ.} Gr 
racy, Walt Whitman, when he said: “I speak the 
pass-word primeval, I give the sign of democracy | Eli 
By God! I will accept nothing which all cannot haye Im 
their counterpart of on the same terms.” Co: 

To this task of building for the future, the United 
States has much to contribute in terms of natural | Thes 
resources, technical skills, and political experience, | addi 
But as this country weighs its next step, which may | On | 
well prove the last step before actual warfare, one | tary | 
preoccupation above all should guide the ultimate | for 
decision. When the United States entered the war} guar 
in 1917, it altered the balance of power in Europe in| peop 
favor of the Allies, for otherwise Germany might | nutri 
have won the war. Yet two years later, in 1919, the | stan 
United States withdrew from Europe, and again al. | resol 
tered the balance of power on the continent—this | peop 
time, as it turned out, eventually in favor of Ger. | Chut 
many. If the American people are not prepared to ¢y 
assume, in time of peace, the responsibilities many | yee} 
of them seem ready to assume in time of war, then} shan 
the United States, by actively entering the conflict, 
may help Germany's opponents to win the war, but} os ; 
it will not have helped them to win the peace. Its) pave 
participation, under such circumstances, would only, yjg¢; 
arouse unwarranted illusions on the part of the repr 
peoples of occupied Europe. The subsequent dis-| and 
illusionment would hardly enhance the prestige of 





| repre 


about the machinery of democracy, as to find how democracy, in whose name the Western World is pi 
we can share with other people the benefits of the challenging the power of Nazism. oaee 
kind of life that Britain, the British Dominions and VERA MICHELES DEAN | emp 
I.L.O. STUDIES POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION "only 

The world-wide conference of the International which continues to function, the I.L.O. provides the tere 
Labor Organization, convened in New York and most active tie with the machinery of international oe 
Washington from October 27 to November 6, has government created in 1919, and its present wartime “™ 
focused attention on official international measures experience is expected to prove useful to gover: ae 


under way to cope with post-war social and economic 
problems. Since the Allies can carry out their pro- 
gram only if they win the war, a good share of the 
recent conference’s work was also directed toward 
strengthening defense production in the pro-demo- 
cratic countries by improving the relations of gov- 
ernment, industry and labor. 


As one of the few organs of the League of Nations 





For an analysis of the probable effect of removal 
of U.S. duties on major Latin American commod- 
ities, read: 


TOWARD FREE TRADE WITH LATIN 
AMERICA by Constant Southworth 


October 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports ...25c per copy 


ForEIGN Po.icy Reports combine the highest standards of 
scholarship with the flexibility and timeliness of journalism. 
Published on the 1st and 15th of each month. Subscription, 
$5 a year; to FPA members, $3. 











ments and statesmen at any peace conference follow: | 
ing the conflict. Certain technical agencies of the) 1 
League still operate—some in emergency headquar- the 
ters, such as the Secretariat's economic intelligence | 5 
division at Princeton University, and its opium com-| “8" 
mittee now located in Washington. But only the Gib: 
I.L.0., whose central offices were moved from Ge Con 
neva to Montreal in August 1940, provides a full! ‘Pe 
complement of personnel with wartime training in cide 
international research, administration and confer-) “¢ 
ence technique. ele 

The executive staff of the International Labor} “° 
Office submitted, for consideration by the general, °° 
conference, a far-reaching program recommending the | 


minimum international measures needed for: — 
FORE 

Development of the world’s resources. Headc 
Migration for employment and settlement. Entere 


Better facilities for nutrition, housing, recreation and) «gp 
culture. 


— 
de 


Was 
Noc- 

the 
racy, 


have 


Lited 
rural 
nce, 
may 
one 
mate 
Wat 
€ in 
Light 
, the 
n al. | 
—this 
Ger. 
d to 
nany 
then | 
flict, | 
, but | 
>. Its 
only 
~ the 
dis- 
re of 


Id is 





AN 


s the 
ional 
rtime 
vern- 
llow- 
F the 
quar- 
rence 
com- 
y the 
| Ge 
- full 
1g in} 
nfer- 





_abor 
neral 
ding 


| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. 
| Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


1 and| 








—— 
Minimum and equitable wages for all workers. 
Placement and vocational training of workers. 


Greater equality of occupational opportunity, and im- 
proved conditions of work. 


Elimination of unemployment. 
Improvement of social insurance. 
Collaboration of employers and workers in initiating and 
applying social measures. 
These official recommendations were augmented by 
additional suggestions of the conference delegates. 
On behalf of the United States delegation, Secre- 
tary of Labor Frances Perkins advocated: free access 
for all nations to the raw materials of the world; 
rantees of the civil and democratic rights of all 
peoples; public responsibility in the fields of health, 
nutrition, housing and child welfare; higher living 
standards for all peoples; and mobilization of world 
resources ‘to produce a more abundant life for 
people who have suffered the privations of war, from 
Chungking to London.” 


COMPOSITION OF THE CONFERENCE. Last 
week's meeting in New York was attended by more 
than 100 official delegates and over 70 advisers — 
representing the governments, employers and work- 
ers of 35 nations. Since Germany, Italy and Japan 
have all formally withdrawn from the League of 
Nations and the I.L.O., none of those countries was 
represented. Similarly, the small pro-Axis countries 
and the remaining European neutrals, who hesitate 
to affront Germany, were conspicuously without 
representation. Vichy France sent one official gov- 
ernment delegate, but no representatives of French 
employers or workers. Of all the Allied governments, 
only the U.S.S.R. failed to send delegates to the con- 
ference. When the Soviet Union was expelled from 
the League of Nations in December 1940, after its 
attack on Finland, it automatically ceased to be a 
member of the I.L.O., and has not re-entered by 
special action. 


The common pro-Allied sentiments of virtually all 
the delegates enabled the conference, from the out- 
set, to serve as a world-wide sounding board for 
arguments favoring extensive aid to Britain. George 
Gibson, vice-chairman of the British Trades Union 
Congress, summarized the leading aid-to-Britain 
speeches with the observation that “before we de- 
cide how we are going to live, we must first make 
sure we are going to live.” The Polish workers’ 
delegates submitted a formal proposal that the 
treasury and property of the German Reich be as- 
sessed, after the war, for forced labor imposed by 
the Nazis on citizens of occupied countries. 


Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: OUTLOOK ON ARMISTICE DAY 
Speaker: John C. deWilde ; 
Date: Sunday, November 9 

Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over NBC 

For station, please consult your local newspaper 











One of the more constructive plans to emerge 
from the conference, along lines suggested on No- 
vember 1 by former Belgian Premier Paul van Zee- 
land, favors regional collaboration as an initial step 
toward wider world economic and political coopera- 
tion after the war. The delegations of Poland, 
Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Greece on Novem- 
ber 4 signed an agreement for an economic unit com- 
posed of their countries, and with provision for the 
eventual admission of Rumania, Hungary and Bul- 
garia to the bloc. This regional unit—consisting of 
Poland, the Danubian states and the Balkans—would 
form a buffer against German expansion to the east, 
and would help promote economic rehabilitation and 
prosperity in the war-torn area of Eastern Europe. 


A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 


FPA STATEMENT OF POLICY 

In this period of national emergency, the Foreign 
Policy Association reaffirms the primary purposes 
for which it was organized in 1918: to promote an 
informed body of American public opinion on for- 
eign affairs. The Association believes that it can 
perform constructive and timely public services by 
continuing to act as an independent source of in- 
formation on international affairs. 

The Association has a record extending over the 
years for unbiased inquiry and freedom of speech. 
These are our best contributions to clear thinking in 
a period of stress. In the discussion of issues of 
American policy our purpose will not be to thresh 
over old straw. The focus will be on policies in the 
making or in process of change, and on results and 
performance. During the coming year, the Associa- 
tion will make every effort to maintain the scrupu- 
lous objectivity which has characterized its research 
and educational work in the past. In its publications, 
its program of popular education, its radio broad- 
casts and its public meetings throughout the coun- 
try, the Association will devote its attention to the 
immediate problems of national defense and of 
American foreign policy. More particularly, we shall 
emphasize the prime importance of the study and 
discussion of factors entering into the character of 
the peace and plans for post-war reconstruction. 





Vol. XXI, No. 3, NOvEMBER 7, 1941. 


EZJo.181 


Published weekly by th¢ Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotrHy F. Lugr, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES Dean, Edstor. 
} Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York. N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Nov. 4.—At a time when the United States is 
bending every effort to expand defense production 
to meet its own military needs and the urgent de- 
mands of Britain, Russia, and other overseas nations 
opposing the Axis, there is a natural tendency to 
overlook the normal economic requirements of Latin 
America. The danger of ignoring the basic supply 
needs of the twenty American republics, however, is 
underlined by recent developments which now 
threaten to create a serious crisis in our relations with 
southern neighbors. 


LATIN AMERICA’S DEFENSE ROLE. The vital 
importance of Latin America is recognized, of 
course, by those Washington agencies which are di- 
rectly concerned with the problem of economic de- 
fense. During the past year, the United States has 
drawn heavily on the raw material resources of the 
continent to augment its stocks of tin, copper, tung- 
sten, manganese, nitrates, and many other strategic 
materials. The Latin American governments have 
cooperated with the United States by denying these 
materials to the Axis powers and pledging virtually 
their entire production to the defense needs of this 
country. They have assisted the United States in en- 
forcing the “blacklist” of Axis agents, despite the 
fact that they are not legally required to recognize 
our regulations covering individuals and firms acting 
in the interests of Germany and Italy. All of the 
Latin American republics, without exception, have 
adopted some form of export control, which strength- 
ens the export control measures applied by Wash- 
ington. No less than ten countries prohibit the ex- 
port or re-export of a// articles subject to control in 
the United States, while the rest apply restrictions 
on the export of many critical defense materials. 
More important, these economic controls are actually 
being enforced by the governments. 

There is no doubt that Latin America has benefited 
from the closer economic ties brought about by the 
war. The tangible results are shown in the rising 
curve of United States purchases, which are now 
running at the rate of more than a billion dollars a 
year, as compared with 450 million dollars in 1938, 
and 620 million in 1940. Today United States im- 
ports from Latin America are almost double the 
dollar value of continental Europe’s normal pre- 
war purchases from that area. But this has solved 
only half of Latin America’s economic problem. On 
the other side of the ledger it is important to note 


that the Latin Americans have not been able to 

as much from the United States as we buy fr 

them. During the first eight months of 1941, 

example, our imports from the other American 

publics exceeded our exports by more than 113 mil 
lion dollars. While this figure may not seem larg 
in relation to total trade, it reflects a potentially 
dangerous situation. If the United States expects 
hold the cooperation of Latin America, it must hy 
ready to provide the manufactured products an} Vol 
machinery which are essential to the economic life 
of the hemisphere, and for which Latin America de. 
pends almost exclusively on this country, now that 
other sources of supply have been cut off by war. | W 


THE PRIORITIES CRISIS. The gravity of the revoll 
crisis is not denied in Washington. Nelson Rocke lease 
feller, Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs, calle in M 
attention to some of the consequences in his speech} count 
before the FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION FORUM if} “war 
New York oa October 25. In Venezuela the inter) that | 
ruption of supply lines from the United States has} suddt 
held up more than 500 individual construction) tries 
projects. Uruguay has complained that its entire con} cipal 
struction industry will be paralyzed unless the) worl, 
United States can find a way to release 2,800 tons of} Gern 
construction rods this month. Chile has protested) yjjjj 
that it is unable to fulfill orders for essential manu} of ¢ 
factured goods in return for the copper it is sending} lead 
the United States. Similar complaints are coming] proy 
from many other Latin American countries whose} dicti 
cooperation is essential for hemisphere defense. Gerr 

While recognizing the justice of these complaints, whic 
Washington officials have been hard-pressed to find) dem, 
a satisfactory solution. The chief difficulty has ap | worl 
parently centered in the priorities system, which ha| 
broken down at many points. Vital Latin American) op ¢ 
shipments have been held up for months, even after spok 
the O.P.M. has granted priority ratings and the Eco} teri, 
nomic Defense Board has issued the necessary expott He 
licenses. One possible solution would be to develop} the 
a system under which supplies essential to hemb| at g 
sphere defense could be allocated directly to Latin} with 
American countries. Only last week it was announced| way 
that O.P.M. was working out a plan whereby dis} the 
tribution of steel will be made by direct allocation! Alt} 
rather than by ineffective priorities. There would bel loss 
complications, of course, in extending the allocation} the 
plan to cover foreign orders, but unless some such| anfj 
drastic remedy is found, the present crisis will be| vers 
come even more acute. the 
+ of | 















WILLIAM T. STONE 






