Act of 1924 
stable career 
e State De 


n the careet 
rs and Min. 
ssarily come 
the United 
nternational 
ative ability 
3” have ap 
ate Dwight 
abassador to 
lomatic rec: 
ion through 


bassador to ; 


rtime diplo 
> and Direc 
ation before 
se the Pres 
-, among the 
and Ambas 
er, our high: 
ll times be 
d public set 
» Citizens aft 
on the basis 
1s of special 
resident will 
ossible met 
Jorial salaty 
of the mos 
| allowances 
R BOLLES 


IN DS 


; 


Brn Arbor Wich 


egp 16 1945 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


PBRIOBICAL ROVM 
GERRERAL LIBRAR* 
UNIV. OF Mic’ 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vor. XXIV, No. 17 


Feervary 9, 1945 


FALL OF MANILA OPENS WAY TO CHINA COAST 


HE entrance of American troops into Manila on 

February 3—less than a week after the first 
American motor convoy crossed the China border 
along the newly opened road from India—turns the 
dock back to the early days of the Pacific War. It was 
at the beginning of January 1942 that Manila fell to 
the Japanese, and within a few months the Burma 
Road was also cut. For almost three years the Philip- 
pines have suffered under Japanese rule, while China 
has been dependent upon air transport for virtually 
all the foreign supplies it has been able to secure. 
But today the Philippines are well on the way toward 
liberation, and the first break has been made in the 
Japanese blockade of China. 

CHINA’S SUPPLY PROSPECTS. These events, 
which are so fraught with emotional significance— 
especially the release of Allied prisoners held by the 
Japanese—are also of prime military importance, for 
they lay the basis for strengthening China’s war ef- 
fort and landing American troops on the China coast 
or Formosa. The first convoy on the Ledo Road, re- 
named the Stilwell Road by Generalissimo Chiang 
Kai-shek, was six miles long and included jeeps, am- 
bulances, medium and light artillery, as well as 
trucks loaded with ammunition and other supplies, 
totaling hundreds of tons. 

Undoubtedly China’s supply prospects are brighter 
than at any time in the past four years, particularly 
since domestic production of war materials may be 
expected to increase. In fact, as Donald M. Nelson 
pointed out in a report published on January 26, 
steps are being taken to raise China's total war out- 
put by the spring of this year to double the rate of 
lat November. The favorable aspects of the situa- 
tion should not be exaggerated, however, for imports 
and home production combined will fall far short of 
China’s needs. Not until a port is opened somewhere 
along the coast will it be possible to make large 
quantities of supplies available. Unfortunately the 


Japanese are doing their utmost to build up strength 


* against American landing forces. This is the mean- 


ing of the current drives in southeastern China, as a 
result of which Japan has taken the rest of the Can- 
ton-Hankow railway and is also threatening cet- 
tain advance airfields which remained in American 
hands after the Chinese retreats last year. 

In the face of these developments, and the experi- 
ences of 1944, Chungking is taking steps to reorgan- 
ize its armies. According to an announcement of 
February 1, about a third of all military personnel 
will be dismissed, many superfluous military organ- 
izations abolished, and sharp increases made in the 
pay of officers and men. It may seem peculiar for a 
country to cut down its armies in the midst of war, 
but Chungking has actually had many more soldiers 
than could be properly equipped or cared for under 
current conditions. Dismissing part of the personnel 
will enable the government to allot more money for 
the remaining forces. 

U.S. AID TO GUERRILLAS. There are clear-cut 
indications that the United States Army is look- 
ing forward to cooperating with China’s guerrilla 
forces, as well as with the Central troops. One sign 
of the times is to be found in the fact that almost 
ten tons of American Red Cross materials—consist- 
ing of sulfa drugs, microscopes, X-ray equipment, 
surgical instruments and other medical supplies— 
have been flown to the Communist capital at Yenan 
by the China Wing of the Air Transport Command. 
This represents a significant bréak in the Central 
blockade of the Communist areas, and it is encour- 
aging to note that it occurred with Chungking’s aid. 
The delivery of these materials may be connected 
with the highly favorable report on medical activ- 
ities in the Northwest submitted by Major Melvin 
A. Casberg, a doctor attached to the American mil- 
itary mission which has been in Communist China 
since last summer. 


= lll SSS] Pee Tu 0 = —>>>>>>>E>EeEe|]SS———_—_—_———SS__ 


The guerrilla troops of the Eighth Route and 
New Fourth Armies are undoubtedly anxious to 
work with the United States Army. There is reason, 
for example, to believe recent Japanese radio reports 
that the guerrillas have been constructing secret air- 
fields in anticipation of their later use by American 
planes. In fact, General Chu Teh, commander-in- 
chief of Yenan’s forces, has specifically mentioned 
the building of landing fields as one of the ways in 
which his armies could cooperate with the Allies 
against Japan. Other forms of aid suggested by Gen- 
eral Chu are: provisioning Allied submarines from 
sections of coast controlled by the guerrillas, supply- 
ing intelligence about the enemy, extending help in 
the rescue of Allied aviators, and “disturbing the 
enemy in Central and North China while he is fight- 
ing the Allies in southeast Asia.” 

UNSETTLED POLITICS. Meanwhile, the polit- 
ical problem of Chungking-Communist relations re- 
mains to be settled. The most recent development in 
this connection occurred on January 24, when Chou 
En-lai, Communist representative in the national cap- 
ital, returned there from Yenan. In an interview 
given before he left the Northwest, Chou declared 


that his object was to propose to the government, the 
Kuomintang, and various lesser political groups or. 
ganized in the Federation of Chinese Democratic 
Parties that a preparatory meeting of all parties and 
groups be held to lay the basis for a National Af. 
fairs Conference and a coalition government. 


Well-established American policies toward Ching 
were reiterated by Under Secretary of State Joseph 
C. Grew on January 23 when he declared that the con. 
summation of a Kuomintang-Communist agreement 
“would be very gratifying. . . . We earnestly desire 
the development of a strong and united China.” Mr, 
Grew added that “this government has been lending 
its best efforts to be of service in appropriate ways, 
such as through the exercise of friendly good offices 
when requested by the Chinese.” Whether anything 
will come of these efforts it is impossible to say. 
Without question it is highly desirable that when 
American forces land in China they enter a united 
country in which there will be no question as to the 
governmental authorities with whom they must deal 
in any particular area. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


U.S. FOLLOWS SHORTSIGHTED ECONOMIC POLICY TOWARD FRANCE 


Although the location and agenda of the Big 
Three Conference remain heavily guarded secrets, 
President Roosevelt is believed to have gone to this 
important meeting determined to fulfill the promise, 
stated in his Message to Congress on January 6: that 
the United States will use its influence to secure for 
liberated peoples the right to a free choice of their 
government and institutions. In implementing this 
policy the President will undoubtedly find that 
American economic power constitutes his strongest 
single weapon. With it, the United States may bring 
pressure on Britain and Russia to readjust, in accord- 
ance with democratic principles, their plans for those 
countries of special strategic importance to them. 
With it, the United States could also help prevent the 
growth in the liberated countries of the misery and 
despair that have all too often in the past given birth 
to totalitarian régimes. In the light of this opportun- 
ity, it is disheartening that so little American eco- 
nomic assistance has thus far been extended to 
France as it attempts to solve the economic problems 
that threaten to produce a political explosion. 

FRANCE PUZZLED BY LACK OF AID. To 
Frenchmen who enthusiastically received the Amer- 
ican armies last summer as they raced up the Rhone 
Valley or fought their way across Normandy, United 
States failure to follow up this display of armed 
power with a program of much-needed economic 
aid for France is as perplexing as it is disappointing. 
This does not mean that the French have not re- 
ceived American supplies, particularly of a military 
nature. The United States has equipped 80 French 


air force units, 8 divisions of the army, and agreed 
to supply 8 more. These supplies are regarded by the 
French as of great importance not only because they 
help them fight for victory but because they speed 
the resurrection of national power, an achievement 
on which the French lay great emphasis. In addition, 
the French civilian population will undoubtedly 
benefit greatly from the reconstruction work done 
by Americans, for military reasons, on transport and 
port facilities. And, finally, the United States Army 
has brought in 175,000 tons of civilian relief sup 
plies consisting of food, soap and some clothing, but 
this amount was merely of token size for so largea 
population. 

France's greatest need is for basic raw materials, 
a few key machine parts and civilian transport, since 
these supplies would give French industries the boost 
they require to set them in motion again. This need 
has not been met and, as a result, the French are 
unable to make the wartime economic contribution 
they believe they could otherwise be making. For, 
contrary to predictions made before D-Day, their it- 
dustrial equipment has emerged largely intact from 
the German retreat and the Allied invasion. How 
ever, without outside help the entire French economj 
has come perilously close to collapse. Shutdowns it 
French industrial plants affect 2,500,000 to 3,000,000 
workers—an enormous group in a nation that nuit 
bers approximately 35,000,000 when prisoners of wat 
and drafted laborers in Germany are subtracted from 
the total national population. Moreover, for lack 0 
transport to move food supplies from agricultural i 


——— 


urban re} 
yation, fe 
and Tou 
of food < 
der thes 
arises: hi 
ment of 
its natior 
nomic an 
HELP 
it seemes 
adoption 
aid for I 
the Unit 
with the 
three-mor 
Liberty s! 
be assigt 
equipmer 
This ton 
French re 
peared st 
of Franc 
States ad 
serious W 
to this p 
productic 
shortages 
the Unite 
billion dc 
tated Fre 
Now, 
sending | 
populatic 
the Fren 
schedule 
period, b 
February 
French h: 
ised the | 
to chang: 
gram for 
postpone 


For a: 


S 


REPO! 


FOREIGN Pi 
Headquarters, 
Scond-class 1 
we month fc 


Be 


——s 


nent, the 
‘oups or- 
mocratic 
rties and 
onal Af. 
t. 
td China 
€ Joseph 
t the con. 
greement 
tly desire 
ina.” Mr. 
n lending 
ate ways, 
od offices 
anything 
le to say. 
hat when 
a united 
as to the 
must deal 


SINGER 


\.NCE 

nd agreed 
ded by the 
cause they 
they speed 
-hievement 
n addition, 
ndoubtedly 
work done 
nsport and 
tates Army 
relief sup 
othing, but 
so largea 


materials, 
sport, since 
2s the boost 
. This need 
French are 
ontribution 
aking. For, 
ay, their it- 
intact from 
sion. How 
ch economy 
1utdowns if 
10 3,000,000 
n that nuit 
ners of wat 
tracted from 
for lack d 


ricultural t 


— 
yrban regions, French cities are on the verge of star- 
vation, food riots have recently taken place in Lyon 
and Toulouse, and labor troubles traceable to lack 
of food and employment have become frequent. Un- 
der these circumstances, the question inevitably 
srises: how can France move toward the establish- 
ment of a popularly elected government and regain 
its national strength if the country is torn by eco- 
gomic and social unrest? 

HELP TO FRANCE POSTPONED. Last month 
it seemed that obstacles which had prevented the 
adoption of a broad program of American economic 
aid for France had been overcome. On January 15 
the United States announced an export agreement 
with the French whereby, during each succeeding 
three-month period, space equivalent to that of 26 
liberty ships, or approximately 260,000 tons, would 
be assigned for shipping to France rehabilitation 
equipment and raw materials for essential industries. 
This tonnage represented only a fraction of the 
French request for 1,000,000 tons a month, but ap- 
peared sufficient to satisfy at least the most pressing 
of France’s civilian needs. In addition, the United 
States adopted measures that would help solve the 
stious unemployment problem in France. According 
to this plan, developed at the request of American 
production authorities who face acute manpower 
shortages at home, as well as the French government, 
the United States Army was to obtain more than a 
billion dollars’ worth of critical goods from resusci- 
tated French industrial plants in 1945. 


Now, however, it appears that these plans for 
sending prompt American aid to the French civilian 
population are being severely curtailed. In January, 
the French expected to receive 6 of the 26 ships 
scheduled for their use during the first three-month 


\period, but they have received none to date. During 


February it is probable that 10 ships will arrive in 
French harbors. The remaining shipping space prom- 
ied the French is apparently “on order” but subject 
tochange. In effect, therefore, the United States pro- 
yam for economic assistance to France has been 


postponed. 


Page Three 


For a survey of the French situation, read: 
STRUGGLE FOR A NEW FRANCE 
by Winifred N. Hadsel 


25c 


July 15 issue of ForEicGN Poticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 


Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 
a f | 


amma 
 —emmmnen = 


MUST RELIEF AWAIT VICTORY? Of such 
major importance to the United States is the critical 
economic situation in France that Acting Secretary 
of State Joseph C. Grew broadcast a report on the 
problem of supplying the French civilian population 
on February 2, and the Office of War Information 
released a similar statement on the subject on Febru- 
ary 4. Both Mr. Grew and the OWI explained that 
the United States wants to do everything possible to 
aid France, that it has already done a great deal, and 
that it is determined to do more in the future. They 
declared, however, that at the moment the United 
States is temporarily blocked in its efforts to extend 
greater assistance because of the priority of military 
requirements both in Europe and the Far East. In 
short, the official position of the United States is that 
much of the program for aiding France must wait 
until victory over Germany is won. 

That military necessities must come first is a strong 
argument, perhaps the strongest that can be ad- 
vanced at a moment when great battles are in their 
decisive stages. Moreover, it is clear that France's 
greatest hope for future economic and political sta- 
bility lies in the achievement of a speedy military 
decision. What is disturbing is the possibility that 
the value of Allied victory over Germany may be 
gravely impaired if we concentrate on winning it to 
such an extent that we neglect to help the French 
and the other liberated peoples tackle their civilian 
problems so that civil war may be avoided. It is not, 
after all, only in war that there is danger that action 
may be “‘too little and too late.’ During the current 
period of national recuperation in France some of 
the main lines of future political and economic pat- 
terns are inevitably being drawn. It is in the midst 
of war, therefore, as well as in the more remote 
post-war period that we must use our economic 
power to help the French maintain conditions neces- 
sary for the establishment of those freely chosen 
institutions President Roosevelt has promised them 
and other liberated nations. Otherwise we may attain 
our immediate objective of defeating the Nazis and 
fail to gain our long-range goal of advancing Amer- 
ican security by maintaining the friendship of France 
and other European nations. 

WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


We Stood Alone, by Dorothy Adams. New York, Long- 
mans, Green, 1944. $3.00 


An American girl, who went to Europe to study and 
married into a Polish family, writes so charmingly and 
with such love for the people and country that even those 
whose views differ will feel an understanding sympathy. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 17, Fesruary 9, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 
ttond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


we month for change of address on membership publications. 


> 181 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


be eee pinawec 


ae 


. * a 
*eeoe® 


“~¥ He cee we 
~ 0 


eh 


a oe es ee se 


Tw Wises ones 


6 
—_ ~ 


Washington News Letter Loe 


WILL ALLIES ACHIEVE COMMON POLICY ON WAR CRIMINALS? 


The Allies twice have recognized that they have 
a common interest in the punishment to be accorded 
war criminals. The first occasion was on October 21, 
1943, when they established in London the United 
Nations Commission for the Investigation of War 
Crimes; the second, on November 1, 1943, when 
President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill and 
Marshall Stalin signed a declaration promising that 
the “major” war criminals would “be punished by 
the joint decision of the governments of the allies.” 
Yet in practice the Soviet Union, Britain and the 
United States have approached the problem of war 
criminals independently. They have declined to take 
advantage of an excellent opportunity to practice 
international cooperation. 


WEAKNESSES OF WAR CRIMES COMMIS- 
SION. Many factors have weakened the War Crimes 
Commission. The Soviet Union has never pattici- 
pated in its work. “We ourselves will judge our 
torturers and this we will entrust to nobody,” Ilya 
Ehrenburg, well-known Russian journalist, was 
quoted by the Moscow radio on January 15. The 
Commission has had only the powers of an interna- 
tional study group, whose proposals both Britain 
and the United States have ignored. The two out- 
standing representatives on the Commission, Sir 
Cecil Hurst, of Britain, and Herbert C. Pell, of the 
United States, sought to turn it into a plenary agency, 
but their respective governments discouraged these 
efforts. Sir Cecil resigned, and on January 26 Acting 
Secretary of State Joseph C. Grew said that Mr. Pell 
was not returning to the Commission as Congress 
had failed to appropriate funds to pay the expenses 
of his office. 


The reluctance of the powers to put their faith in 
international commissions is almost as disheartening 
as the fact that disagreement about the treatment of 
war criminals continues to exist even after German 
territory has been invaded both on the east and west 
by Allied armies, a portent of the enemy's fall. The 
powers disagree on the criterion for deciding who is 
a war criminal; on whether the Nazis who have com- 
mitted crimes against more than one country should 
be tried by international judicial courts or military 
courts; whether the most important Nazis should be 
dealt with by a different process than their under- 
lings; and whether important Nazis, if they are sepa- 
rated from the others, should be hailed before some 


special court or disposed of by political judgment 
The British consider that the Roosevelt-Churchill. 
Stalin statement calls for a political judgment, buy 
the United States and Russia lean toward a trial. 


PUNISHMENT FOR TOP NAZIS CERTAIN. 
Public apprehension over disclosures of the weakness 
of the War Crimes Commission has forced Britain 
and the United States to strengthen their separate 
policies with respect to war criminals. The goverp. 
ments of both countries have now accepted Pell’; 
formula that “war criminals” include those guilty 
of persecuting their fellow-nationals—a device aimed 
at punishing Germans, Hungarians and others who 
harrassed Jews in their own countries. Richard Lay, 
Minister of State, announced this policy for Britain 
in the House of Commons on February 1, and Acting 
Secretary Grew announced it for the United States at 
a press conference on February 2. Mr. Law’s state. 
ment, however, was open to the interpretation that 
the Germans themselves might try their compatriot 
anti-Semites, which meets with little approval here 


The Allies will endanger their relations with one 
another and play into the hands of the defeated 
enemy unless they determine to reach a common 
agreement on details of the war criminals issue. The 
United States government is sincere in its protests 
tions that it will expect war criminals to pay for 
their crimes, and the determination of the Soviet 
government on this score is perhaps the best assur 
ance that Hitler will not be sent to some St. Helena 
The best policy will be served if the public, instead 
of urging full disclosures now of United States pol 
icy on war criminals, presses for international agree 
ment on policy. The United States and Britain might 
endanger prisoners of war held by Germany if the 
two countries should announce before German sut 
render specific programs for settling accounts with 
designated war criminals. Germany has already mis 
treated prisoners from other countries in reprisal 
Thus on December 6, 1944 the Sofia radio at 
nounced that the Bulgarian Red Cross had accused 
the Germans of amputating the hand of a captured 
Bulgarian officer and the index fingers of two Bul 
garian privates, while the Soviet Embassy in Wash 
ington reported in its Bulletin of February 2 that tht 
Nazis had killed 165,000 Soviet prisoners of wal 
during the German occupation of Lithuania. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


FOR VICTORY * BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


1918- 
Ft 
mar 


== 
You. XXI 


BIG 3 


HE « 
the c 
attended 
Churchil 
course of 
ite and 
doubtles: 
stamp O 
give-and. 
meeting 
decisions 
approval 
sion to g 
ing then 
peared t 
of seriou 
DRAC 
addition 
Nazis, t 
Major p 
the Euro 
tablishm. 
countries 
war Uni 
for Gerr 
beyond 
surrende 
tion to | 
ing the 
however. 
hot our | 
and insi: 
aad thei 
0 resto: 
tinction | 
és undo 
face the 
S defeat 
80 mill ic 


