



we fF 


=aaEe_S WHEN SaeUCUmSUS 


' ™ Se wil = | ee ow eS oe ie COP CU lal 


~— 


ae iY SC 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 





VoL. XV, No. 38 


JULY 17, 1936 





THE LEAGUE AND THE CHACO DISPUTE 
by Helen Paull Kirkpatrick 


A study of the methods employed in settling the 
Chaco conflict, which illustrates the difficulties of 
League intervention on the American Continent. 


July 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 





a 
QO) ¥\ Entered as second- 
; Ae -) class matter December 
4 tA 2 2, 1921, at the Post 
a \\\i KAS Office at New York, 
eo 4 N. Y., under the act 
4p Twn > of March 3, 1879. 











al Division, 
oes a 
abiuly Oi vongress, 


i shington, D. Cc. 











HITLER PLAYS TRUMP CARD 


IN AUSTRIA 





HE Austro-German accord, announced in a 

communiqué jointly issued by the two govern- 
ments with Italy’s approval on July 11, represents 
a striking victory for Chancellor Hitler’s policy— 
as expressed in Mein Kampf—of bringing all 
German-speaking peoples within the orbit of the 
Third Reich. In this accord Germany undertakes 
to recognize Austria’s “complete sovereignty” as 
defined by Hitler on May 21, 1935, when he de- 
clared that the Reich neither wished nor intended 
to annex Austria or mix in its internal affairs, 
but that the German people—of which the six 
million Austrians are considered a part—should 
have the right to self-determination. Various 
measures will be adopted to relieve the tension 
which has existed between Austria and Germany 
since 1934, when Austrian Nazis, inspired from 
Berlin, assassinated Chancellor Dollfuss. Ger- 
many will remove the 1,000-mark tax on visas to 
Austria and end restrictions on Austrian trade, 
while Vienna will permit the return of Austrian 
Nazis now exiled in Germany and the circulation 
of German newspapers. Thus far, the bulk of 
concessions appears to be made by Berlin. Aus- 
tria, however — and this is the kernel of the ac- 
cord — promises to bring its “political policies, 
especially in so far as they concern the German 
Reich, into conformity with the fundamental 
recognition of the principle that Austria professes 
herself to be a German state.” This pledge, which 
opens the way to Austro-German union in one 
form or another, is not to affect Austria’s special 
relations with Italy and Hungary. 


The July 11 accord is reported to be accom- 
panied by two secret annexes. The first obliges 
the Austrian government to maintain an army of 
300,000—which would protect Germany from a 
rear-guard thrust by the Little Entente. The sec- 
ond deals with the question of Hapsburg restora- 
tion, which Germany has vigorously opposed. 
Hitler, it is understood, demanded a pledge that 


this question should not be raised for ten years, 
but Chancellor Schuschnigg of Austria merely 
gave secret assurance that restoration was not “a 
topical problem.” 


Announcement of the accord, which was not 
expected to be made public until the end of July, 
was apparently hastened by press reports divulg- 
ing its principal provisions; by Hitler’s desire, 
while refusing to answer the British questionnaire 
of May 8, to give concrete evidence of his pacific 
intentions toward neighboring states; by his de- 
termination to prevent the conclusion of a rumored 
Italo-Soviet accord for defense of Austria against 
Nazi aggression, which would have completed 
Germany’s isolation and blocked its drive into the 
Balkans; and by the anxiety of both Germany and 
Italy to establish a common front for bargaining 
with Britain and France at the Locarno confer- 
ence scheduled to meet in Brussels on July 22. 


While the Austro-German accord appears, at 
first glance, to remove one of the most dangerous 
sources of European conflict, it is, in reality, a 
shrewd move to bring Austria under German con- 
trol not by violence, which failed in 1934, but by 
conciliation. Extremist Austrian Nazis may not, 
for reasons of policy, be at first permitted to play 
a conspicuous réle in Vienna, but it seems a fore- 
gone conclusion that they will ultimately control 
the country and consummate the Anschluss which 
France and the Little Entente have resisted since 
the war. Faced with a choice between reconcilia- 
tion with the Social Democrats, bitterly opposed 
both to Naziism and the Dollfuss brand of fascism, 
and rapprochement with the German Nazis, 
Chancellor Schuschnigg, whose Catholic and 
Fascist connections predispose him against so- 
cialism, chose the Nazis as the lesser of two evils. 
His decision spells the doom of such remnants of 
tolerance as had been allowed to survive in the 
Austrian guild state. As the Nazis assert them- 
selves, it may be expected that political dissenters, 


















































ee: * 

















Jews and even Catholics will share the fate of 
their comrades in Germany. While under the 
July 11 accord the German government promises 
to refrain from interference in Austria’s internal 
affairs, the return of Austrian Nazi exiles and the 
influx of German tourists will serve the Nazi 
cause less conspicuously but probably more effec- 
tively than the direct methods of Dr. Goebbels’ 
Propaganda Ministry. To describe Austria’s 
Nazification as an act of self-determination by the 
Austrian people, whom the government has long 
ceased to consult, would be ironical. 

The Austro-German accord is bound to produce 
fundamental changes in Europe’s shifting diplo- 
matic alignments. By sponsoring this accord, 
Italy has abandoned its post-war attempt to dom- 
inate Austrian politics—an act it may rue the day 
Nazi Germany confronts it on the Brenner Pass. 
Italy’s retreat from Austria may indicate that its 
financial and military resources have been more 
seriously drained by the Ethiopian campaign than 
the world had been allowed to realize. True, col- 
laboration with Hitler furnishes Mussolini with 
a powerful weapon to extract further concessions 
from Britain and France—such as British aban- 
donment of the Mediterranean accord against 
Italy, which France had already denounced on 
July 9 in the hope of placating Rome, and the 
grant of loans or credits for the exploitation of 
Ethiopia. The lifting of League sanctions, far 
from leading to reconstruction of the Stresa front, 
as hoped in London and Paris, has merely caused 
Italy to raise the price of its participation in 
European politics. 

Yet it is Germany, not Italy, which stands to 
gain most from the Austrian transaction. With 
a friendly, if not yet annexed, Austria as base, 
Germany can operate even more effectively than 
in the past to bring the Balkan countries within 
its sphere of economic influence and to detach 
them from France and Britain. Without the fir- 
ing of a shot, merely by the use of tireless propa- 
ganda and economic pressure, Germany may soon 
acquire a predominant position in Eastern and 
Southeastern Europe, at the head of a Fascist 
bloc stretching from the Baltic to the Adriatic, 
and neutralize such assistance as France and the 
Soviet Union might have hoped to give each other 
or the Little Entente in case of German aggres- 
sion. Once the Austrian situation is under con- 
trol, Hitler may safely turn to settlement of the 
territorial issues which have particularly exacer- 
bated German opinion since the war — Danzig, 
Memel, the Polish Corridor—on the fairly reason- 
able assumption that no French or British blood 
will be shed in defense of these regions. When 


Page Two 








Germany has gained its objectives in the East, it 
will be able to confront Britain and France with 
the fact—which should have been abundantly clear 
for the past three years—that Europe can have 
peace, provided it accepts Nazi hegemony on the 
continent. By that time it may be too late for the 
Western democracies to decide whether peace on 
Hitler’s terms is better or worse than war. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 
GERMAN-AMERICAN TRADE WAR 


German-American economic relations, disturbed 
since the advent of the Nazi régime, were further 
complicated on July 11 when countervailing du- 
ties ranging up to 56 per cent were imposed on 
about one-third of Germany’s exports to the 
United States. The increased tariffs will be as- 
sessed under a provision of the Tariff Act of 1930, 
directing Treasury officials to collect supplemen- 
tary duties to offset foreign trade subsidies. It is 
understood that complex German exchange con- 
trol practices—which in effect subsidize exports 
—and the system of direct export bounties by 
German industrial cartels motivated the action 
of the administration. In an attempt to forestall 
the blow, a Reich mission has visited Washington 
to explore the possibility of stimulating German- 
American trade, but thus far appears to have met 
with failure. Germany’s argument is that aid to 
exporters is necessary if they are to overcome the 
competitive advantages of countries with de- 
preciated currencies—including the United States. 

Under the administration’s policy of penalizing 
discrimination against this country’s trade, the 
Reich has already been denied the benefits of 
lower tariffs adopted in our trade agreements. 
On August 1 Australia, too, will cease to enjoy 
these rates, in retaliation for the establishment 
of an import licensing system held to discriminate 
against the United States. Acting under the same 
policy, Washington has on one occasion suc- 
ceeded in securing what it believes to be equitable 
treatment for its commerce abroad. On July 11 
the U.S.S.R. and the United States renewed a 
one-year agreement by which, in return for re- 
ceiving the benefit of the conventional tariffs, the 
Soviet government agreed substantially to in- 
crease its purchases here. Informal assurances 
that Soviet imports from this country would 
amount to at least $30,000,000 annually have been 
repeated. Actually, Soviet purchases during the 
past year have exceeded this sum by $7,000,000. 
It remains to be seen, however, whether the use 
of penalties to insure fair treatment for our for- 
eign commerce will not destroy more trade and 
good will than it creates. DAVID H. PopPER 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 38, Juty 17, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND Lesite BUELL, President; EstHmm G. Ocpun, Secretary; Vera MicHsies Daan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


sm 5 li la il ache oi 0a 

















