AUG 13 1946 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


PERIOVICAL REGS General Library 
¥ 
@BNBRAL LIBRAR : 
—1946 wuly. or mice Vaiversity of Michigan 
ton Arbor, Michtean 
TIN 

rents, and 
have not ee 
of which An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
in income FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
pressed in 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


the Asso- Vo. XXV, No. 43 


Avuoust 9, 1946 


s who pay 


. fore SMALL NATIONS SEEK PRECEDENTS FOR DEALING WITH GERMANY 


. rie —n Germany and Japan, which form 
ication a the central problems in peacemaking in Europe 
cial mee. | md Asia, are not on the agenda of the 21-nation 
| conference which opened in Paris on July 29, dele- 

| gates at the Luxembourg Palace are keenly aware that 
precedents now being established in connection 

n, that if | With the conclusion of treaties with Italy, Finland 
increased | and the Danubian states will carry great weight in 
determining how peace will be made with the prin- 

mendment | “pal Axis powers later. Accordingly, Belgium and 
ir present | the Netherlands, who feel that their views are be- 
ing ignored in the handling of the German question, 

1, 1946" | and New Zealand and Australia, who have long 

| feared that the great powers might ignore their ad- 
vice on the Pacific settlement, have taken the lead 
| in efforts to prevent the Big Four from dominating 
| the Peace Conference. During the past week these 
small independent powers—whose number does not 
include Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Poland, the 
or porated, Ukraine and White Russia, all of whom vote with 
Russia in a more or less solid bloc—waged a diplo- 
matic battle against the Big Four within the vitally 
— 4 important Committee on Rules. 

BIG-FOUR UNANIMITY IN PARIS? In one 
encounter the small nations insisted that the Confer- 
ence elect its own chairman rather than submit to 
the suggestion of the recent Council of Foreign 
Ministers that the Big Four and China rotate the 
ofice among themselves. This attempt failed on 
August 3, when Foreign Minister Molotov strong- 
ly opposed any change in the chairmanship plan 
uestion of | submitted by the Foreign Ministers, and the United 
ign Policy | States and Britain supported his stand. In a second 

and even more important revolt against domination 

| by the great powers, the smaller states demanded 

| that a simple majority rather than a two-thirds vote 

seseenneeennet Ene proposed by the Big Four—suffice to adopt 


recommendations by the Conference to the Foreign 
Ministers concerning the peace treaties. This effort 
placed the Big Four in a serious dilemma. On the 
one hand, none of them was willing to have the 
hard-won agreement of the Foreign Ministers easily 
upset. On the other hand, Britain and the United 
States, especially, were reluctant to appear as the 
opponents of the small nations’ demand that the 
Conference be more than a rubber-stamp for the 
treaties drafted by the Big Four. 

In an effort to find a compromise solution, Britain 
suggested that the Conference send two kinds of 
proposals to the Foreign Ministers—"‘suggestions,” 
which would require only a majority vote, and “rec- 
ommendations,” which would require a two-thirds 
vote. Then, in order to insure the effectiveness of 
the “recommendations,” Secretary of State Byrnes 
brought forward a plan whereby the Foreign Min- 
isters would be bound by these proposals when it 
nrepared the final drafts of the treaties. Even if the 
British and American suggestions are adopted, how- 
ever, the small nations will almost certainly find it 
extremely difficult to muster a two-thirds majority 
on any important questions, and the doctrine of 
great power unanimity as the prerequisite to the 
conclusion of the peace treaties will remain funda- 
mentally unchanged. 


BIG FOUR DIVIDED IN GERMANY? While 
the Big Four assiduously avoid making any conces- 
sions to the demands of the small nations that might 
impair their unanimity on decisions already reached 
by the Council of Foreign Ministers, they find them- 
selves openly divided in Germany. Just one year 
after the conclusion of the Potsdam agreement, 
which was to form the foundation for Allied policy 
toward the defeated Reich until a peace treaty could 
be concluded, this agreement is in danger of being 


| Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


/ 
| 
F 
. 
it 
| 


entirely nullified. In fact, it may be said that the 
Potsdam arrangements have never been fulfilled, 
for one of their basic provisions was that Germany 
—despite its partition into four zones of occupation 
—should be administered as an economic unit. This 
plan was based in part upon a recognition of the 
fact that Germany had a highly integrated economy 
which could not be disrupted during the period of 
military occupation without creating enormous eco- 
nomic problems for the Allies, particularly Britain 
and the United States, whose areas of western and 
southern Germany normally relied for a large part 
of their food supply upon the agricultural areas 
within the Russian zone. In addition, the mainte- 
nance of economic unity in Germany was regarded 
as essential to the eventual reintegration of the coun- 
try. This policy Russia, Britain and the United States 
avowedly endorsed, on the twofold assumption that 
German unity was a historical fact which could not 
be ignored, and that partition of the Reich would 
lead to bitter rivalry among the Big Three for Ger- 
many’s support. 

Despite the Potsdam agreement, Germany has 
been administered during the past year as four sep- 
arate states. As one result of this failure to treat the 
various zones as an economic unit, Britain and the 
United States have been obliged to shoulder a heavy 
relief burden in Germany, which has made it ap- 
pear that they—rather than the defeated state—are, 
in effect, paying reparations. Even more important, 
Germany has been subjected to the economic poli- 
cies of four separate powers rather than to a single 
Allied policy. In the absence of over-all arrange- 
ments, Britain and the United States have dealt with 
their zones primarily on a day-to-day basis and 
awaited implementation of the Potsdam plans, but 
Russia has virtually integrated its zone into the So- 
viet economy by means of its reparation collections 
and provision of raw materials to German factories 
producing goods for Russian consumption. Under 


WASHINGTON WELCOMES NEW REGIME IN BOLIVIA 


The violent revolution that flared up in Bolivia 
on July 19 was a spontaneous, popular and anony- 
mous attack upon the dictatorial Villaroel régime, 
which itself had taken power by violent means in 
December 1943. Three days later President Gual- 
berto Villaroel was assassinated, and his government 
was supplanted by a junta of teachers, students and 
workers headed by Dr. Nestor Guillén, Dean of the 
Supreme Court of La Paz. The uprising started with 
demonstrations by professors and students of the 
University of La Paz, and was reinforced by the 
industrial workers of the capital, who called a gen- 
eral strike, and by units of the Bolivian army which 
deserted to the revolutionary cause. As exiled oppo- 
sition leaders began to return to the country, pro- 
visional President Guillén promised free elections, 


Page Two = 


—-— ————— 


—— 
these conditions Britain and the United States hay 

repeatedly called for the prompt implementatigg 
of the Potsdam economic’ program for Germany, 
However, since neither London nor Washingtoy move 
could devise any method of enforcing compliane! | oven 
with Potsdam which would not run the risk of jp. Fe Ar 
curring outright Russian opposition—thus leadin ) 
to the very partition of Germany they sought to 
avoid—it seemed that the Western powers wer 
caught in a hopeless impasse. In what Mr. Byrnes 
described on July 11 as a “last resort,” the United 
States finally attempted to secure the economic rein. 
tegration of Germany by inviting all or any of the 
other occupying powers to undertake economic 
operation with the American zone. Britain, with 
considerable reluctance, accepted this invitation op 
July 29, and negotiations for economic merger of! <ve m 
the American and British zones are now underway.) jg ordi 
The French have not indicated what their reply will} J, js 


pro-fas 
elemen 
selves 


roel g 
right C 
remov: 
up lab 
it dep: 
| haps Pp 
foreigt 
more s 
social 

militar 


be, but it appears at least possible that they may} of the 
eventually follow the American and British lead} o¢ int 
It is, therefore, upon Russia that major responsibility uplanc 
now rests for the decision as to whether the Reich' petwe, 
shall be divided into “eastern” and ‘‘western’”’ Ger. | Argen 
manies. States. 

What Russia's course of action will be is not yet} the D 
entirely clear. Although Marshal Vassily D. Soke. | dence 


lovsky, Russian military governor in Germany, ex-| with ; 
pressed his disapproval of the American plan on’ questi 
July 30, he has not flatly rejected it. Face-to-face a paw 
with the prospect of a definite break with the West-| Arger 
ern powers in Germany, Russia may possibly decide | for ce 
that the disadvantages which would accrue from this! Sates 
situation outweigh the advantages of exclusive eco | 73 | 
nomic and political control over its own zone. If this | tensib 
conclusion is not reached in Moscow, the theory of | jt. pc 
Big-Four unanimity as the basis for peacemaking | jing. 
will have suffered a far more powerful blow than admis 
it is likely to receive at the hands of the small nations | prouy 
at the Paris Conference. © WinirrepD N. HADsEL | pany 
| Arger 
a for 


restoration of civil liberties and press freedom, and 
a general amnesty for political prisoners. Since this 
transitional government is predominantly civilian | on 
and leftist, it is probable that the coming elections Al 
will bring to power a more representative adminis | 
tration than was the case in the last elections held in 
1940, when only 85,000 of Bolivia’s three and a half 
million people voted. 

VILLAROEL’S RADICAL PROGRAM. In the | 
future, Villaroel’s rule may be remembered princ:- 
pally for his efforts to effect a radical transformation i 
of economic and social conditions in the Indian | Do 
Republic. The social drive behind the 1943 coup Wa | Hieadqu 
contributed by the MNR (National Revolutionary | i" 
Movement), a political coalition of intellectuals and 
workers. The MNR was colored by nationalist and | 


——=!|2 
ates have 
nentatiog 
Germany, 
ashington 
ym pliance 
isk of ip. 
5 leading 
Ought to 
ers Were 
[. Byrnes 
ie United 
MIC rein. 
ny of the 
1OMIC Cp. 
ain, with 
tation og 
nerger of 
inderway, 
reply will 
they may 
tish lead, 
onsibility 


—— 
=S__ 


ro-fascist sentiment and allied itself with certain 
elements in the Bolivian army which described them- 
selves as “‘anti-capitalist.” To the extent that this 
movement was committed to a program of social im- 
provement, it was in many respects comparable to 
the Argentine nationalist revolution. But the Villa- 
roel government went further by recognizing the 
right of labor to organize, prohibiting the arbitrary 
removal and transfer of union leaders, and setting 
up labor services. By strengthening trade unionism 
it departed from the nazi-fascist pattern, and per- 
haps prepared the way for its own downfall. As the 
foreign relations of the Villaroel régime became 
more strained and internal problems multiplied, the 
social drive lost its momentum. The nationalist- 
military clique took refuge in increasingly repres- 
sive measures, including a rigorous press censorship, 
in order to maintain itself in power. 

It is impossible to dissociate the domestic causes 
of the revolution of 1943 from the larger complex 
of inter-American relations. The remote Bolivian 


the Reich 
mn” Ger. | 


is not yet 
D. Soko- 
many, ex: | 

plan on 
ce-to-face | 
he West: | 


ly decide | 


from this | 
ISIVE eCO- | 
ne. If this ' 
theory of 
cemaking 
low than 
11 nations 
TADSEL 


dom, and 
Since this 
y civilian 
elections 


- adminis: | 
1s held in | 
ind a half | 


{. In the 
ed princ- 
formation 
1e Indian 
coup was 
ylutionary 
tuals and 
ialist and 


uplands were then the scene of political warfare 
between Germany, working with and through the 
Argentine military government, and the United 
States. In the Blue Book published in February 1946, 
the Department of State presented documentary evi- 
dence that the Villaroel régime had come to power 
with assistance from Buenos Aires and Berlin. The 
question of recognizing the Bolivian régime became 
a pawn in the more important contest centering on 
Argentina's position in the European war. In return 
for certain concessions from Villaroel, the United 
States recognized the revolutionary junta on June 


| 23, 1944. Although the Bolivian government os- 


tensibly shifted its support to the United Nations, 
its policies have followed closely those of Argen- 
tina. Washington continued to press the Villaroel 
administration to eliminate the influence of fascist 
groups and individuals in the government. In com- 
pany with all the Latin American nations except 
Argentina, the United States only a month ago made 
a formal protest to the Bolivian government re- 


Page Three 


Just Published— 
AMERICAN INVESTMENTS IN EUROPE— 
The Record and the Outlook 
by Harold H. Hutcheson 


25 cents 
August 15 issue of FoREIGN Po.icy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


garding the series of murders and atrocities for 
which it was responsible. The emphatic stand of the 
State Department undoubtedly contributed to the 
success of the July 19 counterrevolution, and it may 
be assumed that the United States will recognize the 
Guillén junta, since it is Washington's understand- 
ing that the revolution has diminished Perén’s 
chances of consolidating an Argentine bloc in South 
America. 

Whether the new government will be able to act 
independently of Argentina is a matter of consid- 
erable conjecture. Landlocked Bolivia is less a na- 
tion than a frontier—the great, sprawling frontier 
of three aggressive Latin American countries, Brazil, 
Argentina and Chile. The instability of its econ- 
omy, peculiarly dependent on the export of one 
product, tin, is another reason why Bolivia is so 
sensitive to outside pressures. The country is largely 
dependent on foreign sources, especially Argentina, 
for its requirements of wheat, processed foods, con- 
sumer goods, and machinery. To shift the emphasis 
from tin mining to agriculture, as Bolivians hope to 
do eventually, requires the opening up of the eastern 
lowlands, which lie 600 to 1,000 miles away from 
La Paz and 11,000 feet below that city. 

The exploitation of the great tropical hinterland 
calls for resources of transport, labor and capital 
which Bolivia does not possess. The country’s diffi- 
cult economic situation, moreover, subjects it to ex- 
tremes of social agitation, as Villaroel’s experience 
so aptly demonstrated. As a result of new educa- 
tional opportunities and improvements in the legal 
status of the peon and the miner, the Indians have 
become increasingly restive and _ self-conscious. 
Whether they will be satisfied with the painfully 
slow pace at which reforms must be conducted to 
be permanently successful, or will demand more 
sweeping action, depends on two factors: the quality 
of statesmanship that the new leaders of the Bolivian 
government may display; and the attitudes which 
neighboring countries adopt toward Bolivia in this 
extraordinarily anxious moment in its history. 


OLIvE HOLMES 


USSR Foreign Policy, by Victor A. Yakhontoff, New York, 
Coward McCann, 1945. $3.50 
A useful summary, with many quotations from docu- 
ments and official speeches, but little attempt at critical 
analysis. 
Nationalism and After, by Edward H. Carr. New York, 
Macmillan, 1945. $1.25 
A thought-provoking essay tracing nationalism’s devel- 
opment and considering how it may shape up in postwar 
times. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 43, AuGusT 9, 1946. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; VERA MICHBLES DEAN, 
Editor, Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


| Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


| By 181 
| 


i 
ts 
\ 


“f 


Washington News Letter |: 


BROADCASTS AND LIBRARIES PROMOTE U.S. POLICIES ABROAD 


The United States relies on its official interna- 
tional shortwave broadcasts to advance our cause in 
areas where we compete for influence with the So- 
viet Union, primarily Eastern Europe. Daily broad- 
casting programs have now become recognized and 
probably permanent instruments of foreign policy 
for 49 governments. The objective of these pro- 
grams is to win the populations in the listening 
countries to the social and political customs of the 
broadcasting nation. The decision of Congress, after 
long debate, to appropriate $19,000,000 to finance 
the State Department's international informational 
program for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1947 
enables the United States to carry forward its pro- 
gram in this field, first exploited seriously during 
World War II through the Office of War Informa- 
tion and the Office of the Coordinator of Inter- 
American Affairs. 

U.S. INFORMATION ABROAD. Some observ- 
ers of the work of the State Department Office of 
International Information and Cultural Affairs have 
been critical. ‘As I visited many of the countries in 
the old world last year, I found that other powers 
did a much better job in informing other countries 
about themselves than the United States,’’ Chester 
E. Merrow, Republican of New Hampshire and 
member of Foreign Affairs Committee, said in the 
House on July 16. While still imperfect, the con- 
duct of State Department informational activities 
has improved since Mr. Merrow saw them in op- 
eration. Broadcasts today go out in 24 languages to 
67 countries. The budget provides for 3,100 em- 
ployees, who spread information not only through 
broadcasts but through motion pictures (of which 
a film on the Tennessee Valley Authority is the most 
popular with foreign audiences), through exchange 
of peoples, and through libraries. 

Eastern European governments have readily 
agreed to the establishment of American libraries 
in their capitals, and have not prohibited their 
people from listening to American broadcasts. The 
Polish government has made available governmental 
radio stations for rebroadcasting American short- 
wave programs from platters. Once a week Polish 
stations broadcast recordings prepared in the United 
States on topics relating to American transportation, 
agriculture, political institutions, etc., and after the 
broadcasts Polish professional groups discuss the 
scripts on the air. The broadcast and the daily news 
summary, which the State Department distributes by 
radio to diplomatic missions abroad, furnish news- 


Europe, with large quantities of American news, 
Partial censorship has at times limited the use Rv. 
manian and Hungarian newspapers make of this 
officially disseminated information. | 

News bulletins are displayed in the American 
libraries in Belgrade, Sofia, Bucharest, Budapest 
and Warsaw. In the Belgrade library last February 
820 visitors were attracted daily by the news bulle. 
tins, three copies of which are on view each day in 
a special room. The Bucharest library invites all , 
comers to listen to the “Voice of America” informa | NE 
tion program emanating daily from its loud speak. N 
ers. The Belgrade library also provides weekly lec. O j 
tures on American subjects, and distributes pictorial 


—«—~ 

papers in the receiving countries, including Easter t 
Le 

‘eer: 


Vou. X 


| 


maps of the United States to Yugoslav children. The | _ 
State Department informational officers have less | akc 
freedom in Russia than in neighboring countries, | Foreig 
but the Soviet government in June increased to | with t 
50,000 the number of copies of the United States | . 4... 
official magazine, America, distributed monthly in | iokes 
the U.S.S.R. at 80 cents a copy. Assistant Secretary of | 4) mo 
State William Benton estimated, in testimony before | 4: 


the House Appropriations Committee this spring, | 
that each copy had from 5 to 50 readers. positic 

SHORTCOMINGS OF THE PROGRAM. The | ©... . 
Administration’s interest in conducting the program | gyvict 
rests generally upon the hope, that from knowing , 4, 4; 


about the United States, foreign peoples will come 


ever, | 


< : some | 
to think well of this country; and specifically from | TH 
the expectation that presentation of official views | ee 
on current questions will win support for American ; 7° 
es . ° . aris | 
policies. Letters from foreign listeners (500 Italians = 
wrote in February, 1,800 in May) increasingly re | ‘ 
: ; 4 : . | so fine 
veal that interest exists abroad in American radio ) 
Y chiefs of diplomatic missions | 1°) 
programs. Yet many chiefs of diplomatic missions decid 
abroad remain unpersuaded that the broadcasts and | adi, 
other programs are politically advantageous, and ac- se 
cordingly discourage the operation. Political officials | a 
in the State Department tend to deny officials con- | a 
cerned with public affairs any participation in the . 
formulation of policy, for whose explanation t0 |) 
people overseas the publicists are responsible. They | which 
also try to control the selection of information and | in the 
cultural officials for foreign posts. The result is that | 7 
the officials in charge of information make less of a ai 
contribution to policy than their position warrants, |.) 
and that many inexperienced or ill-suited persons ate ag 
inadequately handling the United States informa 


: woulc 
tional program in foreign capitals. | 


BLAIR BOLLES 


