ie EC 21 1943 


























— _” ODICAL RUG ee Entered as 2nd class matter 
A eA BRAL LIBRAK* Univer Cee oe ee 
unity, OF MICH. Oe ee 

7 —1943 Ann Arbor, Mich. 
— 
"\Y 
es, 
rks 
ary 
, it 
the An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
100 FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
a 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
day You. XXIII, No. 9 DECEMBER 17, 1948 
ries, 
en| UNRRA SETS HOPEFUL PATTERN OF INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION 
it by Vera Micheles Dean method of distributing relief and rehabilitation sup- 
t IS] Mrs. Dean was a member of Director General Lehman's tem- plies, the treatment of displaced persons, and the 
Lied} porary staff during the first session of the UNRRA Council. financing of UNRRA 
nfla. ie far-reaching decisions of Cairo and Teheran 1. SCOPE OF UNRRA ACTIVITIES. Before the 
‘a . pao’ * ney ‘ ~e ra A = the —_ Council met there had been a tendency among some 

ee AR Paee? St CS BI SCSI OE Ue Ne Americans to think of UNRRA as an agency which 
orld} Gi of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation teh é oency 


would be concerned not only with the immediate 
relief and rehabilitation of victims of war in liber- 
ated areas, as provided by the UNRRA Agreement 
signed at the White House on November 9, but also 
with the general post-war economic reorganization 
of Europe and Asia. This extreme view of the func- 
tions of UNRRA was discarded from the start at 
Atlantic City. The relief and rehabilitation supplies 
whose provision is to be insured by the Administra- 
tion are limited to essential consumer goods for im- 
mediate needs, such as food, fuel, clothing, shelter, 
and medical supplies; and materials (such as seeds, 


-vel,| Administration. Yet this was the first occasion when 
lib} the thirty-three United Nations and the eleven na- 
tne} tions associated with them gathered together to map 
rited} out a program of joint operations on a global scale. 
In perspective, perhaps the most important result of 
Gur} the Atlantic City conference is that it gave concrete 
> the} assurance to the small nations that their interests 
majjwill receive serious and sympathetic consideration 
ling} on the part of the great powers. This assurance, much 
ong needed to counteract the fear that Britain, Russia and 
1 the} the United States might dispose of the future of 
Gee furope without consulting the small countries of that fertilizers, raw materials, fishing equipment, machin- 
ping entinent, helped to give content to the subsequent ery and spare parts) needed to enable a recipient coun- 
claration of the Big Three at Teheran concerning try to produce and transport relief supplies. Its services 
ad 4 the future of small nations. are to include health and welfare assistance, aid in the 
It was inevitable, of course, that differences of repatriation or return of displaced persons, and re- 
ssing opinion should arise among the delegates of forty- habilitation of public utilities so far as they can be 
OS) four nations, varying widely in their interests and repaired or restored to meet immediate needs. 
- ttaditions. Such differences as did appear, however, These supplies and services are to be furnished only 
; jel due not to disagreement concerning the urgency to victims of war in areas liberated from enemy oc- 
a @}0f relief and rehabilitation measures, but to diver- cupation. This means, first, that no attempt was 
fences concerning broader political and economic made by the Council to consider measures of relief 
e Y Ssues. In the absence of an over-all international or- and rehabilitation in enemy or ex-enemy territories, 
ty SM} gnization in which such divergences might be dis- except for measures that may be in the interest of the 


ci fussed not only by the great powers but among all = United Nations (such as prevention of epidemics) ; 
the united and associated nations, it was not surpris- and, second, that the scope of UNRRA activities does 
or that issues going far beyond the problems of re- not include countries not occupied by the enemy, for 

lief and rehabilitation should have been aired at example, India. 
“ps [antic City. 2. UNRRA AND COMBINED BOARDS. It 
The five main topics around which discussion cen- was agreed, from the outset, that the activities of the 


itred were the scope of UNRRA activities, UNRRA’s Administration should be “so conducted that they do 
43 Vilations with United Nations supply agencies, the not impede the effective prosecution of the war,” 

















and should be carried out in fullest collaboration 
with the military authorities in any given area. There- 
fore, it appeared essential that “demands upon sup- 
plies and shipping presented by the Administration 
should be coordinated with other demands through 
the use of existing intergovernmental agencies con- 
cerned with the allocation of supplies and shipping.” 

The relations of the Administration with such 
agencies raised a crucial question, since the agencies 
most directly concerned are the so-called Combined 
Boards (on food, raw materials, shipping, and pro- 
duction and resources) on which Britain, the United 
States and, in two instances, Canada are represented. 
The small nations of Europe, some of which even in 
wartime are supplying nations either because they 
have shipping (Norway, Holland and France), or 
because their colonies are sources of United Nations 
materials (Holland, France and Belgium), would 
like to be represented on the Combined Boards. Fail- 
ing that, these countries, which still have gold and 
foreign exchange and expect to pay in full for any 
relief supplies they may acquire, wanted to have 
direct access to the Combined Boards, by-passing 
UNRRA. Such an arrangement would have placed 
at a serious disadvantage countries like Poland, 
Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Greece, which have 
little or no gold and foreign exchange and will there- 
fore need to receive relief either as an outright gift 
or through some form of lend-lease procedure, and 
would have defeated the very purpose for which 
UNRRA has been created. 


The compromise finally reached was that all mem- 
ber governments shall keep UNRRA fully informed 
of all their relief and rehabilitation requirements, 
“whatever arrangements may be contemplated for 
procurement or finance.” Director General Herbert 
H. Lehman, for his part, will present before the in- 
tergovernmental allocating agencies “the over-all re- 
quirements for relief and rehabilitation of all areas 
liberated and to be liberated in order to permit a 
global consideration of these needs with all other 
needs.” The successful working out of this compro- 
mise will depend on the degree of cooperation given 
the Administration both by the principal supplying 
countries which control the Combined Boards, and 
by the countries in need of relief which have gold, 
foreign exchange and ships at their disposal. Final 
decision in all cases will presumably rest with the 
Combined Boards working in close collaboration with 
the Combined Chiefs of Staff. 


3. DISTRIBUTION OF RELIEF. Once relief 
supplies have been obtained, allocated, and trans- 
ported to a given area, such supplies, according to a 
decision of the Council, shall “at no time” be used 
“as a political weapon, and no discrimination shall 
be made in the distribution of supplies because of 


——_ ___=_=_===—=—=_=—=—=SSSSSSSS—=_ Page Two 














race, creed or political belief.” An element of flexipy 
ity, however, was introduced by the recommendati 
that “relief in all its aspects shall be distributed, 
dispensed fairly on the basis of the relative needs, 
the population in the area,” and by the provision 

“in determining the relative needs of the populaticy 
there may be taken into account the diverse nee) 
caused by discriminatory treatment by the enep 
during its occupation of the area.” This would mak 
it possible for UNRRA to give priorities on supplig 
for those groups—for example, Jews in Poland, ¢ 
civilian hostages from all occupied countries 
specially discriminated against by the Nazis. 
















It was agreed that, in general, the responsibilj 
for distribution of relief and rehabilitation supplig 
within a given area should be borne “by the gover 
ment or recognized national authority which exe, 
cises administrative authority in the area.” Delegaty 
representing a number of the occupied countries ¢ 
Europe—notably those of Western Europe—madej 
clear that their governments intend to handle the dj 
tribution of supplies (especially those they have pai 
for in full) through their own distribution channe 
and expressed the belief that they have sufficient pe: 
sonnel and adequate machinery for the performane 
of this task. A different situation is expected to exig 
in the countries of Eastern Europe and in Asia, ani 
the problems of individual countries will have 
be explored through negotiations between their gov 
ernments and the Director General. While the Cou 
cil recommended that “the Director General shoul! 
be kept fully informed concerning the distribution d 
relief and rehabilitation supplies within any recipies 
areas,” it made no provision for on-the-spot observe 
tion by UNRRA officials of the extent to which it 
recommendations concerning nondiscriminatory dis 
tribution are being fulfilled. 


4. DISPLACED PERSONS. There was consider 
able discussion, during the Council meeting, regard 
ing the categories of displaced persons for whose te 
patriation or return UNRRA should be responsible 
It was finally decided that UNRRA should assist noi 
only the repatriation of citizens of the various Unite 
Nations to their countries of origin, but also the t 
turn of United Nations nationals and of stateles 
persons “who have been driven as a result of the wal 
from their places of settled residence in countries 
which they are not nationals, to those places.” Thi 
provision would empower UNRRA, for example, t 
arrange for the return to Burma, the Malay Statts 





or the Philippines of Chinese residing in these arei 
before the war instead of repatriating them automat 
ically to China; and also to return stateless Jews 
Russians and so on to countries, other than those @ 
their origin, in which they may have been residinf 













7 
“iY 


ds ¢ 


Ltiog 
lee 
nem 


pig 
d, a 
es 


bilit 
lie 
Vern 
exer: 
Late 
es oi 
ide i 
e di 
pai 


ine 


ve ti 
"gow 
“Out: 
r0uld 
on of 
pient 
serve 
ch its 


sider- 
gard 
se fe 
sible 
st not 
inited 
1€ fe 
teless 
e wil 
ies of 


le, t 
tates, 
areas 
mat 
Jews, 
SE 0 


iding 








—_—_— 
—_— 


before the Nazi invasion. UNRRA, however, is not 
to have any responsibility for the repatriation of 
prisoners of war unless requested by the member 
government concerned. 


5. FINANCING OF UNRRA. The question of 
financing the work of UNRRA was another major 
item on the agenda of the Council. The financial plan 
finally adopted after considerable redrafting was that 
introduced by the United States. This plan provides 
that “each member whose home territory has not been 
occupied by the enemy shall make a contribution for 
participation in the work of the Administration, ap- 
proximately equivalent to one per cent of the na- 
tional income of the country for the year ending 
June 30, 1943 as determined by the member govern- 
ment.”” The Council, however, recognized “that there 
are cases in which its recommendations may conflict 
with particular demands arising from the continuance 
of the war or may be excessively burdensome be- 
cause of peculiar situations,’ and that the amount 
and character of the contribution recommended 
should be subject to such conditions. Member gov- 
ernmments in this category may, of course, contribute 
additional amounts, while those whose homelands 
are now occupied may contribute, if they wish, to the 
work of Administration outside their own territory. 

It is estimated that the total cost of UNRRA op- 
erations for a contemplated two-year period will be 
beween two and two and a half billion dollars, of 
which the United States, on the basis of one per cent 
of its 1943 national income, would contribute about 
60 per cent (probably $1,135,000,000), and the 
United Kingdom 15 per cent (about $320,000,000), 
the balance being contributed by the British Do- 
minions, India, and the countries of Latin America. 
It should be pointed out that, in the period 1917-21 
the United States, through private contributions and 
government grants, contributed over two billion dol- 
lars to the relief of war-stricken Europe. The fear ex- 
pressed in some quarters that UNRRA would be- 
come a sort of international WPA was answered by 
Director General Lehman on December 10, when he 
told the House Foreign Affairs Committee that 
UNRRA’s resources “must be used only to meet the 
most pressing needs,” and “not dissipated in financ- 
ing long-range reconstruction projects, however 
sound and praiseworthy they may be.” The success of 
UNRRA, he added, ‘‘must be measured by the speed 
with which it is able to liquidate itself; the sooner 
it becomes unnecessary, the greater will have been its 
accomplishments.” 





Page Three 





—————_— 


My Native Land, by Louis Adamic. New York, Harper, 
1948. $3.75 


Authentic and vivid story of Yugoslavia’s resistance to 
the Axis and the civil war now raging between Chetniks 
and Partisans. Adamic believes the Big Three’s attitude 
toward the Partisans will determine future Allied policy 
with respect to other people’s movements throughout the 
world. 





Here Is Your War, by Ernie Pyle. New York, Henry Holt, 
1943. $3.00 


One more book on North Africa, but with a difference. 
Running along with the story of the campaign and the 
soldiers’ lives is the warm chronicle of personal anecdotes 
which make good reading for those at home. 


The Lady and the Tigers, by Olga S. Greenlaw. New York, 
Dutton, 1948. $3.00 


To the brilliant story of the Flying Tigers the wife of 
Chennault’s Chief of Staff adds an exciting, warmly per- 
sonal tribute, with a neat bit of malice toward some of 
their other chroniclers. 


Way for America, by Alexander Laing. New York, Duell, 
Sloan and Pearce, 1942. $3.50 


Librarian, novelist and poet, the author assails the 
faults of those at home and abroad who claimed to serve 
democratic ideals in pre-war days. He makes a studiedly 
passionate appeal for what he defines as real democracy. 


Trees and Test Tubes, by Charles Morrow Wilson. New 
York, Henry Holt, 1943. $3.50 


An interestingly written history of rubber, which relates 
it to the present crisis. Better on the natural than the 
synthetic product, because the author has lived on a Cen- 
tral American experimental plantation. Text of the Baruch 
report is included. 


CEE SS SOS 


Christmas Gifts 


As another Christmas approaches, we remind 
FPA members and subscribers to give friends a 
membership in the Association or a Headline 
Series subscription. In the critical year ahead, 
your gift will be read, re-read, and shared as a 
living record of the war and the emerging post- 
war world. 


REGULAR MEMBERSHIP*...... . $5.00 
ASSOCIATE MEMBERSHIP* (open only 


to teachers, full-time students, librarians, 
social workers, the clergy, men and 
women in the armed forces, and employee 
groups of ten or more). .....++ ++ $3.00 


SPECIAL HEADLINE SERIES SUB- 
SCRIPTION (10 issues) ........ $2.00 


*Includes weekly Foreign Policy Bulletin and 
Headline Series. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 9, DgcemBER 17, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President ; DorotHy F. Lugr, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


#ne month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


B81 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





mee SH 


eres Oe ‘ 








Washington News Letter 





sitbea, 








Dec. 13.—What Republicans say now on Amer- 
ican foreign policy is heard around the world. Offi- 
cials of allied and neutral countries give weight to 
their words because they cannot disregard the possi- 
bility of a Republican victory in the 1944 Presidential 
election. Some of the views currently expressed by 
Republicans are so reserved that foreign observers 
here are beginning to wonder whether, in spite of 
the Moscow Declaration and the Connally Resolu- 
tion, it can yet be assumed that the United States will 
remain in political partnership with other countries 
after the war. 

HAS ROOSEVELT A DEFINABLE POLICY ? 
Republicans of isolationist background hesitate to 
make direct criticisms of President Roosevelt's course 
in foreign affairs, but some of them question it 
obliquely. Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio wrote, 
for example, in the December 11 Saturday Evening 
Post: “It is quite true that behind a front of simple 
cooperation the President may conceal a real inten- 
tion to bring about an international state or an im- 
perialist British-American control of the world.” As 
it happens, a British-American alliance was advo- 
cated by Thomas E. Dewey, Republican Governor of 
New York, not by President Roosevelt. On December 
4 Alfred M. Landon, Republican Presidential can- 
didate in 1936, asked a group of Senators: ‘‘Just what 
foreign policy does the President stand for?” 

Until Landon spoke, it was believed here that the 
foreign policy of the Administration was plain, and 
had two main objectives: (1) to win the war in close 
alliance with the other United Nations; and (2) to 
participate in an international peace-keeping political 
agency after the war. The second point was sub- 
scribed to by Secretary of State Hull at Moscow and 
was subsequently incorporated in the Connally Reso- 
lution, which the Senate passed by a vote of 85 to 5. 
It is true that the Administration has not explained 
in detail exactly what it hopes to accomplish through 
the generai international political organization called 
for by the Moscow accord or how it expects that or- 
ganization to avoid the weaknesses of the League of 
Nations. It is difficult to see, however, how this could 
have been done in advance of the Cairo and Teheran 
conferences at which, it is assumed, Britain, Russia, 
China and the United States did explore various 
aspects of post-war international collaboration. 

SURFACE AGREEMENT ON POSTWAR. In 
spite of this, there is, outwardly at least, remarkable 
national agreement on the postwar issue. The Ad- 


ministration has sought to achieve an aim that would 
have the support of the country rather than merely 
the Democratic party. The Republican party itself, 
through its Postwar Advisory Council, adopted 4 
resolution at Mackinac Island on September 7 callin 
for “responsible participation by the United States in 
a post-war organization among sovereign nations to 
prevent military aggression and to obtain permanent 
peace with organized justice in the world.’’ Thus the 
Mackinac Resolution agrees both with the aim of the 
Moscow Declaration and the Connally Resolution— 
an international organization, and with their philoso. 
phy—anti-isolationism. 

The sensitiveness of politicians to the current 
strength of this philosophy was shown on December 
9, when Herbert Hoover, the last Republican Pres- 
ident, tried to make amends for Landon’s statement, 
He issued a statement to the press in New York on 
December 8 that Landon had not opposed the Mos- 
cow Declaration, nor was he against the inclusion 
of an identical foreign policy plank in the Repub 
lican and Democratic platforms next year. 

The positions taken by Landon in his talk to the 
Senators and by Taft in his Saturday Evening Post 
article are reminiscent of 1919, when Senator Henry 
Cabot Lodge told Jim Watson that he did not pro- 
pose to try to beat the Versailles Treaty ‘‘by frontal 
attack, but by the indirect method.” Lodge’s indirect 
method consisted of insistence on reservations; that 
of Landon and Taft on planting suspicions that the 
Administration has a hidden purpose in its espousal 
of international cooperation. Nor is it encouraging 
to hear pronouncements by influential businessmen at 
gatherings such as the National Association of Manu- 
facturers which indicate the belief that the United 
States can sell its goods after the war to an impov- 
erished world, yet still refuse to take the goods of 
other countries in payment. 

Under the circumstances, it is difficult for the other 
United Nations to know what our foreign policy is 
going to be when the war ends. They cannot tell 
how influential conservative Republican thought will 
prove to be; nor can they forecast what tack a Repub- 
lican Administration would take, since Republicans 
disagree among themselves. The United States, in the 
eyes of the world, seems highly undependable. For, 
six weeks after Secretary Hull had negotiated an 
agreement and Congress had voted to support his 
policy, some political leaders already hint they are 
reconsidering the matter. BLAIR BOLLES 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 

















accord 
of fre 
Withe 
ities a 
that w 
of the: 
whom 
The 
only a 
inals, 
other 
may 1 
upon « 
lo eva 


daim 


