

















General Library Entered as 2nd class matter 
— eersonier Root University of Michigan 
A genet Oo Ann Arbor, Mich. 
a amt MAY 
— dg 
- 
—I 
many 
y ate 
in the Py , — 
the n interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
i di. FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
f any | 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Ngton | Yor. XX, No. 28 May 2, 1941 
my AMERICA MUST CHOOSE 
Pp an 
the _ last contingents of the British Expeditionary rapidly reaching the stage of tension and nervous 
articy. Force withdrew from Greece, and the Axis vacillation characteristic of the pre-Munich atmos- 
gram, | press predicted a drive against Suez, the people of phere in France and Britain. The “war of nerves,” 
ies, in | Britain and the British Dominions closed their ranks which in Europe has always preceded German mili- 
- State | against discouragement. In his broadcast of April tary or economic pressure, is in full swing in the 
© new | 27, Prime Minister Churchill frankly acknowledged United States today. 
aff fa; { the defeat of Britain and its Balkan allies in Greece, At such a moment, it is the duty of every citizen 
»5 and | swell as the ‘‘vexatious and damaging defeat’ of to weigh, to the best of his ability, such facts about 
easury, | Imperial forces in Libya which, he admitted, had American foreign policy as can be obtained. Few 
croach | ken the British command by surprise. He denied, have access to the kind of confidential information 
1it the | however, that British setbacks in the Mediterranean that is available to the President of the United States. 
‘oreign had created any noticeable uneasiness in the coun- On the President, in the final analysis, rests the re- 
ronths, | ty. The war, he declared, would be decided in the sponsibility for giving the American people, as fully 
sis, but | West; and there he welcomed, ‘with indescribable and frankly as seems consonant with the national 
s own, | lief,” the announcement of President Roosevelt interest, the information on which he and his ad- 
tion to | that American naval vessels and flying boats should visers base both short-term and long-term decisions. 
patrol the waters of the Atlantic. But the President himself has indicated that he 
fund, ) UNITED STATES FACES GRAVE DECISIONS. would like to hear foreign policy discussed “over 
| along Mr. Churchill’s speech and President Roosevelt's the cracker-barrel” and in public forums. Until he 
ing the { S#tement about the Atlantic patrol brought home has given a clear lead to the people as to the course 
nt and | © the American people the gravity of the situation he believes best calculated to serve the interests of 
16 mil | “fronting not only Britain, but also the United the United States, the citizens are bound to be in 
regular States. For the most part, Americans have been al- turmoil regarding an issue which may be a matter 
atil the) 20st frivolously complacent: some because they op- of life and death to them. This issue is whether the 
urtment | Posed any action that might create a risk of war for United States should reverse its policy of aid to 
eceivel | te United States, others because they blindly as- Britain and concentrate solely on preparing for de- 
19 mit | Wmed that Britain, with American aid “short of fense of this country, or carry on its policy of aid to 
prox: wat,” would have little difficulty in defeating Hitler. Britain up to and including measures which might 
sr 1942 | Now that the Germans have proved, again, in the involve this country in a “shooting” war. 
dollars | Bélkans that modern totalitarian war is won not by Colonel Lindbergh, who has emerged as the lead- 
the tal speeches, or moral exhortations, or individual cour- ing spokesman for those who would reverse the 
ted the | 8° but by command of, superior machinery and policy of aid to Britain, which he has consistently 
aching tchnique, Americans who had jubilantly welcomed opposed, has called, quite legitimately, for clarifica- 
; of Greek and Yugoslav resistance have swung to the tion of the views of so-called interventionists. His 
sien other extreme of assuming that loss of the Balkans opponents, equally legitimately, have called for 
> path may mean defeat for Britain. In an emergency the clarification of the views of the America First ad- 
a new) eavity of which it would be irresponsible to under- herents. In all fairness, it should be said that both 
nou Stimate, the further course of the war may depend groups have avoided stating their ultimate conclu- 
one the state of American public opinion, which is sions, one reason being that neither can possibly 



































foresee all the contingencies that it might ultimately 
be called upon to face. 


President Roosevelt starts from the assumption 
that the Axis powers cannot win the war, provided 
the United States effectively becomes the “arsenal” 
of Britain. Where Administration leaders may be 
criticized for lack of clarity is that they have hitherto 
preferred to let events take their course. They have 
not indicated, in advance, that once the United States 
started producing armaments for Britain, it might 
find itself obligated to assure deliveries of these 
armaments, and that one step after another (whose 
exact nature cannot clearly be predicted at this 
stage), might ultimately lead to a state of war with 
Germany. They have not told the American people 
that the Nazi challenge can be met only by strenu- 
ous work and sacrifices to build a war machine com- 
parable to that of Germany. At the same time, it 
should be pointed out that, while President Roose- 
velt considers Britain our first line of defense, he has 
met, in advance, the arguments of the America First 
group by building a second line of defense in the 
Western Hemisphere through military and economic 
cooperation with Canada, construction of new bases 
in the Atlantic, and an active “good neighbor” pol- 
icy with Latin America. 

Colonel Lindbergh and his supporters, however, 
are also open to criticism, since they have not in- 
dicated the means by which they might attain their 
ultimate objectives. Lindbergh starts from the prem- 
ise that, while “it will be a tragedy for the entire 
world if the British Empire collapses,” Britain has 
no “reasonable chance of winning,” and that the 
United States cannot win this war for England, ‘‘re- 
gardless of how much assistance we send.” He there- 
fore contends that the United States, which in his 
opinion cannot conceivably be invaded, should con- 
centrate on developing its own interests and civiliza- 
tion in this hemisphere, without stating specifically 
how this can be done in case of German victory. 

TWO POSSIBLE COURSES. In weighing the 
two courses now open to the United States — to 
proceed with aid to Britain or withdraw into purely 
hemisphere defense—it is important to realize that 


Page Tw ——, 





POLICIES AND PROBLEMS OF THE U. S. NAVY 
by David H. Popper 25 cents 
An analysis of naval progress and problems, discussing 
the possibility of blockade and convoy operations by the 


U. S. Navy if the European war is prolonged; a two-ocean 
defense of the Americas if Britain is defeated. 


May 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 














—— 


no course this country can take is free from risks 
Further aid to Britain does, unquestionably, create 
the possibility of war with the Axis powers, although 
Germany may be expected to avoid a showdown| & 
with the United States as long as possible. Actiye 
participation in war would, in turn, have profound 
effects on the economy of the United States, and 
hence on its future political and social development 

At the same time, it must be recognized that with. 
drawal of aid to Britain by no means insures the | 
United States against future demands and pressure; | 
by a victorious Germany. Nor does it offer any as. 
surance that the United States will find security 
economic prosperity in hemisphere isolation, since 
many Latin American countries, far from being ip. 
terested in the creation of a continental empire un. 
der North American leadership, are oriented eo. 
nomically and culturally toward Europe, and may 
be expected to resume and expand their ties with 
Europe as soon as war is over. A greater German 
empire, commanding the man power and raw ma 
terial resources of the European continent, would be 
in a position to undersell the United States in eco. 
nomically backward areas like Latin America, unless 
this country, in turn, reduced prices and wages, and : 
consequently its standard of living. 

If the Gallup poll is to be taken as an accurate 
gauge of public opinion, 81 per cent of the people 
oppose entrance into the war (and thus agree with) 
Colonel Lindbergh), but 68 per cent favor going) ™ 
in if there is no other way to defeat the Axis powers. ” 
The fundamental contradiction has so far ham 
pered formulation of a coherent foreign policy, ata| 
time when decisiveness and coherence are essential 
to any effective action. The choice has to be made} th 
not in terms of material advantages—for the United Cc 
States must recognize that, at the end of the revolu-} ¢h 
tionary wars of the twentieth century, the world i| a 
knew in 1939 will have vanished beyond recall th 
The choice has to be made in terms of those im} 0 
ponderable values which, unfortunately, cannot bt} ha 
weighed and measured by figures of trade or num) Po 
bers of airplanes, but depend, in the last analysis} i. 
on the kind of philosophy man wants to live bj} th 

VERA MICHELES DEAN J 


six 
) 
} 











Ch 





F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: U.S. NAVAL AID TO BRITAIN | 
Speaker: A. Randle Elliott M. 
Date: May 4, 1941 

Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 


Station: NBC, blue network is | 
= Al 


CO! 











eel 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 28, May 2, 1941. 


Sais 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Natioss off 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Edivw 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 

F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


For 





— 


N risks, 
, Create | 
though 
wdown 
Active 
‘Ofound 
es, and 
pment, 
at with. 
ires the 





ressures | 
any as- 
urity or 
n, since 
cing in- 
Dire un- 
ed eco. | 
nd may | 
es with 
German 
aw ma- 
‘ould be 
in eCo- 
, unless 
yes, and 


accurate 


- people 





ee with 
r going| 
powers 
rc ham 
icy, ata 
>ssential 
ye made 
- United 
-revolu- 
world it 
| recall. 
Ose if 
nnot be 
or num 
analysis, 
live by. 
EAN 


———— 





. Nation 
AN, Béile 











A survey of local political developments within 
latin America during the past three months reveals 
few important changes. Two countries are, it is true, 
jo have new Presidents. On April 15 the Congress 
of HaiT1 picked Elie Lescot, Minister in Washing- 
jn, to succeed Sténio Vincent, who has been in 
fice for the past decade. In VENEZUELA the term 
of President Aleazar Lépez Contreras, chief execu- 
tive since the death of Dictator Gémez in late 1935, 
ame to an end on April 19. Lépez Contreras was 
tained as temporary head of the state while the 
wo houses of the Venezuelan Congress debated the 
hhoice of a successor. On April 28 former War and 
Navy Minister Isaias Medina Angarita was elected 
President by Congress, overwhelmingly defeating 
his novelist opponent, Rémulo Gallegos. Since both 
Lopez Contreras and Vincent could have remained 
in office had they wished, and since both men vir- 
ually dictated the selection of a successor, no pro- 
found changes in policy are looked for either in 
Venezuela or Haiti. 


More significant is the course of developments in 
CHILE. Here, for the past two years, a leftist Popu- 
lar Front government has been bucking a rightist 
majority in Congress. This situation was radically 
altered as the result of Congressional elections held 
on March 2, which returned leftist majorities in both 
houses. Unfortunately for the Popular Front, its 
component elements have been squabbling among 
themselves. Particularly bitter is the feud between 
Communists and Socialists. Annoyed by Communist 
charges that they had sold out to the United States 
and worried by heavy Communist gains at the polls, 
the Socialists have recently voted on more than one 
acasion with the conservative groups. This, in turn, 
has led the Radicals, third major element in the 
Popular Front, to threaten a Cabinet crisis which 
would have as its consequence the ejection of the 
three Socialist members. The situation was further 
complicated by the resignation on April 24 of the 
ix Radical Ministers, who had apparently lost the 
confidence of their own party. 

Congressional elections were also held —on 
March 16— in CoLompiA. Here results were in- 
conclusive. The Liberal party, in office since 1930, 
is badly divided, one faction supporting ex-President 
Alfonso Lopez (1934-38) who hopes to return to 
oflice in 1942, and another faction bitterly opposing 


TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA. 


By JOHN I. B. McCULLOCH 


Lépez on the basis of his alleged leftist sympathies. 
The Conservatives, led by mercurial, Yankee-baiting 
Laureano Gémez, are in a minority in the Chamber 
of Deputies, but control a larger single bloc of votes 
than either the Lopistas or anti-Lopistas taken alone. 
In Ecuapor, Congressional elections are scheduled 
for May. The Liberal party, which has controlled 
Ecuadorean politics for the last 45 years, is rent 
asunder, due largely to the inability of brilliant but 
austere lawyer-President Carlos Arroyo del Rio to 
win any measure of popularity for his régime. Both 
the Conservatives, whose leader Jacinto Jijén y 
Caamafio is now in California, and the Socialists— 
predominantly an intellectual group—hope to turn 
the situation to their advantage. Also on the alert 
for a favorable opportunity is ex-President José 
Maria Velasco Ibarra, stormy petrel of Ecuadorean 
politics, who was last reported launching political 
broadsides from his retreat in Buenos Aires. 


In ARGENTINA Acting President Ramén S. Cas- 
tillo established virtually a one-man régime on 
April 25, when he personally announced to the press 
that he would temporarily govern by decree. For the 
past few months Argentine politics have been dom- 
inated by uncertainty as to whether President 
Roberto Ortiz was capable of reassuming the reins 
of power laid down last summer. The Radical party 
— Argentina’s largest single political group — has 
been demanding the return of Ortiz, who was once a 
member of the Radicals, and is favorably disposed 
to them. Dissatisfied with the policies of Acting 
President Castillo (an old-line Conservative) and 
indignant over alleged electoral frauds in two Ar- 
gentine provinces, the Radicals refused to cooperate 
in legislative activity. Since, after ten years in the 
political wilderness, they finally obtained a majority 
in the Chamber of Deputies last spring, this attitude 
of noncooperation brought about a complete stand- 
still, and the government has been unable to obtain 
appropriations. Lately, a Senate investigation com- 
mittee turned in a report that the gravely affected 
eyesight of diabetic President Ortiz rendered utterly 
impossible his return to power. Thereupon the Radi- 
cal party reluctantly abandoned its intransigent 
attitude on April 4. Its decision has not yet been 
ratified by the party organs, however, and the legis- 
lative boycott is still in force. 


For more extensive coverage on Latin American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS, a bi-weekly newsletter edited by Mr. McCulloch. For sample 
copy of this publication, write to the Washington Bureau, Foreign Policy Association, 1200 National Press Building, Washington, D.C. 














Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Apr. 18.—The crucial issue of naval protection 
for American supplies shipped to Britain—an issue 
upon which United States entry into the European 
war may depend—came to the fore last week in three 
major speeches by leading United States govern- 
ment officials, and was significantly reviewed by 
President Roosevelt at his press conference on April 
25. These public statements clearly indicated that 
convoys—long a point of heated discussion in Wash- 
ington, and opposed this week in a formal resolu- 
tion sponsored by Senator Tobey of New Hampshire 
—are not the only naval measures being considered 
by the United States in its program of aid to Britain. 
The statements also revealed the Administration's 
firm conviction that this country must now move 
actively to insure delivery of war materials con- 
signed to Britain and its allies under the lease-lend 
program, which is costing the United States $7,000,- 
000,000, including $1,300,000,000 in army and navy 
equipment. 

Secretary of State Hull, speaking at the annual 
meeting of the American Society of International 
Law on April 24, declared that, by helping the demo- 
cratic nations resist aggression, the United States is 
“acting primarily for its own safety... . Were the 
* control of the seas by the resisting nations lost, the 
Atlantic would no longer be an obstacle—rather, it 
would become a broad highway for a conqueror 
moving westward.” Although it is a huge task to 
provide the fighting instruments needed to preserve 
control of the Atlantic ‘by the free countries of the 
world,” Secretary Hull stated, the United States 
effort to provide these instruments “now becomes a 
measure of our intelligence.” 


Secretary of the Navy Knox, addressing the 
American Newspaper Publishers Association on 
April 24, asserted that the United States is “irre- 
vocably committed” to see that the aggressor nations 
do not win this war, and “having gone thus far, we 
can only go on. Hitler cannot allow our war supplies 
and food to reach England—he will be defeated if 
they do. We cannot allow our goods to be sunk in 
the Atlantic—we shall be beaten if they do. . . . This 
is our fight.” Mayor LaGuardia, speaking in Ottawa 
on April 23 as a member of the Permanent Joint 
Board for Canadian-United States Defense, declared 
that President Roosevelt and the American people 
recognize their task to provide military equipment 





for Britain and “to get it where it belongs.” The 
Permanent Joint Board for Defense, he said, wag 
“most realistic’ in planning an American defense 
that extends 1,000 miles offshore from “the farthest 
point of either the Canadian or the United States 
coast.” 

President Roosevelt on April 25 agreed with the 
statements of Secretaries Hull and Knox that means 
must be found to get quick full aid to Britain and 


that “this is our fight.” The government, said the | 








President, has no idea at this time of sending naval | 
or air convoys to escort merchant vessels to England. | 


The Pan-American neutrality patrol, however, is be. | 
ing extended farther out into the Atlantic and, when. | 


ever necessary for purposes of hemisphere defense, 
might extend its operations into any part of the 
world. This neutrality patrol, first ordered into ac- 
tion on September 6, 1939, has kept the government 
informed on movements of belligerent warcraft. In 
the present emergency the patrol, it is stated, will 
broadcast its observations “in plain English,” to help 
British merchant vessels avoid contact with hostile 
warships and planes. 

OTHER NAVAL MEASURES CONTEM- 
PLATED. Both the convoy and patrol systems, by 
themselves, have serious deficiencies which would 
impair their effectiveness in safeguarding shipments 
from the United States to Britain. Some combina- 
tion of the two plans, therefore, will probably be 
adopted. Large numbers of merchant ships travel- 
ing in convoy present an easy target for commerce 
destroyers; the speed of a convoy, moreover, is lim- 
ited to that of its slowest vessel, and it can scarcely 
escape attack once it has been sighted. On the other 


hand, the patrol system requires an almost unattain- — 


able number of warships and planes to cover the 
vast ocean surface in which attack might be ex 
pected. Since the United States is not formally at 
war, the “neutrality patrol’—unlike British naval 
patrols—is not intended for direct measures against 
raiding submarines or aircraft, and its possible ef 
ficiency is thus further reduced. In view of these 
difficulties, recent reports indicate that the navy con- 
templates concentrating its forces to maintain 4 
“safe channel” (perhaps a hundred miles wide) 


across the Atlantic. While the dangers inherent in , 
all these plans for American naval action are fully | 


recognized in Washington, the perilous threat to the 
entire program of United States aid to Britain has 
necessitated their immediate consideration. 

A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 











