


ao © ws Dd 
_ fh 


—~ mw w’ 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vor. XIX, No. 7 


eEo7~ 


DECEMBER 8, 1939 





How will the European war affect commercial relations 
between the United States and Latin America? Read: 


WAR AND 
UNITED STATES-LATIN AMERICAN TRADE 


by Howard J]. Trueblood 


25¢ 





MAR 2 9 isd; 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 




















FINLAND STANDS UP TO U.S.S.R. 





HE Soviet invasion of Finland on November 30 

aroused even more profound indignation through- 
out the world than Germany's conquest of Poland. 
Since the suspension of Soviet-Finnish negotiations 
in Moscow on November 13, the Soviet press had 
been vilifying the government of Premier Cajander, 
whom it accused of serving the ‘imperialist’ inter- 
ests of Britain, Sweden and the United States. This 
campaign of unbridled invective reached fever pitch 
on November 26, when the Soviet government de- 
dared that a Finnish battery had fired on its frontier 
forces, and demanded that Finnish troops be with- 
drawn 12 or 15 miles from the border. 


The Finnish government, in a note of Novem- 
ber 27, denied Moscow's accusation, and asserted 
that, on the contrary, firing had occurred on the 
Soviet side of the border. It offered, however, to dis- 
cuss the Soviet proposal with a view to removing 
troops from both sides of the border, and suggested 
joint investigation of the incident by the two coun- 
ties. To a crescendo of country-wide meetings, at 
which Soviet workers demanded drastic punishment 
of “imperialist” aggressors, Moscow, on Novem- 
ber 29, denounced its non-aggression pact with Fin- 
land. This action was taken before the Finnish Min- 
ister in Moscow had had the opportunity to present 
a conciliatory note from his government, whose de- 
livery appears to have been purposely delayed by 
the Soviet authorities. In a speech broadcast on No- 
vember 30 Premier Molotov declared that, contrary 
to the “malicious libel’ and “infamous slander’ 
published in the foreign press, the Soviet govern- 
ment had no desire to conquer the whole of Finland 
and incorporate it into the U.S.S.R. The Soviet 
Union, he claimed, continued to regard Finland “as 
a sovereign, independent state,” but insisted that it 
should adopt a “friendly attitude” toward Moscow. 

Confronted by Soviet invasion, the government of 





Premier Cajander, which had just received a vote 
of confidence, resigned, and a new cabinet headed 
by Risto Ryti, well-known international banker, was 
set up on December 1. In this cabinet V. A. Tanner, 
Finance Minister under Premier Cajander, who had 
participated in the Soviet-Finnish negotiations — 
and, according to Premier Molotov, had blocked their 
consummation—assumed the post of Foreign Min- 
ister. Premier Ryti immediately declared that Fin- 
land was ready to negotiate a settlement with the 
Soviet Union, but would not consent to bargain away 
its independence. His cabinet’s proposal for peace 
negotiations was transmitted to the Soviet govern- 
ment on December 3 by M. Winter, Swedish Min- 
ister in Moscow. 


“PEOPLE'S GOVERNMENT” OF TERIJOKI. 
On December 1, however, the Soviet radio had an- 
nounced the formation of a new “People’s Govern- 
ment” for Finland in Terijoki, a small seaside village 
near the Soviet border, headed by a Finnish Com- 
munist, Otto Kuusinen, who had lived in exile in 
the Soviet Union for nearly twenty years. According 
to a declaration published on December 1, Finland 
will not join the Soviet Union, but will conclude 
with it a pact of mutual assistance, and obtain Soviet 
Karelia. The nature of the régime, said the declara- 
tion, “cannot be decided by the working class”—a 
notable departure from the Soviet revolutionary pro- 
gram in 1917, which may indicate that Moscow is 
seeking to enlist the sympathies of ‘‘popular fronts” 
in neighboring countries. Further evidence of this 
new tendency is given by the economic program of 
the “‘people’s government,” which includes complete 
nationalization of big industries and banks, but only 
partial nationalization of medium and small indus- 
tries; confiscation and distribution of large landed 
estates, but preservation of small farms. What is 
especially interesting about this program is that it 














conforms, in its broad outlines, with the program 
advocated by German Nazis, and may represent an 
attempt by Moscow to outbid Nazi propaganda in 
countries where there is a strong class of farm- 
owners and small artisans and shopkeepers. 


MAIN ISSUES IN CONFLICT. In spite of the 
fact that Soviet preparations for an attempt to obtain 
bases in Finland had been obvious for a long time, 
and had been known to France and Britain at least 
since last March, the world appears again to have 
been taken by surprise; and there is real danger that 
genuine sympathy for the Finns, combined with fear 
of communism—in many cases equally genuine, but 
in others a screen for opposition to all social reform 
— will precipitate a sort of mass hysteria against 
Moscow. It might therefore be useful to recapitulate 
some of the salient features of the Soviet-Finnish 
conflict. 


1. Soviet-Finnish Relations. Finland, for centuries a 
province of Sweden, was annexed by Tsarist Russia in 1809, 
and remained a part of the Russian Empire until March 
1917, when its right to self-government was recognized by 
the Russian Provisional Government. Following the Bol- 
shevik revolution of November 1917 in Russia, Finland 
was torn by civil war between Finnish Reds, who had the 
support of the Russian régime, and the Finnish Whites led 
by General (now Marshal) Mannerheim, who today com- 
mands the Finnish army, and at that time had the support 
of Germany. 


The independence of Finland was recognized by the So- 
viet government in 1921. After that date, there were no 
major clashes between Finland and the Soviet Union, ex- 
cept for friction regarding treatment of Finnish inhabitants 
in Soviet Karelia, an area the Soviet government, during re- 
cent negotiations, offered to cede in return for naval and air 
bases in Finland. Finnish public sentiment, however, has 
been more sympathetic to Germany, Britain and the Scan- 
dinavian countries than to the U.S.S.R.; most of the Finnish 
products, which before 1917 were sold in the Russian Em- 
pire, have been exported to Britain; and many Finns hoped, 
until last August, that Nazi Germany would prove a bul- 
wark against communism. The Soviet government rightly 
or wrongly believed that Germany, in its eastward expan- 
sion—which France and Britain, until March 1939, had 
shown no intention of checking—would use Finland and 
the Baltic countries as bases for attack on Soviet territory. 
It was therefore determined to beat Germany at its own 
game, and get there first. The Allies have now revealed— 
what had already been suspected—that Moscow had de- 
manded bases in the Baltic countries and Finland as the 
ptice of its assistance to the Allies against Germany. The 
Allies refused to pay this price on the ground that it would 
infringe on the sovereignty of small countries. These coun- 
tries, however, in the absence of a strong international or- 
ganization which might have safeguarded them from both 
German and Soviet encroachments, were unable to with- 
stand pressure by their powerful neighbors. The refusal of 
the Allies was a decisive factor in bringing about the Soviet- 
German pact. 


2. Soviet Aims in Finland. Soviet aims in Finland are 
political and strategic, rather than economic. The chief 
wealth of Finland are its lumber, which has been exported 
principally to Britain, and its nickel mines, which were 


Page Two 








—<——— 


being developed by the International Nickel Company, , 
British-controlled enterprise. These British trade and mip. 
ing interests are the main reason why Soviet leaders—fg. 
lowing conclusion of a deal with Germany, who until they 
had been regarded as the arch-instigator of Finnish hostility 
to Moscow—denounced the influence of British “imperial. 
ists” in Finland. Sweden, too, has been apprehensive fp. 
garding a Soviet-Finnish agreement that might give the 
U.S.S.R. control of the Aland Islands, from which Sovig 


forces might menace Sweden’s shipments of iron ore ty 
Germany. 


What Moscow wants in Finland above all are strategic 
bases, from which it could resist future invasion by Ger. 
many and/or the Allies, and the ice-free port of Petsamo, 
It is not improbable that, should the Soviet Union succeed 
in defeating Finland, it might then seek control of ice-free 





ports on the western coast of Norway. This would not only 
enable it to menace Britain but, most important of all | 
would give it a strong card at the next peace conference 
from which it is determined not to be excluded, as it was 
from the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 and the Munich 
Conference in 1938. 


3. Imperialism or World Revolution? The Sovie | 
Union has thus resumed the imperialist objectives of Tsaris 
Russia, both in the Baltic and in the Balkans. Its imperial. 
ism, however, is a revolutionary imperialism, similar to that 
of Napoleon, who carried the ideas of the French revolu. 
tion throughout Europe in the baggage van of his conquer- 
ing armies. The extent to which Moscow’s revolutionary 
ideas will succeed depends not merely on the military force 
at the disposal of threatened countries, but on the degree | 
of their internal unity and stability. One of the principal 
reasons for the rapid disintegration of Poland was that 
this multinational state was torn by dissensions both be 
tween Poles and national minorities, and between rival Pol- 
ish parties. In this respect Finland, with its high degree of 
national homogeneity and social equality offers much great- 
er resistance to Soviet propaganda. One lesson to be drawn 





from Finland’s case is that the spread of communism mus | 
be combated not by mere denunciation of its doctrines, but | 
by genuine efforts to on economic and social con- | 


ditions which offer a breeding-ground for communist ideas. 


4. The Fruits of International Anarchy. Soviet inva 
sion of Finland has branded the U.S.S.R. in many countries 
as Public Enemy No. 1, momentarily eclipsing the similar 
activities of Germany, Italy and Japan. The methods of 
Moscow are certainly no better, but neither are they worse, 
than those of Hitler and Mussolini. The real issue at stake 
is not the relative brutality of this or that aggressor, but the 
fact that, as long as international anarchy continues, each 
power, irrespective of its political or economic system, will 
take advantage of the resulting disorder on the theory that 
“if I don’t get him, he'll get me.”” There are already many 


signs that Soviet invasion of Finland might serve as a signal | 


for the formation of a common front against the U.S.S.R. 
It is not impossible that Germany might invite the Allies 
to abandon war in the West for the sake of launching 4 
crusade against the Soviet Union. Such a crusade would 
have the support of all countries which fear either com 
munism or Russian imperialism—among them Italy and 
Japan. It should be emphatically pointed out, however, that 
an anti-Soviet crusade, no matter how great its justification 
on other grounds, would not prove a remedy from the state 
of international anarchy which has fostered aggression from 
many quarters in the past decade, and would merely spread 
it to the four corners of the earth. The antidote for anarchy 
is not world war, but the establishment of a strong interna 











3~> 
tional « 
only ¥ 
securit 


On 
comp: 
erties 
1938 
when 
the si 
cision 
ruled 
able | 
fixed 
point 
may 
vestir 
ten j 
lowe 
nor | 
pani¢ 
prior 
ernm 
book 
the ti 


W 
actio 
and | 
the 
no f 
mad 
Dep 
quat 
com: 
actic 
dipl 
worl 
com 
host 
may 
the 
oil 
fina 
dire 
disp 
tion 
mer 
the 
sOCi 

i 
tuti 
FOR 


Head 
Enter 


2 





a 


ol. 


wo 








ust | 


but 


On | 


Va- 
ries 
ilar 

of 
rse, 
ake 
the 


will 
hat 
any 





nal | 


> 
lies 


uld 





ve 


A et 








as age 
tional organization, whose members would be concerned not 
only with their own national interests, but also with the 
security and prosperity of other, and weaker, countries. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


LATIN AMERICA—MEXICAN OIL 
AND CUBAN POLITICS 


OIL FIRMS LOSE. The efforts of the foreign oil 
companies to regain control of their Mexican prop- 
erties expropriated by the government in March 
1938 reached another dead end on December 2, 
when the Mexican Supreme Court unanimously held 
the seizure to be constitutional. In a subsidiary de- 
cision, carried by a three to one vote, the court also 
ruled that the expropriation decree applied to mov- 
able goods—such as office supplies—as well as the 
fixed property of the companies. Aside from these 
points, the court ruled that, while the companies 
may claim compensation for legitimate capital in- 
vestments, the government may defer payment for 
ten years. Moreover, no compensation will be al- 
lowed for hypothetical profits on oil in the ground 
nor for the cancellation of concessions. The com- 
panies, however, are to be paid for oil extracted 
prior to expropriation and sold by the Mexican gov- 
ernment, and they will be allowed to recover their 
books and records as well as credits outstanding at 
the time of expropriation. 


With this decision, the possibilities of further 
action in the Mexican courts have been exhausted, 
and the Mexican government is clearly the victor in 
the long legal struggle. The issue, however, is by 
no means closed, and an attempt will probably be 
made to exert diplomatic pressure through the State 
Department, which has demanded “prompt, ade- 
quate and effective” compensation on behalf of the 
companies. It is difficult to envisage what further 
action beyond additional representations on the 
diplomatic front might be made within the frame- 
work of the “Good Neighbor” policy, which has be- 
come increasingly important since the outbreak of 
hostilities in Europe. Hence, although moral support 
may be given by the State Department to supplement 
the economic weapons and propaganda used by the 
oil companies against Mexico, it is believed that 
final solution of the problem can only come through 
direct agreement between the actual parties to the 
dispute. The unyielding stand of both the corpora- 
tions and the Mexican government on the funda- 
mental question of individual property rights versus 
the right of the state to protect its own economic and 
social interests will prove a difficult obstacle. 

Before the Supreme Court decision on the consti- 
tutionality of expropriation, it was widely reported 





Page Three = 





ee 


that arrangements were being made for the Mexican 
oil administration to sell its entire surplus oil pro- 
duction — amounting to about 2,000,000 barrels 
monthly — in the United States. In some quarters it 
is believed that negotiations for this sale have been 
concluded and an agreement reached with an Amerti- 
can company as yet unidentified. This plan, however, 
involves the importation of Mexican oil for re-export 
rather than consumption in this country. In either 
event, such an agreement would afford welcome eco- 
nomic aid to Mexico, whose oil marketing problems 
have increased since the outbreak of war. Revenues 
from this source might also give the government the 
financial basis for a new offer to the oil companies. 


BATISTA PLANS PRESIDENTIAL RACE. The 
political history of Cuba is evidently entering a new 
phase with the emergence of Colonel Fulgencio 
Batista, the strong man of the Island for over six 
years, as a candidate for the Presidency in the elec- 
tions to be held on February 28. Colonel Batista is 
expected to be nominated within the near future by 
a coalition consisting of the Liberals, Nationalists, 
National Democrats and Communists, which sup- 
ported the government in the elections to the Con- 
stituent Assembly last month. The way for Colonel 
Batista’s candidacy had been prepared by the an- 
nouncement of his retirement from the command of 
the army on December 6. The leader of the 1933 
revolution, who has since been content to remain 
technically behind the scenes, is thus submitting his 
power to the risk of a popular vote. 


The Presidential ambitions of Colonel Batista 
have been an open secret for some time, but it was 
thought possible that the defeat of his forces in 
the November 15 elections would prompt reconsid- 
eration. These elections for delegates to the Constitu- 
ent Assembly—charged with the task of preparing a 
new constitution—resulted in 35 seats for Batista 
factions and 41 for the opposition. Among the lat- 
ter, the Cuban Revolutionary party headed by for- 
mer President Ramén Grau San Martin accounted 
for 18, while 15 were won by the Democratic Re- 
publicans led by another ex-President, Mario G. 
Menocal. The remaining eight opposition delegates 
were divided equally between the revolutionary 
ABC party and ex-President Miguel Mario Gomez’ 
supporters. In the light of these results, the Presi- 
dential possibilities are at best confusing, and it is 
not yet known what opposition candidates will be 
put in the field. Moreover, since the November elec- 
tions were fought on a straight pro- and anti-govern- 
ment basis, no clear-cut issues have emerged. 


How arp J. TRUEBLOOD 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. 


Vol. XIX, No. 7, DEcEMBER 8, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nations 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dean, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
S81 F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Tr ney eens ee eo 


ann a NE a 





Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Dec. 4.—Washington reacted more sharply to the 
Soviet invasion of Finland last week than to any 
development in Europe since the outbreak of war. 
During the 72 hours from noon of November 29 
to noon of December 2, the White House and the 
State Department took four steps in swift succes- 
sion: (1) dispatch of a formal tender of good offices 
to aid in a peaceful settlement; (2) an appeal to 
both governments to refrain from bombing civilian 
populations from the air; (3) a statement by the 
President condemning the Soviet Union’s “wanton” 
resort to force; and (4) the imposition of a “moral 
embargo” on sales of aircraft to nations resorting to 
unprovoked bombing. 

President Roosevelt's strongly worded condemna- 
tion followed rejection by Moscow of the American 
tender of good offices—previously accepted by the 
Finnish government—and receipt of official reports 
confirming the bombing of Helsinki. The statement, 
read by the President at his press conference on De- 
cember 1, declared that the news of Soviet naval 
and military bombings “came as a profound shock 
to the government and people of the United States,” 
and that “all peace-loving peoples” will “unani- 
mously condemn this new resort to military force as 
the arbiter of international differences.” The present 
resort to arms “makes insecure the independent ex- 
istence of small nations in every continent and 
jeopardizes the rights of mankind to self govern- 
ment.” 

“MORAL EMBARGO.” Mr. Roosevelt's request 
that American aircraft manufacturers and exporters 
refrain from selling to nations which are “obviously 
guilty of such unprovoked bombing” marks the first 
extension of the policy laid down by Secretary Hull 
eighteen months ago against the shipment of military 
airplanes and equipment to Japan. 

In the case of Japan, this use of discretionary power 
has enabled the State Department to maintain an 
embargo which has proved to be almost as effective 
as a legal prohibition. Secretary Hull’s condemnation 
of bombing, which named no specific country, was 
made on June 11, 1938. It was followed by a circular 
letter from the Department informing all aircraft 
manufacturers that “the United States Government 
is strongly opposed to the sale of airplanes or aero- 
nautical equipment’’ which would “aid or encour- 
age” the bombing of civilian populations, and that 
the Department would “with great regret” issue 
licenses for the export of “‘any aircraft, aircraft arma- 


ments, aircraft engines, aircraft parts, aircraft ac. 
cessories, aerial bombs or torpedoes’’ to countries 
engaged in such practices. Since July 1938 export of 
military aircraft to Japan has ceased, and the total 
value of licenses for civil aircraft equipment has 
dropped to $2,249,000. 

In the case of Russia, the same procedure is con. 
templated, even if the President should decide to 
invoke the Neutrality Act. In either situation the 
effect would be to permit exports to Finland while 
shutting off further sales to the Soviet Union. Since 
January 1939 American airplane shipments to Russia 
amounted to only $2,200,000. Some Washington ob- 
servers foresee the extension of the moral embargo 
to other European belligerents and point to the 
President's use of the phrase “unprovoked bomb- 
ing” as permitting a distinction between nations 
which initiate civilian attacks and those which take 
retaliatory measures. 


For the time being, however, the Administration 
is moving cautiously and resisting the strong pressure 
for breaking off diplomatic relations with the Soviet 
Union. Statements by leading Republicans, includ: 
ing former President Hoover, Senator Vandenberg, 
Senator Bridges and others, demanding either the 
recall of Ambassador Steinhardt or complete sever- 
ance of diplomatic ties have not altered Washing- 
ton’s decision to await further developments before 
taking such steps. 


Even the best informed Washington opinion is 
divided on the probable effects of this week’s events, 
Some officials believe that Russia's expansion in the 
Baltic and its anticipated expansion in southeastern 
Europe may place an increasing strain on relations 
between Moscow and Berlin, and possibly encourage 
moves by Germany for a deal with the Allies. Accord: 
ing to this theory, powerful elements in Germany, as 
well as in Britain, France and Italy, might welcome 
negotiations for a settlement in the West to check 
the rising menace in the East. Other officials—prob- 
ably a majority—do not share this ‘optimistic’ view, 
which they regard as wishful thinking. They believe 
that the understanding between Hitler and Stalin 
rests on the desire to unite against a common enemy, 
the British Empire, which has blocked the ambitions 
of both Germany and Russia. They doubt whether 
this working basis will be broken by minor conflicts 
of interest in the Balkans or the Baltic, and in the 
Far East they look for Soviet-German efforts to align 
Japan against the Western powers. 

W. T. STONE 











assist 
facto! 
have 


Nazi: 
pligh 
tions 
Sand 
prom 
many 
ing « 
land. 
belie 
the | 
path 
inro; 
Gert 
pres 


axis 
dem 
pilo 
the 

less 
mat 


| whi 





mes 
sibi 
life 
uin 
we: 
enc 
tha 
nis 
in 





