Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


failure An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
Japan's FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
United 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


TY POS} Vou. XXI, No. 9 


DECEMBER 19, 1941 


—_ U.S. AND RUSSIA ASSUME CENTRAL ROLES IN GLOBAL WAR 


1g the AS the Axis unfolds its grand strategy for global 
war, it becomes increasingly clear that the to- 
ch fur-} talitarian powers are directing a vast pincer move- 
Secre-| ment toward the Western Hemisphere from the 
I have} Pacific and the Atlantic, in an effort to disable the 
d with} one country in the world whose potential industrial 
production can outmatch that of Germany. The ini- 
tial blows struck during the Japanese surprise attacks 
hin 24} on American and British possessions in the Far East 
n Latin} have so far been warded off, but neither Britain nor 
war on} the United States has yet succeeded in inflicting 
repub-| counterblows on Japan. In the Pacific, the Western 
orm of} powers have been put on the defensive, and must 
ica was} now drastically revise their strategic plans. Before 
yy Nic.) they can assume the offensive, damaged vessels will 
temala, | have to be repaired, or reinforcements brought from 
Decem-| the Atlantic to the Pacific. 
‘ily ex-| Yet any weakening of Allied naval forces in the 
Atlantic is bound to create fresh problems for Brit- 
ain, which must keep its own fleet dispersed over 
the globe, for the protection of widely scattered 
possessions and the transportation of essential food- 
stuffs and raw materials. While British shipping 
= losses in the Atlantic during the month of Novem- 
dered | were the lowest since the fall of France (less 
por ‘ | than 100,000 tons, compared to 180,000 tons a 
25 “*yyll (Month officially declared lost from July through Oc- 
ality” | tober 1941), the situation there may become pre- 
do Bal-| @ous if the Germans succeed in renewing sub- 
o Ba Ke 
5 aban- | Matine warfare on a large scale. The British press 
it wa has already pointed out that Britain’s naval difficul- 
im bo uh tes would be greatly relieved if bases could be ob- 
tained in Eire. But on December 14 President de 
Valera declared that Eire would maintain its neutral- 
ity, even though he warned his people that war 
might come upon them “as a thief in the night.” 
The Anglo-American position in the Atlantic 
Would be further impaired if Hitler could obtain 
3 M. French bases in North and West Africa, notably 


Amett- | 
rent on 
s attack 
isphere. 


sal of { 
, has a 
ilso has 
eported 
piritual 


Dakar, as well as use of the French navy. While 
Vichy is seeking to maintain an attitude of strict 
neutrality in the conflict begun last week between 
the Axis and the United States, Marshal Pétain, for 
the first time since the Armistice, revealed on De- 
cember 12 that his government had protested against 
Nazi measures of reprisal in occupied France. 
Whether this protest indicates a change in temper 
on the part of Vichy it is as yet too early to predict. 
But Vichy’s decision, in turn, is bound to be affected 
by the fortunes of war on the eastern front. 


WITHDRAWAL OR RETREAT? When Ger- 
many invaded Russia on June 22, many French mili- 
tary observers had not expected Russia to last more 
than six weeks. Now that the Russians have not 
only put up successful resistance, but have actually 
taken the initiative in some sectors, Vichy’s estimate 
of the future may have to be revised. The jubilant 
news from Moscow must, of course, be weighed 
against Nazi assertions that the German army is 
withdrawing from Russia according to a pre- 
arranged plan. It is certainly conceivable that the 
Germans might want to withdraw troops for use on 
other fronts, where the weather is more propitious 
for a winter campaign — the Near East or Africa. 
But one thing does seem clear: the German offensive 
against Leningrad, Moscow and Rostov has failed, 
and the Germans have paid a tremendous price in 
terms of men and material for this frustrated 
offensive. 

True, the losses in turn inflicted by Germany on 
Russia have impaired the military and industrial 
power of the Soviet Union. The cost of Russia’s re- 
sistance against an army that had been regarded as 
invincible explains the reluctance of the Soviet lead- 
ers to open a second front at this juncture in the 
Far East, even though it is obvious that Soviet air 
and land attacks on the Japanese would greatly aid 


7 
f 
Hi 
a 
a 


— 
—— 


the ABCD powers. As Ambassador Litvinov pointed 
out in an interview in Washington on December 13, 
the Russians have been keenly aware of Britain’s 
failure to open a second front in Europe, at a time 
when Russia was particularly hard-pressed, and do 
not regard the Libyan campaign of decisive im- 
portance. Moreover, the Russians realize that, what- 
ever aid may have been promised to them by the 
Western powers, this aid must now be severely cur- 
tailed, since the United States wili need airplanes in 
the Far East, and may not be able to spare ships for 
transporting other equipment to Russia via the two 
routes still open—Archangel and the Persian Gulf. 
The Soviet government has made it clear that it 
intends to continue the war against Germany to the 
finish. But it is equally clear that Moscow does not 
intend to be diverted from this objective by the Far 
Eastern conflict. 


WHAT WILL BE RUSSIA’S ROLE IN EU- 
ROPE? As the Russians press the Nazis, some people 
in the Western world have begun to wonder whether 
victory in Europe may, after all, be won by Russia 
(which alone has a land front with Germany), 
rather than by Britain and the United States, now 
active primarily in Africa and Asia. Such a develop- 
ment is not outside the bounds of possibility. Russia’s 
resistance against the German army has won the 
respect, and even admiration of many people 
throughout the world who in the past had bitterly 
opposed the Soviet system. The Soviet leaders have 
been more deft than either British or American 
statesmen in preparing the ground for a collapse 
within Germany. In their public speeches, they have 


Page Two 


— 


distinguished between the Nazis, on the one hand 
and German workers and intellectuals on the other 
in an obvious effort to divide the German people 
In this way, they are seeking to turn the weapon of 
fifth column tactics against the Nazis. 

It would certainly be a gross exaggeration to say 
at this time, that any large number of European; 
would be willing to accept the Soviet system, even jp 
profoundly modified form, if they could find sony 
other alternative to the Nazi new order. Fear o 
Bolshevism, which the Nazis used so effectively t) 
build up their own influence, remains an importan, 
factor in world affairs. Only if the Western powey 
should fail to provide an alternative to Nazism 
would the Soviet program have any chance of su. 


cess in Western Europe—although it might win sup 
port in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, where so. 
cial and economic conditions resemble those jy 
Russia. But the fact must be faced that the majority! 


of people in Europe—among them anti-Nazi Ger} 


mans—have been profoundly disillusioned by Brit 
ain’s policy toward the continent. If an alternative 
to both Nazism and Sovietism is to be presented t: 
Europe, that alternative will have to be formulated 
by the United States, which is regarded by millions 
on the continent as the champion of a new and for. 
ward-looking democracy. Thus the United States is 
not only destined to play a central rdle in the total 
war it entered last week. It is also cast for a central 
rdle in the reconstruction that must follow this wa: 
if we are to justify the sacrifices which the American 
people, together with millions of others throughout 


the world, are firmly resolved to make. } 
VERA MICHELES DEAN | 


RIO CONFERENCE TO DETERMINE HEMISPHERIC WAR POLICY 


During the first week in January, the Foreign 
Ministers of the twenty-one American republics are 
to meet in Rio de Janeiro, for the third time since 
the outbreak of the European war. This meeting has 
been called by Secretary of State Hull, at the urgent 
recommendation of various South American coun- 
tries, especially Chile. It is based directly on a dec- 
laration (Article XV) approved at the Havana 
Conference of July 1940, whereby an act of aggres- 
sion against any signatory state was to be followed 
by a consultation of all of them. 


Christmas 1041 


You may be interested in following the example of 
an FPA member, who writes us: 


“In lieu of a Christmas card this year, I am dis- 
tributing copies of the timely Headline Book— 
The Struggle for World Order*—as a possible aid 
toward world-wide attainment of happier days.” 


*By Vera Micheles Dean: 25 cents a copy; quantity rates on 
request. 


As foreseen, geography has played an important 
role in determining the reaction of individual Latin 
American republics to the crisis. With the single ex 
ception of Mexico, all those countries situated north 
of the South American mainland have followed the 
United States into hostilities against Japan, Ger 
many and Italy. Mexico, moreover, has severed t¢ 
lations with the Axis triumvirate and appears read) 
to cooperate wholeheartedly with the United States, 
in coastal patrol and other essential defense meas 


) 


ures. No such unanimity of response has marked the| 
republics of the South American continent, many 0] 
which lie well outside the assured radius of US 
military and naval assistance. To date, no Souti! 


. { 
American country has gone so far as a war declaté 


tion, although Colombia—at the northern end 0 
the continent—has broken off relations with Japas 
In addition Axis funds have been frozen in a num 
ber of South American republics, notably in Brazil 
which has also muzzled pro-Axis elements of th 
press. 


—— 


A pa 
week h 
South 4 
Chile, | 
as a be 
solutiot 
advant: 
naval | 
limited 
would 


peace. 


ARC 
gentin: 
vitally 
Ameri 
the Ur 
impres 
marre 
Ramo: 
more | 
instru 
up pr 
ing th 
long s 
public 
cently 
Agust 
eral s 
ful fis 
Arget 
side 
clarin 
nantl 
opini 
Dece: 


suddi 
into 

who 

maki 
hesit 
hemi 
the [ 
such 
Ame 
most 
the \ 
on f 
State 
wort 


FORE] 
Headq 


Entere 


ee 


— 


€ hand 


——— 
————— 


A particularly important development of the past 


e othe} week has been a decision by several of the major 


People 
2pon of 


. to Say, 
ropean; 
even in 
id some 
Fear of 
ively ty 
1portant 
Power 
Nazism 
of Suc: 
vin Sup 
here s0. 
hose in! 
majority| 
zi Ger. 
by Brit 
ernative 
ented ty 
mulated 
millions 
and for. 
States is 
he total 
| central 
this war 
merican 
oughout 


DEAN 


portant 
al Latin 
ngle ex-/ 
2d north 
wed the 
n, Ger 
ered f¢ 
rs ready 
d States/ 
e meas 
rked the 
many of 
of US 
O South 
declare{ 
end of 
1 Japan 
a nuit 
1 Brazil 
, of thi 


South American countries, including Argentina and 
Chile, to refrain from considering the United States 
as a belligerent. Although obviously a compromise 
solution, this arrangement confers certain practical 
advantages on the North American republic: U.S. 
naval forces for instance, will have the same un- 
limited access to South American ports that they 
would have if the Washington government were at 


peace. 


ARGENTINA’S STAND. The reaction of Ar- 
gentina to recent events is of particular interest. This 
vitally important republic was one of the first South 
American countries to announce that it would regard 
the United States as a non-belligerent. The excellent 
impression created by this move has been somewhat 
marred by the obvious reluctance of Acting President 
Ramén Castillo to offend the totalitarian powers 
more than was absolutely necessary. On government 
instruction, police have been methodically breaking 
up pro-U.S. and pro-democratic demonstrations dur- 
ing the past week. The Castillo régime has, however, 
long since forfeited any title to represent Argentine 
public opinion in international matters. A cable re- 
cently sent to President Roosevelt by ex-President 
Agustin Justo is more indicative, perhaps, of gen- 
eral sentiment in Buenos Aires. Justo, still a power- 
ful figure behind the scenes, expressed the belief that 
Argentina should place itself unreservedly at the 
side of the United States, even to the extent of de- 
claring war. Possibly in response to the predomi- 
nantly pro-United States and anti-totalitarian public 
opinion in Argentina, Sefior Castillo indicated on 
December 15 that he might declare a state of siege 
to curb pro-Axis propagandists. 

On balance, the response of Latin America to the 
sudden and dramatic entrance of the United States 
into actual hostilities would go far to justify those 
who have detected a new hemispheric unity in the 
making. Nine Latin American states have without 
hesitation declared war, while every republic in the 
hemisphere has given some measure of support to 
the United States. Barring some unforeseen disaster, 
such as a successful Axis invasion of the South 
American continent, this measure of support is al- 
most certain to increase, rather than diminish. For 
the very security of Latin American territory depends 
on military and naval assistance from the United 
States, and even more perhaps on economic aid. It is 
worth noting that in current Chilean-Argentine plans 


Page Three — 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: U.S. MOBILIZES ECONOMY 
FOR WAR 
Speaker: John C. deWilde 
Date; Sunday, December 21 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over NBC 
For station, please consult your local newspaper 


for fortifying the strategic Straits of Magellan, at 
the very tip-end of the South American continent, 
equipment from the United States is expected to 
play an important part. Against this background, the 
Rio Conference should afford an excellent oppor- 
tunity for submerging individual hesitations and mis- 
givings in a common program. 
J. I. B. McCuLLocH 


Hawaii: Restless Rampart, by Joseph Barber, Jr. New 
York, Bobbs-Merrill, 1941. $2.75 
An excellent analysis of America’s strategic military 
outpost, with significant factual observations on the terri- 
tory’s economic organization, alien population, and political 
aspirations. 


War Propaganda and the United States, by Harold Lavine 
and James Wechsler. New Haven, Yale University 
Press, 1940. $2.75 


A study of pressure groups and propaganda methods, 
with special emphasis on measures designed to influence 
United States foreign policy during World War II. 


The New Burma, by W. J. Grant. New York, Macmillan, 
1940. $2.00 
A brief but fascinating sketch, written by the former 
editor of the Rangoon Times and somewhat colored by offi- 
cial opinion, of the cities, customs, history, religion, trade, 
and economic and political life of Burma. 


Europe’s Trade, by the Economic Intelligence Service, 
League of Nations. Geneva, League of Nations, 1941. 
$2.00 


This valuable statistical study surveys the commercial 
relations of Europe with the rest of the world as well as its 
intra-continental trade during the decade preceding the 
war. Despite the attempts of some nations to achieve 
autarchy, it is apparent that Europe, on the eve of the 
war, was dependent on outside sources of foodstuffs and 
raw material. 


Low on the War, by David Low. New York, Simon & 
Schuster, 1941. $2.00 
These cartoons by one of the world’s best-known political 
commentators form a witty, incisive, history of the first 
twenty months of the war. 


What Mein Kampf Means to America, by Francis Hackett. 
New York, Reynal and Hitchcock, 1941. $2.00 


In this book-length book review, Mr. Hackett sketches 
in the background of Mein Kampf, condenses its 900 
rambling pages, and describes in American idiom the Ger- 
man Fiihrer’s principles of faith and action. The author 
believes that Hitler’s work is ample proof that the Euro- 
pean war is not just another contest between rival powers 
but a bid for German supremacy over the world. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 9, DgcEmMBER 19, 1941. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lget, Secretary; VERA MicHe.es Dean, Editor. 


National 


Entered as Second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Bow 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, including Foreign Policy Bulletin, Five Dollars a Year 


el 


ee SO i 


Barrera ot an Ree | 


a eS a 


a 


ices ei aa 
Pe: 


i 
ye? 
ry | 

ri 
en 
J 4 
if 

, 

a 

e 
ta 
i 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
Dec. 15.—Although Washington has recovered to 
some extent from the stunning effect of the initial 
Japanese blows and has been encouraged by the re- 
sistance of the ABCD powers to Japanese landing 
operations, there is no disposition here to minimize 
the seriousness of the Pacific crisis. Secretary Knox's 
statement on December 15 regarding the damage to 
our fleet and base facilities at Pearl Harbor revealed 
smaller losses in ships than had been feared, but 
heavy loss of lives. In reality, the Pacific Fleet has 
been placed strictly on the defensive, at least until 
reinforcements in planes and capital ships can arrive 
at Hawaii, thus leaving Japan free to concentrate on 
its immediate objectives in Southeast Asia. 


PROBLEM OF REINFORCEMENTS. The im- 
mediate task confronting the government is to rush 
reinforcements to Hawaii and the Philippines. The 
danger of another attack on Hawaii will probably re- 
main acute until ships can bring enough fighter 
planes to Oahu to compensate for the severe losses 
inflicted by the Japanese. The problem of reinforc- 
ing the Philippines promises to be formidable. Ad- 
miral Hart’s Asiatic Fleet includes a considerable 
number of submarines which, together with Dutch 
and British U-boats, may prove a hazard to Japanese 
operations, but basically it is too weak to do more 
than harass the opposing forces, particularly now 
that Britain’s capital-ship strength in the Far East 
has been destroyed. The Philippine Army and Air 
Force have so far given a good account of them- 
selves, but their supplies and equipment may prove 
inadequate to withstand continuous attacks from 
near-by Japanese bases. Both Britain and the United 
States are severely handicapped by the enormous dis- 
tances over which supplies must move. With the 
Japanese mandated islands lying athwart the direct 
approach to the Philippines, which are some 6,000 
miles from our Pacific coast, it is likely that rein- 
forcements must be shipped along the safer, but 
more circuitous, southern route which would add 
3,000 to 4,000 miles to our communication lines. 


RUSSIA IN THE FAR EAST. The fundamental 
pessimism about the outlook in Washington is en- 
hanced by the disappointment over Russia’s failure 
to enter the Far Eastern war. Those who were specu- 
lating about the possibility of another abrupt Russian 
realignment have been reassured by the declarations 
of Pravda and Mr. Litvinov’s interview with the 


press. Yet the reluctance of the Soviet Union to em 

gage in a war on two fronts indicates that countrys EF 
weakness in the Far East for the time being, ang 

eliminates the possibility of utilizing Siberian bases _ 
for counterblows against Japan. Officials here do not | 
criticize Russia’s decision, which, it is acknowledged, 

must have been reached after full consideration of 

Soviet resources. In fact, many observers believe that 

the Soviet Union will use its limited strength to the 

best advantage if it can continue to immobilize most 

of Germany's military man power. 


ama 
Vou. XX. 
a 


PRODUCTION AND ALLOCATION. In his [N t« 
third report on lend-lease aid, submitted to Congress clear 
on December 15, President Roosevelt reaffirmed the | of its bc 
necessity of further lend-lease assistance to other Pearl Hi 
countries despite our own involvement in war. To it has 
prosecute the war effectively on all fronts, the whole with th 
production program is being revised. On December Until su 
10 William S. Knudsen, director of OPM, revealed the mic 
that government agencies had drawn up new sched. | “ontest« 
ules calling for a 24-hour day and 7-day week, and |S © 
an expenditure of about $1,000,000,000 a week. This threat ‘ 
means that we shall ultimately be spending at least mand k 
$50,000,000,000 a year for war purposes—an amount where | 
approximately one-half of our national income as And m 
compared with the one-quarter we are spending ‘Ms 
today. MINOL 


cembe 
Meanwhile, one of the major problems will be _ 


how to allocate this country’s limited war output JAP 
among the existing and potential theatres of war. 


| 110 rk 
Since the Allies are for the most part still on the : 
defensive, they must distribute their forces ovet jan’ 
wide areas in readiness to parry any blow from the | 5)... 
enemy. There is still much speculation in Washing: lapan’ 
ton, for instance, about Germany’s next move. Some } 5... 
anticipate a German occupation of Portugal and bed ni: 
Spain, which would neutralize Gibraltar and pave disrup 
the way for heavy German reinforcements in North | 5. 4, , 
Africa, coupled, perhaps, with a simultaneous drive | yin¢. 
against Turkey and the Middle East. suppl 


, 


To meet these manifold difficulties the Allies must | ‘orces 
completely coordinate their war efforts in every field. | deen « 
This means not only the pooling of production facili- | of rec 
ties, which are undoubtedly vast, but also a single | Malay 
military and naval command, particularly in the Far | In 
East, as well as unified control and direction of f tope- 
shipping facilities, on which the outcome of the wat | its fo 
vitally depends. It we 

JOHN C. DEWILDE diffic 


