


ion. 
uld 
rom 
S to 
t to 


omic 
tates 

this 
atory 


niger 
opin- 
rling 
> the 
ewey 
- that 
ssia § 


Com 
com 
ice at 
d test 


| per 








: 
= » 2 
University of Ute 


Ann Arhor. Mf ch. 


JUL 2 1945 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


i “sChigan PERIODICAL ROSCA 
PENERAL | jp ap 


FNTY. or - 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIV, No. 36 


JUNE 22, 1945 





BIG THREE SEEK COMMON GROUND ON POLICIES TOWARD EUROPE 


RESIDENT TRUMAN'S announcement on June 
13 that he would confer with Prime Minister 
Churchill and Marshal Stalin in Berlin within three 
to six weeks indicates his determination to shape the 
strategy of peace as President Roosevelt shaped the 
strategy of war—at Big Three conferences unham- 
pered by public scrutiny. And if there is one point 
on which the “little 45” have agreed at San Fran- 
cisco, however reluctantly, it is that without coopera- 
tion among the great powers, and especially the 
United States, Britain and Russia, little progress can 
be made toward the political stabilization or eco- 
nomic reconstruction of Europe. Their acceptance of 
the great power veto even over amendments to the 
Charter (for a ten-year period) shows the lengths to 
which they are prepared to go in order to give the 
Big Five adequate authority for the maintenance of 
world security. 

This authority, however, can be constructively ex- 
ecised only if the great powers themselves have a 
dear idea of their objectives and a sense of respon- 
sibility about the methods they use to attain these 
objectives. As long as we were all engaged in the 
furopean war, the impression prevailed that we were 
fighting not only the military machine of Germany, 
but also the ideas of Nazism and Fascism which de- 
termined the character of German militarism. Now 
that the first purpose which brought the United Na- 
tions into the European war—the military defeat of 
Germany—has been achieved, the extent to which 
we are all prepared to support anti-Fascist forces in 
liberated countries assumes paramount importance. 

The United Nations cannot hope to extirpate the 
foots of Fascism—unemployment, discontent, de- 
Moralization, distrust of democratic processes and 
institutions—solely by armaments or economic con- 
trols, least of all now that the end of hostilities 
forces us to reconvert to peacetime life in Europe. 





Positive beliefs, reflected in positive policies, are 
needed if the defeat of Germany is not to leave 
Europe so disoriented and disintegrated that another 
form of totalitarianism, this time of the Left, would 
appear to be the only way out. 

WHAT IS “DEMOCRACY ?” Again and again, 
most recently at the Yalta Conference, the great 
powers have expressed their determination to foster 
“democracy” in Europe. No attempt, however, has 
been made publicly to define “democracy.” To 
Anglo-Saxons the term usually means the opportun- 
ity freely to elect political leaders, with such corol- 
laries as freedom of the press, of assembly, of dis- 
cussion and criticism. Political democracy as so un- 
derstood has been promised by the United States and 
Britain to all liberated countries. Yet reasons of 
military security, predilections for one type of gov- 
ernment as against another, and fear of disorder 
have caused the Western Allies to qualify consider- 
ably their promise of political freedom in countries 
under their control, notably in Italy and Greece. The 
tendency of Britain to deprecate the rise to power 
of anti-Fascist groups in Italy and to favor retention 
of the monarchy, and the seemingly negative attitude 
of the United States, have given little support to 
Italian anti-Fascists. It is all the more encouraging 
that, even under these circumstances, the six parties 
now active in Italian political life have been able to 
steer a middle course between Right and Left ex- 
tremism, and to agree, on June 17, on the choice of 
Ferrucio Parri, of the Action party, a prominent 
Partisan leader in northern Italy, as Premier of a re- 
constructed cabinet in which Pietro Nenni, Socialist, 
and Manlio Brosio, Liberal, will serve as Vice 
Premiers. 

HOW RUSSIA SEES IT. But even in countries 
where political democracy has been long in existence, 
and conditions are favorable to its restoration— 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


i 
\ 
| 
lt 
yy 
| 
v 
") 
( 
i) 
| 
4 
i 


Se eae 


ee 


Ee ee 


os 


- —— 











nat 


rahi 


ee NON te 


a eiaiabalgh te 














France, Holland, Belgium, Norway, Denmark—it is 
already clear that people are preoccupied not only 
with freedom to vote, but even more urgently with 


_ freedom to work and to eat. When the Russians speak 


of “democracy” it is not in terms of political free- 
dom (which they themselves have experienced only 
briefly throughout their history), but in terms of 
economic and social opportunities for the masses. 
When it is objected, quite correctly, that the Russian 
standard of living is far lower than that of leading 
Western countries, the Russians reply that they have 
been in the process of industrializing a backward 
nation which during the past quarter of a century 
has been dominated by fear of war. They contend 
that, once this fear has been eliminated by strong 
security measures, national and international, Russia 
will experience a marked rise in living standards. 
Russia's economic and social promises, as well as 
achievements, have made a profound impression on 
adjoining backward areas in Europe and Asia, where 
peoples who have had little or no experience with 
political democracy regard any improvement in ma- 
terial well-being, however slight, as a step forward 
and, rightly or wrongly, believe that pre-war ruling 
groups or individuals prevented such improvements. 

When the Russians place on trial the sixteen Poles 
accused of “diversionary activities” in Poland during 
the war, they place on trial not so much the indi- 


WHAT STAND WILL U.S. TAKE 

The freeing of eight imprisoned leaders of the 
Indian National Congress, including Jawaharlal 
Nehru, may prove as significant a bid for political 
agreement in India as the actual content of the Brit- 
ish White Paper announced on June 14. The current 
British statement is a reaffirmation of the Cripps pro- 
posals, which were rejected by the various Indian 
groups a little more than three years ago. What 
London has now done is largely to take one aspect of 
the discusions held at that time—namely the com- 
position of the Viceroy’s Executive Council—and 
urge the Indian parties to cooperate with Britain in 
this respect. Specifically, the Indians are being in- 
vited to fill all the seats in the Executive Council ex- 
cept the posts of Viceroy and War Minister, which 
would remain in British hands. 

If accepted, the new proposals will break the war- 
time deadlock, while allowing all essential powers 
to remain with the Viceroy, who has a veto over the 
composition of his Executive Council and the official 
actions of its members. The crucial question for the 
Indian parties is whether they should overlook the 
offer's defects and accept it—perhaps with modifi- 
cations—as a means of emerging from the sterile 
atmosphere of recent Indian politics. Participation in 
government might enable the Indian National Con- 
gress to develop cooperation with the Moslem 


Page Two 


ON FUTURE OF COLONIAL ASIA? 








i 
—— 


viduals concerned as a way of life which, in thei, 
opinion, produced a hostile attitude toward Russi, 
and toward Polish elements supporting Russia. Ye 
they have recognized the need for a government jp 
Poland which would represent other elements thay 
those already represented in the Lublin regime. The 
decision to make a fresh attempt to broaden thy 
regime by the inclusion of Poles like Stanislay 
Mikolajczyk and Jan Stanczyk who arrived in Mos 
cow on June 16 in an effort to break the deadlock 
reached over the Yalta agreement. 


The best hope for Europe is that the Wester 
powers and Russia will ultimately agree that political 
freedom without social and economic content is ap 
empty shell, but that social and economic welfare 
cannot be assured above the mere level of subsistence 
without the voluntary participation of the people 
through political action. Skeptics question whether 
such agreement can be reached in the foreseeable 
future, and doubt, for this reason, that the Westem 
powers and Russia can work together in an interna. 
tional organization of which their wartime alliance 
must be the core. But it would certainly be defeatist 
to abandon hope for cooperation between wartime 
allies when all of us have only begun to fight for 
peace. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


League and to convert the present White Paper 
into something broader than it now is. The de 
cision would undoubtedly be much easier for the 
Congress if the release of political prisoners had not 
been limited to eight leaders among the many de 
tained by the authorities. 

AMERICA’S STAKE IN COLONIAL EAST. The 
new developments in India, when viewed against the 
background of the war with Japan, suggest the need 
for a clearer American policy on colonial areas 
especially in Asia, where most of the world’s colonial 
population lives. The interest of the American people 
in these areas can be stated as follows: 

(1) Cooperation with the peoples of the Eas 
Indies, Malaya, Indo-China and other colonies wil 
save American lives in the war against Japan. This 
was even more true six months or a year ago, whet 
the Japanese hold on Southeast Asia was firmer than 
it is today, but the aid rendered by local guerrillé 
groups in the Philippines and Burma shows the if 
portance of enlisting all possible help from native 
populations. This does not mean that we need ideal 
ize the state of development, politically or otherwise 
of the colonial peoples, many of whom are quilt 
backward. The main proposition is this: we can us 
whatever support they can give, but to secure maxi 
mum help the powers must demonstrate by theif 








tern 
tical 
S an 
fare 
ence 
ople 
other 
~able 
stern 
era: 
ance 
matist 
time 
t for 


AN 


Paper 


e de 
r the 
d not 
ry de 


". The 
st the 
> need 
areas, 
Lonial 
eople 


> East 
os wilh 

when 
¢ than 
errilla 
he it 

native 
| ideal: 
erwist, 
> quilt 
an us 
> maxi 


y ne 














——— 
— 





actions that victory over Japan will mean a better 
life for colonial nations. 

(2) The preservation of peace in the Far East after 
the war rests partly on satisfying the national aspira- 
tions of peoples who have hitherto enjoyed neither 
independence nor self-government. If the Western 

wers move too slowly in abandoning colonial rule, 
the logical outcome will be the outbreak of national- 
jst revolts over a wide area. The history of indepen- 
dence movements shows that these upheavals gener- 
ally involve the great powers. Just as France, Spain 
and the Netherlands supported the American colon- 
ists in the eighteenth century, so the powers would 
tend to line up on one side or the other in future 
colonial uprisings. Under such circumstances, it is 
impossible to imagine that the Big Five would take 
unified action to prevent the resurgence of a militarist 
Japan, or to deal with other issues that might arise 
in Asia. 

(3) The rise of new national states would aid the 
development of Asiatic markets for the products of 
the United States. The colonial market, although 
often profitable for particular countries or exporters, 
is not a large market, as comparisons between the 
purchasing power of colonial and independent 
peoples readily reveal. It is true that under Western 
tule some progress has taken place in colonial areas 
and that independence in itself is no guarantee of 
prosperous development. But it is clear that full 
expression of the material and spiritual potentiali- 
ties of the Asiatic peoples can occur only under 
national rule, difficult though the process of estab- 
lishing effective national government may prove. 

OUR POSITION ON TRUSTEESHIP. If these 
objectives correspond to the interests of the United 
States, then the course followed by the American 
delegation at San Francisco on the subject of trustee- 
ship is open to question. For this country showed 
little official interest in colonial independence and 
was concerned most of all with the establishment of 
American control over the mandated islands cap- 
tured from Japan. Desirable though this goal may 
be from the point of view of national security, the 
American stand at the United Nations conference 
makes it difficult for us in the future to ques- 
tion measures which other nations may take in 
colonial areas on grounds of security. Moreover, our 
effort to distinguish between strategic and non- 
strategic zones, while perhaps feasible among the 
sparsely settled Pacific islands, does not provide an 
adequate approach to the problems of the teeming 


Page Three 








millions of India and Southeast Asia. And certainly 
the unwillingness of the United States, despite its 
policy in the Philippines, to put itself on record in 
favor of colonial independence will not increase our 
prestige among politically conscious groups in the 
colonies, from whom Asia’s future leaders will come. 

It is true that dominion self-government may meet 
the needs of some colonies, but there is reason to 
doubt whether a country like India will be satis- 
fied to develop within the framework of a dominion 
relationship. It is also true that American policy in 
the Philippines compares favorably with that of 
other colony-holding powers in their possessions. 
Yet, a satisfactory attitude toward the 16,000,000 
people of the Philippines—assuming that we aid the 
islands in the future to establish a sound economic 
basis for political independence—does not relieve 
us of the responsibility for taking a constructive in- 
terest in developments elsewhere in colonial Asia. 

The United States, of course, would not wish to 
express an opinion on every colonial event of sig- 
nificance, for this could only produce sharp antag- 
onisms between ourselves and such allies as Britain, 
France and the Netherlands. Nor would it be wise 
to overlook the economic and political importance 
of India for Britain, Indo-China for France or the 
Indies for the Netherlands. It is plain that the United 
States will be in the best position to work for satis- 
factory evolution of the colonial world toward more 
adequate forms of government and economic life if 
this country’s economic policies take into account the 
difficult position of the colonial powers. 

At the same time, it is important that the United 
States keep the record straight concerning its own 
sympathy for the aspirations of the colonial peoples, 
even though it should be aware that these aspirations 
will not be realized according to a pat formula or at 
the same rate in different areas. To the extent that 
useful opportunities arise, either publicly or in the 
day-to-day operation of diplomacy, we should express 
our interest in a sound adjustment of colonial issues. 
Failure to do so would mean abandonment of 
America’s potentialities for constructive leadership 
in the Far East. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 
(The second in a series of articles on America’s Far Eastern policy.) 





The Coming Air Age, by Reginald M. Cleveland and Leslie 
E. Neville. New York, Whittlesey House, 1944, $2.75 


The editors of Aviation Research Associates discuss the 
probable status of aviation at the end of World War II. 
Indicating the impact of the airplane on modern s0- 
ciety, the authors chart the future development of this 
agency of transportation. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 36, JuNE 22, 1945. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lust, Secretary; VERA Michutes Dan, Editer, Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act ef March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Gao 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








Washington News Letter |: 


EXPANSION OF WORLD TRADE REQUIRES GREATER U.S. IMPORTS 














As the time approaches for making a decision on it in reconverting to normal production for export, 
this country’s post-war international commercial pol- and if it could accept with greater equanimity the 
icy, the Washington Administration realizes more expanding trade interests of this country in areas like 
and more clearly that a policy which would restrict the Middle East and Spain, where British goods al. | gy 
Britain’s trade position in the world might be detri- ways used to get first call. The race for industrial 
mental to our long-term economic interests. The export markets begins at the factories—and if the 
g United States entered the war partly as a result of factories of the United States should produce export 
3 its determination to assure the survival of Britain commodities ahead of British competitors, the British | 
HN as a free state, and it would be folly now to undo would favor more than ever continuance of the ster. | Y% 
X the work of war by an insufficiently considered ling bloc, which assures their exports a definite mar- 
program of peace. However, the Administration ap- ket in a limited area. CH 
parently does not believe that the British will suc- The Britisher, whose country’s welfare, and even 
ceed in safeguarding their own interests by restrictive survival, depends on exports, sees two wartime T 
bilateral practices in the form of sterling blocs and changes in the United States with respect to foreign a 
imperial preference. trade. (1) As a result of the war, the United States f | 
ATLANTIC CHARTER ON TRADE. The Ad- has become the greatest exporter in the world’s his. aA 
ministration takes as the starting point of its interna- ss sateg cor ogee " pres ageotorg der ia mor 
tional economic program part of the fourth para- Se a np 2 Fat 
graph in the Atlantic Charter in which President spates: Sawa. in codinnsy commence. Ana two 
Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill declared that commodities are far better known abroad than ew ove 
zs ' : or before. (2) As a result of wartime plans to keep | |. 
they will endeavor, with due respect for existing , ss the United States for | MP 
obligations, to further the enjoyment by all States, ee & oe ne Se . a “s oa bro 
great and small, victor or vanquished, of access, on “6 ~w tin . a "y ree ee a * | not 
equal terms, to the trade and to the raw materials of re otc Nee ag meee: 
the world which are needed for their economic pros- ineonanee mee ee eee ay Ce 
perity.” Britain’s current commercial policy shows “The Washington Administration has reached Gal 
; pga pe a pata a a tentative conclusion that the soundest commercial . 
‘ The war has strencthened th t Brit- policy for both this country and Britain is multilateral in 
2 gthened the contemporary Bri 2 


‘ ; eh ‘ i ibl trictions. Action | | 
ish policy of restriction, which dates only from 1932. exchange with the fewest possible restriction : tior 


Then the United Kingdom, harassed by hard times on the Bretton Woods agreement, and especially on ie 


iM ; ; he T Agreements Act now before the Senate, 

ry and the rise of trade barriers elsewhere, inaugurated — tade Ag : ; aga 

ie, f ‘al £ h h th will reveal whether this country has come to realize dl 
t oe or oe sare F ae ae way d n awa that the need for imports is as important as that for ha 
ke so, apple le canker ll exports. According to the view of the most respon 


ments in individual countries through such instru- 
ments as the Roca-Runciman agreement with Argen- 
tina, and started to establish the sterling bloc. 
However, as Frank W. Fetter of the Department of 


sible quarters here, only the greatest possible liberty | 
of trade will permit the world movement of enough | ,.. 
commerce among nations to provide an adequate i" 


, um d imports for any one of the 
State remarks in an article on Anglo-American trade velame of ae a - 94 Since j Pees! ted 
: : : . nations, including the British. Since it is estimate aln 
interests published in the State Department Bulletin oe. 
; ae that Britain must increase its exports at least 50 pet 
of March 25, 1945, only in 1940 did the bloc “take cent above the prewar level, it is apparent that keen a 
on its present legal significance of an area that main- vale £ £ ae Am ee ce est 
iz tains a rigid exchange control as against the rest of a ee eee oe eee ne Fo 


» : : : must ensue. This serious commercial probiem must ‘ 

the world.” Today the sterling bloc still retains that ordi fen P ae 

ae » be met with sincere determination to promote the in- kin 
significance. 


ternational harmony of both countries while advanc- | ,, 
TIMING OF RECONVERSION. Britain might ing the economic interests of each. 

more rapidly return to its pre-1932 policy if it were Biaizk BOLLES 
certain that the United States would not outstrip 


Pia 





he, WELT 
pee ne = 


cs Som 
ot ie 


a 
= eee SS 


= aS 


TL tips lesa 


an 


me 
(The second of two articles on American commercial policy.) un 


FOR VICTORY * BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


eee itt 
x er 5 


~ 


ies 


rs 


Type 

















