‘d bel- 
enable 
| seas. 
»vern- 
ent of 
h ship 
port. 
avoid 
‘pense 


ILDE 


National 
N, Editor. 
ar, 


‘ 


; 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Vou. XVI, No. 6 


DECEMBER 4, 1936 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
MY. OF MICH. 2, 1921, at the Post 


Office at New York, 
pEC 10186 


N. Y., under the act 
ef March 3, 1879. 
| (BRARIAN’S OFFICE. 


EUROPEAN DIPLOMACY IN THE SPANISH CRISIS 


by Vera Micheles Dean 


The impact of Spain’s civil war on the European 
struggle between fascism and communism; the motives 
and application of the Franco-British policy of non- 
intervention; its effect on relations between Western 
democracies and Fascist dictatorships. 


December 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Dr. William W. Bishop 
% University of Michigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


GERMAN-JAPANESE PACT 


AROUSES DEMOCRACIES 


O far as its published terms are concerned, 

the German-Japanese agreement of Novem- 
ber 25 is limited to joint action against Com- 
munist propaganda. Germany and Japan also 
agree to invite third parties “whose domestic 
peace is endangered by the disruptive activities” 
of the Communists to join what may amount to a 
Fascist International. According to a supple- 
mentary protocol the German and Japanese gov- 
ernments will take strict measures, “within the 
framework of existing laws, against those who, 
at home or abroad, directly or indirectly, are ac- 
tive in the service of the Communist Interna- 
tional” and will create a permanent commission 
to achieve this objective. 

Despite the vehement denials of Berlin and 
Tokyo it is suspected in some quarters that, in 
addition to the published agreement, Germany 
and Japan have reached a military understanding 
by which the Nazis will give technical aid to 
Tokyo concerning aviation and chemical warfare. 
It is also reported that Germany and Japan have 
agreed to divide the Dutch East Indies into two 
spheres of influence. Mussolini, already com- 
mitted to a campaign against communism by the 
Italo-German accord of October 25, agreed on 
November 28 to recognize Manchoukuo in return 
for Japanese recognition of Italy’s Ethiopian con- 
quest. 

As a gesture of conciliation the Soviet govern- 
ment on November 25 commuted to ten years’ 
imprisonment the death sentence imposed on Emil 
Stickling, a German engineer who confessed to 
the charge of sabotage. When the terms of the 
German-Japanese agreement became known, how- 
ever, speakers at the Eighth Congress of So- 
viets, which assembled last week to adopt a new 
constitution, declared that they would resist any 
encroachment on Russian soil. Asserting that 
Japan had twice attacked Soviet territory during 
the past 48 hours, Foreign Commissar Litvinov 


stated on November 28 that the German-Japanese 
agreement was an alliance against the Soviet 
Union. At this Congress it was disclosed that 
the U.S.S.R. had increased its submarines by 715 
per cent since 1933, and it was implied that the 
Soviet air force now consists of more than 7,000 
planes. 

If Hitler had hoped to become the leader of a 
great world coalition against the Soviet Union, 
his hopes seem doomed to disappointment. In- 
stead of joining an anti-Communist alignment, 
Poland—the most dubious of France’s allies— 
cemented its understanding with Rumania during 
a visit paid to Warsaw last week by the new Ru- 
manian Foreign Minister, Victor Antonescu. One 
of the indirect objects of this visit was to bring 
about a rapprochement between Poland and 
Czechoslovakia—a country which, by virtue of its 
location and its mutual assistance pact with the 
Soviet Union, may become the next object of 
German aggression. Should this effort at rap- 
prochement succeed, it will prove of great impor- 
tance because Poland is in a position to prevent 
a successful German attack on Czechoslovakia. 

By his recent acts Hitler has also forfeited the 
possibility of securing an understanding with 
Britain. Irritation in London over the German- 
Japanese pact, which may be directed at British 
interests in the Orient, was increased by reports 
that German Ambassador Ribbentrop had assured 
Hitler the British were merely bluffing in their 
warnings to Germany. To dispel this impression, 
Foreign Minister Eden declared on November 27 
at a luncheon in honor of M. Van Zeeland, the 
Belgian Prime Minister, that Belgium could count 
on British aid in case of an unprovoked attack. 

Meanwhile, in Spain the lines between Fascist 
states and other great powers have become more 
clearly drawn. On November 27 the Spanish gov- 
ernment, which had earlier protested against the 
attack of a “foreign” submarine on one of its 


‘warships, invoked Article XI of the League Cov- 
enant and asked the Secretary-General to convene 
a special session of the League Council. It 
charged that the armed intervention of Germany 
and Italy on behalf of the Rebels virtually con- 
stituted an act of aggression against the Spanish 
Republic. While Britain and France have little 
desire for a Council meeting, which would make 
it difficult for them to continue dodging the Span- 
ish issue, they have recently displayed signs of 
stiffening against Fascist intervention in Spain. 
Last week Britain stated it would resort to force 
to protect legitimate British shipping destined for 
Spanish ports. Following the dispatch of eight 
British submarines to Spanish waters, General 
Franco announced that he would establish the 
safety zone demanded by Britain in the harbor of 
Barcelona in case of Rebel bombardment. 


By concluding an anti-Communist pact, Ger- 
many and Japan seem to have overreached them- 
selves. It is difficult to see how either govern- 
ment can render concrete assistance to the other 
in fighting the Communist “menace.” The fact 
that the two countries felt it necessary to sign 
such an agreement strengthens the belief that 
their internal régimes are far from stable. This 
agreement will inevitably arouse the suspicion, 
if not the hostility, of Britain and the United 
States. Similarly, premature recognition of 
General Franco by Germany and Italy may deal a 
hard blow to the prestige of the Fascist states 
should Franco fail to capture Madrid. The sup- 
_ port extended to Franco by the Fascist states was 
doubtless inspired not only by hostility to com- 
munism but by a desire to use the Spanish crisis 
for purposes of bargaining with Britain and 
France. It is difficult to believe, however, that 
either Hitler or Mussolini originally considered 
Spain worth a general European war. Yet, as a 
result of their own acts, the Fascist states are 
now threatened with a major diplomatic defeat. 
By effecting a rapprochement with Britain, Mus- 
solini may succeed in extricating himself from a 
highly embarrassing position. Hitler may find it 
more difficult to retreat. Nazi diplomacy seems 
to have precipitated a crisis which may lead 
to a show-down between Germany and the rest 


of the world. RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


JAPAN’S ARMY PROGRAM 


When the Hirota Cabinet was formed on 
March 9, 1936, the army exacted pledges inter alia 
for a strong foreign policy and increased arma- 
ment expenditures, the latter to be financed by 
higher taxes. Despite certain indications to the 


Page Two 


<n 
——— 


contrary, there was good: ground for believing | 
that these pledges embedded the army program 
in Japanese governmental policy more thoroughly 
than at any previous time. This view has been 
sustained by three recent events: the extensive 
demands made on the Nanking government in 
October, the conclusion of a German-Japanege 
pact “against communism,” and the Japanese 
budget for 1937-1938 approved on November 27, 


Nanking’s unexpectedly strong resistance to 
the Japanese demands has apparently postponed 
their acceptance indefinitely. Meanwhile, the 
center of activity shifted to Suiyuan, where 
Japanese-supported Mongol and “Manchoukuo” 
troops were preparing to invade this Inner Mon- 
golian province. The first attacks were thrown 
back by General Fu Tso-yi’s provincial troops, 
which then took the initiative by capturing Pai- 
lingmiao, in northern Suiyuan, on November 25, 
This town had been one of the main bases for the 
attack, and Chinese reports claimed that some of 
the Japanese officers who were aiding the Mongol 
troops were captured in the operation. Prepara- 
tions for a more serious invasion of Suiyuan now 
seem to be under way in western Chahar, where 
the Mongols are being reinforced by large ‘“Man- 
choukuo” troop contingents and Japanese mili- 
tary supplies. This new attack can hardly be 
repelled without effective Nanking assistance to 
the Suiyuan troops. Despite belligerent declara- 
tions by official spokesmen at Nanking, none of | 
the central government’s troops or airplanes ap- 
pear to have reached Suiyuan. The capture of 
Pailingmiao was effected by a small force of about 
5,000 provincial troops, and “repainted” Japanese | 
planes have bombarded this force without a“ 
countering opposition from Nanking’s airplanes. 


Japan’s new budget for the fiscal year 1937- 
1938 calls for total expenditures of 3,041 million | 
yen, an increase of 798 million over the previous | 
budget.* Both its total and the sums allotted to | 
the army and navy are the largest in Japanese | 
history. Military-naval expenditure totals 1.4088 
million yen, an increase of 381 million over 1936- | 
1937. Steep rises in taxation become effective 
under this budget. Despite the additional rev- | 
enue thus provided, deficit loans aggregate 840 | 
million yen, an increase of 179 million. Army 
expenditures, which total 720 million yen in the 
new budget, include the first instalment of the 
six-year replenishment program; beginning with 
the next budget, the normal military expenditure 
is expected to be 900 million yen. T A Biel 


*One yen equals approximately 28.5 cents. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 6, Dgcemsgr 4, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesiie Bueit, President; EstHEr G. OGpgn, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Béitor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


One Dollar a Year. 


FO 


An in 


