


ore 


orts 
‘On- 


fain 
ent 
fol- 


>10- 
ults 


1€u- 
ved 
om- 


late } 


rent 








all 
qust | 
ship 


ram 


ular | 


ocal 
the | 
will 


any | 
sup- | 
ties 

All | 
eme 
rom 


ated 





PRR Ai KUM 
a 1. LIBRARY 
' P MICK. 
Ge 
T’ 
—1944 . 


yan 18 1944 


Entered as 2nd class matter 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 13 


JANUARY 14, 1944 





RUSSIA PROPOSES POLISH BORDER SETTLEMENT 


HE announcement over the Moscow radio on 

January 11 that the Soviet government does not 
consider “unchangeable” the 1939 frontier fixed un- 
der the Ribbentrop-Molotov agreement, and offers 
Poland a new frontier corresponding to the Curzon 
Line of 1919, as well as an alliance of mutual as- 
sistance against Germany modeled on the Russo- 
Czech pact of December 12, 1943, should do much 
to ease the dangerous tension created by the advance 
of Russian forces into Poland. This tension threat- 
ened to precipitate a conflict among the United Na- 
tions over the spoils of war when the war itself is 
actually far from won, with the possibility that 
the Germans might yet snatch victory out of impend- 
ing defeat. The mere prospect of such an eventual- 
ity should have a sobering effect both on the 
great powers, not one of which can win the war 
alone, and on smaller countries like Poland, not one 
of which can be liberated from Germany without 
the aid of the great powers. 


CURZON LINE PROPOSED. The Russian dec- 
laration of January 11 is constructive in both tone 
and substance—although its assertion that the pleb- 
iscite that resulted in the incorporation of western 
Ukraine and western White Russia into the U.S.S.R. 
was “carried out on broad democratic principles’ 
might call for a re-definition of “democratic.” The 
main points of the declaration are that the Treaty of 
Riga of 1921* committed an injustice by leaving large 
bodies of Ukrainians and White Russians within 
the Polish state—a contention which would find sup- 
port among neutral observers; that ‘‘a strong and 
independent Poland,” whose re-establishment the 
Soviet government declares it favors, will be strength- 
ened by the exclusion from its borders of non-Polish 
populations; and that Moscow is ready to “correct” 
the Ribbentrop-Molotov frontier in such a way that 





*See V. 


a M. Dean, ‘Problem of Eastern Poland Tests Moscow-Teheran 
ord, 


Foreign Policy Bulletin, January 7, 1944, 


“districts in which the Polish population predomi- 
nates be handed over to Poland.” For this purpose, 
the Soviet government is ready to accept the Curzon 
Line, which was proposed by the Supreme Allied 
Council in 1919 as a military line beyond which Rus- 
sian armies should not go into Poland. This line, 
which at the time was rejected by both Poles and 
Russians, would have left the predominantly Ukrain- 
ian and White Russian areas of eastern Poland on 
the Russian side. 

Moscow’s proposal will probably be unacceptable 
to extreme Polish nationalists. It corresponds, how- 
ever, to suggestions made by the more moderate 
Polish spokesmen in this country. From a strictly 
realistic point of view, the possession by either Russia 
or Poland of the disputed borderlands between the 
Curzon Line and the pre-1939 Russo-Polish frontier 
would not of itself assure the security of either coun- 
try, since it is not a strategically defensible territory 
such as that, for example, which blocks the Allied 
advance in Italy. Such security as both Russia and 
Poland may hope to attain against the renewal of 
German expansion will have to be sought in a gen- 
uine understanding between the two countries, with- 
in the framework of a viable international organ- 
ization. 

An understanding, in the form of an alliance of 
mutual assistance, is offered by the Soviet government 
—but it is offered to the Polish people, not to the 
Polish government in London which, according to 
the January 11 declaration, “has proved incapable 
of establishing friendly relations with the Soviet 
Union” or of organizing “an active struggle 
against the German invaders in Poland itself.” 
What the Soviet government proposes, without ac- 
tually stating it in so many words, is the creation 
either in Poland or elsewhere of a new régime—the 
Union of Polish Patriots in Moscow might be the 
prototype—that would be ready to cooperate with 


























the Kremlin on terms it considers acceptable. That 
Poland, once it has been liberated from German 
rule, will want to effect fundamental political, eco- 
nomic and social changes has been made clear both 
by the underground movement in the homeland, and 
by many Poles in exile. It is not a foregone conclu- 
sion, however, that a free Poland would necessarily 
opt for the Soviet system. Nor would the imposi- 
tion of this system from outside assure Poland the 
degree of internal stability that is essential for its 
twar reconstruction. 

EAST PRUSSIA TO POLAND? In compensation 
for the territorial loss Poland now faces, the Soviet 
government suggests that Poland “must be reborn, 
not by the occupation of Ukrainian and White Rus- 
sian territories, but by the return of territories seized 
from Poland by the Germans.” Although no specific 
reference is made to East Prussia, this presumably 
is the chief area that the Soviet government has in 
mind. The proposal that Poland should take East 
Prussia has been heard with increasing frequency 
in this country, with the corollary that all Germans 
be removed from that territory. 

On many grounds, the proposal to exchange East- 
ern Poland for East Prussia may seem to have merits. 
What is readily forgotten is that East Prussia, cen- 
turies-old outpost of Germanism against the Slavs, 
has the same sentimental and ethnographic signifi- 
cance for the Germans as western Ukraine and west- 
ern White Russia are claimed by the Russians to 
have for Russia. The transfer of East Prussia to the 
Poles, even minus its inhabitants, would create a new 
terra irredenta which the German people would 
strive to recover. To say that loss of this territory 
would only serve the Germans right is to take a 
short-sighted view of the post-war period. For what- 
ever we undertake to do concerning Germany should 
be viewed not in terms of what it does to the Ger- 


PageTwo 








i 
a 


mans, but what it does for the reconstruction of 
Europe. And the seizure by Poland of East Prussia 
which at no time in history was an integral part of 
the Polish state, would merely lay the basis for ap. 


other war. Nor would mere physical removal of the | 


inhabitants of East Prussia into Germany of itself 
produce a change of mind among Germans. Such a 
change can be effected only through an internal te. 
volt against the social and economic system carried 
over from feudal times into the Weimar Republic 

TOWARD INTERNATIONAL COOPERA. 
TION. Future relations between Germany and Po. 
land, as well as between Poland and the Soviet 
Union, are obviously of immediate and poignant 





—— 


coord 
contr 
regul. 
also | 
ductic 
inter 
—fot 
ritori 

Th 
capac 
sion 
of th 
becot 
be c 





concern to Poles and Russians. But they are also of 
profound concern to all the other United Nations. 


The main issue at stake today is not the determina. 


tion of this or that frontier, but the creation of an 


State 
color 
with 


cons! 


international organization in which the security of | ing, 


all countries, large and small, would be a matter of 
common concern, to be achieved by common effort, 
In a broadcast of January 8 inaugurating a new series 
entitled ‘The State Department Speaks” James C. 
Dunn, political adviser on European affairs to Sec- 
retary of State Hull, said that the most important 
single question at the Moscow conference was wheth- 
er the great powers “were determined to seek their, 
and the world’s, salvation through international co- 
operation or whether they had other plans and de. 
signs for the future” which would have raised “the 
dread certainty’ of a third World War “even before 
World War II was finished.” The Moscow proposal 
of January 11 holds out hope that, at the crossroads 
where we now stand, the method of international 
cooperation may yet be the road chosen by the 
first great power to threaten Germany with defeat 
in Europe. : 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


CARIBBEAN COMMISSION POINTS TO NEW FORM OF COLONIAL RULE 


The announcement on January 4 that a West In- 
dian conference is being set up as an advisory body 
to the Anglo-American Caribbean Commission, thus 
providing a channel for consultation with local re 
resentatives, marks an important step in the develop- 
ment of joint colonial administration. It has already 
been suggested in Washington that the experience 
gained from this experiment may provide a useful 
model for handling post-war colonial problems in 
other areas of the world. 

EXPERIMENT IN REGIONALISM. The Anglo- 
American Caribbean Commission was established on 
March 9, 1942 “for the purpose of encouraging and 
strengthening social and economic cooperation” be- 
tween the United States and its possessions in the 
Caribbean, and the United Kingdom and the British 
colonies in the same area. Its members, working un- 


der co-chairmen—one American and one British— 
were to deal “primarily with matters pertaining to 
labor, agriculture, housing, health, education, social 
welfare, finance, economics . . . and on these matters 
to advise their respective governments.” 

It was apparently intended at the outset that the 
Caribbean Commission should not only concern it 
self with maintenance of the economic structure of 
the islands and provision of the basic necessities of 
life, but also lay down plans for reconstruction of 


the area. It was some time, however, before the Com- | 


mission was able to look beyond war necessities, for 
intensification of German submarine warfare in West 
Indian waters in the summer of 1942 made it neces 
sary to concentrate all efforts on the immediate prob- 
lem of supplying the essential needs of the islands. 
In this task considerable success was achieved in the 





pecte 
plies 
| food 
velo 
quat 
feret 
repr 
ish | 
of tl 

A 
TA 
beat 
} ope: 
| Col 
| told 
} gov 
| adn 
| tabl 
| that 
| acc 


Sec: 


] 
! 








REFS | 


A 





ried 
lic, 


viet 
lant 
) of 
ons, 
ina- 
an 
of 
r of 
ort. 
Ties 


_ of 


for 
Jest 
ces- 
rob- 
ads. 











—_—_ 
— 


coordination of shipping, food production, economic 
controls, and in measures to spread employment and 
regularize wages. Benefits of a permanent nature can 
also be expected, particularly from increased pro- 
duction in agriculture and fishing. In addition, the 
interchange of information and direct investigation 
—for example, by American officials in British ter- 
ritories—has established a useful technique. 

The West Indian Conference, acting in an advisory 
capacity, should enhance the value of the Commis- 
sion by providing opportunities for representatives 
of the local populations to express their views and 
become associated with its work. The new body is to 
be composed of two delegates from each United 
States territory and each British colony or group of 





' colonies, and is to be furnished by the Commission 


with a permanent secretariat, acting presumably as a 
constant link between the two bodies. The first meet- 
ing, which will be held in the near future, is ex- 
ted to consider such questions as increasing sup- 
plies for the islands, stabilizing prices, maintaining 
food production after the war, continuing the de- 
velopment of fisheries, and accelerating health and 
quarantine measures. It is also stated that the Con- 
ference will be free to invite the participation of 
fepresentatives from other than American and Brit- 
ish islands, a step which, if taken, will remove one 
of the limitations in the present arrangement. 
ADVANTAGES OUTWEIGH DISADVAN- 
TAGES. The pattern being developed in the Carib- 
bean foreshadows the possibility of international co- 
operation in other colonial areas. On July 13, 1943 
Colonel Oliver Stanley, British Colonial Secretary, 
told the House of Commons that, while the British 
government intended to remain responsible for the 
administration of British colonies, it favored the es- 
tablishment of Commissions in certain regions so 


_ that common problems might be met and solved by 


acommon effort. ‘These Commissions,” the Colonial 


Secretary declared, “‘would comprise not only the 








For a survey of some of the basic questions that 
preoccupy public opinion today, READ— 
THE U.S.S.R. AND POST-WAR EUROPE 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


Vol. XIX, No. 11, of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members $3. 














Page Three — 





states with colonial territories in the region, but also 
other states which have in the region a major stra- 
tegic or economic interest.’’ This would mean, ap- 
parently, that in a Commission for the East Indies, 
the Netherlands, Britain, the United States, China, 
and possibly others, would be represented. 

From the colonial point of view alone, regionalism 
offers many obvious advantages. First, such colonial 
problems as disease, soil erosion, transport, migrant 
labor, etc., cross boundaries and can be effectively 
handled only by action over a wide area. Second, eco- 
nomic policy could be integrated through a regional 
commission and the financial needs of the poorer 
colonies met more readily if they were part of a 
larger group. And, finally, the third-party judgment 
provided by a commission would act as a stimulus to 
the administration to adopt progressive policies. 

But there are certain drawbacks which are not 
so obvious, and therefore perhaps the more danger- 
ous. The interposition of an intermediate authority 
between a colony and the colonial power may tend to 
obscure the source of real responsibility, and widen 
the gap between the governors and the governed. In 
the case of British colonies, for example, responsibil- 
ity rests on the Colonial Secretary, and public opinion 
can be brought to bear on him to change policy. It 
might be unwise, moreover, to include in such a 
scheme a colony which was well on the way to self- 
government, for it would suddenly find many of the 
powers it was about to assume transferred to a new 
organization. There would also be a danger that a 
nation with a reactionary native policy—South Af- 
rica, for example—might assume the dominating in- 
fluence on a commission, or at least that divergent 
colonial policies would lead to deadlock. 

On balance, however, the advantages of joint ad- 
ministration—or more accurately, joint supervision— 
of colonies on a regional basis seem clearly to out- 
weigh the possible drawbacks, and the system has 
probably come to stay. There will be many difficul- 
ties, not least the problem of associating the colonial 
peoples in the work of the commission. The West 
Indians were restive at their exclusion from the 
Caribbean Commission, and it still remains to be 
seen whether the newly established Conference can 
satisfy their aspirations. But, if the system as now 
set up in the West Indies can be made to work in the 
interests of both the Caribbean peoples and the gov- 
erning powers, the pattern established there will 
probably be adopted in other colonial regions. 


HowarbD P. WHIDDEN, JR. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 13, JaNuaRY 14, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera MicHgeLes Dgan, Eéftor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Be isi 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





D Sow ee Sees 


a ee li rm 
—_———— 


elisa ag 


eee 


oot res 


ey 


ae 2a 


Washington News Letter 

















JAN. 10.—The Washington Administration, which 
expects Polish Prime Minister Stanislaw Mikolajczyk 
to visit this country before long, has until this week 
remained hopeful that relations between the Soviet 
and Polish governments might be mended. 

The Polish controversy is a domestic as well as a 
foreign issue for the United States, whose 3,000,000 
citizens of Polish birth or parentage hold a strong 
political position in New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, 
Michigan, and Illinois, and have influence in other 
states. Answers to a questionnaire distributed by the 
Office of War Information for another federal 
agency last summer disclosed that an overwhelming 
majority of the Polish-Americans take an active inter- 
est in Polish affairs. The impending visit of 
Mikolajczyk might enhance this interest. 

POLISH-AMERICAN GROUPS. The Adminis- 
tration is aware that Polish-Americans may vote next 
November according to their view of how capably 
the State Department has protected Poland's inter- 
ests in its controversy with the Soviet Union. Some 
officials, however, doubt that political opponents of 
the Administration will try openly to take advantage 
of any Polish-American dissatisfaction, because the 
success of the international collaboration policy 
which both Republicans and Democrats have ap- 
proved might well depend on a successful com- 
promise settlement of the Soviet-Polish issue. 

Polish-Americans do not form a solid bloc. Seven 
of the ten Polish-American Congressmen are Demo- 
crats, the others Republicans. Polish-Americans be- 
long to three main organized groups, each of which 
follows a different line regarding Polish politics. 
Chauvinist Polish-Americans, favoring nationalist ex- 
pansion of Poland at the expense of Russia and 
Czechoslovakia, have formed the National Com- 
mittee of Americans of Polish Descent, which is 
known as KNAPP. Its sponsor is Ignace Matuszew- 
ski, a Polish emigré. Its actual organizer is Maximil- 
lian Wegrzynek, wealthy New York importer. 

Polish-Americans on the Left, favoring full Polish 
accord with Russia on Russia’s terms, organized the 
Kosciusko League last autumn in Detroit. Polish in- 
tellectuals on the Left have rallied around Oscar 
Lange, professor at Chicago University. Before the 
Kosciusko League was established, the politically 
most active Polish Leftist among the workers was 
Leo Kryczki, of Milwaukee, president of the Ameri- 
can Slav Congress. In December a number of Poles 
withdrew from the Congress in protest against what 


FOR VICTORY ° 


BUY UNITED STATES 


they considered its radical tendencies. 

Most Polish-Americans belong to the leading so. 
cieties of the Polish-American Council—the Polish 
National Alliance, the Polish Catholic Union or the 
Polish-American Women’s Alliance. The Council, 
moderate in politics, supports the Polish government 
line. Its president, Dean Francis Swietlick of the 
law school at Marquette University, Milwaukee, 
blocked a move to make him president of the Amer. 
ican Slav Congress and also thwarted an attempt by 
the KNAPP to oust him from the chairmanship of 
the Polish National Alliance. 

The nine Polish language dailies and 35 semi- 
weekly and weekly papers controlled by the different 
groups show uncertainty about the line they will 
follow in American politics, although they take pro- 
nounced stands on foreign affairs. Judging by cir. 
culation figures, the Polish government has the pre. 
ponderant press backing through the chief papers 
of the Polish National Alliance, the daily Dziennit 
Zwiazkowy and the weekly Cjoda, both published in 
Chicago; of the Polish Roman Catholic Union, 
the Dziennik Chicagoski; of the Polish-American 
Women’s Alliance, the Chicago and Pittsburgh week- 
ly Glos Polek; and through two large independent 
dailies, the Buffalo Dziennik dla W sjystkich, and the 
Cleveland Wiadomosci Codzienne. KNAPP’s organ 
is the Nowy Swiat, New York daily, which Wegrzy- 
nek owns and to which Matuszewski contributes. 
The Kosciusko League’s paper is the Detroit weekly | 
Glos Ludowy. 

ADMINISTRATION'S ATTITUDE. The Polish 
side of the territorial question raised by the Russian 
claim to the eastern areas has often been presented 





191: 


] 


—< 
VoL. 4 


Te 


TW 


W 


tion | 
ment 
land 
on tt 
cessf 
tinue 
Euro 
com 
Allie 

SC 
Mos 
in th 
may 
ning 
river 
sout 
sive 
pass 
win; 


Zhr 





to the American government. President Roosevelt | 
heard it from the late Prime Minister Wladyslaw | 
Sikorski, who visited the United States twice after | 
Russia entered the war in 1941. The Administration | 
has taken neither the Russian nor the Polish side, It | 


rive! 
the 
cut 
dou 
sian 


has contented itself with noting the points of differ-| qj, ; 


ence between the two governments and has sought 
to get them on speaking terms, in the belief that the | 
controversy over boundaries can be resolved later. | 
The American government has not indicated, how- 


, Sit 
hav 
tow 


E 


ever, that it accepts the view put forward by David) hay 
Zaslavsky who, in his attack in Pravda of January 502) tho 


Wendell Willkie, said that the question of the east: 

ern Polish territory is an internal affair of the Soviet 

Union, and not the concern of other countries. 
BLAIR BOLLES 


WAR BONDS 


and 
so | 
aste 
hav 
ma: 








