ing | 
he | 


ind | 


nd- 
lic 


an- 
the 

to 
not 
uld 
on, 
ea- 


ave 
lic 
the 
ing 
en- 
‘ith 


in 
ng, 
nt. 
sa 
rch 
the 
the i 
ign 
1es- 
the 
Ty; 
nst 
nile | 
ing 
nal 
ars 
een 


ional 
ditor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVI, No. 8 DECEMBER 18, 1936 





CREATING A PHILIPPINE COMMONWEALTH 
by David H. Popper 


This report discusses the constitution and govern- 
ment of the new Philippine Commonwealth; the politi- 
cal, economic and social problems it must face; and the 
significance of Philippine defense policy for the Com- 
monwealth and the United States. 


December 15 issue Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











Dr. William W. Bishop 
% University of Michigan Lib 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











CHANG HSUEH-LIANG’S COUP 





HE sudden coup d’état carried out by Chang 

Hsueh-liang on December 12, involving the 
capture of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and his 
detention at Sian, has temporarily relegated all 
other Far Eastern issues to the background. The 
factors entering into this coup, especially in con- 
nection with its international ramifications, are 
even more complicated than is normally the case 
in China. Tokyo and Berlin denounce the coup 
as a Comintern plot, while Moscow attributes it 
to a Japanese intrigue designed to place obstacles 
in the way of China’s unification. 


Surface events supply a plausible case for 
Chang Hsueh-liang’s anti-Japanese pretensions, 
and for possible collusion between his forces and 
the Chinese Communists in the northwest. The 
rank and file of the Young Marshal’s army, con- 
sisting largely of former Manchurian troops, have 
been bitterly anti-Japanese—a stand which has 
apparently been strengthened by their contacts 
with the Chinese Communist forces. On the other 
hand, certain characteristics of the coup tend to 
negative such an interpretation. Chang Hsueh- 
liang’s character and past actions are not of a 
nature to qualify him as a close ally of the Chinese 
Communists. So far there has been no evidence 
of direct military cooperation between his army 
and the Communists. His original three demands 
asked for a declaration of war against Japan, a 
pledge by Nanking to recover all lost territories, 
and readmission of the Communists into the Kuo- 
mintang on the pre-1927 basis. This last demand 
does not express the Chinese Communist position 
today, which calls for a united front of all anti- 
Japanese forces but not on a basis merging the 
Communists with the Kuomintang. Finally, it 
has been reported that Chang Hsueh-liang is seek- 
ing rich provinces and greater revenues for his 
army and is compromising on his anti-Japanese 
demands. 


At the same time, Chiang Kai-shek’s position 
in this affair does not stand up well under close 
scrutiny. On December 11 it was revealed that 
the Nanking government had accepted a number 
of Japan’s demands. Among other items Nanking 
had agreed to suppress anti-Japanese movements, 
engage Japanese advisers, and reduce Chinese 
tariffs. Although no agreement was reached as 
to “joint defense” against communism, both sides 
“concurred on several items.” Despite Nanking’s 
ostensible repudiation of these undertakings after 
hostilities had developed in Suiyuan, several of 
them have actually been in process of fulfillment. 
On November 23 seven officers and many mem- 
bers of the All-China National Liberation Asso- 
ciation, a popular anti-Japanese organization, 
were arrested at Shanghai. Among the arrested 
officers were Chang Nai-chi, noted economist and 
former vice-president of the Chekiang Industrial 
Bank; Shen Chung-ju, president of the Shanghai 
Bar Association; and Tsou Tao-feng, a leading 
Chinese journalist and publisher. Moreover, al- 
though Chiang Kai-shek had refused “joint de- 
fense” measures against the Chinese Communists, 
i.e., brigading his own troops with the Japanese, 
he had agreed to undertake anti-Communist 
measures himself and had prepared for them be- 
fore his visit to Sian. These preparations reached 
the stage of formal action on December 12, the 
day of Chiang’s capture, when the Executive Yuan 
issued orders to twelve provincial governments 
for a general anti-Communist campaign. 

This move was aimed mainly at the situation in 
the northwest, where the growing strength of the 
Communist forces had aroused the concern of the 
Japanese. In August and September the last of 
the Communist troops had fought their way from 
Szechwan into Kansu and northern Shensi. At 
the present time, the main Red armies and all 
the important Chinese Communist leaders have 
joined forces and are consolidating their position 





; 

















in this northwestern region. In the course of 
previous fighting in Shensi, several units of Chang 
Hsueh-liang’s army had deserted en masse to the 
Communists. The new Communist policy of not 
fighting unless attacked and the practical cessa- 
tion of anti-Communist operations by Chang 
Hsueh-liang’s army had lately resulted in a vir- 
tual truce between them. Under these circum- 
stances, Chiang Kai-shek’s preparations for a 
renewed anti-Red campaign represented an open 
challenge to the Young Marshal. Nanking’s 
mobilization of forces in the northwest was thus 
directed mainly against Chang Hsueh-liang in- 
stead of against the Japanese in Suiyuan, where 
the fighting has so far been carried on entirely by 
the local provincial troops. When Chiang Kai- 
shek went to Sian, he carried with him orders to 
replace Chang Hsueh-liang by a Fukien military 
leader, Chiang Ting-wen. The Young Marshal, 
however, struck first by seizing and imprisoning 
Chiang Kai-shek. 


While Chang Hsueh-liang’s coup is open to seri- 
ous condemnation as a means of achieving unity 
in China, the essence of his demands correctly ex- 
presses the platform on which political unity 
should be attained. In this respect, his action 
presents a sharp challenge to Nanking. The poli- 
cies pursued by Chiang Kai-shek in recent years 
suggest that he has used the slogan of “unification 
before resistance” to mask his efforts to establish 
a personal dictatorship, even while he was crip- 
pling all genuine anti-Japanese forces and move- 


ments. T. A. BISSon 


EDWARD GOES INTO EXILE 


Britain’s constitutional crisis has been termi- 
nated with promptness and dignity by the abdica- 
tion of King Edward VIII in favor of the Duke 
of York. Asa result of the Abdication Act passed 
by Parliament on December 11, the Duke of York 
comes to the throne as George VI and his wife 
becomes Queen Elizabeth. In his farewell radio 
speech Prince Edward, who now goes into volun- 
tary exile as the Duke of Windsor, declared that 
he had “found it impossible to discharge my du- 
ties as King as I would wish to do without the 
help and support of the woman I love.” Edward’s 
insistence on marrying Mrs. Simpson was a 
tribute to his sincerity. Yet the elevation to the 
throne of a twice-divorced American would have 
led to such criticism that the great prestige and 
power of the Crown would, as Prime Minister 
Baldwin pointed out in a moving speech to the 
House, have been undermined far more rapidly 
than it was built up, “and once lost I doubt if 


Page Two 








anything could restore it.” The Archbishop 9 
Canterbury, on December 13, used even stronger 
language when he expressed his “sadness” that 
Edward “should have sought his happiness in : 
manner inconsistent with Christian principles 

marriage and within a social circle whose stand- 
ards and ways of life are alien to the best instinetg| 
of his people.” 


Despite Edward’s reputed pro-German sympa- 
thies, it is unlikely that his abdication will have 
any pronounced effect on Britain’s foreign or 
domestic policy. Prime Minister Baldwin’s suc. 
cess in promptly liquidating this crisis, however, 
is of great importance. Had he failed to find a 
solution, the cohesion of the Empire—held to- 
gether largely by the personality and prestige of 
the Crown—might have been jeopardized. §o 
long as the crisis existed British foreign policy 
remained paralyzed. Incidentally, it is perhaps 
significant that Germany did not take advantage 
of Britain’s internal controversy to launch an of- 
fensive in Central Europe. With the accession of 
George VI, the prospects for European stabiliza- 
tion should increase. 

In addition to demonstrating the unique capac- 
ity of Britain to resolve acute difficulties by peace- 
ful means, Edward’s abdication has indicated that 
the ties which unite the Dominions to the mother 
country are unusually strong. Under the West- 
minster Statute of 1931, any law touching the suc- 
cession to the throne requires the assent of the 
parliaments of the Dominions. Canada, Australia, 
New Zealand and South Africa assented to the ab- 
dication bill before it was introduced, but the atti- 
tude of the Irish Free State was at first uncertain. 
Had the Free State parliament exercised its power 
to veto the accession of the Duke of York, a mortal 
blow might have been struck at the Empire. On 
December 12, however, the Dublin body passed a 
law assenting to the accession, after having, on 
the previous day, abolished the office of Governor- 
General and the Crown’s prerogatives in Ireland’s 
internal affairs. 


sense merely extended the precedent established 
in 1930 when Sir Isaac Isaacs, a citizen of Austra- 
lia, was appointed Governor-General of that Do- 
minion and when last November Mr. Patrick 


But these steps were not incon-' 
sistent with the Westminster Statute, and in a! 





Duncan, a South African, was named Governor- | 


General at Pretoria. 


The events of the past two weeks have again | 


revealed the inherent moral strength of an Empire 
which, whatever its defects, remains the world’s 
strongest bulwark of liberalism and peace. 


R. L. B. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 8, Dscempsr 18, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymowp Lesits Busit, President; Esrumr G. Ocpan, Secretary; Vera MicHuies Dian, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at che Poss Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


; 








|Z] 





