



o.oo 





©. 
” 


8.5: 


* to 
der 
een 
‘ing 
Ose- 
lera 
Ses, 

the 
ince 
Lxis, 

the 
ping 
yrth- 
ire’s 
S as 
bor. 
rish- 
itted 


But, 
itral, 
y te 
e of 
ions. 
pro- 
n the 
it of 
: CONn- 
Lition 


eving 
if—it 
main 
fe of 
se de- 
od its 
39, it 
from 
thern 
D sec 
large 
arty 
a 
- been 
YTT 


43 





a 


PERIODION aK 
a 


JUL 14 194. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Wichigan 


LO). e (Cr ROH IGh: 118) & jy 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 38 


Jury 9, 1948 





HE naval battle of Kula Gulf in the central 

Solomons on July 5-6 has apparently resulted in 
a new American victory over the Japanese fleet, 
although not without losses on our own part. In 
the week since General MacArthur's headquarters 
announced United Nations operations on a 700-mile 
front from New Guinea to the Solomon Islands 
the enemy has offered more resistance by sea and 
air than on land. But this means little, for the 
Allied forces have confined themselves to the seizure 
of important, but unoccupied islands, and to landings 
on the fringes of well-protected Japanese positions. 
The real test of enemy reactions will not come until an 
effort is made to take Salamaua on New Guinea, 
Munda on New Georgia island, or some other point 
of significance in Japan’s chain of outer defenses. 

DIFFERENCES FROM GUADALCANAL. Cur- 
rent operations represent a considerable change from 
the conditions that characterized the fighting for 
Guadalcanal. Today we are definitely on the of- 
fensive in the Pacific and are not simply seeking to 
defend ourselves by attacking first, as was the case 
last year. As a result of the improvement of the 
United Nations’ position on the European front, the 
shortening of the supply route to the East through 
the victory in North Africa, and the great rise in 
American production, more naval and air power has 
become available for the Pacific. In the words of 
Secretary of the Navy Knox on July 2, “the day of 
shortages is nearing an end.” Moreover, the absence 
of a united command that drew so much criticism 
in connection with Guadalcanal is no longer in evi- 
dence: General MacArthur is in charge of the entire 
drive this year, although the forward movement in 
the Solomons is quite properly under the immediate 
supervision of Admiral Halsey. 

The present campaign may resemble last year’s 
operations in one respect: the length of time required 
for the achievement of objectives. It will not be easy 





FUTURE DRIVES IN PACIFIC CALL FOR IMPROVED POLITICAL STRATEGY 


to seize the air bases of the central and northern 
Solomons or to take Salamaua and Lae; and months 
of combat may be expected before Rabaul, the key 
Japanese air, naval and submarine base on New 
Britain island, can be reached and subdued. These 
actions may, in fact, merge into other drives this 
fall, especially if Burma is invaded when the rains 
are over and if China becomes a more important 
center of air and land activity. Everything depends, 
however, upon the nature of the Japanese reaction 
and how much Tokyo is willing to sacrifice to hold 
its island outposts. 

POLITICS AND THE WAR WITH JAPAN. 
In the excitement created by new moves of our armed 
forces, it would be unwise to forget the military im- 
portance of our political relations with Asia. Since 
the conclusion of British and American treaties end- 
ing extraterritorial rights in China last January, there 
has been an almost complete absence of United 
Nations political action in the Pacific. Although 
statements have been made, little or nothing has 
been done to resolve the doubts of the Far Eastern 
peoples, especially in China and India, about the 
future of Allied policy in the colonial world. In the 
House of Representatives, whose members applauded 
Mme. Chiang Kai-shek so vigorously some months 
ago, it has been impossible to persuade a majority 
of the Committee on Immigration and Naturaliza- 
tion to approve a bill for the repeal of Chinese ex- 
clusion and the placing of Chinese immigration on 
a quota basis. One bill along these lines has already 
been killed, and it is doubtful whether action on an- 
other can be secured before the summer recess. 

Meanwhile, the Japanese have not been idle. In 
recent months they have not only used the short- 
comings of western policy in their propaganda 
among the peoples of Asia, but they have initiated 
a new course of their own. In occupied China they 
have sought to give the impression that the days of 





> et] ie ee rae Ss 
———————————SS 221.0 ooeee--—™ 
harshness and cruelty toward the local population cases, are just in the process of awakening to th 
are over, and they have buttressed this policy by problems of the modern world. Having never 
handing over to the puppet government at Nanking ceived self-rule from their old masters, with wha 
various foreign rights and properties. In southeast can they compare the present Japanese rule, especially 
Asia they have promised independence within a year if Japan cleverly simulates concern for native we. 
to the Philippine Islands and Burma, and on July 5 fare? This danger is reinforced by the color issue 
they announced that Thailand, because of its co- which is absent from the European situation by 
operative attitude, had been ceded territories for- operates against us in Asia. 
merly part of Malaya and Burma. Although our These conditions make it all the more importap, 
major Far Eastern allies, the Chinese, will hardly be —_that the United Nations take decisive forward-look 
deceived by these moves, it would be a mistake to _—ing measures in the territories that are still unde 
think that other peoples in Asia will be entirely their control and make promises of a substantil 
immune to the Japanese appeal. character to the nations of occupied Asia. There 
PUPPETS IN SOUTHEAST ASIA. Because of a danger that we will fall into the error of think 
developments in Europe, Americans may have the ing that all the conquered eastern peoples are like 
impression that, just as Germany is able to secure the native tribal groups we are meeting in the south 
the cooperation only of corrupt and traitorous ele- Pacific, communities without national consciousnes 
ments in the occupied countries, so Japan’s native that can be dealt with entirely on the basis of treat- 
support will be limited to outright Quislings. There ing them properly after we land in their territory, 
is an important difference, however, between the two But peoples gripped by nationalist feeling will de 
situations. In Europe the conquered countries have mand more than satisfactory personal behavior on 
known what independence means and have had an the part of our troops and their leaders. They wil 
Opportunity to operate their own political institu- want to know what their political and economic 
tions. In consequence, they cannot easily be fooled status is to be when the Japanese are driven out, and 


by the invader. The people of the Indies, Malaya, their attitude toward our military operations may be) 


Burma and even the Philippine Islands have not yet strongly influenced by the nature of our reply—o 


known true national independence and, in many _ lack of it. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 
WAR TESTS RESILIENCY OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS 
The war in Europe has entered a critical phase ty of France, and his opposition to Allied interven- 


whose outcome will be decided not only by sheer tion in French affairs, foreshadow the attitude that 
weight of armed force, but also by the political wis- the liberated countries may be expected to take one 
dom and home-front cohesion of the United Nations. they are free to decide their own fate. If all that 
Nazi propaganda is doing everything in its power _—_ Britain, the United States, and Russia—each in it 
to divide the Allies, and pit them against each other, = own way, or jointly—are planning to do in Europe 
vo ae am 2 sored a the anced is to substitute their dictation for that of Hitler, 
FOCUVE OS GERCREINE We LXIs. NEWS 15 Brist to 1 they will be confronted after the war with the same 
mil, from the deeth of General Sikocski, Premier kind of resistance that has prevented—fortunately 
of the Polish government in London, in an airplane for the Allied cause—consolidation of Hitler's “nev 
crash sit July 6, to the wave of internal conflicts that order.” The task that continues to face the great 
sn ey the United States. The Allied peop ues powers is how to combine efficiency in military and 
will have to draw more than ever before on their ti ith th sat ‘ble 1 
resources of judgment and patience to meet this new pone es: nme se “er oe tam f Lary - 
propaganda barrage. + soe or Be tee es and aspirations Of s ‘ nations 
BUILDING DEMOCRACY INTERNATION. which, admittedly, are not strong enough to regail 
ALLY. But in the field of political warfare, as in 
military operations, it is not enough to remain on 
the defensive. The alarm expressed by the small 
nations of Europe, through their representatives in 





For a discussion of the problems that face the 
United Nations in the Far East, READ— 


London and Washington, concerning the draft STRATEGY OF THE WAR IN ASIA 
agreement establishing a United Nations Relief and by Lawrence K. Rosinger 
Rehabilitation Administration, on the ground that 2 5 Cc 


this draft envisages a great-power directorate for 
the post-war period, must be squarely faced as a 
portent of difficulties ahead. Similarly, the emphasis 


FOREIGN Poticy REporT, VoL. XIX, No. 3 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 








oD = of ©} 


— ~~ -«- eee Ss 4 FF aM Tn Oem OO eS le hlUr Ol lr UlC ell OP 


— tone tonto” 2 





laid by General de Gaulle on the national sovereign- 

















—=>= 
to the 
er fe 
. what 
ecialh 
€ wel. 
1SSug, 
mn but 


Ortant 
1-look. 
under 
tantial 
here js 
think. 
re like 
> south 
usness 
treat. 
rritory, 
rill de 
10f on 
ey will 
onomic 
ut, and 
may be 
oly—or 
NGER 


iterven- 
de that 
ce One 
ull that 
1 in its 
Europe 
Hitler, 
1e same 


unately 


s “new 
e great 
ary and 
ible te 
nations 
) regail 


e the 


ynth. 














or maintain their independence unaided. In essence, 
this is the never-ending task of weaving together the 
multicolored and many-textured threads of the fabric 
of democratic society. 

IS DEMOCRACY THREATENED HERE? Some 

ple in this country, disheartened by recent de- 
velopments on the home front, are beginning to 
wonder how the United States which, they feel, has 
not yet successfully solved the problem of demo- 
cratic administration within its own borders, can 
participate in the far more complex tasks of inter- 
national administration. Yet such discouragement is 
both premature and unjustified. It was to be expected 
that the fabric of our society would be subjected to 
extraordinary strains and stresses as a result of war. 
Surely, there is little virtue in making democracy 
work only under conditions of political stability and 
economic prosperity. The real test is whether it can 
work under unfavorable circumstances. And while the 
United States has not yet been tried in the sense that 
Britain or Russia or China have been tried, there is 
no ground for assuming that it will not meet the 
trials ahead with at least equal courage and reso- 
lution. 

Nor is it entirely fair to say, as have some 
American and British critics, that this country has 
proved less capable of bearing the brunt of war than 
Britain. It is true that the British people have dis- 
played remarkable courage and capacity for adjust- 
ment. But it must not be forgotten that the British 
are an unusually homogeneous people, bound to- 
gether by a long rich history of trials endured and 
triumphs achieved in common—while the United 
States is still a relatively new country, built up by 
immigrants from many lands, of many tongues, nur- 
tured in many different traditions. The achievement 
of these immigrants, over the years, in welding to- 
gether a nation in spite of many threatening divisions 
and conflicts ranks as high in the turbulent history 
of mankind’s search for the good society as the 
growth of democratic institutions in Britain. 

TEMPER OF THE COUNTRY. No one who has 
traveled up and down this country during the past 
year can feel anything but admiration for the temper 
of the people as a whole, and humility in the face of 
the selflessness, thoughtfulness, and stamina dis- 
played by the men and women who make the wheels 
of our democratic society go round. What is disturb- 
ing is, that in the midst of so much intrinsic devotion 
and concrete accomplishment, a struggle for personal 
power and prestige should still be going on among 


alte  ———_—_—_—_—_  — — ——— == 


those who represent the people in Congress, or are 
appointed by elected officials. | 
Yet, here again, it must be borne in mind that 


part of this struggle, at least, is due to sincere be- © 


lief on the part of some of the contenders that they 
cquid do a more effective job for the country, could 
save lives and shorten the war, if only they could 
exercise greater authority in carrying out the respon- 
sibilities assigned to them. Such struggles take place 
in totalitarian régimes as well—but there they are 
punctuated not by publicity, but by bullets, as those 
who fail to win the argument are disposed of by their 
opponents. The vast effort to make a democratic 
society function with some degree of discipline in 
time of war inevitably generates friction, creates a 
spirit of frustration, induces fatigue. It could doubt- 
less be carried out with less conflict, fewer delays, 
a greater spirit of give and take. But in all the heat 
and dust of the debates being waged in this coun- 
try over fundamental political and economic issues, 
the people, as well as their representatives, are at least 
learning the manifold difficulties of democratic 
processes. The lessons learned in these days of crisis 
should make us more tolerant of other countries, 
subjected to similar strains under far more critical 
circumstances, notably France, and more understand- 
ing in our approach to the problems of post-war 
reconstruction. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 





Short Cut to Tokyo: The Battle for the Aleutians, by | 


Corey Ford. New York, Scribner’s, 1943. $1.75 


A brief, popular account of fighting in the Aleutians, 
with special emphasis on the role of the Army Air Forces. 


The Command of the Air, by Giulio Douhet, translated by 
Dino Ferrari. New York, Coward-McCann, 1942. $4.00 
The first complete English translation of a classic of 

military aviation. 


The Economic Development of the Netherlands Indies, by 
Jan O. M. Broek. New York, Institute of Pacific Rela- 
tions, 1942. $2.00 
Useful short survey of this valuable area, now under 

Japanese control. The author ciscusses the historical back- 

ground, the islands and their people, commcdity produc- 

tion and sales abroad, changes in Indies economic policy, 
industrial development, foreign trade, and post-war pros- 
pects. 


The Air Offensive Against Germany, by Alan A. Michie. 
New York, Henry Holt, 1948. $2.00 


From a close study of results achieved by the RAF, the 
author concludes that 1,000-plane raids on Germany’s 50 
key cities would bring about Nazi defeat in 1948. But he 
warns that such raids will not be possible unless the 
American air force adopts night-bombing and closer 
cooperation with the RAF. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 38, Juty 9, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


uarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F, Lest, Secretary; Vera Micnetes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





Washington News Letter 





grid bteg, 





JuLy 5.—On July 12 the United States will have 
been engaged in this war for a length of time equal 
to the entire period of our participation in World 
War I. But instead of being able to celebrate a 
victorious Armistice at the end of one year, seven 
months, and five days of war as we did a quarter of 
a century ago, we have only just set our feet on the 
road to victory. This contrast between the situation 
then and now gives some idea of the magnitude of 
the present conflict as compared with the last war. 

To be sure, the military position of the United 
Nations has improved out of all recognition in re- 
lation to the picture as it was just a year ago. Then, 
the Japanese were still on the offensive in the south- 
west Pacific, after having overrun in succession 
Thailand, Malaya, the Dutch East Indies, the Philip- 
pines and Burma. The Germans were pushing ahead 
in the Caucasus, and ple were wondering 
whether Russia would be able to last through the 
summer. Rommel had captured Tobruk, driven the 


British out of Libya, and was threatening the Suez 
Canal. 


ALLIES ON OFFENSIVE NOW. Today it is the 
Allies who are everywhere on the offensive. Ameri- 
can troops have retaken Attu in the Aleutian islands, 
and in the southwest Pacific have begun an attack 
in the Solomons and in New Guinea, with the key 
Japanese base of Rabaul as their objective. Anglo- 
American forces have driven the Axis out of North 
Africa and are now threatening Sicily and Sardinia. 
The German U-boat campaign appears to have col- 
lapsed, with sinkings of Allied shipping the lowest 
in months, while the Allies for the first time are 
destroying enemy submarines faster than the Nazis 
can build them. Hitler's expected offensive on the 
Eastern front, however, has begun, although later 
than had been generally anticipated. 

Judging by Goebbels’ radio propaganda, the prin- 
cipal hope of the Nazis now is based on the belief 
that American internal economy may collapse under 
the strain of war. Recent developments within the 
United States have undoubtedly afforded comfort 
to Berlin and justified the alarming statement in the 
Senate’s Kilgore report, published on June 21, that 
“the home front is sagging.” The remoteness of the 
United States from actual war zones has fostered 
the dangerous belief that not only business, but 
politics, can be carried on “as usual” in this country. 

The most striking illustration of this illusion was 
the recent coal strike in which John L. Lewis, in 





violation of his pledge to order no strikes for the 
duration, called out the miners from the pits and 
thereby jeopardized production of munitions for the 
armed services. But Congress, too, is an offender ig 
this respect. Its revolt against the government's pro- 
posal to use subsidies as a means for rolling back 
food prices revealed: that many Congressmen retain 
the illusion that the old laissez faire economic sys- 
tem can continue to operate in time of war. The 
race riots in Detroit, too, were a disturbing symptom 
of disunity played up by Axis propaganda. 

EVILS OF DIVIDED AUTHORITY. Nor has 
President Roosevelt yet solved the problem of cen- 
tralizing authority and responsibility on the home 
front. The resignation of Chester Davis as Food 
Administrator once more called attention both to 
the division of authority and the duplication of 
effort by various war agencies. It is this state of 
affairs that provokes constant bickerings among high 
policy-making officials of the government. The ac- 
cusations and recriminations exchanged last week 
between Vice President Henry A. Wallace, in his 
capacity as chairman of the Board of Economic War- 
fare, and Jesse Jones, head of the Reconstruction 
Finance Corporation, is only the latest episode in a 
long series of such quarrels. 

The origin of this dispute goes back to April 13, 
1942, when President Roosevelt vested in the BEW 
complete control of all public purchase import op- 
erations, which had formerly been conducted by Mr. 
Jones. This directive was issued because, under 
Mr. Jones, the program of building up stockpiles of 
critical materials had failed dismally, although Con- 
gress had authorized the policy nearly 18 months 
before Pearl Harbor. But, although the President 
had conferred on the BEW power to purchase, Mr. 
Jones retained the power to sign checks, without 
which the BEW could not continue its program of 
procuring the necessary materials. The way in which 
the RFC held up the vital quinine program illustrates 
the evils both of the prevailing system of divided 
authority and the “business as usual’ mentality. 

Hitler’s sole hope of winning this war now is to 
protract the struggle and play for time, in the hope 
that war-weariness among the United Nations, dé 
visions among the Allies and, above all, a collapse 
of the American home front may compel his a¢ 
versaries to accept a “compromise peace” which 
would, in effect, leave him the victor. 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


ee 


a ee en en © ee ee ee ee © 





pm® 


a a ee a ee ee ee | 


