—--___ 
—$___ 


cross 
‘Wwan- 
hting 
Nor, 


p ver- 
to the 
» COon- 
emier 
ns at 
rts to 
tigate 
. 
| that 
red to 
atting 
>, and 
e this 
for a 
ations 
it the 
ed to 
order, 
should 
an as 
mtier. 
1 tend 
ort to 
lurian 
; time 
nswer 
. over 
ne So- 
on by 
ch 31 
mitted 
ensify 


» that 
. Yet 
ilitary 
Inner 
tween 
ter is 
ninous 
t, the 
its de- 
on has 
th the 
r that 
ion of 
acision 
are the 
losing 


ISON 


National 
N, Editor. 
car. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


by the Research Sta ff 


sieeileaiila: One Dollar a Year 
- FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


~ RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


we, 


in interpretation of current int ents 


You. XV, No. 25 APRIL 17, 1936 


DICTATORSHIP IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
by Charles A. Thomson 


An analysis of the assets and liabilities of “dictator- 


ship, Caribbean style,” and the “good neighbor” pro- 
gram of the United States. 
April 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


4 Aig > 
oN 
: »* 
r igion, oO 2\ 
sn ~? ’ a 
; VA 5 
& y UC FORGES ‘ ba 
a 
" , y “ : D. Se " 


LEAGUE STRIVES FOR PEACE ON RHINE AND NILE 


S part of the League’s effort to restrain both 

Hitler and Mussolini, the Committee of 
Thirteen meets on April 16 to determine whether 
its invitation to Italy and Ethiopia to open armis- 
tice negotiations at Geneva has borne fruit. If 
not, then the League Sanctions Committee of 
Eighteen is to discuss once more the application 
of an oil embargo. These decisions were taken 
at a meeting of the League Council, which opened 
on April 8, only after bitter arguments between 
the French and British delegates. Aroused by 
Italy’s use of poison gas in Ethiopia and its pene- 
tration of the British sphere at Lake Tana, Mr. 
Eden demanded a show-down with the Italian 
government. In reply M. Flandin, French For- 
eign Minister, attempted to secure indefinite ad- 
journment of the League Committee of Thirteen, 
in favor of direct negotiations between Rome and 
Addis Ababa. When Eden demanded a formal 
investigation of the charge that Italy has been 
using poison gas, Flandin insisted on simultaneous 
investigation of Italy’s charge that Ethiopia is 
employing dum-dum bullets. The decision of the 
League Committee to continue peace negotiations 
constituted a victory for the British point of view. 


Nevertheless, the prospect of securing a nego- 
tiated peace between Italy and Ethiopia on terms 
compatible with the Covenant appears remote. 
Intoxicated by new military victories, Mussolini 
declared at a Cabinet meeting on April 8 that 
he would be satisfied only with the “total an- 
nihilation” of the Ethiopian troops. He is ob- 
viously making a desperate effort to crush all 
resistance before the rains come next month. If 
he succeeds, the League can do nothing except to 
refuse to “recognize” the fruits of aggression, for 
at this late date military sanctions seem out of 
the question. If he fails, the strain imposed by 
the war and existing sanctions on Italian resources 
will increase, involving unpredictable interna- 
tional consequences. 


The French Peace Plan 


At the opening of the Council’s meeting the 
French government published a memorandum 
commenting on Hitler’s peace plan of April 1. 
After intimating that all future agreements 
would be valueless if the German government be- 
lieved it was entitled to ignore any treaty on the 
ground of the “vital” rights of the German people, 
it declared that prohibition of fortifications in 
the Rhineland was essential to European security. 
It argued, moreover, that the German bilateral 
non-aggression pacts, divorced from any provi- 
sion of mutual assistance, would add nothing to 
the engagements taken by Germany under the 
Anti-War Pact. “France, anxious not only for 
her friends, but also regarding her obligations as 
a member of the League of Nations, cannot con- 
ceive a settlement of Western security in which 
she disinterests herself from the security of the 
rest of Europe.” The memorandum inquired 
whether Germany would again secede from the 
League should it fail to secure satisfaction with 
regard to colonies. Was Germany willing to ac- 
cept the League’s jurisdiction in case of violation 
of its non-aggression pacts? Did it favor quan- 
titative limitation of aerial and other armaments? 
Would it recognize the European territorial status 
quo as valid? 


In an accompanying declaration, the French 
government sketched its own plan for European 
organization. This plan provided for a general 
European agreement aimed at the strengthening 
of collective security. If a general agreement is 
impossible at present, collective security should 
be achieved by regional ententes. The principle 
should be accepted that no treaty can be modified 
except by the “consent of all. No demand for 
modification shall be proposed for twenty-five 
years.” Sanctions should be applied not only 
against acts of aggression but also against treaty 
violations. For this purpose states should main- 


tain special military forces at the disposal of a 
European Commission or the League Council. 
This European Commission should supervise the 
execution of treaties, and by a two-thirds ma- 
jority decide the size of armaments of every Eu- 
ropean state, subject to appeal to a permanent 
arbitration board; by a similar majority it should 
pass on the validity of regional pacts in the light 
of the proposed general European agreement. 


With regard to economic difficulties, the French 
plan provides for the widening of markets and 
the security of trade through conclusion of a 
European customs truce and customs-union, the 
establishment of international trade tribunals to 
prevent the breaking down of economic relations, 
and the organization of a European money and 
credit system. To secure raw materials and pro- 
vide a population outlet, colonial tariff régimes 
should be modified without affecting political, 
sovereignty. None of these economic steps 
should be taken until the problem of political se- 
curity is solved. 


While some of these economic ideas are inter- 
esting, the French thesis that no territorial boun- 
daries should even be discussed for twenty-five 
years, and that the armament and treaty obliga- 
tions of every state should be determined by a 
two-thirds vote of the European Commission 
which France would obviously control, is plainly 
unacceptable to Germany if not to other states. 
Nevertheless, the French plan as a whole keeps 
the door open for negotiations. 


The Locarno powers, meeting in Geneva on 
April 10, issued a communiqué—with Italy ab- 
staining—which declared that while the German 
government had not made the contribution neces- 
sary for the restoration of confidence, it was 
nevertheless desirable to explore all opportunities 
for conciliation. Consequently Britain would get 
in touch with Germany to determine the meaning 
attached by the German government to its pro- 
posed non-aggression pacts with Eastern and 
Central European states. In case Germany makes 
any material change in the Rhineland situation, 
the Locarno powers agreed to meet at once. Note 
was taken of the fact that conversations between 
the Belgian, British and French general staffs 
will begin on April 15. Both the French and 
German peace plans will be presented to the 
League Council, and in any case the Locarno pow- 
ers will confer again at the next meeting of the 
Council, which is scheduled for May 15. Barring 
some new provocative act on the part of Hitler, 
this decision would seem to postpone any funda- 
mental action on the German problem until after 


Page Two ——— 


the French elections on April 26, while at the 
same time inaugurating negotiations for a new 


settlement. RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


SPAIN OUSTS ITS PRESIDENT 

On April 7 the Spanish Cortes, by an adverse 
vote, forced the withdrawal of Niceto Alcala 
Zamora, President of the Republic since 1931, 
The motion on which the Cortes voted declared 
that the President had unnecessarily dissolved the 
previous parliament on January 7. Under ar. 
ticle 81 of the Spanish Constitution the President 
may dissolve the Cortes twice during his six-year 
term, but parliament has the right to review the 
necessity of the second dissolution, an unfavor- 
able decision involving automatic dismissal of the 
executive. Diego Martinez Barrio, presiding of. 
ficer of the Cortes, temporarily succeeded to the 
presidency. Elections to choose a new executive 
are scheduled for May 17. 


President Alcalé Zamora’s efforts to strengthen 
Center forces and to steer a middle course be- 
tween the violently antagonistic Left and Right 
had earned for him the hostility of both groups. 
The initiative in ousting him, however, was taken 
by the Socialists, supported by the Left-Republi- 
cans; the deputies of the Right abstained from 
voting. 

Meanwhile Premier Manuel Azafia with his 
Left-Republican Cabinet continues in office. Since 
the elections of February 16, Azafia has been un- 
der heavy pressure from the Socialists and their 
allies to carry out promptly the reform program 
advocated by the Popular Front.* Demonstra- 
tions of victory by Left-wing groups led to the 
burning of churches and convents, newspaper of- 
fices and political centers of the Right parties. 
Street clashes resulted in numerous fatalities. 
Seizures by the peasants of extensive landhold- 
ings, including two properties owned by President 
Zamora, testified to the impatience of the masses 
for agrarian reform. On March 26, 60,000 farm 
laborers occupied large estates in the province of 
Badajoz. They were induced to withdraw only 
when the authorities promised to press for divi- 


sion of lands. CHARLES A. THOMSON 


**‘Another Swing of the Spanish Pendulum,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin 
February 28, 1936. 


Income and Economic Progress, by Harold G. Moulton. 
Washington, Brookings, 1935. $2.00 
In this lucidly written study Dr. Moulton concludes that 
the basic defect of our economic system lies in the distri- 
bution of national income. He calls for a more flexible 
price structure which will permit the masses to obtain the 
benefits of larger and more efficient production. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 25, Aprit 17, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasiig Bueit, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under che Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Ani 


a 
VOL. 
—_——_ 


Apri 


