


tion 


n of 
onal 
lera- 
1 of 
1 of 
the 
‘the 
rma: 


liffi 


ated 








>> FER e"* 946) 


Entered as 2nd class matter 











- 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 18 


FEBRUARY 15, 1946 





—_—_ 


U.S. MOVES TO RELIEVE STARVATION ABROAD 


ne the fact that “‘more people face 
starvation and even actual death for want of 
food today than in any war year and perhaps more 
than in all the war years combined,” President Tru- 
man set forth on February 6 a nine-point conserva- 
tion program by which the United States will strive 
to increase the amount of food it sends abroad. 
Judged by the dietary standards of nearly any other 
country, the restrictions on American food consump- 
tion outlined by the President can hardly be termed 
drastic. One series of controls, designed to provide 
6,000,000 tons of wheat for Europe during the first 
six months of this year, will oblige Americans to eat 
darker bread and fewer pastries and to discontinue 
the manufacture of alcoholic beverages and beer 
from wheat. Another group of restrictions, adopted 
to swell our exports of fats, meats, oils and dairy 
products, may result in the renewal of meat rationing. 


WHY ARE MEASURES SO BELATED? The 
chief question that arises in connection with the Presi- 
dent’s food-saving program, in view of the truly 
desperate situation which exists abroad, is why it 
was not adopted and put into operation months ago. 
Last August, when President Truman returned from 
the Potsdam Conference, he described the European 
food situation in his radio report to the nation, and 
declared: “We must help to the limits of our 
strength, and we will.” Yet in spite of this pledge, 
no restrictive measures designed to insure its ful- 
fillment were adopted. On the contrary, lend-lease 
—on which many Allied countries whose economies 
had been badly disrupted by the war depended for 
basic food supplies—was abruptly terminated on 
August 21, and most of our food rationing controls 
were lifted within three months after V-J Day. 

Meanwhile, hunger and destitution have been 
growing in nearly every Allied and liberated nation. 


To some extent, responsibility for these conditions 
rests on various foreign governments, for in certain 
cases their badly conceived and poorly executed con- 
trols have encouraged black markets, and in a few 
instances wholesale redistribution of land has sac- 
rificed immediate agricultural production for long- 
range radical reform. But it is man’s ancient enemy, 
the weather, rather than any human errors that has 
brought so large a part of the world to the brink 
of famine. On the Continent and in North Africa 
the wheat crop, on which millions of Europeans 
normally depend for the bread that is the mainstay 
of their diet, has suffered from the worst drought in 
fifty years. Other weather factors have so greatly 
impaired crops in Argentina, South Africa and 
Australia—normally among the leading granaries 
of the world—that only the United States and Can- 
ada have any considerable amount of wheat on hand. 
And, to make the world food picture still darker, 
there have been predictions of famine in India, 
which may affect many miiliouws of people by next 
summer. Coming only three years after the Bengal 
famine of 1943, which took a minimum of 1,000,000 
lives, another Indian famine would have grave ef- 
fects on the already low physical strength of the In- 
dian people, and presumably would produce far- 
reaching political repercussions. 


In view of facts like these, which have been known 
for months, it was hardly necessary to await the grim 
report, on February 6, of the Emergency Economics 
Committee for Europe to learn that 140,000,000 
Europeans are subsisting on less food per person than 
is needed for health-sustaining purposes. Neither 
was it necessary to wait until Sir Ben Smith, British 
Minister of Food, warned Parliament early this 
month that Britain must return to its lowest wartime 
rations, or until France faced its present acute food 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 





























shortages, to discover that the European food prob- 
lem has developed into a near-catastrophe. 


WHY HASN’T UNRRA DONE THE JOB? 
Many Americans have had the impression that the 
United States, by means of its participation in 
UNRRA, has been sending enough food abroad to 
insure minimum health standards to all Allied coun- 
tries in need of relief. This, however, is not the case. 
UNRRA'’s resources are available only to those lib- 
erated peoples whose governments announce their 
inability to finance their own immediate relief needs. 
At the moment UNRRA’s European operations are 
confined to Greece, Yugoslavia, Albania, Czecho- 
slovakia, Italy, Poland, the Ukraine, and Byelo- 
Russia. In the Far East, only China is being sup- 
plied from this source. Moreover, even within 
the restricted area of UNRRA’s operations, relief 
work has often been handicapped by lack of sup- 
plies. This does not mean, of course, that continued 
American support of UNRRA is not needed, and 
it is to be hoped that this organization will now be 
able to secure more supplies in this country. But it is 
equally imperative that additional aid be made 
available to non-UNRRA countries, which presum- 
ably have funds to pay and are eager to help them- 
selves. 

That the United States has nevertheless waited 
until now to take strong action on the world food 
crisis appears to have been due in part to the belief 
in Washington that this country had such great 
quantities of grain in reserve that restrictions on do- 
mestic consumption would not be needed to assure 
a surplus for foreign distribution. It has long been 
clear, however, that this assumption was fallacious, 
for the United States has been consistently failing to 


Page Two 








a 
— 


meet its monthly commitments to various Allied pg 
tions for grain exports. It should be noted, in fag. 
that the new food conservation program is designed 
solely to fulfill commitments that were made month 
ago. 

ARE AMERICANS UNWILLING TO HELP) 
The main reason the Administration has been » 
tardy in taking steps to implement its reiterated 
promises to help fulfill foreign food requirements 
has apparently been its belief that the people of this 
country were unwilling or unprepared to continue 
wartime sacrifices once the war was over. That there 
is some basis for this belief it would be impossible 
to deny in the face of widespread complaints that 
the United States has “already done more than 
enough for foreigners.’’ It would be unrealistic, how. 
ever, to overlook the existence of other Americans, 
who are not only ready but eager to help shoulder 
the responsibilities of the United States as a major 
world power. In fact, it is partly because more 
than 40 organizations representing women and labor 
have indicated their conviction that the United States 
should follow up military victory with measures for 
relief and reconstruction that the present food con- 
servation program has finally been inaugurated. 
Among the most important leaders in this effort has 
been the League of Women Voters. Members of the 
League have succeeded in building up in their local 
communities a politically effective body of opinion 
that is willing to accept enforced food restrictions 
at home to relieve desperate needs abroad. In this 
way the League and other citizen groups have trans 
lated their belief in “international cooperation ’’ into 
concrete action on the basic human problem of food. 


WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


DEBATES IN UNO HELP CLARIFY ROLE OF SECURITY COUNCIL 


The first session of the United Nations Organiza- 
tion was forced by circumstances to work out its 
procedure in the full glare of the world publicity 
given to Iran’s appeal to the Security Council against 
intervention by Russia, and the charges brought by 
the U.S.S.R. and the Ukrainian Republic against 
Britain in Greece and Indonesia. The knottiest pro- 
cedural question raised in the course of blunt de- 
bates between British Foreign Secretary Bevin and 
Russia's Foreign Vice-Commissar Vishinsky was 
whether a country that brings to the Council’s atten- 
tion a situation which, in its opinion, constitutes a 
threat to international peace and security, thereby 
becomes a party to a dispute. If that is the case, that 
country would be disqualified, under the provisions 
of the UNO Charter, both from voting and, if one 
of the Big Five, from using the veto power while 
peaceful methods of dealing with the dispute are 
under discussion in the Council. Paragraph 1, Ar- 
ticle 35 of the Charter (invoked by Iran, the U.S.S.R., 


and the Ukrainian Republic) states that any mem- 
ber of the United Nations may bring to the attention 
of the Security Council or the General Assembly any 
dispute, or any situation, which (as defined in Article 
34) “might lead to international friction or give rise 
to a dispute.” Iran’s appeal against Russia clearly 
involved a dispute between the two countries. But 
did Russia, when it charged that the presence of 
British troops in Greece constituted a threat to peace, 
thereby become party to a dispute with Britain, and 
also with the Greek government, which contends that 
British troops are in Greece with its consent ? 
WHEN DOES A CHARGE BECOME A DIS. 
PUTE? Mr. Norman Makin of Australia, president 
of the Security Council, acted at first on the assump- 
tion that no dispute was involved. Russia, therefore, 
appeared within its rights in seeking to vote on the 
matter when Mr. Bevin demanded that the Council 
acquit Britain of the charge made by Mr. Vishinsky. 
Subsequently, when it became evident that a major 





a 


ity of 
clear . 
er. Y¢ 
the Se 
proce: 
stain 
pacifi 
Russ! 
dispu 
boun¢ 
becon 
WI 
tial v 
Gree 
of th 
to dr 
uatio 
or gi 
been 
ing © 
gued 
the p 
it mi 
whic 
bers 
pute 
it to 
will 
men’ 
imp¢ 
natic 
whic 
takis 
Org. 
If 
brin 
the 
part 
vok 
whc 
pare 
sma 
disc 
alsc 
) Is € 
eno 
in | 
or 
thr 
rel: 
for 
cor 


FOR 
Heac 
Secor 
one 





| 4 


ned 
nths 


LP? 


ated 


em: 
‘ion 
any 
icle 
rise 
arly 
But 

of 
ace, 
and 
hat 


)IS- 
lent 
np 
re, 
the 
ncil 


—— 





) 
Bw 181 








—_—— 
———— 


ity of the members of the Council were prepared to 
dear Britain, Russia threatened to use its veto pow- 
er. Yet Article 27 of the Charter provides that, when 
the Security Council debates decisions on other than 
procedural matters, a party to a dispute “shall ab- 
stain from voting” as long as the Council discusses 
pacific settlement of disputes. If it is assumed that 
Russia’s charge against Britain on Greece produced a 
dispute, then clearly both Britain and Russia were 
bound to abstain from voting. When does a charge 
become a dispute ? 

While Mr. Makin has been criticized for his ini- 
tial view of the issue raised by Russia’s charge on 
Greece, his position can be justified by the wording 
of the Charter. For Articles 34 and 35 clearly seek 
to draw a distinction between a dispute, and “a sit- 
uation [which} might lead to international friction 
or give rise to a dispute.” Why would it not have 
been correct to regard Russia’s charge as constitut- 
ing “a situation”? As a matter of fact it may be ar- 
gued that it was Russia which originally confused 
the procedure by speaking of a threat to peace, when 
it might more accurately have referred to a situation 
which might cause international friction. If mem- 
bers of the United Nations must wait until a dis- 
pute threatening peace has arisen before they call 
it to the attention of the Security Council, conditions 
will probably have reached the point where settle- 
ment by peaceful means will prove difficult, if not 
impossible. The most important thing is to give 
nations the opportunity of discussing situations 
which, while not yet at the stage where a dispute is 
taking place,-call for action by the United Nations 
Organization. 

If every time a member of the United Nations 
brings a situation it regards as a threat to peace to 
the attention of the Security Council it becomes a 
party to a dispute, small nations will hesitate to in- 
voke paragraph 1 of Article 35—but great powers 
who want to annoy each other will make use of that 
paragraph on the ground that they are defending 
small nations or dependent peoples. While this may 
discourage flimsy charges by small nations, it will 
also discourage the free and fearless discussion that 
is essential to the success of the UNO. Nor is it 
enough to say that Russia’s charge about the British 
in Greece was either a figment of its imagination 
or the fruit of propaganda. For both imagined 
threats and propagation of ideas affect international 
telations just as much as tangible factors like armed 
force or economic pressure, and must be taken into 
consideration. 





Page Three 








WHAT IS NATURE OF SECURITY COUNCIL? 
The Security Council, obviously, is not a judicial 
body. Even if it be regarded as an administrative 
body clothed with semi-judicial functions at certain 
stages of the process of peaceful settlement of dis- 
putes provided for in the Charter, it is at the same 
time a political body which, when peaceful pro- 
cedures fail, is empowered to adopt sanctions up to 
and including the use of armed force against a nation 
designated as an aggressor. If a judicial decision is 
desired, then the parties to a dispute must have re- 
course to the International Court of Justice, whose 
fifteen members were appointed last week by the 
General Assembly. It is conceivable that the Court 
could have been asked to rule on certain points in 
the Iranian, Greek and Indonesian situations, espe- 
cially those involving disputed interpretation of 
documents and statements, some published, others 
unpublished. But in essence all three cases were po- 
litical, not justiciable, in character, and required the 
kind of political or, one might call it, parliamentary 
discussion accorded to them in the Security Council. 

If that is the case, then it may well be that the 
Council should restudy its rules of procedure, to 
bring them into closer conformity with procedure 
familiar to parliamentary bodies. Members of the 
United Nations might then be free to discuss what- 
ever worries are on their minds (as members of 
Parliament do in the British House of Commons), 
without thereby being regarded as having provoked 
a dispute of major proportions; and points of dis- 
agreement could be referred to fact-finding commis- 
sions for report to the Council. Any investigating 
commission, however, to be truly fact-finding should, 
as Mr. Stettinius said on February 11, “be com- 
posed of impartial persons chosen for their com- 
petence, who would represent not individual coun- 
tries but the Council itself.” Then the tendency 
displayed by the great powers during the first ses- 
sion of the UNO to force the Security Council to 
hand down either an indictment or an acquittal, just 
as if it were a court of law (which it clearly is not), 
could be checked, and the Council could function, 
as it has already shown signs of doing, as a sounding 
board for the conscience of mankind. 


VeRA MICHELES DEAN 





Pioneer Settlement in the Asiatic Tropics, by Karl J. 
Pelzer. New York, American Geographical Society, 1945. 
$5.00 
Land utilization and the problems of agricultural coloni- 

zation in the Philippines and Netherlands East Indies dis- 

cussed in detail. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 18, FEBRUARY 15, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 Fast 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotruy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











coh ARERR ae 





Washington News Letter 




















ADMINISTRATION CAMPAIGNS FOR APPROVAL OF LOAN TO BRITAIN 


Since President Truman on January 30 requested 
Congress to approve the $3,750,000,000 loan his Ad- 
ministration tentatively offered the United Kingdom 
on December 7, Federal government officials respon- 
sible to the President have been considering the 
loan’s political implications on our foreign relations. 
In some quarters in Washington the question is be- 
ing raised whether the United States will be drawn 
into a long-term partnership with Britain, at the ex- 
pense of other members of the United Nations if 
Britain alone receives a large loan from this country. 


CONGRESSIONAL OPPOSITION TO LOAN. 
Secretary of State Byrnes strongly upheld the 
necessity of extending credit to Britain at a din- 
ner of the Foreign Policy Association in New York 
on February 11. The Secretary noted that from 
the point of view of international economics, 
a sound argument can be made for singling out 
Britain as the recipient of a large loan. The United 
Kingdom depends on imports to keep its economy 
in sound condition. It lacks the dollars it needs to 
purchase goods in the United States and, unless this 
country helps it, may be unable to finance its transi- 
tion from war to peace without placing further re- 
strictions on world trade. The proposed British loan 
is part of the United States’ general program for the 
restoration of international commerce to a prominent 
place in our own economy and that of other coun- 
tries. Since this country and the United Kingdom are 
the principal trading nations of the world, our com- 
mercial interests offer compelling reasons for lend- 
ing to Britain before lending to any other nation, 
especially on the terms outlined in the draft loan 
agreement, which bind Britain to lower its imperial 
preferences and loosen its hold on the sterling area. 


The Treasury is preparing a memorandum, suggest- 
ing that the United States adopt a program of gen- 
eral international lending to other leading countries 
as well as Britain, and make loans not through the 
Export-Import Bank, whose lending capacity is lim- 
ited by statute, but through the Treasury. Mean- 
while, however, Congressional opposition to lending 
money to foreign governments is so strong that one 
suggestion which high Administration officials are 
considering as a possible way of improving the 
chances of the loan in House and Senate is an agree- 
ment to negotiate no other Treasury loans. Those 
who oppose the loan maintain that the interest of 
the United States in insuring repayment from Britain 
might cause this country to take the British side in all 


international disputes, regardless of the merits of g 
given controversy. They hold, moreover, that a loan 
to Britain alone would leave the world beset by eco. 
nomic problems that would disturb our own stability, 
While agreeing that economic stability cannot be 
recovered so long as international trade is paralyzed, 
they believe recovery will also be impeded so long 
as France, Russia, China and other countries suffer 
from actual or potential inflation and a scarcity of 
goods that can be rectified only by borrowing. 

The dilemma of the Administration has become 
apparent to Congress. On January 31 Representative 
J. Parnell Thomas, Republican, of New Jersey, wrote 
President Truman: “I hope that in recommending 
the loan to the United Kingdom you are taking into 
consideration possible demands from other nations, 
and likewise the embarrassment which would ac 
crue to us were we to grant a loan to the United 
Kingdom and not one to Russia and the other pow- 
ers."" The one intangible issue at stake is whether 
the United States, by making a single loan, would 
thereby provide a nucleus for a western bloc of pow. 
ers. At the same time, the Administration is not now 
persuaded that it would be wise to let Britain suffer 
for lack of dollars simply because Congress will not 
make dollars available to other countries in large 
supply. 

LENDING POLICY NEEDS DEFINITION. 
Since the House Committee on Banking and Cur 
rency will not take up the loan message at least 
until it has dealt with the bill extending the life of 
the Office of Price Administration, and since the 
House itself will not begin to debate the loan before 
the last of March at the earliest, the Administration 
has several weeks in which to make up its mind on 
its lending policy. 

This delay may enable the Administration to per- 
suade public opinion to support the British loan. A 
majority of the letters Congressmen now receive at 
tack the loan, but an increasing number of news 
papers back it. Uncertainty about the decision Con- 
gress will finally make perturbs the British govert- 
ment. It has accepted the invitation of the United 
States to attend the conference at Wilmington 
Island, Georgia, on March 8 that is to establish the 
International Monetary Fund and the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in a¢ 
cordance with the terms of the Bretton Woods Agree 
ments. But Britain is doubtful whether it can partic: 
pate in the Fund and Bank unless it receives the loaa 

BLAIR BOLLES 





| 


191 


