









































Se Entered as 2nd class matter 


NOV 5 


Uni». 
‘a Urs t¢ ‘a . 
°o6Y Of Bre, De 


“iLChi-« 


Ann Art *an Ulbrapy 


or. Nich, 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 














| An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





) You. XXIV, No. 2 


OcToBER 27, 1944 





T° an extent unmatched even by the Presidential 

elections of 1920, the present campaign is 
focused on issues of foreign policy. Today voters 
are earnestly trying to decide not whether the United 
States should collaborate with other nations, but 
which of the two parties will prove most capable of 
assuring our effective participation in an interna- 
tional organization to prevent aggression and pro- 
mote the welfare of all peoples. Specific decisions of 
the Administration have been criticized, from ‘differ- 
ent points of view, by those who on the one hand 
feel that the United States has gone too far in work- 
ing with other countries and, on the other, by those 
who feel it has not gone far enough. But, after sift- 
ing all these criticisms, and acknowledging that in- 
ternational collaboration is the avowed objective of 
both parties, the voters still face the task of deciding 
which one of the two candidates will prove more 
determined, and least vulnerable to isolationist pres- 
sures, in achieving this objective. 

PRESIDENT TAKES THE OFFENSIVE. It is 
to this issue that President Roosevelt addressed him- 
elf in his speech to the Foreign Policy Association 
on October 21. He did not attempt to answer point 
by point the charges leveled at the foreign policy of 
his Administration by Governor Dewey at the Herald 
Tribune Forum on October 18. Instead of being on 
the defensive, the President took the offensive: first, 
by listing some of the measures of international col- 
laboration that were opposed by Republican mem- 
bers of Congress before Pearl Harbor—notably the 
teciprocal trade treaties, the selective service law, 
lend-lease; and, second, by pointing out the strategic 
positions now occupied in Congressional committees 
dealing with foreign affairs and appropriations by 
Republicans long committed to a policy of isolation. 
At the same time, he paid a warm tribute to “‘dis- 
tinguished men and women of vision and courage” 
in the Republican party “who have vigorously sup- 








VOTERS WEIGH PARTY PLEDGES OF INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION 


ported our aid to our allies and all the measures that 
we took to build up our national defense.” He em- 
phasized the need “to complete the organization of 
the United Nations without delay, before hostilities 
actually cease,” and expressed his belief that the 
Security Council of this organization—as proposed 
at Dumbarton Oaks—“must have the power to act 
quickly and decisively to keep the peace by force, if 
necessary.” To achieve this end, he said, the Amer- 
ican representative on the Council “must be endowed 
in advance by the people themselves, by constitu- 
tional means through their representatives in Con- 
gress, with authority to act.” By stressing this cru- 
cial point the President indicated both the concrete 
step by which the United States can best assure other 
countries that it is sincere in urging prompt action 
against future aggressors, and the paramount nec 
sity of having in Congress men and women Who, 
whatever their party affiliations, “want their\gdv 
ernment to act, and not merely talk, whenevesand 
wherever there is a threat to world peace.” il) 4% 
DECISION WOULD CLARIFY POLICY, Onily 
when the United States has decided to participate 
fully and promptly in an international orgasization 
will it be able to develop a coherent foreign polity, 
unhampered by the debate waged since the turn of 
the century concerning the degree of» responsibility 
this country should assume in world: affairs., Our 
choice is not between isolation and collaboration.) At 
no time in our history have we really wanted to;be 
completely isolated from the rest of the world. On 
the contrary, Americans have wanted to trade every- 
where freely, to send missionaries abroad, to-shame 
in the cultural heritage of other peoples. Whati.we 
have been reluctant to do is to, assumé-any lasting 
political or military commitments: outside our,own 
borders or, at least, the borders of the Western Hein- 
isphere. Now we see that’ we! cannot have our|cake 
and eat it too. We cannot demand! the opén dobdr/for 





abhi ee bees SS crete ee 


fe SS ee na hc ern Sa 











our trade, freedom of the seven seas, and opportun- 
ities for our citizens to travel and teach in other lands 
unless we are ready to collaborate politically as well. 
We cannot enjoy the advantages of international col- 
laboration, and take none of its risks. 
DEWEY’S CRITICISMS. Without such clarifica- 
tion of our foreign policy, it is difficult, in fact futile, 
dispute among ourselves concerning this or that 
attitude toward given countries. Governor Dewey 
ressed the sentiments of many Americans when 
he deplored the predicament of Poland and urged 
the recognition of de Gaulle—accorded by the United 
States, Britain and Russia on October 23. But it is not 
enough to deplore this situation, or urge that meas- 
ure, unless this country is determined to assume 
responsibility henceforth for its professions of 
friendship for other peoples. It is unfortunate, under 
the circumstances, that many of the newspapers and 
political spokesmen who now feel so much sympathy 
for Poland or France showed so little desire to have 
the United States lift a finger for these countries in 
their hour of need. Nor will the cause of collabora- 
tion with other nations be advanced if natural con- 
cern for Poland should be used as a springboard for 
attacks on Russia. It is regrettable that Governor 
Dewey should have intimated that the armistice con- 
cluded on t 13 by General Malinovski of 
the U.S.S.R. with Rumania on behalf of his own 
country, as well as Britain and the United States— 
just as General Eisenhower had concluded an arm- 
istice with Marshal Badoglio of Italy on behalf of 
the United States, Britain and Russia—was a secret 
treaty, for the document he referred to was pub- 
lished on September 14 in the New York Times, and 





Page Two 





—= 


three days later in the September 17 issue of the 
weekly Department of State Bulletin. 

Many citizens would agree with Mr. Dewey ip 
regretting that the United States has not yet clarified 
its policy with respect to Germany—although Pres. 
ident Roosevelt took a step in that direction on Octo. 
ber 21. But here again our policy will take one 
form if the country decides to reduce collaboration 
with other nations to a minimum, and an entirely 
different one if it maintains an effective partnership 
in the common enterprise of post-war reconstruction, 
Governor Dewey made it plain that he does not 
differ from the Administration in his support of in. 
ternational collaboration. While not going as far as 
President Roosevelt did three days later in asking 
that Congress give the American representative on 
the Security Council the right to act promptly, he de. 
clared: “We must make certain that our participation 
in this world organization is not subjected to reser. 
vations that would nullify its power to maintain 
peace and to halt future aggression.” 

It is on the question of which party will best be 
able to prevent such nullification that the American 
people will have to decide on November 7. At a time 
when millions of our citizens are fighting overseas, 
those of us who enjoy the privilege of voting are, 
as President Roosevelt said, trustees for the men and 
women who fell in the last war and are falling in 
this war. We have no right to rest, or concentrate on 
the advancement of our personal interests and ambi- 
tions, or taste the joys of peacetime living, until we 
have fulfilled this trust—not only on Election Day, 
but in the years ahead. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(This is the first of two articles.) 





CHUNGKING-COMMUNIST COALITION ESSENTIAL TO CHINA’S PROGRESS 


There is one main issue in Chinese politics about 
which all other political questions revolve. This issue 
is the relationship between the Central government 
at Chungking, ruled by the Kuomintang under 
Chiang Kai-shek, and the Chinese Communists under 
Mao Tse-tung, with their center at Yenan and many 
guerrilla régimes in the Japanese rear. Chiang and 
Mao symbolize the two most powerful groups in 
China, whose unity or disunity will determine their 
country’s development and position in the world for 
many years to come. Nominally, it is true, there is 
but one Chinese government—at Chungking. But 
Chiang’s administration, although leading resistance 
against Japan for more than seven years, has not 
yet achieved a genuine coalescence of all the ele- 
ments that make up wartime China. The Communists 
and Chungking are fighting parallel wars against 
Japan, based on separate home fronts with distinct 
economic, political and military structures. The net 
effect is to weaken Japan, but China also suffers as a 
result of these internal divisions. 

WHO ARE THE COMMUNISTS? The Commu- 


nist-led Eighteenth Group and New Fourth Armies, 
under General Chu Teh and other masters of mobile 
warfare, range over vast areas in north and central 
China and reach almost to the outskirts of such cen 
ters as Peiping, Shanghai, Nanking and Hankow. In 
the south allied guerrilla fighters operate around 
Canton. Virtually the whole of Communist China 
consists of islands of guerrilla territory retaken from 
the Japanese after being lost to them by Central of 
provincial forces. The single exception is the Shensi- 
Kansu-Ninghsia Border Region in the northwest 
which—with its population of something undef 
2,000,000—was held by the Communists before the 
war and has not been invaded by the Japanese. 
From 1939 on the Chungking government refused 
to allow correspondents to visit the Border Regiot 
and instituted a physical blockade to cut it off from 
supplies and contacts with the outside world. This 
blockade is still maintained, but in May 1944 a group 
of newspapermen was permitted to travel to the 
northwest. The dispatches of the American reportets, 
published in this country in recent months, tell 4 














R2¢see SRB BSSSR2 FF Bs 


B. 


tell 4 





F ul . 


ns 














,_ — 


striking story of effective economic, political and mil- 
itary Organization. They suggest, for example, that 
living conditions in Yenan are better than those in 
Chungking; that the Border Region has a function- 
ing democratic government, popularly elected and 
representing the opinions of diverse elements among 
the people; and that all energies are directed toward 
vigorous prosecution of the war against Japan. 

GUERRILLA POWER. One correspondent te- 

rts that the Communists claim to have under their 
administration in the northwest and in guerrilla 
China 86,000,000 people, i.e. almost one-fifth the 

pulation of pre-war China if the usual estimate 
of 450,000,000 is accepted. A Communist represen- 
tative in Chungking also has declared that there are 
470,000 regular troops in the Eighteenth Group and 
New Fourth Armies, in addition to 2,200,000 guer- 
tillas in an organization known as the People’s Vol- 
unteer Corps. Whether or not these figures are en- 
tirely correct, the general impression they are in- 
tended to convey is undoubtedly warranted: the Com- 
munists wield enormous political and military power 
and will inevitably play a highly significant role in 
shaping China’s future. Not only is their absolute 
strength far greater today than in 1937, but they 
have gained in relative standing as a result of Chung- 
king’s deteriorating position, particularly in the past 
six months of Japanese victories on the China front. 

The fact is that the leaders of guerrilla China have 
developed an effective formula for organizing mass 
resistance to Japan on the basis of agricultural re- 
forms, popular government and democratic military 
organization. That such a formula has not been de- 
veloped by the Kuomintang is clear, for the Com- 
munists would hardly hold the areas they do if the 
Central government had an adequate program with 
which to undermine Japan’s control of overrun prov- 
inces. Under a double blockade imposed by the 
enemy and by Chungking, the Communists have 
achieved an amazing degree of self-sufficiency and 
have expanded their domain. But the main point to 
be noted is that foreign visitors who have published 
their impressions have found the guerrilla program 
4 moderate one, consonant with the principles 
espoused by the Kuomintang. 

FAILURE OF A MISSION. This past spring and 
summer Lin Tsu-han, chairman of the Border Re- 
gion, was in Chungking to negotiate a political settle- 
ment. His mission failed. The Central government 
offered to authorize and supply 10 divisions of the 
Eighteenth Group Army (100,000-150,000 men), 
to recognize the existence of the Border Region gov- 


Page Three 








































———=_= 





ernment, and to consider making a verbal promise to 
end the blockade if a general agreement was reached. 
Remaining Communist troops were to be disbanded, 


authorized forces were to be concentrated in a desig- — 


nated area, and local guerrilla governments were to 
be taken over by Chungking representatives. Lin, 
however, proposed recognition of a much larger 
number of divisions, disposition of the guerrilla re- 
gions under the National Military Council on the 
basis of principles beneficial to the war of resistance, 
the granting of legality to all political parties (at 
present only the Kuomintang is legal), and the guar- 
anteeing of free speech, press and assembly. He also 
requested the immediate establishment of popular 
constitutional government. 

These and other issues involved in the discussions 
are more than the private affair of two conflicting 
parties. They are a subject of debate between the 
Kuomintang and third-party or independent elements 
in Free China, as well as within the Kuomintang 
itself. In the past year sharp differences have de- 
veloped inside the official party, with Sun Fo, Pres- 
ident of the Legislative Yuan, leading those circles 
which consider it essential to make genuine conces- 
sions for unity if China’s sacrifices are not to be 
in vain. These circles also understand that if the 
Chungking government is to represent all patriotic 
groups by becoming a coalition régime, the Kuo- 
mintang must advance a progressive program cap- 
able of winning true popular support. But reaction- 
ary officials—men like Chen Li-fu and Chen Kuo-fu, 
two brothers high in the Kuomintang bureaucracy— 
oppose the abolition of one-party rule and seek to 
preserve the reign of clique politics and repression. 


AMERICA—AN INTERESTED PARTY. When 
Americans speak frankly on Chinese questions and 
reach unfavorable conclusions about Chungking’s 
attitude toward unity and democracy, this does not 
mean that they are forgetting the contributions made 
by the Chinese government even at this moment to 
Japan’s defeat. But Americans are growing aware that 
Chungking faces crucial decisions which either will 
greatly strengthen the régime by broadening it or 
will weaken it both internally and in relation to the 
Japanese. This country naturally is concerned, for it 
wants a powerful China as a partner in war and 
peace. Since undemocratic, narrow rule is a standing 
invitation to civil strife, it is clear that only a progres- 
sive China can be strong enough to fulfill this role. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(The third in a series of articles on conditions in China.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 2, Ocroser 27, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera MicHEeLes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ez 81 





Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








All 
i 
i 
iil 
4 
i 
My 
i 
h 
\ 
i 
ii 
r 
y 
1 





ae Seen ~ 


eae 


aang EAS 












— 














Bd19v f 


O} Sear ic 
boghy W 
W. 
niesb 


& m1 Dbsistine>: 


pS Cee ee Cet vestaweet 


Shington News Letter 









sites, 








mt. 















‘the ippines the United States has many 
active ‘alfiés, 6 ed into guerrilla groups, which 
have been'hatassinp’ the Japanese and collaboration- 
ists during the a between the surrender of United 
States’ forces ‘at ‘Cotregidor on May 6, 1942 and the 
nye of Leyte and on October 20, 1944. In a 
report to Tokyo ‘earlier this month, the Japanese Am- 
bassador in Manila;'Shozo Murata, complained that 
alone among the regions of the co-prosperity sphere 
the' Philippines ‘were kept in disorder by guerrilla 
batids, ‘in’somié of which Americans as well as Fili- 
pinos were fighting. 

LAUREL’ UPSET BY NONCOOPERATION. 
Actions'3f the’ government of the Philippine 
“tepublic,”” led “by “President” José Laurel, reflect 
the disquiet created throughout the islands by the 
’ guerrillas and ‘by the widespread noncooperation of 
other Filipinos: Seeking “peace and order,” Laurel 
late in August feotganized the islands’ constabulary, 
whose ‘fi¢w ‘cOmmahding officer, Major General 
Paulino, Santos; anounced a policy of “strict law 
enforcement.””“In ‘September Laurel divided the 
islands ‘into seven administrative districts, in order— 
among other reasons—to “coordinate the government 
activities ‘With those of the Japanese military author- 
itiés” In many districts the local officials, in opposi- 
tion t6 the cerittal ‘government's collaborationist pol- 
icies, had’ béen ‘interfering with the efforts of the 
Japatiese/ to/imairitain their defenses against the ex- 
pected United Nations invasion. 

y Resentment against the puppet government has 
been »ititensified) since September 22, when Laurel 
declared» watiom the United States and invoked mar- 
tial: dawo'ito: suppress treason, sedition, disorder and 
violence; and toxforcibly punish all disturbances of 
public peace.’i Apparently the war declaration threat- 
ened the unlityof the cabinet. Foreign Minister Clark 
M: Recto commerited that it had thrown the country 
into'a State-of:\‘temporary confusion.” Teofilo Sison, 
Home Minister; predicted that the state of war would 
probably :cause a further deterioration of respect for 
law.and order. Oni September 25 Laurel admitted the 
weakness |of| his leadership and the disunity of the 
nation by announcing that “on no occasion” would 
he authorize conscription of Filipinos to fight for 
Japan, although conscription is essential to imple- 
ment the declaration of war. 

Japan's policy of exploiting the islands economic- 
ally and its failure to provide adequate imports of 
food for the Filipinos are among the factors respon- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


WILL EXPECT ROLE IN PHILIPPINES GOVERNMENT 


sible for the unwillingness of the people to support 
the agents of Japan or Laurel. The chief economic 
program of the Philippines under Japanese rule was 
production of critical minerals—copper, chrome and 
manganese—for export to Japan. For this purpose 
labor was diverted to the mines, and hundreds of 
trucks were used to transport the minerals to ports, 

Japan has made small return for this precious loot 
in the one commodity the Philippines badly need— 
foodstuffs. Last May the Japanese army announced 
its determination to import “large quantities” of 
rice, but a shipping shortage prevented fulfillment of 
this decision—assuming that the will was there. The 
Filipinos’ need became so acute, however, that on Sep- 
tember 14 the Imperial Japanese Army contributed 
2,000,000 pesos to the Philippine relief fund and on 
September 18 donated 3,000 sacks of Saigon rice for 
distribution to the people of Manila and Cavite. 

Neither this “largesse’’ nor the efforts of the 
Manila government to increase domestic agricultural 
production have ameliorated the food problem. Min- 
ister of Economic Affairs Pedro Sabido promised in- 
tensive output of rice and casava, improved methods 
for distributing food, and threats of punishment 
against dishonest officials who connived at violating 
the food control laws. Undoubtedly the United States 
must meet large-scale requirements for food relief. 

WILL GUERRILLAS ACCEPT OSMENA? 
While guerrilla activities are sure to assist the ad- 
vance of the invading armies, they nevertheless pre- 
sent this country with a grave political problem.* 
According to reports which have leaked out from the 
Philippines, many of them oppose return of the gov- 
ernment which has been conducting its affairs from 
Washington as an exile capital. “At my side és 
your President, Sergio Osmefia,” General Douglas 
MacArthur, commanding the invasion, said in his 
proclamation to the Filipinos when he landed on 
Leyte. A conciliatory man, Osmefia may find a com 
mon ground with the more temperate of the guet- 
rillas, and in the Philippines—as in the liberated 
European countries—it is to be expected that the re 
turning government will invite representatives of 
resistance groups into the cabinet. It is the hope of 
the United States that internal political agreement 
will have been reached by the date fixed for Philip 
pine independence—July 4, 1946. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


*See Walrer Wilgus, ‘‘Filipinos 


Foreign Policy 


Face Serious 


iipit Post-Liberation Problems,” 
Bulletin, August 11, 1944. 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





191 


va. 


—_—_ 


Wil 


BY 
( 
on tl 
Asso 
ing : 
fulfil 
tutio 
vit 
[ opm: 
Roos 
whil 
alrea 
the J 
—th 
near 
Assc 
to he 
the 
, twet 
eithe 
the : 
beer 
whi 
I 
suin 
stan 
fore 
affir 
tion 
it is 
thes 
eith 
terr 
niti 
Ar 
s€C 
mer 
Lez 
Th 

















