




le 





VoL. XV, No. 39 


MEY 20 ae °: 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 





JULY 24, 1936 





+ 
Ul 


MR. BUELL TO LECTURE 


During the weck of August 10, Mr. Buell will give a series 


to which F. P. A. members are invited. 


The National Council of YMCA’s, 40 College St., Toronto, 
will be glad to furnish details regarding the Institute, which will 
be held from July 31 to August 14 at Lake Couchiching, Ontario. 


lectures at the Canadian Institute on Economics and Politics, 





Enured as second 


class matter December 











2, 1921, at che Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879 
«) ~ 4 +84 

v a se WJ | ow 

< a4 

Xo; i 

aes ( o~ 


Periodical Division, 


Library of Congress, 


Washington, D. C. 











JOCKEYING FOR POSITION IN EUROPE 





HE events of the past two weeks would indi- 
cate that Hitler has succeeded in preventing 
Italy from combining with France and Britain 
in a new Stresa front. Germany has achieved this 


} not only by making concessions with regard to 


Austria, but also by strengthening Italy’s position 
in the air, particularly in the Mediterranean. An 
agreement signed June 26 established direct air 
communication between Rome, Berlin and the 
North Sea, giving Italy a base in Hamburg. This 
air route cuts directly across the line maintained 
between France and the Soviet Union. Italy, in 
return, has given Germany an air base in the 
Dodecanese which may prove of value in realizing 
Nazi ambitions in the eastern Mediterranean. 

On the heels of their agreement with Austria, 
the Nazis have taken a new step in Danzig. Here 
the local government on July 18 enacted a series 
of decrees virtually abolishing the democratic con- 
stitution guaranteed by the League and dissolving 
opposition parties. Although Poland tended to 
minimize Nazi activities in Danzig, in accordance 
with the German-Polish friendship agreement, 
these decrees came as a shock to Warsaw. The 
official Polish press stated that, while protection 
of the Danzig opposition is a matter for the 
League, “Poland will not allow her rights to be 
impaired in the slightest degree.” By making 
temporary concessions Hitler succeeded in win- 
ning the friendship of Poland in 1934 and of Italy 
in 1936. But he cannot absorb Danzig and Aus- 
tria without losing both of these friendships. 

Moreover, other powers have not been slow to 
answer the German-Italian move. On July 15 


Foreign Minister Titulescu won a striking vic- 
tory over his Nazi opponents in Rumania, and on 
the next day it was announced that a military 
railway across Rumania, which would make it 
possible to transport troops from Russia to 
Czechoslovakia in case of war, would be construc- 
Should this 


ted with the aid of a Prague loan. 


announcement de followed by an alliance between 
Moscow and Bucharest, German penetration in 
Southeastern Europe may encounter new ob- 
stacles. 


The Montreux Conference 


A further check to Italy and Germany came at 
the Montreux conference, which met on June 22 at 
Turkey’s request to revise the 1923 Straits con- 
vention. This convention prohibited Turkey from 
fortifying the Straits and obliged it to allow free 
passage into the Black Sea, subject to certain re- 
trictions, unless Turkey itself was at war, when 
the Straits might be closed to enemy vessels. The 
convention was placed under the supervision of an 
international commission. Turkey contended that, 
in view of world-wide rearmament—Ankara is 
particularly afraid of the Italian base in the Dode- 
canese—it had found it necessary to fortify the 
Straits. 
to secure peaceful revision of post-war treaties— 
a division early arose between the Soviet Union, 
which wished to make the Black Sea a closed lake, 
but with the right to send its own fleet into the 
Mediterranean, and Britain, which asked that, in 
a war in which Turkey was neutral, belligerent 
fleets be allowed to enter the Black Sea without 
restriction. The British proposal, under which 
any fleet could strike a blow at the Russian Black 
Sea coast, seemed to be based upon the pre-war 
conception of belligerent rights, ignoring the ques- 
tion whether war was in violation of the League 
Covenant. Following announcement of the Aus- 
tro-German accord, Britain modified its position. 
In the new convention, signed on July 20, Turkey 
is allowed to fortify the Straits and to close them 
to the warships of all countries when it is at war, 
or threatened by aggression. In the latter case, 
however, Turkey agrees to reopen the Straits if 
the League Council, by a two-thirds majority, as- 
sures it that its security is not threatened. Non- 





At the Montreux conference—the first - 








———— 

















Black Sea tonnage in the Mediterranean is re- 
stricted to a maximum of 45,000 tons, while the 
Russian fleet is unlimited, and in peacetime may 
be sent without restriction into the Mediterran- 
ean. What is more important, Turkey also must 
admit belligerent warships if these are acting 
against an aggressor in accordance with the 
League Covenant or with a regional pact, regis- 
tered at Geneva, to which Turkey is a party. 
Thus if Turkey can be induced to adhere to the 
Franco-Soviet pact of mutual assistance, the Rus- 
sian and French fleets will be able to utilize the 
Black Sea as a base from which to launch an at- 
tack on the Mediterranean. In any event, the 
outcome of the Montreux conference seems to have 
strengthened the anti-Italian bloc in the Mediter- 
ranean as well as the principle of collective se- 
curity. 

Meanwhile, on July 15 Mussolini announced the 
lifting of League sanctions in a speech declaring 
that “the white banner has been hoisted in the 
ranks of the world’s sanctionists.” Italy declined 
to take part in the Montreux conference, or in 
the Locarno conversations, originally scheduled 
for July 22, unless Germany was also invited. 
Britain, after considerable hesitation, agreed to 
participate in a three-power Locarno conference 
with France and Belgium, but only for “prelim- 
inary discussions,” in the hope that a five-power 
conference would follow. The next few months 
are likely to see a continuation of this jockeying 
for position. Only the future will determine 
whether the result will be a division of Europe 
into two hostile systems of alliances, a new con- 
cert of the great powers such as Mussolini desires, 
or a reorganized League. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


NANKING GAINS CONTROL OF KWANGTUNG 


The retirement of General Chen Chi-tang, ruler 
of Kwangtung province since 1931, marks the 
final collapse of the challenging movement against 
Nanking initiated by the Southwest Political 
Council early in June. Effective military resist- 
ance by Chen Chi-tang’s forces has ended, and 
further opposition by the Kwangsi commanders 
may be liquidated without fighting. In the final 
outcome, Nanking’s control over the south will un- 
doubtedly be more firmly established than at any 
time in the past. 

Under cover of a surface calm, an intense dip- 
lomatic struggle was waged during the past 
month between Nanking and the south. Chiang 
Kai-shek mobilized the full strength of the party 
machinery, which he closely controls, by summon- 





Page Two — 





ing the Kuomintang Central Executive Committee 
to meet at Nanking on July 10. At the same time, 
he lavished millions of dollars in the successful 
effort to buy off Chen Chi-tang’s military asso- 
ciates. The Southwest Political Council attempt- 
ed to broadcast a three-point program of demands 
on Nanking, which it presented at the Kuomin- 
tang plenary session. The demands comprised 
severance of diplomatic relations with Japan and 
armed resistance to the invader; abrogation of all 
secret treaties, including the Shanghai armistice, 
the Tangku truce and the Ho-Umezu agreement; 
freedom of action for the people’s anti-Japanese 
movements and restoration of civil rights, includ- 
ing freedom of speech and publication. 

This program was smothered by Nanking’s 
press censorship and apparently failed to carry 
conviction in the country at large, as witnessed 
by the refusal of Generals Tsai Ting-kai and 
Chiang Kwang-nai, former leaders of the Nine- 
teenth Route Army, to join the movement. On 
July 7 a number of Cantonese aviators deserted; 
the defection of General Yu Han-mou, commander 
of the First Kwangtung Army, on July 8, proved a 
crippling blow. At Nanking on July 13 the plen- 
ary session rejected the southern proposal for 
active resistance to Japan, deposed Chen Chi-tang, 
appointed Yu Han-mou in his place and ordered 
the dissolution of the Southwest Political Council. 
Yu Han-mou assumed control of his army and 
turned it against Canton, thus facing Chen Chi- 
tang with part of his own forces. Further defec- 
tions ensued and on July 18, when his remaining 
officers refused to fight, Chen withdrew to Hong- 
kong. 

General Yu Han-mou’s powers at Canton are ex- 
pected to be purely administrative, since 70,000 
reliable Nanking troops will be garrisoned along 
the Canton-Hankow railway in northern Kwang- 
tung. <A financial commission, headed by T. V. 
Soong, will consolidate Nanking’s fiscal control 
over the province. It remains to be seen whether 
Nanking’s newly acquired strength will induce 
Chiang Kai-shek to enter upon a program of seri- 
ous resistance to Japan’s encroachments. The im- 
mediate effect of Nanking’s victory is to reduce 
the strength of those forces within China which 
were pressing the central government to revise 
its non-resistance policy. On July 21 the exten- 
sion of Chiang Kai-shek’s influence to Canton was 
signalized by two events: anti-Japanese posters 
were torn down, and Chinese newspapers which 
had been denouncing Japanese aggression ap- 
peared with blank columns eliminated by the 


censor. T. A. BISSON 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 39, JuLy 24, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Screet, New York, N. Y. 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
RayMOND Lestiz BueELL, President; EstHer G. OGpEN, Secretary; Vera MicHeLtes DEAN, Edistor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











| 


