A ale 





L\ 


a 


TA. 


un- 
DrO- 
of 
velt 
yf ia- 
lled 
60, 
and 
and 
lear, 
tary 
N to 
e of 
for 
ress, 
rply 
and 


5 re. | 


itary 
the 


been 
onal 
air- 


tion 
) per 

and 
As a 
Navy 


the | mainly on popular discontent with economic condi- 
imal} ; 
ships | 


| handling of the war and the diplomatic issues relat- 


con: 
this 
ama: 
verse 


bill 


ques 
ith a 
aken 
ional 
e eX: 
reign 
hill. 
ER 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


PERIODICAL 
You. XIX, No. TF ENER AL Tine any 
WHY EUROPE WENT TO WAR 
By Vera Micheles Dean 


“I value your concluding remarks, which are 
tempered with wisdom and wise with temperance.” 








JANUARY 19, 1940 








— 


—Raymond Gram Swing 
The December WORLD AFFAIRS PAMPHLET . 


—_—— 


. 25 cents 


JAN 
Entered as BAL, 


class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 
University of Wichigan 


Ann Arbor, Michizan 











NEW TOKYO CABINET FACES DIPLOMATIC TEST. 





es NTMENT of Admiral Mitsumasa Yonai 
as the new Japanese Premier on January 14 reg- 
isters a victory for the ‘elder statesmen” who have 
been stubbornly resisting extremist influences since 
1931. Admiral Yonai, a recognized moderate, is 
known to have opposed the efforts made by the 
amy to conclude a military alliance with Germany. 
The former War and Navy Ministers are taken over 
into the new Cabinet, however, and little actual 
change in the cautious policy of the previous Cabinet 
isto be anticipated. A real challenge to the program 
being followed by the military, entrenched in the 
government China Affairs Board, has not yet become 
practical politics in Japan. The “new order in East 
Asia” is still the accepted framework within which 
Japanese policy must be worked out, but a moderate 
statesman is obviously needed for the task of con- 
ciliating the United States at this time. 


THE CABINET CRISIS. The most significant 
aspect of the overthrow of General Abe’s Cabinet— 
merely hinted at in press dispatches—is that it turned 
tions. No opposition to the Abe government's 
ing to the war existed in proportions strong enough 
to warrant the Cabinet’s resignation. The current mil- 
tary campaigns in south China, particularly the oc- 
cupation of Nanning, were being reported as brilliant 
victories by the Japanese forces. Preparations for the 
inauguration of Wang Ching-wei's centralized pup- 
pet government in occupied China were progressing 
favorably. A few days before General Abe’s resig- 
nation the China Affairs Board, the Cabinet and the 
Emperor had successively approved the plans for es- 
tablishment of Wang Ching-wei’s régime. The Jap- 
anese people had been led to believe that the Grew- 
Nomura conversations at Tokyo had achieved satis- 
factory results, involving assurances that the United 


States would institute no special discriminatory mea- 
sures when the Japanese-American trade treaty ex- 
pired on January 26. The fact that Admiral Yonai 
has taken over these policies in toto indicates clearly 
that issues of foreign policy were not responsible for 
the change in government. 

Behind the Cabinet crisis lay a general movement 
of economic dissatisfaction, accentuated by a serious 
government blunder in the handling of the rice ques- 
tion. For several months Japanese newspapers and 
periodicals have been filled with complaints over the 
functioning of the “economic control” provisions, 
shortages of necessities, and the rise in prices. In the 
autumn these economic issues came to a focus on the 
rice shortage which had developed after the crop 
failure in Korea, due mainly to a severe drought. Ex- 
tensive hoarding occurred, and the rice dealers en- 
gaged in “black market’’ selling above the fixed price 
of ¥38 per koku (5.1 bushels). On November 6, dis- 
regarding previous statements that the official price 
would not be increased, the Cabinet suddenly an- 
nounced that the price would be raised to ¥43. As 
the farmers had already disposed of the bulk of their 
crop, the gain was reaped mainly by the dealers. 
Shortages in other necessary commodities, notably 
charcoal, also became serious last year, leading to 
official regulations against heating residences before 
December 15. 

Questions of this nature apparently brought about 
the non-confidence petition, signed by a majority of 
the Diet members and presented to Premier Abe at 
the end of December. It is significant that the army 
itself counseled General Abe’s resignation, in order 
to avoid renewed popular agitation over these deli- 
cate economic issues when the Diet reconvened on 
January 20. The first effort of the new Cabinet, it is re- 
ported, will be directed toward loosening the restric- 
tions of the control decrees imposed under the Na- 




















tional Mobilization Law. Owing to the difficulties of 
Japan's economic situation, however, the problem of 

ecting improvements in the living conditions of 
the people without jeopardizing the war effort pre- 
sents a serious dilemma. 


WAR FRONTS IN CHINA. Since mid-Novem- 
ber Japanese forces have engaged in two strong of- 
fensive thrusts in south China. The occupation of 
Nanning cut a Chinese line of supply along high- 
ways from French Indo-China into Kwangsi province. 
The railway from Indo-China into Yunnan province, 
however, lies much further inland. From Nanning 
Japanese planes are able to bomb this railroad with 
somewhat greater facility, despite the obstacles im- 
posed by distance and high intervening mountains. 
Such bombing raids apparently inflicted some damage 
on the Yunnan section of the railway early in Janu- 
ary, leading to a French protest which was rejected 
by the Japanese authorities. It is doubtful whether 
bombing raids can entirely cripple this railway, al- 
though it may be closed through Japanese pressure on 
the French authorities. The new Burma-Yunnan high- 
way is so far inland as to be virtually impregnable; it 
can be closed only if Britain succumbs to Japanese 
pressure. 


The second Japanese offensive—northward from 
Canton—has apparently resulted in a military victory 
for China as crushing as that registered last fall at 
Changsha. These two campaigns, in fact, bear strik- 
ing similarities. In both cases, the Japanese forces 
were seeking to extend their control over the Canton- 
Hankow Railway. Except for limited areas around 
Hankow and Canton, Chinese armies hold the inter- 
vening 400-mile stretch of this important railway. In 
September the Japanese command struck from the 
north at Changsha, but failed; in December, the at- 
tack was shifted to the southern end of the line. By 
late December the Japanese divisions had advanced 
80 or 100 miles from Canton into northeastern 
Kwangtung province. Chinese counter-attacks first 
halted the advancing Japanese columns, and then 
forced them into a disastrous retreat. By mid-January 
the Chinese forces had fought back to within 25 
miles of Canton, where they were still pressing hard 
on the retreating Japanese troops. 


Page Two 








—= 


DIPLOMATIC ISSUES. On the political from 
Japan’s leaders have completed the initial steps tg. 
quired for establishment of Wang Ching-wei’s ney 
government, which is expected to be formally jp. 
augurated in the near future. Under the military cop. 
ditions prevailing in China, this régime can provide 
only the thinnest screen for what is in effect Japanes 
control and domination. If Japan’s forces of occupa 
tion were withdrawn, no Chinese government unde 
Wang Ching-wei could stay in power for even a week 
in present-day China. Japanese sponsors of the ney 
régime hope that it may contribute to a split in the 
nationalist government at Chungking, and thus weak. 
en Chinese military resistance. Of this there are as ye 
no convincing signs. If, however, the Japanese ay. 
thorities could arrange a compromise settlement with | 
the Western powers, leading to tacit recognition of 
Wang Ching-wei’s régime, the effect on Chungking 
might prove much more serious. Japan’s negotiations 
with the Western powers may thus provide the key 
to the outcome of events in China. 





The crucial diplomatic issue concerns Japanese. | 


American relations after the trade treaty expires on| 


January 26. The strong plea made on January 11 by) . 


Henry L. Stimson, former Secretary of State, for an 
embargo on the sale of American war materials to 
Japan has called forth vigorous rejoinders. Forces | 
on both sides of this issue are lining up for | 
what is expected to prove a severe struggle) 
in Congress during the winter. The State De| 
partment continues to maintain a tight-lipped| 
silence on the policy to be followed after Jan-| 
uary 26, except for denying that a modus vivendi on| 
trade relations with Japan has been reached. Never 
theless, it is not expected that any immediate penal-| 
ties on Japanese trade, through tariff action or other | 
wise, will be imposed when the treaty expires. It| 
seems probable that the State Department will con 
tinue to explore possibilities of securing more favor | 
able treatment for American nationals in occupied 
China, while holding the threat of penalty action ovet 
Japan's head. The larger question of the embargo will 
meanwhile be left in the hands of Congress. 


T. A. Bisson | 





NEUTRALS SEEK PROTECTION AGAINST WAR 


The cancellation of military furloughs in the Neth- 
erlands and the mobilization of additional troops in 
Belgium on January 14 represent another one of 
those scares which have periodically disturbed the 
neutral countries of Europe since the outbreak of hos- 
tilities. Everywhere, from the Balkans to Scandinavia, 
the neutrals are making feverish preparations to 
guard against the constant threat of involvement in 
war. 


THE LOW COUNTRIES IN DANGER? In the 
light of conflicting reports regarding German troop 
movements it is difficult to determine whether tht 


most recent measures of the Low Countries, whic! 
coincided with the temporary suspension of home| 


leaves for the British Expeditionary Force in France 
are anything but purely precautionary. In Berlin the 
rumor of an impending German invasion of the 
Netherlands was dismissed as “another fear epidemi 








z= \\ 


mov 
shot 
agai 
Brit: 
Ger: 
trals 
Jan 


witl 
wha 
indi 
case 
eer 
Lov 
arm 


mrpym,~pinppop.enad 





front 
PS re. 
S new 
ly in. 
Y Con. 
‘OVide 
aNese 
Cupa- 
under 


> new 
in the 
Weak. 
as yer 
eau 
with 
on of 


ations 





e key 


Anese- 
eS On 
11 by} 
Or an 
als to 
‘orces 
> for} 


uggle | 
De 


ipped 

Jan- 
di on} 
Jever: 
enal- 
other: | 
es. It 
| COM 
-aVOl: | 
upied | 
1 over 
> will 





ON | 


in the 
troop 
r the 
vhich | 
home 
ance, 
n the 
f the 
demic 








—————— 
— 


based on false reports.” If the Germans failed to 
move last November, there seems no reason why they 
should do so now. While a successful operation 
against Holland would give the Reich bases closer to 
Britain, the extension of hostilities might also make 
Germany much more vulnerable and bring other neu- 
trals into the war. In a strongly worded statement on 
January 6 the Netherland government again warned 
“that each violator of Dutch territory will be met 
with the most severe power of our weapons, from 
whatever side attack may come”; and Belgium has 
indicated that it would give immediate assistance in 
case of aggression against its northern neighbor. It 
seems hardly in Germany’s interest to convert the 
Low Countries into an arena of war and deprive its 
amy of the protection now afforded by the Westwall. 
The frequent reports of German threats may be mere- 
ly part of the “war of nerves” which Berlin is waging 
against all neutrals, in order to induce them not only 
to furnish the Reich with more supplies, but to re- 
double their efforts in favor of an early peace. 


SCANDINAVIA BETWEEN TWO FIRES. Nor 
would Germany gain anything by extending the zone 
of military operations to Scandinavia. The threaten- 
ing tone of the German press expresses only the 
Reich’s fear that Norway and Sweden may allow 
themselves to become embroiled in a war with the 
Soviet Union by assisting the Finns. Such a war, in 
which the Allies would probably participate, might 
cut Germany off from indispensable supplies of 
Swedish iron ore. In response to German warnings, the 
Scandinavian press has emphasized that none of the 
northern countries would ever permit a major power 
to utilize its territory as a base of operations. At the 
same time Norway and Sweden firmly rejected a So- 
viet note, delivered on January 5, which claimed that 
the assistance accorded to Finland violated their obli- 
gations as neutrals. Both maintained their right to 
permit the departure of volunteers as well as the 
transit and purchase of war supplies for Finland. The 
publication of this correspondence in Moscow on 
January 14 further exacerbated their relations with 
the U.S.S.R. Tass, the official Soviet news agency, 
characterized the Norwegian and Swedish replies as 
not ‘entirely satisfactory,” and the Moscow press and 
radio sharply assailed the two countries. The Scandi- 
navian nations, however, refuse to be intimidated. 
Their determination to defend themselves and pursue 
an independent policy was affirmed in the speeches 
with which King Gustav and King Haakon opened 
the Swedish and Norwegian parliaments on January 
11 and 12 respectively. The two sovereigns an- 
nounced that their governments would seek larger 
military appropriations. 





Page Three 








NEW MOVES IN THE BALKANS. In the Bal- 
kans both Italy and Turkey continue their efforts to 
keep that region free from conflict. The comversa- 
tions which the Hungarian Foreign Minister, Count 
Csaky, had with Count Ciano at Venice on January 
6 and 7 appear to have produced an agreement for 
close cooperation against any Soviet attempts to pene- 
trate into southeastern Europe. The reported accord 
is probably not directed against Germany, since Hun- 
gary, living in the shadow of the Reich, can hardly 
afford any anti-German undertakings. In fact, Ger- 
many may welcome the purported agreement as a 
possible check on any eventual Soviet move into the 
Balkans. The efficacy of Italian assistance to Hungary 
will depend, however, on the attitude of the Yugo- 
slav government, whose territory separates Italy from 
Hungary. For the moment Belgrade is still intensely 
distrustful of Italian motives. It fears that Italy and 
Hungary plan to set up a three-power, anti-Soviet, 
Catholic bloc which would include Croatia, and sus- 
pects that the Italians fomented recent disorders in 
Croatia and elsewhere in an attempt to split the 
Yugoslav state. 

While Italy has counseled Budapest not to use 
force in settling its territorial dispute with Rumania, 
Turkey has been making similar efforts in Bulgaria. 
The establishment of a direct air service between 
Sofia and Moscow and the conclusion, on January 5, 
of a three-year trade agreement by the U.S.S.R. and 
Bulgaria, created widespread fears in the Balkans 
that Sofia was rapidly falling under the influence of 
the Kremlin. The rumor—apparently unfounded— 
that Bulgaria had promised the Soviet Union air and 
naval bases at Varna and Burgas on the Black Sea 
added to the alarm felt in Turkey and Yugoslavia. 
Bulgaria, however, has been moving cautiously. The 
Bulgarians, despite their traditional sentimental at- 
tachment to Russia, probably know that the U.S.S.R. 
is unable for the present to help them realize terri- 
torial revision at the expense of their neighbors. In 
recent conversations with Numan Menemencioglu, 
Secretary-General of the Turkish Foreign Ministry, 
the Bulgarian Premier and Foreign Minister, George 
Kiosseivanoff, reassured Turkey about his country’s 
peaceful intentions. The communiqué issued at the 
close of the conference on January 13 expressed com- 
plete agreement on “the maintenance of peace in the 
Balkans and the preservation of the neutrality pro- 
claimed by the Bulgarian government.” 


JOHN C. deWILDE 





An Atlas of Current Affairs, by J. F. Horrabin. Sixth edi- 
tion revised. New York, Alfred A. Knopf, 1939. $1.50 
Brings timely aid to frantic searchers for shifting boun- 

daries. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 13, January 19, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotrHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHELBs DkAN, Biéitor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


is 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 





sibber, 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JAN. 15.—A significant re-statement of American 
naval policy was allowed to pass almost unnoticed 
last week as Congress opened discussion of President 
Roosevelt's national defense budget and heard con- 
flicting testimony on the Vinson bill to increase by 
25 per cent the combatant tonnage of the Navy. 


REVISING “FUNDAMENTAL” NAVAL POL- 
ICY. Testifying in support of the Vinson bill, Ad- 
miral Harold R. Stark, the new Chief of Naval Op- 
erations, revealed for the first time a departure from 
the fundamental policy of a ‘Navy second to none” 
in favor of a fleet equal to any hostile coalition which 
might be brought against it. Admiral Stark ex- 
plained that the General Board of the Navy had been 
compelled to revise its estimates of the defense re- 
quirements of this country as a result of the events 
of 1938 and the outbreak of war in 1939. “We must 
face the possibility,’ he said, “of an Allied defeat, 
and then measure the strength of the powers which 
might combine for action against the Americas.” 
Theoretically, he asserted, the United States Fleet 
should be increased to a strength “not less than that 
required to defend the United States, its interests and 
possessions, and maintain the integrity of the Monroe 
Doctrine against the combined navies of our potential 
enemies in both oceans.” To assure victory, we should 
have a 5 to 3 ratio of superiority available for the 
Atlantic, as well as the Pacific. 


This objective, even though not realized in the Vin- 
son bill, represents a startling advance beyond the 
limits of our naval policy as previously announced. 
For more than 20 years our naval construction pro- 
grams have been based on the principle of “parity” 
with the largest fleet of any single foreign power. 
The claim to parity with Great Britain was first ad- 
vanced in the expansion program of 1916, and was 
confirmed at the Washington Conference of 1921, 
when the 5-5-3 ratio was established. No change in 
policy was suggested in 1938, when Congress author- 
ized a 20 per cent increase in tonnage to keep up 
with the construction programs of other powers. 


The new Vinson bill, which calls for another 25 
per cent increase in ‘“‘under-age’’ vessels, would be 
sufficient to maintain the existing ratio in the Pacific, 
but not adequate, according to Admiral Stark, “to de- 
fend our home waters, the Monroe Doctrine, our 
possessions and our trade routes’ against a possible 
coalition of Japan, Russia, Germany and Italy. Never- 
theless, it confronts Congress with an important ques- 


tion of naval policy, and one which has far-reaching 
implications for American foreign policy. 


NATIONAL DEFENSE BUDGET. Apart from 
the naval program, the national defense estimates in 
President Roosevelt's budget have proved a source of 
much confusion in Congress. Last week five leading 
newspapers published five different sets of figures, 
and even the Congressional Record carried summaries 
which varied by several hundred million dollars. One 
reason for these discrepancies is that the budget pre. 
sents two complete statements, one based on “esti- 
mated expenditures” and the other on ‘‘estimated ap- 
propriations,” not all of which may actually be ex- 
pended during the fiscal year. The real cause of con- 


fusion, however, is the division of this year’s defense | 


appropriations into separate budgets, with the regu. 
lar Army and Navy funds included in Budget “A,” 
while “emergency” funds are segregated in Budget 
“B.” The emergency budget—which totals $573,000, 
000—not only includes supplementary appropriations 
for the War and Navy Departments, but also allo- 
cates funds to the Coast Guard, the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation and the Panama Canal, available for 
expenditure during 1940 and 1941. To arrive at the 
total figure for national defense, it is necessary to 
add the substantial allotments to the Army and Navy 
from the Public Works account. The actual appropria- 
tions called for during the present session of Con- 
gress are shown in the following simplified table: 


BREAKDOWN OF THE NATIONAL DEFENSE BUDGET 
NAVY DEPARTMENT 
Regular Appropriations (Budget A) 
Emergency Appropriations (Budget B) 
For Fiscal Year 1940 


$904,540,037 





fOl 


An int 


Vou. X 


jus 
econ 
nay i 


THI 


<? 


States 
The , 
sever 
—are 
questi 
miSsic 
tral z 
presa, 
other: 
the fe 
ports 
| the N 
publi 
contr 
toa 

lease 
dema 





146,049,256 
123,932,540 
50,000,000 


For Fiscal Year 1941 
Public Works 


Total, Navy Department $1,224,521,833 


WAR DEPARTMENT 


Regular Appropriations (Budget A) $689,.933,400 
Emergency Appropriations (Budget B) 
For Fiscal Year 1940 119,999,842 
For Fiscal Year 1941 133,921,166 
Public Works 29,502,188 


Total, War Department $973,356, 596 
OTHER DEPARTMENTS 
Emergency (Budget B) 


Coast Guard (for 1940 & 1941) $11,285,080 
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(for 1940 & 1941) 3,963,000 
Panama Canal (for 1941) 34,000,000 
Total, Other Departments $49,248,080 | 


TOTAL NATIONAL DEFENSE 
This total is double the appropriations for the fis- 
cal year 1939, and four times the budget for 1935. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 


$2,247,126,509 


| trol 
“whe 
days 
vesse 
TI 
| Versi 
| sized 
| corre 
| State 
In it 
| of ¢ 
cens 
| ship 
mitt 
dest 
thro 
fere 
whe 








