—<—<—<—— 


id de. 
Union 
ly and 
Africa, 


n local 
al ties 
Yonfer. 
re than 
nperial 
S May 
of de. 
cpendi- 
predict 
riat in 
sis, but 
accede 
nperial 


red in- 
il tariff 
the at- 
session 
ckenzie 
le bar- 
vosevelt 
nerican 
ements 
greater 
| States 
agree- 
Domin- 
‘ish ex- 
severe- 
aw ma- 
na and 


States) 


rinciple 
ld have 
1ent ap- 
unds, to 
ction it 


e, ho -| 
derived. 


1 States 
London 
perhaps 
bracing 
OPPER 
Reynal & 
thor’s re 


. Sanchez. 


ys educa- 


4. National 
RAN, Editor. 
Year. 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Vou. XVI, No. 31 


May 28, 1937 


¥ BILLIONS FOR DEFENSE 
by W. T. Stone and R. A. Goslin 


A startling picture of what the nations of the world are 
spending for armament. This book describes the development of 
war, the doctrine of the “nation in arms” and the organization of 
modern armies. It examines America’s national defense policies, 
and finds that our armed forces are organized not primarily to 
defend our shores, but to wage an overseas war in defense of 


national interests. 
A HEADLINE BooK—25c. 


2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Dr. William #. Bishop 


% University of Wichigan Libre 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


SOVIET UNION WRESTLES WITH TROTZKYISM 


ASS arrests and executions reported last 

week from widely separated regions of the 
Soviet Union reveal the state of nervous appre- 
hension created by the suspicion that Trotzkyist 
“wreckers” are seeking to undermine the coun- 
try’s economic system. As predicted by foreign 
observers, the Moscow trials of August 1936 and 
January 1937 were merely the opening gun in a 
far-reaching campaign to exterminate all persons 
suspected of treasonable activities. 

On March 3, in a speech to the Central Com- 
mittee of the Communist party, Stalin warned 
the population to beware of Trotzkyists and spies 
in the employ of capitalist countries hostile to the 
Soviet Union. Two days later Bukharin and 
Rykov, former leaders of the Right opposition, 
were charged by the Central Committee with anti- 
party activities and expelled from the party. On 
April 3 Henry G. Yagoda, erstwhile head of the 
OGPU—who had already been demoted to the 
office of Commissar of Communications—was dis- 
missed on charges of embezzling public funds. 
On May 11 Marshal Tukhachevsky, Vice-Com- 
missar of War, was removed from his post and 
appointed commander of the relatively unimpor- 
tant Volga military district. On May 16 all but 
one of the members of the Central Trade Union 
Council secretariat were dismissed as “enemies 
of the people.” On May 20 it was reported that 
44 persons had been shot on charges of acting 
as agents of the Japanese on the Trans-Siberian 
Railway; while 20 others were executed in Tiflis 
as “Trotzky-Fascist terrorists who aimed at the 
establishment of an independent republic under 
the protection of a certain capitalist power.” 
Wholesale arrests were made among engineers 
and technicians, notably in the Donetz Basin, 
where coal production has lagged behind the 
schedules set by the second Five-Year Plan. 

Alarmed by this hunt for alleged Trotzkyists, 
factory directors and engineers hesitated to un- 


dertake any project involving the least possibility 
of risk, for fear they might be arrested in case of 
failure. The situation became so disturbing that 
on May 15 Andrei Vishinsky, Attorney-General 
of the U.S.S.R., who had acted as prosecutor in 
the Moscow trials, intervened to check the over- 
zealousness of local authorities. His intervention 
revealed the dilemma of the government which, 
having advertised the danger of Trotzkyism, 
cannot dismiss charges of sabotage without in- 
vestigation, yet realizes that the prevailing hue 
and cry destroys the morale of honest executives 
and blocks the development of Soviet industry. 
While continuing to prosecute alleged wreckers, 
the Stalin government is now seeking to remedy 
the major difficulties revealed by the Moscow 
trials — industrial maladjustment and party 
bureaucracy. 

The trials had disclosed an appalling picture 
of disorganization, waste and inefficiency in the 
principal Soviet industries, which the government 
blamed on the wrecking activities of self-con- 
fessed Trotzkyists. Yet the execution of opposi- 
tion leaders did not check disorganization or pre- 
vent a slump in Soviet production of coal, oil and 
non-ferrous metals. This would lead one to as- 
sume either that opposition to the government 
is more widespread and virulent than was origi- 
nally admitted, or that industrial inefficiency is 
due not merely to sabotage, but to fundamental 
flaws in Soviet operation of planned economy. 
That the latter assumption may not prove far 
from the truth is indicated by a speech made on 
May 8 by Valery Mezhlauk, Commissar of Heavy 
Industry, who urged substitution of small and 
manageable plants for mammoth enterprises, and 
suggested partial revision of Soviet emphasis on 
Stakhanovism. 

It had also been argued during the January 
trial, notably by Radek, that absence of democ- 
racy within the party left dissident party mem- 


bers no choice except resort to underground op- 
position activities. The validity of this criticism 
was tacitly admitted on March 5, when the Cen- 
tral Committee of the party announced its inten- 
tion to eradicate the evils of party bureaucracy. 
All party officials—with the exception of the Cen- 
tral Committee, whose members will continue to 
be appointed—must henceforth be freely elected 
by secret ballot and not, as had frequently hap- 
pened in the past, appointed from above on 
grounds of favoritism or local political pull. 


That the party, far from relaxing its hold, in- 
tends to strengthen it in anticipation of emer- 
gencies, is indicated by a decree of May 17, es- 
tablishing supreme military councils in all mil- 
itary districts. Each council is to be composed 
of three members—the district’s commanding of- 
ficer and two civilians, presumably representing 
the party’s views, who will check the work of 
their military colleague. Besides supervision over 
military affairs, the councils will have full re- 
sponsibility for the political and moral condition 
of the army, and will direct its “merciless strug- 
gle” against espionage, sabotage and wrecking. 
This decree is apparently intended to minimize 
the danger that the army, which has doubled in 
size during the past four years, with a resulting 
dilution of the Communist element, might become 
a source of opposition to the government. At the 
same time it increases civilian control over the 
army—a development which was opposed by 
Tukhachevsky and may have been one of the 
causes of his downfall. 


The campaign against Trotzkyism offers a 
striking illustration of the often bewildering 
course followed by the Soviet government, which 
today denounces opponents of its policies as 
wreckers and traitors, and tomorrow acknowl- 
edges the truth of their criticisms by incorporat- 
ing opposition suggestions in its official program, 
which it then becomes treasonable to question or 
criticize. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


CHURCHES FIGHT HITLER 


Strained relations between Germany and the 
Vatican may reach the breaking point if Cath- 
olic Bishops of the Reich carry out their inten- 
tion of making a determined appeal on June 5 on 
behalf of membership in Catholic Youth organi- 
zations and if the Pope decides to publish a “white 
book” on Nazi violations of the Concordat. The 
fundamental conflict between the totalitarian 
claims of the Nazi state and the Catholic Church, 
latent at all times, has come sharply to the fore 
in recent months as a result of the government’s 
uncompromising efforts to enlist all children in 


~___-- Page Two 


— 


an expanded Hitler Youth organization known ag 
the “State Youth” and to end Confessional schoo] 
education. By pressure exerted on parents 
in various school elections held throughout south- 
ern Germany, the Nazis were strikingly success. 
ful in reducing registrations for Catholic schools 
to a negligible percentage. This campaign pro- 
voked the Pope to issue an encyclical on March 2] 
in which he took the Reich to task for the “sup. 
pression of liberty of choice for those who have 
a right to Catholic education.” At the same time 
he assailed Nazi philosophy for practically deify- 
ing the state and its leader. 


Publication of the encyclical created a storm of 
indignation in German official circles. The papal 
letter was rejected as unwarranted interference 
in the Reich’s internal affairs. In a determined 
attempt to discredit the Catholic Church, the govy- 
ernment resumed the trials of priests and mem- 
bers of religious orders which had been suspended 
a year ago as a conciliatory gesture to world 
opinion. About a thousand members of such or- 
ders have been or are being brought to trial on 
charges of immorality. In trying four priests 
and three Catholic laymen for treason the state 
also sought to link Catholicism with communism, 
Speaking on May Day, Chancellor Hitler scorn- 


fully declined to “tolerate criticism of the state’s 


morals when there appears to be sufficient reason 
to concern one’s self about one’s own morals.” He 
challenged his critics by reiterating the deter- 
mination to “take away their children” and train 
them “to become new Germans.” 

Meanwhile, prospects that the government 
would settle its differences with the Evangelical 


Church have well-nigh vanished. Elections for a 


new national synod which Hitler ordered on Feb- 


ruary 15 to restore unity among the Protestants | 
have been postponed indefinitely. Both the Ger- | 
man Christians and the opposition Confessional | 
Church movement have clearly indicated they © 


would not accept the results of any poll unfavor- 


able to their cause. In order to keep its doctrine | 
free from Nazi influences the Confessional Church © 
is apparently working for complete separation | 


of Church and State. It leaders have won over 
to this view most of the moderates who once fav- 
ored some compromise with the government. 
The latter, seeing that its plans for unified con- 
trol of the Church are in danger of being thwarted, 


has renewed persecution of Confessional pastors. | 
During the week ending May 22 six pastors were | 
arrested. At the same time passports were re- | 
fused to fourteen opponents of Nazi Church pol- | 


icy who wished to attend the Lutheran Ecumen- 
ical Conference at Oxford, England. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 31, May 28, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND LzsLim BugELL, President; EstHer G. Ocpgn, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dran, Béiter. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


FO 


An in 


Vou. X 


| 


city 
) kille 
Dew 


