of 
n- 
id | 
its 
ne 
ne 
ne 





iS 


_ FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


F N POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
rape West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


4 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 


2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 














FEBRUARY 10, 1939 





@Vou-X yal, No. 16 





Institute on International Problems 


for 
Teachers and Club Leaders 


PROBLEMS OF OUR POST-MUNICH WORLD 
Saturday, February 18 


9:45 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Hotel Astor, New York 


Morning session 
All sessions, 


- - - 75 cents 


including luncheon - $2.25 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 








ee 





ROOSEVELT MOVES TO 


STIFFEN DEMOCRACIES 





PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT’S reported statement 
that the frontier of the United States lies in 
France, with its belated denial, added to the perplex- 
ities of the European situation, already confused by 
Rebel advances in Spain and diplomatic reorienta- 
tions in Eastern Europe. The immediate effect of the 
President's statement was less pronounced in France 
and Britain, where fear of a disavowal overshadowed 
satisfaction at this evidence of American cooperation, 
than in Germany and Italy, which saw in it a sinister 
attempt to bolster up the democracies. In this sense, 
Mr. Roosevelt's secret conference with the Senate 
Military Affairs Committee temporarily acted as a 
deterrent; and the mildness of Mussolini’s address to 
the Fascist Grand Council on February 4, when he 
failed to disclose his territorial aspirations, was re- 
garded in some quarters as a direct outcome of Amer- 
ican pressure. The value of the President’s action, 
however, was weakened by his unusually heated de- 
nial, and by fear in France and Britain that his for- 
ward move—like President Wilson’s advocacy of the 
League of Nations—might have the result of 
strengthening isolationist sentiment in Congress and 
the country at large. 

From the European point of view, the principal 
issue regarding the President's action is that it may 
cut athwart the policy of “appeasement” sponsored 
by France and Britain at Munich. The object of this 
policy is to placate Germany and Italy with conces- 
sions at the expense of weaker countries—yesterday 
in Eastern Europe, tomorrow possibly in Africa or 
Asia, where the colonies of Portugal, Belgium and 
the Netherlands might still be used to stave off a 
general war. True, France and Britain have been 
bending every effort since Munich to accelerate their 
own armament production, and to supplement it by 
the purchases of airplanes in the United States. A 
new note of calm determination, sounded by Prime 


Minister Chamberlain at Birmingham, has since been 
re-echoed by him in the House of Commons on Jan- 
uary 31, and by Lord Halifax on February 3. At the 
same time, Mr. Chamberlain has made it clear that 
Britain is prepared to consider trade and colonial 
concessions to Germany provided—and this has long 
been the crux of the matter—Germany, in turn, is 
prepared to do its share in restoring world confidence, 
and to consider some measure of arms limitation. 

Hitler has hitherto contended that the Third Reich 
cannot be expected to engage in any kind of diplo- 
matic bargaining regarding territories of which it was 
deprived at Versailles. He sees no reason why Ger- 
many should be asked to give a quid pro quo, what- 
ever form it might take, for the return of its African 
colonies or of former territories in Europe like Memel 
and Danzig. As in the case of Austria and Czecho- 
slovakia, Hitler has nothing to gain by war if he can 
obtain satisfaction of his demands by peaceful means. 
Should these means prove ineffectual, he can once 
more be expected to use threat of force as a lever to 
extract concessions from recalcitrant countries. 

The assumption underlying President Roosevelt's 
foreign policy, as expressed in his message to Con- 
gress and his conversations with the Senators, ap- 
pears to be that, once Germany is confronted with a 
united democratic front and a sufficient show of 
force, as seen from Europe, it will abandon its de- 
mands. Only this assumption would justify Mr. Roose- 
velt’s course, for if his policy merely led to the out- 
break of a general war necessarily fought on Euro- 
pean soil, it would hardly appeal to people who last 
September demonstrated their overwhelming desire 
for peace. The policy of stiffening the backbone 
of the Western democracies in advance of a new 
crisis is both sound and practicable—but only if these 
powers themselves sincerely intend to resist Italo- 
German pressure. If they are still in a mood to make 





ig 
ik 


i 
ij 
| 
4] 


SNe me 


ee ee 


‘ee eat 














concessions to the fascist dictatorships, then the 
United States, after twenty years of futile efforts to 
avoid foreign commitments, might inadvertently find 
itself holding the bag in Europe. 

Even if the Western democracies are ready to resist 
further expansion by Germany and Italy, the United 
States should not engage in the dangerous practice 
of buying a pig in a poke. No matter how profound 
and legitimate our desire to strengthen the Western 
democracies against Nazism, the United States can- 
not be expected to underwrite the European status 
quo. It cannot become a partner, either silent or ac- 
tive, in any combination whose sole object is the pro- 
tection of international vested interests. As the price 
of its economic, moral or military collaboration, it 
would be justified in seeking from the Western pow- 
ers an elucidation of their foreign policy. For twenty 
years the democracies have used their preponderant 
military and financial power to prevent any change 
of the territorial status guo by peaceful means, thus 
leaving Germany, Italy and other dissatisfied coun- 
tries no alternative except, in their turn, to resort to 
force. Before and after Munich they went to the 
other extreme of making, at the point of Hitler's 
gun, concessions they had refused to an unarmed 
Germany. Unless a general settlement of all political 
and economic problems is reached—and such a set- 
tlement seems remote at the present moment—the 
democracies are confronted with the difficult task of 
checking the use of force by dictatorships, while at 
the same time attempting to consider demands which, 
if indefinitely rejected, might lead to an explosion. 
The United States can make a constructive contribu- 
tion to this task only if it knows both the scope and 
the roots of the problem. 


In formulating its foreign policy, this country 
must also consider the change in emphasis which has 
taken place since Munich. Germany remains econom- 
ically dominant in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, 
and this domination can be broken only if France, 
Britain and the United States are prepared to absorb 
the: foodstuffs and raw materials of this region, 
which they have given no indication of doing. Ger- 
many’s political control of the East, however, has 
proved hard sledding. Public sentiment in Poland, 
Hungary, Rumania and Yugoslavia remains anti- 
communist, but it can hardly be characterized as pro- 
Nazi. What it favors is not collaboration with Ger- 
many, but maintenance of each country’s hard-won 
national independence. Perhaps the most beneficial 
effect of the German drive to the East is that it has 
forced the various dictatorships in that region to 
make concessions to their national minorities and op- 
pressed classes—especially the peasants—in a belated 
effort to stem the Nazi tide. This situation is illus- 
trated by the Yugoslav Cabinet shift of February 4, 


Page Two 








when the Stoyadinovitch dictatorship, which had 
openly favored Germany and Italy, was forced to re- 
sign by the withdrawal of its Moslem and Catholic 
supporters. This political split may force the gov- 
ernment to satisfy the demands of the Croats—whose 
disaffection might disrupt the country—for auton- 
omy within a federated democratic system. Should 
the Croat leader, Dr. Matchek, succeed in carrying 
out his program, the country’s foreign policy may 
undergo a reorientation—not in the direction of out- 
right anti-Nazism, because Yugoslavia, lacking West- 
ern support, cannot afford to antagonize the Third 
Reich, but in the direction of forming a bloc with 
Poland, Hungary, Rumania and possibly Bulgaria to 
resist further German expansion. Such a bloc might 
have the support of Italy, which seems anxious to re- 
construct its sphere of influence in the Balkans, de- 
stroyed by the advance of the Third Reich. Should 
these various diplomatic moves assume concrete form, 
Nazi Germany, like the empire of the Hohenzollerns, 
may be confronted with the necessity of warding off 
pressure on two fronts, at a moment when its eco- 
nomic and moral resources are far smaller than in 


1914. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BATISTA VISITS MEXICO 


The ten-day visit to Mexico of Colonel Fulgencio 
Batista, Chief of Staff and unofficial ruler of Cuba, 
has occupied the center of the stage in inter-Amer- 
ican politics since February 1. Colonel Batista, in his 
speeches and interviews, advocated a ““Washington- 
Havana-Mexico City axis,” opposed the introduction 
of European ideologies into the Western Hemisphere, 
and pledged Cuba’s support to Mexico in case of for- 
eign attack. The chief importance of his visit is that 
it represents the most recent step in a rapprochement 
between the two countries, which has been in pro- 
gress for more than a year. Although both govern- 
ments have stated that no concrete agreements were 
contemplated, this striking demonstration of accord 
has caused speculation abroad concerning their fu- 
ture policies. 

The most important question raised by this visit is 


whether it signifies any tendency on Batista’s part to | 


support Mexico’s expropriation policy, or use it as a 
model for his own program. Cuba has recently been 
in the grip of an economic depression. During the 
past year, public opinion has shown considerable sym- 


pathy for the nationalization measures of the Car- | 
denas régime. Recent government proposals, such as | 


a mortgage bill submitted in January, seem to fore- 
cast a Leftward trend in economic policy. During his 
visit, Colonel Batista inspected various economic pro- 
jects of the Mexican government, and announced a 
“slightly Left of center” policy which would avoid 
both fascism and communism. 


(Continued on Page 4) 














por 
cor: 
Said 
ven 
sior 


re- 
his 
rO- 
da 
oid 





Washin gton News Letter 


——— 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Fes. 6.—Amid all the tumult and the shouting 
over Mr. Roosevelt's foreign policy, several impor- 
tant aspects of the problem cannot be obscured by 
the public allegations and retractions, the charges 
and counter-charges which have been hurled from 
both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue. At the close of 
this turbulent week three underlying factors remain 
to be taken into account: 

1. That the United States already is and must inevitably 
be a decisive element in the world balance of power. 

2. That the objectives of the President and the State De- 
partment have been, and still are, dictated by an honest 
conviction that this country can postpone or avoid war by 
tipping the balance of force in Europe against the axis 

wers and in favor of Britain and France. 

3. That the objectives of Congressional critics are dom- 
inated by an honest belief that the United States can and 
should hold aloof from foreign commitments; that we 
should not be drawn into European “power politics”; and 
that Congress should not surrender the war-making power 
to the Executive. 

These three factors overshadow the unfortunate 
incident of the President's “confidential” interview 
with the Senate Military Affairs Committee on Jan- 
uary 31, and the question of “secrecy” which arose 
from the disclosure of special facilities granted to the 
French airplane mission. As the Congressional debate 
proceeds, they seem destined to assume increasing 
importance. 


America and the Balance of Power. On Febru- 
ary 3, following the White House press conference 
at which Mr. Roosevelt denounced as a ‘‘deliberate 
lie’ the published reports that he had placed Amer- 
ica’s frontier in France or on the Rhine, Senator Key 
Pittman handed Washington correspondents a type- 
written statement warmly supporting the President's 
four-point definition of American foreign policy. The 
President's re-definition was as follows: 

“We are against any entangling alliances, obviously ; 

“We are in favor of the maintenance of world trade for 

everybody-—all nations—including ourselves ; 


“We are in complete sympathy with any and every effort 
made to reduce or limit armaments; 


“As a nation—as American people—we are sympathetic 
with the peaceful maintenance of political, economic 
and social independence of all nations in the world.” 

But the final sentence in Senator Pittman’s sup- 

porting statement contained an assertion which many 
correspondents failed to emphasize. Mr. Pittman 
said: ‘The only thing in my opinion that could pre- 
vent war in Europe, and the possibility of its exten- 
sion to the United States in the future, would be such 





an equal balancing of military power that neither 
side to a controversy would be willing to undertake 
the chance of a defeat.” 

This, of course, was the essential point and the key 
to the Administration's recent foreign policy: wheth- 
er we like it or not, the United States is so much a 
factor in the balance of power that any action on our 
part—either positive or negative—inevitably tips the 
scales in Europe. How well this is recognized in the 
State Department was shown last week by the 
anxious appraisal of European reactions to the first 
cabled reports of the secret White House Conference 
on Tuesday; to Mr. Hoover's Chicago speech on 
Wednesday; and to the President’s somewhat be- 
lated press conference explanation on Friday. Even 
Mr. Hoover, it was pointed out, acknowledged the 
influence of the United States in the Euro bal- 
ance of power when he warned that aerial d- 
ment of civilian populations would arouse American 
public opinion. 

The Executive Position. Up to this moment there 
is no indication that the furore in Congress or the 
backfire in the press have materially altered the Pres- 
ident’s major objectives. There is still some difference 
of opinion within the State Department, both as to 
what may happen in Europe and what action this 
government should take. But, in general, the Pres- 
ident and his State Department advisers are proceed- 
ing on the following assumption: That Germany, 
Italy and Japan will continue their expansionist ses 
grams through 1939; that a European crisis is likely 
to be precipitated by the colonial demands of Ger- 
many and Italy; and that the combined strength of 
the two axis powers may overwhelm Britain and 
France unless the balance of power can be restored 
without delay. This appraisal, formulated after 
Munich, has been strengthened if anything by Hit- 
ler’s Reichstag speech, although an acute crisis is no 
longer expected in March. In the opinion of the Pres- 
ident and his advisers, it dictates an immediate course 
of action designed to strengthen the hands of Britain 
and France in every possible way “short of war’’ so 
as to forestall a situation which would threaten the 
vital interests of the United States. Whatever the 
exact words Mr. Roosevelt may have used in his con- 
ference with the military committee, the belief that 
our own first line of defense lies in France and Brit- 
ain continues to determine the basic assumptions of 
Executive policy. 

The Position of Congress. While the ultimate 
aims of the Executive remain unchanged, the imme- 








~ 


B 
t 
{ 
i 
p 
} 


if 


a eae 


ee re 


a 


a 


— ee 





— ae ee 


SO ne 











— 
> = 








diate prospects for implementing a positive policy 
through revision of the Neutrality Act have been ma- 
terially altered by the storm in Congress. Partisan 
politics has doubtless been one element in the Con- 
gressional reaction but, in the opinion of most im- 
partial observers, it is not the principal factor. Far 
more important is the genuine ae of American in- 
volvement in a “foreign war,” which continues to 
dominate both Houses of Congress despite the un- 
doubted shift in Congressional sentiment during the 
past two years. Whatever the sentiments of indi- 
vidual members with regard to Spain or China, and 
however strong the dislike of Nazism and fascism, 
Congress as a whole has continued to reflect the tra- 
ditional and deep-seated antipathy to American in- 
tervention in what it regards as the “disputes of 
Europe.” It is this traditional distrust of European 
commitments or entanglements, rather than the pow- 
er of the isolationist bloc, which gives strength to the 
attack on the President’s policies. 

The first skirmishes in this debate, however, have 
not yet revealed a definite issue on which Con- 
gressional critics can organize their lines for a de- 
cisive combat with the President. The charge of 
secrecy affords a convenient base for attack, but can- 
not effectively curb Executive control of foreign pol- 
icy. The airplane incident can hardly be used to pre- 
vent sales to Britain and France in time of peace. The 
only issue on which the fight might be waged would 
be an immediate proposal to amend the Neutrality 
Act so as to give the President discretion to embargo 
aggressors. And on this issue the Administration has 
elected to stay its hand until the storm is over. 


W. T. STONE 


BATISTA VISITS MEXICO 
(Continued from Page 2) 

It seems doubtful that closer relations with Mexico 
cani materially relieve Cuba’s basic problem of diver- 
sifying its production or finding outlets for its sugar 
at satisfactory prices. Although Mexico enjoys a very 
favorable trade balance with Cuba, its purchases of 
Cuban products could not be greatly increased. Nego- 
tiations for a trade agreement, opened about a year 
ago, have not been brought to conclusion. Meanwhile 
the United States, which takes about three-fourths 
of Cuba’s sugar exports, has begun negotiations 
for revision of the existing reciprocal trade agree- 
ment. On November 29, after his return from a visit 
to Washington, Colonel Batista announced that an 
oral agreement had been reached on this subject, by 
which the United States would reduce the duty on 
Cuban sugar, and would make concessions on Cuban 





Page Four alll 





— 


tobacco and other agricultural commodities. In re. 
turn, Cuba would grant concessions on rice imports 
from this country and relax its labor laws for the 
benefit of American residents. Secretary Hull denied 
that any agreement had been concluded, however, 
and American Senators from sugar-producing states 
are offering sharp opposition to concessions on sugar 
imports. It seems unlikely that cooperation be. 
tween Mexico and Cuba could have an important 
effect on Cuban-American negotiations. But if Batista 
intends to move much further to the Left in his eco- 
nomic policy, cooperation with Mexico might afford 
him moral support. At the same time, the Cardenas 
government, confronted by many difficulties over his 
oil expropriations, would doubtless welcome Cuba’s 
assistance. 

Whether or not Colonel Batista’s recent travels re- 
sult in concrete advantages for Cuba, they have ap- 
parently enhanced his personal popularity with the 
masses at home. Although he has ruled Cuba as an 
army leader since 1934, there have been many signs 
that he wishes to place his leadership on a more 
democratic basis. If, as forecast in news reports, he 
seeks the Presidency of Cuba in 1940, his new luster 
as an international statesman should prove to be a 
distinct asset. Pau B. TAYLOR 


PUBLISHED FEBRUARY 6, 1939 
EUROPE IN RETREAT, by Vera Micheles Dean. 
(Knopf, $2.00) An analysis of the post-war diplo- 
matic situation, the Munich accord, and its possible 
results for the world tomorrow. 





The Refugee in the United States, by Harold Fields. New 
York, Oxford University Press, 1938. $2.50 


A careful and intelligent account of the laws and regu- 
lations on immigration affecting the refugee; the experi- 
ence of the various groups of post-war refugees who have 
come to this country; and the American instrumentalities 
for aid to émigrés. This study should do much to overcome 
the over-simplified and often fallacious idea that every 
immigrant necessarily displaces an established worker. 


War, Peace and Change, by John Foster Dulles. New York, 

Harper, 1939. $1.75 

A careful analysis of the ethical and political mechan- 
isms whereby violence has been largely eliminated within 
the state; of the factors accounting for the persistence of 
anarchy in the international sphere; and of the steps 
which must be taken if legal procedures and the processes 
of orderly, peaceful change are to be applied to prevent 
war. Mr. Dulles’ proposals for liberal and tolerant atti- 
tudes in international relations, as an offset to exaggerated 
or imperialistic nationalism, offer little hope for immediate 
improvement in the world situation. They will not appeal 
to those who view war as an expression of fundamental 
ideological differences or a concomitant of social change. 
But they do clarify the causes of international conflict and 
set forth the broad lines on which improvement must 
proceed. 


= 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 16, Fepruary 10, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lestre Bugit, President; Dorotny F. Leger, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dean, Editor 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Se 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 








So" 
IN] 


DIF 


ran 


ed | 
hol 


afte 
onc 


sO 
on 


Ind 


tior 
Phi 


and 
tag’ 
Las 
wol 
con 
lan 
uat 
thu 
tior 
not 
inf 


Ari 
the 
of | 
tary 


of 


ly 
clai 
pla 
pla 





