


AU J We 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN : a 
ars An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff MN, class matter December 
ng Subscription, One Dollar a Year r, Ly : o& can rn Bi 
om Zi “py. %, N. ¥., under the act 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated > Ly Gy df Mach 3. 
‘ed 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. a 4 ? %, ; 
lay i A, 1O, 
lox | Son XVI, No. 42 August 13, 1937 i 
dle, | —— > 
or- 
‘in NEW YORK MEETING DATES Dr. William W. Bishop 
ign October 21 — dinner meeting 
jen November 13 February 5 % University of Michigan Library 
tep December 4 February 26 
ers January §& March = 12 Ann Arbor, Mich. 
oy- January 22 March 26 
on. Mark these dates on your calendar NOW for the stimulating 
the and timely discussions at the Hotel Astor. 
va, 
m- 
= FRANCE STRIVES FOR RECOVERY 
1a) 
His PEAKING at Périgueux on August 7, Finance ing local governments to reduce their deficits and 
= Minister Georges Bonnet rather aptly de- by coordinating rail and road transport. 
the scribed France “as a slowly recovering patient” Ultimately the government hopes to reduce by 
€ref and pleaded with the French people “to speak a conversion operation the debt charges which at 
softly” and “not to raise disputes” which might present absorb about a quarter of the budget. By 
Y-| easily jeopardize Marianne’s return to health. revaluing once more the gold holdings of the Bank 
ect If France recovers it will be at the cost of heavy of France, the Finance Minister has obtained a 
= sacrifices exacted by Bonnet and Premier Chau- fund of almost 7 billion francs which will be used 
tee temps. The new Popular Front government, more to support government bonds which are now 
ver} conservative than the Blum cabinet, has not quoted far below par. As a test of the market the 
102) shrunk from Draconian measures to put money Treasury is offering 4 per cent bonds in exchange 
lal) into the coffers of a nearly bankrupt Treasury. for a 414 per cent issue maturing in October. 
the After casting the franc loose from its moorings The fate of the government hinges largely on 
tad and obtaining the right to draw on the Bank of the success of these measures. Some signs of re- 
“Ne'| France for additional advances, Bonnet promptly covery are now apparent. Capital seems to be 
ich proceeded to put French finances in order. On returning, although still rather hesitantly. Pro- 
OV-) July 8 he obtained the cabinet’s approval of a duction is gradually improving, and business in 
a series of decrees which will increase government the Paris area particularly has been greatly stimu- 
41€S} revenue by about 8 billion francs a year and bal- lated by the extraordinary influx of tourists. 
1a} ance at least the ordinary budget. Although in- Much depends on whether industrialists and finan- 
the come and real estate taxes were raised, most of ciers are now prepared to expand their operations. 
ats} the new levies bear heavily on consumers. The The government has taken pains to win their con- 
ary | production tax was increased from 6 to 8 per fidence. It has abstained from threats against 
on-'} cent and import tariffs restored to the level pre- “hoarders” and “deserters of the franc,” and its 
ely vailing before October 1936 when the franc was appointment of Pierre Fournier as Governor of 
_ | devalued. Telephone, telegraph and postal rates the Bank of France was at least partly designed 
its | were raised, and the price of tobacco, manufac- to please the banking interests. 
the | tured by a state monopoly, increased by 20 per One great obstacle to economic and financial 
has | cent. revival is the uncertain political situation. l- 
on- In order to relieve the Treasury, substantial though Parliament will not meet again until the 
the"| reductions have been effected in the extraordinary end of October, politics have not been adjourned. 
re-| budgetary expenses for 1938, which must be cov- Many adherents of the Popular Front are sharply 
R ered by borrowing. Freight and passenger rate critical of the conservative course being followed 
increases will cut about 214 billion francs from by the Chautemps cabinet. In their opinion the 
New | the annual railway deficit which the Treasury is government has capitulated completely to the 
= talled upon to finance. On July 30 the govern- “financial oligarchy.” The labor union leader, 
Ment accepted Bonnet’s proposal to limit the Léon Jouhaux, declared early in August that he 
___}Treasury’s extra-budgetary disbursements for would have preferred foreign exchange control 
ion} 1988 to approximately 25 billion. Economies of to any surrender to the financial interests. In 
dis} about 1214 billion are envisaged, primarily by response to Blum’s pleading, the annual Socialist 
curtailing expenditures for public works, compell- Congress on July 13 approved continued partici- 






































RPK ES Lo ~ 


ki 
k 
i 


i, | 
eH 


a 








pation in the Chautemps cabinet, but one-third 
of the membership voted in opposition. Moreover, 
the Congress approved a resolution calling for 
amendment of the Popular Front program to in- 
clude the nationalization of key industries and the 
railways, measures to free state finances from the 
grip of “financial and industrial oligarchies,” and 
curbs on the power of the Senate which is now 
controlled by conservative Radical Socialists. 
Since practically all these proposals are opposed 
by the Radical Socialist party, a split in the Popu- 
lar Front may be impending. A break-up might 
also be precipitated by fusion of the Socialist and 
Communist parties. Until recently no progress 
was made in this direction because many Socialist 
leaders feared that the Communists would soon 
dominate a united proletarian party. The fall of 
Blum, however, has undoubtedly made the So- 
cialists more receptive to the Communist pleas 
for unity. Yet, despite their critical attitude to- 
ward the Chautemps cabinet, both Communists 
and Socialists realize that the country is tired of 
politics and apparently tending toward modera- 
tion. They may hesitate a long time before dis- 
rupting the Popular Front and plunging France 
into a prolonged period of political uncertainty 
which might end once more in the formation of an 
extremely conservative “national union” govern- 


ment. JOHN C. DEWILDE 


THE SOVIET SIGNS A NEW TRADE PACT 


On August 6 the United States proclaimed a 
new trade agreement with the Soviet Union, re- 
newing and enlarging the original pact of July 
1935. The new accord extends unconditional 
most-favored-nation treatment to the Soviet 
Union, and revokes the $2-a-ton penalty tax on 
Soviet coal imports, imposed under the Revenue 
Act of 1932 on countries which sell more coal to 
the United States than they buy here, “unless 
treaty provisions of the United States otherwise 
provide.” In return, the Soviet agrees to import 
at least $40,000,000 worth of American merchan- 
dise during the next twelve months, and to limit 
its coal exports to 400,000 tons, less than those of 
1935-1936. Total Soviet purchases will be $10,- 
000,000 in excess of the amount specified in the 
1935 accord, but only about $4,000,000 more than 
its actual imports during the past year. Eventu- 
ally they may be further augmented by the pur- 
chase of one or more 35,000-ton battleships, for 
the construction of which a Soviet corporation is 
reported to be negotiating. 

The original 1935 agreement extended to the 
Soviet Union all benefits granted to other nations 
under the Trade Agreements Act of 1930. The 
principal product thus affected was manganese, 


Page Two 








which had received a 50 per cent reduction in d 
under the treaty with Brazil. The new pact con 
tinues this policy in substance, but broadens jf 
to cover unconditional most-favored-nation treat. 
ment of all products imported from the Soviet 
Union. Minor additions in the 1937 agreement 
include a safeguarding clause permitting the 
United States to impose embargoes under the 
Neutrality Act, and a provision exempting agree. 
ments with the Philippines, the Panama Cana] 
Zone and Cuba (only the latter of which was in. 
cluded in the 1935 pact) from application of the 
most-favored-nation clause. 


The coal tax concession has been attacked in g 
public statement by the Anthracite Institute as 
illegal and ruinous to American coal producers 
In reply to this “paid propaganda,” Secretary of 
State Hull defended the new pact as a further step 
in his program of liberalizing America’s foreign 
trade. He pointed out that the United States regu. 
larly exports about thirteen times as much coal 
as it imports, and that the Soviet Union has con. 
sented to restrict its coal exports to a lower figure 
than that of last year. It may also be noted that 
the Soviet Union reserves the right to denounce 
the treaty in January 1938, in case the Treasury 
Department should be overruled by the courts in 
its contention that this and a similar tax remis 
sion included in the trade treaty with the Nether. 
lands are legal. 














The new treaty, along with such incidents ag 
the cordial reception in America of the Soviel 
trans-Polar fliers and the friendly treatment oi 
American naval crews which recently visited 
Vladivostok, apparently represents a gradual im 
provement in Soviet-American relations, which 
may one day materially affect the Far Eastem 


situation. HELEN FISHER 





Survey of International Affairs, 1935, by Arnold J. Toym 
bee and V. M. Boulter. New York, Oxford, 1936, ! 
volumes: Vol. 1, $6.00; Vol. 2, $7.00 


Documents on International Affairs, 1935, Stephen Heald 
editor. New York, Oxford, 1936. $8.50 


These volumes, indispensable to the specialist for refer 
ence purposes, are also absorbing reading for the layman 
The major portion of the first volume of the Survey deali 
with the impact of German rearmament on Europe, stres® 
ing the collapse of the Disarmament Conference, proposali 
for a European mutual assistance pact, the Franco-Italiat 
agreements of January 1935, the restoration of conserip 
tion in Germany, and its complex diplomatic sequel. Vol 
ume 2 is entirely devoted to the Italo-Ethiopian conflict 
from its outset until the meeting of the League Assembl} 
in September 1936. In conjunction with the companiot 
volume of Documents on International Affairs, it takes it 
place as a definitive study of the subject—one which cal 
hardly be surpassed before historians gain access # 
material still concealed in the archives of Europe. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 42, Aucust 13, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND LeEsLig BuRit, President; EstHER G. OGpEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Nation# 











