





on 


ans- 

the 
into 
ute 


> to 


find 

the 
10W 
into 
and 
juer 
try. 
tion 

re- 
arve 
len- 


ntic 
| by 
heir 
An- 
don 
vere 
ina, 
cto- 
raft 
\s$a- 

the 
lave 
here 
will 


H ar- 


the 











Dr. Will eit Entered as 2nd class matter 
ve WAilian WH. Sishop 3 
e 
AL a ee ee J Yi mICD lean Libra 
UNIV. n- weeny jas gan Library a 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 5 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL. XXII, No. 13 


JANUARY 15, 1943 





THE PATTERN OF EUROPE’S FUTURE? 


— that Britain, Russia and the United 

States have no intention of permanently occu- 
pying any part of reconquered Europe—except pos- 
sibly such bases as the United Nations, acting in 
concert, agree should be placed under international 
control to permit adequate policing of the continent 
after the war—military administration must be re- 
garded as temporary in character. Britain, Russia 
and the United States, even working in closest col- 
laboration, cannot impose a given pattern on the 
European continent without arousing some of the 
resentment that Hitler has created by his attempt to 
establish a ‘‘new order.” What Allied military ad- 
ministrators can do during the period of temporary 
occupation is to help the conquered peoples achieve 
their own liberation, and create the conditions in 


| which they may, at the earliest possible moment, 


start reweaving the broken threads of their ex- 
jstence. The reverse side of such a policy is that 
the Europeans, once they have recovered, with our 
aid, from the hardships of Nazi conquest, must 
accept their share of responsibility for the recon- 
struction of the continent by composing their in- 
ternal and external conflicts—and by not transplant- 
ing these conflicts, as some of them are doing today, 
to the soil of the United States. 

DIVERSITY IN UNITY. The recognized need 
for some form of unification of Europe after the 


_ War sometimes leads to the assumption that the iden- 


tity of small nations should be obliterated in a fed- 
eration or other type of organization that might be 


| established and maintained by the great powers. This 


assumption is not only quite naturally repugnant to 
the small nations which are valiantly fighting on the 


_ Side of the Allies, but also entirely overlooks the 


varied and valuable contribution they have made 
through the centuries to the development of West- 


1. The last of a series of four articles on the reconstruction of 
Europe. 


ern civilization. Nationalism, when directed into 
cultural channels, has enriched the thought and cre- 
ative expression of mankind. It is only when na- 
tionalism, distorted by fanaticism, takes the form of 
attempts to achieve hegemony by one nation at the 
expense of others that it becomes a menace to the 
peace of the world. 

NEED FOR CULTURAL AUTONOMY. The 
unity of Europe after the war should not exclude— 
on the contrary it should encourage—the free flow- 
ering of national cultures. But is there any reason 
to believe, as the peace-makers of 1919, deeply in- 
fluenced by the concept of national sovereignty, be- 
lieved, that national identity can be preserved only 
within the framework of nation-states? Today we 
know that some of the states formed after World 
War I by the process of self-determination were so 
weak in terms of territorial expanse, population and 
resources that they proved unable to withstand the 
impact of their powerful neighbors. Instead of re- 
suming the process of self-determination at the 
point where it was interrupted by Nazi conquests and 
creating another string of small states to satisfy 
new national aspirations—for example those of the 
Slovaks, Ruthenians, Croats, and Ukrainians—would 
it not be wise to distinguish between the natural 
desire of human beings to perpetuate their own cul- 
tural traditions, and the unsubstantiated belief that 
this desire can find expression only by being confined 
between boundary lines? 

If the experience of the past quarter of a century 
is any guide, the goal toward which the United 
Nations should work is not the further parceling 
of Europe, but the formation of a European organ- 
ization in which all national groups—no matter how 
large or small—would have an opportunity to en- 
joy their own traditions and customs, speak their 
own language, practice their own religious beliefs; 
yet, at the same time, would be integrated into an 


{ 


i a A 


i» 
wm 
F 
pn 
ee 
> 
£3 
t 
' 
k 
Ree 
ry 
% 














administrative framework within which they might 
achieve peaceful economic development and protec- 
tion against military and political attack. 

EXAMPLE OF U.S.S.R. The pattern for such 
a framework is not that of the United States, as 
advocates of Federal Union have contended, because 
the problems of Europe are vastly different in na- 
ture and scope from those of this country. A far 
more promising pattern is that of the USSR., 
where some 150 races and nationalities enjoy an 
opportunity for cultural autonomy — although not 
fully in the case of religion—but have been united un- 
der a centralized political and economic administra- 
tion. This does not mean that a unified Europe 
would have to adopt the totalitarian features of the 
Soviet system, which are a direct result of Russia's 
own historical development. There is no reason why 
a system providing for the cultural autonomy of the 
various national groups of Europe could not be 
established on lines that would correspond to the 
experience with democratic methods that is part of 
the heritage of the continent’s western and northern 
countries. 


The gradual formation of a European organization 
—perhaps beginning with the regional groupings 
already envisaged in treaties between Poland and 
Czechoslovakia, and Greece and Yugoslavia — af- 
fords, in the long run, the most promising way of 
meeting the danger of renewed German expansion. 


Much is being said about the need to weaken Ger- . 


many—by unilaterally disarming the Reich, or “de- 
stroying”’ the German people, or dismembering Ger- 
many. Some of these measures will prove impossible 
in practice, while others would require permanent 
occupation of Germany. Instead of concentrating on 
plans to weaken Germany, might it not be more 
fruitful to think in terms of strengthening the 
United Nations, especially Germany's neighbors to 
the-east, whose economic and social backwardness 
has made them so vulnerable to military and eco- 
nomic pressure by the Reich? To accomplish this 
task, Britain and the United States would have to 


ARGENTINA STILL FAR 


The sudden death on January 10 of General 
Agustin P. Justo, former President of Argentina and 
the most powerful opponent of the isolationist policy 
of Dictator-President Ramon S. Castillo, represents 
a serious loss for the progressive forces in South 
America. A strong advocate of outright declaration 
of war against the Axis powers, General Justo was 
currently considered the only man who, as head of 
a democratic coalition, could successfully oppose 
President Castillo in the 1944 elections for the Presi- 
dency of Argentina. In recent months, two of the 
three chief political parties of the country—the 


Page Two 





——e 
———e 





abandon the policy they have followed toward the 
continent, and especially toward Eastern Europe and 
the Balkans, of “absentee landlordism’’ alternated 
by spasmodic interventions once the situation had 
become desperate. At the same time, they would 
have to forswear any attempt after this war to iso- 
late Russia from participation in European affairs— 
on the assumption, which seems justified, that Russia, 
for its part, will have no desire to isolate itself from 
the rest of the world. 

Effective reconstruction of Europe, however, te. 
quires crystallization not of detailed blueprints— 
which at this stage might hamper, rather than help— 
but of what might be called the basic philosophy 
of life that the United Nations hope to act on dur- 
ing and after the war. What disheartens many people 
today is not that this or that compromise is effected 
to meet certain emergencies. That is understood, al- 
though not always approved. What is disturbing is 
the seeming lack of guiding principles behind the 
compromises. The fear inevitably arises that the 
first whiff of victory may be bringing to the fore, in 
Britain and the United States, the elements who hope 
that once the war is over the world can be restored 
to some semblance of what it was before 1939, and 
who fear change in Europe from whatever quarter 
it may come. Yet to overlook the changes wrought 
among the peoples of Europe by the sufferings they 
have endured and the sacrifices they have made 
would be to misread the meaning of our times— 
just as Pitt and his supporters in England at the end 
of the eighteenth century failed to grasp the perma- 
nent changes that were being wrought in the fabric 
of Europe by the French Revolution. The conquered 
peoples have placed their trust and their hopes in 
the capacity of the United Nations, and especially 
the United States, to understand the crisis through 
which we are living, and to resolve it if at all pos- 
sible by methods that will permit the further pro- 
gress of democracy. To betray this trust and frustrate 
these hopes would be one of the greatest acts of 


treason known to history. Wiis Diiceres me Theale 


FROM BREAK WITH AXIS 


Radical party, which is believed to have the backing 
of some 60 per cent of the voters; and the Socialist 
party, to which 15 per cent of the electorate, in- 
cluding most of the organized workers, belong— 


favored the nomination of General Justo as a coali- | 


tion candidate, and political maneuvering to this end 





had already begun. The Conservatives, who form | 


another large party and are supported by some 20 per 
cent of the voters, back Castillo and his policy. Dis- 
appearance of ex-President Justo from the political 
scene undoubtedly strengthens the position of the 
present Conservative government. 











phy 


dur- 


king 
ialist 
. in- 
ng— 
‘oali- 
; end 
form 
D per 
Dis- 
itical 


F the 








—— 





STATE OF SIEGE RENEWED. A year has 
elapsed since the adoption by the Conference of 
Foreign Ministers of the American Republics at Rio 
de Janeiro of a resolution urging all the American 
nations to sever diplomatic and economic relations 
with the Axis powers, but President Castillo is still 
determined to hold fast to Argentina’s policy of 
“prudent neutrality.” Evidence of this unchanged 
attitude is found in the decree of December 14, 
1942 renewing the state of siege proclaimed at the 
time of the Rio Conference. The purpose behind 
this measure is as much to prevent the Argentine 
press from criticizing the government’s foreign pol- 
icy and expressing itself in favor of severance of 
relations with the Axis as to prohibit public demon- 
strations which do not follow the line of neutrality 
in the present conflict. The fact that the government 
took this step in spite of strong popular opposition 
shows that Castillo will defend his present policy 
by all available means. 


Actually, the reasons for this attitude lie much 
more in internal politics than in fear of reprisals by 
the Axis, although the Argentine government con- 
stantly stresses the dangers that would beset its 
merchant fleet of some two dozen ships if the policy 
of neutrality were abandoned. President Castillo— 
who came to power as a result of the illness and 
subsequent death of liberal President Roberto M. 
Ortiz—is mainly concerned with avoiding too close 
cooperation with the democracies for fear of losing 
his absolute control over the country. Moreover, the 
fear of Russia and communism, which is shared by 
all members of the government, increases their re- 
luctance to throw in their lot with the democracies. 
Close working collaboration with the United Nations 
would inevitably strengthen opposition to the Castillo 
régime, and endanger its existence. 


ELEMENTS SUPPORTING CASTILLO. It 
would be an oversimplification of the Argentine state 
of affairs, however, to believe that while the present 
government is anti-democratic, the people in their 
entirety are pro-United Nation. The situation is much 
more complex. It is true that at least 80 per cent 
of the more articulate population, composed primar- 
ily of the middle-class and the intelligentsia of 


| Buenos Aires and other coastal cities, is sincerely 


in favor of a victory of the United Nations over the 
Axis. But the picture is altered by the indifference 
that prevails in the rural areas. There, one finds 
little support for a war of survival of the democra- 


Page Three 














cies. Most of the landed aristocracy, anxious to 
maintain its position of wealth and privilege, is 
fundamentally anti-democratic and supports Castillo. 
The peons—farm laborers—of the interior, on the 
other hand, are desperately poor and uneducated, 
and have no clear idea as to what the war is really 
about. They therefore show little interest in who is 
going to win. The tenant farmers in the more fertile 
regions, most of them Italian immigrants, enjoy a 
somewhat higher standard of living than the peons, 
but the great majority refrain from expressing any 
decided political opinion. Finally, the state-supported 
Catholic Church is persuaded that any move toward 
liberalism would endanger its moral and material 
position. It is principally from these groups that 
the Castillo government draws its power. 


Renewal of the state of siege and the sudden 
death of General Justo have lessened the possibili- 
ties for a change in governmental policy in the near 
future. Despite London’s official condemnation, on 
the eve of the New Year, of Castillo’s foreign pol- 
icy—thereby blasting the argument of Axis sym- 
pathizers that even Britain favored the government's 
neutral position—there seems to be little hope for a 
reversal of the present situation in Argentina. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 





Victory Is Not Enough: The Strategy for A Lasting Peace, 
by Egon Raushofen-Wertheimer. New York, Norton, 
1942. $3.00 


A former League of Nations official, Austrian by birth, 
presents one of the most stimulating and realistic analyses 
of post-war problems published to date, basing his sug- 
gestions for the future not on theory, but on knowledge of 
European history, politics and psychology. Among several 
interesting suggestions he offers is a proposal for a general 
“freezing” of conditions as they may exist in Europe at 
the end of the war, to give time for political stabilization 
and economic rehabilitation. 





Why have the Nazis respected Swiss neutrality? 
How many refugees and children does Switzerland 
harbor today? What steps have the Swiss taken 
with regard to rationing? political restrictions? 
imports and exports? agriculture? Read— 


Switzerland in Wartime 
by Ernest S. Hediger 
25c 
January 1 issue of FOREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 


REPORTS are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5 a year; to FPA members $3. 














FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 13, JaNuaRY 15, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; VERA MicHELES Dran, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


“Qo 181 





SA TE 























iz Washington News Letter 


JAN. 11.—President Roosevelt in his annual mes- 
sage to the new Congress on January 7 intimated 
that this legislative assembly might be called upon 
to play a great part in molding the peace. “I tell you 
that it is within the realm of possibility that this 
78th Congress may have the historic privilege of 
helping greatly to save the world from future fear,” 
he said. 

In his message the President listed as post-war 
goals the permanent disarmament of Germany, 
Japan and Italy, the continuance of the United Na- 
tions as a coalition to guarantee the prevention of 
another global war, and cooperation to assure world 
economic stability. 

The policy of the Roosevelt Administration is in 
effect to make this conflict what the last world war 
was supposed to be—a “war to end wars.” It aims 
to prevent the tragedy of the nineteen-twenties, 
when Wilsonian idealism was followed by a futile 
, effort to revert to what President Harding called 
“normalcy.” Specifically, two major policies carried 
out by the United States after Versailles contributed 
to a great degree to the outbreak of the present war: 
(1) the isolationism and aloofness from active par- 
ticipation in international affairs, symbolized con- 
cretely by our refusal to have anything to do with 
the League of Nations; (2) the adoption of a pol- 
icy of exaggerated tariff protection, which, reaching 
its culmination in the Smoot-Hawley Tariff of 1930, 
effectively prevented our debtor nations from pay- 
ing us. As Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles 
put it in his address of May 30 last, in becoming in- 
volved “in the greatest war mankind has known, we 
are reaping the bitter fruit of our own folly and our 
own lack of vision.” 


HULL’S TRADE PACTS THREATENED. Vice 
President Henry A. Wallace, whose speeches during 
the past year have attracted nation-wide attention 
and who is thought by some to be favored by Mr. 
Roosevelt as his successor, urged the United Nations 
in a radio interview on December 31 to set up a post- 
war council to preserve the peace with an interna- 
tional air force as its chief instrument of force. 
He went on to say, however, that “force without 
justice would sooner or later make us into the image 
of that which we have hated in the Nazis,’ and he 
urged equality of opportunity for all nations in in- 
ternational trade. For this reason, he demanded re- 
newal of the Administration's authority to negotiate 
reciprocal trade agreements, predicting that the fight 


FOR VICTORY °* 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





on this issue would be “the first round in the battle 
for a just peace.” 

In fact, a bill to terminate all reciprocal trade 
agreements concluded with foreign nations by Sec 
retary of State Cordell Hull was introduced in Con. 
gress by Representative Harold Knutson, Republi. 
can, of Minnesota, and referred to the House Ways 
and Means committee on the very day the President 
delivered his message. The authority under which 
such treaties have already been entered into with 25 
nations was first granted by Congress in 1934 for 
a 3-year period and was extended for additional 
3-year periods in 1937 and 1940. The latest of such 
pacts was signed with Mexico on December 23, and 
agreements with Bolivia, Iceland and Iran are now 
in process of negotiation. The warrant of authority 
expires on June 12, 1943. 

G.O.P.'S STRATEGIC POSITION. The struggle 
on this issue will certainly be intense and may be 
the first big parliamentary battle to be waged in 
the new Congress. As the Republicans in the new 
House have about equal strength with the Democrats 
(208 members against 222), fear has been expressed 
in political quarters here that the minority party may 
be able, with the aid of some dissident Democrats, 
to block any further extension. The fallacy in this 
argument lies in assuming that all Republicans are 
opponents of international cooperation. Obviously, 
this is not the case when the titular head of the 
party, Wendell Willkie, has been an outstanding ad- 
vocate of cooperation with the United Nations, 
while another Republican, Governor Harold Stassen 
of Minnesota, jumped into the limelight on Janu- 
ary 7 with a speech advocating the realization of 
Alfred Tennyson’s dream of a world parliament. 


It might also be pointed out that Charles L. McNary | 


of Oregon, present minority leader in the Senate, 
produced in 1919 a compromise proposal for settle- 
ment of the League of Nations controversy which, 
if accepted, would have resulted in the entrance of 
the United States into that organization. 


But it is clear that if such an evenly divided body | 


as the 78th Congress is to be effective in helping to 
establish a lasting peace, it behooves the Republican 
minority to rise above party politics in matters of 
foreign policy, and it is up to the President to con- 
tinue to avoid Woodrow Wilson's fatal error of 
assuming an attitude of uncompromising and im: | 
placable hostility toward the Opposition. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 





eo St 


oy 


_ 
a 


oD naan 


