— 
——_———— 


onal re 
mmerce 
19 esti- 
Mexican 
st to the 
ich have 


resident 
me. The 
Cedillo, 
>Ardenas 
state of 

to win 
rstwhile 
| his fol. 
a bands. 
erved to 
yn, it by 
, mented 
ingle of 
€ appat- 
t weeks 
or move- 
of Depu- 
‘ardenas- 
| govern 


nade less 
orted at 
al, a pfo- 
quate to 
e cost of 
ived the 
r benefits 
the con- 
the time 
| pressure 
abor dis- 


OMSON 
B. Rogers. 


1uspices of 
s, presents 
’s external 
ly written, 
represents 
problems. 
le of their 
1 find here 
h problems 
cooperation. 
TT 
ed. National 
Dean, Editor, 


iT. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


NICAL ROO 
LIGRARY 
, OF MICMOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


JUL 5 1938 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879, 


Vou. XVII, No. 36 


—— 


JULY 1, 1938 


CANADA IN WORLD AFFAIRS 
by James Frederick Green 


A survey of the essential factors determining 
Canadian policy regarding international problems, 
with particular reference to a possible general war. 


July 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents a copy 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


POWERS STRUGGLE FOR MEDITERRANEAN CONTROL 


HILE the Non-Intervention Committee was 

once more going through the motions of check- 
ing foreign participation in Spain’s civil war, the 
Loyalist government startled the world by announc- 
ing that, unless aerial bombardments of open towns 
by the Rebels were stopped, it would retaliate by 
bombing “points from which raiders come.” This 
threat, first thought to be directed against Italy, 
which has publicly praised the feats of its airplanes 
in Spain, brought the warning on June 26 that Rome 
would respond by acts of war. What Italy thinks of 
the Loyalists reminds one of the French saying: “This 


animal is very mean; when attacked, he defends 
himself.” 


The Loyalist threat was primarily intended to 
bring pressure on the Daladier government which, 
following the unusually early adjournment of the 
Chamber of Deputies on June 17, revealed that it 
had closed the Franco-Spanish frontier on June 2. 
This frontier, theoretically closed under the non- 
intervention agreement, had been opened by the 
Blum cabinet in March for passage of Czechoslovak 
and Soviet war material. It was hoped that the Dala- 
dier move, inspired from London, would bring a 
corresponding gesture of good will from Italy and 
Germany, which have made no secret of their as- 
sistance to General Franco under cover of non-inter- 
vention. France’s decision probably did facilitate the 
task of the Non-Intervention Committee which on 
June 21, with the acquiescence of the Soviet Union, 
adopted the British proposals calling for evacuation 
of “volunteers,” who are to be counted by interna- 
tional commissions; re-establishment of strict control 
over Spain’s land and sea frontiers; and grant of bel- 
ligerent rights to Franco, including the right to 
search foreign ships, several of which were again 
bombed last week on the ground that they were car- 
tying war material to the Loyalists. 


Britain’s efforts to liquidate the Spanish civil war 
by assuring Franco’s victory have been hastened by 
pressure from Italy. Mussolini is said to demand that 
the Anglo-Italian agreement of April 16, which is 
to go into effect only after withdrawal of foreign 
“volunteers,” should be applied without further de- 
lay if Italy is not to default on it. This demand creates 
an embarrassing situation for Prime Minister Neville 
Chamberlain, who has repeatedly assured the House 
of Commons that withdrawal of foreign volunteers 
was an ironclad condition of the Anglo-Italian deal 
on which he has staked his political future. The 
breakdown of this deal would play into the hands 
of the opposition parties, which are already accus- 
ing Chamberlain of pusillanimity for his reluctance 
to do more than protest against repeated Rebel 
bombing of British ships. 


While the Spanish struggle remains deadlocked at 
home and abroad, the Mediterranean powers are 
jockeying for position in anticipation of a general 
conflict. The Yugoslav Premier Stoyadinovitch, who 
has never concealed his pro-Fascist sympathies, vis- 
ited Count Ciano in Venice on June 16, where they 
reviewed the situation created by Germany's absorp- 
tion of Austria. Italy is apparently hoping to use 
Yugoslavia as a buffer against German economic 
penetration in the Balkans, hitherto regarded as an 
Italian sphere of influence. Britain and France are 
meanwhile assiduously cultivating Turkey, which 
will probably be allowed to send troops into the 
Sanjak of Alexandretta, a section of the Syrian man- 
dated territory over which France is about to relin- 
quish jurisdiction. Anglo-French cooperation with 
Turkey would be welcome to the Soviet Union, 
which by the Montreux agreement of 1936 obtained 
the right to send warships through the Dardanelles 
into the Mediterranean, and might—provided it de- 
velops sufficient naval power—become an important 


, Fy 


or Z 
ES SSE 8 Nae 


a SRS 
os 


iatibdeseeseamees 


factor in that region. Political shifts in the Near East 
assume particular importance for the U.S.S.R. at a 
moment when Germany, pressing its drive to the 
East, is acquiring a foothold in Iran, within striking 
distance of the rich Baku oil fields, whose output 
has become doubly essential for a country which is 
mechanizing not only industry but also agriculture. 

Throughout Europe the powers which expect to 
be aligned against each other in a major conflict are 
testing their strength, bringing all available raw ma- 
terials within their political control, and cautiously 
appraising their neighbors as potential friends or 
enemies. If the World War took the masses every- 
where by surprise, it would no longer do so today, 
when the man in the street is painfully aware of 
feverish war preparations. Yet today, as in 1914, 
foreknowledge and common sense appear to have no 
bearing on the course of events. War is not inev- 
itable, but general reluctance to make sacrifices for 
peace inevitably reduces the narrow margin which 
separates anticipation from realization. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


UNREST IN BRITISH WEST INDIES 


Recurrent strikes and riots in Jamaica, following 
similar disorder in Trinidad last year, reveal wide- 
spread economic distress in the British West Indies. 
A strike of stevedores and street cleaners began at 
Kingston on May 21, and was widened two days 
later by a sympathetic strike of industrial and agri- 
cultural workers in many parts of the island. Armed 
conflict between unruly mobs and the police have 
resulted in twelve deaths and scores of injuries in 
recent weeks. Governor Denham was granted 
emergency powers by the legislative council and the 
cruiser Ajax was summoned from Bermuda to hel 
maintain order. The original strike was settled by 
mediation on May 27, but violence continues. 


In response to vigorous criticism from Parliament 
and the press, the new Colonial Secretary, Mr. Mal- 
colm MacDonald, has announced the appointment 
of a royal commission to study economic and social 
conditions throughout the West Indies, and inaugura- 
tion of interim measures for improving labor con- 
ditions. An experienced administrator, Sir Arthur 
Frederick Richards, was appointed Governor of 
Jamaica on June 14 to replace Sir Edward Denham, 
who died at Kingston on June 2. A land settlement 
project, costing £500,000, will be launched immedi- 
ately, to provide work for the unemployed. 

Although the immediate issue in the Jamaica strike 
concerned wages and hours, the present crisis is 


Page Two 


—<—— 


the result of colonial exploitation, accentuated 

the current agricultural depression. The stevedores 
sought wages of 25 cents an hour instead of 16-1g 
cents, while the street cleaners desired an increase 
from $4.50-$5.00 to $7.50 per week. Although 
wages in both Jamaica and Trinidad range from 25 
cents to $1 per day, it is generally believed—in the 
absence of reliable statistics—that the cost of living 
has been steadily rising. Poor housing, inadequate 
sanitation, disease, and poverty have provided fuel 
for the inflammatory leadership of political agitators 

The Report of the Royal Commission on the 
Trinidad riots, published last February, revealed the 
basic factors of the unrest which is spreading 
throughout the British possessions from Barbados to 
Guiana. The economy of this area, resting largely 
on the export of tropical products, has been jeop 
ardized by the post-war decline in agricultural price 
and restriction of markets. Sugar and cocoa, ¢ 
two major crops of Trinidad on which 200,000 in- 
habitants are dependent, have suffered particularly 
in recent years. Although petroleum is now Trini- 
dad’s most important export, the industry employs 
relatively few workers and pays the prevailing low 
wages. 

Critics of the British government, including Mr 
Lloyd George and Lord Olivier, formerly Governor 
of Jamaica, charge that the Colonial Office has failed 
to protect the natives from exploitation and that local 
officials have proved inefficient. Increased wages, 
land settlement, diversification of crops, and health 
and housing projects are apparently the immediate 
needs of the population, requiring both financial as 
sistance from London and more liberal administra 
tion in the colonies. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


Japan in China, by T. A. Bisson. New York, Macmillan, 


1938. $3.00 

The outgrowth of years of study and tr: 3 bool 
by the FPA’s Far Eastern expert constituts nost 
scholarly analysis yet published on the «: nt 
Sino-Japanese relations since 1933. Mr. Bissor ymps 
thetic to the aspirations of the Chinese, but this does no 
affect his objectivity in describing China’s progress towarl 
unification, Japan’s descent into the morass of military 
fascism, and the resulting struggle for power in the Orient 


Canada, the Pacific and War, by William Strange. New 
York, Thomas Nelson, 1938. $1.75 


Published under the auspices of the Canadian Institute 
of International Affairs, Canada, the Pacific and Wa 
treats one aspect of Canadian affairs which has heretofor 
received little attention. Outlining the relation of th 
Dominion to the struggle for power in the Pacific, Mr 
Strange contemplates the danger of war to Canadial 
safety. In stimulating journalese, he raises many prob 
lems of coastal defense which should interest citizens d 
both Canada and the United States. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 36, Juty 1, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasiig Buewt, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHEtes Dean, Béilor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


a 


—— 


Nationa 


An i? 


new ( 
featu: 
energ 
Unerr 
is WO 
ment 

works 
entert 
spect 
the I 
some 

erate 

down 
terior 
vious. 


0; export 


ing tk 
befor 
For tl 
of ac 


Th 
used 
other 
King 
and | 
Crisis, 
fate 
ment 
endea 
Nazi 
Rome 
Ansel 


