nts 
25 
45 
ks, 


nd 
for 
1n- 


ild 


ohn 


the 
18, 
1 of 
: of 


air, 


iral 

for 
pite 
ists’ 


the 
are 
art. 


ars. 
938. 


ack- 


— 


tional 
ditor. 
































co. Further encouragement to their cause has been 
given by recent reports that General Franco would 
shortly appoint as his Prime Minister Ramén 
Serrano Sufier, a leader of the Falangist movement 
known as an admirer of Italian and German fascism. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN Entered g - 
An inter pretaggn of current international events by the Research Staff yg Page pe ge 
gz e Subscription, Two Dollars a Year Office at New York, 
mY ¥ N. Y., under the act 
oe N POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3, 1879. 
ort 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
FS: 
ve XVIII, No. 19 MARCH 3, 1939 
THE PUZZLE OF PALESTINE, by David H. Popper General Libdrary 
i i -Jewi r in Palestine? . : . 
age eg site Pon —S and University of Michigaa 
gives not only the essential facts of Palestine’s turbu- 
lent history, but also an account of the various plans Ann Arbor, Michigan 
which have been proposed to solve this problem. 
cloth edition, 95 cents 
Headline Books, No. 14 paper edition, 25 cents 
RECOGNITION OF FRANCO HASTENS SHOWDOWN 
~ deciding to recognize the Franco régime on Yet the position of the British and French in 
February 27, Britain and France have adopted a Spain is not entirely hopeless. Preoccupation of the 
course which had become increasingly inevitable Spanish government with internal reconstruction, and 
during the last few months. From the very begin- possible dissension among the divergent elements 
ning of the Spanish civil war their refusal to offer which have helped Franco to victory, may preclude 
energetic opposition to Italo-German intervention Spain’s active participation in the European struggle 
had paved the way for defeat of the Popular Front for power. Prolonged occupation of Spanish soil by 
government in Spain. A reversal of that policy at Italian troops, or obvious attempts by Germany or 
the last moment would have needlessly prolonged Italy to dictaté the ‘country’s internal policy, might 
the conflict without affecting the final outcome. Un- well arouse the hostility of the Spanish people, who 
able to pursue an alternative course, the British and have traditionally resented all foreign interference. 
French could not make recognition of General In such an eventuality Franco could play London and 
Franco conditional on specific pledges regarding Paris against the fascist powers. Trade with free- 
treatment of the vanquished government forces or exchange countries like France and Britain is also 
the future conduct of Spanish foreign policy. essential for Spain, which needs to replenish its de- 
Nevertheless, recognition of the Nationalist ré- pleted supply of foreign exchange; and ve alone 
. asia thie Gear chia in on Ae ae can supply the long-term foreign loan which may 
ov ipeagtn hee P 6 be needed to heal the wounds of almost three years 
paign to wean Franco away from Italy and Germany. € civil w y 
Admittedly it will prove difficult to dislodge the ea lbescitaet vee 
fascist nations from their present position of vantage. Outside Spain the position of France and Britain 
Rome and Berlin will not cease reminding Franco appears strong. Their rearmament programs are at 
that he would hardly have won without their as- last proceeding at a more satisfactory pace; and their 
sistance. The Italians still have at least 30,000 troops economic and financial reserves are far superior to 
in Spain, while the Germans have entrenched them- those of the fascist powers. The British and French 
selves in the economic and commercial life of the need only strong nerves to resist the pressure from 
country. Both hope to use Franco’s large and well- Berlin and Rome. Actually, Hitler and Mussolini seem 
trained armed forces as a pawn in their program of rather at a loss as to their next step. For Germany the 
power politics. Their expectation that Nationalist way to the East appears at least temporarily barred. 
Spain will adhere to the anti-Comintern pact will The anti-German student demonstrations which took 
probably be realized. They also derive support from place last week in Warsaw and other Polish cities 
Franco’s decision, announced early in January, to testify to the fundamental antagonism between Po- 
play an active rdle in the Mediterranean and Moroc- land and Germany; and the dissolution of the lead- 


ing Hungarian fascist party on February 24 indicates 
that Hungary is not prepared to follow entirely in 
Germany’s wake. A series of visits by Count Ciano, 
Italian Foreign Minister, in Belgrade, Budapest and 
Warsaw seems to prove also that Italy is anxious to 





a 


an ene 


ee 














aid eastern European states in resisting Nazi pene- 
tration. 

The realization of fascist objectives at the expense 
of Britain and France appears even more difficult. It 
would be suicidal for Germany and Italy to embark 
on war. They can only hope, by constant maneuvers 
and threats, to keep Europe in such a state of ferment 
and tension that the other powers will in the end 
meet their demands for the sake of “appeasement.” 
The dispatch of Italian reinforcements to Libya, re- 
ports of accelerated arming in Germany, and the 
menacing tone of the German and Italian press are 
all part and parcel of these tactics. 


A policy of watchful waiting and an attitude of 
calm confidence are the only effective counter- 
weapons to this campaign. More recently, British 
Statesmen have coupled their appeasement policy 


» with assertions that they will resist any threat to the 


“vital interests” of France and Britain. Such was the 
tenor of a speech delivered by Foreign Minister 
Viscount Halifax on February 23. Yet the difficulty 
of joining appeasement with an expressed determina- 
tion not to yield to force is that any conciliatory 
gesture will inevitably be regarded by the fascist 
powers as an indication of weakness. Maintenance 
of “law and order” in the face of threats need not, 
and must not, preclude alteration of the status quo; 
yet orderly revision can proceed only after Germany 
and Italy have been convinced that their sword- 
rattling tactics do not intimidate other powers. Only 
then will it be possible to reach a constructive gen- 
eral settlement providing for adjustment of colonial 
and economic issues as well as termination of arms 
— JOHN C. DEWILDE 


BRITAIN PROPOSES INDEPENDENT PALESTINE 


Amidst Arab victory celebrations, charges of be- 
trayal from the Jews, and a sharp outburst of violence 
in Palestine, United States Ambassador Joseph P. 
Kennedy visited the British Foreign Office on Febru- 
ary 27 to discuss the implications for the United 
States of any steps to abrogate the British mandate 
over the Holy Land or to curtail Jewish immigration. 
This démarche, undertaken pursuant to the terms of 
the Anglo-American Palestine convention of 1924, 
followed closely upon publication of a summary of 
Britain's plan to abolish the League of Nations 
mandate and establish an independent Palestinian 
state bound by alliance to the British Empire. Em- 
bodying vital concessions to the Arabs, the proposal 
is the fruit of a tripartite conference of Arabs, Jews 
and Britons convened at London on February 7. 


Under the British proposals, whose impact has 
scarcely been dulled by their tentative form, a transi- 
tional period which might be prolonged until 1942 





Page Two = 





or 1944 would precede the consummation of inde. 
pendence. Constitutional details—among which ade. 
quate safeguards for all British interests would be 
prominent—would be settled by a round-table con. 
ference of British, Arab and Jewish representatives 
nominated by the British and meeting in London, 
possibly in the autumn of 1939. Procedures roughly 
analogous to those used in formulating the Egyptian 
and Indian constitutional structures would be em- 
ployed. But before these measures were taken, the 
British government would add Arabs and Jews to 
the existing executive and advisory councils for Pal. 
estine, now composed entirely of British officials, 
While these representatives would probably exercise 
only consultative functions, they are apparently to 
be selected on a basis of proportional communal 
representation, so that Arabs would enjoy a two-to- 
one predominance in the legislative organs. The path 
would then be cleared for Arab domination in an 
independent Palestinian state linked by alliance with 
Britain, although treaty provisions would doubtless 
guarantee Jewish minority rights—how effectively no 
one can say. Meanwhile, immigration and the acquisi- 
tion of land by Jews would be drastically circum- 
scribed. Once arrangements for independence were 
completed, the future of the Jewish National Home 
would rest to a considerable degree in the hands of 
the leaders of the Arab majority in Palestine. 


Although final judgment on the British proposal 
must be deferred until it is published in extenso, it 
seems apparent at the moment that by its terms the 
Arab Nationalists have won their greatest triumph 
in Palestine. Its provisions do not, to be sure, accord 
the Palestinian Arabs the complete and immediate 
independence for which they have steadfastly con- 
tended, but they do inaugurate a policy which would 
evolve inexorably toward that goal. Delegates from 
the five Arab states present at the conference are 
reported to be urging the Mufti of Jerusalem to ac- 
cept it, with excellent prospects for success. The 
Mufti, who dictates Palestine Arab moves from his 
refuge in the Lebanese Republic, would now have 
little to gain by continuing his policy of absolute 
intransigence. 


To the Zionists this sudden turn in the negotia- | 


tions is a cruel blow, and they have not been slow to 
reveal their bitterness. With the refugee problem 
complicated by a Spartan German police order re- 
quiring the Berlin Jewish community to produce the 
names of 100 Jews daily for expulsion from the 
Reich, the one haven to which additional numbers 
of the persecuted might have turned now appears 
likely to be barred by British fiat. More than this, 
the status of the 450,000 Zionists already resident 
in the National Home may: be crystallized in a 
(Continued on Page 4) 

















Washington News Letter 





pred ebagy 











—— 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Fes. 27.—The first steps are now being taken to 
implement the Administration's post-Lima policy of 
resisting German and Italian pressure in South 
America by something more concrete than good 
neighbor protestations. Last week both Houses of 
Congress approved a bill to extend until 1941 the 
life and scope of the Export-Import Bank, the gov- 
ernment agency best adapted to combat totalitarian 
trade practices in this hemisphere. The Treasury De- 
partment is concluding arrangements to give finan- 
cial aid to Brazil; and State Department trade ex- 
perts are searching for a solution to the dilemma 
created by Argentina’s announcement that it must 
balance its trade with the United States, even to the 
point of cutting its imports of American goods by 
40 per cent. 


Threatened opposition to renewal of the Export- 
Import Bank's charter failed to materialize in either 
the House or the Senate. Republican critics of the 
measure, attacking the bank as a dangerous instru- 
ment of foreign policy and a “war breeder,” had to 
be satisfied with an amendment to limit its borrow- 
ing and lending powers to $100,000,000. While the 
$25,000,000 credit granted on December 15 to the 
Universal Trading Company was condemned as “‘a 
political loan” to the Chinese government, the bank's 
previous commitments have merely aided the expor- 
tation of American goods to other countries. The 
inroads made in Latin America by European ex- 
porters, who in many cases enjoy government back- 
ing, are due in large part to the more liberal credit 
terms they can offer. In 1938 United States trade with 
eight Latin American countries was facilitated by 
credits extended by the Export-Import Bank. It is 
understood in Washington that a large portion of 
the bank’s increased capital will now be used in this 
direction, particularly to finance American exports to 
Brazil. 


For the last two weeks Washington officials have 
been assiduously courting the Brazilian Foreign 
Minister, Oswaldo Aranha. In the past, the United 
States has been inclined to take Brazil’s friendship 
for granted, and has unwittingly offended it by its 
persistent efforts to woo Argentina. Recently Brazil 
has become the spearhead of the ideologic and eco- 
nomic penetration of the European totalitarian states 
into Latin America. Its strategic location, and the 
Strength of its national defenses, make it of vital 


military importance for protection of the Monroe 
Doctrine. Mr. Aranha has been at pains to convince 
Washington officials that the pressure of the fascist 
countries will prevail in Brazil unless material aid 
is forthcoming from the United States. 


No announcement has yet been made as to just 
what form this aid will take. The passage of the 
Export-Import Bank bill, even with its limiting pro- 
vision, was encouraging to the Aranha mission. Aside 
from the more liberal credit facilities thus afforded, 
two suggestions have been under discussion for 
bolstering trade between the two countries. One is 
that Brazil might divert its wheat imports from 
Argentina to the United States; another that a tri- 
partite agreement to include Argentina might be 
negotiated. Treasury officials are considering a loan 
to the Brazilian government (the figure reported is 
$50,000,000) to furnish Brazil with ample foreign 
exchange and stabilize its currency. The rehabilita- 
tion of Brazil’s national defense is another pertinent 
item. Such financial and trade arrangements, although 
they sometimes clash with the spirit of the Hull 
trade program, are needed to combat German bar- 
ter practices. Since trade and political prestige go 
hand in hand, closer economic ties between the 
United States and Brazil would materially check 
Nazi influence. 


Congressional opposition, however, may be ex- 
pected to any direct loan to the Brazilian government. 
American investors have fared badly in recovering 
their South American loans. The new “credit im- 
perialism’’ of the Treasury Department and its extra- 
curricular activities in the recent airplane sales are 
viewed with suspicion by several groups, including 
some State Department officials. The resignation of 
Wayne Taylor, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, 
was presumably a protest against such policies. 
Washington observers do not expect all of Aranha’s 
requests to be granted. 


The Argentine warning that future imports from 
the United States are to be curtailed by 40 per cent 
was evidently timed to coincide with Aranha’s visit. 
The chief dilemma in our trade and political rela- 
tions with Argentina is the inability of the United 
States to import sufficient agricultural products from 
Argentina to balance our large exports to that 
country. Trade with Argentina is no “natural,” and 
is hardly stimulated by our refusal to admit Argen- 
tine beef in any quantities or under any conditions 
on the ground that infection of beef in any portion 





qs 
i 
v| 
: 
2 
; 
| 

















of Argentina prohibits importation of all its meat 
products. Possibly the Argentines hope that their 
action will hasten Congressional reconsideration of 
the Sanitary Convention, already ratified by Argen- 
tina but pigeonholed by Congress at its last session. 
Germany’s willingness to absorb Argentine raw ma- 
terials on a barter basis, and Britain’s insistence that 
Argentina buy British goods in exchange for its 
large importations of Argentine beef and wheat, 
however, are more important factors. Unless tripar- 
tite trade between Brazil, Argentina and the United 
States materializes, or large short-term commercial 
credits to these countries can be arranged, there seems 
to be little hope of drawing both Argentina and 
Brazil into the American economic and political orbit. 

FREDERICK T. MERRILL 

BRITAIN PROPOSES INDEPENDENT PALESTINE 

(Continued from Page 2) 

“permanent ghetto,” without possibility of further 
development. From the Zionist point of view, it 
appears that the Arabs are being rewarded for their 
unceasing terroristic campaigns and hostility to 
Britain, while the Zionists are penalized for follow- 
ing a policy of non-retaliation and loyalty to the 
Empire. They may therefore be expected to repeat 
the tactics adopted in 1930, when a British declara- 
tion favorable to the Arabs provoked such a storm 
of protest that it was “reinterpreted” in a manner 
restoring the balance between the two antagonists. 
As a last resort, passive resistance by the Jewish com- 
munity in Palestine has been envisaged; and _hot- 
heads among the Zionists might utilize the occasion 
to engage in retaliatory violence against the Arabs, 

which the Jews have thus far generally eschewed. 
Should the Zionists feel constrained to espouse 
measures of this sort, the British would be confronted 
by a continuing state of disorder in the Holy Land 
for. which they may logically be saddled with a high 
degree of responsibility. It would not be equitable 
to condemn British policy unreservedly. Britain has 
had the thankless task of attempting to reconcile 
two uncompromising nationalist movements. In an 


Page Four —. 








———, 


age of Realpolitik the British cannot be too severe| 
censured for extending the olive branch to the Arabs 
in order to retain their strategic predominance jg 
a region threatened by fascist maneuvers. Never. 
theless, the reluctance of the British to take stronger 
steps to quell terrorism long before it had reached 
its present proportions, or to call an Arab-Jewish cop. 
ference before violence became organized rebellion 
will weigh heavily against them. Non-Zionist Jews 
and a large body of neutral observers would have 
given considerable support to a compromise pro. 
posal recognizing the basic claims of Arab national- 
ism, but not throttling the future expansion of Jey. 
ish economic development in the Levant. They were 
particularly hopeful of such a scheme because Prime 
Minister Chamberlain, in opening the tripartite con. 
ference on February 7, declared that the government 
entered the discussions “bound by its obligations 
under the mandate . . . to both Arabs and Jews,” 
although arguments for changes in the mandate 
would be heard. 


The highly tentative nature of the suggestions thus 
far made by the British government permits it still 
to turn in this direction without loss of face. If it 
does not do so, an Arab-dominated Palestine will 
soon spring into existence. By appeasement of the 
Palestine Arabs Britain obviously hopes to retain its 
ascendancy among the ardent nationalists of the 
Middle East, despite the challenge of the totalitarian 
states. Yet here, as in the West, the question arises 
whether concessions which appear to be won by vio- 
lence will suffice to maintain Britain’s position in the 
region affected or in the world at large. 


Davip H. Popper 


MR. THOMSON’S RESIGNATION 


The Foreign Policy Association regrets to announce 
that, on February 15, 1939, Mr. Thomson resigned as 
Research Associate to take up his new duties as 
Assistant Director of the Division of Cultural Rela- 
tions in the Department of State. Mr. Thomson had 
been the F.P.A.’s Latin American expert since 1933. 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Betrayal in Central Europe, by G. E. R. Gedye. New York, 
Harper, 1939. $3.50 


An interesting and informative account of the fall of 
Austria and the partition of Czechoslovakia, written by a 
correspondent of the New York Times. Mr. Gedye, who 
was stationed first in Vienna and later in Prague, gives 
graphic, detailed pictures of both crises from the point of 
view of a staunch opponent of Nazism. 


Foundations of British Foreign Policy: From Pitt (1792) | 


to Salisbury (1902), edited by Harold Temperley and 
Lillian M. Penson. New York, Macmillan, 1938. $7.50 


An excellent collection of two hundred documents, many 
published for the first time, illustrating the policy of 
successive Foreign Secretaries. The editors have added 
historical notes to explain each document in terms of in- 
ternational affairs and domestic politics. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 19, Marcu 3, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lesiig Buewt, President; Dorotruy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


pis 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











FC 


An 


VoL 


Eu 


ane ae, Le geen Cf. oe 





