re enter. 
to capitu. 
, by their 
‘00 miles 
rfields at 
industrial 


BN 


bombers, 
> inclined 
in part to — 
1 another 
, Chiang gy 
glory of 


ie war to 


war hori- 
t to gain 
rave, and 
year, Can- 
er as the 
r the out- 
certain— 
ll not be 
ing force 
predicted 
the Nazi 
opulation | 


1 Egypt, 
unched a 
. Despite 
mvoys in 
bombers 
is known 
fs in men 
lexandria 
mination 
rited Na- 
and seri- 
ld repre- 
f France. 
autumn, 
ne tide is 
in favor 
Trew, just 
dcast on 


beat but, | ; 


American 
rough, it 
the Jap- 


1ans. 


LLIOTT 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


mee wii 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXI, No. 47 


SEPTEMBER 11, 1942 


ALLIED LEADERS FORESEE OFFENSIVE IN EUROPE 


 peranaghl ROOSEVELT’S Labor Day radio 
address, and Mr. Churchill’s report to the House 
of Commons, delivered within a few hours of each 
other, struck a common note of confidence in the 
growing power of the United Nations, and of cau- 
tion concerning the sacrifices that must be endured 
before victory is in sight. At a time when Stalingrad, 
whose surrender has been repeatedly prophesied by 
the Nazis, continued to withstand German assaults, 
the President and the British Prime Minister both 
stressed the quality of Russian resistance, and Hitler’s 
failure to destroy Russia’s armies. In spite of mili- 
tary setbacks and territorial losses Russia, said Mr. 
Roosevelt, “will hold out and, with the help of her 
Allies, will ultimately drive every Nazi from her 
soil.” 

OFFENSIVE SPIRIT ON RISE. Both spokesmen 
expressed guarded hopefulness about the outcome 
of the struggle in Egypt, where the Allies have ap- 
parently blunted the spearhead of a large-scale of- 
fensive launched by Field Marshal Rommel on 
August 30, with command of the eastern Mediter- 
tanean as its goal. Regarding the Pacific area, where 
the Japanese threaten Allied footholds in New 
Guinea and the Solomon Islands, Mr. Roosevelt 
warned that Japan still possesses great strength and 
will make every effort to retain the initiative. But 
both President Roosevelt and Mr. Churchill paid 
major attention to the European theatre of war 
where, the President declared, “the power of Ger- 
many must be broken.” ‘Preparations for an offen- 
sive,’ said Mr. Roosevelt, ‘are being made here and 
in Britain,’ and Mr. Churchill, after mentioning the 
influx of American troops into the British Isles, 
added: “There is no reason to suppose that we have 
not the means of victory in our hands, providing that 
the utmost in human power is done here and in the 
United States.” 

That the British alone could not have attempted 


an invasion of the European continent—as has often 
been urged by armchair strategists—becomes daily 
more evident. Of the four million men mobilized by 
Britain out of a population of 47 million, over two 
million are serving in land forces on many scattered 
fronts, among them Egypt and the Middle East; in 
the British Navy, which guards lines of communi- 
cation on the seven seas; and in the R.A.F. which, 
until this summer, fought off the German air force 
in Western Europe almost single-handed. While the 
number of American soldiers dispatched overseas is 
a military secret, the President indicated on Labor 
Day that it is three times that sent during the first 
nine months of World War I—which might be 
roughly about 500,000. Of these only a portion are 
in Northern Ireland and England, the rest being 
scattered, like the British, on many fronts, from 
Iceland to Australia, from West Africa to India. 
This dispersal of men, as well as of war material, 
notably airplanes, has been criticized both in Britain 
and the United States. Yet, as President Roosevelt 
remarked on September 7, no one suggests that any 
of the four theatres of war he discussed should be 
surrendered. “Certainly,” he said, “it could not be 
seriously urged that we abandon aid to Russia, or 
surrender all of the Pacific to Japan, or the Medi- 
terranean and Middle East to Germany, or give up 
an offensive against Germany.” Indirectly replying 
to those of their critics who have demanded a uni- 
fied command and closer coordination of United 
Nations forces, both the President and the British 
Prime Minister indicated that there is complete 
agreement between Britain and the United States on 
policy in waging global war. This agreement—ac- 
cording to Mr. Churchill’s speech and to an announce- 
ment of September 8 from the White House—was 
reached at a conference of British and American 
military and political leaders in London in July, when 
“the necessary decisions regarding military operations 


— 
———- 


were made.” The British-American agreement was 
presumably reenforced through the conversations 
held in Moscow in August between Stalin, Churchill, 
and other United Nations officials. 

NECESSITY FOR SPEED. The necessity for ut- 
most speed in weakening the German war machine 
is emphasized not only by Russia’s plight, but also 
by the mounting tide of Nazi brutality against con- 
quered peoples. This brutality may be expected to 
increase as the Nazis become less certain of victory, 
and more hard-pressed to obtain the raw materials, 
foodstuffs and man power needed for continuance 
of the war against Russia which, it is now frankly 
admitted in Berlin, will go on through another 
winter. Every day that Nazi control over Europe is 
prolonged is not only lost for the United Nations 
in a military sense, but spells the doom of men and 
women in Europe whose courage and devotion will 
be needed in the post-war world. 

The very brutality of the Nazis is provoking a 
deep-seated revulsion among the conquered peoples. 
Reports from unoccupied France reveal that Vichy 
orders, issued on Nazi directions, for the rounding 
up of Jews of foreign origin who had taken refuge 
there have provoked a minor civil war against the 
French “collaborationist” authorities. Many police- 
men have refused to carry out these orders, thus 
courting dismissal, while peasants and workers, in 
spontaneous revolt, have armed themselves with 
scythes and sticks to defend the refugees. The strik- 
ing thing, in a world that Hitler had thought com- 
mitted to selfishness and corruption, is that these 


Page Two 


LL 
———n 


peasants and workers are risking punishment not 
because they themselves are directly menaced, but 
because they have apparently found it impossible to 
remain passive onlookers of Nazi cruelty. The cour- 
ageous protests of the Catholic Church—from the 
Pope and leading French Archbishops, notably Arch- 
bishop Saliége of Toulouse, to the village priests of 
France—as well as Protestant condemnations, have 
strengthened this revulsion of the French people, 
who have shaken off the apathy induced by their own 
suffering to help other sufferers. Catholic opposition, 
which comes at a moment when the Laval govern. 
ment has announced the dissolution of all labor or- 
ganizations—including the Christian Workers’ unions 
—and the establishment of a single labor union, 


challenges Marshal Petain’s repeated claim that his | 


“national revolution” is built on a Catholic basis, 
Outwardly, the Nazis have succeeded in crushing 
liberty, destroying justice, and traducing democracy. 
Yet the greatest paradox of our times is that seldom 
in human history have so many people, varying so 
widely in historical development, political traditions 
and economic practices, been so stubbornly deter- 
mined to preserve, achieve or recover liberty, justice 
and democracy. It is on these three principles, said 
Bishop de Andrea of Buenos Aires at a dinner of 
the Inter-American Seminar in Chicago on Septem- 
ber 2, that post-war reconstruction must be based, 
thus adding the weight of Catholic opinion in Latin 
America to convictions expressed—and practiced— 
by many Catholic leaders in conquered Europe. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


CHILE’S FOREIGN POLICY IN THE BALANCE 


The forthcoming visit of Chilean President Juan 
Antonio Rios to the United States (now scheduled 
for October) may conceivably serve as the prelude to 
an open break with the Axis powers, a move which 
would have important repercussions throughout the 
Americas. At present Chile and Argentina are the 
only two countries in the Western Hemisphere which 
maintain diplomatic ties with the aggressor nations. 
Should Chile sever its relations following the 
Rios trip, it is by no means certain that Buenos 
Aires would follow the example. Undoubtedly, 
however, such a move would enormously strengthen 


For an analysis of political and economic condi- 
tions in Vichy France based on first-hand material, 
READ: 


Vichy France Under Hitler 
by David H. Popper 


25c 


Aucust 1 issue of ForgEIGN PoLicy REPorTS 


REpoRTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


elements within Argentina which are urging aban- 
donment of President Castillo’s policy of ‘prudent 
neutrality.”” What is more, a Chilean break with the 
Axis would reduce the importance of Santiago as a 
focus of Axis espionage and propaganda. The Nazi 
Ambassador in Chile, Baron von Schoen, is a skilled 
diplomat of long experience in the United States, 
Mexico and South America, who has cleverly ex- 
ploited his wide personal contacts among various 
strata of Chilean society, and his departure from 
the scene would represent a distinct’ gain for the 
pro-democratic forces. 


SENTIMENT vs. REALISM. A vast majority of 
Chileans, estimated at anywhere from 75 to 90 
per cent, are emotionally sympathetic to the cause 
of the democracies in the present conflict. When it 
comes, however, to an actual break in relations with 
the Axis, the percentage is considerably less. Chileans 
are inclined to stress the length—some 2,800 miles— 
of their virtually unprotected South Pacific coast 
line, and to emphasize the importance of maintain- 
ing an uninterrupted flow of merchandise over the 


—— 


north 
the 7 
ciden 
Chile 
to a 
Braz: 
read) 
in th 
over, 
tralit 
tinct: 


cut ¢ 
izati 
Com 
mun 
Mex 
expe 
Naz 
part 
of 1 
have 
brat 
on - 
Osc: 
inet 
rem: 
dent 
is b 
Mat 
part 


tena 
opp 
pro 
not: 


A 
| of t 


Heac 
secor 


<= 


—=: 


1€nt not 
ced, but 
ssible to 
‘he cour- 
rom the 
sly Arch- 
riests of 
ns, have 

people, 
heir own 
position, 

govern- 
labor or- 
s’ unions 
r union, 


that his | 


‘ic basis, 
crushing 
mocracy. 
t seldom 
rying so 
raditions 
ly deter- 
y, justice 
les, said 
inner of 
Septem- 
e based, 
in Latin 
icticed— 
pe. 
DEAN 


1g aban- 
‘prudent 
with the 
agO aS a 
he Nazi 
a skilled 
d States, 
retly ex- 
various 
ire from 
for the 


jority of 
5 to 90 
he cause 
When it 
ons with 
Chileans 
) miles— 
fic coast 
naintain- 
over the 


— 
—_ 


north-south routes. On March 13 a Chilean vessel, 
the Tolten, was sunk by an Axis submarine. The in- 
cident has not been repeated, however, and many 
Chileans fear that an open Axis break would lead 
to a wave of wholesale sinkings, as in the case of 
Brazil. They point out that the United States is al- 
ready getting powerful economic help from Chile 
in the form of copper and nitrate shipments. More- 
over, Chilean policy—they assert—is not one of “neu- 
trality,” but rather of ‘“‘non-belligerency.” This dis- 
tinction has been consistently maintained since the 
Rio Conference in January, and was stressed anew 
by the Chilean Ambassador in Washington, Rodolfo 
Michels, on his recent return from a trip to Santiago. 


WAR DEBATE CUTS ACROSS PARTY LINES. 
The debate over foreign policy in Chile has already 
cut across party lines. The first of the major organ- 
izations to come out definitely for a break was the 
Communist party. As in the case of other Com- 
munist groups in Latin America (the Cuban and the 
Mexican, for example), the Chilean Communists 
experienced a sudden change of heart following the 
Nazi attack on Russia in June 1941. Since then the 
party organ, E/ Siglo, has been a vigorous champion 
of the United Nations’ cause. Chilean Socialists 
have also taken their stand for a break. In a cele- 
brated address in the Teatro Caupolican in Santiago 
on June 4, Minister of Fomento (Development) 
Oscar Schnake, foremost Socialist in the Rios Cab- 
inet, argued that Chile could not and should not 
remain neutral. The Radical party, to which Presi- 
dent Rios and a majority of Cabinet ministers belong, 
is badly split over the severance issue. In mid-July 
Marcial Mora resigned as president of the Radical 
party after other party leaders had voted for main- 
tenance of the status guo. Even among the chief 
opposition parties—the Liberals and Conservatives— 
prominent voices have been heard urging a break, 
notably that of the highly respected physician and 
politician, Eduardo Cruz Coke, who baldly asserted 
a few weeks ago that Hitler’s “new order’ was a 


THE F.P.A. 


A History of Chile, by Luis Galdames, translated and ed- 
ited by Isaac Joslin Cox. Chapel Hill, N. C., University 
of North Carolina Press, 1941. $5.00 
One of the valuable Inter-American Historical Series on 

individual countries of South America. 


The Battle of South America, by Albert E. Carter. New 
York, Bobbs-Merrill, 1941. $2.75 


A sprightly and generally well-balanced political survey 
of the South American countries. 


Page Three 


“new order of slavery.” 

On the extreme right of the Chilean political 
spectrum are various organizations with open pfo- 
Fascist leanings, such as that headed by the notori- 
ous Jorge Gonzdlez von Marées, who has acted as 
spokesman of the Chilean National Socialist party 
and—at a later date—of the so-called Vanguardia 
Popular Socialista. Such groups may be expected to 
wage a last-ditch fight against any anti-Axis moves. 
Since they claim to be, first and foremost, Chilean 
“nationalists,” they are likely to exert a more effec- 
tive and insidious influence over national policy than 
the transplanted Germans who are concentrated in 
many districts of the Chilean South. 


In the last analysis, a decision on the vital issue 
of Chilean foreign policy will rest in the hands of 
the executive, that is to say President Rios and his 
immediate advisers. Foreign Minister Ernesto Barros 
Jarpa, despite his previous experience as head of 
the Chilean-United States Cultural Institute, is re- 
ported to have been reluctant to assume responsibil- 
ity for advocating an Axis break. A less negative 
attitude has been taken by youthful Interior Min- 
ister Raul Morales Beltrami, who will have tem- 
porary charge of the government during his chief's 
absence. As for President Rios himself—who was 
installed in office April 2 to fill out the unexpired 
term of the late Pedro Aguirre Cerda—he is by tem- 
perament and training a cautious man. Ever since 
his inauguration, Rios has declared that he would 
modify the lines of Chilean foreign policy only 
when he received a clear “popular mandate’ for 
doing so. Both Mexico’s entrance into the war at 
the end of May and Brazil’s war declaration of Au- 
gust 22 have enormously stirred opinion in Chile, 
and it would not be at all surprising if President 
Rios—following his Washington visit—should de- 
cide that the time had at last come to bring Chilean 
policy more closely into line with that of nineteen 
other American republics. 


JOHN I. B. McCuLLocH 


BOOKSHELF 


They Called Me Cassandra, by Geneviéve Tabouis. New 
York, Scribner, 1942. $3.00 
Interesting memoirs of a brilliant journalist whose in- 


sight into European politics was keen and often prophetic 
enough to justify her title. 


Total Espionage, by Curt Riess. New York, Putnam’s, 1941. 
$2.75 
Illuminating story of the meticulous care with which the 
Nazis built up their world spy system. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 47, SEPTEMBER 11, 1942, 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ses 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


SEPT. 8.—Two major changes in the cabinets of 
Spain and Japan last week, involving the downfall 
of their foreign ministers, were regarded in Wash- 
ington as likely to have a distinct bearing upon the 
course of the war. The retirement of the pro-Axis 
Ramon Serrano Sufier as Spanish Foreign Minister, 
although apparently due to internal causes, is ex- 
pected to strengthen the influences in Spain working 
to keep that country out of the war, while the resig- 
nation of Shigenori Togo, Japanese Foreign Minister, 
is generally interpreted here as presaging a coming 
Japanese attack on Siberia. 

The dropping of Serrano Stier, outspoken cham- 
pion of collaboration with the Axis, by his brother- 
in-law, Generalissimo Francisco Franco, on Septem- 
ber 3, was part of the biggest ministerial shake-up 
that the Spanish dictator has made since he became 
undisputed ruler of the country in the spring of 1939. 
The significance of the change is underlined by the 
fact that Franco himself replaces Serrano Sijfier as 
head of the Falange, the only political party permitted 
in Spain, while General Francisco Gomez Jordana, 
known for his monarchist leanings, returns to power 
as Foreign Minister, a post he once held in Franco’s 
Cabinet. 


TRIUMPH FOR STATE DEPARTMENT. Gen- 
eral Franco’s following from the beginning of the 
Civil War in 1936 has been composed of two dis- 
tinct elements: (1) the Falangists, the Fascist group 
which has wanted to turn Spain into a totalitarian 
state modeled on Mussolini's Italy; and (2) the 
Traditionalists, composed largely of the big land- 
owners, the Army and the clericals, who have favored 
restoration of the monarchy. The original Falangists, 
founded by a son of an earlier Spanish dictator, 
Primo de Rivera, have wanted Spain to enter the 
war on the side of the Axis, while the conservatives 
have wanted their country to keep out of it. 

Shortly after the beginning of the Civil War, Gen- 
eral Franco amalgamated the two groups in one 
party, called the Falange, but behind a facade of 
unity the old cleavage remained. The fact that 
Franco, who has always opposed granting the Nazis 
a passage-way through Spain to attack Gibraltar, has 
now personally taken over the leadership of the 
party is regarded as a setback for the Axis. 

It was doubtless only a coincidence that the shake- 
up in the Spanish government took place just a few 
. days after President Roosevelt's proposal on Au- 
gust 28 that the American republics should jointly 
contribute financial assistance for the repair of cathe- 


drals and other works of art damaged during the 
Civil War, as well as cooperate in a plan of assistance 
for building up Spain’s tourist traffic once World 
War II is over. Nevertheless, the removal of Serrano 
Sifier is considered here as distinctly a feather in the 
cap of the State Department, which has adhered to 
its course of cultivating good relations with Madrid, 


A JAPANESE THREAT TO SIBERIA. The fall 
of Shigenori Togo as Japanese Foreign Minister on 
September 1 is the first important change to be made 
in the Japanese Cabinet since Pearl Harbor. He is 
replaced by General Hideki Tojo, the Premier, who, 
by concentrating in his hands the War, Foreign 
Affairs and Home portfolios, now becomes the Jap- 
anese dictator. 

Unlike Premier Tojo, who has the reputation of 
being very bellicose towards Russia, Togo, as Am- 
bassador in Moscow from 1938 to 1940, is credited 
with having prepared the way for the signing of the 
Russo-Japanese neutrality pact in April 1941. The 
retirement of this diplomat, who was reported to 
have been opposed to a Siberian adventure, is the 
latest link in a chain of evidence that suggests a 
forthcoming Japanese attack on Russia. 

Forrest Davis and Ernest Lindley have stated in 
their book, How War Came, that Hitler’s bargain 
with Japan included a pledge to move on Siberia 
when the Nazis reached the Volga. In their advance 
on Stalingrad, the Germans now claim to have at- 
tained this river. The Japanese occupation of the 
outer fringes of the Aleutian islands was regarded 
by military experts in Washington as primarily a 
move to cut American supply lines with Siberia. 
Lieut.-General Joseph W. Stilwell, commander of 
the American forces in India, stated at New Delhi 
on September 1 that a Japanese attack on Russia 
was indicated by the “defensive attitude’ they are 
now taking in China. Recent Chinese victories in 
Chekiang and Kiangsi provinces have been attributed 
partly to the withdrawal of Japanese troops to other 
theatres of operation. 

It is true that most experts had expected a Japanese 
move against Siberia in August, when weather con- 
ditions were most favorable. But it is pointed out 
that the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931 
began in September. Reports of the massing of Jap- 
anese troops along the Siberian frontier to a total of 
750,000 suggest that Premier Tojo is on the point of 
acting to fulfill his long-cherished dream of occupy- 
ing the Siberian Maritime Provinces. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


| 
| 


VOL. 


forc 
men 
tanc 
Ver 
not 
dur: 
fror 
surf 
the 
in t 
pinc 
agal 
wh« 
logi 
mili 
fling 
sista 
Vv 
tirel 
not 
teri: 
ler | 
time 
ern 
that 
four 
terr 
the 
rept 
by t 
as 
We 
mer 
Uni 
Rus 
mat 
ent 


