Entered as 2nd)glass matter 


td brary 


ANK tes 
nt Artor: 


NOV 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIV, No. 1 


OcToBEerR 20, 1944 


——— 


CHIANG KAI-SHEK REGIME TORN BY KUOMINTANG DIFFERENCES 


ECENT air attacks on Japanese-held Formosa 
and the Ryukyu islands point to American land- 
ings in the Philippines, perhaps at a fairly early date, 
and the Phitippines in turn can serve as a stepping- 
stone toward the China coast. But it is obvious that 
the tempo of the United States in joining up with the 
hard-pressed Chinese from the sea cannot match the 
speed of the Japanese in carrying forward their pres- 
ent land drive in east central China. Even though 
deliveries of supplies by air from India may increase, 
China will have to depend largely on itself for many 
months to come. Consequently, Chungking is in no 
position to hope that American military aid will 
appreciably lighten its political problems in the 
period immediately ahead. 


A NEW KIND OF CRISIS. The current tense 
situation in Free China dates from the disastrous 
Honan campaign of last spring, when Japan seized 
the cities of Loyang and Chengchow in the north and 
shattered one of Chiang Kai-shek’s most important 
armies. This aroused a storm of Chinese criticism 
centering about the need for army reforms, greater 
honesty and efficiency in civil and military affairs, 
the maintenance of civil liberties, and alleviation of 
the heavy burden imposed upon the peasantry by the 
ptesent administration of the land tax in grain. Con- 
tinuing Japanese successes in eastern China also 
weakened the Central government politically by de- 
ptiving it of significant grain-producing areas and 
further breaking up the territorial unity of its do- 
main. On the other side of the ledger, Chungking has 
in its favor a halt in price increases, at least tem- 
porarily, and the harvesting of an exceptionally good 
ctop. But with prices well over 400 times their pre- 
wat level and food in any event scarce for large sec- 
tions of the population, no fundamental strengthen- 
ing of the government's position has taken place. 


This is not the first time during the war that 
China has faced a political crisis. It might be said that 


the seven and a half years of the struggle with Japan 
have been one long crisis in which China has man- 
aged to continue resistance despite all obstacles. In 
the past, foreign discussion of the country’s political 
difficulties was virtually limited to the conflict between 
Chungking and the Chinese Communists—a conflict 
which expressed itself not only in sharp controversy 
but in military friction between Central and guerrilla 
forces. Not until this year could it be said that there 
was also a crisis within the government itself and 
within the official political party, the Kuomintang. 


OFFICIAL DISSENTERS. The leader of this 
movement for change is Sun Fo, 53-year-old son of 
the famous nationalist leader, Sun Yat-sen, and him- 
self President of the Legislative Yuan as well as an 
outstanding advocate of constitutional government 
for China. In the course of this year Sun Fo has made 
several statements of an extremely sharp character, 
advocating civil liberties, close cooperation with 
China’s allies on the basis of internal democracy, and 
a general political housecleaning. On October 9, eve 
of the anniversary of the 1911 Revolution which es 
tablished the Chinese Republic, he is reported to have 
urged an end to “political tutelage.” Since the Kuo- 
mintang has long held to the theory that it alone 
has the responsibility for tutoring the Chinese people 
in democratic government, Sun Fo’s latest statement 
is of profound significance. He appears to have sug- 
gested—if the brief dispatch passed by Chinese cen- 
sors is correct—that Chungking abandon its political 
monopoly and admit representatives of other points 
of view into the administration. This is the first time 
during the war, as far as this writer is aware, that 


any government official has publicly advocated such 
a course of action. 


Sun Fo is an advanced liberal, carrying forward 
his father’s traditions, but his opinions reflect the 
feelings of wide circles within and outside the Kuo- 
mintang. It is no secret, for example, among Amer- 


ican observers of Far Eastern affairs, that T. V. 
Soong, Chungking’s Foreign Minister, a conservative 
in his personal philosophy, is deeply disturbed by 
current Chinese contitions. Or that General Chen 
Cheng, who has commanded troops on many impor- 
tant fronts, has been advocating fundamental mili- 
tary reforms for well over a year, but has been op- 
posed by War Minister Ho Ying-chin. Outside 
Chungking it would seem that certain provincial 
military leaders are growing restive as the Central 
government's difficulties increase. At the same time 
various minor political groups organized in the Fed- 
eration of Chinese Democratic Parties are expressing 
sharp criticism of official policies. 

NEED FOR CRUCIAL DECISIONS. Undoubted- 
ly there is developing in China a broad area of agree 
ment among extremely diverse political elements, 
ranging from the Communists to staunchly conserv- 
ative members of the Kuomintang. The main issue 
that draws them together is the demand for a more 
efficient and honest government, genuinely tolerant 
of more than one point of view. As long as military 
Operations in China were deadlocked, these ques- 
tions must have seemed theoretical to many who are 
now concerned about them. For China was holding 
on, and that, after all, was the main criterion in mak- 
ing political judgments. But in the past six months 
the Japanese have broken the military stalemate, and 
the political stalemate has been destroyed along with 
it. What was once a matter of theory now presents 
itself as a question of China’s survival and of draw- 
ing to the full on China’s own strength in order to 
halt or slow down the invader. 

This is why the Generalissimo is now faced by 
some of the most crucial problems of his career. 
Chiang Kai-shek has usually stood above the political 


Page Two 


ee 
— 


battles of the Chinese capital, and popular censure 
has generally descended on his subordinates. But he 
is now being subjected to personal criticism on the 


ground that he bears responsibility for conditions and | 


refuses to drop unsatisfactory officials to whom he 
is bound by long association. It is impossible to pre. 
dict what the Generalissimo will do, but he unques. 
tionably has the power to bring about far-reaching 
changes within the régime. The frank comment al- 
lowed at the People’s Political Council session in 


September and the relaxation of the Chinese censor. 
ship at about the same time gave rise to hopes both 
in China and outside that Chiang had finally 
made his decision. But now the censorship has been 
tightened again, and the official attitude is hardening. 


ZERO HOUR AT KWEILIN? China has weath. 
ered many previous crises, but today there is no room 
for easy optimism. The current battle for Kweilin, 
capital of Kwangsi province, may be even more im- 
portant politically than militarily. For Kweilin is the 
focal point of operations by a group of Chinese gen. 
erals who showed tendencies toward separatism in 
the years before 1937, came into the Central fold in 
the upsurge of resistance against Japan, and might 
again follow a highly autonomous course if the Jap- 
anese armies should cut them off from close contacts 
with Chungking territory. It is probably not an ex. 
aggeration to say that the most useful steps Chung. 
king could take in dealing with the Kweilin situation 
would be to meet the serious political issues that are 
agitating the country by overhauling the government 
and granting more democracy, thereby rallying the 
support of all patriotic groups. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(The second in a series of articles on conditions in China.) 


ANGLO-RUSSIAN SECURITY ZONES MAY BE DEFINED AT MOSCOW PARLEY 


The Anglo-Russian talks which began in Moscow 
on October 9 coincided with the release from Dum- 
barton Oaks of the draft plan for the future United 
Nations organization. Thus the Moscow conference 
will provide ample illustrations for discussion of 
the issue raised by the new Security Council of 
whether predominant positions should be given to 
the great powers. It is assumed that the Churchill- 
Stalin conversations are chiefly concerned with defin- 
ing the spheres of influence which the two powers 
expect to hold in Europe once Germany has been de- 
feated. Attention turns naturally, therefore, to spe- 
cific issues with which the conference must deal. But 
it should be remembered that both nations have 
taken an active part in forging the Dumbarton Oaks 
plan and leading spokesmen of the two countries are 
fully aware that many problems, which must be dealt 
with in all areas of Europe, will demand interna- 
tional collaboration. It is only necessary to recall, for 
example, that United Nations aid, in terms of relief 


and future capital investment for reconstruction pur 
poses, will be necessary in all parts of Europe. 

BRITAIN’S WESTERN BLOC. Most observers 
now believe that Britain is prepared to acquiesce in 
what it feels is Russia’s natural desire for security in 
Eastern Europe over future relationships will be 
forged within the context of the 20-year Anglo- 
Russian treaty of alliance, signed in May 1942. 
Granting the possibility of neutralizing German 
power, Britain and Russia are staking out claims 
of paramount interest in areas radiating from that 
central point to the fringes of Europe. These claims 
will be dictated by historic ties and the necessities of 
military security. 


— 


Britain has made it clear recently that, in Westem | 


Europe, it intends to work closely with nations com 
manding the continental approaches to the British 
Isles—a position that will balance Russia’s easteff 
security zone. To this end, the British have taken the 
lead among the three major allies in urging accept 


tT 


FORE 


Heade 


| 
| 
| 


secon: 


one n 


=—=s 


r censure 
s. But he 
m on the 
tions and 
whom he 
le to pre. 
e unques- 
-reaching 
nment al. 
ession in 
se censor- 
opes both 
d finally 
has been 


ardening, 


as weath- 
$ no room 
Kweilin, 
more im- 
ilin is the 
inese gen- 
iratism in 
al fold in 
ind might 
f the Jap. 
e contacts 
ot an ex. 
os Chung: 
1 situation 
*s that are 
yvernment 
llying the 


ISINGER 


: China.) 
AARLEY 


ction pur: 
‘ope. 

observers 
quiesce in 
security if 
s will be 
ar Anglo- 
May 1942. 
y German 
mut claims 
from that 
ese claims 
cessities of 


n Wester 
tions com 
the British 
a’s easteff 
> taken the 
ing accept 


ance of the de Gaulle régime as the official govern- 
ment of France. Quietly but persistently, the British 
Foreign Secretary has expressed the view that de 
Gaulle’s leadership can do much to establish the re- 
vitalized France which Britain considers of the ut- 
most importance. Britain’s interest in Western Eu- 
rope also includes Norway, Belgium, Holland and 
Luxemburg, as well as Spain and the ancient British 
| ally, Portugal. A step toward closer cooperation 
among some of these countries was taken in 1943 
when the Dutch, Belgian and Luxemburg govern- 
ments concluded a monetary pact to which, it has 
been intimated, both France and Britain may adhere. 


=— 


| This forecast seems justified, for on October 5 Brit- 


ain signed a financial agreement with the Belgian 
government which its Finance Minister, Camille 
Gutt, suggested might be a prelude to a West Euro- 
pean financial bloc. A similar accord, fixing the rate 
of exchange, was signed by the French Provisional 
Government and Britain on February 6, 1944. 
) These arrangements, and others that may be forth- 
coming, can serve as a basis for broader agreements, 
or a customs union, which would furnish valuable 
economic support for further political cooperation. 


| The evolution of this policy follows the line of 
| feasoning enunciated last November by Jan Chris- 
‘ tiaan Smuts, South African Premier, and restated 
somewhat more tactfully by Foreign Minister Eden 
| in his speech to the House of Commons on Septem- 
| ber 29. Declaring that he was in agreement with 
those who favored closer ties with the countries on 
Europe’s western fringe, Eden suggested that such an 
arrangement would aid in preventing future German 
aggression and that ‘‘as an element in the general 
international system . . . it gives us perhaps more 
authority with the other great powers if we speak for 
the Commonwealth and for our near neighbors.” 


“SHOWDOWN” ON POLAND. While British- 
ets are becoming more articulate and conscious of 
their interest in Western Europe, they are increasing- 
ly prepared for the U.S.S.R. to play an important 
tole with respect to Poland and Eastern Europe. 
Diplomatically, they will endeavor to see that such 
influence is based on the pattern established by the 
Soviet-Czechoslovak treaty of alliance signed last 
December and on the statement of Foreign Minister 
Molotov, made at the time of the Red Army's en- 
trance into Rumania on April 2. In both instances, 
Russia explicitly maintains its desire for friendly re- 
lations with its neighbors and indicates no intention 
of forcing its ideology on them. 


eS 


Page Three 


Poland is, of course, a special case, not only be- 
cause of the friction which has characterized Russian- 
Polish history, but because Britain is bound to Poland 


by treaty and declared war on Germany because of . 


Hitler’s attack on that country. No one denies the 
many difficulties which beset any attempt to find a 
compromise solution to the Polish question, yet the 
Russian press has indicated that a “showdown” is 
now intended. No hint has been given of the final 
outcome of the parleys, but the fact that it was pos- 
sible to invite Premier Stanislaw Mikolajczyk to join 
Churchill and Stalin in Moscow holds out hope for 
a compromise. Mikolajczyk will confer not only with 
Russian and British delegates, but with Boleslaw 
Berut, president of the Polish National Council, the 
régime in Lublin which has the approval of the 
Soviet Union. Reports suggest that the tragic War- 
saw incident and the dispute over the Commander- 
in-Chief in the London Polish cabinet will be rele- 
gated to the background so far as possible. As a re- 
sult, the chief problem will center on the role of 
Mikolajczyk, who is personally acceptable to Mos- 
cow, in a possible new government. 

THE BALKAN SCENE. Military events of the 
past week tend to clarify the picture of future lines 
of British and Russian influence in Southeastern Eu- 
rope. In Yugoslavia Red Army forces joined with 
Tito in storming Belgrade, and in Hungary Hitler’s 
extremist aids, who have replaced the Horthy régime 
which sued for peace on October 15, must now pre- 
pare to defend Budapest from the Red Army. In 
Bulgaria, although diplomatic developments were 
temporarily impeded by hesitation over the armistice 
terms, Russian army forces have also been the de- 
ciding factor as German power recedes. In its wake 
Soviet influence follows the trend of pre-1914 
Russia, which was intent on pursuing a Pan-Slavic 
policy; but unlike the situation a generation ago, 
little resistence to these events is now heard in Brit- 
ain. The current extensive British Commando raids 
into Greece and the effective occupation of Athens 
suggest, however, that Britain will counter the grow- 
ing Soviet influence in the northern Balkans by pur- 
suing with increased vigor its historic interests in the 
eastern Mediterranean. Although the British Foreign 
Office may be prepared to accommodate growing 
Soviet influence in eastern Mediterranean affairs, no 
concessions similar to those in Northeastern Europe 
will be feasible in the southern Balkans. For this area 
is located astride Britain’s imperial life line and is 
vital to its security. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 1, Ocroper 20, 1944. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matver December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


National 


‘a 
7, a 
5 he 
ct 
iP 
is 
ip 
4 
if 
ag 
Vy 
xi 
Sie 
4 ia 
' 
aa 
a 
a: 
he 
f 
a 
a 
wa 
tl 
a 
ih, 
‘A> 
ae | 
1 
re 
bt 
4 
Dat 
é 
y 
* 
é 
f 


iis ger on perereaas 


ft RIES «Dae LO Paty 


ek. 


— 
oP Da Sg at Eo RL ak a 


+ ZOSRRGPNS RCSB IRE tae MR 
etd as eG eS eg 


ts a 


~ # bis | 


Washington News Letter 


pred ebngy 


ANOMALIES OF ALLIED POLICY IN IT ALY 


The Administration continues to receive criticisms 
of Allied policy toward Italy despite the joint an- 
nouncement by President Roosevelt and Prime Min- 
ister Churchill on September 26 that ‘‘an increasing 
measure of control will be gradually handed over to 
the Italian administration.” The root of this criti- 
cism lies in the indecision concerning Italian mili- 
tary affairs, politics and economic reconstruction, 
which has existed since the Italian declaration of war 
against Germany on October 13, 1943 and the sign- 
ing of the Instrument of Surrender last October 28. 
The country is treated neither as a respected friend 
nor as a defeated enemy. 

ITALIANS ASK IMPROVED STATUS. While 
the Roosevelt-Churchill announcement called for put- 
ting “the full resources of Italy and the Italian people 
into the struggle to defeat Germany and Japan,” the 
Rome weekly, Voce Operaia, organ of the Christian 
Left, remarked on October 2: “It is clear that such a 
distant war [against the Japanese} can be fought 
only if we will be allowed first to participate fully 
in the war against Germany, if our prisoners will be 
allowed to return to Italy, if the harsh armistice will 
be changed to a fair settlement of peace.” Failure to 
publish the terms of the armistice has inspired many 
rumors about its harshness, since it is suspected of 
requiring Italy to abandon African colonies held be- 
fore the Ethiopian war, as well as European territory. 

The Italian government, headed since June 9 by 
Premier Ivanoe Bonomi, appears to its critics to have 
only the authority which the Allied Commission 
grants it. Allied control is a “cape of lead,” Pietro 
Nenni, secretary of the Italian Socialist party, pro- 
tested on September 21 in his newspaper, Avanti. 
When British Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden gave 
the impression in the House of Commons that Brit- 
ain would forbid restitution to Italy of its colonies, 
Bonomi saw a new slight to his country and said: “It 
is necessary that democratic Italy feel herself wel- 
comed as a sister among the democracies of the 
world.” 

The Allies have no intention, however, of grant- 
ing full recognition until Italy’s northern provinces 
are freed from the German armies and the neo-fascist 
government of Mussolini’s Italian Social Republic. 
But the prospect that liberation of northern Italy 
will not come until spring raises the question whether 
the political restlessness now marking Italian affairs 
can be held in check throughout the winter unless the 
Allies agree to increase the power of the Rome 


FOR VICTORY © BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


régime, at least to the extent of holding elections fo, 
a constituent assembly and local officials. Politically, 
the Bonomi government is no more isolated from 
democratic elements in the north than the London 
exile governments of European countries were iso. 
lated from political movements in. their homelands, 
Communication exists between Rome and the centers 
behind the German lines, where patriots control the 
western section of Lake Como, the territory between 
the Julian Alps and the Yugoslav frontier, and other 
regions. 


SOVIET PRESTIGE GAINS. Articulate Italians 
are finding fault with the amount of assistance grant. 
ed their country. “First and immediate considerations 
in Italy are the relief of hunger and sickness and 
fear,” the Roosevelt-Churchill statement of Septem. 
ber 26 declared a few days after the United Nations 
Relief and Rehabilitation Administration voted to 
spend $50,000,000 in relief for Italy. On September 
26 the newspaper Reconstruzione expressed disap 
pointment at the small size of the UNRRA grant 
and at the absence of lend-lease aid for Italy. The 
UNRRA assistance is equivalent to the amount of 
money spent during a two-and-a-half month period 
by the United States army for Italian relief. President 
Roosevelt said on October 4 that steps were “being 
taken to restore the damaged transportation and 
electrical facilities of Italy,” but this reconstruction 
is limited to the facilities immediately needed for war. 


Majority opinion within the United States goverm- 
ment favors a more positive.and helpful policy to 
ward Italy, but the Administration has not unduly 
pressed its views in this matter on its allies. ‘The 
British are playing a predominant role in the present 
setup while the United States shows no interest, 
George Baldanzi, CIO observer who visited Italy 
during the summer, said on September 23. Luigi 
Antonini, of the A.F. of L., who visited Italy with 
Baldanzi, said on October 5 that “the facts of the 
picture in Italy will play into the hands of the com- 
munists” (although the Italian Communist party 
numbers only 200,000, according to a statement on 
September 25 of their leader, Palmiro Togliatti). 
The confusion of American-British policy increasé 
the influence and prestige of the Soviet Union it 
Italy—for Italians are unfavorably comparing theif 
treatment at the hands of the United Nations with 
the mild terms accorded Rumania by Russia. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


191 


