Frances 
of the 
hat are 
id fore. 
sy their 
Llulose, 
ail and 
ce most 
- indus- 
ful are 
invited 
| a “re. 
has al- 
ich fac- 
‘oO make 
y, prob- 
ial pro- 
ccupied 
t. 
DIGER 


w York, 


‘ar East, 
ns after 
ding but 


ubleday, 


istry offi- 
is of the 
egy, and 
orces. 


_ by the 
of Na- 
41. $2.50 
a well- 
succinet 
War on 


1., Bobbs 


iment on 
r days of 
id bit of 
S. 


National 
y F. Lest, 
New York, 


pica: kuum 
L LIBRARY 
uwety. OF Mica. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


1942 


Sse 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y 


Vou. XXI, No. 37 


— 


JuLy 3, 1942 


ALLIED REVERSES AGAIN RAISE PROBLEM OF WAR AIMS 


al communiqué issued on June 27 in Washing- 
ton and London by President Roosevelt and Mr. 
Churchill, who with other leaders share the ulti- 
mate responsibility for the strategy of the United 
Nations, indicated agreement on action to be taken 
to curb submarine warfare, aid China, and “divert 
German strength from the attack on Russia.” The 
latter point was given emphasis by the designation, on 
June 25, of Major General Dwight D. Eisenhower 
as commander of American forces in the European 
theatre of operations, and the announcement that the 
General was already in London. 


Whatever course may now be followed by the 
United Nations—invasion of Western Europe, inten- 
sification of the air offensive against the Reich, re- 
inforcement of British troops in Egypt, or added aid 
to hard-pressed China—involves serious difficulties, 
especially until the United Nations have succeeded 
in reducing the submarine menace in the Atlantic. 
But by now it is painfully obvious that risks must be 
taken if Nazi and Japanese advances in many sectors 
we to be checked. In fact, perhaps the most funda- 
penal difference between Nazi tactics and the tactics 
of the United Nations lies in the far greater readi- 
ness of the Nazis to make daring decisions and then 
carry them ruthlessly to fulfillment, irrespective of 
the cost in men and materials. This daredevil spirit, 
which so far has been matched only by the Russians, 
is due in part to the Nazis’ disregard for human life 
—a disregard which Britain has not displayed. The 
British policy of economizing on lives as far as pos- 
sible is entirely understandable in human terms, and 
| is not open to criticism on the part of Americans un- 

til this country has shown itself willing to make 
reckless sacrifices. Otherwise the United States, in 
turn, would be open to the criticism that it is ready 
to expend money and industrial productive power, 
provided the actual fighting—and dying—are done 
by others far from our shores. 


DO BRITISH LACK DYNAMISM? But if the 
dynamism of the Nazis is due in part to their very 
ruthlessness, which the United Nations would not 
want to imitate, it is also due to the belief, prevalent 
even among non-Nazi Germans, that they are fight- 
ing for a better place in the sun, and that defeat 
would be tantamount to annihilation of the German 
nation. This belief, reinforced by the superiority in 
both armaments and strategy hitherto enjoyed by the 
German Army, has inspired in the Germans a fight- 
ing mood that has been noticeably lacking among 
the British in all theatres of war except that of the 
British Isles. By contrast, the British and Americans 
have not yet sufficiently felt the fear of defeat to be- 
come passionately intent on victory. 

It is perhaps not without significance that ob- 
servers in Libya and the Far East are unanimous in 
praising the courage and morale of British soldiers, 
but note, at the same time, the passivity and com- 
placency of superior officers, and the absence, in the 
ranks, of enthusiasm about the war, and even of a 
clear understanding concerning the issues at stake in 
the conflict. Is this accidental—or may this lack of 
spirit be due to a more or less conscious feeling that, 
in fighting for Burma, or Malaya, or Egypt, the Brit- 
ish are fighting for something extraneous to their 
homeland—for regions where they have lived as 
aliens, and are still regarded as aliens by many of the 
natives? In their defense of the British Isles, the 
British have displayed a quiet and stubborn heroism 
on a par with that of the Russians and Chinese who 
are also fighting for preservation of their homelands, 
or of Polish and Czech and other exiles who are fight- 
ing for recovery of theirs. 


NEED TO CLARIFY BRITISH WAR AIMS. 
Since it is generally recognized that civilian and mili- 
tary morale are as essential to the winning of the war 
as the quantity and quality of war material, it may be 
proper to ask whether British soldiers might not be 


j 
i 
: 
M 
‘ 
& a 
By 
. 
a 
! 
ti 
t 
nr! 
i 
h 
Hi 
“A 
i 


perenne 


fired with greater determination in theatres of war 
outside the British Isles if they had a clearer idea of 
what they are fighting for. It is again not without 
significance that the most notable, and most stirring, 
statements about international post-war reconstruc- 
tion have come from Washington, Moscow and 
Chungking, and not from London—although much 
thought has been given in Britain to problems of 
reconstruction in the British Isles. References by some 
Britishers to “reconquest” of Burma and Malaya, 
unaccompanied by any indication that these British- 
ers have grasped the revolutionary changes wrought 
by war in the structure of Western imperialism, must 
sound hollow to those among the younger generation 
in Britain who have long been aware of maladjust- 
ments and inadequacies in the British colonial system. 
It is true that, if the far-reaching character of these 
revolutionary changes were completely appreciated 
in Britain, the people most favorable to colonial rule 
might be the first to lose interest in continuance of the 
Far Eastern conflict, since they would feel that a 
United Nations victory in that area would not result 
in recovery of material possessions or special privilege 
for the Western powers. 


Yet is it not time for the British—as well as Amer- 


Page Two 


—= 


icans—to clarify this very point? To show, not mere 
ly by words, but by deeds, that what we are fightin 
for in the Far East, and other so-called backwar 
areas, is not restoration of the status quo, or perpetu. 
ation of extraterritorial rights, exclusion laws an( 
racial discrimination, but liberation of all peoples— 


not merely from the ruthless new imperialism of the 
Axis nations, but also from the old, more mellow, 
imperialism of the Western powers? Purely as a call 
ter of self-interest, the Western powers will sooner o 
later have to recognize that their only opportunity, 
after the war, to participate in the economic develop. 
ment of the Far East depends on two things: military 
defeat of Japan; and acknowledgement, in practice, 
of the rights of Asiatic peoples, including the Jap. 
anese, to share the benefits of progress in Asia op 
terms of equality with Britain and the United States, 

To underestimate the striking force of the arma. 
ments and ideas of our opponents, as we are still 
doing, borders on criminal frivolity. But it would be 
equally mistaken to underestimate our own ability 
to forge new ideas and new relationships capable of 
inspiring potential allies everywhere to join the 
United Nations in a war of liberation. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


ROMMEL’S DRIVE PRECIPITATES ALLIED MILITARY CRISIS 


With the German invasion of Egypt and the in- 
creasingly dangerous situation of the British Eighth 
Army east of Matruh, the position of the United Na- 
tions in the Near East seems more critical than at any 
time since the war began. The British withdrawal from 
Matruh on June 28 proved a grievous blow to Allied 
hopes. The decisive battle for control of the Nile 
Valley and the Suez Canal has begun in the relatively 
narrow gap between the coast and the Qattara De- 
pression, in an area roughly 125 miles west of Alex- 
andria. German penetration of British defense lines 
here would open the way to further Axis gains which 
might well extend the war indefinitely. 

Unless the British can maneuver the remnants of 
the Eighth Army for a defense south of El Daba, 
Rommel—with a force estimated at not more than 
100,000—may soon be sweeping toward Alexandria 
without serious opposition except from the air. His 
troops have utilized British lines of communication, 
especially the coastal railway and highway paralleling 
his line of advance to the east. Furthermore, German 


New edition, revised, June 1942... 


WAR ATLAS 


44 maps ? 25c 


Our Alaskan outpost; Strategy in the Mediterranean ; Russian 
Front; Strategic distances in Pacific; Panama Canal; Hawaii; 
China’s supply lines; Australia and New Zealand; etc., etc. 


Order from FPA, 22 East 38th St., New York 


supplies, already reaching Tobruk from Crete, can 
now come to Matruh by sea. Thus, Rommel's supply 
problem has been less serious than had been antici. 
pated, while the movement of German air strength 
from Europe to North Africa may cut down Allied 
air superiority. 

Should Egypt fall, its resources, including cotton, 
wheat and the newly discovered iron and chrome de 
posits near the Assuan Dam, would pass into Axis 
hands, and the road would be open to the Middle 


East. Moreover, it is only necessary to imagine the 
destruction of American supply depots in Eritrea and 
at Basra, severance of the southern route to Russia 


through Iran, and a junction of the German and Jap | 


anese in the Persian Gulf or in India to appreciate 
the gravity of the battle for Egypt. 


POLITICS IN THE NILE VALLEY. The politi-| 


cal situation in Egypt has thus taken on new impor 
tance. Technically an independent constitutional 
monarchy, Egypt is bound to Britain by the 1936 
treaty of alliance, which in effect has made it a pas 
sive ally. In accordance with the treaty, British forces 
use Egyptian territory, ports and airdromes as bases 


of operation, but the Egyptian government has to| 


date failed to declare war on the Axis, although its 
territory has now been invaded for the third time and 
its cities bombed by Axis planes. As late as June 24, 
after Rommel had taken Tobruk and crossed the 
Egyptian frontier, the Prime Minister, Nahas Pasha, 
told his people Egypt had never been asked “‘to pat 


| 


——— 


ticipat 

Thi: 
dange! 
factor: 


what 
Britist 
“color 


| tians, 


offer 
the fe: 
follow 
In s 
tion oO 
tion, | 
the gt 
two y' 
shorta 
tende: 
paren 
Whet 
Germ 
ited vi 
of as 
broad 
Egypt 
“shou 
so de: 
of he 
to saf 
it is fF 
the bi 
over t 
Th 
lies is 
grouy 
well | 
ing cl 


Ge 
Atlar 
War ¢ 
acerb 
the I 
man 
paigr 
auth 
subm 
zone 
ern | 
and 
entre 
hows 
mad 
insid 


——— 


ot mere. 
ackward 
Perpetu. 
AWS and 
coples— 
nN of the 
mellow, 
iS a mat. 
OONEr of 
ortunity, 
develop. 
military 
practice, 
the Jap. 
Asia on 
d States, 
1e arma: 


are still! 


vould be 
n ability 
pable of 
join the 


DEAN 


ete, can 
S supply 
N antici- 


strength 
n Allied 


, cotton, 
ome de 
ito Axis 
Middle 


gine the 
trea a 
> Russia 
and Jap-| 
ypreciate 


i politi 
y impor: 
itutional 
ne 1936 
it a pas- 
h forces 


as bases 
- has to| 
ough its 
ime and 
June 24, 
ssed_ the 
s Pasha, 
“to pat 


—_ 


ticipate in the war or send troops to the frontier.” 


This nonbelligerency in the face of such acute 
danger can be understood only in the light of two 
factors. Most important, perhaps, is the attitude of 
the great majority of Egypt’s population of 16,000,- 
000. Although sympathy for Britain has grown some- 
what in the past two years, the deep-rooted anti- 
British feeling, engendered by many years of British 
“colonial” rule, has not beeen erased. For most Egyp- 
tians, dislike of British influence is so strong as to 
offer fertile soil for Axis propaganda and obscure 
the fear of inevitable Nazi despoliation which would 
follow if the British are defeated. 

In spite of Egypt's refusal to turn from the cultiva- 
tion of cotton to wheat in order to feed its popula- 
tion, the British have bought up and stored by far 
the greater part of Egypt's cotton crop over the past 
two years, and have endeavored to alleviate the food 
shortage by diverting to the Egyptian people food in- 
tended for their army. But these measures have ap- 
parently done little to moderate dissatisfaction. 
Whether the picture will change if and when the 
Germans move eastward from the virtually uninhab- 
ited western desert, which the Egyptians do not think 
of as their homeland, it is difficult to say. In a radio 
broadcast last December, Mahmoud Hassan Bey, 
Egyptian Minister to Washington, stated that, 
“should there be an attack on the Valley of the Nile, 
so dear to us, Egypt will rise like one man in defense 
of her sacred homeland and face the foe resolutely 
to safeguard her dearly won liberties.’’ Nevertheless, 
it is probably true that the most to be expected from 
the bulk of the Egyptian people, if the conflict sweeps 
over them, is a passive neutrality. 

The second factor impeding Egypt's aid to the Al- 
lies is dissension on foreign policy among influential 
groups in the country. Fifth-column activity might 
well be fomented by some of the 70,000 Italians, liv- 
ing chiefly in the cities, and by the Palace clique, one 


Page Three 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: UNITED NATIONS’ ZERO HOUR 
Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 
Date: Sunday, July 5 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 


For station, please consult your local newspaper 


faction of which has long encouraged King Farouk’s 
Italian sympathies. A struggle is almost certainly 
going on between the pro-Axis element, long culti- 
vated by both Germany and Italy, and its opponents, 
who until recently were none too well pleased with 
British policy in Egypt. Some encouragement can be 
found, however, in the fact that Nahas Pasha, who 
commands an overwhelming Wafd (nationalist) ma- 
jority in the Assembly and enjoys widespread popular 
support for his record of vigorous nationalism and 
his recent ‘‘new deal” policy, has changed from his 
earlier anti-British position to support of the British 
cause. Although he will hesitate to ask his people to 
take up arms, he has made it clear that in his capa- 
city as military governor as well as Prime Minister 
he will not tolerate fifth columnists. 

The result of the battle of Egypt, however, may in 
the end depend less on the Egyptian attitude than on 
the relative strength—in equipment, supply, and, 
above all, leadership—of the forces now facing each 
other in the western desert. Unless General Auchin- 
leck, now in command of the British armies, can stop 
Rommel before he reaches the Valley of the Nile, 
neither a rising of the Egyptian people to defend 
their homes nor widespread sabotage of the British 
defense is likely to prove decisive. The outlook is 
dark but it can be expected that the British will spare 
no effort to repair the disasters which have befallen 
them. If they fail in this attempt, the position of the 
Allied Nations in the Near and Middle East is in- 


deed grim. Howarp P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


NAZI SUBMARINE WARFARE AROUSES LATIN AMERICANS 


Germany's submarine campaign on this side of the 
Atlantic, still the Achilles heel of the United States’ 
war effort, has now become the principal factor ex- 
acerbating the already strained relations between 
the Latin American countries and the Axis. If Ger- 
man radio broadcasts are to be believed, the cam- 
paign entered a new phase on June 26, when Nazi 
authorities put into effect a policy of unrestricted 
Submarine warfare against any ships entering a vast 
zone stretching from the coast of France and North- 
ern European waters to the eastern shores of Canada 
and the United States, as far south as the northern 
entrances to the Caribbean sea. The facts indicate, 
however, that ruthless U-boat attacks have been 
made on neutral and belligerent shipping alike, both 
inside the zone and out, regardless of proclamations 


emanating from Berlin. On June 22—before the new 
‘‘blockade” was to become effective—the Rio Tercero, 
an Argentine vessel, was torpedoed about 120 miles 
from New York in broad daylight, with a loss of five 
lives. On the same day a small Colombian schooner 
traveling between two of that country’s ports was 
sunk by gunfire and six of its crew killed. Mean- 
while, the toll of vessels of the United Nations and 
the other American republics destroyed in Western 
Atlantic waters has risen to 324, with many of the 
sinkings occurring in the Caribbean and the South 
Atlantic. 

ARGENTINE OPINION AROUSED. Unusual 
anti-German demonstrations broke out in Buenos 
Aires after the attack on the Rio Tercero, the third 
Argentine vessel sunk by the Axis since the beginning 


———— 


of the war. Popular irritation was especially intense 
because long-delayed negotiations over the torpedo- 
ing of the new Argentine tanker Victoria, sent to the 
bottom on April 17, had been concluded only on 
June 16. In the settlement the German government 
acknowledged responsibility for the attack, expressed 
“lively regret” for the “error’’ and offered to pay com- 
pensation—presumably after the end of the conflict. 
Since both governments desire to maintain friendly 
relations, the Rio Tercero incident will undoubtedly 
be liquidated in the same fashion. The significant fact 
about the sinkings is that they have affected the na- 
tion’s delicate sense of pride and have thus given the 
strong liberal opposition to the régime of President 
Castillo an opportunity to agitate against his ‘“‘pru- 
dent neutrality” policy. 

Establishment of the new German submarine war- 
fare zone must also present the government with an 
embarrassing dilemma. If Argentina makes an agree- 
ment with the Reich exempting its ships from attack, 
it will lay itself open to the reproach that it has brok- 
en away from the Pan-American front and may suffer 
commensurate economic reprisals by the United Na- 
tions. If Argentine ships sail into the demarcated 
area and are destroyed, popular pressure to break re- 
lations with the Axis will become a serious factor 
in internal politics. Finally, if Argentine vessels are 
re-routed to United States ports in the Gulf of Mex- 
ico, outside the zone, as has been done in at least one 
case, the régime will be charged with pusillanimity; 
it may, moreover, find it impossible to acquire the 
vital coal supplies it has been transporting from our 
Atlantic coast cities. 


These unpalatable alternatives, coupled with in- 
creasing shortages of certain basic commodities in 
Argentina, serve in small part to offset the great loss 
to the democratic cause as a result of the re- 
tirement from office of President Roberto M. 
Ortiz. Ever since Dr. Ortiz temporarily relinquished 
his post in July 1940 because of failing eyesight and 
poor health, the hopes of the liberals have been 
buoyed by the expectation that, some day, he might 
return to continue his campaign for electoral honesty 
and support for the democracies. After long consul- 
tations between his physicians and a New York 
specialist, nowever, Dr. Ortiz formally submitted his 
resignation, which was accepted by a joint session of 
Congress on June 27. Inasmuch as Dr. Castillo and 
his conservative following had already acquired al- 
most complete control of the central government, the 
formal accession of Castillo as President should cause 


= Page Four ——— = 


no immediate change in national policy. But the con. 
servative machine, which employs electoral fraud 
without scruple, should now be able to win the pres. 
idential contest of 1943, barring unforeseen devel. 
opments. 


OTHER REACTIONS. In other Latin Americag 
countries, the threatened or actual destruction of mer. 
chant vessels has had somewhat more serious rever- 
berations. Chilean government sources have intimat- 
ed that Chile would regard as a hostile act the de 


struction of any American vessel off the South Amer- | 


ican Pacific coast, as well as any Axis attack on that 
coast or on the Panama Canal. Chile has also issued 
explicit warning of grave consequences if any of its 
own ships are sunk along the United States coast, 
Pending events of this type, however, the Chilean 
régime is loath to abandon its policy of maintaining 
diplomatic relations with the Axis. With the support 
of all but the small Communist element, the Chilean 
senate, on June 25, approved the government's pres- 
ent course. In Colombia, on the other hand, the Nazi 
submarine attack has paved the way for a much more 
stringent system of control of Axis funds and na- 
tionals than had previously existed. 

The gradually hardening attitude of the Latin 
American countries is facilitating additional measures 
to lessen enemy influence in the Western Hemis- 
phere. After July 2, over-all control of United States 
imports, to be administered by the War Production 
Board, will insure that all vessels entering our ports, 
whatever their nationality, carry cargoes of the ma- 
terials most needed in the war effort. On June 28, 
moreover, it was disclosed that the movements of the 
entire Brazilian ocean-going merchant marine, con- 
sisting of about 300,000 tons of ships, would be 
placed under the jurisdiction of the Allied Shipping 
Control Board, with indications that convoys would 
be instituted between the United States and Brazil. 
Last but not least, the conference of Latin American 
central bank representatives which met at Washing: 
ton on June 30 will coordinate financial measures for 
the control of enemy enterprises. Thus, little by little, 
the hemisphere is being mobilized for more efficient 
support to the cause it has recognized as right. 

Davip H. Popper 


Mediterranean Front, by Alan Moorehead. New York, 
Whittlesey House, 1942. $2.75 


The personal experiences of a British newspaperman 
during the two British offensives in Libya, the East Afri- 
can and Syrian campaigns, and the courageous effort of 
the Allied forces to hold Greece and Crete. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 37, Jury 3, 1942. 


Popper, Associate Editor. 
Three Dollars a Year. 


Bw 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DeaAN, Editor; 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, 


National 
Davip H 
3, 1879. 


Incorporated. 


at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


F 


| 


Vou. XX 


| 


IVE 

resi 
struggle 
Revolut 
the surr 
did not 
of an e 
focused 
tation, 
nationa 
importz 
the mo 
of inter 
Japanes 

WA 
China | 
of inte 
year of 
methoc 


econon 
| tal at 
scorche 
ization 
of the 
space | 
was lo 
and a) 
faced : 
test by 
sistanc 
ing up 
Yunna 
| ing ne 
munic: 
outsid 

Dur 
nation 
chief | 


tries r 


