ool 
nts 
th- 
Sg- 
Ols 


TO- 


up- 
ave 
me 
fy- 


| of 


pal 
nce 


ere 


pol- 
len- 


tional 
iditer. 





EE LT, RET TT 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVI, No. 32 JUNE 4, 1937 


— 





STRATEGY AND DIPLOMACY IN THE 
MEDITERRANEAN 


by David H. Popper 


Britain and Italy have become the chief antagonists in the 
Mediterranean. This report considers the general strategic 
situation confronting Italy, Britain and France, and the 
manner in which that situation has been modified by recent 
diplomatic developments. 


June 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 














Dr. William W. Bishop 
% University of M 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











“DEUTSCHLAND” CRISIS REV 


- 
—_—_—_—_—_—_—_———— 


IVES EUROPEAN TENSION 





HE German bombardment of Almeria on 

May 31, in reprisal for the attack by Loyalist 
airplanes on the “pocket battleship” Deutschland, 
threatens to wreck the latest international effort 
to limit hostilities in Spain, and dangerously ag- 
gravates the forces menacing European peace. 
Germany and Italy have both announced with- 
drawal from the non-intervention patrol of the 
Spanish coasts, and from participation in the 
London Committee, until “sure guarantees” are 
received against a recurrence of attacks on their 
vessels. To forestall more serious developments, 
London and Paris have warned the Fascist powers 
against further direct action and suggested a neu- 
tral inquiry to determine responsibility for the 
Deutschland bombing. 

Five German warships launched the Almeria 
bombardment without warning. Contrary to the 
German claim that only the fortified port had 
been attacked, journalists reported that the whole 
city had been shelled. At least 20 persons were 
killed, including women and children. The 
Deutschland had been bombed by Loyalist air- 
planes on May 29 while anchored at Iviza in the 
Balearic Islands; 23 seamen were killed. The 
Valencia Ministry of Defense asserted that the 
vessel had first opened fire on the aircraft. Prior 
to the bombing Admiral von Feschel, command- 
ing the German squadron in the Mediterranean, 
had notified Valencia that “adequate measures” 
would be taken should Loyalist aircraft fly over 
German vessels. But the German cabinet, in a 
communiqué issued on May 30, denied the Valen- 
cia charge and declared the attack was made 
without provocation. 

Three days earlier the Italian auxiliary war- 
ship, Barletta, had been bombed by a Loyalist 
airplane at Palma, on the island of Majorca, six 
officers being killed. At the same time the Ger- 
man torpedo-boat, Albatross, and also the 
British flotilla leader, Hardy, were reported to 


have been “seriously endangered.” These craft, 
as well as the Deutschland, were engaged in the 
international patrol of the Spanish coasts spon- 
sored by the London Non-Intervention Commit- 
tee. The Valencia government contended, how- 
ever, that the vessels’ presence in Insurgent har- 
bors contravened non-intervention regulations 
which provided that control ships remain ten 
miles off the coast. It also pointed out that patrol 
of the area including Majorca and Iviza had been 
assigned to the French navy, and hence that Ger- 
man and Italian warships had no mission in these 
waters. But officials in London announced that 
patrol ships had frequently been making short 
visits to Spanish ports. 

Loyalist resentment has long been rising 
against the activities of German and Italian war- 
ships, which were accused of various secret at- 
tacks on Spanish ports and with directly aiding 
the Rebel cause. Valencia spokesmen have re- 
peatedly charged that Majorca was dominated 
by Italian forces, and that the island was used as 
a base for Italian warships and bombing planes. 
Feeling had been exacerbated by the bombing of 
Valencia on May 28 and of Barcelona on May 29 
by airplanes presumably from Majorca, which re- 
sulted in the slaughter of large numbers of non- 
combatants in both cities. 

On May 27 Julio Alvarez del Vayo, represen- 
tative of the Valencia government at Geneva, 
presented to the Council of the League of Nations 
a White Book entitled “Italian Aggression.” This 
contained 101 photostatic copies of documents 
declared to have been taken from Italians killed 
or captured in the rout of their troops at Guada- 
lajara in March. The White Book purported to 
establish the presence in Spain of completely or- 
ganized Italian military units, which were acting 
as “a veritable army of occupation.” It cited 
orders from the Italian Ministry of War for 
equipment and embarkation of troop units, to be 


ichigan Libra 





; 
- 
a | 


ee 
ee ory 





a 


ier ~ i S 
At ay Aa. Eas nae 


~ 


—SSSS———[—=_=—=[aABRBo_—_— ~~ Page Two 


supplied with arms and munitions from army 
stores. It presented documents to indicate that 
high government officials, including Mussolini 
himself, took an active part in sending orders and 
encouragement to the Italian forces in Spain. 
“All this,” declared Alvarez del Vayo, “is tanta- 
mount to invasion of Spain by Italy.” 

Del Vayo, however, did not demand that the 
League Council take action on the White Book. 
A resolution unanimously approved by the Coun- 
cil on May 29 made no mention of that publica- 
tion, but endorsed a move, approved by the Lon- 
don Non-Intervention Committee on May 26, look- 
ing toward limitation of hostilities in the penin- 
sula through “withdrawal of all non-Spanish 
combatants taking part in the struggle in Spain.” 
This proposal to retire all foreign volunteers was 
part of a larger project evolved by British diplo- 
macy, which envisaged establishment of an arm- 
istice between the contending forces as a neces- 
sary accompaniment of the withdrawal program. 
Once fighting had been stopped, it was hoped that 
it might not be resumed. 

France had promptly voiced full support of 
the British program, while the Soviet Union was 
reported as accepting it in principle. Germany 
had returned what was considered in Downing 
Street as an “encouraging” answer. Italy, how- 
ever, did not reply. The silence of the Valencia 
White Book on German intervention in Spain— 
save for a single reference to German bombing 
planes—was interpreted as the result of British 
influence, which sought to detach Hitler from 
Mussolini and, through this isolation of Italy, 
to bring pressure on Rome to support the British 
program. Now, the Loyalist bombing of German 
and Italian warships has apparently reunited the 
Fascist states. Germany has announced that it 
will attempt no further reprisals, but both its 
naval commanders and those of Italy have been 
authorized to fire on airplanes and warships which 


appear threatening. CHARLES A. THOMSON 


EGYPT JOINS THE LEAGUE 


Egypt’s formal admission to membership in 
the League of Nations on May 26 marked the 
final step in its rise to the status of a sovereign 
nation. A vassal state for 2000 years, the land of 
the Nile was recognized as an independent state 
on August 26, 1936 with the signature of the 
Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of Friendship and Alli- 
ance. Aside from the continued presence of some 
British armed forces, the only remnant of for- 
eign control was the system of capitulations 
by which the nationals of twelve foreign powers, 
including the United States, Britain, France and 
Italy, were exempted from Egyptian taxation and 








permitted to administer their own legal system 
through consular and mixed courts. The British 
government, in the Anglo-Egyptian treaty, had 
recognized the anachronism of maintaining a 
separate régime for foreigners in Egypt and 
promised to support its ally in calling a confer. 
ence to abolish the 400-year-old rights. 

The conference convened at Montreux, Switzer. 
land, on April 12, 1937. When it closed on May 
8, Egypt had received the right to tax foreigners 
on the same basis as its own nationals after 
October 15, 1937, and to bring all legal cases in- 
volving foreigners under the control of Egyptian 
courts after a twelve-year transition period dur- 
ing which the foreign judges of the mixed courts 
will be gradually replaced by native Egyptians. 
The present jurisdiction of the consular courts, 
except for questions of personal status (marriage, 
divorce, inheritance, etc.), will pass to the mixed 
courts at once. 

The conference held at Montreux—the same 
city where Turkey obtained the right to remil- 
itarize the Straits last year—was carried on in 
a markedly harmonious atmosphere. The only 
serious point of disagreement concerned the 
length of the transition period. Egypt had asked 
for twelve years, but France and other powers 
with large financial interests in Egypt preferred 
a twenty-year period. The prompt support of 
Britain and the United States—the latter acting 
in the name of its “good neighbor” policy— 
brought about the adoption of the Egyptian pro- 
posal, and at the final signature of the convention 
all twelve powers signed without reservations. 


HELEN FISHER 





The Ejido: Mezxico’s Way Out, by Eyler N. Simpson. 
Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina Press, 1937. 
$5.00 
A first-rank study of Mexico’s agrarian reform, notable 

for its encyclopedic scope, its thorough research and its 

arresting thesis. 


— 





Pre-War Years, 1913-1917, by Frederic L. Paxson. Bos- 
ton, Houghton-Mifflin, 1936. $3.75 
This well-written survey of American democracy and 
the World War suffers from inadequate discussion of 
fundamental social and economic currents. 


We Can Defend America, by Johnson Hagood. Garden 
City, Doubleday Doran, 1937. $2.50 
An American general strikes at the organization of our 
military forces for purposes other than defense against 
invasion. 
Portrait of a People, by Dorothea Orr. New York, Funk 
and Wagnalls, 1936. $2.50 
Sympathetic and picturesque record of two years in 
Croatia. 
National Economic Security, by Arthur B. Adams. Nor- 
man, University of Oklahoma Press, 1936. $2.50 
Stimulation of consumers’ goods industries and a wider 
and more even distribution of national income are held the 
keystones of greater economic stability. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 32, Jung 4, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonpD Lgsiig BuELL, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MicneLtes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 














