



ng 
ho 


or 
rts 

if 
ish 


PSs 
iat 
ind 
ar- 
tly 


me 
ro- 


om- 
ites 
is a 


ign 
eal 
the 
de- 
; an 
fact 
rict 
licy 
3, in 
ved. 
the 
are 
has 
orm 


bers 
tion. 


‘ational 


Editor. 


pr ergs 


* 


A 
- 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Entered as secend- 

clase matter December 

2, 1921, at the Post 

Ame, Office at New York, 

ly Ld /p Y., under the act 
R. Mareh 3, 1879. 














VoLt. XV, No. 4 


NOVEMBER 22, 1935 





F. P. A. DISCUSSION MEETINGS IN NEW YORK, 1935-1936 


Luncheon Meetings: Hotel Astor 


NOVEMBER 23, 1935 

DECEMBER 7, 1935 FEBRUARY 15, 1936 

JANUARY 4, 1936 MARCH 7, 1936 
MARCH 28, 1936 


JANUARY 25, 1936 





There will be one evening meeting—the date to be announced later. 


Pericdical Division, 


RF 

t @v’ 

Library of Congress, \% af Ny 
” , 

Washington, D. C. ei niv 2 











BULLETINS FROM ALL FRONTS 





League Besieges Italy. On November 18, despite 
Italy’s threat of reprisals, the League for: the first 
time in its history applied economic sanctions 
against an aggressor. Fifty states which nor- 
mally buy 60 per cent of Italian exports will now 
bar all imports from Italy with the exception of 
money, gold, silver, books, newspapers, maps and 
music; while 52 will embargo various raw ma- 
terials needed for war, with the notable exception 
of coal, oil, cotton, iron and copper, which are 
also produced by two non-League countries—the 
United States and Germany. 

Normally the United States supplies 58 per 
cent of Italy’s cotton, 21 per cent of its oil, 25 per 
cent of its copper, and 11 per cent of its iron and 
steel. On November 16 Secretary of State Hull 
pointed out that exports of these commodities, 
“which are essentially war materials,” had con- 
siderably increased, adding that this is directly 
contrary to the government’s policy and the “gen- 
eral spirit’—if not the letter—of the neutrality 
resolution adopted by Congress last August. 

While sanctions may at first rally the Italian 
people behind Mussolini, they are bound to create 
serious problems for many key industries. To 
take but one example: the Fiat automobile works 
already face loss of foreign markets as a result 
of the League boycott, as well as drastic curtail- 
ment of domestic sales owing to the prohibitive 
price of gasoline, whose importation and sale are 
strictly regulated by the government. This situa- 


_ tion spells not only widespread unemployment, 


» but also ruin for industrialists who had hitherto 
' Supported Fascism as a bulwark against Com- 


>» munist expropriation. 


Mussolini apparently in- 
tends to forestall popular dissatisfaction and gain 


. a diplomatic bargaining-point by occupying as 


much Ethiopian territory as possible in the short- 
est possible time. This is indicated by the recall 
of General de Bono, a veteran Fascist, whose tac- 
tics were apparently too slow for Mussolini, and 
his replacement by Marshal Badoglio, chief of 


the General Staff, at one time known for his anti- 
Fascist sentiments. A rapid advance into Ethi- 
opia—if practicable—might possibly induce Brit- 
ain to give Italy better terms when it comes to a 
settlement. It is equally possible, however, that 
it might lead the Italian army to another Adowa. 


V. M.D. 


Britain Renews Baldwin’s Mandate. Strength- 
ened by both its energetic stand in favor of the 
League and its rearmament program the National 
Government of Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin 
won a surprisingly complete victory in the Brit- 
ish elections on November 14. The government 
will enjoy a safe margin of about 245 in the next 
parliament, as compared with the phenomenal ma- 
jority of 411 seats gained in the panic elections 
of 1931. The government’s loss is much less than 
even the Conservatives had expected. Although 
the Labor party increased its parliamentary rep- 
resentation only from 59 to 154, according to the 
popular vote it has recovered almost all its losses 
since 1929. In fact, the Opposition polled nearly 
10,000,000 votes, or only about 1,500,000 less 
than the government total. 

The elections further increased the trend to- 
ward the return of the two-party system. The 
small parties fared badly. The National Labor- 
ites lost 5 of their 13 seats, and former premier 
J. Ramsay MacDonald, as well as his son Malcolm, 
was defeated. The opposition Liberals had their 
representation cut from 30 to 17, and lost their 
leader Sir Herbert Samuel. The Conservatives 
now hold 385 of the 428 government seats, while 
the Labor party dominates the Opposition. 


J.C. W. 


Nazi Anti-Jewish Decrees. The Nazi executive 
decrees of November 15, amplifying the Nurem- 
berg anti-Jewish laws, deal with citizenship, in- 
termarriage and sex relations, and the servant 
problem, but omit all reference to economic mat- 
ters. In general they appear to embody some 

























































slight concessions; Hitler, however, may issue 
further regulations at any time, and the new 
orders therefore cannot be regarded as a signifi- 
cant victory for Nazi moderates. 

The decrees provide that only Reich citizens— 
that is, persons of German or “related” blood 
who could vote on September 15, 1935—may pos- 
sess full political rights. Jews are specifically 
barred from citizenship, voting and holding public 
office; those still occupying public office—for the 
most part, war veterans—must retire by Decem- 
ber 31, 1935. The law now recognizes only three 
classes of persons: Germans, Jews (75 or 100 per 
cent Jewish), and Jewish “mixtures.” In the 
latter category, individuals 25 per cent Jewish 
may attain citizenship; the same applies to half- 
Jews who do not belong to a Jewish religious com- 
munity and are not married to Jews. Marriage 
and extra-marital relations between Jews and 
non-Jews, and even between the various Jewish 
categories, are strictly regulated. The age limit 
for “Aryan” servants in Jewish homes has been 
lowered from 45 to 35, provided they were em- 
ployed before September 15, 1935. 

Hitler apparently aims at eventual assimilation 
of so-called Jewish “mixtures.” The future of 
full and 75-per-cent Jews, however, seems hope- 
less. The new decrees do not regulate their eco- 
nomic position and thus allow continuation of 
boycotts imposed by local officials despite admoni- 
tions from above. Commenting on the situation, 
the London Times declares that the Nuremberg 
laws “are making Nazi Germany more than ever 
a paradise for blackmailers.” M.S. W. 


Trade Pact with Canada. The signing on Novem- 
ber 15 of a Canadian-American reciprocal trade 
agreement effective for three years marked the 
end of a period of tariff retaliation which helped 
to reduce trade between the two countries by 60 
per cent between 1929 and 1934. The agreement, 
whose general provisions closely follow those 
of the six trade pacts previously concluded by 
Secretary Hull, lowers duties on American ex- 
ports valued at $415,000,000 in the year ending 
March 1930. 

Canada, our largest foreign source of supply, 
receives tariff concessions on many _ products, 
some competitive and some complementary to the 
United States economy. Canadian woodpulp and 
newsprint are admitted free for the duration of 
the agreement, and reductions in duty are allowed 
for specified quantities of cattle, cream, seed 
potatoes and certain types of timber and lumber. 
Many other agricultural and forest products, as 
well as fish, minor mineral products, and aged 
whiskies, are admitted at lower rates. In return, 


Page Two 





— 
—__ 





Canada levels barriers on hundreds of American 
agricultural and industrial items by granting the 
United States tariff treatment as favorable a: 
that accorded any other non-British nation, and 
revising the system of arbitrary customs valua. 
tions at present in force. Canadian duties, more. 
over, are reduced on over 80 items, including fresh 
vegetables, citrus fruits, machinery and electrical 
equipment, and iron and steel manufactures. 
Considering the many obstacles to freer trade 
between the two countries, the agreement is sur. 
prisingly broad in scope. Canada has been bound 
by the Empire preferences established in the Ot- 
tawa agreements, while the Roosevelt adminis. 
tration has had to face the economic nationalism 
of American agricultural organizations in a pre. 
election year. To American economic groups 
which will feel increased competition, the admin- 
istration has pointed out that while imports from 
Canada will be limited to a very slight fraction of 
our market, they will aid Canada by increasing 
the demand for its relatively small export surplus. 


Dm. F. 


The Philippines. With the inauguration on 
November 15 of Manuel Quezon as first President 
of the Philippine Commonwealth, the Islands en- 
tered the ten-year transition period of controlled 
autonomy, designed to lead toward complete in- 
dependence in 1945. A decree signed by Presi- 
dent Roosevelt certified the transfer of power to 
the new executive and other officials, elected on 
September 17 under a constitution ratified by a 
Philippine plebiscite last May. 

During the period of “probationary apprentice- 
ship” the United States will retain its sovereign- 
ty over the Philippines; through its High Com- 
missioner Washington will control defense, for- 
eign relations and important phases of finance, 
and may exercise the right of intervention. Pros- 
pects for a successful conclusion of the transi- 
tional period are already clouded by questions 
concerning the future international status of the 
Islands, their internal stability and economic 
welfare. General Douglas MacArthur, formerly 
Chief of the United States General Staff, has been 
named military advisor to the new régime, and 
immediately on his arrival at Manila President 
Quezon announced the inauguration of a system of 
universal compulsory military service. In the eco- 
nomic field the progressive raising of tariff bar- 
riers by the United States against Philippine ex- 
ports, 85 per cent of which are now shipped to 
this country, threatens disastrous consequences 
unless a reciprocal trade conference, scheduled 
early in 1936, guarantees a substantial American 
market for the commerce of the Islands. C.A.T. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 4, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


November 22, 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


1935. Published weekly by the 
RAYMOND Lestir Bugtt, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 


Foreign Policy Association, Nations 


Incorporated. 


, under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 





































'< 


