LA\\J 


on 
ild ha 


; of 


PPropri- 


ides that 
escinded 
majority 
vo-thirds 
ial veto, 
ion may 
ime that 
} powers 
of such 


ions, the 
egree of 

for and 
realized. 
ontinued 
es to be 
se, 


d during 
J everthe- 
preement 
villing to 
The sug- 
worth of 
it author- 
pprehen- 
ieve that 
the pro- 
irs Com- 
> a vote, 
e House. 
ssue now 
to which 
resident, 
on fidence 
the field 
nt unde- 
_ those in 
authority 
furnished 
to influ- 
1e British 
| in many 
clarify its 
sloy these 
STONE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XX, No. 18 


FEBRUARY 21, 1941 


| ae declaration of friendship signed by Turkey 

and Bulgaria on February 17, in which the two 
guntries undertook to refrain from any acts of ag- 
pression, represents a diplomatic victory for Germany 
in the “war of nerves” by which it hopes to bring 
its struggle against Britain to a close with a mini- 
mum expenditure of lives and material. While Ger- 
many was Clearing the way for prompt termination 
of the Greco-Italian war in the Balkans, General 
franco conferred with Mussolini at Bordighera on 
February 12 and with Marshal Pétain at Montpellier 
om February 13, presumably concerning Spanish aid 
to the Axis powers, restoration of the monarchy in 
Spain, and possible use by Germany and Italy of the 
French navy and French bases in Africa. 


So far as can be determined, General Franco is not 
mxious to engage Spain—now threatened with 
arvation—in the European conflict, even to the 
atent of having a German or Italian army operating 
om Spanish soil against Britain. Nor do Marshal Pétain 
ind General Weygand appear ready to acquiesce in 
Nazi demands for use of the French navy and French 
African ports. Yet Nazi pressure may soon force 
both France and Spain to conform to Nazi plans, 
imespective of their own desires. The complicated 
Maneuvers now going on in Vichy, where Admiral 
Darlan is emerging as the strong man of the hour, 
tnd to indicate that the Nazis have by no means 
ibandoned the hope of relegating Marshal Pétain 
04 position of innocuous desuetude, and restoring 
M. Laval to a key position in a cabinet which would 
le ready to collaborate unreservedly with the “new 
der.” The resignation of Marcel Peyrouton, for- 
met Minister of the Interior, who had played an 
mportant part in Laval’s downfall, represents an- 
ther attempt to remove from Vichy those elements 
Which might be inclined to resist Nazi pressure. 


GERMANY TIGHTENS GRIP IN BALKANS 


NAZIS TURN THE SCREWS IN BALKANS. 
Meanwhile, in the Balkans, King Boris of Bulgaria 
appears to have accepted Nazi arrangements for the 
gradual occupation of his country by German troops, 
disguised as businessmen and tourists who, despite 
official denials, are taking over control of airports, 
roads, and strategic bases. A similar technique has 
been used with respect to Yugoslavia, whose Prime 
Minister Cvetkovitch and Foreign Minister Cincar- 
Marcovitch paid a visit to Hitler at Berchtesgaden 
on February 13. German strategy in the Balkans is 
to avoid open hostilities, if possible and, through 
the massing of German troops and airplanes in Bul- 
garia and Yugoslavia, bring pressure on Greece to 
accept peace with Italy. This strategy, if successful, 
would place on Britain the onus of taking the first 
openly warlike step in the Balkan countries; would 
eject British forces from Greece, the first place on 
the continent where they had obtained a foothold 
since Dunkerque; and prevent assistance to Britain 
on the part of Turkey, which has undertaken to fight 
only if Bulgaria allows its soil to be used for mili- 
tary operations. At the same time, Germany is offer- 
ing Bulgaria and Yugoslavia, as compensation for 
their acquiescence, the prospect that they may obtain 
territory at the expense of Greece and Albania. 


For Britain, Hitler's policy of consolidating Nazi 
control of the continent before undertaking an all- 
out invasion of the British Isles is hard to combat, 
unless the British are prepared to attack Rumania, 
Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. It would be difficult to 
prove that the Balkans—any more than the Low 
Countries or the Scandinavian states last spring— 
welcome German encroachments on their territory, 
economic resources, and political independence. Yet, 
for the present and the immediate future, these coun- 
tries have far more to fear from Germany than from 
Britain, and their rulers have apparently come to the 
conclusion that discretion is the better part of valor 


— thus demonstrating anew Machiavelli’s dictum 


that it is far more important to be feared than to be 
loved. 


Should the Nazis succeed in paralyzing, in ad- 
vance, the possible resistance of France and Spain in 
the western Mediterranean, and of the Balkans in 
the eastern Mediterranean, the position of the British 
forces in Africa would, in turn, become vulnerable 
—especially if the Axis should succeed in striking 
at the British Army of the Nile from French bases 
in Tunisia and Syria. Such a pincer-like move- 
ment would, according to present indications, be 
synchronized with a Japanese thrust at British, 
French or Dutch possessions in the Far East, so as 
to achieve a maximum of distraction in London, as 
well as Washington, and disperse the British war 
effort. Its prospects for success, while still consider- 
able, have been markedly reduced by Britain’s winter 
campaign in Africa. As a result of this campaign, the 
British have won control over Mediterranean bases 


which could still bar a German thrust toward Suez. 
MR. HOOVER’S FOOD PLAN. Under the cir- 


cumstances, it is not unnatural that the British, who 
feel menaced on all fronts, should be cool to Mr. 
Hoover’s new proposal, made in Chicago on Febru- 
ary 17, for a test feeding of three million Belgians. 
Mr. Hoover pointed out, in terms which cannot fail 
to appeal to humanitarian instincts, that millions of 
people in the occupied countries are already living 
on sub-marginal rations, and may be enduring actual 
Starvation in a short time. He proposed to experi- 
ment with a test feeding in Belgium, to ascertain 
whether people in that country can be saved with- 
out military advantage to either side. Food at the 
rate of 50,000 tons a month would be distributed to 
one million adults and two million children through 


Page Two 


—<—<—<—— 


soup kitchens, “so that there would be no questiq 
of feeding Germans.” The German governmey 
would be asked to agree not to requisition nati» 
food; both Britain and Germany would be requestg 
to give free passage for relief ships; and the who, 
operation would be supervised by some neutral body 

The decision whether or not to accept Mr. Hooye, 
plan poses an ethical and political problem of th 
greatest poignancy. To permit the malnutrition, } 
not yet actual starvation, of millions of people in 
the occupied countries who have been warned by th 
Nazis not to expect assistance from Germany, ap 
pears to be not only an inhuman act, but an » 
which may eventually weaken and even destroy th 
spirit of democratic resistance in these countries, () 
the other hand, aid to the occupied countries woul 
relieve Germany of one of its most pressing pmb 
lems—that of providing some measure of subsisteng 
for peoples on whom it has imposed its dominatioy, 
and over which it intends to rule in case of victory 
The question, then, must be asked whether the fa 


of these peoples may not prove still more diss 


trous if they are left, even with adequate food, w 
der the rule of the Nazis, who are gradually exti:| 
pating all elements which might ultimately resis’ 
the “new order.” The most disturbing aspect of thi 
problem is that it raises issues which may confus 


and divide American opinion on the internationd/ 


situation at a moment when clarity and decisiveney 
are more necessary than ever before. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


“AXIS STRATEGY IN THE BALKANS” is th 
subject of the FPA’s broadcast on February 23, ove! 


the blue network of the National Broadcasting Com \ 


pany from 2:15 to 2:30 E.S.T. The speaker will & 
Vera Micheles Dean. Please let us have your comment 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Finland Fights, by H. B. Elliston. New York, Little, Brown, 
1940. $2.75 


A vivid and searching report of the war in Finland. Al- 
though written in haste “while impressions were still hot,” 
the book is both careful of fact and sincere in its expres- 
sion of opinion. 


What will Russia do in the new Balkan crisis? Read: 


RUSSIA AND THE “NEW ORDER” IN 
EUROPE by Vera Micheles Dean 


25¢ 


December 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


The New Infantry Drill Regulations, U.S. Army. Harm 
burg, Pa., Military Service Publishing Co., 1940. 50 cent 


An invaluable manual for the infantryman, compilé/ 


from United States Army publications. 


America’s Last Chance, by Albert Carr. New York, Crowel 


1940. $2.75 

Alarmed by the fascist menace, the author proposes 
series of measures to strengthen our armed forces and tf 
invigorate our democracy. 


Gertrude Bell, by Ronald Bodley and Lorna Hearst. Ne 
York, Macmillan, 1940. $2.50 
The career of Miss Bell, who was an archeologist ® 
Arabia, a confidant of the Arabs, and a counsellor & 
British Middle Eastern officials during and after the la 
war, paralleled that of T. E. Lawrence. This is a popula 
uncritical account of her life. 


Ee 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 18, Fesruary 21, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


1941. 


Ea 6: 


FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., 


Natron 


Edi 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 
Leet, Secretary; 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Association, Incorporated 
VerRA MICHELES DEAN, 
Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership. Five Dollars a Year 


CA 
of tl 
grour 
(Ven 
great 
count 
oct. § 
ducti 
figure 
enou; 
whol 
prese 
wat 2 
conv¢ 
opme 
of N 
1940 
curta 
and 1 
next 


EX 
ducti 
for f 
drast 
coffer 
to G 
tinen 
try— 
0 p 

Sit 
contr 
fatio 
set u 
erie 
unsy: 
icier 
fecer 
City 
Vene 
expe 
some 


B, 
JEC” 
ona 
the | 
agric 
fepu 


I 
ror m 


£0 


—= 


O question 
Overnmen 
iOn natiy 
> LEqueste 
the whok 
utral body 
t. Hoover; 
em of the 
utrition, jf 
people ir 
ned by th 
‘Many, ap. 
ut an a 
lestroy th 
intries, () 
ries woul 
sing prob 
subsisteng 
omination, 
of Victon, 
et the fat 


ore isa 
- food, w. 


1ally extir | 
itely resist’ 
ect of this) 
ay confus 
ternational | 


lecisivenes | 


3S DEAN | 


1S” is the| 
y 23, over | 
sting Com: | 
cer will be] 
- comments 


my. Harris 
40. 50 cent 
n, compile / 


rk, Crowell, 


proposes 4 
rces and tt 


learst. Nev 


heologist 2 
yunsellor 
‘ter the las 
s a popula 


TT 
ited. Nation 
Dean, Editi 


ar. 


CARACAS, VENEZUELA (by air mail). Discussions 
of the economic situation in Venezuela revolve 
yound that republic’s major export commodity, oil 
(Venezuela is the world’s greatest oil exporter, third 
greatest producer), and around attempts to free the 
country from excessive dependence on that one prod- 
uct. Since the outbreak of the present war, oil pro- 
duction has had its violent ups and downs, but 
figures just compiled indicate that, surprisingly 
eough, 1940 oil production for Venezuela as a 
hole was only 10 per cent below that of 1939. At 
present, owing to the uncertainties of the European 
war and the dependence of oil exports on the tanker- 
gonvoy system, oil men are unable to forecast devel- 
opments beyond the immediate future. Standard Oil 
of New Jersey is currently operating at about the 
1940 level; while Shell has ceased the successive 
artailments which followed the collapse of France, 


and now hopes to maintain stable conditions for the 
next couple of months at least. 


EXCHANGE DIFFICULTIES. Although oil pro- 
duction has fallen off by only one-tenth, the market 
for many of Venezuela’s other products has been 
drastically reduced. This is particularly true of 
coffee, more than 50 per cent of which formerly went 
t)Germany (much of this for re-sale to other con- 
tinental countries). The result is that the oil indus- 
ty—always a major factor—now accounts for over 
9 per cent of all Venezuela’s dollar exchange. 


Since 1937 the country has had nominal exchange 
@ntrol, but not until October 1940 was an actual 
ationing of exchange instituted and a control board 
st up. This control board, relatively lacking in ex- 
perience, has been criticized for its arbitrary and 
usystematic handling of problems, but greater ef- 
iciency is anticipated in the future. Meanwhile, the 
recent grant of a $10,000,000 credit by the National 
City Bank of New York to the Central Bank of 
Venezuela (partly in the form of an overdraft) is 
expected to ease the general exchange situation 
somewhat. 


BALANCED ECONOMY AN ULTIMATE OB- 
JECTIVE. Venezuela’s unhealthy over-dependence 
on a single commodity has long been recognized, but 
the present war has strengthened efforts to revive 
agriculture and cattle-raising, which were once the 
fepublic’s chief sources of wealth. Efforts to encour- 


TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA 


By JOHN I. B. MeCULLOCH 


age farming have run afoul of various obstacles. 
Lucrative wages in the oil fields have drained away 
labor from the farms. Immigration has never been 
scientifically organized. Lack of transportation cre- 
ates a farm-to-market problem, and there are no 
storage facilities for perishable goods such as fresh 
vegetables. Ministers of Agriculture have been fre- 
quently changed, and each one has inaugurated a 
new program. Estimates differ as to the amount of 
arable land actually available in Venezuela, but there 
is no disagreement as to the fact that better organiza- 
tion of farming and marketing is a prime necessity. 


Cattle-raising suffers from many of the same hard- 
ships as agriculture, plus certain others. In the days 
of Dictator Gémez, cattle-breeding was practically a 
presidential monopoly and competitors were squeezed 


to the wall, with the result that the number of 
cattle declined from ten million to less than three. 


About a year ago an energetic man——César Mon- 
treal Salinas—was chosen director of the Ganadera 
Industrial Venezolana (Venezuelan Cattle Industry 
Company). Recently he spent five months in the 
United States, working with Armour and Company. 
A new plant is now to be opened in the heart of the 
cattle country at San Fernando—a combination 
slaughterhouse, packing plant, and cold storage es- 
tablishment. From San Fernando it is planned to 
send meat by airplane, a procedure which promises 
to work out more economically on the whole than 
the old method. 


A LONG-TERM PROGRAM. The revival of 
agriculture and cattle-breeding represents a long- 
term program in Venezuela, and no sensational re- 
sults are expected at once. The improvement of 
transportation, the securing of technical assistance 
from countries like the United States and Argentina, 
the training of would-be farmers and ranchers, the 
establishment of storage facilities in consumption 
centers, are among the most obvious approaches to a 
solution of the problem. The economic situation at 
present is loaded with danger. Relying almost ex- 
clusively on oil exports, and importing a very high 
percentage of its food, Venezuela would be faced 
with serious social and political problems—to say 
nothing of privation and human misery—should in- 
ternational trade currents be seriously deflected for 
an extended period. 


For more extensive coverage on Latin American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS, a bi-weekly newsletter edited by Mr. McCulloch. For sample 
copy of this publication, write to the Washington Bureau, Foreign Policy Association, 1200 National Press Building, Washington, D.C. 


Pwr 


AL ROOM 


or 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


Fes. 18.—Following a brief “war scare” in the 
Far East, the official spokesman of the Japanese gov- 
ernment issued a statement on February 18 suggest- 
ing termination of all war and offering Japan’s ser- 
vices as mediator if such services are called for. In 
these critical days, however, Tokyo’s policy is re- 
vealed less by its statements than by its naval and 
air moves in southeast Asia. 


EPISODE IN “WAR OF NERVES?” Tokyo had 
made a move of this kind on February 10, when a 
small number of Japanese troops and bombers sud- 
denly appeared at Saigon, the strategic port of south- 
ern Indo-China. This force arrived in Saigon unan- 
nounced, before any decision had been reached in 
the negotiations attending the Thailand-Indo-China 
peace conference at Tokyo. It was obviously being 
used as a trial balloon to test the Anglo-American 
reaction. An immediate rejoinder came from Singa- 
pore, where the military authorities dispatched a 
strong force of R.A.F. bombers to advance air bases 
in northern Malaya. 


Another rejoinder came from Washington the 
next day when President Roosevelt, at a press con- 
ference, departed from his fixed rule of not answer- 
ing “iffy” questions. In answer to a correspondent’s 
query, he firmly declared that the movement of 
American supplies to Britain would not be affected 
“if the United States became involved in a Far 
Eastern war.” The real storm blew up three days 
later. On the afternoon of February 13 alarming re- 
ports began to come in from the Far East. In Aus- 
tralia the Acting Premier, Arthur R. Fadden, de- 
clared that the war had moved into a stage of “the 
utmost gravity,” and a special War Cabinet confer- 
ence was arranged for the next morning. Air Mar- 
shal Sir Robert Brooke-Popham, coordinator of 
Britain’s Far Eastern defenses, was in Australia at 
the time to confer with the military authorities of 
the Dominion. It was also announced that the Aus- 
tralian cruiser Sydney had returned from the Medi- 
terranean to bolster the Far Eastern front. The Neth- 
erlands Indies issued recall orders to two of its 
ships, while United States consular officials renewed 
previous suggestions that American nationals should 
leave the Far East. No particular reason for these 
actions was assigned, except for vague rumors of 
Japanese military-naval concentrations, supposedly 
in preparation for a “lightning move” south, and of 


an “ultimatum” delivered to the Netherlands East ‘ 


Indies. There was some ground for believing that 
Britain and the United States were taking a hand. 
in the “war of nerves” which has so far been a 
monopoly of Axis diplomacy. 

THE AFTERMATH. By February 14, when Ad. 
miral Nomura presented his credentials to President. 
Roosevelt, the storm was already beginning to blow 
over. In Japan the public displayed serious con. 
cern, and the Cabinet Information Bureau issued q 


reassuring statement which discounted the immi- 
nence of war in the Pacific. For the time being} 


moreover, the dispatch of additional Japanese troops’ 
and supplies to Saigon was apparently abandoned. 
On the other hand, it seems but a question of time 
before Tokyo will proceed to occupy Saigon, as well 
as the neighboring base of Cam Ranh Bay. 

Efforts to concert defense measures in the Pacific 
against a possible Japanese southward thrust have 
continued in Anglo-American diplomatic circles: al 
Washington. On February 15 Secretary Hull con 
ferred jointly with the British Ambassador and the 
Australian Minister, and later with the Netherland: 
Minister. Lord Halifax, the British Ambassador 
stated to the press after the conference that Britis! 
forces in the Far East had been increased “quit 
substantially,” while Dr. A. Loudon, the Nether 
lands Minister, declared that “the Dutch East In) 
dies will fight any aggressors.” The House Nave 
Affairs Committee, after hearing Admiral Haro” 
R. Stark, Chief of Naval Operations, also voted 0 
February 15 to recommend expenditure of $12,800 
000 for the improvement of Guam and Tutuila ha 
bors, as part of a series of naval base expansio" 
projects. From London, on February 16, came th) 
further announcement that the seas north of Singe 
pore, covering an area of 80 by 50 miles, were bein, 
mined. 

The immediate issue in the Pacific turns on th 
possibility of a Japanese drive into southeast Asia 
which would be “coordinated” with German move 
in Europe. Growing influence wielded by Naz 
agents in Tokyo, especially over the Japanese mili 
tary, has lent weight to the hypothesis that Japa 
may now be prepared to strike simultaneously wit 
Germany. Informed opinion in Washington, how 
ever, is still inclined to believe that, before commi 
ting itself to a military adventure so unpredictabl 


in outcome, Japan will wait to see the effects off 


German strategy in Europe. 
T. A. BIssON 


VOL. 


Afte 


calli: 
acts 

It d: 
offer 
flict, 
pow 


Und 


