





= 
to 


ASES 
Dar- 


by 
ight 
; to 

be 
its 
pril 
SSO- 
nco, 
lian 
eral 
Lich, 
long 
t of 
med 
1SSO- 
the 
for 
tion, 
has 
non- 
€ to 
rmet 
1eNts 
Mr. 
S tO 
fear 
o far 
S re- 











































AN 


. No- 
ng at 
y on 
ide a 
Sions 
peak- 
est tO 
; will 
‘ation 
s An- 


ledge 
; year 


-adily 


oo 
National 
Editor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An i (ate a of current international events by the Research Staff 
aL LIBRARY Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


, OF MIEM EIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vout. XVII, No. 35 


—_—_— 


JUNE 24, 1938 





THE PUZZLE OF PALESTINE, by David H. Popper 


What lies behind the Arab-Jewish struggle in Palestine? 
Why do British troops intervene? The Puzzle of 
Palestine answers these questions, and gives not only 
the essential facts of Palestine’s turbulent history, but 
also an account of the various plans which have been 
proposed to solve this problem. 

cloth edition, 95 cents 


Headline Books, No. 14 paper edition, 25 cents 





iyi-2-S Saar 
Entered as second- 


class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Michtvan 











GERMANY TAPS RESOURCES OF AUSTRIA AND JEWS 





G ERMANY’S threatened repudiation of Austrian 

government loans, and the new anti-Semitic 
drive launched by the Nazis with redoubled viru- 
lence, introduce fresh complications in German- 
American relations, already strained by economic 
and ideological conflicts. In a speech of June 16 
castigating American trade policies, Walther Funk, 
German Minister of Economics, marshaled legal, 
economic and moral arguments for repudiation of 
the Austrian debt, and scaling down of the “un- 
justified interest rates” of 514 and 7 per cent on the 
Dawes and Young loans to a ‘normal point.” The 
Austrian loans, he argued, had been granted not for 
economic reasons, but for the political purpose “‘of 
preventing Austria’s Anschluss.’ According to Herr 
Funk, Austrian economy, at its incorporation into 
that of Great Germany, “had not been built up with 
foreign aid but had been intolerably impoverished.” 


The arguments advanced by Herr Funk had al- 
ready been rejected by the United States in a note of 
June 9, which Secretary Hull made public on June 17. 
This note called for payment by Germany of the 
defaulted June 1 debt service due on the $20,000,000 
American share of the 1930 Austrian international 
loan. In a note of April 6 which remained unan- 
swered, the United States had already stated that “‘it 
will expect” that Austria’s indebtedness will be recog- 
nized by Germany, ‘and that service will be contin- 
ued by the German authorities which have succeeded 
in control of the means and machinery of payment 
of Austria.” Austrian debts to this country total 
$64,493,480, of which $26,005,480 is owed to the 
United States government for post-war relief loans, 
the balance consisting of debts to private American 
Citizens represented by nine different dollar-bond 
issues floated in the United States by Austrian prov- 
inces, municipalities and public utilities. Although 





some of Austria’s loans were predicated on fulfill- 
ment of the peace treaties, and may be thus described 
as “political,” they were used either directly for the 
purpose of post-war relief, or to strengthen Aus- 
trian economy. It should be further pointed out that, 
contrary to Herr Funk’s contention, Austrian econ- 
omy had achieved a striking measure of recovery by 
the end of 1937; that Austria possessed foreign ex- 
change and gold resources far superior to those of 
the Reich which were immediately mobilized to pay 
for German purchases abroad; and that Austria, 
before annexation, had scrupulously met its foreign 
debt obligations. What Germany apparently hopes 
to achieve, by threatening repudiation of “political” 
loans, is to make political capital out of debt negotia- 
tions with Austria’s creditors. 


Financial considerations also serve to explain the 
drastic measures adopted against Jews during the 
past week in an effort to end all remaining trade be- 
tween Jews and Aryans. A decree of April 27 had 
ordered all Tews, foreign as well as German, to regis- 
ter their property by June 30, and had authorized 
Field Marshal Goering to use this property “in con- 
formity with the economic interests of Germany.” 
This measure—which brought protests from the 
United States and was amended on June 20 to ex- 
clude foreign Jews—precipitated liquidation of Jew- 
ish property, thus further straining the position of the 
reichsmark on world markets. To check the flight 
of capital, the government on June 8 prohibited any 
transfer of money by Jews emigrating from Ger- 
many. Still more drastic methods have been used in 
Austria, where Jewish emigrants are obliged not 
merely to abandon their property but, if known to 
have wealthy friends or relatives abroad, are ex- 
pected to pay a ransom, such as has been levied on 
Dr. Freud. These measures, which are nothing less 





—s 
aie 
ere 


=the aa 
Sete artes: 


aaa 


saggy 


So eae 


cs 


Serie KER 


a 


ie SAR 


SP aE 


aS ere 


| 
i 
| 


a 


Ae 


we fate 





am a 


Nereis YP 














Page Two = FC 


than confiscation, are inspired primarily by the de- 
sire to obtain additional foreign exchange, which 
Germany sorely needs, and to mobilize Jewish prop- 
erty, estimated at 10 billion marks, for the program 
of expansion launched under the Four-Year Plan. 
At the same time, they are unquestionably used as a 
lever on the intergovernmental conference sum- 
moned at the initiative of the United States, which 
is to meet at Evian, France, on July 6 to examine the 
whole problem of refugees. The Reich squarely con- 
fronts the world with the choice between giving 
refuge to Jews stripped of their property, who would 
necessarily increase the unemployment and financial 
problems of other countries, or else witnessing in 
cold blood the forced extinction of 400,000 people. 
This choice is all the more tragic because of the high 
hopes,pinned on the Evian conference which, under 
the best of circumstances, can only explore a problem 
whese solution would call for the most difficult or- 
ganized migration of populations witnessed in mod- 


ern times. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


IMPASSE BLOCKS OIL SETTLEMENT 

Three months after Mexico’s expropriation of 
British and American oil companies, negotiations for 
settlement of the resulting international controversy 
were still deadlocked. With the hostility of the 
petroleum companies promoting an almost airtight 
boycott of Mexican oil in British and American mar- 
kets, it seemed likely that Mexico—despite President 
Cardenas’ aversion to transactions with the fascist 
states—would do business irrespective of ideological 
distinctions, following the practice made orthodox 
by the United States and Great Britain. On June 15 
it was announced that a New York firm had ar- 
ranged for the sale of 10,000,000 barrels of oil, 60 
per cent of the payment to be made in German ma- 
terials and machinery. Earlier shipments to Italy as 
well as Germany had been reported. 

Mexico has meanwhile continued efforts to come 
to terms with Washington. The Cardenas govern- 
ment submitted on May 26 its latest proposal for 
settlement of the petroleum debt. Details of the plan 
have been closely guarded, but it is reported to pro- 
vide that the approximately 60 per cent of Mexican 
oil production which is normally exported would be 
sold to the companies at a price considerably below 
that prevailing on the world market, the difference 
to be applied as payment for the expropriated 
properties. While the State Department was believed 
to consider the Mexican overture a reasonable basis 
for negotiation, progress seemed blocked by the 
unwillingness of the oil companies to consider any 


modification of their demands for unconditional re 
turn of the holdings. A Department of Commerce 
study made public at Washington on June 19 esti. 
mated direct American investments in the Mexican 
petroleum industry at $69,000,000, in contrast to the 
figures of $125,000,000 or $150,000,000 which have Vol 
hitherto been current. . 

Undeterred by disappointment abroad, President 
Cardenas has strengthened his position at home. The 
long-rumored revolt of General Saturnino Cedillo, 
chief hope of Mexico’s conservative anti-Cardenas 
forces, flared into action on May 20 in the state of 
San Luis Potosi. But the movement failed to win 
effective support, and within ten days the erstwhile} jy, 
governor had been driven into the hills, and his fol- 
lowers reduced to a few scattered guerrilla bands | — 
While prompt suppression of the revolt served to 





CA 


. . r , 
warn other potential candidates for rebellion, it by P 
no means purged Mexican politics of unregimenred 
factionalism. Right-wing elements in the single of V 


ficial Party of the Mexican Revolution have appar-] | 
ently become apprehensive during recent weeks} ™% 
concerning the growing influence of the labor move-| 
ment; and the majority bloc in the Chamber of Depu- | ™ 
ties has voiced strong opposition to a Cardenas. by 
sponsored civil service law, which accorded govern. } > 
ment employees the right to strike. th 


On the economic front the President has made less 
decisive gains. Oil production is now reported at 
approximately 65 per cent of its former total, a pro- 
portion estimated in some quarters as adequate to 
permit the government to break even on the cost of 
operation. But workers have not yet received the 
40-hour week, the wage increases and other benefits 
ordered by the Federal Labor Board during the con-| bt 
troversy with the private companies. For the time} ‘0 
being, however, union discipline and official pressure | © 
are expected to prove adequate to keep labor dis- | hé 





content within channels; and the industry continues T 
to operate under government management with ne | 2 
imminent portents of breakdown B 
CHARLES A. THOMSON r 

Canada Looks Abroad, by R. A. MacKay and E. B. Rogers. | 
New York, Oxford, 1938. $3.50 G 


Canada Looks Abroad, published under the auspices of 
the Canadian Institute of International Affairs, presents 
the first comprehensive survey of the Dominion’s external | ¥! 
relations. Carefully organized and objectively written, | tg 
with relevant documents and bibliography, it represents j 
a masterly handling of complex and difficult problems. 
Americans who are interested in the attitude of their} 4 
northern neighbors toward foreign affairs will find here] 9 
an intelligent and provocative approach to such problems 
as neutrality, collective security, and empire cooperation. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 35, June 24, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National li 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesiig Buett, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micnees Dean, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


e's) F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





