





ver 
Out 


ny, 
ital 
ves- 


» to 
ced 
ter- 
e Is 
rce. 
Jan- 
nu- 
e a 
But 
eral 

far 
out 


ash- 
the 


not 
and 
nef, 
the 


and | 


$ in 
Rus- 
yuld 
ong 
ora- 








—1946 


vl 1946 
BRMHMEAL ROOM 
CGNBRAL LIBRAR: 


uN1V. OF MIGR Entered as 2nd class matter 


Dr. William v. Eishop 


Y ff. De 


Untwnr 
i” 


=i? - 
¥elL Sk “7 - tf: ws 
*/ Of &.Colgan 


Library 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


4. 
hiaad ASoor, wich 
tle 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 84 


Jun 7, 1946 





BIG-THREE COMPETITION REFLECTED IN EUROPEAN ELECTIONS 


_ the Big Three are as yet unable to agree 
on the peace treaties that would rearrange the 
balance of power in Europe, they are viewing with 
the keenest interest the results of the national elec- 
tions recently held in Czechoslovakia, France and 
Italy. Despite the important local problems at stake, 
the dominant question in each case was whether the 
voters would gravitate toward Russia or toward the 
United States and Britain. With the issue thus clearly 
joined, not only Moscow, but Washington, London 
and the Vatican attempted to exercise some degree 
of influence in the elections to secure the results they 
desired. 

CZECHOSLOVAKIA CONFIRMS PRO-SOVIET 
POLICY. In the Czechoslovak elections of May 26 
the emergence of the Communists as the strongest 
party marked a success for Russia’s efforts to consol- 
idate its position in Eastern Europe. The victorious 
Communists won the largest vote of any single party, 
and they have named as Premier Klement Gottwald, 
aformer leader of the Comintern who spent the war 
years in Russia. To many Americans the results of 
these Czechoslovak elections have come as a shock. 
Not only has the United States generally assumed 
that no nation would freely choose a Communist 
Premier, but it has, somewhat complacently, clung 
tothe memory of its role as godparent of the Czecho- 
slovak republic during World War I. Americans 
have also tended to overlook the less flattering his- 
torical fact that the Czechoslovaks were deeply dis- 
illusioned with the West at Munich and assumed, 
tightly or wrongly, that Russia would have aided 
them against Hitler. Moreover, while the United 
States has talked only in general terms about a forth- 
coming economic agreement with Czechoslovakia, 
Moscow signed a bilateral trade treaty with Prague 
on April 10. 


FRENCH COMMUNISTS LOSE FIRST PLACE. 
In France the political current appears to be running 
in the opposite direction from that in Czechoslo- 
vakia. In the national elections held on June 2 to 
choose a new Constituent Assembly that will write 
a constitution to replace the draft rejected by a ma- 
jority of voters on May 5 — chiefly because its pro- 
visions for an all-powerful unicameral Assembly 
seemed to make possible domination by a Commu- 
nist minority—the moderate Catholic Popular Re- 
publican Movement (MRP) replaced the Commu- 
nists as the largest party. With the MRP in first 
place—but lacking a majority—the Communists run- 
ning second, and the Socialists third, the French will 
probably be obliged to form another provisional 
tripartite régime, headed this time by Georges 
Bidault, leader of the MRP and the present Foreign 
Minister. Although the French elections have con- 
firmed the anti-Communist trend indicated by the 
earlier referendum on the constitution, they have by 
no means assured France of greater political unity 
and stability. It will, in fact, be more difficult than 
ever for the MRP and Socialists to work with the 
Communists in the months ahead, for the recent 
electoral campaign was characterized by such rancor 
that virtually nothing remains of the common re- 
sistance front formed by these groups during the war. 

Neither will it be possible for the great powers to 
forget the subtle maneuvering in which they engaged 
in order to influence the French elections. Britain 
and the United States clearly sought by indirect inter- 
vention to counterbalance communism in France by 
special pre-electoral moves, while Russia aided the 
Communist party. By what must be regarded as more 
than mere coincidence Britain declared on May 30 
that it was going to arm a strong French air force 
with aircraft and equipment, and on May 28 the 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 





== 








United States announced its loan to France. According 
to the terms of the comprehensive Franco-American 
trade and financial agreement, which goes into im- 
mediate effect, a credit of approximately $1,400,000,- 
000 will be extended to France to aid in national re- 
construction. In addition, the cost of about $1,800,- 
000,000 worth of war-consumed lend-lease supplies 
will be cancelled, and the United States will sell 
_ France war surpluses valued at $1,400,000,000 for 
$300,000,000. 

In all fairness it should be pointed out that Wash- 
ington did not impose, either explicitly or implicitly, 
conditions of any kind on French domestic or for- 
eign policy in return for the loan. Yet the financial 
agreement was unavoidably ‘‘political’’ in the broad 
sense of the word, since the prospect of immediate 
economic aid from the United States encouraged 
rank-and-file voters in France to support moderate 
political groups. The French Communists, clearly 
aware of the political implications of the loan, at- 
tempted to offset its influence in behalf of their 
opponents by declaring that their efforts for indus- 
trial reconstruction had been responsible for the 
American decision to grant credits to France. And in 
a further attempt to minimize the importance of 
American aid, they claimed that the “electoral 


REVIVING EUROPE SETS COURSE TOWARD SOCIAL DEMOCRACY 


The results of post-war elections in many Euro- 
pean countries confirm the conclusions reported last 
winter by the Foreign Policy Association* that the 
prevailing trend on the continent is toward neither 
Right extremism nor communism. The middle-of- 
the-road social democracy which, with a very few 
exceptions, is gaining the ascendancy on the conti- 
nent in spite of the bitter heritage of civil hatreds, 
hunger and material destruction left in the wake of 
war, is composed of two major elements, both un- 
familiar to American politics: the Socialists (also 
known as Social Democrats) and the Catholic So- 
cialists (variously known as Christian Democrats, 
Christian Socialists or, as in France, Popular Re- 
publicans). 


SOCIAL DEMOCRACY IN ASCENDANCE. 
The first of these major parties owes its inspiration 
to the principles of Marxism. The second draws its 
ideals from a series of Papal encyclicals advocating 
social reforms from the time of Pope Leo XIII to the 
present day. Both these groups which, with varia- 
tions in relative strength, have won strong major- 
ities in Belgium, the Netherlands, France, Hungary, 
Austria, Norway and Denmark, as well as the United 
States zone of Germany, advocate nationalization of 
key enterprises affecting the public welfare, and both 
are fundamentally in agreement on the need for 





*See V. M. Dean, ‘Daily Contacts in Europe Aid Russo-Western Under- 
standing," Foreign Policy Bulletin, November 30, 1945; and idem, “U.S. 
Policy in Europe,’’ Foreign Policy Reports, January 15, 1946. 








Page Two 











—— 


wheat” which Russia has sent France during the pag 

two months has saved the nation’s bread ration. 
PAPAL INTERVENTION IN ITALY. In Itaj 
the efforts of the Big Three to influence the outcome 
of the first free national elections in nearly twenty. 
five years—the results of which had not been taby. 
lated as we went to press—were less direg 
than in France. At the same time, however, the fag 
that Britain and the United States opposed the col. 
lection of heavy reparations from Italy at the receng 
conference of Foreign Ministers and insisted tha 
Trieste remain an Italian city, while Foreign Com. 
missar Molotov supported the contrary point of view, 
was undoubtedly not overlooked by many Italia 
voters. But the most important intervention in the 
Italian elections was that of the Pope. In a broad. 
cast to the College of Cardinals on June 1, Pius XI] 
made the last in a series of pre-electoral appeals to 
the French and, more especially, to the Italians, 
against ‘‘state absolutism” and “the wreckers of 
Christian civilization.” Although the Pope mentioned 
no parties by name and refrained from referring to 
the monarchical issue in Italy, he delivered one of the 
strongest attacks against extreme Left political 
groups that the Papacy has made in recent decades. 
WINIFRED N. HADsEL 


far-reaching reforms that could assure not only po 
litical but also economic and social democracy. The 
most significant aspect of the gains made by these 
two parties is that their program appears revolution- 
ary to a majority of Americans, but is welcome to 
British Dominions like Australia and New Zealand 
as well as the Labor government of Britain, whose 
sweeping victory at the polls less than a year ago 


in effect strengthened the trend toward social de | 


mocracy on the continent. 

It is of the utmost importance that this should be 
understood in the United States, for hitherto opinion 
here has tended to view the struggle for power in 
Europe solely as a struggle between American democ 
racy and Russian communism. This view has to 
an increasingly dangerous extent obscured compre 
hension of developments on the continent, even 
among officials in Washington. In reality the strug: 
gle in Europe since the defeat of Nazism and Fas- 
cism has been between social democracy and com 
munism—and the United States, by its fear of any 
movement labeled “socialism” has again and again, 
while vigorously denouncing Russia, imperiled the 
very elements on the continent that are most sympa 
thetic to Western democracy, and most opposed to 
totalitarianism of either Right or Left. 


LEFTISM NOT ALL DUE TO RUSSIA. The 
apprehension aroused in London and Washington 


— 


Europ 
the fe 
streng 
ore 

ave 
c Hu 
for m 
of the 
by ad 
regar 











by Russia’s domination in the countries of Eastern 





S$ to 


of 
ned 
g to 
the 
tical 
des, 


pe 


hese 
“i0n- 
e to 
land 
hose 


de- 


d be 
nion 
r if 
moc: 
s to 
\pre- 
even 
‘rug: 
Fas- 
com: 
any 
Zain, 
the 
npa- 
d to 


gton 


stern 











——_ 
—_—_ 





Furope and the Balkans has led us to assume that in 
the few instances where Communists have shown 
strength this has been due entirely to Moscow’s 
propaganda or threat of force. This theory has been 
gravely undermined, on the one hand, by elections 
in Hungary and Austria, which rolled up majorities 
for moderate and even conservative parties in spite 
of the presence of Russian troops, and on the other 
by admittedly free elections in Czechoslovakia, long 
regarded as an outpost of the West, where the 
Communist party registered the highest gains won 
in any country of Europe. It is true that the prox- 
imity of Russia does exercise an influence on neigh- 
boring countries. But that influence may prove to be 
detrimental, and not necessarily favorable, to Rus- 
sia. At the same time it is entirely possible that, with- 
out interference by Russia, extreme Leftist move- 
ments will gain ground in countries where economic 
conditions are rapidly deteriorating, as in Austria, 
or which have little hope of finding economic stabil- 
ity except in cooperation with Russia, notably 
Czechoslovakia. It is this development which the 
United States has not sufficiently heeded. 

With the disappearance of Germany, which was 
both the principal market and the principal source 
of manufactured goods for Eastern Europe and the 
Balkans, these countries are confronted with the al- 
ternative of either obtaining substantial aid from the 
United States and Britain, or of entering the eco- 
nomic sphere of Russia. What we must realize is that 
the United States, before 1939, played only an insig- 
nificant role in the trade of these countries, for the 
most part backward producers of agricultural prod- 
ucts for which we have little need. Unless we 
either decide to make them gifts of manufactured 
goods or to open our markets to their products in 
payment for credits, we shall have to recognize the 
necessity they experience of trading with Russia. It 
is understandable that, in view of our major con- 
tribution to the common struggle for the defeat of 
the Axis powers, and of the undertakings made by 
Russia at Teheran and Yalta, we should feel that 
we have the right to demand free elections in coun- 
tries of Eastern Europe and the Balkans—notably 
Poland and Rumania—now governed by dictatorial 
tégimes that bar opposition activities, and to criti- 
ize conditions in Bulgaria and Yugoslavia, where 





For background on Siam’s protest to the United 
Nations, read— 
SIAM AND THE GREAT POWERS 
by Virginia Thompson 
A survey of the attempts of this small country—beset by 
powerful neighbors each imbued with imperialistic con- 
cepts—to live with the great powers on harmonious terms. 
25 cents 


March 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month 
Subscription $5.00; to F.P.A. members, $3.00 





Page Three 





~~ ——s 

















elections already held have proved unsatisfactory to 
us. But if we intervene in these countries against Rus- 
sia, we must do so with the knowledge that their 
peoples have hitherto lacked the economic well-being 
and minimum education that would enable them to 
make what we could acknowledge as “free” choices. 

IS U.S. POLICY IN EUROPE REALISTIC? There 
are many obvious reasons why the United States 
fears and distrusts Russia. But if this country, as 
some propose, should now adopt the position of re- 
garding war with Russia as inevitable—a view de- 
scribed by General Eisenhower on June 2 as “vicious” 
—it should do so at least with fuller understanding 
of the issues at stake in Europe than is now usually 
displayed. Historians will argue for years concern- 
ing the moot question whether Russia created an 
“eastern” bloc which inevitably brought about a 
“western bloc” or, as Mr. Churchill put it at Fulton, 
Mo., a “fraternal association” of the United States 
and Britain; or whether the Western powers, by se- 
crecy about the atomic bomb and attempts to acquire 
new strategic bases, fanned Moscow's fears of a 
Western coalition. What is clear is that, since the 
end of the war, the policy of the United States 
has been based, in rapidly increasing measure, on the 
assumption that Russia is the enemy of the Western 
world; and that setbacks for communism will bring 
about in Europe restoration or establishment of “free 
enterprise,” of capitalism, and of institutions pat- 
terned on American democracy. 

If that is, in fact, the basis of our policy in Europe, 
then we may soon discover that we are operating on 
assumptions that are not realistic. We cherish our 
way of life, find it peculiarly suited to our needs, 
and would understandably resent attempts by other 
countries to alter or destroy it. But it might be well 
for us to ask ourselves whether our way of life is 
equally suited for other countries whose experience 
differs from our own—for China, or India, or Russia, 
or even most of Europe? The choice today is not be- 
tween capitalism and communism. To an extent that 
will some day profoundly surprise us, the peoples of 
Europe, Asia and Latin America, while rejecting the 
totalitarianism of communism, find themselves out 
of sympathy with the materialism of American so- 
ciety, and are seeking a course that would combine 
political liberty and cultural and moral values with 
social and economic progress. In this respect—much 
as this, too, may surprise us—there is a closer “fra- 
ternal association” between the British under a Labor 
government and the social democratic régimes of 
Europe than between Britain and the United States; 
and a greater area of common experience between 
all those who in Europe suffered terror and starva- 
tion in the fight against Nazism, including the Rus- 


sians. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The second of two articles on possible next steps in disputed areas.) 





‘ 
gt 
rp; 
i 
Sea 
ie 
a. 
Bah) 
3 
if 
i 
| 
t 
4 
4 
é 
: 
H 
a 














Page Four 








—.. 
et 





UNSETTLED CONDITIONS CONFRONT CHINA-BOUND AMERICANS 


SHANGHAI, May 14.—What is probably the first 
American passenger ship to reach Shanghai since 
1941 has just discharged its Shanghai-bound trav- 
elers. We landed today, about 170 strong, after a 
15-day trip on the converted troop ship, Marine Fal- 
con. The passage has had special significance, for 
the arrival of this private vessel without commercial 
cargo is a step toward resuming normal communica- 
tions between China and the United States, severed 
by the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. 

UNCERTAINTY ABOUT CHINA. The pas- 
sengers on the Marine Falcon seemed about as ran- 
dom a group of persons with business in China as 
one is likely to find. Not all were United States citi- 
zens, for there were Chinese, British subjects, Cana- 
dians, Swedes, Swiss and others; but the 80-odd 
Americans who debarked at Shanghai are symbolic 
of America’s interest in China. They fall into four 
main categories: missionaries, government personnel 
(chiefly UNRRA, but also some soldiers), business- 
men, and a miscellaneous group consisting largely 
of the wives and children of men already working 
in China. 

It was encouraging to note that, while a patron- 
izing attitude toward China was shown by some pas- 
sengers, the “Old China Hand”’ spirit was not much 
in evidence. Many of the passengers were new to the 
field of Chinese affairs and had had no opportunity 
to acquire prejudices that pre-war treaty-port experi- 
ence frequently imparted to their predecessors. There 
was also an unspoken awareness that China in the 
long run will become a great power, despite current 
difficulties, and that foreigners who approach the 
Chinese in a condescending manner are out of step 
with the trend of events. But perhaps the main point 
is that the Western position in the Far East has been 
thoroughly shaken up, and no one on board was 
quite certain how his or her affairs would work out 
after we reached Shanghai. 

HOPES FOR THE FUTURE. Although uncer- 
tainty was a major theme, it was mingled with strong 
overtones of optimism and a desire to come to grips 
with the problems of operating in China. The mis- 
sionaries in the main looked forward to building 
anew, although many of their hospitals, schools and 
church buildings were destroyed during the war. 
Particularly interesting was the Episcopalian deacon- 
ness who, under a cooperative arrangement with the 
China Aid Council, a relief organization in New 
York, carried with her a quantity of penicillin cul- 
tures as well as various materials useful in the de- 


velopment of penicillin. These supplies will be 
utilized partly by Mme. Sun Yat-sen, widow of the 
great Chinese nationalist leader, in her medical work 
and partly by the deaconness, who will take her share 
to Hankow which, she hopes, will become a center 
for penicillin production and distribution in Wes 
Central China. 

The UNRRA group of some 20 men and women 
reflected the variety of rehabilitation, as well as re 
lief tasks undertaken by that organization. There 
were specialists in child care, relief administration 
and social work, a public health nursing consultant, 
an oral surgeon, a radio engineer, a distribution 
supervisor, various administrators and others. 

The comparatively small business group consisted 
of individual traders, as well as technical and office 
staff people for firms like the National City Bank, 
British-American Tobacco Co., Socony Oil, etc. This 
slight business representation reflects principally the 
caution with which American and other foreign 
firms are viewing the chaotic political and eco. 
nomic conditions of postwar China. Although China 
offers a field of operations for some importers and 
exporters and for certain of the larger companies, 
the dominant current note seems to be one of caution 
in approaching this market. 


NEED TO UNDERSTAND CRUCIAL ISSUES. 
The effectiveness of individual Americans in China 
in the years ahead will depend largely on the political 
and economic conditions under which they will have 
to operate, especially those affecting Russo-American 
relations. Yet there was virtually no discussion of 
crucial Far Eastern issues among the passengers— 
partly because the news supplied to the ship by radio 
in two weeks of bulletins contained but one brief 
reference to China, and partly because of the new. 
ness of many of the people to the China field. 

Nevertheless, the absence of vigorous concer 
about the issues confronting American policy-makers 
in China cannot but be disturbing. The role of the 
United States in Far Eastern affairs is indicated by 
the many cargo ships and naval vessels anchored in 
Shanghai waters, as well as by the smaller American 
naval craft which swarm in the harbor. But mere 
physical power will not be enough to make an in- 
telligent, effective policy possible if Americans in 
general show a lack of awareness and active interest 
in current Chinese conditions. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(Mr. Rosinger is spending four months in China and Japan 
gather first-hand material for FPA publications.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 34, Jung 7, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


ee 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera Micueres DBAN, 
Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Yeat. 


Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 





_ *: 





Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





191 


perec 


durit 
selve 


nava 
have 
Unit 
of p 
at th 
plan 


navi; 
dimi 


pows 


