2h Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 
go nee P 
wy, W FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
9" 


; 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
i” 
IN. 


BB8 It 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An int ion of current international events by the Research Staff 





rita] | Vou. XVIII, No. 42 


AvucustT 11, 1939 





— 


AUG 16 1930 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 

















l ay ibrar 
a RAW MATERIAL RESOURCES OF LATIN AMERICA General Lib y 
om. by Howard J]. Trueblood University of Michigan 
0th What are the raw material resources of Latin America? 
This survey analyzes them from the standpoint of present whav. Hichticafi 
The production and future potentialities, and deals with the Ann Arbor, Michiga 
lave important questions of control and markets. Particular 
sult attention is paid to commodities of strategic significance 
ef to the United States. 
L ef. 
em. August 1 issue of FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS .. . 25 cents 
NuUst =, 








1 of 





ra EUROPE PREPARES FOR A CRISIS 





al — Parliament has adjourned until 
Pro. October 3 and Prime Minister Chamberlain 
dent} has retired to his retreat in Scotland, no relaxa- 
9} tion in international tension is expected. The British 
are vigilant and determined not to be caught nap- 


yi} ping. Mr. Chamberlain sent Parliament on vaca- 
een} tion over the vigorous protests of a considerable 
y 26 group of Conservatives as well as the customary 
din} Labor and Liberal Opposition. The vote against ad- 
eral journment might have been still larger in the absence 
the) of encouraging reports from the fields of armament 
tra} and diplomacy. Current airplane production is 
tea} reported to be surpassing that of the Reich; the 
the} number of warships under construction this year 
0) constitutes an all-time record; and only recently, on 
sold August 2, the government made public its plan to 
otal} build 180 more small vessels, largely to combat the 
xi} menace of submarine warfare. The negotiations for 
the} an alliance with the Soviet Union, moreover, received 
was! new impetus by an announcement on July 31 that 
Ss an imposing Anglo-French military mission was be- 


ing sent to Moscow for conversations with the Soviet 
Srl} General Staff. 


on THE DANZIG CONFLICT. It is too early to say 
that these developments have minimized the pros- 
pects for war this autumn. The conflict over Danzig 
Har| iS dangerously acute, with both sides occupying such 

| itreconcilable positions that no retreat is possible 
8 at | without irreparable loss of prestige. Hitler stands 
— | definitely committed to bring the Danzig population 
are} | home to the Reich,” and Poland is just as resolutely 
lyses| determined to resist any change in the status of the 
opie Free City. Nor is there any equivocation this time in 
the Franco-British pledges to support Poland. The 
——} situation in Danzig seems to be heading rapidly to- 
siow’'| ward a crisis. The city has been militarized to a large 
degree: barracks have been erected, considerable 


quantities of men and arms smuggled in, and prep- 








arations made to bring in German troops in order 
to head off a possible Polish occupation. 

It is doubtful whether Poland can long tolerate 
the present developments in Danzig without being 
confronted in the end with a fait accompli. Its own 
economic and financial situation may also compel 
decisive action in the near future. A poor country 
like Poland cannot indefinitely maintain one million 
men under arms without serious drain on its re- 
sources. While the Polish government has received 
a British credit of £8,163,000 for the purchase of 
war materials, this amount represents only a small 
fraction of its current arms expenditures. Moreover, 
the Poles have so far been unable to obtain an addi- 
tional gold loan of £5,000,000 which is badly needed 
to bolster the zloty. 


In the face of this situation the renewed fillip 
given the Anglo-French negotiations with Russia be- 
comes extremely important. Without Soviet aid it 
would be almost impossible to save Poland from 
being overrun by the German army, or to cut the 
Reich off from the supply of Swedish iron ore so 
indispensable to its war economy. The departure of 
the Anglo-French military mission for Moscow on 
August 5 indicates at least that the Soviet govern- 
ment is still interested in the formation of an “anti- 
aggression front’ and that Britain has finally yielded 
to Moscow’s desire for the simultaneous conclusion 
of military and political accords. At the same time, 
however, William Strang, the British Foreign Office 
expert, is returning home from Moscow after seven 
weeks’ negotiations without having removed the ob- 
stacles in the way of a political agreement. The chief, 
and apparently only, difficulty is still the definition 
of “indirect aggression.” Moscow envisages the 
possibility of gradual German infiltration in the 
Baltic states which might make these countries satel- 
lites of the Reich and possible bases for an attack 











on Russia. While the British government recognizes 
this danger, it wants to define more precisely the 
exact circumstances under which action to ward off 
indirect aggression would be warranted. The settle- 
ment of this question is particularly difficult because 
all the Baltic countries are united in resisting ‘‘pro- 
tective measures” by any combination of powers 
which would impair their independence and make 
them mere pawns in the European struggle for power. 


GERMANY’S DILEMMA. Meanwhile, the Reich 
is in a quandary. The Nazi leaders must realize 
that events are no longer playing into their hands. 
Faced with the prospect that Britain and France 
will increasingly outstrip German armament pro- 
duction, the government may consider this fall the 
best time to strike. The Reich’s industrial, labor 
and fiscal reserves are approaching exhaustion, and 
there are many signs of economic deterioration, even 
if a collapse can hardly be expected. Yet, within 
limits, the Reich still has the advantage of being 
able to select the time and direction of its next ad- 
vance. It may try to confound its opponents by let- 
ting September pass without a major crisis, and then 
unleash a surprise offensive later in the fall. Again, 
it may decide that the Polish issue is too hot to 
handle for the moment and turn its attention to the 
Balkans where only two countries have received a 
British guarantee and the waters are troubled enough 
to provide good fishing. There is as yet no assur- 
ance that the Jugoslav Regent will approve the re- 
cent provisional agreement to settle the conflict 
between Serbs and Croats which has long menaced 
the internal unity of Jugoslavia; and the Croat 
leader, Dr. Matchek, has threatened to invoke the 
help of Germany unless the issue is settled once and 
for all. In Hungary the Nazis and the government 
are.at odds, and it may not be long before the for- 
mer also send an appeal to Berlin. That the road 
of German economic expansion is still open in South- 
eastern Europe was illustrated only recently by the 
signature of two agreements providing for German 
collaboration in the exploitation of Rumania’s 
forestry and agricultural resources. Despite its cur- 
rent difficulties Germany still hopes to find ways 
and means to extend its Lebensraum. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


BRITISH “APPEASEMENT” AT TOKYO? 


Prime Minister Chamberlain’s cautious reply to 
Mr. Noel Baker’s interpellation on the Far East can 
hardly be reassuring to those members of Parlia- 
ment who have been demanding a stronger stand 


Page Two = 





ccomernaaeecat —.., 
— 





in the Tokyo negotiations. The casual reference tp 
the remote possibility of a dispatch of the British 
fleet to Far Eastern waters was made in a contey 
designed to indicate the unlikelihood of such action, 
Obviously the whole British fleet cannot be sent ty 
the Far East, but the combined Anglo-French navig 
would appear strong enough to permit some strength. 
ening of the present weak forces at Singapore and 
Hongkong. By openly stressing the defenselessnes 
of the. British position in the Far East, Mr. Cham. 
berlain has played into the hands of the more reck. | 
less Japanese army elements in China. His speech | 
was delivered on August 4; two days later, Japanese 
air raiders destroyed two British steamers in the | 

Yangtze River near Ichang. Since the steamers were 

moored several miles below Ichang, at a recognized 

anchorage for foreign shipping, the attack can hardly 

be defended as accidental. Meanwhile the blockade | 
of the foreign Concessions at Tientsin has again | 
been tightened, and the general effort to drive | 
British nationals from North China has continued, | 





Mr. Chamberlain’s speech, made when Parliament 
was preparing to adjourn for two months, raises im. 
portant questions concerning the future course of 
the Anglo-Japanese negotiations at Tokyo. It tends 
to confirm previous reports that the four Chinese 
suspects whom the Japanese wish to place on trial 
in the puppet régime’s courts will be surrendered by 
the British authorities in the ultimate settlement. | 
Additional terms not yet fully disclosed indicate that 
the Japanese will also be admitted to a share in the 
policing of the British Concession at Tientsin. There 
is no sign that these agreements have been utilized 
to win Japanese concessions on the important silver 
and currency issues at stake in the negotiations. The 
Japanese negotiators are still demanding that the 
British hand over the Chinese government's silver, 
held in Tientsin, to the puppet authorities at Peiping, 
and that the British “cooperate” in supporting the 
Japanese-sponsored currency in North China. De. 
cision on these issues must be reached within the } 
next few weeks. Was Mr. Chamberlain preparing 
the members of Parliament for an eventual sur | 
render on the currency question? At no point in his | 
address was there a specific disavowal of that pos | 
sibility. He made it clear, moreover, that the British 
government has no immediate intention of abrogat- 
ing the Anglo-Japanese commercial treaty, and thus 
aligning itself with the United States in practical 
measures to secure Japanese respect for foreiga | 
rights and interests in China. 





T. A. BIsson 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 42, AuGust 11, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHeLtes Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


>_> 





National 








FC 


— 

VoL. 

— 
if 





