





























ion 
ent 
ich 
rid 


ng, 
ary 


ge 
nsit 


JAN 24 '45 
Entered as 2nd class matter 








[FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 





FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





You. XXIV, No. 14 


January 19, 1945 





through Poland—cynically discounted in advance 
by critics of the U.S.S.R—brings once more into 
focus Russia’s relations with its Western allies. To- 
tay some Americans want to know why the United 
States, before extending lend-lease aid to Moscow, 
did not exact a promise from Stalin that he would 
deal with the small nations of Eastern Europe in ac- 
@rdance with our ideas on the subject. This is a 
tantalizing historical hypothesis, but it only shows 
how short our memory is apt to be. 


EXTREMES OF VIEWS ON RUSSIA. When 
Germany invaded Russia on June 22, 1941 it was a 
day of unalloyed relief for Britain, which up to that 
time (and this, too, we are beginning to forget) had 
been fighting Germany alone for over a year. Brit- 
ain's struggle had provoked our warmest admiration 
and had caused us to give the British lend-lease aid, 
but had not brought us actively into the war. For 
the United States, Russia’s participation in the war 
held the promise that beleaguered Britain would not 
succumb to Germany. If there was anything we felt 
like asking of Russia at that time, it was that it 
should keep on fighting. 

When we first extended lend-lease aid to Russia 
on October 30, 1941, the Germans were at the gates 
of Moscow. We were then hardly in a position, even 
had we wanted to, to impose terms on Stalin. We, 
and the British, breathed a sigh of relief when the 
Germans began to retreat. Our materials were just 
beginning to trickle into Russia when the siege of 
Stalingrad was lifted in 1942. We applauded every 
Subsequent Russian advance. Yet when Moscow 
pressed for the opening of a second front in Europe, 
many Americans thought the Russians uncouth in 
their blunt demands. When the Russians approached 
the borders of countries conquered by Germany, 
Which Russia alone was in 4 geographic and military 
position to liberate, doubts and suspicions began to be 





RUSSIA’S WORLD OUTLOOK AFFECTED BY EXPERIENCE WITH UNRRA 


P| HE opening of the Russian winter offensive 


voiced about the possible effects of Russian victories 
and Moscow’s ultimate purposes in Europe. Nazism 
had not yet been defeated. Yet already many people, 
some of whom had whole-heartedly favored appease- 
ment of Germany, had begun to predict a war be 
tween the Western allies and Russia—only to ask 
peremptorily, following our own setbacks in West- 
ern Europe, why the Russians were so slow about 
opening a front in Poland to relieve German pres- 
sure on our forces. 

These doubts and suspicions have not been al- 
layed by Russia’s participation in one international 
conference after another—from the food conference 
at Hot Springs to the security conference at Dum- 
barton Oaks. If the Russians attend, its critics fear 
Moscow is trying to bore from within. If they absent 
themselves, as they did in the case of the Chicago 
Aviation Conference, it is assumed that they must be 
nurturing sinister designs against the West. 

What is the answer to all the riddles about Rus- 
sia that are being propounded at this time? The 
Russians certainly are not saints, as some early West- 
ern discoverers of the Soviet system had, in an excess 
of ill-informed zeal, sometimes proclaimed. But 
neither are they satanic supermen. Even in the Krem- 
lin there are divergences of views about the foreign 
policy Russia should pursue at this moment, one of 
the most critical and decisive in human history. Even 
in that outwardly regimented country there are some 
who place the accent on nationalism and isolation- 
ism, and others who favor international cooperation. 

UNRRA’S ATTITUDE TOWARD RUSSIA. Rus- 
sia’s decision, like our own, will not be reached in a 
vacuum. It will be affected by a shrewd estimate of 
the attitude other countries may be expected to as- 
sume toward Russia—not now, when the United Na- 
tions need Russia’s military might both in Europe 
and Asia, but after the war, when this need may 
have disappeared. In particular, Moscow’s policy on 

















DT i tel ee 


oo OO eee 


the all-i issue of collective security will be 
ined by its experience in international organ- 
izations that are already functioning. 
It is all the more unfortunate, under the circum- 
Russia's experi i i 
and Rehabilitation Administration 
encouraging. Many factors can be ad- 
duced to explain the situation. UNRRA itself, built 
igh hopes that the need of some peoples for 
the humanitarian urge of others to relieve 
would be powerful stimulants to cooperation 
nations, has so far found it impossible to 
get much beyond the blueprint stage. Ships and sup- 
plies, urgently needed for the prosecution of the 
war, are hard to get. Most of the areas in acute need 


i 


ernment-in-exile and the Lublin Committee recog- 
nized by Russia as the Provisional Government of 
Poland. ' 
CAN UNRRA STALEMATE BE BROKEN? 
Every one acquainted with former Governor Herbert 
H. Lehman, Director General of UNRRA, will tes- 
tify to his humanitarian ideals and his desire to 
make the international organization he heads fulfill 
its high mission. But no one concerned with the fate 
of the conquered peoples, and with the future of in- 
ternational organization, can view with equanimity 
the stalemate UNRRA appears to have reached, 
notably in its relations with Russia. And part, at 
least, of the responsibility for this stalemate must 


MacARTHUR CAMPAIGN PROMISES EARLY INDEPENDENCE FOR FILIPINOS 


American naval and air superiority has made pos- 
sible General MacArthur's Philippine operations and 
is essential to their ultimate success. Assuming that 
this superiority is maintained, liberation of the Phil- 
ippines seems a foregone conclusion. This liberation 
would cut the Japanese empire in two, depriving 
Japan of oil, rubber and other vital supplies from 
the Dutch and British Indies. 

A thorough student of military history like Gen- 
eral MacArthur is doubtless fully aware of his debt 
to sea power, although he has not stressed it in his 
communiqués. His unhackneyed strategy and his em- 
ployment of the element of surprise have proved 
brilliantly effective against an enemy who plans 
meticulously but has never shown aptitude for deal- 
ing with unforeseen situations. General MacArthur 
also may recall Frederick the Great’s remark that it 
is easier to make war in one’s own country, where 
every citizen is a guerrilla or an intelligence agent, 
than in that of the enemy. This is approximately the 


be laid at the door of UNRRA. On its staff are 

men and women inspired by ideals and possessing 
valuable technical skills. But it also numbers, in key 
policy-making positions, Americans who, possessing 
no knowledge of international affairs, no experience 
in negotiations with foreign nations, have brought 
about a situation in which the Russian members of 
the organization find themselves sidetracked, shor 
of authority, frustrated and thwarted at every tum, 
(The same thing, it should be added, is true of other 
non-Americans in UNRRA.) Russia is in need of t¢. 
lief for its liberated areas. Relief, too, is needed for 
the areas of Poland and Czechoslovakia freed by the 
Russians. It is true that the Russians are not always 
easy to deal with. But the anti-Russian bias revealed 
by some of the American officials of the organization 
only serves to reinforce Russia’s suspicions, carried 
over from the last war, that relief may come to be 
used as a political weapon. The result is that the 
Russians are relying on their own efforts, however 
limited, for such relief as they can give the people 
of their liberated areas. 

It is international organization, not Russia, that 
stands to lose most by the inadequacies of UNRRA. 
Machinery of international cooperation is only as 
good as the people who make it work. UNRRA, if 
left in the hands of political opportunists concerned 
primarily with personal power, could become a 
tragic warning against international organization. If 


well-administered by people experienced both in re | 


lief and in the problems of other countries, it could 
still become a steppingstone toward cooperation 
among nations in the wider field of collective secur- 
ity, in which the United States needs Russia as much 
as Russia needs us. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


situation in the Philippines today, and has been in 
some parts of the islands ever since Pearl Harbor. 

JAPAN FAILS TO CONQUER FILIPINOS. For 
security reasons, the full story of Filipino resistance 
during Japanese occupation is not yet available. It 
may be said, however, that more than half the archi 
pelago was never subject to Japanese rule; that some 
guerrillas carried on regular governments, evet 
maintaining a postal system; and that Japanese ef 
forts to build an auxiliary army from the old Philip 
pine constabulary failed completely. Many months 
ago radio contact was established by General Mac 
Arthur and the Commonwealth government-in-exile 
with resistance groups. The futile and sometime 
harmful short-wave broadcasts from America, which 
had promised aid “within six months,” were sue 
ceeded by realistic military and political directions 
from Genera! MacArthur, the late President Quezon, 
President Osmefia, and Brigadier General Carlos 
Romulo. 





@ feel 











ESmep,p Bene reR FRAERTABBARR SRE SAR SSO = 


65 8 


oy 


ed 
B: 








Japanese attempts to influence the people by prop- 
aganda, by the use of Japanese “Catholics” from the 
army's religious section, by lessons in the Japanese 
language, and by the Kalibapi (local spies) and 
neighborhood groups, were largely nullified by bru- 
tal military measures, personal indignities such as 
slapping Filipinos in the face, food shortages, meas- 
ures to deprive the ¢aos of their cherished bolos, and 
efforts to indoctrinate a Malayan people with the 
bleak code which Japanese militarists profess and 
often practice. An amusing sidelight on their at- 
tempts to popularize the “co-prosperity sphere” is 
the fact that in Tagalog “co” means “my,” which 
was apparently overlooked by the earnest propagan- 
dists from Tokyo. It is safe to assume that, except 
for a few paid spies and a handful of genuine “Pan- 
Asiatics,"’ Filipino cooperation with our forces will 
be complete. 


The collaborationist problem is also unlikely to 
prove difficult by comparison with similar problems 
in Europe. There are no ideological differences 
among Filipinos, with the attendant bitterness which 


| divides right and left wing groups elsewhere. Al- 


though nearly a thousand important officials of Pres- 
ident Osmefia’s party, the Nacionalista, have held 
office under the Japanese, the great majority are be- 
lieved to have been out of sympathy with their con- 
querors. Many have kept in touch with the guerril- 
las; some were designated for that purpose by the 
Commonwealth government before the fall of Cor- 
tegidor. Tension developed on Leyte after the Amer- 
icans landed, when guerrilla leaders sought the pun- 
ishment of alleged collaborationists, and President 
Osmefia’s plan for a commission to examine these 
cases was suspended. General MacArthur apparent- 
ly cut the Gordian knot by proclaiming on December 
30 that he would hold collaborationists in military 
confinement for the duration of the war, and then 
tun them over to the Philippine government for 
trial. This delay, which will give time for passions 
to subside, undoubtedly had the willing approval of 





JUST PUBLISHED— 


CONGRESS AND FOREIGN POLICY 
by Blair Bolles 


25c 


January 15 issue of Forgicn Poticy Reports 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











— Page Three SS 








President Osmefia. As this will protect collabora- 
tionists from any immediate reprisals, it will not be 
surprising to see many of them—including members 
of José Laurel’s puppet cabinet—seeking sanctuary 
behind the American lines as soon as they can elude 
their Japanese masters. 


ISLANDS’ ECONOMIC PROBLEMS. Economic 
problems would seem to be more important than 
political issues. President Osmefia, who has just re- 
turned to Washington, has intimated that he will 
seek a free trade treaty with America as soon as the 
Tydings Act expires in 1946, or before. Immediate 
shortages, however, are acute and will be more so— 
a mass evacuation of Manila is already reported un- 
derway because of food scarcity. With inter-island 
transportation almost nonexistent and land traffic 
disorganized, relief may prove a heavy burden on 
overtaxed American shipping. Yet, as most Filipinos 
live on the land, widespread famine conditions need 
not be anticipated. 


The announced policy of the American govern- 
ment is to turn over administration of liberated 
areas to the Commonwealth as soon as the military 
situation permits. A recent suggestion of President 
Osmefia that complete independence be granted, if 
militarily feasible, by November 1945, would appear 
desirable from several points of view. Provision al- 
ready has been made by Congressional resolutions of 
June 30, 1944 for advancing independence from the 
previously determined date of 1946, and for the ac- 
quisition of land, sea and air bases by the United 
States. The Philippine Congress extant when Japan 
invaded the islands would still be legally able to 
function. More important than this, however, an 
early grant of independence would be a formal 
acknowledgment of the loyal support the Filipino 
people have given the United States, despite dangers 
and disillusionments, throughout the war. This re- 
lationship has had few, if any, parallels in the his- 
tory of colonial government, and its culmination 
in independence would have a profound effect 
among Asiatic peoples who may still be subject to 
Japanese rule. 

WALTER WILGUS 





Indian Crisis: The Background, by John S. Hoyland. New 
York, Macmillan, 1943. $2.00 


A British missionary and educator in India discusses 
Indian politics and life from a pro-nationalist point of 
view. A useful survey, based on intimate personal knowi- 
edge. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 14, January 19, 1945. 


tt Memth for change of address on membership publications. 





Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated: National 


Headguartérs, 22 Ease 39th Screer, New York 16, N. Y. Pranx Ross McCoy, Presidext; Donotmy F. Luzgt, Seeretery; Vena Micueies Daan, Editor. Eavered as 
mcoa@lass matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
=> Produced under union conditions and composed and pristed by union labor. 














Washington News Letter Seal 





VANDENBERG CALLS FOR LASTING MILITARY COMMITMENTS 


The notable address on foreign affairs which Sen- 
ator Arthur Vandenberg, Republican of Michigan, 
made in the Senate on January 10 has a dual political 
character. Senator Vandenberg points out the in- 
escapable need for international collaboration when 
he says: “I do not believe that any nation hereafter 
can immunize itself by its own exclusive action.” At 
the same time his statement, valuable today, may 
prove harmful tomorrow, for it contains a list of dif- 
ficult conditions which Senator Vandenberg would 
require our allies to accept as the price of treaty as- 
sociation with them. Those conditions could, under 
adverse circumstances, become the modern counter- 
part of the reservations with which Senator Henry 
Cabot Lodge prevented acceptance of the League of 
Nations Covenant by this country in 1919. 

USEFUL EFFECTS OF ADDRESS. Prevailing 
opinion in Washington, however, is that the current 
good outweighs the possible ill effects of Vanden- 
berg’s address. Through its tolerant understanding 
of world problems and its restatement of American 
idealism, it can strengthen President Roosevelt in the 
conference he is expected to have with Prime Min- 
ister Churchill and Marshal Stalin after Inauguration 
Day. By drawing attention to the primary security 
interests of our allies—the elimination of any future 
military threat from Germany and Japan—Vanden- 
berg has demonstrated to the other United Nations 
that there are influential persons in the United States 
outside the Administration who understand their 
problems. 

The address marks a further step toward that co- 
operation of Republicans and Democrats on issues 
of foreign policy which cautiously began to develop 
last summer through talks between Secretary of State 
Cordell Hull and John Foster Dulles, foreign affairs 
adviser to Governor Thomas E. Dewey. The out- 
standing accomplishment of this cooperation was to 
temper irritation in the United States over the unilat- 
eral actions of Britain and Russia in Europe, and to 
redefine the meaning of the war in the idealistic 
terms used in earlier years by the Administration. 

For these various reasons President Roosevelt dis- 
suaded Democratic Congressional leaders from criti- 
cizing the address, although their reluctance to let a 
Republican score a triumph and their doubts about 
the value of some of Vandenberg’s proposals caused 
them at first to consider a deprecating reply. At the 
same time the President discouraged the holding of 


a debate on the good points made by Vandenberg, 
one of which Mr. Roosevelt has shown no intention 
of heeding until after the meeting of the three heads 
of state. Vandenberg urged that the President “speak 
out” in public to our people and our allies on for. 
eign policy. The President’s view is reported to be 
that anything official said now might disturb the out. 
look for a successful Big-Three meeting. His In. 
augural Address on January 20 will show whether 
he has revised this view. 

DEMILITARIZATION TREATY PLAN. The 
Vandenberg address contained not only a message but 
a plan. The prospects for political realization of the 
plan as Vandenberg presented it are slight, because 
with it he associated conditions that might make col- 
lective peace-making impossible. The Senator urged 
that the “major allies” agree to a “hard and fast 
treaty” to keep Germany and Japan “permanently 
demilitarized.” But, in return, he wants an agree. 
ment from Britain and Russia that they will submit 
for review to the security organization, not yet estab 
lished, the unilateral frontier settlements (Poland), 
and the bilateral security agreements (between Rus 
sia and Britain, Russia and Czechoslovakia, Russia 
and France) that European powers have made dur. 
ing the war. There is no indication here that our 
allies will agree to this bargain. Britain has appre 
hensions about this country’s post-war economic pol- 
icy, France remains cool toward the United States, 
and Russia still doubts our intention to embrace ef- 
fective collective security. The conditions proposed 
by Senator Vandenberg mix the German and Jap 
anese problems with the larger problem of future 
world security. 

Vandenberg weakened his plan by express 
ing doubts about the likelihood that the United 
States would become an active participant in an it- 
ternational security organization. Moreover, he stil 
opposes granting the American delegate to an intef- 
national organization the right to order the use of 
American troops without previous consultation with 
Congress—a proviso that would greatly reduce the 
efficacy of the Security Council proposed at Dumbar 
ton Oaks. Since a German demilitarization treaty, 
however, would bring the allies more closely te 
gether, both now and after the war, it is considered 
possible here that some such agreement might be 
reached, but without the conditions suggested by 
Vandenberg. BLAIR BOLLES 


FOR VICTORY * BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 














