


a. 


7: % 


. 
‘ 


= 
‘ 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





”§6—Ca+6L 


You. XIX, No. 21 


Marcu 15, 1940 





PERIODICAL ROOM Rocered ss socend 
GENERA! 1 ro ary . ae er 
UNIV. : Office at New York, 
j N. Y., under the act 

MAP CO aag 1879. 














NEW HOMES FOR OLD 
Public Housing in Europe and America 
By William V. Reed and Elizabeth Ogg 


“A magnificent job of condensing the problem and 
the promise of shelter into 116 pages, with over 90 
photographs and charts.”—-Common Sense Magazine 


Headline Book No. 21... . 25 cents 


General Library 
f Michigan 


9 at *% * 
Unsiverssty ° 


*¢ 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 








——e 





EUROPEAN POWERS STRUGGLE OVER FINLAND 


— 





AS diplomatic, military and economic lines are 
tightened in Europe from the Arctic to the 
Black Sea, there is an almost equal chance that the 
conflagration which has so far been damped down 
except in Poland and Finland will suddenly flare up 
or, with equal suddenness, will be checked once more 
by peace negotiations. Both in Scandinavia and in the 
Near East the Allied conflict with Germany seems 
on the point of merging into an Allied conflict with 
the Soviet Union. And conversely, should peace 
“break out” on any sector of Europe's fronts, it might 
possibly be widened into discussion of a general 
settlement. 

MOSCOW PEACE NEGOTIATIONS. During 
the past week the efforts of both neutrals and bel- 
ligerents converged on Finland, which had become 
the testing-ground of all the conflicting forces in 
Europe. Soviet-Finnish negotiations, officially opened 
on March 7 when a Finnish delegation headed by 
Premier Risto Ryti arrived in Moscow, were launched 
under such outwardly diverse auspices as those of 
Sweden, Germany and the United States. Among 
the many go-betweens who paved the way for the 
Moscow conference, the ones most in the limelight 
were the Swedish explorer Sven Hedin, one of 
Hitler's frequent visitors; the Swedish industrialist, 
Axel Wenner-Gren, who was recalled from a vaca- 
tion in Nassau by a message from Marshal Goering 
and, after traveling on the same boat as Mr. Welles, 


, happened to be in Berlin when the American envoy 


teached that capital; Per Svinhufvud, former Presi- 
dent of Finland, who saw Herr von Ribbentrop in 
Berlin just before the German Foreign Minister left 
for Rome; and Lawrence A. Steinhardt, American 
Ambassador to Moscow (formerly Minister to Swe- 
den) who, following the luncheon tendered to him 
by Premier Molotov on February 28, held several 
conversations with the Soviet Foreign Office and 
leading diplomats in Moscow, and placed his Em- 


bassy at the disposal of the Finnish delegation. 

Out of the welter of contradictory reports gen- 
erated by the first news of Soviet-Finnish negotia- 
tions emerged the impression that Moscow had not 
surrendered its original demands regarding cession of 
Hangoe and Petsamo, and was insisting on acquisi- 
tion of Viborg—which had not yet been occupied 
by Soviet troops and, according to Finnish legend, 
has always marked the furthermost limit of Russian 
invasion. In addition, Moscow was said to be de- 
manding guarantees from Finland and Sweden 
against any attack through their territory. Neutral 
circles derived some satisfaction from the fact that, 
by agreeing to negotiate with the Ryti government, 
the Kremlin had abandoned its earlier claim that it 
would recognize no régime in Finland other than 
the ‘‘People’s Government” of Orto Kuusinen, es- 
tablished under its auspices in Terijoki on Decem- 
ber 1. This satisfaction was short-lived, since on 
March 10 the Moscow radio renewed its attacks on 
the “capitalistic government” of Ryti, and called on 
the Finns to join “the Kuusinen People’s army.” 

FINLAND’S CHOICE. The stake of Finland, 
Sweden, Germany and Russia in a possible peace is 
fairly clear. Finland is confronted with a choice be- 
tween continuing a lone fight against overwhelming 
odds, at the risk of subjecting its population and 
economic resources to destruction, or accepting the 
best terms Moscow may offer. It would be too early 
to assume, however, that such a peace would long be 
compatible with Finnish or Swedish independence. 
The very fear of “encirclement” which was invoked 
to justify Hitler’s occupation of Sudetenland and 
Stalin’s original demands on Finland inevitably dic- 
tates further expansion to prevent fresh possibilities 
of “‘encirclement’’—until the expanding power meets 
with overwhelming resistance. If it may be assumed 
that Moscow's principal objective is to assure the 
strategic security of Leningrad against hostile attack 











from a base on the Gulf of Finland, then that ob- 
jective will not have been achieved either with Hel- 
sinki’s acceptance of Stalin’s reported terms, or even 
with complete conquest of Finland. As in the days 
of Peter the Great, its fulfillment may necessitate a 
Soviet thrust in the direction of Norway's Atlantic 
seaboard. The Russian people are essentially non- 
militaristic, and Stalin’s formula of preserving peace 
to “build socialism in one country” had, until the 
Finnish campaign, been in harmony with the na- 
tional temper. But it must be borne in mind that, in 
spite of the Soviet-German pact, Moscow remains 
convinced the “first workers’ republic in the world” 
will eventually have to defend itself against an anti- 
Communist crusade launched by Germany with or 
without the cooperation of the Allies. It is significant 
both that the Gest Soviet approach regarding peace 
negotiations with Finland was made through Britain 
on February 22, rather than through Germany as 
might have been expected if Moscow was working 
hand in glove with Berlin; and that one of the sub- 
jects reported to have been discussed by Herr von 
Ribbentrop during his call on the Pope was the pos- 
sibility of a crusade against Bolshevism. 

Further Soviet expansion in Scandinavia might en- 
counter the opposition of Britain and Germany, both 
equally interested in the iron ore resources and strate- 
gic bases of this area. The British government, after 
apparently rejecting the Hore-Belisha proposal for 
the creation of a Scandinavian theatre of war, was 
spurred by the Moscow peace negotiations into of- 
fering to send an expeditionary force to Finland’s 
aid, provided free passage was assured by Norway 
and Sweden. This offer met with firm resistance in 
Stockholm, where the government of Per Albin 
Hansson appears determined to avoid any action that 
might antagonize Germany. Sweden is on the whole 
sympathetic to the Allied cause, and profoundly 
shaken by the plight of Finland. But, having wit- 
nessed the fate of Czechoslovakia and Poland, the 
Swedes fear that Allied aid would be neither suf- 
ficiently prompt nor sufficiently effective to ward off 
a swift German attack on the ports and industrial 
centers of southern Sweden. And so repugnant is 


etr= EEE: =e 


+ 








— 


the Soviet system both to Swedish industrialists ang 
to the Socialist trades unions that, if the USSR 
should press westward, Sweden might seek Germay 
“protection” against Russia, even if it involves Najj 
domination of the Scandinavian countries. This i 
particularly true because the Swedes, rightly q 
wrongly, believe that the Allies, in making a 
eleventh-hour offer of aid to Finland, were motivated 
not by humanitarian considerations, but by the desire 
to acquire a Scandinavian base against Germany and 
to bar the Reich from Sweden's iron ore. Should 
Moscow’s terms prove too stiff, however, the posi. 
bility is not yet excluded that Finland might use thes 
terms as a lever to obtain last-minute aid from both 
Sweden and the Allies. 

WHY GERMANY WANTS PEACE. Germany 
would doubtless be willing to ‘“‘protect’’ Sweden, 
both because it could thus prevent any possibility 
of Allied operations in Scandinavia, and block fur 
ther Soviet expansion in the Baltic, which is no 
more palatable to the Reich than it is to Sweden, 
At the same time, conclusion of the Soviet-Finnish 
war is highly desirable from the German point of 
view. It would enable Moscow to resume shipments 
of foodstuffs and raw materials, especially oil, now 
needed for Soviet war transport and military opera 
tions. Moreover, if Germany finds it necessary to 
fight in the Balkans, Moscow might be persuaded 
to transfer its activities to the Near East, in an effor 
to checkmate the attack which the Allies, in concer 
with Turkey, appear to be preparing against Russian 
oil centers in the Caucasus. Whether the Soviet Union, 
which until now has followed a course dictated by 
self-interest rather than collaboration with the Reich, 
is prepared to play the réle projected for it by the 
Nazis, is by no means clear. It is at this point that the 
European balance is most delicately poised. For if 
the Allies give active aid to Finland, they may fore 
the Soviet Union into closer cooperation with Ger 
many; while if they abstain from such aid, they may 
facilitate bloodless conquest of the Scandinavian 
countries by the Reich, which would then be free to 
proceed with a similar program in the Balkans. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


VON RIBBENTROP VISIT LEAVES AXIS UNCHANGED 


While Mr. Sumner Welles, who reached London 
on March 10, continued to investigate the war aims 
of the European belligerents, both Germany and the 
Allies sought to gain a diplomatic vantage point in 
the Mediterranean. The British government promptly 
negotiated a temporary settlement of its coal dispute 
with Italy, in order to take the wind out of the sails 
of the German Foreign Minister, Joachim von Rib- 
bentrop, who paid an unexpected visit to Rome on 
March 9. Both protagonists hoped to strengthen 


their position in Rome before Mr. Welles returns) 


there next week, and to take the initiative in the 
Balkans and Near East. 


THE COAL DISPUTE. By carrying out theif 
threat to stop Germany's maritime exports of coil 
to Italy, the British were able to force a showdows| 
over one gap in their blockade. Between March 5 
and 8 the Allied blockade control had seized 13 
Italian ships, carrying about 100,000 tons of Ger 
man coal from Rotterdam. Following negotiations 








Ital 


vor 


FOR 
Hea 
Ente 





4 


Beeawk Bre il 


’ER 


eeB8sFRB8G B28 


ona 
22 


era: 


r if 
orce 


may 
ian 
e t0 


heit 
“al 
wn 
h § 

13 


~ 


ons 








a 


perween Lord Halifax and Giuseppe Bastianini, 
jtalian Ambassador in London, Great Britain agreed 
on March 9 to release these ships and cargoes, in 
recurn for Italy’s promise to send no more vessels 
for German coal. This agreement was a face-saving 
device for both parties. The British accepted the 
jtalian argument that the purchases and shipments 
had been arranged before March 1, when the em- 
bargo on Germany's coal exports to Italy became ef- 
fective. The Italians escaped the dilemma of either 
surrendering their ships or challenging Britain. 

This compromise merely postponed a settlement of 
Italy's economic and diplomatic problems. It is there- 
fore possible that Italy, which previously had re- 
fused to supply Great Britain with arms and air- 
planes in return for coal, may soon accept a modified 
trade agreement. Italy is compelled to import al- 
most 80 per cent of its annual requirements of lig- 
nite coal, totaling 15,000,000 tons. Germany nor- 
mally supplies 7,000,000 tons and Great Britain 
over 2,500,000 tons of Italy’s imports, three-fourths 
of which are transported by sea. By cutting off the 
4,000,000 tons which Germany ordinarily sends by 
sea, the British had threatened Italian industry with 
an eventual breakdown. Pending the negotiation of 
a modus vivendi with Britain, Italy continued to im- 
port coal by railway from Germany, while in Rome, 
a German economic expert, Dr. Karl Clodius, dis- 
cussed the possibility of increasing Italy's imports 
by land. But the Reich would probably be unable or 
unwilling to use its hard-pressed transportation sys- 
tem for this purpose indefinitely. 

VON RIBBENTROP’S TRIP. The coal crisis was 
over before Germany had an opportunity to stiffen 
Italy’s stand against the British. It was generally be- 
lieved that the Nazi Foreign Minister would ask 
for Italian support in any intervention Germany 
may be planning in the Finnish war, as well as for 
diplomatic aid in the larger European conflict. Since 
Italy's’ position in the Balkans might be seriously 
endangered by a German or Soviet-German victory, 
Mussolini could hardly be persuaded to join Hitler 
in war except at a very heavy price. Perhaps the Ger- 
man government may have anticipated this price in 
the semi-official declarations — made during Mr. 
Welles’ visit to Berlin—that the Reich was demand- 
ing an end to British sea power, particularly Britain’s 
control of Gibraltar and Suez. After the departure 
of von Ribbentrop from Rome, however, Count 
Ciano’s organ, I/ Telegrafo, asserted that “neither 
Italy nor I/ Duce is influenceable.” 


In an audience with the Pope on March 11, Herr 
von Ribbentrop expressed Germany's desire for 





Page Three = 








peace and a reconstruction of Europe. The Foreign 
Minister was received with studied coldness, it was 
reported, even though he declared that Germany 
would respect religious liberties and would welcome 
the return of Cardinal Hlond to Poland. The Ger- 
man government apparently proposed a rapproche- 
ment with the Vatican, in order to reinforce national 
unity at home—jeopardized by the Pope’s outspoken 
criticism of the Nazi régime—and to regain Catholic 
good will abroad. While von Ribbentrop was con- 
ferring in Rome, Chancellor Hitler—in an unusually 
brief and grim address, delivered in honor of Heroes’ 
Memorial Day, March 10—swore “a holy oath that 
this war, which was forced on us by the capitalistic 
power holders, France and Britain, must end in the 
most glorious victory in German history.” Germany's 
war aims, moreover, received indirect but important 
support from Hungary on March 6, when the For- 
eign Minister, Count Csaky, opposed the restoration 
of “the patchwork that was Czecho-Slovakia,” which 
he declared would be contrary to the welfare of 
Europe. 


NEAR EAST REPERCUSSIONS. Both the Anglo- 
Italian coal dispute and the von Ribbentrop mission 
to Rome will undoubtedly affect the still obscure 
developments in Turkey and the Near East. Al- 
though the Allied concentration of troops in the 
eastern Mediterranean has probably been exagger- 
ated in the press, it is obvious that Britain and France 
are preparing for the defense of their interests in 
that region and even for some eventual offensive 
action in the Black Sea area. The Allies have a strong 
diplomatic position in Turkey which they are using 
to full advantage. If Italy should be tempted to 
enter the war on Germany's side, Turkey in self- 
defense would have to join the Allies in protecting 
Egypt and the Suez Canal, and in driving Italy from 
the eastern Mediterranean. If the Soviet Union, on 
the other hand, pushes into the Balkans—either with 
or without Germany's consent—Turkey would also 
find it almost necessary to assist the Allies, although 
its treaty with them specifically excepts a war with 


the U.S.S.R. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





The Northern Countries in World Economy, by the Delega- 
tions for the Promotion of Economic Cooperation be- 
tween the Northern Countries. Helsinki, Otava Printing 
Office, for the Delegations, 1939, 2nd ed. $1.50 
A remarkably useful, concise survey of the economic re- 

sources and commercial importance of Denmark, Finland, 

Iceland, Norway and Sweden. 


Diplomacy, by Harold Nicolson. New York, Harcourt 
Brace, 1939. $2.00 


A brief discussion of the history and practice of diplo- 
macy that presents sound but not very novel ideas. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 21, Marcu 15, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Donotuy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MiIcHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York,-N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Gp 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News BP ettect 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Mar. 11.—In the midst of the fast-moving and 
perhaps decisive political events which are shaping 
the future course of Europe’s two wars, it is inter- 
esting—and perhaps significant—that Under-Secre- 
tary Sumner Welles should take the time in Paris 
and London to present the views of the United States 
on the economic problems that will have to be faced 
in any peace settlement. Up to this point, Washing- 
ton has maintained the strictest silence on the politi- 
cal issues arising from the Russo-Finnish negotia- 
tions and their relation to the war in the West. 
While Senator Pittman suggested the possibility of 
a month’s truce in a speech on Sunday night, no 
Administration spokesman has yet hinted at the terms 
on which President Roosevelt might consider the 
réle of mediator in Europe. 


THE ECONOMIC BASIS OF PEACE. In present- 
ing a formal memorandum to Paul Reynaud, the 
French Finance Minister, on March 9, Mr. Welles 
not only outlined the economic policy of the United 
States, but emphasized the basic importance which 
economic issues will assume, if and when the time 
comes for peace negotiations. The views he ex- 
pressed were not new or original. According to the 
summary made public by the French Finance Min- 
istry, Mr. Welles sought assurances on three gen- 
eral principles: (1) that restoration of liberal trade 
policies must be the basis of political and economic 
peace; (2) that the revival of healthy international 
commerce precludes exclusive, discriminatory trade 
agreements, and calls for prompt removal of all 
wartime restrictions when hostilities cease; (3) that 
post-war agreements must be based on full reciproc- 
ity, applied without fear or resentment. 


These principles, of course, have been repeatedly 
expressed in Washington by Secretary Hull in his 
appeals for renewal of the reciprocal trade program. 
They have also been transmitted to the neutral gov- 
ernments with which Mr. Hull has had frequent 
contacts during the past few weeks. But despite 
the generally ‘favorable’ reaction reported by the 
State Department, many convinced advocates of the 
Hull program are asking whether even the democra- 
cies will be able to return to “liberal” trade policies 
if the war continues for more than two years. They 
point out that Britain and France have already been 
forced to abandon most of their liberal principles for 
the duration of the war, and are making new com- 
mitments which will be difficult to terminate. Great 


Britain's import licenses and commodity controls 
may be essential for the prosecution of the war, by 
they may prove equally essential in meeting th 
problems of post-war readjustment. Even the mog 
liberal and progressive economists in England are 
urging not a return to free-trade programs, but am. 
bitious “public works” programs based on planned 
economies. If this trend continues, and controlled 
economies extend throughout Europe, will it be pos 
sible for the United States to cooperate in the work 
of economic reconstruction without revising its own 
economic system? 


This question has been raised by more than one 
Administration spokesman in recent weeks. In 4 
much quoted address before the Yale Political Union 
on January 31, Assistant Secretary of State Berle 
declared that it is probable that “everywhere else 
in the world, economic necessity will have driven 
the great countries to a system of government-cre 
ated money and of finance designed almost entirely 
for social ends. . . . Either we must contribute to 
re-establishing a classic system abroad, or we shall 
have to re-shape our own economy in order to bk 
able to deal with the world at all.” Mr. Berle did 
not hazard an answer, beyond suggesting that we 
might hand over our accumulated (and useless) 
gold as a free gift to re-establish trade and normal 
life. 

There are indications, however, that some of these 
basic problems are being seriously examined. Early 
in January, the State Department announced the 
creation of a special Advisory Committee to study 
questions arising from the war and relating to the 
settlement which must come sooner or later. This 
committee, under the direction of Hugh Wilson, 
former Ambassador to Germany, has been working 
quietly for several weeks, and is establishing con 
tacts with economic experts in several other govern 
ment agencies, including the Treasury, the Federal 
Reserve Board and the Commerce Department. The 
results of its surveys will not be published, of course, 


but the preparatory work may prove of great value | 


when the time comes to discuss the terms of peace. 

Meanwhile, the Administration resolution to e 
tend the Trade Agreements Act has been reported 
favorably by the Finance Committee and sent to the 
Senate without amendments. The action of the Com 
mittee was taken on March 8, by a vote of 12 to 8, 
with only two Democrats opposing renewal of the 
program. 


W. T. STONE 













nae 


as 
tw 
at the 
dicates 
capital 
threat 
elimin 
ing its 
and d 
ment | 
future 
Italy | 
easter! 

“P/ 
the te 
ably < 
minec 
a wat 
center 
indica 
Buchz 
offere 
for si 
doubt 
ment 
Berlis 
press: 
drive 
slova 
Nazi 
tectic 
matte 
Rum 
Marc 
occu 
forti 
man: 
sour 
lease 








