at the 
a new 


JELL 


dverse 
Alcala 

193], 
clared 
ed the 
ler ar. 
»sident 
x-year 
ew the 
ifavor- 
of the 
ng of.- 
to the 
cutive 


nethen 
‘se be- 

Right 
rroups. 
; taken 
epubli- 
| from 


th his 
Since 
en un- 
1 their 
‘ogram 
onstra- 
to the 
per of- 
arties, 
alities. 
idhold- 
Psident 
masses 
) farm 
ince of 
w only 
r divi- 
ISON 


+ Bulletin 


Moulton. 


des that 
e distri- 
flexible 
tain the 


National 
N, Editor. 
ear. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


VoL. XV, No. 26 


Apri. 24, 1936 


N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Uy YO 
it, “a 
sb Qp 


POLITICAL CONFLICT IN FRANCE 
by John C. deWilde 


What will the April 26 elections bring to France? 
On the answer to this question hinges the future 
of democratic government in the French republic. 


April 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


NAZI 


GERMANY 


MEANS WAR 


by MILDRED S. WERTHEIMER 


Miss Wertheimer has just returned from a three months’ 
visit to Europe. 


The most striking impression gained from a 
visit to Germany the last week in March is that 
the very nature of the Hitler régime is such as 
to make further faits accomplis inevitable. 


The Rhineland coup of March 7 was almost en- 
tirely the result of domestic pressure. The actual 
date chosen was determined by the fact that in 
Geneva on March 10 Mr. Eden was expected to 
answer M. Flandin’s question as to Britain’s in- 
tentions regarding its Locarno commitments. 
The reoccupation of the Rhineland, however, was 
undoubtedly the consequence of urgent represen- 
tations made by Dr. Schacht to Hitler and the 
Cabinet against Nazi radicals. This quarrel be- 
tween moderates and radicals had become so seri- 
ous that a practical impasse had been reached, 
while dissatisfaction among the masses mounted 
steadily. Hitler is said to have been greatly dis- 
turbed by reports from the secret police of grow- 
ing discontent among all classes of the people. 
The German debt had reached astronomical pro- 
portions; the foreign exchange and raw material 
shortage was acute; certain foods were scarce. 
The Reich desperately needed—and continues to 
need—money, raw materials and food. And in 
order to quiet the German people, it was evident 
that a major success which could be capitalized by 
Dr. Goebbels was the sole way out. Such a success 
could only be achieved in foreign policy; and 
despite the opposition of the moderates and of the 
army itself, Hitler reoccupied the Rhineland. 

The army, however, remains indifferent to 
politics. It is not in sympathy with many Nazi 
policies, but for the present is getting what it 
wants—rearmament. The army, moreover, needs a 
period of quiet to complete its reorganization and, 
unless serious internal disturbances occur, there 
seems little or no likelihood of army intervention 
in the political field. On the other hand, the gen- 


erals are waging a virtual war with the Nazis 
to settle the question of the disposition of the 
Special Guards (SS)—-the Pretorian Guard of the 
party. This group numbers 150,000, of whom at 
least 40,000 are armed. They are under the com- 
mand of Himmler, head of the secret police, and 
the army demands that they be incorporated 
in the Reichswehr or in the regular police. In 
either case, it would cease to be the private army 
of Hitler and the party radicals, and some ob- 
servers fear that another June 30 “purge” may be 
precipitated before this question is finally settled. 

The Rhineland coup, however, has temporarily 
sidetracked these internal dissensions and allowed 
the Nazis to concentrate public attention on for- 
eign affairs. It is impossible to predict how long 
the appeasing results of this diversion will last. 
When the lid shows signs of blowing off again, 
another coup will become necessary; and the next 
time, the Nazis will have to cross a frontier: 
Meanwhile, Hitler is attempting to play a réle in 
foreign politics comparable to that which he 
played in 1930-1933, during the so-called period 
of “legality” in German domestic affairs. In 
order to secure the raw materials and money nec- 
essary to complete rearmament, the Leader is pos- 
ing as the peace angel of Europe, even offering to 
return to Geneva. 

There is not the slightest doubt, however, that 
the expansionist aims of Nazi foreign policy as 
laid down in Hitler’s Mein Kampf remain unal- 
tered. The Nazis would naturally prefer to 
achieve their goal by eventual peaceful annexa- 
tion of Germans outside the Reich, made possible 
by the preponderance of German armed force. 
Meanwhile, it seems clear that no matter what 
concessions the Nazis may make to the Western 
European powers in order to gain the necessary 
breathing-spell now, they will under all circum- 
stances fortify the Rhineland. This would reduce 
the value of potential French assistance to the 
Little Entente and Poland to a minimum, and 


we 


eee 


- 
een ae 


oe 


AE OR 


would virtually give Germany the free hand in 
the East which it covets above all things. Hitler’s 
offer of bilateral non-aggression pacts, moreover, 
would further weaken the already tottering col- 
lective system, and might introduce “bilateral 
wars” in Europe. Thus Hitler’s signature on 
freely negotiated international treaties may be 
trusted only as long as the German army feels 
unprepared for war, or the domestic situation in 
the Reich remains quiet enough to obviate re- 
newed foreign political ‘“‘successes.”’ 


THE LEAGUE MARKS TIME ON ETHIOPIA 


On April 20 the League Council adopted a reso- 
lution which deplored the breakdown of concilia- 
tion in the Italo-Ethiopian conflict, reaffirmed the 
obligation of League states to apply sanctions 
against Italy, without providing for their in- 
tensification. This resolution represented a com- 
promise between Britain’s demand for an oil 
embargo and France’s desire to continue negotia- 
tions with Mussolini, in the hope of aligning Italy 
with the anti-German powers. The compromise 
was largely due to the efforts of Mr. Eden and M. 
Paul-Boncour, French Minister for League Af- 
fairs, who persuaded the British Foreign Secre- 
tary that France could not apply further sanctions 
on the eve of parliamentary elections, for fear 
such a move might play into the hands of the 
pro-Fascist and anti-sanctionist Right, which 
hopes to overthrow the Left-Center government 
of Premier Sarraut. He consequently urged post- 
ponement of oil sanctions until the next meeting 
of the Council, scheduled for May 11, when he 
believes that the Popular Front, composed of Left 
parties, will have won at the polls. 


The Council’s resolution was based on a report 
from Salvador de Madariaga, chairman of the 
League Committee of Thirteen, who had acted as 
mediator between Italy and Ethiopia in an at- 
tempt to open peace negotiations “within the 
framework of the League and the spirit of the 
Covenant.” The Madariaga report declared that, 
while the League’s appeal of March 3 to the two 
belligerents “had received replies that offered a 
prospect of a prompt cessation of hostilities and 
final restoration of peace, such hope must for the 
moment be abandoned.” Mussolini’s conditions, 
as delivered in Geneva by Baron Aloisi on April 
16, were that an armistice could be signed in the 
field by Marshal Badoglio only after Italy had 
received guarantees that Haile Selassie would not 
use this breathing-space to rally and reorganize 
his troops; that negotiations must be conducted 
directly between Italy and Ethiopia, without in- 
terference by the League —although a silent 


Page Two 


League observer could be present; that negotia- 
tions must be held not in Geneva, whose atmos- 
phere is regarded as inimical to Italy, but on the 
“neutral” territory of Ouchy in Switzerland; and 
that the peace treaty, once concluded, would be 
submitted to the League. The Ethiopian repre- 
sentative, Wolde Mariam, rejected these terms as 
“wholly unacceptable,” and demanded that the 
League should apply all sanctions envisaged by 
Article XVI of the Covenant, including an oil em- 
bargo and military measures. 

With Italian troops already in Dessye, and 
pressing on to Addis Ababa from the north and 
Harrar from the south in an attempt to effect a 
junction of the two armies led by Marshal Bado- 
glio and General Graziani, Italy is in no mood for 
compromise, and apparently will not rest content 
until it has occupied all of Ethiopia. The Italian 
victories are disturbing to the British not only 
because an aggressor is thus successfully defying 
the collective system, but because Italian control 
of Lake Tana, headwaters of the Blue Nile which 
irrigates the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, gives Mus- 
solini a strong card for future negotiations with 
Britain. At the same time the British contend, on 
the basis of a League report on sanctions pub- 
lished April 16, that Italy has lost half of its gold 
supply since the outbreak of war; that its foreign 
trade has been drastically curtailed; and that 
even if it should occupy Addis Ababa before the 
beginning of the rainy season, it will be so weak- 
ened by the League’s economic siege that it will 
be unable to enjoy the fruits of victory or even 
maintain its lines of supply in Ethiopia. Further 
weakening of Italy, however, is feared by France, 
which believes it must have Mussolini’s aid to 
check a German Putsch in Austria or Czechoslo- 
vakia unless—and that is the fundamental un- 
certainty of the European situation—Britain 
makes it clear to Hitler that it will intervene in 
case of Nazi aggression in Eastern Europe with 
at least as much dispatch and determination as it 
has displayed in Ethiopia. British public opinion, 
already alarmed by the Franco-British-Belgian 
staff consultations for military action in the West, 
which opened in London on April 15, is not pre- 
pared to underwrite the peace of Eastern Europe. 
Yet the only alternative to a collective system 
sufficiently strong to check a potential aggressor 
—as pointed out by Premier Sarraut to French 
provincial editors on April 16 and by Mr. Eden 
in the League Council on April 20—is gradual 
disintegration of the League, and resumption by 
each state of untrammeled freedom to defend 
itself against aggression by all the means at its 
disposal. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 26, Aprit 24, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOnD Lasiig Busit, President; EstHmm G. Ocpan, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dxan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


