



Le) \ NJ 





fia, 
the 
the 
that 
ists, 
and 
uip- 


ern 


the 
tion 

the 
abi- 
hile 
hina 
over 
rov- 
ited 
7en- 
had 
F 38 

the 








ists. | 


that 
ugh 
hich 
om- 
ates 
rmy 
ons. 

the 
rces 
sliti- 


with _ sands of villages, actions are taken which deter- 


the 
wer. 
in 
urge 


— 1946 


NOV 8 1945 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


PORISSK A CFO 
COWERAL LINGMARY 
waty ef Mich 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Assoctation 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vor. XXV, No. 38 


JuLy 5, 1946 





LOCAL CONDITIONS—BAROMETER OF CHINESE CIVIL STRIFE 


SHANGHAI—American discussion of Chinese 
politics usually revolves about the problem of ne- 
gotiations between the Kuomintang and the Chinese 
Communists, almost to the exclusion of other as- 

ts of the Chinese internal political scene. This 
tendency has been particularly marked in the 
months since General Marshall came to China, for 
the first half of 1946 has seen the conclusion of the 
Political Consultative Conference agreements in 
January; the military reorganization accord in Feb- 
tuary, and the subsequent failure to execute these 
decisions; the outbreak of large-scale warfare in 
Manchuria; and the recently announced fifteen-day 
truce, which has now expired without a settlement. 
Everything has seemed to hinge on whether a satis- 
factory verbal agreement can be reached, and things 
have seemed to be going well or badly according to 
the progress of discussions on political and military 
formulas of national scope. 


LOCAL POLITICS ALSO CRUCIAL. Unques- 


 tionably China is urgently in need of centrally-con- 





cluded agreements among the Kuomintang, Com- 
munist Party, Democratic League and other groups; 
and no leader conscious of the country’s deep de- 
sire for peace will leave any stone unturned in the 
effort to achieve unity through discussions in Nan- 
king. But what is abundantly clear in China, and 
far more difficult to appreciate at a distance, is the 
fact that the political situation here consists of much 
more than inter-party negotiations. Day in and day 
out, in hundreds of large and small cities and thou- 


mine the fundamental political atmosphere of the 
country. Democratic resolutions drawn up in the 
national capital can hardly be worth the paper they 
are written on unless the political life of local com- 
munities is reasonably consistent with the idea of 


democratic unity. As a result, the possibilities of 
establishing an all-party government in China can 
probably be observed more clearly by turning the 
microscope on local conditions than by focusing 
attention on wider aspects of Communist-Kuomin- 
tang rivalry. 

Recently the dominant political tendency in the 
leading urban centers has been toward increasing 
control of the thoughts and actions of the individual 
citizen. In such widely-separated cities as Canton, 
Sian, and Chengtu the offices of liberal newspapers 
have been attacked and damaged by anonymous 
bands, whose members have gone unpunished. The 
tension has probably been greatest in Sian, leading 
city of the Northwest, where a liberal newspaper, 
whose office was first attacked and later literally 
besieged, suspended publication. The editor of an- 
other Sian newspaper was shot to death in the streets. 

One of the chief hurdles facing any new publi- 
cation is the problem of registration, for without of- 
ficial permission from the Bureau of Social Affairs 
publication is illegal, although newspapers and 
magazines may generally be issued for the brief 
period in which permission is pending. Recently in 
Peiping over seventy publications were banned, and 
the local Publishers Federation subsequently issued 
a statement, protesting against the general difficul- 
ties faced by the press throughout China. The de- 
mand was made that persons involved in physical 
attacks on newspaper offices be severely punished 
and that the local authorities be held responsible. 
Of the publications recently banned three were is- 
sued by the Communists, while the rest have repre- 
sented other points of view. In general, it is clear 
that while the system of direct press censorship was 
abolished in China some time ago, the problem of 
press freedom remains a significant one. 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 











POLICE CONTROL IN SHANGHAI. In May 
it became known that the Shanghai Municipal Po- 
lice Bureau was planning to inaugurate a police- 
control system under which police officers would be 
assigned to supervise a specific number of house- 
holds, with the right to enter any private residence 
or commercial store in their area at any time of day 
and as often as might be considered necessary. This 
system went into effect on June 1 in one district of 
the city and is to be extended to others, although 
it has met with sharp local criticism. That the de- 
velopment is more than a Shanghai phenomenon 
was indicated in the middle of May, when enforce- 
ment of police control began in Nanking. In the 
capital, according to the Ta Kung Pao of May 17, 
a census registration system was also being enforced 
in the Nantung district, where residents were re- 
quired to report to the authorities whenever chang- 
ing their dwelling place. If any resident failed to 
make such a report, not only was the head of the 
particular family to be punished, but all families 
involved in the “joint bond” were also to be pun- 
ished. (This refers to the fact that a group respon- 


In a message to Congress accompanying his veto 
of the bill which would have extended price control 
beyond June 30, President Truman stated that he 
had no alternative since approval of the bill would 
have been tantamount to legalizing an inflationary 
upsurge of prices. There is no assurance at present 
that the Senate will approve a revised bill that 
would afford the degree of price control which the 
President and his advisers consider indispensable if 
we are to avoid an inflationary boom and collapse. 
Economists are agreed that an alarming inflationary 
gap exists in the American economy, as indicated by 
the tremendous volume of purchasing power and 
the failure to date of production to match demand. 
All signs today point to a rising trend of prices, 
which apart from its impact upon the domestic con- 
sumer, must certainly be a source of grave concern 
abroad. Faced with the prospect of steadily rising 
prices for imports from the United States, other 
countries will probably be unwilling to revert quick- 
ly to private trade, as they have been requested to 
do by the State Department. On the contrary, state 
purchasing missions may well be considered an un- 
avoidable device to procure the maximum of essen- 
tial imports in exchange for a decidedly inadequate 
. supply of dollars. Price inflation in the United States 
will unquestionably be a setback to other nations 
seeking to rehabilitate their economies. 

STATE TRADING RESULT OF ECONOMIC 
EMERGENCY. Fifteen countries, including Russia, 
have purchasing missions in the United States. The 
Russian buying organization was set up long before 
the war; all other missions were organized during 





Page Two 


THREAT OF U.S. INFLATION IMPEDES MOVE TO END STATE TRADING 











—= 


sibility system in political and social matters is jp 
widespread operation in Central Government tery 
tory.) 

CIVIL WAR ATMOSPHERE. Many foreigney 
and Chinese interpret these developments as fund, 
mental symptoms of a civil war atmosphere—symp 
toms which are just as significant as the clashing of 
rival armies in civil strife. It is clear that if Gener 
Marshall, despite the events of recent months ig 
Manchuria, is still able to achieve some results on, 
diplomatic level, the effects are likely to be illusoy 
in the face of the existing local political situation 
For it is impossible to bring about coalition gover. 
ment as long as the members of the proposed coali. 
tion cannot express themselves equally in places like 
Shanghai and Peiping. Local conditions may there 
fore be taken as a barometer of China’s political 
weather. Americans will do well to pay increasing 
attention to this barometer and not to allow their 
attention to be focused solely on the issue of reach 
ing political and military formulas. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 





the war and served as central agencies to prepare 


— 


BRI 


COT] 
decisi¢ 
Liver} 
the sy 


rt | 


of the 
of a 

decad 
Whe! 


from 
Liver 
conti: 
cotto 
buye: 
simil 
pape 
cotto 
close 


tion 


Tl 


nati¢ 
in sc 
of tl 


) ' ' | pure 
estimates of requirements, particularly in conned of 7 


with lend-lease. They also bought in the open mar 
ket essential civilian goods, and for their entire 
procurement program arranged supply priorities 
and shipping space. They were originally, therefore, 
an integral part of the war economy and so useful 
that their formation was encouraged by the United 
States. Since the end of the war some of the func: | 
tions of the missions have ceased; on November 2, , 
1945, procurement facilities of the United States 
government were closed to them. Buying programs 
incident to plans for rehabilitation and reconstruc 
tion, as well as purchases in connection with the 
lend-lease “‘pipe-line” have, however, resulted in 4 





continued large volume of transactions by these | 


missions. 

Continuance of state trading for the time being 
is a matter of necessity rather than free choice. For- 
eign economies were greatly disrupted by the war, 
and in varying degrees impoverished. Relief and re- 
habilitation are on so vast a scale that.a return to 
private trade has not been possible. Shortage of 
foreign exchange—especially dollars—and the dis- 
organized condition of trade and business, reflected 
in rising prices, have compelled retention of war- 
time controls, in the absence of which a country’s 


limited resources might be dissipated in purchase of | 


non-essentials. Moreover, private trade cannot be re 
stored until workable systems of import priorities 
through licensing individual importers have been 
established. State trading in the output of national- 
ized industries will undoubtedly continue. 


nen 
frat 
are 

cha 
tha 
ov 


oS 





wrt aD if 


I 


IS i 


Sners 
unda 
symp. 
ng of 
Neral 
hs ip 


USOry 
ation, 
Vern. 
coali- 
S like 
here. 
itical 
asing 


each- 


ER 


YG 
>pare 
ction 
mat- 
ntire 
rities 
fore, 
seful 
rited 
“unc 
~ 2 
tates 
rams 
truc- 
the 
in a 
hese 


eing 
For- 
war, 
1 re- 
n to 
» of 
dis- 
cted 
Wat- 
2 of 
. £e- 
ities 








Ss 








 — 
— 


BRITAIN CONTINUES BULK BUYING OF 
COTTON. Parliament on March 28 approved the 
decision of the British Board of Trade to close the 
Liverpool Cotton Exchange permanently and retain 
the system of bulk buying through the Cotton Im- 
port Board, which was established at the beginning 
of the war. The British thereby decreed the demise 
of a private trading organization that for several 
decades has been a center of world trade in cotton. 
Whereas spinners formerly protected themselves 
from price fluctuations by dealing in futures on the 
Liverpool exchange, henceforth trading risks will 
continue to be borne by the government. Sellers of 
cotton, for their part, must do business with a single 
buyer in the British market. Britain is engaged in 
similar state trading in other commodities—sugar, 
paper, sisal, timber and food; but the decision on 
cotton has peculiar significance since it permanently 
closes a market hitherto frequently traded in by na- 
tionals of other countries. 

The government justified its decision in terms of 
national interest, and rejected the criticism expressed 
in some quarters that the program violates the spirit 
of the American loan agreement. There are some in- 
dications, however, that the British may not have 
purely economic considerations in view. The editors 
of The Manchester Guardian, endorsing the perma- 
nent suspension of private trade in cotton, stated 
frankly that “With our overseas obligations as they 
are it may well happen, unfortunately, that our pur- 
chases of cotton may sometimes be dictated by other 
than the purely economic considerations which have 
governed them in the past.” 


FRENCH PROMISE RETURN TO PRIVATE 
TRADE. Although both Britain and France have 
nominally socialist governments, the French unlike 
the British have indicated a desire to restore private 
trade as soon as it is feasible. As early as September 
1945 the Provisional government authorized a lim- 





| ited return of trade with the United States to private 


channels. It was made clear, however, that the bulk 
of French imports would continue to be handled 
by the government, a policy dictated by the large 





NOW AVAILABLE— 
ATOMIC ENERGY IN INTERNATIONAL 
POLITICS by Harold C. Urey 
25 cents 


June 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 





Page Three 





a 








——— 
mT 





import requirements of the five-year reconstruction 
program. In the meantime, resumption of private 
trade will be facilitated by formation of import 
groups, industry by industry, under direction of the 
government. These groupements will engage in bulk 
buying in their particular fields, and are therefore 
just as capable of making exclusive purchase con- 
tracts as are state trade agencies. Their potential- 
ities in that respect were recognized in the recent 
credit negotiations; accordingly, in section IV of 
the loan agreement of May 28, groupements were 
given a temporary status, to be abolished as soon as 
difficulties of transport and distribution in France 
have been overcome. The French also agreed to con- 
tinue curtailment of government procurement in the 


United States. Haro_p H. HuUTCHESON 


(The first of three articles on postwar commercial policy.) 





ZONE NUMBERING 
If your zone number does not appear in your address, 
please send it to us. This will facilitate prompt delivery 
of your Bulletin. 





Population and Peace in the Pacific, by Warren S. Thomp- 
son. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1946. $3.75 
Believing that the development of the Pacific peoples in 

the next few decades may determine whether we will have 

a third world war, the author analyzes in detail the heavy 

population pressures throughout most of the Far East and 

pleads for the ending of European control of Far Eastern 
resources. 


Japanese Militarism: Its Cause and Cure, by John M. 

Maki. New York, Knopf, 1945. $3.00 

An enlightened discussion by a Japanese-American, 
based on the view that the elimination of Japanese aggres- 
sion will be achieved “only when the political, economic, 
and social conditions that have created Japanese militar- 
ism and aggression have been eliminated.” The historical 
sections, presenting the long-term background of the Jap- 
anese state are especially useful. 


International Investment and Domestic Welfare, by Nor- 
man S. Buchanan. New York, Henry Holt & Co., 1945. 
$3.75 


This book admirably sets forth the pros and cons of in- 
ternational investment, particularly the post-war pros- 
pects. The subject is treated in a nontechnical manner, 
and is developed from the point of view of the United 
States as the leading creditor nation. The author minimizes 
the importance of foreign lending in the maintenance of 
a high level of income in the United States. He states 
clearly the implications of large post-war loans, concludes 
that such a program may not be desirable for several 
reasons and outlines alternatives. 


A Cartel Policy for the United Nations, by Corwin D. 
Edwards and others. New York, Columbia University 
Press, 1945. $1.25 
A series of five lectures delivered last year at Columbia 

University on American policy toward cartels, the atti- 

tudes of other countries, and the possible effects of cartels 

on world security and full employment. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 38, JuLy 5, 


1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, 


Editor, Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
| Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








a 
= ae 


SRA. 


moon sh MEARE Lass I aif 


Aa a 
= eee 


a 


& 
es 


Washington News Letter 














WILL BIKINI TESTS STRENGTHEN BARUCH’S EFFORTS TO CURB VETO? 


However useful the testing of atomic power at 
Bikini Atoll on June 30 may prove to scientists and 
military strategists, the vast experiment will be fully 
justified only if it focuses world attention on the im- 
portance of controlling atomic energy. To no group 
will the findings at Bikini be more crucial than to 
the individuals charged with framing foreign policy 
of the great powers. In the case of America this 
means the United States Senate, as well as the White 
House and the State Department. Since Bernard 
Baruch’s presentation on June 14 of this country’s 
proposals to the United Nations Atomic Energy 
Commission, members of the upper house in Wash- 
ington have been considering whether they want to 
change their attitude toward the use of the veto 
power in deliberations of the Security Council. For 
the ultimate fate of the Baruch plan depends not 
alone on whether the United Nations accept it, but 
on whether the Senate approves it. Baruch said that 
the United States decision within the Atomic Energy 
Commission would be ‘‘subject, of course, to our con- 
stitutional processes.’’ The Constitution requires that 
treaties have the approval of two-thirds of the Sen- 
ators voting before this country becomes a party to 
them. 


SENATE AND VETO. Baruch has forced both 
the UN and the Senate to reconsider the veto by 
telling the Atomic Energy Commission that “there 
must be no veto to protect those who violate their 
solemn agreements not to develop or use atomic 
energy for destructive purposes.” At the San Fran- 
cisco Conference of the United Nations, the United 
States delegation insisted that the Charter contain 
the veto because President Truman and Secretary 
of State Edward R. Stettinius, Jr. feared that the 
Senate would reject a Charter lacking a veto, which 
the Senators on the United States delegation regard- 
ed as a device for protecting American sovereignty. 


Despite occasional public statements from a few 
of their colleagues in favor of some limitation of 
national sovereignty (like that made to the Foreign 
Policy Association by Senator Fulbright, Democrat, 
of Arkansas, last October 20), most Senators have 
continued to favor the maintenance of the veto 
power. Uncertainty about the reception which one- 
third plus one of the Senators would give to his 
veto proposal will weaken Mr. Baruch’s argument 
before the Atomic Energy Commission. President 
Truman on June 28 pledged his full support to 
Baruch, and on the same day Baruch announced 


that only Russia, Poland and the Netherlands amoy 
the 12 members of the Commission were not wholj 
in agreement with the 20 key points of the Ame 
ican plan. 

BIKINI AND SENATE. Since the dropping of 
the atomic bombs last August on Hiroshima an{ 
Nagasaki, Senators have found that a large part of 
the public is apathetic about the whole issue of 
atomic energy. Now that new tests of the use ¢ 
atomic bombs at sea have begun, there may be a re 
vival of interest in the crucial problems which cop 
front members of the Atomic Energy Commission 
While many Americans have criticized the tests af 
an unhappy attempt to display American might be 
fore the rest of the world, they can serve a useful 
purpose if the United Nations are reawakened ty 
the awful destructive implications of warfare fought 
with atomic weapons. It is doubtful, however, 
whether the first of the Bikini tests will serve this 
purpose. The final results of the Bikini experiment 
cannot be known for several weeks. In comparison 
to the damage already wrought in Japan and tha 
which is likely to follow from an underwater atomic 
explosion, planned for the near future, the June 4 
results may appear negligible. 


As yet neither the Baruch proposals nor sugges 
tions made by Russia for outlawing atomic weapons 
have been explained clearly to the general public 
Mr. Baruch’s insistence that quick and certain pun 
ishment be meted out for any violations having to do 
with the manufacture of atomic bombs indicates that 
no nation should have “veto” rights in an Atomic 
Development Authority, yet to be established. In s0 
far as the United States plan has been clarified, how- 
ever, Baruch’s suggestion relates to the abandon- 
ment of the veto power in the Security Council on 
atomic energy matters. This would in effect necessi- 
tate amendments to the United Nations Charter 
about the Security Council’s veto arrangements, 
which exist in any case only for the five permanent 
members. The question of the veto has already 
plagued other deliberations of the Security Council; 
and during the New York sessions of the Council 
it has become more than ever apparent that the 
danger of war itself must be eliminated. Many Sen- 
ators hold this view, and in this they join with Rus 
sia—as they did at the time of the San Francisco 
Conference—believing that improvement of politi 
cal relations among the major powers is the great 


question of the hour. Bia BOLLES 








