ularly 
Fric- 
1 the 
dical 
ecent 
ding 
Nco’s 
have 

the 
alysis 
derlie 


ON 


eed & 


sh lit- 
spain” 
nation 
esence 
of the 


New 


estern 
es the 
ces in 


arty in 
umbia 


everal 
ouncil 
nented 
1 neg- 


“ascist | 


nts, to 
istries 
s. He 
olicies, 
ind its 
put ef- 
terial’ 





National 
s matter 


KA» 
“IV, OW MICH. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


oom Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


‘nve 
7 & 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 

















Vou. XVII, No. 17 


FEBRUARY 18, 1938 





AMERICA’S ROLE IN THE FAR EASTERN CONFLICT 


by Paul B. Taylor 


The middle-of-the-road course adopted by the United 
States in the Far Eastern conflict has aroused wide- 
spread controversy. This report analyzes the issues of 
American policy toward war in the Far East, and the 
trend toward alignment with Britain, France and other 
powers which oppose change of the status quo by force. 


February 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents a copy 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 

















THE NIGGER IN THE 


GERMAN WOODPILE 





os diplomatic and army shake-up, like a 
powerful dissolvent, has precipitated a kaleido- 
scopic reshuffling of Europe’s political alignments. 
Into the melting pot of rumors, conjectures and 
wishful thinking have been thrown not only wild 
speculations regarding Germany's next step in Eu- 
rope, but Britain’s suddenly resumed negotiations 
with Italy regarding withdrawal of Italian troops 
from Spain; the spectacular fall of the “Goga and 
Gaga” government in Rumania; and Schuschnigg’s 
surprise visit to Hitler's Berchtesgaden retreat. 
While the political flavor of the resulting stew 
remains to be determined, one of its principal in- 
gredients is Britain's desire to forestall any drastic 
announcement by Hitler when he addresses the 
Reichstag on February 20. It is Britain which, profit- 
ing by the suspense created by the Hitler “purge,” 
attempted to weaken the Rome-Berlin axis from its 
Italian end by pressing for a settlement. If rumor 
is true, it is British pressure in Bucharest which 
hastened the fall of Goga. Again, it is Britain 
which, seeking to translate the Halifax visit into 
concrete terms, is said to have urged an Austro- 
German compromise safeguarding Austria’s inde- 
pendence, for which the Reich might be rewarded 
by some concession on the colonies. Throughout 
Fastern Europe, the hope that Britain, having 
achieved a measure of rearmament and resumed 
international lending, is now on the point of play- 
ing its role as a great power buoys up statesmen who 
fear German expansion and, having been disillu- 
sioned by France, now turn to the British for support. 


While the British Cabinet appears to be agreed 
tegarding the necessity of concessions to Germany 
and Italy, it is reported to be split on the pace of 
negotiations with the fascist dictatorships — Prime 
Minister Chamberlain advocating immediate pay- 
ment on account, before Hitler has had a chance to 


throw Europe into turmoil, and Foreign Minister 
Eden urging caution in making concessions without 
first obtaining adequate guarantees of good behavior 
from would-be aggressors. There is little doubt that 
Italy, which has dissipated its military and economic 
resources on far-flung expeditions, is ready to taper 
off its foreign commitments, and concentrate its 
strength in Central Europe and the Balkans, where 
its aspirations clash with those of Germany. While 
Mussolini officially welcomed further consolidation 
of Hitler’s totalitarian state, he can hardly remain 
indifferent to the possibility that a stronger Ger- 
many may use pressure to bring Austria within the 
orbit, not of the Rome-Berlin axis, but of the Third 
Reich; or overlook the propaganda regarding harsh 
treatment of Germans in the Italian Tyrol, which 
appeared in Munich immediately after the army 
“purge.” Nor does Hitler’s diplomatic shake-up offer 
much hope of additional German help to Rebel 
Spain, where Italy might be left holding the bag 
while the Reich intensifies its Drang nach Osten. 
Mussolini appears ready to withdraw from Spain, 
provided some method is found of presenting his 
withdrawal as a triumph for Italian diplomacy. 
Britain, in turn, seems ready to facilitate this process 
of face-saving by promising belligerent rights for 
Franco, recognition of Ethiopia and possibly a loan 
for development of Italy’s new empire: 


Carol Jettisons Goga ‘ 

Meanwhile, King Carol, who apparently used ~ 
Goga as a graphic if unpleasant example of what 
might be expected under the more extreme régime of 
the fascist leader, Codreanu—chief aspirant to the 
post of Rumanian Fuehrer—jettisoned Goga when 
his anti-Semitic and anti-foreign measures threat- 
ened to plunge Rumania into economic chaos and 
alienate the Western democracies. On February 10 
Carol set up a government of “national union,” 





























which serves as a screen for his personal dictator- 
ship. This cabinet, headed by Premier Miron Cristea, 
Patriarch of the Orthodox Church, includes members 
of all parties, with the notable exception of 
Codreanu’s Fascist Iron Guard and the liberal Na- 
tional Peasant party, whose leader, Maniu, issued a 
manifesto on February 11 severely criticizing Carol’s 
high-handed disregard of parliamentary methods. 
The key posts in the Cabinet—Interior, Justice and 
War—are held by so-called “king’s men,” with 
George Tatarescu, whose Liberal party was defeated 
at the polls in December, acting as Foreign Minis- 
ter. On February 12 the King suspended the consti- 
tution; appointed a commission to draft a new or- 
ganic law; proclaimed martial law and a strict censor- 
ship; and announced a program which contemplates 
economic and social reforms—long overdue in Ru- 
mania—as well as adherence to Rumania’s alliances 
with France and the Little Entente. Goga’s fall con- 
stitutes a severe blow co extremism in Rumania, and 
is regarded in Berlin as a defeat for the Rome-Berlin 
axis. But King Carol's dictatorship, beneficial as it 
may prove for a country torn by political turmoil, can 
hardly be regarded as a step toward democracy, and 
the Goga measures against Jews have been postponed 
or soft-pedaled rather than definitely abandoned. 


Nor is it possible, as yet, to assess the true charac- 
ter of the projected Austro-German settlement. 
Schuschnigg’s visit to Berchtesgaden on February 12 
—at the request of Hitler, apparently prompted by 
Mussolini—can in no sense be described as a trip 
to Canossa. The Austrian Chancellor is a determined, 
strongly religious man, not easily shaken by either 
threats or inducements. He went to Berchtesgaden 
not as a petitioner, but as a complainant against in- 
creased Nazi activity in Austria—which, according 
to documents seized in a raid on Nazi headquarters 
in Vienna on January 26, is directly inspired and 
financed by the Reich. Schuschnigg, it is reported, 
cold Hitler that Austria's independence could not 
be the subject of discussion. He demanded that 
Hitler publicly disavow the Austrian Nazis, whose 
activities are at present illegal. Hitler countered by 
insisting that the position of Austrian Nazis be 
legalized, and that a pro-Nazi, Dr. Seyss-Inquarht— 
whom Schuschnigg had planned to include in his 
Cabinet—be given the key post of Minister of the 
Interior, now held by the Austrian Chancellor. To 
grant this demand would be to throw the door wide 
open to German domination of Austria. To refuse, 
according to reported threats of German leaders, 
would be to invite a wave of Nazi terrorism which 
might make it necessary for the Reich to “restore 
order” in Austria. This leaves Schuschnigg with a 
choice between the devil and the deep blue sea. Ger- 
many, moreover, is said to be seeking control of the 
Alpine Montan Company, Austria’s chief producer 





Page Two 





remem 
——— - 





—<. 


of iron ore. The Reich needs Austria’s raw materials, 
but Austria has been reluctant to accumulate frozep 
debts in the Reich, when it can sell for cash in other 
markets. While Germany remained Austria's prin- 
cipal customer in 1937, Austrian exports to coun. 
tries which do not have clearing agreements—Brit. 
ain, France, Switzerland and the United States— 
showed a sharp increase. Austria is undoubtedly 
ready to reach a compromise with Germany—but 
only if Hitler unequivocally recognizes its inde. 
pendence by deeds, and not merely by words. 

By holding Europe in suspense regarding his next 
step, Hitler apparently hopes to achieve his objec- 
tives without having to fight for them. Like Musso- 
lini, Hitler has found that threats are cheaper, and 
often more effective, than cannon. When Hitler as. 
serts that he wants peace, he is probably sincere. Buy 
the peace he envisages is a peace enforced on weaker 
countries by threats of worse to come if they do nor 
yield. This is the nigger in the German woodpile of 
pacific assurances. This is what complicates the prob- 
lem of reaching a settlement with Hitler's Reich. 
Few would argue today that the Western democta- 
cies can indefinitely perpetuate the European status 
quo in the face of nations which question its assump- 
tions. Change there must be—but how is it to be 
achieved? The real issue is whether the democracies, 
in negotiating with Hitler, should lead from fear, 
discarding tricks like Austria or Czechoslovakia in 
the time-honored game of power-politics; or lead 
from realization that concessions must be fitted into 
a framework of international organization which 
provides both for peaceful change and for action 
against aggression—by force or threat of force. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 
NAVAL ISSUES HINGE ON CHINA 


Japan’s note of February 12, while expressing a 
desire for ‘fair and equitable” disarmament, refuses 








to supply the information on its naval building plans 
requested by Great Britain, France and the United 


States, signatories of the London Naval Treaty of | 


March 25, 1936. Even the qualitative limitations on 
naval armament effective during the past two yeats | 


now seem about to be thrown into the discard. Diplo- 
matic conversations, involving resort to the “‘esca- 
lator’ clause by the three democratic powers, are 
expected to start immediately. An unlimited naval 
armament race, both in tonnage and gun calibre, 
will probably begin before the year is out. Because 
of the rumor that Japan is building larger capital 
ships, existing limitation to 35,000 tons will no 


longer be maintained. The building of 40,000-ton | 


capital ships, or even larger, manned by 18-inch 

guns and costing possibly 75 million dollars in the 

case of the United States, seems about to become 4 

reality. This development will apparently not be 
(Continued on Page 4) 











BEBREE Il 


es— 
redly 
—but 
inde. 


next 
bjec- 
UuSSO- 
and 
tT aS 
. But 
eaker 
DO not 
ile of 
prob- 
eich. 
\0Cra- 
status 
ump- 
to be 
acies, 
fear, 
cia in 

lead 
1 into 
which 
action 


AN 
ing a 


Fuses 
plans 


aty of | 


ns On 
years 
Diplo- 

esca- 
S$, are 
naval 
alibre, 
ecause 
-apital 
ill no 
00-ton 
8-inch 
in the 
ome a 


ot be 


W ashington News Letter 














, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Fes. 15—At the end of the second week of a 
turbulent running debate on the rdle of the navy in 
American foreign policy, Washington correspondents 
assigned to the State Department were handed last 
Saturday a short mimeographed press release which 
served to underline the points at issue more sharply 
and more effectively than any of the questions and 
answers bandied back and forth on Capitol Hill. 
[he press release contained the text of a letter from 
Rep. Louis Ludlow, father of the war referendum, 
and a reply from Secretary Hull. Mr. Ludlow, 
voicing the fears and suspicions of many of his Con- 
gressional colleagues, asked whether the new arma- 
ment program is intended solely for ‘defense of our 
homeland and our possessions” or whether it really 
contemplates the use of the navy “in cooperation 
with any other nation in any part of the world.” 

The question had been asked before in the course 
of the week—not once but a dozen times—and had 
been answered. But too many questions and answers 
had missed the mark. Senator Hiram Johnson, stirred 
to action by the implications of “secret consulta- 
tions” in London, had introduced a formal resolution 
(Feb. 7) demanding that the Secretary of State “‘ad- 
vise the Senate whether or not any alliance, agree- 
ment or understanding exists or is contemplated with 
Great Britain relating to war or the possibility of 
war.” Without waiting for the Senate to act on the 
resolution, Mr. Hull had shot back his curt and 
emphatic “no.” Admiral Leahy, testifying before 

House Naval Affairs Committee, had given 
categorical assurance that the navy had “no foreign 
mmitments’” and no “understandings regarding 
assistance to be given or received.” And Chairman 
Vinson, striving to allay fears of entanglement, had 
introduced (Feb. 11) an amendment to the naval 
bill defining the “fundamental naval policy” in terms 
of single-handed defense of American rights and 
interests throughout the world. Ironically, as it 
seemed to some, the Vinson isolationist policy called 
for a “two-fleet” navy far larger than any yet pro- 
posed, and adequate “to guard the Continental 
United States . . . in both oceans at one and the same 
time; to protect the Panama Canal, Alaska, Hawaii, 
and our insular possessions; to protect our commerce 
and citizens abroad; to . . . guarantee our national 
security, but not for aggression; to insure our na- 
tional integrity, and to support our national policies.” 

Mr. Hull’s reply to Mr. Ludlow, which was timed 








with the Japanese note declining to divulge informa- 
tion on Tokyo's naval building program, was ap- 
parently designed to serve a double se. It 
sought to reinforce previous denials that the United 
States had any engagements relating to war, while 
upholding the basic principles of consultation with 
other powers in defense of “common interests and 
common objectives.” Two passages were read with 
particular interest: 

“We believe, however, that the people of this count 
desire that the country be respected, that our nationals 
our interests abroad be given fair treatment, and that there © 
should prevail in the world conditions of peace, order and 
security. This country always has exerted its influence in 
support of such objectives. We believe that withia the limi- 
tations of its traditional policies it should continue to do 
so. If it is prepared and known to be prepared, the likeli- 


hood of its being drawn into trouble will either be absent 
or greatly diminished.” 


After stating that the middle-of-the road policy 
announced last August “‘is still being strictly ob- 
served,” Mr. Hull added: 

“That while avoiding any alliances or entangling commit- 
ments, it is appropriate and advisable, when this and other 
countries have common interests and common objectives, 
for this government to exchange information with govern- 
ments of such other countries, to confer with those govern- 
ments, and, where practicable, to proceed on parallel lines, 
but reserving always the fullest freedom of judgment and 
right of independence of action.” 

While this candid statement quieted the worst 
fears on Capitol Hill, few Washington observers 
believed that it would be the last word in the cur- 
rent debate. For the statement itself, coupled with - 
other developments, still lefe the door open to two 
interpretations. To those like Dr. Beard, Representa- 
tive Brewster, and Senator Johnson, who suspected 
the word “quarantine’’ in the President's Chicago 
speech, it fitted into a disturbing pattern fashioned 
by the secret London mission of Captain Ingersoll, 
chief of the War Plans division; the revelation that 
the traditional defense line in the Pacific has been 
pushed out to Samoa; and the rumors of plans for 
a long-distance blockade of Japan to be enforced by 
joint action of the two fleets. Those who dislike the 
implications of “parallel action” cannot believe that 
Captain Ingersoll was concerned solely with consul- 
tations preparatory to invoking the escalator clause 
of the London Naval Treaty. 


On the other hand, to those who fear the conse- 
quences of isolation at a time when the peace of the 
world is threatened, these same moves in the diplo- 
matic game fit into another pattern. This section of 














opinion agrees with Mr. Hull that it “is a matter of 
simple common sense for nations which desire peace 
to cooperate in every practical way.” They see Amer- 
ican and British diplomacy, by parallel action, tak- 
ing advantage of the balance of forces in the Pacific 
—a balance which is stacked against Japan in the 
long run—in order to advance toward a new Far 
Eastern settlement in which the Western powers will 
have a voice. The two navies are inevitably instru- 
ments of this diplomacy; so are the Soviet force in 
Siberia and the resistance of China. In the end, 
diplomacy may use this balance of force to convince 
Japan that a compromise settlement is inevitable, 
and that other powers are concerned with the terms. 

Whatever the true pattern, the question on every 
mind in Washington is whether the navy is to be used 
as an instrument of wise or blustering diplomacy. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 


NAVAL ISSUES HINGE ON CHINA 
(Continued from Page 2) 
affected by Japan’s implied assertion that it is not 
building super-vessels which exceed treaty limits. 

Naval limitation thus ends just sixteen years after 
signature of the Washington Conference treaties in 
February 1922. Current issues should be viewed in 
the light of the historical links between these two 
periods. The arguments presented in the Japanese 
note, despite their plausible exterior, are somewhat 
blunted by the events occurring in the Far East since 
September 18, 1931. China, for example, will not 
be impressed by the claim that Japan is “prompted 
by a spirit of non-menace and non-aggression.” 
Nor can Japan’s actions in China be separated from 
the issues involved in naval limitation. 

The Washington Conference treaties included a 
settlement of political questions in the Pacific area, 
without which naval limitation could not have been 
achieved. In the Nine-Power Treaty, Japan pledged 
itself to respect China’s independence and terri- 
torial and administrative integrity, and to uphold the 
principle of the open door. Later, Japan also re- 
stored Shantung province to China. As a result of 
this political settlement, the Western powers became 
willing to surrender their commanding naval posi- 
tion in the Far East. They agreed, first, to maintain 
the status quo on fortifications and naval bases in a 
wide radius surrounding Japanese possessions and, 
second, to enter into a ship-scrapping and naval limi- 
tation agreement on the basis of a 5-5-3 ratio. These 
terms guaranteed Japan’s naval security in the Far 
East, unless its naval needs expanded by virtue of 
aggressive action. By 1931-1932 Japan’s margin of 


Page Fourr= 














=| FC 





—— 











security had further increased, as the United States 
lagged behind while Japan built up to treaty limits. 

Japan chose this moment to overrun Manchuria 
and set up “Manchoukuo.”” On December 29, 1934 
when its demand for naval parity was not conceded, 
Japan denounced the Washington naval limitation 
agreements. In other words, it first tore up the Nine. 
Power Treaty and then refused to abide by the 5-5-3 
naval limitation ratio. Today Japan seeks to conquer 
the whole of China. Commensurate with its new 
responsibilities, nothing less than full naval parity 
can represent “a fair and equitable measure of dis. 
armament’ —which is the gist of the Japanese note 
of February 12. Japan wants naval equality in order 
to defend its recent conquests; this the Westem 
powers will not admit. Naval limitation, at least in 
the Pacific, is not likely to be re-established until a 
new settlement of China questions is reached be. 
tween Japan and the Western powers. 

In Mr. Vinson’s omnibus definition of American 
foreign policy, which he proposes to incorporate in 
the naval appropriations bill, our interest in China 
questions, i.e., the open door, comes under the head- 
ing of “national policies.” The tug-of-war between 
Congress and the Executive seems to have landed 
the United States in a dilemma. The President does 
not wish to apply the Neutrality Act. This Act would 
prevent China from purchasing the munitions of 
war which it cannot manufacture, while permitting 
Japan to buy the oil, scrap iron and cotton with 
which it can manufacture munitions. The President 
also seems to feel that sentiment in Congress and the 
country is opposed to American cooperation with 
other powers to restrain Japan’s aggression in China. 
On the other hand, he apparently believes that gen: 
eral support for naval increases can be secured. The 
result is a naval-building program under which the 
United States prepares single-handed to defend both 
coasts, at one and the same time, as well as our tra- 
ditional overseas commitments in the Far East. There 
is no evidence that the isolationist bloc can en: 
force a complete withdrawal from our Far Eastern 
involvements, which remain as extensive as ever. Un 
der the circumstances, it might be safer and less ex 
pensive for the American people to support the 
Executive in an open and avowed effort to achieve 
concerted international action against Japan. Ii 
would be cheaper, because concerted action would 
not demand the huge navy required for single 
handed defense of the policies laid down by Mr 
Vinson. It would be safer, because it would hold out 
some possibility of reversing the trend toward 
anarchy beyond our shores. T. A. Bisson 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 17, Fasruary 18, 1938 Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lustig BusLt, President; Vera Micugres Dgan, Editor. 


Nations 
Entered as second-class matte 


December 2, 1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


A 
RIO! 
ENER 
NIY. 





= 1s| 


| = 








