








past 


n he 
olish 
-ation 
aw in 
e day 
other 
d Dr. 


»vern- 
L join 


wwakia 
oy the 


r, Dr. 
ots in 
11Ca20- 
sads a 
as, and 
Milan 
restige 
, Lon 
ely to 
h gov- 
re in a 


[OTT 


DS 


PERIODICAL Room 


RAL LIBRARY 
V. OF MICh 


'eneral Library 


vr * 
t 3 | , - 
“ily 


. os 


MAY 28 1943 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


pres ts 
Srsity of Michigan, 


Ann Arbor. Nich 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 32 


May 28, 1943 





—_ 


HE decision of the Presidium of the Executive 
Committee of the Communist International, 
reached on May 15 and announced on May 22, to 
propose its own dissolution to its sections in vari- 
gus countries, marks a turning-point not only in the 
war, but also in the turbulent history of our times. 
One of Hitler’s strongest propaganda weapons has 
been the prevailing fear of Communism, against 
which he offered Nazism as a bulwark. By dissolv- 
ing the ties that bound Communist parties through- 
gut the world into an international organization, the 
Comintern removes itself from the arena of the 
world-shaking ideological debate that has raged ever 
since its formation by Lenin in 1919. Its disappear- 
ace, at the same time, is the culmination of pro- 
found changes that have been taking place in Soviet 
foreign policy during the past quarter of a century. 

“PERMANENT REVOLUTION” LONG OVER. 
When the Bolsheviks came to power in 1917, they 
were faced with bitter opposition both within Russia 
ind abroad. On the home front they crushed their 
opponents first by victory in the civil war of 1918-21, 
and subsequently by successive purges of hostile ele- 
ments of both Right and Left. On the foreign front, 
they waged an equally stubborn struggle, first against 
‘tapitalist encirclement,” then, after Hitler’s emer- 
gence on the scene, against “Fascist aggression.” In 
this struggle the Communist International played an 
important part, great as were the efforts of the Soviet 
government to dissociate itself officially from its activi- 
ties. Not only were its headquarters in Moscow, 
where it was inevitably subject to Russian influence, 
bat the Communist parties that composed it sought 
in every possible way to conform to the “party line” 
& formulated by the Russian Communists, irrespec- 
lve of the national interests or aspirations of their 
own countries. 


In the early days of Soviet rule, the “party line” 
was determined first and foremost by the expecta- 











END OF COMINTERN CLARIFIES RUSSIA’S POLICY 


tion that the Russian revolution would be the har- 
binger of similar uprisings all over the world. It was 
with this expectation in mind that Trotzky advocated 
a policy of “permanent revolution,” which would 
have made of Russia the standard-bearer of a world- 
wide revolutionary movement. This policy met with 
a series of setbacks between 1921 and 1927 when, 
in the wake of the “return to normalcy” after the 
war, Fascist or conservative tendencies, instead of 
Leftist uprisings, gained the upper hand in countries 
that were experiencing social turmoil—notably Italy, 
Hungary and China and, later, of course, Germany. 
Following Lenin’s death in 1924, Stalin, who op- 
posed ‘‘permanent revolution,” challenged Trotzky’s 
leadership, and in this fateful duel for power won a 
lasting victory, first ejecting Trotzky from party 
ranks in 1927, then exiling him from the Soviet 
Union. It is significant that the last annual meeting 
of the Communist International was held in 1922, 
and that thereafter the organization assembled only 
on three occasions—in 1924, 1928, and 1935. The 
years that followed Trotzky’s defeat—years of grim 
struggle to industrialize Russia, collectivize its agri- 
culture, and forge its relatively backward and in- 
choate masses of people into a great military power 
—were marked by the ascendancy of Stalin’s own 
views, which he summed up as the “building of social- 
ism in one country.” Stalin’s essentially nationalist 
policy, as contrasted with the internationalism of 
Lenin and Trotzky, was cemented by the German 
invasion of the U.S.S.R. in 1941, which aroused in 
the Russians a sense of national unity in defense of 
their fatherland against the Nazis. ° 
WILL RUSSIA ABANDON INTERVENTION? 
In its decision of May 15 the Communist Interna- 
tional recognizes that the stubborn resistance of the 
United Nations, like that of Russia, is due not solely 
to the activities of Communists in their midst, but 
to the staying power of national unity, and under- 





—_—————————>={H{={=x=[{_—__——=—==_= Page Two 


takes not to weaken this resistance—which is of di- 
rect aid to Russia—by the perpetuation of dissension 
between Communists and non-Communists. Many 
people, while welcoming this move, have already 
raised the question whether this is not mere scene- 
shifting, to be followed by the resumption of inter- 
ventionist activities formerly attributed to the Com- 
munist International, but this time openly on behalf 
of Russia’s national interests. Only practical experi- 
ence can answer this question—but one thing already 
is clear. Russia will continue to take a lively interest 
in the policies and actions of its neighbors, and will 
insist that such policies and actions should not as- 
sume an anti-Russian character. 

In this, Russia would not be acting differently from 
other great powers, each of which tries, at one time 
or another, to use its influence to produce in neigh- 
boring countries reactions favorable to its cause—as 
the United States, for example, has done again and 
again in Latin America. To assume that no such in- 
tervention will take place after the war is to nurture 
a dangerous illusion. The real question at stake is 
not whether the great powers will intervene in 
smaller countries—this can be taken for granted— 
but whether, in the future, they will use their influ- 
ence with some sense of responsibility toward these 
countries. If Russia’s relations with its weaker neigh- 
bors should be guided in the future by concern for 
their welfare, and that of the world community, as 
well as the welfare of the U.S.S.R., then it can greatly 
help post-war reconstruction—as the dissolution of 





—=:2 





the Comintern indicates it wants to do. And there js 
little doubt that the degree of responsibility it exer. 
cises will, in turn, depend on that shown by Britain 
and the United States, and on the mutual confideng 
that can be developed between the three great powers, 
Nor should we expect that the dissolution of the 
Communist International will necessarily end the 
possibility of revolutions in Europe or elsewhere 
Such revolutions as may occur, however, will not be 
the result primarily of propaganda from Moscoy 
whether nationalist or Communist in origin. They 
will spring, first, from maladjustments within the 
countries where they take place. But they will be 
affected, as Stalin anticipated in the early twenties, 
by the example Russia has set of “building socialism 
in one country.” Russia will unquestionably exercise 
great influence during and after the war—not because 
of its propaganda, which has been relatively ineffec 
tive in the advanced industrial countries of the West, 
but because it has had the courage and resourceful. 
ness, and has developed the technical ability, to re 
sist the greatest military and industrial power of our 
times. This influence cannot be effectively combated 
by witch-hunting of American Communists, or by at 
tempts to isolate Russia. It can be met, squarely and 
honorably, only by demonstrating—as the British and 
Americans are doing today—that a democratic so- 
ciety can display similar qualities of courage and 
resourcefulness while, at the same time, preserving 
or even perfecting its own political institutions. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FOOD PARLEY PRACTICAL TEST OF POST-WAR IDEALS 


The first sessions of the United Nations’ food 
conference, which opened at Hot Springs, Virginia, 
on May 18 for the purpose of discussing post-war 
freedom from want, were beset by difficulties which 
tended to obscure the delegates’ fundamental ob- 
jectives. Some of these difficulties, such as exclusion 
of the press, resulted from special wartime circum- 
stances and need for secrecy; others arose from con- 
fusion over whether wartime production and relief 
as well as long-term agricultural policies were to be 
discussed. By the beginning of the second week of 
meetings, however, these handicaps had been largely 





For a study of the problems which will confront 
any United Nations relief council and six essential 
principles of planning for an effective rehabilita- 
tion policy in countries freed from the Axis, 
READ— 

U. S. RELIEF FOR EUROPE 
IN WORLD WAR I by Winifred N. Hadsel 


25c 


March 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5.00; to F.P.A. members, $3.00. 











overcome through relaxing the restrictions on cor } 


respondents and making it clear that a separate con- 
ference on relief problems will be held later. 


RECORD WILL BE IMPORTANT. It is of the 
greatest importance that the ground should be thus 
cleared for action, for the delegates from the 45 
countries represented have open to them a two-fold 
opportunity that may not present itself as clearly 
again. First, they have within their grasp the pos 
sibility of restoring public confidence in the ability 
of international discussions to serve as a means of 
securing understandings and workable bases for ef 


fective action. Between 1932 and 1939 the tech- ( 


nique of conferences fell into widespread disreputt 
because of its repeated failure to secure agreements 
or to culminate in any definite proposals. If, aftet 
victory, the roundtable method of controlling it 
ternational relations—the alternative to the use of 
force—is to be restored as a dependable means of 
retaining unity among the United Nations, a com 
ference on a subject of such universal and vital im 
portance as food offers a chance to establish that fact 

The major objective of the conference is the formu 
lation of constructive plans for adjusting post-wal 





anne vu Se KR AS ih 


= 
Cc 


Ser pb csc > oA. 


@ me 


- 


& © SS bt ss wa 


a es ae i _- ~~ = = LYE 





10t be 


ill be 
nities, 
ialism: 
ercise 
Cause 
effec. 
West, 
ceful- 
to re 
of our 
ibated 
by at- 
ly and 
sh and 
HC $0- 
e and 
erving 


EAN 


Nn CO / 


'e COM 


of the 
e thus 
he 45 
7o-fold 
clearly 
1 poy 
ability 
ans of 
for ef 
> tech 
srepute 
ements 
after 
ing i 
use of 
ans of 
a com 
tal im 
at fact. 
formw 
ost-wal 

















— Page Three a 


agriculture to secure better nutrition for all people. 
The war has succeeded in making the world con- 
scious of the importance of good nutrition. For more 
than a generation before 1939 reformers and liberals 
preached the duty of governments to improve the 
diets of underprivileged citizens but, even where this 
responsibility was assumed, it was usually considered 
chatity rather than good economics and politics. 
When nations became armed camps, however, the 
relation between adequate food, good morale, and 
ability to do the work that war demanded was made 
painfully clear, and the food front became only a 
little less important than the fighting front. Now, 
as these nations at war look toward the post-war 
period, they realize that their obligations to feed 
their people properly will not cease with termination 
of the conflict, but must continue if a stable and 
peaceful world is to be established. 

LONG VISTA OF PROBLEMS. As the British 
delegation stated in its declaration of principles on 
May 23, the present conference can “provide a val- 
uable introduction to the consideration of those eco- 
nomic problems to which the United Nations will 
have to devote their urgent attention in the near 
future.”” Included in this list is the need for improv- 
ing the education of consumers to encourage them to 
adopt more healthy patterns of nutrition. This is not 
to say, of course, that every one in every part of the 
world should have exactly the same diet, for the 
much-discussed Hottentot may find that a pint of 
milk per day is not in accord with his tastes and 
habits. Furthermore, local climates and soils must 
obviously be determining factors in arranging an 
area’s basic diet. 

Another subject that discussions of post-war agri- 
culture will raise is the future of current wartime 
controls used to encourage production. A too hasty 
feturn to normalcy would greatly penalize countries 
like New Zealand which have expanded farm pro- 
duction for export, and would lead to an agricul- 
tural slump similar to the one which followed 
World War I. Moreover, a country like England, 
which under pressure of war has reversed its century- 
long tradition of importing most of its food and 
how produces approximately 60 per cent, does not 
want to lose the social values of this return to the 
land. As Prime Minister Churchill noted in his speech 
to Parliament of March 21, in which he outlined 
Britain’s post-war domestic aims, “a vigorous re- 
vival of healthy village life” is one of Britain's 
desired goals. At the same time, however, the British 





realize they will have to resume purchasing abroad 
if they expect to sell in foreign markets, and believe 
that they can, simultaneously, maintain their re- 
stored agricultural life only by raising the level of 
consumption. 

Also involved in the discussion of food will be the 
matter of improving agricultural equipment. Con- 
cretely, this means that countries such as the United 
Kingdom and the United States will have to pro- 
vide better farm buildings, new equipment for tin 
farms, and new homes and community buildings in 
order to encourage farmers to remain on the soil 
instead of flocking to cities. In less advanced coun- 
tries like China or Mexico, where necessary equip- 
ment must be secured from abroad if more food is 
to be produced, this expansion of agriculture means 
that additional industrial goods will have to be 
imported. International financial and monetaty 
agreements would also be necessary in carrying on 
this campaign against human want, for long-term 
credits would have to be extended to many countries 
to enable them to carry through a policy of increased 
production. Bolivia, for example, has already indi- 
cated through its delegate that it could not make 
the capital investments needed for increasing pro- 
duction without more credit than has been available 
in the past. Thus the adoption of a food policy 
based on human needs, once it has been implemented 
by the United Nations, could serve as a “self-starter” 
for an entire cycle of increased industrial production 
and expanded world trade. 


WHINIFRED N. HADSEL 





Japan’s Dream of World Empire: The Tanaka Memorial, 
edited with an introduction by Carl Crow. New York, 
Harper, 1942. $1.25 
Text of the much-discussed memorial on world conquest, 

supposedly submitted to the Emperor on July 25, 1927 by 

Premier Tanaka. Accompanied by notes and a brief intro- 

duction and conclusion. 


Fire in the Pacific, by Simon Harcourt-Smith. New York, 

Knopf, 1942. $2.00 

A former British official in the Far East briefly surveys 
the history of Japanese aggression, convinced that the 
people of Japan are “seventy-five million madmen, all pre- 
pared to commit any crime at the behest of the State.” 
The author is sharply critical of pre-war appeasement 
policies and believes that steps must be taken at once to 
enlist the peoples of the colonial east in our cause. 


Hitler: Man of Strife, by Ludwig Wagner. New York, Nor- 
ton, 1942. $3.50 
An up-to-date biography of Hitler, packed with his- 
torical facts, dates and events, and written in a light 
imaginative vein. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 32, May 28, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lagt, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor. Encered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
a Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





Washington News Letter 














May 24.—Congress last week witnessed the rare 
spectacle of a British Prime Minister replying to a 
United States Senator on the floor of the House of 
Representatives. But it would be a profound mistake 
to assume that Senator Chandler of Kentucky— 
who, in a three-hour speech in the Senate on May 17, 
raised the question of whether it was sound policy 
for the United Nations to concentrate on Germany 
first—spoke merely for himself. 


Senator Chandler is an influential member of the } 


Senate Military Affairs Committee, and therefore has 
access to the private views of high-ranking com- 
manders in the U.S. fighting services. In his speech 
he was probably reflecting the opinions of some of 
the military and naval men in the country. His was 
an “inspired” talk, timed for delivery while vital de- 
cisions concerning the future conduct of the war were 
still in the making in the current Roosevelt-Churchill 
conferences with the Combined Chiefs of Staff. 


A POPULAR DEMAND. In making himself the 
public champion of the “beat Japan first” school of 
thought, Senator Chandler has brought into the open 
a topic that has long been the subject of much hush- 
hush discussion in Washington. The Navy, in par- 
ticular, which professionally regarded Japan as the 
“hereditary enemy,” from the beginning has been 
itching to carry the fight to the Far Eastern foe first. 
The Navy has been supported by a number of: high 
U.S. Army officers now operating in Australia, India, 
and China, who consider that Washington grossly un- 
derestimates the Japanese peril. It will be recalled that 
in April this group warned that Japanese invasion of 
Australia was imminent. It should be noted, however, 
that Senator Chandler went beyond mere debate of 
the military strategy of the United Nations. He also 
raised doubts about the intentions of Russia, and 
cast aspersions on the present Far Eastern achieve- 
ments, as well as the future plans, of Britain. In 
this respect he voiced an isolationist point of view, 
and was joined—through the process of “‘yielding”’ on 
the request of other Senators—by former outspoken 
isolationists such as Wheeler, Shipstead, Vandenberg 
and Clark of Missouri. 


WHY GERMANY COMES FIRST. Mr. Chur- 
* chill, in his speech to Congress on May 19, indicated 
that the decision taken by him and Mr. Roosevelt 
at their Washington meeting in January 1942 to 
concentrate against the European end of the Axis 
until Germany and Italy are defeated, leaving the 


FOR VICTORY ° 


struggle against Japan until later, still stands. 
this meeting, he said, “it was evident that while 
defeat of Japan would not mean the defeat of 
many, the defeat of Germany would infallibly m 


the defeat of Japan.” This strategy he made clear, 


is essential for the security of both Britain and the 
United States. Moreover, he declared, it will be nec. 
essary in the immediate future to balance off, in 
other parts of Europe, the contribution Russia is mak- 
ing to the United Nations’ cause by holding at least 
190 Nazi divisions, plus 28 divisions of Germany's 
satellites, nailed down on the eastern front, as com- 
pared with an equivalent of 15 divisions which the 
Axis lost in Tunisia. While Senator Chandler based 
his case on the premise that the Nazis were hence- 
forth doomed to remain on the defensive, Mr. 
Churchill told Congress that there was “‘little doubt 
that Hitler is reserving his supreme gambler’s throw 
for a third attempt to break the heart and spirit” of 
the Red Army. He stated that the United States and 
Britain must do everything in their power that is 
“sensible and practicable to take more of the weight 
off Russia in 1943.” 


Mr. Churchill was able to a great extent to dispel 
the fear voiced by Senator Chandler that, after Ger- 
many had been defeated, Britain would relax its 
efforts and leave the United States to subdue Japan. 
The Prime Minister re-emphasized previous pledges 
to fight Japan to the death with all his country’s 
ability and resources, “side by side with you while 
there is a breath in our bodies and blood flows in 
our veins.” He pointed out that Britain has as great 
material interests to retrieve in the Far East as the 


United States, besides having what he called the | 


“largest military disaster” in British history to avenge. 


Naturally the Prime Minister was not in a position 
to say what aid, if any, Russia would give us in the 
war against Japan after Hitler is beaten. But it is 
significant that Churchill emphasized the hope he 
and Mr. Roosevelt have of meeting Stalin “at no 
distant date.” In Washington some observers believe 
the British and Americans will press the Russian 
Premier to grant American airmen the use of bases 
in Siberia from which to bomb Japan. It is perhaps 
not a coincidence that on the very day Mr. Churchill 
addressed Congress, the Tokyo radio cautioned Russia 
against placing bases at the disposal of the Allies, 
warning that such action would lead to a Japanese 
Blitzkrieg against the Red Army. 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 












| 





