


New 


SSOT 
ages 
icult 
Har- 
ving 


and 


tional 
Lest, 
York, 





General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arhor. Wich. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


A 
"P24 top 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vot. XXI, No. 27 


APRIL 24, 1942 





LAVAL SEEKS TO IMPOSE HITLER'S NEW ORDER ON FRANCE 


- his radio address of April 20 Pierre Laval, who 
on April 14 had been commissioned to form a gov- 
ernment “upon new foundations,” tried to assure the 
French people that there are no alternatives in the 
present conflict other than a complete Nazi victory 
followed by “‘socialization’”” of Europe. His speech 
presumably heralds a new propaganda offensive to 
destroy the democratic sentiments still alive in 
France, and to pave the way for France’s inclusion 
in Hitler’s ‘“‘new order.”’ 

The capitulation of Marshal Pétain to a man he 
eartily dislikes not only represents a personal de- 
feat, but opens a new phase in France’s relations with 
Germany. The appointment was the result of inten- 
sive negotiations started on March 27 when, in an 
interview with Marshal Pétain, M. Laval informed 
him that, in the opinion of Germany, France's for- 
eign relations were ‘worsening daily.” Not only was 


| the Vichy government leaning on Washington, but 











it had refused to carry out a German demand for 
French workers which would have been equivalent 
to a virtual mobilization of industrial man power in 
France and would have placed half a million more 
French skilled workers in German war industries. 
Following this refusal, the German government was 
teported to have sent a strongly worded note to Vichy 
on April 10, asking for the right to draw large con- 
tingents of workmen from both the occupied and the 
non-occupied zones; a reshuffle of the Vichy Cabinet 
aiming at a more “‘realistic’’ policy toward Germany; 
and a readjustment in Vichy’s attitude toward Wash- 
ington. The note apparently contained no indication 
of the consequences of refusal to comply with these 
demands, but on April 12 the German members of a 
commission meeting in Paris to arrange for the de- 
livery of 100,000 tons of wheat to the Vichy govern- 
ment were abruptly recalled to Berlin. 

THE NEW SETUP. Even before M. Laval had 
completed the list of his new Cabinet, it was an- 


nounced that Marshal Pétain would retain only the 
title of Chief of State. Admiral Darlan, who had 
occupied the posts of Vice-President of the Council 
of Ministers, Minister of National Defense, Secre- 
tary of State for Foreign Affairs, and performed 
other responsible functions, is not a member of the 
new Cabinet. However, he will remain Commander 
of the French Armed Forces and is directly respon- 
sible to the Marshal in this capacity. It has been offi- 
cially announced that he will continue to be the 
Marshal’s successor. 

In the Cabinet finally announced on April 18, M. 
Laval assumes the key posts of Chief of Government, 
and Minister of Foreign Affairs, Interior and Infor- 
mation. Of the other five Ministers, only two were 
in the previous Cabinet. Contrary to what may have 
been expected, the new Cabinet members have not 
been chosen from the most outspoken defenders of 
all-out collaboration with Germany. Neither Marcel 
Déat nor Jacques Doriot has been included among 
Laval’s official collaborators. This may be interpreted 
either as a move by Laval to concentrate all power in 
his own hands and at the same time conceal the pro- 
Axis character of his Cabinet, or as a maneuver to 
leave the way open for maintenance of relations with 
the United States. 

The announcement that M. Laval had taken over 
the reins of government has had immediate reper- 
cussions. In France, where M. Laval is thoroughly 
unpopular, signs of revolt against the Nazis flared up 
both in the occupied and unoccupied zones. Acts of 
sabotage ranging from hand-grenade throwing to 
derailment of a German troop train were reported 
from various sources. An attempt was made to as- 
sassinate M. Doriot. A general uprising of the French 
people seems improbable, however, as long as the 
new government refrains from open terrorism. 

WHAT NEXT? While it appears certain that the 
Laval government in no way represents the people 





A | 
it 


4 
| 
a 
1) 


a See Fe 


a EE a AZ 


———————— ———_=_S—_[_—_—_—_—Se ee  ~ Page Two 


of France, there is little indication of the moves it 
may make in the immediate future. As far as internal 
policy is concerned, it may increase the severity of 
police control and censorship, and mobilize more 
French man power for the German war industries. 
According to a recent report of the Office of Facts 
and Figures, the Berlin radio declared that 150,000 
French civilian workers were already in Germany, 
and boasted that four special trains leave France 
weekly with French volunteers for the Reich. Fur- 
thermore, it is believed that at least half of the present 
industrial output of France is for German account. 
The Nazis may possibly attempt to make the Laval 
régime more palatable to the French people by per- 


MEXICAN OIL PAC: CLEARS WAY FOR FULLER COOPERATION 


One of the few remaining obstacles to Mexico's 
full collaboration in the task of hemisphere defense 
was removed by the announcement, on April 18, that 
experts appointed by the governments of the United 
States and Mexico had fixed $23,995,991 as the value 
of this country’s oil properties expropriated by Mex- 
ico in 1938. The agreement on this troublesome prob- 
lem is an outgrowth of a general settlement of the 
issues outstanding between the two countries, reached 
on November 19, 1941. Because of the tense inter- 
national situation, both were at that time determined 
to employ methods to remove the irritating effects 
of the deadlock between the United States oil com- 
panies (of which the Standard Oil of New Jersey 
had by far the largest investments) and the Mexican 
régime over the compensation to be paid. Two ex- 
perts, one from each country, were therefore charged 
with determining the amount due the companies. 


THE OIL COMPANIES’ DILEMMA. While the 
United States firms need not accept the payment now 
offered—which represents but a small fraction of 
their claims—refusal to do so will leave them with- 
out government support in pressing their demands. 
From their point of view, acquiescence would mean 
that, implicitly at least, they had abandoned their in- 
sistence on compensation for subsoil rights which, 
they contended, represented the bulk of their prop- 


- erty in Mexico. If the companies were to adopt the 


position taken by the United States government that 





What was actually accomplished at Rio? To what 
extent was hemisphere solidarity strengthened? 


READ: 


The Rio de Janeiro Conference of 1942 
by DAVID H. POPPER 


25c 


April 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 


REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















—, 
ee 


mitting repatriation of some of the 1,500,000 Frenc, 
prisoners of war in Germany, or by delivering to up. 
occupied France a fraction of the foodstuffs produced 
in the occupied zone. But the gravest decision of the 
new government will concern the French fleet. y 
Laval faces three possible alternatives: to leave the 
fleet idle in French ports, as provided by the armis. 
tice; to use it for reconquest of French Equatorial 
Africa, Syria, or other French possessions now in the 
hands of Free French authorities; or to employ the 
fleet to support a possible Axis drive in the Medi. 
terranean. Any move by Laval to give military aid tp 
Hitler would bring France into open conflict with the 
United Nations. ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


such rights, even though once legally held, were to 
be ignored in settlements of this type, an important 
precedent would be set for indemnification of foreign 
minerals enterprises taken over by Latin American 
nations. Moreover, the tendency toward expropriation 
might be encouraged in this hemisphere, with far- 
reaching consequences for such enterprises. 

On the other hand, acceptance of the new valua- 
tion will wipe the slate clean of an immense accumu- 
lation of dispute and rancor. It will pave the way 
for return of the United States companies as technical 
experts to collaborate with the Mexican government 
on a royalty basis in operation of the wells at peak 
efficiency. Directly or indirectly, the proceeds of oil 
exports to the United States and other countries 
would then be used by Mexico to settle its debt 
to the companies. Such a program would greatly 
strengthen the trend toward development of Latin 
America’s natural resources by United States capital 
and managerial skill working together with local 
capital and labor, in joint enterprises in which the 
governments themselves play a prominent part. Co- 


operation of this kind may serve to moderate the| 


fears of many Latin Americans who still suspect that 
the war emergency may be used to rivet United States 
economic imperialism on their national life. 
COMPACTS FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOP. 
MENT. As far as Mexico is concerned, economic 
cooperation with this country has progressed by leaps 


and bounds since the accords of November 1941. On | 


April 4 the two governments formally announced 


their intention to negotiate a trade agreement. Three} i 


days later Dr. Ezequiel Padilla, Mexico’s Foreiga 
Minister then on-a visit to Washington, joined with 
Acting Secretary of State Sumner Welles in announce 
ing important new arrangements designed to increast 
Mexico’s productive capacity, especially in cases 
where the output would contribute to the United 
States’ war effort. Through cooperation between pti 
vate investors in this country, Mexican government 
agencies and the Export-Import Bank, basic indus 





tries $ 
establ 
for @ 
chaser 
progt 
ward 
diate 
railw: 
ing Ci 
two ¢ 
const: 


be bu 











BEFEFRSEB I 


E- 


“eter 


e to 
tant 
eign 
1Can 
tion 


ilua- 
imu- 
way 
nical 
nent 


f oil 
tries 
debt 
eatly 
atin 
pital 
local 
. the 


| that 


i] 
tates 


OP- 
omic 
leaps 


nced 


“hree 
reign 
with 
yunc- 
rease 


cases 
nited 
1 pfi- 
ment 
ndus- 











—— 


tries such as a:steel and tin-plate rolling mill may be 
established with the aid of favorable priority ratings 
for equipment and materials which must be pur- 
chased here. In addition to a highway construction 
rogram of great strategic value, already going for- 
ward under Export-Import Bank credits, an imme- 
diate survey is to be made of the needs of Mexico’s 
railway transportation system to improve its carry- 
ing capacity for vital war materials. Experts of the 
two countries will also investigate the possibility of 
constructing small cargo vessels in Mexico. It has 
been agreed that a high-octane gasoline plant shall 
be built there as soon as the necessary equipment can 
be spared by the United States. 


The full significance of the economic compacts be- 
tween Washington and Mexico City emerges only 
when it is realized that direct military cooperation 
between the two nations has reached a point never 
before equalled in their history. War measures super- 
vised by a joint defense board have done much to 
diminish the danger of enemy use of barren Lower 
California as a base, and preparations are under way 
to strengthen Mexico’s Caribbean installations. A 
lend-lease agreement signed on March 27—the fif- 
teenth now completed with American republics—un- 
doubtedly assures the Mexican government of the de- 
livery of additional armaments. Both the government 
and the powerful labor movement are wholehearted- 


THE F.P.A. 


Jews in a Gentile World: The Problem of Anti-Semitism, 
by Isacque Graeber, Steuart Henderson Britt, and 
others. New York, Macmillan, 1942. $4.00 


Distinguished scholars in sociology, psychology, eco- 
nomics, political science, anthropology and other social 
sciences contribute their analyses of the problem of anti- 
Semitism to an enlightening symposium. In view of re- 
current waves of interest in this baffling social phenomenon, 
the volume should serve as a guide of permanent value. 


Pierre Laval, by Henry Torrés. New York, Oxford, 1941. 
$2.50 


An intimate and critical biography, with special em- 
phasis on Laval’s ventures in French public life between 
1914 and 1936. The author, a prominent French attorney, 
has known Laval for more than 30 years. 


Dakar: Outpost of Two Hemispheres, by Emil Lengyel. 
New York, Random House, 1941. $2.00 


A colorful, popularly written account of the history and 
present condition of Dakar and French West Africa, based 
entirely on published sources. The author emphasizes the 
importance of the area in terms of Atlantic and world 
strategy and includes useful maps. 


Brazil in Capitals, by Vera Kelsey. New York, Harper, 
1942, $2.50 


Entertainingly written guide to Brazilian cities. 





Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: FRANCE’S ROLE IN NAZI BUROPB 
Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 

Date: Sunday, April 26 

Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 





For station, please consult your local news paper 








ly in favor of strong action to perfect the defenses of 
the hemisphere, so that the Allies can strike firmly 
against anti-democratic forces in other theaters of 
war. While some elements, within the govern- 
ment and outside it, still have many reservations re- 
garding such close collaboration with the United 
States, the sharp contrast between the Mexican atti- 
tude in 1917 and 1942 affords striking proof of the 
success of the Good Neighbor policy in recent years. 


Davip H. Popper 


F.P.A. BRANCH CONFERENCE 

On Friday, May 8, the Foreign Policy Association 
will hold a conference of representatives of F.P.A. 
Branches and Affiliates at National Headquarters, 
New York, for an exchange of experience and in- 
formation which we hope will prove mutually advan- 
tageous. The conference will discuss the educational 
objectives of the F.P.A. during the war period, and 
the methods by which the organization can increase 
the scope and usefulness of its work. 


BOOKSHELF 


This is England Today, by Allan Nevins. New York, Scrib- 
ner’s, 1941. $1.25 
The political, economic and social changes that are tak- 
ing place in Britain as a result of the war are examined 
by a distinguished American historian. 


The Totalitarian War—and After, by Carlo Sforza. Chi- 
cago, University of Chicago Press, 1941. $1.25 
A brief and lucid analysis of the world crisis by an 
Italian statesman who has consistently opposed Fascism 
and “appeasement.” 


Good Neighbors, by Hubert Herring. New Haven, Yale 

University Press, 1941. $3.00 

An unusually frank survey of social and economic forces 
at work in Argentina, Brazil and Chile, with short notes 
on the other 17 Latin American republics. The author, 
who has had long experience in the field of Inter-American 
affairs, devotes about two-thirds of his book to the large 
ABC countries. 


Post-War Worlds, by P. E. Corbett. New York, Farrar and 

Rinehart, 1942. $2.00 

A broad historical discussion of the various proposals 
for post-war organization, issued as a volume of the 
Inquiry Series of the Institute of Pacific Relations. This 
study also grapples with the concrete readjustments that 
will have to be considered in the regions of Europe, the 
Pacific, and the Western Hemisphere. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 27, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


APRIL 24, 1942. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


a 





Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Witutam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lest, 
Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dean, Editor; Davin H. Poppgr, Associate Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 


National 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Sees aad 
ss : 





Washington News Letter 








Per peed btagy 








APRIL 20.—Despite heartening reports that Amer- 
ican planes were bombing Tokyo and other Japanese 
cities, attention in Washington remained focused on 
the crisis in Europe precipitated by the return to pow- 
er of Pierre Laval. Critics of the State Department's 
policy toward Vichy adopted an “I-told-you-so” at- 
titude when Marshal Pétain surrendered political 
power to a man he had personally ousted from his 
Cabinet last November. The Administration itself 
lost no time in indicating its disapproval of the 
Vichy coup d’état by recalling Admiral Leahy on 
April 17 for consultation. At his April 17 press con- 
ference Mr. Welles stated that there might be further 
announcements even before Admiral Leahy reaches 
Washington. 

In a matter so highly controversial as the policy 
of the United States toward unoccupied France there 
is naturally room for a wide difference of opinion. 
It should be said, in all fairness, that the State De- 
partment had no illusions regarding the degree of 
independence enjoyed by Marshal Pétain. While the 
Marshal had won the confidence of the Administra- 
tion, it was obvious that any assurances he might give 
regarding France’s future course would be deter- 
mined, in the final result, by the degree of pressure to 
which he would be subjected on the part of the Nazis. 

What has astonished those most familiar with the 
complex situation in Vichy is not that the Marshal 
surrendered so much to the Nazis, but that he sur- 
rendered so little during the difficult months follow- 
ing the armistice. The detention of over a million and 
a half Frenchmen in German prison camps, who were 
thus lost to France’s economic and intellectual life, 
is in itself a terrible weapon in Hitler’s hands. More- 
over, until Britain and the United States are in a posi- 
tion to open a front in Western Europe and raise 
their blockade of French territory, France remains at 
the mercy of the Nazis for most of its supplies, es- 
pecially food. The impression in Washington is that, 
as a last resort, Hitler used the threat of starvation 
to obtain all-out “collaboration” from Pétain. And 
it must be recalled that Americans who have been 
most critical of United States policy toward Vichy 
were also most opposed to the shipment of food to 
unoccupied France—on the ground that it would 
prove of aid to the Nazis. 


PROS AND CONS OF U:S.-VICHY POLICY. 
It would be easy to argue that, instead of maintain- 
ing diplomatic relations with Vichy, Washington 
should either have left Marshal Pétain strictly alone 
or should have occupied strategic French territories 


outside France, notably Dakar, Madagascar and Map 
tinique. A purely negative policy of noncommunig, 
tion with Marshal Pétain, however, would have hag 
the effect of throwing France back on Germany—ang 
this at a time when the French people, under the firs, 
impact of defeat, had been reduced to a state of dap. 
gerous apathy. An active policy of occupying French 
territory, desirable as it seemed, would first of alj 
have required the entrance of the United States into 
the war. This course was clearly not supported by 
majority of American public opinion at the time of 
France's collapse in 1940. It would also have called 
for a display of military force which was not avail. 
able at that time and, in the case of Dakar and Mad. 
agascar, at tremendous distances. Moreover, Amer. 
ican occupation of French soil would have been im. 
mediately interpreted by the Nazis and their Paris 
sympathizers as an attempt to rob a prostrate France 
of its hard-won patrimony. 

Faced by this cruel dilemma, the most that the 
Administration hoped to accomplish was to prevent 
the French fleet from falling under German control; 
to bar the Germans from strategic bases in Africa; 
and to resist any action by Vichy which seemed to 
exceed the terms of the armistice. On all three counts 
the State Department believes that it fought a sue 
cessful delaying action. That this action was purely 
defensive is readily admitted. But, since a military 
offensive has hitherto proved impossible, Washing 
ton regarded its policy as the best alternative. It gave 
the French people time to recover to some extent 
from their dangerous state of apathy, and to te 
examine their situation with a certain degree of de 
tachment. The very fact that the Nazis had to tum 
once more to Laval, the most discredited man in, 
France, is in itself an indication of the reluctance of 
most Frenchmen to collaborate openly with Hitler 

Washington fully recognizes the dangers of Laval’s 
return to power. It expects that the Nazis will do 
everything they can to use French industry, French 


labor, the French fleet, and possibly even a reorgat | 


ized French army and air force against the United 
Nations, meanwhile adopting a policy of ruthless 
terrorism toward all dissenters. For the United States 
to maintain unaltered relations with Vichy undet 
these circumstances would be to condone a man fe 
jected by the French people—which was not true i 
the case of Marshal Pétain, who enjoyed the respect 
of many of his countrymen. Instead, Laval’s 1 
emergence may prove the signal for increasing 
French resistance to Nazi domination. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





ane 
om 


VoL 


| 


F 


RE 
Adol 
must 
new 
rapid 
the y 
succe 
Asia 
perio 
duce 
ment 
ulti 
quen 
of 1° 
analy 
signs 
seve! 
first 
A 
signi 
Brité 
Allie 
med: 
as p 
is ar 
caus 
alon 
ener 
an a 
broc 
ingt 
in t 
Mar 
it w 
brid 
shor 
S 
of 








