{ 
ee 
of major 
it is Sug. 
e Britain 
effect of 
Eastem 
strength 


ce today 
1ediation 


H-AND. 
sate pro- 
he cash- 
ministra- 
sm from 
quarters 
ious fact 
\ merican 
*d on the 
al Land, 
eared at 
‘tman to 
proposal. 
le public, 
maritime 


proposed 


in vessels 
gaged in 
ial trade. 
nate that 
ns would 
andatory 
ne North 
ohibition 
elligerent 
»ximately 


tons. In 
would be | 
ts in the | 

totaling 
“belliger 
and Brit 
any other 
th Africa 
of these 
American 
id South 
maritime 
crease if | 


STONE 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


PERIGDICAL ROOM 


GENERAL LIBRARY aaa 
UY. oF class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
Orr N. ¥., under the act 
a 2, 09 of March 3, 1879. 
I39 


You. XVIII, No. 52 


Octoser 20, 1939 


Announcing 
F.P.A. WORLD AFFAIRS INSTITUTE 


1914-1939: Is History Repeating Itself? 


All sessions, including luncheon . . $2.25 
Morning session . a ag 75 
Afternoon session, FPA members . 50 


Saturday, November 4, Hotel Astor, New York 
9:30 a.m. to 4:45 p.m. 


General Library 
University of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 


- BRITAIN’S WAR OF WATCHFUL WAITING 


2 rejecting Hitler's peace proposals, Prime Min- 
ister Chamberlain indicated on October 10 that 
Great Britain would continue its present tactics of 
diplomatic maneuver, defensive warfare, and eco- 
nomic siege. Mr. Chamberlain supplemented Premier 
Daladier’s speech of October 10 by denouncing the 
German offer as “vague and uncertain” and declar- 
ing that “‘past experience has shown that no reliance 
can be placed upon the promises of the present Ger- 
man government.” In reply, Herr Hitler—through 
his press chief, Dr. Otto Dietrich—warned that Ger- 
many is now invincible and that Britain and France 
would be responsible for “the most gruesome blood 
bath in history” that is soon to engulf Europe. Re- 
ports that Dr. Dietrich had requested President 
Roosevelt to mediate were subsequently denied in 
Berlin, after the President had indicated that the 
United States would intervene only if formally in- 
vited by all belligerent governments. 

Mr. Chamberlain’s refusal to discuss peace under 
present conditions was designed to force Hitler to 
take both the diplomatic and military initiative in 
Western Europe. As in the World War, the British 
government—by framing its own objectives in vague, 
general terms and demanding that Germany restore 
conquered territory as a prerequisite for negotiations 
—sought to win support from the Empire and neu- 
tral countries by placing the moral blame upon Ber- 
lin. This maneuver was apparently successful, for 
the Nazi régime delayed beginning the “war in 
earnest,” and hinted that further peace proposals 
would soon be made. Meanwhile, Germany has con- 
tinued to win victories at sea, torpedoing a British 
battleship—the Royal Oak, a 29,150-ton veteran of 
Jutland—as well as additional British and French 
merchant ships. 


BRITAIN’S DIPLOMATIC AIMS: At the same 


| time that it combatted German submarines and sent 


158,000 men to the Western front in the first five 
weeks of war, Great Britain has sought primarily 
to weaken the Nazi régime from within and to en- 
circle it from without. That a war in the West is 
unpopular with the German people was indicated 
on October 10, when rumors of an armistice evoked 
widespread celebrations in Berlin. Britain hopes to 
impress the Germans—already enduring the ration- 
ing of food, clothing and other necessities—that the 
present conflict is to begin with the blockade con- 
ditions of 1918. It has not yet succeeded, however, 
in formulating its aims in terms that will appeal to 
the German people. As yet it has given no indica- 
tion that the mistakes of Versailles will not be re- 
peated and that the Reich will not be deprived of the 
political and economic position in world affairs 
which it can rightfully demand. Leaders of the 
Labor and Liberal parties, and even Conservative 
back-benchers, have repeatedly urged Mr. Chamber- 
lain to issue a plan for a wholesale reconstruction of 
Europe, possibly under some scheme of federation: 
The Government has refused to formulate its pol- 
icy in precise terms, partly because of the difficulties 
inherent in launching any long-range program at 
this time, and partly because of its desire not to 
alienate the Soviet Union, Italy, and the Balkan 


neutrals. 


As Britain thus stalled for time, in the hope that 
Hitler's chances for victory would steadily diminish, 
it has been participating in the diplomatic warfare 
that rages from the Arctic Ocean to the Dardanelles. 
It countered Germany's commercial pact with the So- 
viet Union by signing a barter agreement on Octo- 
ber 11, under which British tin and rubber will be 
exchanged for Russian lumber. Despite the effect 
of the Nazi-Soviet pact on Poland last August, the 
British derive considerable satisfaction from the fact 
that Russia appears to be encircling Germany in 


Eastern Europe. Even though realizing that Russian 
expansion—with or without German collaboration 
— must eventually menace the Empire, Britain 
benefits, at least temporarily, from Stalin’s rapid 
encroachment on German spheres of influence in 
the Baltic. The Soviet Union secured valuable con- 
cessions from Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania — 
while returning Vilna to the latter on October 10 
—and then pressed for similar advantages from 
Finland. The Finnish mission returned from Mos- 
cow on October 15, reportedly refusing to meet 
Soviet demands. The altered balance of power in the 
Baltic was to be considered at a conference sum- 
moned by Sweden for October 18 in Stockholm, and 
attended by the President of Finland and the Kings 
of Sweden, Norway, and Denmark, as well as their 
foreign ministers. 


TURKEY’S DIFFICULT POSITION. The British 
government is particularly concerned with the devi- 
ous game being played in the Balkans and eastern 
Mediterranean. While a mission from Turkey re- 
mained in London to sign a mutual assistance pact, 


A BRITISH “DEAL” 


The important victory won by the Chinese armies 
north of Changsha early in October, which has been 
overshadowed by news from the European fronts, 
climaxed a succession of diplomatic and military re- 
verses Japan has met since midsummer. During the 
preliminary phases of the Tientsin dispute, Japan 
appeared to be driving a hard bargain with the 
Western powers. The latter were apparently in full 
retreat on July 24, when the Craigie-Arita formula 
conferring virtual belligerent rights on Japan in 
“occupied” China was announced. In the ensuing 
negotiations at Tokyo, conducted under this formula, 
Japan hoped to undermine the positions of the 
Western powers in China, and thus to carry through 
a flank attack on the Chinese military resistance. 


JAPAN’S RECENT SETBACKS. On July 26, 
however, the State Department abruptly denounced 
the Japanese-American commercial treaty. Although 
the Anglo-Japanese negotiations for settlement of 
the Tientsin dispute continued at Tokyo, they were 
eventually terminated without real gain for Japan 
on August 18, when Ambassador Craigie rejected 
a set of Japanese economic demands affecting North 
China. Further blows followed. Conclusion of the 
Soviet-German pact on August 23 struck at the 
foundations of the anti-Comintern pact, and de- 
prived Japan of potential German military aid 
against the U.S.S.R. At about this time Soviet- 
Japanese hostilities on the Outer Mongolia-Man- 
choukuo frontier reached their height, and the 
Kwantung Army suffered a military defeat involv- 


Page Two 


eT 
ee 


the Turkish foreign minister, Shukru Saracoglu, cap 
ried on difficult negotiations in Moscow. Turkey is re. 
ported to have refused Russia’s demands that it clog 
the Straits to Britain and France—in order to pre. | 
clude Allied aid to Rumania—and that it permit the 
Soviet Union and Germany to create and superyig 
a neutral Balkan bloc. Since Turkey's potenti 
enemy is Italy, however, it is probable that the Ap 
kara government will endeavor to maintain strig 
neutrality and to play off—and receive econom 
benefits from—each of the various belligereny 
Britain greatly desires the benevolent neutrality of 
both Italy and Turkey, as well as that of the Balkay 
countries, where the British hope to outbid Germany 
for vital raw materials. As in the World Wa 
Britain hopes to extend its diplomatic and naval 
front from the Baltic and North Sea through Gj 
braltar to both the Dardanelles and Suez Canal. || 
remains to be seen whether Britain’s traditional siege 
technique, bulwarked by gold and ships, can de 


feat a modern foe equipped with airplanes an(| 


submarines. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN | 


WITH TOKYO? 


ing, according to subsequent official Japanese i 
missions, 18,000 casualties. 

By a series of rapid moves, initiated at the end o| 
August, Japan sought to redress the balance. A new | 
Cabinet was formed, the campaign against Britain 
was halted, conciliatory overtures were made to) 
Washington, and a military truce was arranged with 
the Soviet Union. The Japanese program also called 
for a speedy settlement of the “China incident’ 
through establishment of an imposing puppet gor) 
ernment headed by Wang Ching- wei, which would] 
centralize the various local régimes at Peiping, Nao- 
king, Shanghai and Hankow. 


THE CHANGSHA OFFENSIVE. Preparatory 
inauguration of Wang Ching-wei’s new government, 
scheduled for the anniversary of the Chinese Re| 
public on October 10, the Japanese commant 
launched a major offensive against Changsha. By 
September 24, after preliminary advances begun in} 
mid- September, a two-column attack southward from) 
Yochow and westward from the Kiukiang- Nar-| 
chang line was in full swing. Some 500,000 troops,| 
of which the Japanese forces totalled approximatel}| 
200,000, were engaged on a 70-mile front. During] 
the first week Japanese forces rapidly cleared the 
northern section of the Nanchang-Yochow-C hang| 
sha triangle, and by October 1 Japanese vanguard} 
were reported at the gates of Changsha. Five day 
later a Chinese counter-attack, directed against the 
flanks of the Japanese columns, had turned the at} 
vance into a retreat. By October 15 the Chines 


acess —_ 


——= 
oglu, cap 
r key is fe. 
at it close 
-f to pre. 
erMit the 
supervig 
potential 
it the Ap. 
‘ain strig 
economic 
lligerents 
trality of 
ne Balkap 
Germany 
rld War, 
nd naval 
ough G. 
Canal. | 
onal siege 
, can de 


anes and 


GREEN 


anese ad 


he end of 
ce. A new 
st Britain 
made to 
nged with 
lso called 
incident” 
ppet gov 
ich would 
ing, Nam 


aratory to 
vernment, 


inese Re 
commant | 
igsha. By) 
begun it 
vard from 
iang-Nat| 
OO troops, 
‘oximatel}| 
it. During 
eared the 
yw-Chang 
vanguatds 
Five days 
gainst the 
od the at 
e Chines 


—— Page Three 


forces had regained all territory lost during the 
offensive and were attacking Yochow, the base from 
which the inland column had originally launched its 
drive. 

Events of the past six months give added signifi- 
cance to this Chinese military victory. In the spring 
of 1939 Japanese offensives in central China were 
also ineffective; the first was halted after the capture 
of Nanchang, while the second—#in northwest 
Hupeh province—experienced a drastic reverse simi- 
lat to that at Changsha. Either the Chinese armies 
are displaying much greater offensive-defensive 
strength, or else the morale of the Japanese soldiers 
is markedly deteriorating; both factors may, per- 
haps, be operating on the military fronts in China. 
In any case, it would appear that further Japanese 
advances will require the use of large numbers of 
additional troops, demanding heavy financial out- 
lays, particularly in view of the enhanced morale 
of China’s military commanders and forces. The 
victory at the front not only delays inauguration of 
the Wang Ching-wei régime, but diminishes any 
influence that régime might have on China’s political 
leadership at Chungking. Finally, it adds new com- 
plications to Japan’s efforts to restore its diplomatic 
front and strengthen its international position. 


“APPEASEMENT” IN THE FAR EAST? In 
most respects, the strategic advantages which Japan 
might have expected to secure from a European con- 
flict have been dissipated by its recent setbacks. The 
Soviet Union, freed from the menace of a combined 
German-Japanese attack, can now extend even 
greater aid to China. The United States, with its 
fleet in the Pacific and the potential threat of a trade 
embargo, holds weapons which Japan hardly dares 
challenge. These weapons are also available for use 
in defense of the Anglo-French stake in China, with 
which American interests are closely intertwined. 


The Western powers probably dispose of sufficient 
strength to block further Japanese encroachment on 
their interests in China. London and Paris, however, 
may prefer to protect their interests by a compromise 
that will serve to prevent an outright Japanese 
collapse. Anglo-French diplomacy is today more than 
ever inclined to view Japan as a bulwark against 
the Soviet Union in the Far East, and appears to be 
joining hands with Tokyo in a “deal” that will sac- 
tifice nationalist China. The warning of Sir Stafford 
Cripps on October 10 that the Anglo-Japanese alli- 
ance is being revived merely underlines such events 
as the withdrawal of British naval vessels from the 
Yangtze River, the renewal of Ambassador Craigie’s 


conversations with Japanese officials, and the re- 
ported French “suggestions” at Chungking that 
China should conclude peace with Japan. The two 
Far Eastern powers still able to pursue an inde- 
pendent policy—the United States and the U.S.S.R. 
—hold the key to the outcome of any such Anglo- 
French maneuver. In view of London’s strategic de- 
pendence on the United States at this time, it is 
difficult to see how an “appeasement” policy could 
be followed in the Far East against American oppo- 
sition. If the Western powers, including the United 
States, joined in such a program, the issue would 
be clear-cut. Deserted by the Western democracies, 
China would probably be forced to turn to the So- 
viet Union for the means of continued resistance. 
The emergence in the Far East of an apparent wil- 
lingness to sacrifice China, after its heroic struggle 
of the past two years, raises serious doubts regarding 
the character of Anglo-French war aims in Europe. 


T. A. BIsson 


Germany’s Claim to Colonies, Information Department 
Papers, No. 23, second edition, revised and enlarged, by 
the Royal Institute of International Affairs. New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1939. 1s. 


An excellent brief treatment of Germany’s colonial 
claims and of the British reactions to them. After a short 
historical statement on the rise and fall of Germany’s 
colonial empire, the authors analyze, but do not evaluate, 
the arguments put forward on the two sides. 


Propaganda Technique in the World War, by Harold D. 
Lasswell. New York, Peter Smith, 1938. $3.50 


The second edition of a standard work. 


The Democratic Monarchies of Scandinavia, by Ben A. 
Arneson. New York, Van Nostrand Co., 1939. $1.60 


A good, simply written text on the governmental sys- 
tems of the three Scandinavian countries, with useful 
chapters on the historical and social-economic background. 


The New Democracy and the New Despotism, by Charles 
E. Merriam. New York, Whittlesey House, 1939. $3.00 


Denouncing the intellectual inconsistencies and subter- 
fuges of modern dictatorships, the author maps out the 
ideals, aims and basic mechanisms of democratic govern- 
ment operated for the general welfare. 


France Faces Depopulation, by Joseph J. Spengler. Dur- 
ham, N. C., Duke University Press, 1938. $3.00 


An exhaustive study of the French population problem, 
which reaches the conclusion that if further population 
growth were to be stimulated it would decrease the real 
per capita income of the country and thus lead to a lower 
standard of living for the French masses. 


Dictatorship in the Modern World, edited by Guy Stanton 
Ford. (Revised and enlarged.) Minneapolis, Minn., Uni- 
versity of Minnesota Press, 1939. $3.50 


The descriptive material on present-day dictatorships 
which makes up the bulk of this volume has been brought 
up to date, and the excellent analytical essays on dictator- 
ship and democracy, including new data, retain their edu- 
cational value. A very useful political handbook. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 52, OcrosEr 20, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


National 


FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lert, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


EB 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


| 
} 


Washington News Letter \~'::: 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 16.—With the European war in its seventh 
week and the neutrality debate dragging into a third 
week, official and public interest has turned to the 
possible effects of hostilities on economic relations 
between the United States and Latin America. Ef- 
forts to tighten inter-American trade relations were 
dramatized by reports of a plan to lend part of the 
United States gold holdings to Latin American coun- 
tries, which was discussed at the President's press 
conference on October 13. Apparently immediate 
action along these lines is not being considered and, 
in any event, would require approval by Congress. 
The arrangements made in 1937 to sell Brazil gold 
up to $60,000,000, however, went into effect on 
October 16. Meanwhile, the broad question of trade 
changes in the Americas, resulting from the hostili- 
ties, is being probed by economists in the Commerce 
and State Departments. 


THE LATIN AMERICAN TRADE PROBLEM. 
Last year, the twenty Latin American republics 
imported $1,390,000,000 worth of goods, of 
which $497,000,000 worth came from the United 
States, $238,000,000 from Germany, $170,000,000 
from the United Kingdom, and $49,000,000 from 
France. Despite assurances by the Reich that de- 
liveries to Brazil and Chile can be made through 
neutral countries, it seems probable that German 
exports to Latin America will be almost entirely 
eliminated during the war. France and Great Britain, 
moreover, will doubtless find it difficult to maintain 
exports while their industrial capacity is devoted to 
war needs. Theoretically, the war means the im- 
mediate opening up of additional export markets 
in Latin America to the United States. 

This country is unquestionably in a position to 
supply Latin America with most of the goods for- 
merly purchased from the belligerent nations. But 
it can obtain the full benefit of this opportunity only 
by increasing imports of Latin American goods, or by 
new loans and investments. While it would be im- 
possible for the United States to absorb much larger 
quantities of Latin American corn, wheat, copper, 
nitrates, petroleum or even coffee, industrial recov- 
ery in this country will increase consumption of vari- 
ous other products from Latin America, such as 
quebracho, hides and skins, casein, bauxite, sisal and 
linseed. In addition, the United States might purchase 
more manganese, cacao and wool from Latin Amer- 
ica at the expense of sources of supply outside the 


Western Hemisphere. From the long-range point 
view, however, these considerations are perhaps 
important than efforts to develop new Latin 
ican export products for the United States 
While new agricultural and mineral possibilities, 
which the United States has been officially i 
ested for some time, are being explored, the dev 
ment of Latin American manufacturing ind 
producing for the export trade is also being studi 

FINANCING INTER-AMERICAN TRADE 
PANSION. Even with the high degree of coo 
tion now existing between the twenty-one Ameti 
republics—in sharp contrast to the situation folf 
ing the outbreak of the war in 1914—and the mu 
desire of the United States and Latin America 
tighten economic bonds, the war will inevitably 
rupt previous trade channels. Much stress has 
laid on the flow of orders to the United States whi 
might otherwise have been filled by one of the 
ligerents. A few Latin American countries have 
change resources sufficient to permit a rapid shift 
this nature, and some have benefited substantially 
from the rise in prices for their export products. Y@ 
Latin America as a whole is facing a serious problem 
in disposing of many of its most important products, 
and an over-all economic boom of substantial propor 
tions cannot be assumed simply on the basis of 
the war. 

The development of new Latin American expoft 
products for the United States, the influence of 1 
covery in this country and the concentration of pur 
chases in the Western Hemisphere will necessarily 
be a slow process. The same is true of any possible 
movement of long-term capital from the Uni 
States to Latin America. Meanwhile, exchange difit 
culties may prevent the sharp expansion in expomt 
trade which has been so widely forecast. Pending 1 
adjustment of trade currents, the situation prob 
could be relieved in part by short-term credits, 
for the present at least, the funds of the Expo 
Import Bank have been virtually exhausted, and pf 
vate capital may be reluctant to take the initiative. If 
this connection, Jesse Jones, Federal Loan Admini 
trator, has proposed the establishment, under thé 
auspices of the Export-Import Bank, of a compatiy 
for Latin American trade development. While this 
proposal is hardly past the plan stage, it is apparent 
that the Administration is determined to take all 
measures in its power to facilitate inter-Americaf 
trade expansion on an economically sound basis. 

Howarp J. TRUEBLOOD 


a —eee a. 


point of 
haps ess 


in 7m 
$ marke 
vilities, 
lly inte 
develop 
industries 
studied, 
ADE Ei 
coop of . 
Amerig 
n follow 
e mutual 
erica 
tably dig: 
has bee 
tes whidy 
f the bel 
have && 
d shift of 
stantially 
jucts. Ye 
s problem 
produats, 
al propor | 
basis of | 


an export 
ce of 
n of put 
ecessarily | 
y possible 
e nite 
ange diffi 
in export | 
ending 1 
probably 
edits, bul 
e Export 
1, and pte 
itiative. Im) 
Admini¥ 
under thé} 
, compat | 
While this} 
S apparent) 
» take all 
-Americait 
basis. 
EBLOOD 


