


Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


» 


ae 194) 


Tn Pee ae ’ 
University of Nich 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











‘ssing An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
ns of FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
nited 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
of a| 
comb, | Vor XX, No. 20 MarcH 7, 1941 
be of 
ad NAZIS IN BULGARIA THREATEN GREECE AND TURKEY 


'T HE occupation of Bulgaria on March 2 by 
1 the) > German troops — an occupation that the Nazis 
ident described as “temporary’— placed Germany in a 
“oyer- strategic position to strike at Britain’s two remaining 
ment |allies in Europe, Greece and Turkey. This move, 
ed at|preceded by infiltration of German officers, soldiers 
‘izing |404 technicians in mufti, occurred twenty-four hours 
} the 2fter the Bulgarian Prime Minister, Bogdan Philoff, 
for | had adhered to the Axis pact of September 27, 1940 
at a ceremony in Vienna attended by Hitler. In this 
_pact—to which only Hungary, Rumania and Slovakia 
BFS) had previously adhered—Germany, Italy and Japan 
sant undertook to give each other military and economic 
>ugh-| assistance in case one of them is attacked by a power 
not engaged at that time in the wars of Europe and 
- has| Asia. In explaining Bulgaria's collaboration with the 
bjec-| Axis to the Bulgarian Sobranye (Parliament) on 
of a|March 2, Prime Minister Philoff stated that this ac- 
uture| tion did not alter the country’s intention to preserve 
nator | Peace, Or its obligations to other states—presumably 
‘lican 2 teference to the friendship declaration of Febru- 
made! 2°Y 17, 1941, in which Bulgaria and Turkey had 
aid ed | Promised to refrain from aggression. Bulgaria’s ac- 
ceptance of German occupation was approved by the 
peat* | government parties, controlling 140 of the 160 seats 
Of BT in Parliament, which overrode the objections of op- 
© Ff position groups, notably the Agrarians, some of 
t out) whose leaders had already been arrested and sent to 
€ aS‘ concentration camps. 
| still! NAZIS PRESS FOR ITALO-GREEK PEACE. 
mine) The immediate aim of the Nazis in Bulgaria is to 
tates. bring overwhelming pressure on Greece with a view 
- this ‘© prompt termination of the Italo-Greek conflict, 
fy. Which has proved a severe drain on Italy’s military 
-itish TeSOUtCeS. By diverting Britain's attention to the 
F cial problems of a Balkan campaign, this move might 
simultaneously slow down the British advance in 
Africa. Under present circumstances, it is difficult 
NE jto see how Greece can long resist combined Italian 


1ce to 


» this 


and German pressure unless it receives prompt and 
substantial aid from Britain. Even if the British could 
spare some of the troops now fighting on the Libyan 
front—where for the first time they are facing Ger- 
man units sent to aid the decimated Italian forces— 
they would find it technically hazardous to transfer 
these troops to the Greek port of Salonika, where 
landing operations might have to be carried out un- 
der German bombing. Had the British been in a 
position to take the initiative, and occupy Salonika 
in advance of the Germans—as the Allies succeeded 
in doing during the first World War—they might 
conceivably, with Greek aid, have been able to re- 
sist the German advance to the Aegean. But their 
attention during the winter months had to be focused 
on Africa, where they did seize the initiative, as ad- 
mitted by Mussolini in his speech of February 23, 
1941. To land troops in Greece now that the Ger- 
mans dominate Bulgaria’s Greek frontier would be 
an operation as difficult, and possibly as disastrous, 
as the British attempt to invade Norway following 
occupation of that country by the Germans last April. 
Yet the British will have to give some form of tan- 
gible aid if Greece—where popular feeling remains 
pro-British—is to be prevented from signing a sep- 
arate peace with Italy, and if Yugoslavia and Tur- 
key, which have not yet succumbed to Nazi pressure, 
are to support the British cause. 

WILL TURKEY RESIST GERMANY ? The most 
practical course now open to the British would be to 
prepare another line of defense against further Ger- 
man expansion to the east by strengthening the po- 
sition of Turkey, which officially remains Britain’s 
ally. The conversations held by Foreign Secr 
Eden and Sir John Dill, chief of the British Imperial 
General Staff, in Cairo, Ankara and Athens during 
the past two weeks were presumably concerned with 
the problems of defensive preparations by Turkey. 
It is generally recognized that Turkey's army of 


—_— 








=_—_—_—————o—— 


600,000, which lacks modern equipment and air- 
planes, could not embark on offensive operations 
against Germany. It is believed, however, that 
granted the Turks have the desire to resist, they 
could defend their territory against German thrusts 
in the direction of either the Suez Canal or the 
Mosul oil fields—two objectives of paramount im- 
portance to the British Empire. On March 2 the 
Turkish government closed the Dardanelles to all 
ships except those having special permits and em- 
ploying Turkish naval pilots; and on March 3 semi- 
official quarters in Ankara indicated that Turkey 
would act with Britain if Germany’s Balkan army 
should attack either Greece or Turkey. 

The final decision of the Turkish government 
hinges not only on the extent of material aid it can 
expect from Britain, but also on the attitude of the 
Soviet Union. The Turkish government is undoubt- 
edly friendly to Britain and hostile to Germany; but 
it has been reluctant to become involved in war with 
the Reich until it had ascertained Moscow’s views, 
for fear that the U.S.S.R. might divide Turkish ter- 
ritory with the Nazis, as it did in the case of Poland 
and Rumania. The hurried visit to Ankara of Sir 
Stafford Cripps, British Ambassador in Moscow, 
on March 1, during Mr. Eden’s conversations with 
Turkish statesmen, may indicate the possibility if 
not of Soviet aid to Turkey, at least of Soviet acqui- 
escence in Turkish defensive preparations against 
Germany. This impression was strengthened by the 
tone of Moscow’s note to Bulgaria on March 3, in 





Page Two 











——t 


which the Soviet government declared that Ge 
many’s occupation of that country threatened “a! 
tension of the war,” and refused to support By)’ 
garia’s new Axis-dominated policy. 
The Soviet government, however, significant) 
omitted to protest in Berlin against German ocq 
pation, and gave no hint of the course it might fo,’ 
low in case Turkey decides to fight on the side ¢ 
Britain. The U.S.S.R.* is not prepared for a majq_ 
conflict with Germany, either from the industrial 9 
the military point of view. It would prefer to see th 
European conflict end in a stalemate which woul 
leave both Britain and Germany so exhausted thy 
they would be incapable of attacking the Soviet Unig, 
for many years to come. Now that Germany, howeve 
appears to be holding the trumps in the Balkan 
Moscow may find it necessary to redress the balang 
between the belligerents. Such a move seems pas} 
ticularly urgent at a moment when German troop | 
occupy the Rumanian port of Constantsa and th 
Bulgarian ports of Varna and Burgas on the Blad| 
Sea, from which German submarines could har 
the relatively weak fleets of Turkey and the U.S.SR| 
Reports that Turkey will permit the passage o 
British warships into the Black Sea emphasize thi 
aspect of the conflict in the Balkans and the Nea’ 
East, and reveal again the extent to which the wa 
between Britain and Germany is developing into: , 

struggle for sea power. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN | 


*CE. Foreign Policy Bulletin, November 15, 1940; January 17. 1941. 


“FREE” GOVERNMENTS AID BRITAIN 


Open resistance to the German occupation by Am- 
sterdam residents on February 26, pro-allied espion- 
age in Norway, and acts of sabotage in Poland and 
Bohemia indicate the existence of widespread oppo- 
sition in the conquered countries, which may eventu- 
ally be utilized by the governments in exile located 
in England. 

As the Nazis subdued and occupied nation after 
nation in Europe, cabinets and heads of state were 
usually able to escape and flee to London, where six 
governments now function. Their present and po- 
tential contribution to the Allied war effort is con- 
siderable, and if the Nazis are ultimately defeated, 
these governments will undoubtedly play a leading 





Australia is confronted with the gravest threat in 
its national history. For an appraisal of its war 


effort, read: 
AUSTRALIA IN THE WORLD CONFLICT 


by James Frederick Green 


25¢ 


March 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 














role in the reconstruction of the Continent. Some 
the refugee officials have already begun to outlist 
the new order they wish to establish at the close @| 
the war. In November 1940 the Polish and Czed 
governments made a joint declaration of policy it) 
which they agreed, after the successful termination 
of the war, “to enter . . . into closer political ant, 
economic association, which would become the basi 
of a new order in Central Europe and a guarantee @| 
its stability.” 


Poland. At the last stage of the German-Russiat 
invasion of Poland, leading members of the gor 
ernment escaped to France and then, in July 1940, 
England. Power is now vested in the President @ 
the Republic, Wladyslaw Racziewicz, and a Cabin¢ 
of nine. A National Council of 24 members, ap| 
pointed by the President and representative of mati 
Polish political and religous groups, acts in an at 
visory Capacity. | 

The government controls the Polish armed foret 
of 50,000, including 3,000 aviators. Army units havt 
served in North Africa and are training in England) 
while members of the air service are participating it 





ers. 
Bel; 
arm 
Con 
golc 
join 
Afr. 

T 
low 
and 
lanc 
Far 


_—_- 
FORE 
Headc 
Entere 























=F Page Three —_——— 
fense of Britain. A small fleet of three 

Gey the gee geil wen i142 LISTEN IN to the FPA’s broadcast on Sunday, 

@! destroyers, two submarines, and 14 other vessels March 9, from 2:15 to 2:30 ES.T the 

o : , ; :30 p.m., E.S.T., over 

Bul} have joined the Royal Navy, and merchant ships blue network of the National Broadcasting Com- 

totaling over 100,000 tons are serving the Allied pany. 

anth) cause. Subject: THE NEAR EAST IN CRISIS 

oc! Free France. The British government on June 28, Speaker: Louis E. Frechtling 

t fol? 1940 recognized General Charles de Gaulle as We welcome your comments on our broadcasts. 








leg’ “Leader of all free Frenchmen,” but has not ac- 
naja! corded de Gaulle’s committee the status of a provi- duces 38 per cent of the world’s rubber, 17 per cent 
ala! sional government. Apparently London is reluctant of its tea, and is the fifth largest producer of petrole- 
¢ th! to affront Marshal Pétain by setting up a rival gov- um. It has its own defense forces—a navy includ- 
ould, ernment. ing three cruisers and a considerable number of 
tha Free French troops now number 35,000 and are submarines, an army of 80,000, and a small but 
Jniog scattered throughout the British empire, especially in modern air force. Curacao and Aruba in the West 





eve, Britain and North Africa. Twenty French warships, Indies contain the vital refineries for processing 
kan; numerous auxiliary vessels, and 60 merchant ships Venezuelan and Colombian oil. 
lang} have joined the movement. The French territories Norway. The Norwegian government and its 


pas) which have declared their allegiance to de Gaulle —_constitutional monarch, King Haakon VII, left Nor- 
oops!) are valuable both economically and strategically. By way authorized by the Parliament to exercise full 





1 th) submitting to Free French control, French Equatorial power for the duration of the emergency. It main- 
Blak!) Africa, including the mandated territory of Cam- tains supervision over a merchant fleet of nearly 
har) eroon, gave the Allies a corridor across the middle —_ 4,000,000 tons which is now aiding the Allied cause. 
SR) of Africa and enabled French forces to attack Libya A Danish Council has been established in London 
e | from the south. Five small dependencies in India, to organize Danes throughout the world in opposi- 
> thi! as well as the nickel-producing island of New Cale- tion to the Nazis. A Free Italian Committee, com- 
Nex! donia and Tahiti in the Pacific, have adhered to the posed of Italians pledged to overthrow Mussolini, 
> wa London committee. and an anti-Nazi Rumanian Committee were formed 
nto:, Czechoslovakia. The Provisional Czechoslovak in February 1941 with the assistance of the British 

_ Government recognized by the British on July 21, — Ministry of Information. None of these groups, how- 
AN | 1940 is composed of the President, Dr. Eduard ever, has the status of a provisional government. 


Benes, a Cabinet of 14, and a State Council, which 
has some of the functions of a parliament. The gov- 
emment is dependent on Britain and on Czechoslo- 
ned) vaks living outside Europe for funds to support the 
utlint | Czech army and air force numbering about 20,000 


Louis E. FRECHTLING 





Out of the Night, by Jan Valtin. New York, Alliance, 1940. 
$3.50 


This autobiography of a youth who reached maturity as 


se, men. Some of the units have taken part in the a revolutionist in post-war ornene — — we as a 
e ; : ‘ . Communist agent, particularly in the Hitler Reich, makes 
zed Libyan ees and others are stationed in the a gripping story. Although its authenticity has been chal- 
cy British Isles. lenged, the book appears to portray faithfully the ruthless 
.atios | Belgium. While King Leopold is a prisoner of methods of both the Gestapo and the Communist Inter- 
| ami} the Nazis, his government functions with full pow- national. 
basi) ers in London. One of its first acts was to conscript Pacific Islands Under Japanese Mandate, by Tadao Yanai- 
° Ps ° Tni j 
ce Belgians all over the world for service with the gee woe pee ae pete pirearese 
» atmy. The government in exile controls the Belgian wee ak bn Sy niesttte, eaaniaiiell. cneain Gals 
1ssiat | Congo, with its resources of copper, tin, radium and social factors, religion and government. The most ade- 
gold, and its defense force of 15,000, units of which quate source book of factual data on the islands, this work 
gor ioined in th . ; he Teli . 5 appears as a report in the International Research Series 
40, tt yr in the campaign against the Italians in Last of the Institute of Pacific Relations. 
i rica. 
nt The Chinese Way in Medicine, by Edward H. Hume. Balti- 
sbine The Netherlands. The Dutch government fol- more, the Johns Hopkins Press, 1940. $2.25 
$, ap lowed Queen Wilhelmina to London in May 1940, A fascinating historical study of Chinese ideas and 
onal and although it has lost its power over the home- —, . pn as bap as China’s gyn ay 
| ee +s : eS this field, by a doctor with long experience in China. The 
n ab | 1204, it still administers important territories in the —_}.°* reader will find in this book a delightful introduction 


Far East and the Caribbean. Netherland India pro- to the Chinese people’s outlook on life. 





force FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 20, MarcH 7, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
have! Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRaNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotrHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dgan, Editor. 
, ) Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 

stan > Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 

ing iy F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Mar. 3. While Administration leaders in the 
Senate press for final action on the lease-lend bill, 
government officials already fear that the material 
aid which might be extended to Britain under this 
measure will be seriously limited by a shortage of 
shipping facilities. Although few observers credit the 
Nazi claim that 740,000 tons of merchant vessels 
were sunk during February, no one lightly dismisses 
Hitler’s threat of intensified sea warfare. The Ger- 
mans have had time to build additional U-boats, 
train crews, and prepare new bases in the occupied 
territories from which British sea lanes are easily ac- 
cessible. 


SHIP LOSSES. British Admiralty figures, which 
on the whole have proved more accurate than the 
German, indicate that almost 5,000,000 gross tons 
of British, Allied and neutral merchant shipping 
have been sunk by enemy action since the beginning 
of the war. Another 4,000,000 tons have probably 
been damaged sufficiently to necessitate time-consum- 
ing repairs. These losses are all the more severe be- 
cause enforced reliance on distant sources of supply, 
and delays in convoying as well as loading and dis- 
charging cargoes, have reduced the carrying power 
of the British fleet by one-third to one-half. 

Sinkings have far exceeded British and Ameri- 
can replacement capacity. Last year British ship- 
yards probably completed not more than 750,000 
gtoss tons of ocean-going merchant vessels, while 
American yards built a little less than 500,000 tons. 
It is doubtful that the British can surpass their out- 
put this year, particularly since the German air force 
will keep British yards under constant attack; and 
the Dominions can hardly be expected to build over 
200,000 tons. 

U.S. SHIPBUILDING. Britain’s chief reliance 
must therefore be placed on acceleration of ship- 
building in the United States. The emergency ship- 
building program in this country comprises 260 
standardized freighters with a dead-weight tonnage 
or carrying capacity of about 2,600,000. The first of 
the 60 ships ordered by the British, however, are not 
scheduled for completion until the late fall of 1941, 
and deliveries of the remainder will take another 
year. The last of the contracts for the 51 new ship- 
building ways needed for the construction of the 200 
cargo ships in the Maritime Commission’s emergency 
program was awarded on February 14, but even 
though the keels will be laid soon, the first freighters 





will not be ready for service before early 1942. 
Meanwhile, an acute shipping crisis is expected 
develop in the spring and summer of 1941. W, 
ington officials do not believe that many more ye 
sels can be made available to Britain. The ships stil 
in the government's laid-up fleet aggregate a little 





over 100,000 tons and are being reconditioned fo; 
service in the American merchant marine. This coup. | 
try cannot spare many vessels now operating in it 
own coastal and foreign trade services, because the | 
withdrawal of British vessels from neutral shipping | 
routes and the demands of the defense program haye 
greatly increased the burden on the American mer 
chant marine, which in the past few years had cap 
ried less than one-third of United States foreign | 
commerce. The requirements of cargo space for ¢ 
sential defense materials is so great that the Mari 
time Commission announced on February 28 the| 
creation of a Division of Emergency Shipping. 
There is still a possibility that foreign ships idl 
in American ports may be taken over and sold to th 
British. The Chilean government established a prec 
dent in this respect by seizing three Danish ships m 
February 15; and the Argentine government is r 
ported to be considering similar action. The idle for 
eign tonnage in United States ports includes about 
44 Danish, 27 Italian, 2 German, 14 French and 
Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian ships. Up to th 
present, the government has not invoked its doubtfil 


legal powers under the Espionage Act of 1917 ti, 


take over these vessels. Negotiations to charter th 
Danish ships are said to have made considerabk 
progress, and overtures have also been made to tht} 
Italian shipowners. In each case, however, the trat| 
sactions contemplate operation of the ships on = 
can rather than British trade routes. 

Under these circumstances, a critical shortage | 


British shipping facilities can be avoided only tf} ; 


effective measures are taken to reduce losses. In thi 
connection the United States faces serious decision 
in the near future. To protect shipments of vit) 
supplies to Britain we can either provide the Britis 
navy with additional destroyers or assume the con 
duty ourselves. Although the United States still ha’ 
74 World War destroyers which could be transferte 
to Britain, the British may not have enough nav 
personnel to man them. In the end, this country mi 
be faced with the choice of standing by while t 
British Isles succumb to the counterblockade, or # 
convoying British supply ships despite the danger | 


direct involvement in war. JouN C. pEW1LDE | 





A 


