















de- 
ns, 
ar- 
aty, 
in- 
r is 
ited 
ery 


the 
1ips 
tate 
oT O- 
the 
any 
vith 


ple- 


the 
ape 
side 
lire- 
the 


does 
and 
- the 

the 








y 
3 





Seah Sy INST LYS 


t 


4 








an’s 
the 
10ny 


ume 

Al- 
port 
and- 
hina 
ndon 
1ited 
1ing- 


illiam 


state 


Yuban 
New 


19383- 
ident. 





Nationa! 
Edster. 





eee 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


interpretation of current inte by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Deller a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 





17 


‘ 


ot. XV, No. 24 APRIL 10, 1936 





[HIRD PRINTING!! 


: WIET RUSSIA: 1917-1936 
‘Lo b\ Vera Micheles Dean 


A secondtevision ‘of the pamphlet published in December 
1933, which \provides7a clear and informed analysis of the 
principal aspec the Soviet experiment, a record of de- 
velopments withtw7thé/ Soviet Union and a survey of Soviet 
foreign relations, > 


1 Affairs Pamphlet No. 2 Single copies 25 cents 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at che Post 
Office at New York, 
g ‘ < N. Y., under the act 











SA Ct of March 3, 1879. 

'y Z 
«  @ © 
\ 1Y: As 

+ oT, é 

\7,, @ 

ae 

2 & ry. <a 
RT tT) 


% « a 
Periodical Division, 


Library of Congress, 


Washington, D. C.- 











HITLER’S PEACE PLAN: MENACE OR PROMISE? 





ITLER’S much-heralded peace plan, deliv- 
ered to the British government by Herr von 


Ribbentrop, special Nazi envoy, on April 1, and 
communicated by Mr. Eden on the same day to 


e 


rance and Belgium, adds little to the Fuehrer’s 


Reichstag speech of March 7 and is significant 


hiefly for its omissions. The principal points of 


this plan—which is clearly directed at winning the 
sympathies of the British people—are as follows: 





Western Europe—Germany proposes a “standstill” 
period of four months, during which it will undertake 
not to increase troops in the Rhineland, provided France 
and Belgium give a similar pledge. Fulfillment of this 
understanding is to be supervised by a commission com- 
posed of one representative each from Britain and Italy 
—the Locarno guarantors—and a third neutral power. 
The most important omission here is that Germany fails 
to promise not to refortify the Rhineland—a promise 
which Mr. Eden had urged as Hitler’s contribution to 
the appeasement of Europe. If the Reich, as reported, 
is preparing to erect fortifications in the former demili- 
tarized zone, then France may eventually be prevented 
from rendering effective aid to its Eastern European 
allies in case of German aggression. 

The five Locarno powers at once, or at latest after 
the French elections scheduled for April 26, are to begin 
negotiations for a Western air pact and 25-year non- 
aggression treaties between Germany and France, and 
Germany and Belgium, to be guaranteed by Britain and 
Italy. These non-aggression treaties are particularly 
welcomed by the British public, which hopes that they 
will usher in a period of peace and prosperity in West- 
ern Europe, while at the same time giving Britain a 
breathing-space in which to strengthen its armaments. 

The Franco-German treaty is to be ratified by a 
plebiscite of the two nations—as distinguished from 
parliaments. Such a plebiscite—if modeled on the com- 
pulsory plebiscite held in Germany on March 29—might 
be expected to prove more unanimous under the Nazi 
dictatorship than under the French democratic régime, 
and might thus impress British opinion with the over- 
whelmingly peaceful sentiments of the German people. 

France and Germany are to pledge themselves to 
control the press and the schools in an effort to prevent 
all expressions of opinion which might poison relations 
between the two countries. This pledge assumes the 
establishment by France of a totalitarian censorship 
such as already exists in Germany. At the same time 





this pledge, if scrupulously carried out, would require 
immediate suppression in Germany of Hitler’s Mein 
Kampf. 

Germany reiterates its willingness to rejoin the League 
of Nations either at once or on completion of negotia- 
tions, and suggests the establishment of an international 
arbitration tribunal, which is apparently intended to 
supplant the World Court. 


Eastern Europe—Only one of Hitler’s 19 points refers 
to Eastern Europe. Germany declares its willingness 
to negotiate bilateral non-aggression pacts with states 
on its southeastern and northeastern borders—presum- 
ably for a 10-year period. These pacts are not to carry 
the guarantees of other powers, such as Germany is 
willing to accept in the West, and will depend entirely 
on the word of the two signatories. If the Reich, for 
instance, concludes bilateral non-aggression pacts with 
Lithuania, Austria and Czechoslovakia, and then de- 
cides to absorb Austria by force, Czechoslovakia, by its 
pledge of non-aggression, would be precluded from in- 
terfering in the struggle until the League had reached 
a decision about sanctions against the aggressor. The 
plight of Ethiopia, which patiently waited for League 
action, is hardly calculated to encourage Germany’s 
neighbors in Eastern and Southeastern Europe. Nor 
does Hitler’s peace plan mention the Soviet Union. 


Limitation of Armaments—Germany proposes “practi- 
cal” measures to check unlimited armaments competi- 
tion. Its principal suggestion contemplates abolition 
and prohibition of offensive weapons—heavy tanks and 
heavy artillery. The Reich at present is not well- 
equipped with these weapons, and lacks the money to 
construct them. Their abolition would consequently in- 
volve a sacrifice not by Germany, but by France and the 
Soviet Union. 

While the British government accepted Hitler’s 
peace plan as a basis for further negotiations, it 
was clearly disappointed by its failure to repair 
the damage caused by violation of Locarno. On 
April 1, in accordance with the Locarno memo- 
randum of March 19, Mr. Eden handed a letter to 
the French and Belgian Ambassadors in London, 
stating that, should efforts at conciliation with 
Germany fail, Britain will at once, in consultation 
with France and Belgium, consider reciprocal 
measures to meet the situation, and for this pur- 
pose will establish or continue contact between 





“ 
een 


gree 


oy 


us 
“th 
ot | 
103 













































the general staffs of the respective countries. In 
an effort to maintain an even balance between 
France and Germany, the British Foreign Secre- 
tary suggested that Hitler’s peace plan, as well 
as French counter-proposals framed by M. Flan- 
din, should be discussed not at another meeting of 
the Locarno powers—as urged by France—but in 
Geneva, where the League Committee of Thirteen 
convened on April 8 to consider prospects for an 
Italo-Ethiopian settlement. 


Mr. Eden’s success in transferring negotiations 
with Germany from a Locarno to a League plane 
will depend on the attitude of France, which 
seems determined to end League sanctions against 
Italy and bring Mussolini back into the European 
concert, to ward off the possibility of a Nazi 
putsch in Austria. Now that the Italian forces 
have reached Lake Tana, which lies in the British 
sphere of influence, and have inflicted defeat on 
the army personally led by Haile Selassie, Musso- 
lini is expected to insist on a peace settlement 
more favorable than the Hoare-Laval plan, and on 
direct peace negotiations between Italy and Ethi- 
opia, without interference by the League. Mean- 
while Italy’s victories, accompanied by aerial bom- 
bardment of undefended towns and the use of 
poison gas, have once more aroused British public 
opinion, which demands sterner sanctions against 
Il Duce. Britain, which tends to condone Ger- 
many’s breach of Locarno, will find it difficult to 
win France’s support for fresh League action in 
the case of Italy. For France, which in deference 
to British opinion has abandoned the negative 
attitude it took in the early phase of the Rhine- 
land crisis, and intends to submit constructive 
counter-proposals, continues to regard Italy as 
necessary to the reconstruction of collective secur- 
ity on the basis of regional mutual guarantee 


pacts. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BORDER CLASHES ALARM FAR EAST 


The gravest aspect of the Manchurian-Outer 
Mongolian clash on March 31 is not alone its di- 
mensions, which far exceed those of any of the 
previous “border incidents.’”” Much more serious 
is the fact that the Kwantung Army was again 
acting independently of the Tokyo Foreign Office, 
which was not informed of the details of the affair 
until two days after it occurred. According to 
dispatches from Ulan Bator on March 31, a force 
of several hundred Japanese and “Manchoukuo” 
troops, equipped with tanks, airplanes, heavy 
artillery and machine guns, penetrated 28 miles 
south of Lake Buir Nor into Outer Mongolia. 
After severe fighting, marked by heavy casualties 








Page Two — 





— 


on both sides, they were finally driven back across 
the border. Two days later, on April 2, a Kwan- 
tung Army communiqué asserted that the fighting 
had occurred twelve miles north of Lake Buir Nor, 
in Manchurian territory. 


In judging the accuracy of these respective ver- 
sions, the relation of the “border incidents” to the 
internal political struggle in Japan must be con- 
sidered. The Soviet Union has accepted Premier 
Hirota’s protestations of peaceful intentions at 
face value, and has cooperated in the efforts to 
establish a joint border commission to investigate 
disputes on the frontiers of “Manchoukuo.” On 
March 17 the Soviet Union further agreed that 
the proposed commission should be empowered to 
“verify the border as fixed by treaties” by setting 
up new border signs, stretching barbed wire, and 
digging ditches between the posts. Despite this 
partial concession to the Japanese demand for a 
“re-demarcation” of the boundary, negotiations 
are still held up by Tokyo’s insistence that the 
competence of the commission be restricted to 
one section of the Manchurian-Siberian border, 
while the Soviet authorities contend that it should 
cover the whole of the Manchurian-Siberian as 
well as the Manchurian-Outer Mongolian frontier. 
Success in forming such a commission would tend 
to limit the Kwantung Army’s ability to resort to 
independent military action on the Manchurian 
borders. Frontier clashes occurring at this time 
constitute, in effect, the Kwantung Army’s answer 
to Hirota’s negotiations with the U.S.S.R. over 
the formation of a border commission. The So- 
viet Union pointedly alluded to this situation by 
warning the Japanese government on March 31 
that it assumed grave responsibility if it permitted 
the actions of “subordinate organs’’ to intensify 
the present causes of friction. 


Premier Hirota declared on March 25 that 
there would be no war while he held office. Yet 
the Kwantung Army pushes forward its military 
preparations in Manchuria, north China and Inner 
Mongolia. The de facto understanding between 
Japan and Germany, even though the latter is 
not yet in a position to act, is another ominous 
sign. Confronted by this growing threat, the 
U.S.S.R. has reorganized and strengthened its de- 
fenses in eastern Siberia. The Soviet Union has 
also signed a mutual assistance pact with the 
Mongolian People’s Republic, making clear that 
it will resist a determined Japanese invasion of 
Outer Mongolia. In the last analysis the decision 
for war or peace will be made at Tokyo, where the 
moderate forces now seem to be steadily losing 
ground to the extremists. T. A. BISSON 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 24, Aprit 10, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND Lagsiig Bueit, President; EstHeR G. OGpgN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








