












cent 
ints 
um- 
ron- 
lent. 
d be 

and 
ame 
ated 
alin, 
y €Xx- 
with 


igma 
€ to- 

the 
cibly 
New 
‘Ipro- 


vhich 
some 
e cal- 
s Act 
g the 
d the 
nging 
s and 
painst 
ote of 
more 


on by | 


post: 
ed by 
ction. 
easure 
‘s, the 
O sus 
puntry 
a po- 
s they 
oot i 
ggera- 
before 
OTT 


DS 





General Lidrary 


APR 19 1949 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


University of Michigan 


a abe pati) | 


QENERAL LIBRARY 
antiv. oF MICH 


Ann Arbor, Michican 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





You. XXII, No. 26 


Aprin 16, 1943 





U.S. AND BRITAIN PLAN CURRENCY STABILIZATION TO AID WORLD TRADE 


q HE publication on April 6 and 7 of the United 
| * States and British post-war currency proposals 
‘marks the first step in a concerted endeavor on the 

part of Washington and London to prevent monetary 
chaos after wartime economic controls are relaxed. 
Both plans aim at opening avenues for trade and 
capital movements by stabilizing currencies and 
granting nations easier access to foreign exchange; 
both recognize that an increased flow of goods and 
‘capital between nations is a prerequisite to world 
prosperity, and are designed to promote this end. 

WASHINGTON PROPOSES STABILIZATION 
FUND. The American plan, prepared by Harry D. 
White of the U.S. Treasury, proposes a United Na- 

tions stabilization fund, which would give far greater 
stability to exchange rates than existed in the inter- 
war years by making available to countries the for- 
eign exchange necessary for settlement of their trade 
balances. States adhering to this plan would agree 
on exchange rates for their currencies, and bind 
\themselves not to alter this rate except by a four- 
| fifths vote of the managing board of the stabiliza- 
tion fund. Each member would contribute a quota, 
based on its holdings of gold and foreign exchange, 
its trade balance, and its national income. Member 
states would have voting power according to con- 
ttibution, but no country could possess more than 

25 per cent of the total votes. The aggregate of all 
quotas would be roughly $5,000,000,000 although 
the fund would start with $2,500,000,000—each 
member depositing half its quota. In return, members 
would receive credits with the fund in terms of a 
|New international currency, the wnitas, defined as 
equivalent to $10 in gold. The fund would try to 
prevent violent fluctuations in exchange rates and 
acute shortages of any particular currency. To achieve 
this it would sell member nations either gold or the 


currency of other countries, taking local currencies 
in exchange. 











For short-run discrepancies in the balance of in- 
ternational payments, the American plan might work 
somewhat as follows. If over a period of time the 
United States sold abroad more goods than it bought, 
the claims of American sellers against foreign buy- 
ers would exceed the claims of foreign sellers on 
American buyers. Without some kind of regula- 
tion, attempts of foreign buyers to get dollar ex- 
change to make payments would force up the dollar 
in terms of foreign currencies. But under the pro- 
posed plan, the stabilization fund would take part 
of the dollar balance contributed by the United 
States and sell dollars to the debtor countries. In this 
way foreign buyers could reimburse American ex- 
porters without paying a premium for dollar ex- 
change. 

In the case of chronic unbalances between exports 
and imports the problem would be. more difficult, 
but the plan suggests ways to prevent countries 
from piling up export balances year after year 
and others from accumulating large import bak” 
ances. The fund could refuse to sell foreign exchange 
to debtor countries until they cut down imports by 
domestic adjustments, and could ask creditor coun- 
tries either to reduce exports or increase imports. Of 
course, if a major creditor nation refused to coop- 
erate, the whole plan would fall apart, but it may 
be assumed that the countries which adhered would 
accept its provisions. 


LONDON ADVOCATES CLEARINGHOUSE. 
The British plan, designed by Lord Keynes, adviser 
to the Treasury, proposes an international clearing- 
house without capital assets. Members of this mul- 
tilateral clearing system would receive foreign ex- 
change, where necessary, up to a quota limit based 
on each nation’s foreign trade during the three-year 
period from 1936 to 1938. The governing board of 
the clearinghouse would be limited to twelve or 








ia nntnerpenpenmasesS ti, = 


oi se 


ite cadres 2 


~ 
See 
ad 


Do gg 






Le 


ss ee os Repti <3 
sSxhestmss ae: ; Se =e 7 
- oes Le oat eee 
. 








fifteen members—nations with the larger quotas ap- 
pointing one member each, and those with smaller 
quotas naming a member for convenient political 
or geographical groups. By this arrangement, the 
major nations would have the greatest voice but not 
a definite veto, as under the American plan. 

To facilitate what would amount to transfer of 
foreign exchange from creditor to debtor countries, 
Keynes proposes an international currency to be 
known as bancor. This currency unit would apparently 
be tied in part to gold, but to a much lesser extent 
than the American unitas. If a participating country 
incurred an unfavorable balance of international 
payments, it could for a time finance the difference 
by means of an overdraft on the bancor assigned to 
it. But if this limit was exceeded, the country would 
at once be called upon by the clearinghouse to ad- 
just its position—on penalty of losing the right to 
draw on its account—by surrendering gold, checking 
outward capital movements, or devaluing its currency. 

COMPROMISE SHOULD BE POSSIBLE. While 
both Washington and London have stated that their 


WHO WILL TEACH WHOM AFTER THE WAR? 


The statement reported to have been made on 
April 7 by Dr. Ralph Turner, representing the Di- 
vision of Cultural Relations of the State Depart- 
ment at the Institute of Educational Reconstruction 
in New York, to the effect that the United States 
is planning to “educate” Europe, taken in conjunc- 
tion with the New York Times’ revelations of al- 
leged failures on the part of American teachers to 
convey a rudimentary knowledge of history to their 
students, raises some interesting long-range ques- 
tions. The facile assumption made by some people 
in this country that the most effective method of 
preventing the recurrence of wars is through the re- 
education of citizens of the Axis powers—and that 
such re-education can be best accomplished by class- 
room inculcation of certain ideas or principles—al- 
ready threatens to lead to misapprehension, and 
hence to ultimate disillusionment. 


IS MORE EDUCATION EUROPE’S NEED? If 
those who urge re-education of Europe by the United 


PageTwo = — 





Pros and Cons of the 
RECIPROCAL TRADE PROGRAM 


10c 


Brief history; arguments for and against; discussion 
questions and reading suggestions. Quantity rates on 
request. 


Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 East 38th Street, New York 



















































plans are tentative and that neither government js 
in any way committed to its proposals, it is clear 
that each has designed a plan with its own prob. 
lems and traditions primarily in mind. Although no 
return to the gold standard is possible, the United 
States naturally wishes to take advantage of its gold 
reserves of over $22,000,000,000. The British, op 
the other hand, are apparently reluctant to tie ster. | 
ling to gold, and favor a system which would give | 
some assurance that their pre-war position as the | 
world’s greatest trading nation would not be seri- 
ously jeopardized by lack of gold or foreign ex. | 
change. Since both the United States and Britain 
are in agreement on the necessity of an international 
organization to stabilize currency and exchange on | 
the multilateral principle, and since both are prepared | 
to initiate measures for dealing with the causes 
of unbalance in international trade, a compromise 
should be possible either before or during the United 
Nations monetary conference to be held in the near 
future. 











HowarD P. WHIDDEN, Jr. 


States mean classroom instruction at various levels, 
then the underlying belief that Americans are better 
educated than the French, Dutch, Norwegians or, 
for that matter, the Germans will come as a sur- 
prise to the peoples of Europe who, to take only 
one much publicized subject, have probably absorbed 
more knowledge of their own history by living 
among monuments inherited from the past than the 
average American has learned through classroom 
study. When it comes to revering the achievements 
of vanished civilizations, the Europeans have mucli| 
to teach the people of the United States—even 
though it must be admitted that their reverence for 
the past sometimes fans conflicts and prejudices in 
the present. 

DOES MERE KNOWLEDGE GUARANTEE | 
DEMOCRACY? But if it is true that large sections | 
of Europe’s populations need not American te 
education but the opportunity, with Allied aid, to 
overthrow Hitler’s rule and resume and expand theit 
own educational practices, why did not education) 
in Europe prove an obstacle to war? The answer is| 
that mere knowledge is not enough to prevent 4 
given course of action, or to guarantee its opposite 
What is needed is willingness among people to pu! 
their knowledge to work—to use it for constructive 
instead of destructive purposes. 

This is where the great alarm stirred by the New 
York Times survey of the knowledge of Americat 
history among high school and college student 





| 





appears to be disproportionate—especially amon{ 
college educators who, if they were not alread 
aware of these lapses, must themselves be held « 


eff 
lec 
of 
n0 
bo 
co 
ca 


pa 





nt is 
clear 
prob. 
gh no 
inited 
gold 
h, on 
- Ster- 
| give 
S the 
» Seri- 
N €x- 
ritain 
tional 
ge on | 
pared 
causes 
‘omise 





Jnited 


© near | 


Jr. 


levels, 
better 
ns of, 
a sur- 
e only 
sorbed 
living 
an the 
;sroom 
ements | 
- much 
—even 
ice for 
ices in 


NTEE | 
ections 
an fe 
aid, to 
id. theit 
ucation 
swer is 
vent 4 
posite 
to put 
ructive, 


ie Net 
nericai 





tudent) 

amon 
alreadi 
neld 











— 


sponsible for negligence. The alarm is voiced largely 
on the ground that students who do not know certain 
facts of American history must be spso facto unpre- 

ed for the responsibilities of democratic society. 
Js this a sound assumption? 

WHAT IS ESSENCE OF DEMOCRACY ? Actu- 
ally, the American public schools have handled 
effectively the infinitely difficult task of giving at 
jeast rudimentary classroom instruction to millions 
of children of the most diverse racial, religious, eco- 
nomic and educational backgrounds—many of them 
born in families of illiterate immigrants who had 
come here from all corners of the world. That edu- 
cation, under these circumstances—which had no 

allel in the countries of Western Europe—often 
tended to be reduced to the lowest common denomi- 
nator is understandable, even if regrettable. That 
every effort should be bent in the future to make edu- 
cation at the primary and secondary level not only ex- 
tensive, as it is today, but intensive should by now 
be obvious. What is often forgotten by critics is that 
while American education may produce relatively 
fewer scholars than corresponding education did in 
pre-war Europe, it has proved tar more successful 
in acquainting children with the practices of demo- 
cratic living. And it is this—the spirit of give and 





Page Three Ks 





~~ neem 


—————=—_—_ 





take, of sportsmanlike respect for the achievements 
of others, of fairness toward opponents—that Amer- 
icans could successfully contribute to the rehabilita- 
tion of post-war Europe. 

But the real essence of democracy cannot be con- 
veyed merely through classroom lectures or refer- 
ence books. Its possession cannot be adequately tested 
by even the best devised questionnaires. Nor is it 
always most strikingly displayed by those who be- 
lieve themselves to be highly educated in the schol- 
astic sense. Indeed, it is often found in its purest 
form among men and women the world over who: 
have not had to study books in order to learn how 
to respect the rights and integrity of fellow-beings. 

The most promising kind of re-education we can 
undertake in Europe after the war is not through 
propaganda extolling this country’s achievements, 
or through condescending attempts to remake the 
Europeans, who are justly proud of their contribu- 
tion to world civilization, into what Margaret Mead 
has called “‘pale and distorted” images of ourselves 
—but by practicing in our relations with other na- 
tions the methods of democracy we have so effec- 
tively, in spite of many blunders, learned to practice 
at home. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The Peace We Fight For, by Hiram Motherwell. New 
York, Harper, 1943. $3.00 


This small, loosely written book by a former European 
correspondent of the Chicago Daily News contains more 
solid common sense on problems of post-war reconstruction 
than most tomes on the subject. The author is quite vague 
when it comes to political questions, but performs a real 
service by bracing American readers to meet the knotty 
problems of relief and rehabilitation. 


The Red Army, by Michel Berchin and Eliahu Ben-Horin. 
New York, W. W. Norton, 1942. $3.00 
A sketchy but useful account of the composition and 
organization of the Red Army, and of the campaigning in 
which it has participated since 1938, with brief descrip- 
tions of Russia’s principal military leaders. 


Joint Production Committees in Great Britain. Montreal, 
International Labor Office, 1943. 50 cents 
A valuable study describing the British system of joint 
production committees in individual factories, mines, ship- 
yards, etc., that has developed in order to secure full labor- 
management cooperation in war production. 


An Outline of Political Geography, by J. F. Horrabin. New 

York, Knopf, 1942. $1.50 

In a very readable new book, which contains 46 maps 
and is a development of his earlier Outline of Economic 
Geography, this famous English map-maker and econo- 
mist has written a condensed economic history of the world 
centering on the effect of geographical factors in the devel- 
opment of society. 


Ramparts of the Pacific, by Hallett Abend. New York, 
Doubleday Doran, 1942. $3.50 
Description of a trip through the Far East shortly be- 
fore Pearl Harbor by a former New York Times Far 
Eastern correspondent. 


Wilson’s Ideals, edited by Saul K. Padover. Washington, 
American Council on Public Affairs, 1942. $2.00 
The author of one of the most interesting biographies of 
Jefferson presents selections from Wilson’s written and 
spoken words to show his vision of a truly democratic 
peace. 


The Mediterranean, by Emil Ludwig. New York, Whittle- 
sey House, 1942. $3.75 
The author calls his book “a sort of tapestry” and that 
it is, a colorful interweaving of history with many de- 
tails which make come alive those who have fought, lived 
and ruled on its shores. 


Deadline: The Behind-the-Scenes Story of the Last Decade 
in France, by Pierre Lazareff. New York, Random House, 
1942. $3.00 
Stories of the last decade in France, written by the 

former editor of Paris-Soir, centéring on the venality of 

the French press. 


The Foe We Face, by Pierre J. Huss. Garden City, New 
York, Doubleday, Doran, 1942. $3.00 
A vivid picture of Nazi Germany, drawing for the most 
part pen-portraits of its rulers, by the former head of the 
Berlin office of the International News Service. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 26, APRIL 16, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FranK Ross McCoy, President; DornotHy F. Lugt, Secretary; Varna Micug.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at leas: 


One month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


<B> 181 








Washington News Letter 














Apr. 12.—The strategic question underlying the 
Tunisian campaign has never been whether the Allies 
could drive the Axis from North Africa, but how 
long it would take them. The Axis High Command's 
objective in sacrificing a quarter-million soldiers by 
sending them to Tunis has been to upset the Anglo- 
American : timetable, and compel the Allies to 
consume sO many previous weeks in overcoming 
remnants of German-Italian resistance in Africa that 
there would be no time left to undertake an in- 
vasion of Europe this summer. The rapid advance 
of Montgomery's 8th Army, however, indicates that 
the end of the Tunisian battle is already in sight. 

Definite plans for one or more invasions of Eu- 
rope in 1943 were undoubtedly mapped out at the 
Casablanca meeting in January, and Anglo-Ameri- 
can conquest of North Africa will open up strategic 
possibilities that were not on hand last year. Then, 
only an invasion of northern Europe was practicable; 
now a series of coordinated attacks from various 
points is possible. Thus, while the vast force of 
highly trained British and American troops quar- 
tered in England and Northern Ireland strike at 
Norway or the Channel coast of France, it will b 
possible for a second invasion army to attack the 
Axis from Africa, say in Sicily or the Balkans. 

THE AXIS IS ALARMED. While the High Com- 
mands on both sides seek to shroud their plans in 
utmost secrecy, surface indications tell the laymen 
that both the Allies and the Axis expect an invasion 
of the Continent to materialize this summer. Re- 
cently, for instance, extensive coastal zones along the 
southern and eastern shores of England were de- 
clared restricted areas for use “‘as bases for offensive 
operations against the enemy.” 

The Axis, too, is making counterpreparations. 
Mussolini and Hitler concluded on April 11 a four- 
day “crisis conference,” presumably devoted largely 
to discussion of the defense of Italy. For it is ob- 
vious that that highly vulnerable country is destined 
to become a target for concentrated Anglo-Ameri- 
can air attacks as soon as the conquest of Tunisia 
has been completed. Hitler also conferred with King 
Boris of Bulgaria and, following their meeting, 
Dmitri ‘ Vassileff, Bulgarian Minister of Public 
Works, broadcast on April 7 that if the Allies at- 
tempted landings in Greece, Albania, or Yugo- 
slavia, Bulgaria would actively enter the war. 

It is by no means certain, however, that the Allies 
will be able to carry out their invasion threats in 


FOR VICTORY ° 


1943. The obstacle that prevented Anglo-American 
forces from landing in force on the Continent in 


1942 exists in an even more aggravated form this | 


year. This obstacle is the shipping bottleneck, caused 
by the intensified U-boat warfare the Nazis are now 
waging. It was currently said a year ago that 1942 
was Hitler's last opportunity to win the war. This 
year, it can be said with equal assurance, will give 


the Fuehrer his final chance to stave off defeat. His | 


most powerful shield is neither the Siegfried line 
nor the chain of fortifications he is erecting along 
the European coast, but the submarine packs that 
are now swarming in the mid-Atlantic. 

HITLER’S LAST CARD. A clear warning that 
the Nazis would make a desperate effort to cut the 
flow of war supplies to England and Africa this year 
was given on January 30, when Hitler elevated 
Admiral Karl Doenitz, Germany’s submarine fleet 
commander, to supreme head of the German Navy 
in place of Admiral Erich Raeder. Secretary of the 
Navy Knox disclosed on April 6 that the U-boat situ- 
ation was “tough,” and hinted that Doenitz, whose 
fertile mind devised the wolf-pack submarine tactics, 
has elaborated a new and more deadly form of attack 
against our convoys. 

It is unfortunate that the need to conceal shipping 
losses from the enemy has kept the American people 


from realizing that the “Battle of the Atlantic’ is | 


easily the most critical campaign of the whole war. 
How many Americans know that our shipping losses 
from U-boats in March were among the highest for 
a single month since the war began in 1939? 
Allied counterattacks against the submarine have 
taken three principal forms. (1) A new type of war- 
ship, the so-called destroyer-escort, as protection for 
convoys. The first of these vessels was put into service 
only last February, but by July the Navy expects to 
have a large number of these warships. (2) Construc- 
tion of escort aircraft carriers, which are not suit- 


able for action with the fleet but are expected to add , 


enormously to the efficiency of anti-submarine patrols, 
especially in the mid-Atlantic. (3) Air attacks 
on Nazi submarine bases and construction yards. 
The effectiveness of these attacks has been questioned 
by many naval authorities, but the report that United 
States bombers severely damaged seven out of fifteen 
submarines on construction slips in the daylight raid 
on Vegesack on March 18 shows what may be ac- 
complished by such methods. 
JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 














, | 


