iT 
——— 
,UROPE 
ican public 
ss Marshal 
hereby run 
Soviet and 
was bend. 
gether. He 
f free elec. 
viet Union, 
regard 4s 
3S. 
| provided 
should “be 
ttered elec. 
f universal 
lization of 
ture of the 
ope, where 
exclusively 
srnment €&- 
scow is but 
e originally 
‘gime estab- 
ight display 
States and 
tion of the 
until it has 


J EUROPE 
iallenge the 
r one thing, 
propose if 
mination of 
1 the face of 
an internal 
acceptance 
er countries, 
whether it 
to determine 
mist groups 
the United 
ere to abat 
ig the out 
ite Stettinius 
ce, when he 
1 themselves 
eir decision. 
right or left 
/ matters for 


iR BOLLES 


ONDS 


JUL 1 6 1945 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


Toy Sep ayes 2 oe e we % 2 « 
University O% weaCnizan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 


FOREIGN 


POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIV, No. 38 


JuLy 6, 1945 


HOW CAN U.S. BEST PROMOTE UNITY IN CHINA? 


gs statement by War Minister Chen Cheng on 
June 6 that there had been “isolated cases” of 
Kuomintang-Communist clashes in the past few 
months, and the decision of the Chinese Communists 
not to participate in the forthcoming session of the 
People’s Political Council, advisory body of the 
Chungking government, are symptomatic of the de- 
teriorating political situation in China. The gap 
between the two main groups is growing visibly, 
and each is taking steps to strengthen itself for a 
possible showdown. The spectre of civil war, never 
wholly absent during the eight years of Chinese 
fesistance, is becoming more threatening now that 
the Japanese are withdrawing troops from large 
areas south of Shanghai and the Yangtze river. As 
Central forces reenter cities given up by the enemy, 
they draw nearer the bases held by the Communists. 
What will happen when the Chinese armies of 
Chungking and Yenan meet on an extended front 
isa question that concerns the entire world. 

NO TIME FOR ILLUSION. Recently there has 
been a tendency in the United States to gloss over 
the dangerous realities of Chinese politics and to 
draw comfort from superficial developments. For 
example, the resolutions adopted by the Kuomintang 
Congress in May have been welcomed for their 
pledges of constitutional government in the future. 
But beneath the surface little reason for optimism 
appears, since the lack of political harmony in China 
is more pronounced than ever. Certainly disunity 
is far greater than in the period—less than a year 
ago—when General Stilwell and Ambassador Gauss 
were exerting strong pressure for a genuine relaxa- 
tion of one-party rule by the Kuomintang and the 
welding of all Chinese armies into a more unified 
and effective fighting force. Perhaps the mission 
now being sent to Yenan by the People’s Political 
Council will have a useful effect, but it would be un- 


wise to exaggerate the power of this committee. 

A disturbing element in the political situation is 
the possibility that some American policy-makers 
have become resigned to the existing disunity in 
China and have decided to drift along with politi- 
cal conditions as they are. The danger is that if 
internal differences are not adjusted, a political ex- 
plosion may occur immediately after the Pacific 
war is over, or before Japan has been defeated. 

It is true, of course, that the United States cannot 
by itself determine the future of China and that 
even the wisest policy might not be wholly success- 
ful. It is also true that the Chungking government 
is the officially recognized, national government of 
China and that our attitude toward it can be justified 
on this ground alone. But no policy is likely to be 
effective if it is based largely on diplomatic forms 
and avoids the realities behind the scenes. One of 
these realities is the fact that the Central régime 
could hardly maintain itself against political oppo- 
sition in its own territory or against Yenan with- 
out American support in the form of military as- 
sistance and economic aid. Undoubtedly the United 
States has an important interest in Chungking’s re- 
sistance to Japan. But in supporting this interest we 
cannot escape a large measure of responsibility for 
Chungking’s actions. Our responsibility would be- 
come even greater if civil conflict were to develop. 

WHAT CHINA MEANS TO US. The difficult 
task before the State Department and the American 
people is to formulate a policy that will best serve 
the interests of the United States in an extremely 
complex situation. These interests are three-fold: to 
secure maximum military aid from China in the war 
against Japan; to encourage the development of a 
China that will contribute fully to the preservation 
of post-war peace in the Pacific; and to promote 
the rise of a large-scale Chinese market for Ameri- 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


| 
i 


So. & wow och 


~~ a eee 


; 


es 


Are + @ Pe tng. | ~' 


eg can, & 


———————— 


can goods. The time seems to have come to recognize 
anew what many American leaders apparently saw 
clearly a year ago: that none of these interests can 
be advanced with maximum effectiveness unless 
China is governed by a progressive administration, 
promoting the welfare of the Chinese people, and 
mobilizing the nation as a whole for the war against 
Japan as well as for post-war reconstruction. This 
goal, to be sure, cannot be achieved in a day, but 
Our present course of giving Chungking what 
amounts to a “blank check” has the effect of en- 
couraging an intransigent attitude on the part of 
the Central government and at the same time mak- 
ing Yenan less amenable to compromise. 


A NEW COURSE NEEDED. From a military 
point of view our policy today is to aid the Chung- 
king forces alone and to render no assistance to the 
Yenan troops, despite the favorable impression they 
made on members of the American military mission 
which visited them last year. It is well known that 
when General Stilwell was in China high Ameri- 
can leaders were anxious to cooperate with Yenan, 
as well as Chungking, partly because of the aid 
guerrilla armies might give to Allied forces invad- 
ing the North China coast. Another reason was to 
avoid international complications if the Russians 
at some point entered the Far Eastern war and estab- 
lished military cooperation with the Communist 
forces in Manchuria and North China. 

The Stilwell-Gauss approach was based on the 
view that politics should hasten victory, and that 
Japan would be defeated more quickly and cheaply 
if we gave support to all the effective military forces 


Page Two —— 


in China. This policy was neither anti-Chungking 
nor pro-Yenan, but first of all anti-Japanese. Hoy. 
ever, when serious obstacles arose inside Chungking 
General Stilwell was recalled, and shortly after. 
ward, for reasons that were somewhat different, Am. 
bassador Gauss resigned. Today a strong case cap 
be made for pursuing once more the principles that 
prevailed before last November, and this time carry. 
ing them through. 

An occasion for reorienting American policy js 
presented by the current discussions of T. V. Soong 
in Moscow, and it would be a hopeful augury if 
the United States and the Soviet Union now devel. 
oped a common approach to the China situation, 
In any event, it is dangerous for this country to lose 
the opportunity to be a mediator in China by sup. 
porting Chungking to the hilt, while refusing to 
deal with Yenan. There is much merit in the sug. 
gestion made by the New York Herald Tribune on 
June 29 that if efforts to settle the internal situa. 
tion in China fail, the United States should perhaps 
“ignore bitter opposition from the Kuomintang and 
send American troops into the Communist areas to 
assist and supply the Red guerrillas who are fight 
ing the Japanese.” The editorial notes that, “with both 
Kuomintang and Red armies dependent on Ameti- 
can supplies, civil war could be discouraged by 
threats of withdrawal of assistance from an aggres 
sor.” The adoption of such a course would mean 
that the United States had assumed a middle role 
in Chinese politics, such as it seeks in the affairs of 


the world at large. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(The third in a series of articles on American Par Eastern policy) 


TANGIER’S STATUS HEIGHTENS TENSION BETWEEN FRANCE AND SPAIN 


A fresh crop of predictions that General Franco's 
régime will soon collapse has appeared as a result 
of mounting tension between France and Spain dur- 
ing recent weeks. The Maquis-led attack at Cham- 
béry, near the Swiss frontier, on June 15, on a train 
carrying homeward a number of Spaniards who 
formerly lived in Germany, Austria and Poland, 
registered the popular resentment many Frenchmen 
harbor against Spaniards alleged to have aided the 
Axis during the war. More important, the resolu- 
tion passed by the Foreign Affairs Committee of the 
Consultative Assembly in Paris on May 25, calling 
for an Allied appeal to Franco to resign, represented 
a demand by the group officially appointed to rep- 
resent French opinion until elections are held. 

INTERVENTION UNLIKELY. Neither of these 
developments, however, has affected the position of 
Franco. The French government has sent a formal 
apology to Madrid for the Chambéry incident, and 
the Committee responsible for the anti-Franco reso- 
lution has no power to carry through the recom- 
mendation since the entire Assembly is merely an 


advisory body whose suggestions are frequently ig 
nored by General de Gaulle. Yet despite the fact 
that for the moment, at least, these incidents have 
only provided Spain with an excuse to close the 
frontier at a time when France is interested in pro 
curing food south of the Pyrenees, these moves maj 
foreshadow a stiffer French policy toward Spain. For 
although France is currently concerned with 
construction, the occupation of Germany and the 
maintenance of basic interests in Syria, the French 
are also aware that they have several scores to settle 
with Franco's Spain. 

The chief count France has against the Spanish 
leader is that he maintained close relations with 
Mussolini and Hitler throughout the war. Today 
the Spanish régime, which is made up of men who, 
without exception, have been both pro-Axis in for 
eign policy and proponents of Fascism in domestit 
affairs, is protesting that its actions sprang from 
considerations of expediency and the desire to keep 
Spain at peace. But Madrid’s current efforts to wo0 
the Western Allies with promises of friendship and 


—— 
changes 
outwar« 
as far < 
are con 
only fa 
mans a 
war bu 
fact the 
mand ¢ 
render 

eve of | 
tagonis! 


lapse F 
internat 
which | 
cause C 
French 
abolish 
all hig! 
moves 
his rég 
Tangie: 
cient h: 
vaded | 
Spait 
curred | 
place p 
powers 
pass in 
of Spai 
fative . 
pier, th 
in 192: 
shared 
France 
ance of 
halfhez 
point c 
Franco 
came < 
depenc 
money, 
for the 
North 
ate th 


FOREIGN 
Headquart 
second-cla 
one mont! 


om 


-hungking 
tly after. 
rent, Am- 
, Case can 
ciples that 


‘ime Carty: 


_ policy is 

V. Soong 
augury if 
10W devel- 

situation, 
try to lose 
na by sup. 
efusing to 
n the sug- 
[ribune on 
nal situa- 
id perhaps 
intang and 
ist areas to 
> are fight. 
, with both 
on Ameti- 
yuraged by 
an aggres 
rould mean 
middle role 
1e affairs of 


ROSINGER 
Eastern policy.) 


) SPAIN 
equently ig 
ite the fact 
cidents have 
o close the 
sted in pio 
» Moves may 
d Spain. For 
ed with fe 
iny and the 
the French 
ores to settle 


the Spanish 
lations with 
war. Today 
of men who, 
-Axis in for 
1 in domestic 
sprang from 
lesire to keep 
fforts to woo 
iendship and 


a 
— 


changes at home that will give Spain at least the 
outward forms of democracy have failed, at least 
as far as France is concerned. For many Frenchmen 
are convinced that the Axis attack in 1940 was not 
only facilitated by the military experience the Ger- 
mans and Italians gained during the Spanish civil 
war but was actually encouraged by Franco. The 
fact that the Generalissimo has not fulfilled the de- 
mand of General de Gaulle’s government for sur- 
render of Pierre Laval, who fled to Spain on the 
eve of Germany’s collapse, has added to French an- 
tagonism toward Spain. 

FRENCH-SPANISH RIVALRY. Still another 
reason why the French may be expected to support, 
even if they do not initiate, any forthcoming move 
from abroad to secure a new government in Spain 
is that Franco immediately took advantage of their 
defeat in 1940. Only a few days after France’s col- 
lapse Franco sent Spanish troops into Tangier, the 
internationalized port across from Gibraltar in 
which the French played the predominant role be- 
cause of their strong military position in adjacent 
French Morocco. During the following winter, Spain 
abolished the international control bodies and ousted 
all high officials who were not Spaniards. By these 
moves Franco attempted to realize at least part of 
his régime’s dream of a new Spanish empire, for 
Tangier had formerly been linked to Spain by an- 
dent historical ties established when the Moors in- 
vaded Spain from North Africa. 

Spain’s loss of Tangier to international control oc- 
curred during the competition for Morocco that took 
place prior to World War I, when none of the great 
powers felt it could afford to see this strategic port 
pass into the hands of any single nation. As a result 
of Spain’s inability to cope with the resistance of the 
tative Riffs in the Spanish region surrounding Tan- 
gier, this de facto arrangement was formally replaced 
in 1923 by the International Statute in which Spain 
shared control of the Tangier zone with Britain, 
France and—after 1928—with Italy. Spain's accept- 
ance of the internationalization of Tangier remained 
halfhearted, and the Tangier question became a focal 
point of Spanish suspicions regarding France. Under 
Franco’s control, therefore, Tangier promptly be- 
Game a center for Nazi agents and Moroccan “in- 
dependence” parties which were supplied with 
Money, arms and propaganda material by the Axis 
for the purpose of stirring up native unrest in French 
North African possessions. It is difficult to evalu- 
ate the results of this enemy-subsidized activity 


Page Three 


——— 
cer 


because some of the requests Moroccan leaders are 
now making for greater independence undoubtedly 
reflect the weakened position of France during the 
past five years and would probably have occurred 
without Axis encouragement. But in any case the 
French, who are now forced to cope with native de- 
mands for greater local autonomy, are not likely to 
forget the contribution of the Tangier agents to their 
problems in North Africa. 


FUTURE STATUS OF TANGIER. Franco is well 
aware that Allied victory in Europe renders his 
unilateral control of Tangier untenable, and on June 
12, in a note to the British government which had 
protested his action in 1940, he offered to return the 
city to its international status. The Generalissimo did 
not, however, send a similar notification to Paris, 
and this fact, when considered in connection with 
two suggestions Spain is reported to have made to 
Britain for a new régime in the city, seems to indi- 
cate that Franco is determined to whittle down the 
French role in Tangier even if Spain does not 
benefit from internationalization. First, Spain in- 
formed London that, after Spanish troops evacuate 
Tangier, native troops of the Caliph—the local rep- 
resentative of the Sultan of Morocco—will maintain 
order in the city. In view of attempts by Moroccan 
leaders to gain a larger role in local administration, 
this proposal raises the question whether or not 
these native troops would be willing to move out 
later in favor of occupation forces sent by the great 
powers. In addition, Spain announced it would wel- 
come American participation in the reoccupation and - 
administration of Tangier. That the United States 
is not averse to this proposal is indicated by the fact 
that American representatives are now engaged with 
Britain and France in preliminary international dis- 
cussions on Tangier, which opened on July 2. It 
appears, moreover, that American interests in com- 
merce and communications throughout north and 
west Africa would be advanced if Washington 
shared responsibility for this strategic port. But it is 
not merely the development of native and American 
interests in Tangier that promises to raise complex 
problems of international politics in connection with 
the future status of the zone. If the possibility that 
Russia may be a party to the new arrangements ma- 
terializes, the U.S.S.R. would emerge as one of the 
Mediterranean powers, particularly since the Krem- 
lin is negotiating with Turkey for permission to 
share in the control of the Dardanelles. 

WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


POREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 38, Jury 6, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorormy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micuzies Daan, Editor. Envered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


ome month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


SB 121 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter = 


NEED FOR REFORM OF STATE DEPARTMENT CONFRONTS BYRN ES — 
The State Department since December 1944 has to attract a sufficiently large number of recruits tp EF 
ae 


been working on plans regarding the fundamental give the Department a variegated selective choice, 
reorganization of the country’s machinery for con- It is not unusual for officers to spend, in the line of 
ducting foreign affairs. The signing of the United duty, more than their federal income, and the reop. 
Nations charter by the American delegation on June ganization the Department is devising calls for ig. 


of the change, which would involve a considerably was low; today, however, both the Army and the 
increased State Department budget. Judge Byrnes’ Navy report that many men in uniform are making om 


‘A 26 brings to a head the need for reorganization, be- creased allowances. 
4 cause this country’s present diplomatic apparatus is The war and the profoundly altered position of 
Bi still geared to a policy of isolation. President Tru- the United States in world affairs have overcome, in 
iy man’s nomination on June 30 of James F. Byrnes as part, the apathy that formerly figured as another | Yor. x3 
i Secretary of State to succeed Edward R. Stettinius, deterrent to recruitment. The number of candidates 
of Jr., may help pave the way for national acceptance for any Foreign Service examination before the war 
y 
: 
B 


x 
& 
ot 
¢ 
+ 
¥ 
« 
i 


principal qualifications for his new post are his influ- inquiries about the Foreign Service, and on June 29 cont 
2 ence with and understanding of Congress, where he the State Department announced that Foreign Sery. | spite of 
a served as Representative and Senator. At the Crimea ice examinations would be given to 400 members } tion is 
4 Conference in February, President Roosevelt relied of the armed services. in the | 
: 3 on Byrnes for guidance on how Congress and the The Office of the Foreign Service, meanwhile | enemy 
i i American public would react to the various proposals has been exploring the possibility of systematically { necessa 
.4 he was discussing with Marshal Stalin and Prime borrowing Army and Navy officers for temporary} it is ho 
ih Minister Churchill. diplomatic assignments, and establishing a “foreign | conditic 
se STATE DEPARTMENT CHANGES NEEDED. service reserve” among civilians to be used from} of, at | 
iS The replacement of high sub-officials—the Under time to time on special tasks. During the war Foreign | enemy 
a i Secretary and Assistant Secretaries—that customarily Service officers, as well as Army and Navy officers, | pation. 
accompanies a change in the Secretaryship would be have attended classes in the various colleges giving | @ poss 
( inadequate to meet the urgent requirements of the special courses relating to particular foreign coun ) underli 
- time. In recent years, almost every Federal agency tries. This educational comradeship will contribute | Germa: 
‘o in Washington has developed an interest in some the State Department hopes, toward a close relation | Curt 
: particular foreign field, and the domestic policies ship with the military services in the future. can po 
of the various agencies frequently affect our foreign FOREIGN SERVICE TRAINING PROGRAM. } that th 
relations. As a result, the United States needs a Reorganization of the Foreign Service will necessi | with u 
uF State Department that can effectively coordinate tate a modernized system of training. The reformers } desire | 
: f these interests and policies in order to secure the in the Department have received suggestions for | promis 
i consistent foreign policy that President Truman stiffening the educational requirements, and aban- | ‘ulers. 
° called for in his talk of June 29 with Alfred M. doning the old-style entrance examination, which | fine ur 
5 Landon in Kansas City. A first step toward insuring stressed factual questions and for which the candi | will kn 
. consistency would be the creation of a position of date could prepare in a tutoring school, rather than | them. 
+ Permanent Under Secretary, akin to that in the profound knowledge and understanding. It has also; ® @ 
: British Foreign Office, and the broadening of the been suggested that the Department establish a train | ¢atly | 


Foreign Service to include reportorial specialists in ing program within the Foreign Service to fit offices | quired. 


vd the fields of interest of the various agencies. for the difficult tasks of diplomacy and enable the} Sze fu 
. PROBLEMS OF THE DEPARTMENT. Im- State Department to weed out those who fail, after} that, i 
4 provement of the Foreign Service, whose officers serve a period of probation, to show real ability. Since | machir 
é not only on the diplomatic missions abroad but on the State Department needs to develop high politi | Hons r 
{ many of the political desks in the State Department, cal capacity, as well as technical efficiency, in its} | DO 
a is a primary requirement for a modernized Depart- Foreign Service officers, the creation of a Foreign} § unli 
f ment. Initially, this improvement is a problem in re- Service Institute, on a level with the Army and Navy Chung 
Ee cruitment. In the past, the salary scale, compared War Colleges, is tentatively under consideration. and le 
' with the expenses of the officers, has been too low BLAIR BOLLES ond 
'€ Cal 
i FOR VICTORY * BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 
4 : 


a 


