| out that 
e requife 
d that in 
en made, 


ortion of 
for. But 


inued fe 
need for 
in order | 
oduction. | 
nt reduc | 
Lugust 1, | 
cent cut 
essential 
progress 
and pet 
are taken. 


STONE 


ee ag. er ene Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XX, No. 36 


JUNE 27, 1941 


HITLER RESUMES CRUSADE ON COMMUNISM 


—, invasion of Russia in the early 
hours of June 22 opened a new phase of the 
wat which is bound to have profound repercussions 
throughout the world. This invasion came as a shock 
both to those in Western countries who, in harmony 
with the Communist party “line,” had been de- 
nouncing Britain’s “imperialist” war against the 
Reich, and those who had too hastily interpreted the 
Soviet-German pacts of 1939 as a sign of “all-out” 
collaboration between Germany and the U.S.S.R. 

NAZI CHARGES AGAINST MOSCOW. If the 
statements issued by Hitler and von Ribbentrop on 
the day of invasion are correct—and they are sub- 
stantiated, in most details, by facts available from 
other sources—the German Fuehrer signed the non- 
aggression pact “with a heavy heart,” and with an 
equally heavy heart accepted Russia’s subsequent oc- 
cupation of the Baltic states, southeastern Finland, 
Bessarabia and Moldavia, as well as Soviet diplo- 
matic maneuvers in the Balkans—all in the hope of 
temporarily appeasing Stalin, and meanwhile crush- 
ing Britain in the West. What apparently disturbed 
the Nazis most, judging by von Ribbentrop’s state- 
ment, was that the Soviet government, far from 
abiding by its pledge to abstain from interference in 
Germany’s internal affairs, apparently out-fifth-col- 
umned Nazi fifth columnists by spreading Com- 
munist propaganda not only in the Reich, but in all 
occupied countries, and allegedly committed acts of 
sabotage, notably in the case of 16 German ships. All 
these anti-German moves, according to the Nazi lead- 
ets, were made by the Soviet government in collabora- 
tion with Britain and the United States for the pur- 
pose of prolonging the war and throttling Germany. 
Hitler, therefore, decided to oppose the Soviet ‘‘men- 
ace"—not only to defend Germany, “but to save 
the entire civilized world from the dangers of bol- 
shevism and clear the way for true social progress 
in Europe.” 


NAZISM PROCLAIMED BULWARK 
AGAINST COMMUNISM. These statements revive 
the main theme of Hitler's pre-1939 denunciations 
of Russia—the accusation that Bolshevism threat- 
ens European civilization, and the assertion that 
Germany offers a bulwark against this threat. On 
a far larger scale than he has yet attempted, Hitler 
is thus again seeking to drive a wedge between 


groups within each nation—the very thing of which 
von Ribbentrop accuses the Russian Communists. 
What is not yet always understood in the Western 
world is that the Nazis themselves have taken a 
leaf out of the book of Lenin, who during the first 
World War urged his followers to “transform the 
imperialist war into a civil war.” Where the Rus- 
sian Communists were only partially successful, due 
both to native inefficiency and to the repugnance of 
most Western peoples for the pattern of life devel- 
oped in the Soviet Union, the Nazis have proved 
far more effective, by the simple device of promising 
to protect private property and religion—only to 
whittle down both of those institutions through eco- 
nomic restrictions and racial discrimination. 
Although the Nazis have now turned back to 
Hitler’s original concept of seeking: “living space” 
for the Germans in the east, they have not for a 
moment abandoned their intention of destroying the 
British Empire. If Hitler should win his objectives 
in Russia, Britain and the countries now aiding Brit- 
ain would be confronted with far more deadly 
danger than they face today, since Germany would 
then have acquired a position from which no block- 
ade could probably dislodge it. This was clearly 
recognized by Prime Minister Churchill in his broad- 
cast of June 22, in which he rejected all thought of 
peace with Germany, and said that nothing will turn 
Britain from its ‘‘single irrevocable purpose” of de- 
stroying Hitler ‘‘and every vestige of the Nazi 
régime.” In a speech to the House of Commons on 


EE EEeee 
———— 


—— 
a 


June 23 British Foreign Secretary Eden declared that 
Britain would help Russia fight Germany to the 
finish. What is most significant, he stated, appar- 
ently with the consent of both Moscow and the Po- 
lish Government-in-Exile, that Britain’s pledge to 
restore Poland remained unaffected. 

SOVIET ASSETS AND LIABILITIES. Only time 
can answer the question whether Russia can meet 
the supreme test imposed by the German invasion. 
So far as military training and industrial resources 
are concerned, the Soviet Union must be regarded 
as inferior to Germany — although the Russians 
were ahead of the Germans in experimenting with 
modern devices like parachutists and transport of 
troops by air. The major weaknesses of the Soviet 
Union are its transportation system, which has 
proved unequal to the strains of peacetime activi- 
ties and, if disrupted by German bombings, might 
in turn throw industrial production out of gear; the 
stubborn opposition of the newly occupied terri- 
tories—Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and southeastern 
Finland—which might welcome liberation from So- 
viet rule, even if it comes at the hands of the Ger- 
mans; and the possibility that civilian morale in 
general, already lowered by frequent purges and 
continuous economic difficulties, might be under- 
mined by initial German victories as well as by 
German appeals to the aspirations of various na- 
tional groups within the U.S.S.R. Among these 
groups the most important are the Ukrainians, who 
have long hoped for unification of their people, 
historically divided between Russia, Poland, Hun- 
gary and Rumania; some of their leaders are re- 
ported to be aiding the Nazis. Hitler may also be 
expected to appeal to the religious sentiments of 
those who have resisted the “godless” propaganda 
of the Soviet government, and to the anti-Soviet feel- 
ings of White Russians—although Alexander Keren- 


Page Two 


— 


sky, former Premier in the provisional governmen 
of 1917, appealed on Juné 22 for unity of all Ry 
sians against Hitler. 

The most important asset of the Soviet Union jp 
its struggle against Germany will not be the decep. 
tralization of its industries, many of which haye 
been erected in the Urals and Siberia, beyond Ge. 
man bombing range, nor its great expanse of te,. 


ritory, which can be overcome to some extent by 
use of German motorized equipment. Moscow’ 
greatest asset is the bitter hostility aroused by the 
Nazis in all occupied countries—a hostility that did 
not exist in 1939, and that may now prove a dap. 
gerous boomerang for Hitler; and the latent belief 
among many workers, peasants and intellectuals 
especially in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, that 
Communism remains irrevocably opposed to Fascism 
and, in the long run, will destroy it in Europe. This 


belief had been seriously shaken by the Soviet-Ger.| i 


man non-aggression pact of 1939. But it is signif. 


cant that active resistance to the Nazis in occupied | 
countries often comes not from industrial or pro’ 


fessional groups, some of whom hope to benefit| 
by “collaboration” with Germany, but from in 
dustrial workers and what is known as ‘“‘the man 
in the street.” It is to this resistance that Foreign 
Commissar Molotov, in his broadcast of June 22, 
shrewdly appealed when, in contrast to Prime Min 
ister Churchill, he drew a sharp distinction betweea| 
“the clique of bloodthirsty Fascist rulers” on the’ 
one hand, and German workers, peasants and inte: 
lectuals on the other. These are the people who are 
ready to support Britain against Germany, but who 
might conceivably support Russia instead, if Britain 
and the United States fail, at this crucial turning 
point, to provide them with a vision of the world 
order the Western powers hope to establish as a 


alternative to Nazism. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


GERMANY SEEKS SECURITY IN EAST FOR ATTACK ON BRITAIN 


In ordering the invasion of the Soviet Union, with 
all its attendant risks, Hitler was apparently actu- 
ated by two imperative motives. The first was to 
eliminate the danger, once and for all, that Russia 
might strike Germany in the rear just as the war 
against Britain was entering its decisive phase. The 
second was to assure Germany ample resources to 


For Moscow’s opinion of Hitler’s “new order” 
in Europe, read: 


RUSSIA AND THE “NEW ORDER” 
IN EUROPE by V. M. Dean 
25¢ 


Vol. XVI, No. 19, of Foreign Policy Reports 


defy Britain and the United States in a long wat. 
The first of these motives appears clearly in the 
statements issued by both the Fuehrer and von Rib 
bentrop. In August 1939 the Nazis submerged thei 
traditional hostility to Bolshevism and concluded # 
non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union only be 
cause the Army insisted that Germany could no 
fight a war on two fronts. The Nazis made the bes 
of this situation, but apparently remained skeptic 
regarding the permanent character of the Russ 
German arrangement. As signs of Russian hos 
tility multiplied, German Army leaders also los 
faith in the agreement with Moscow and began 
realize that the Russian threat might prevent. thet 
from conquering the British Isles. According ® 
Hitler, the Army advised him that such large Get 


TH 
second 
Gayda 
new W 
found 
Axis < 
Britais 
mans 
mater: 
sabota 
endle:s 
demat 

De: 
powe! 
positi 
quere: 
and f 
partic 
from 
rope 
face { 
imprc 
for e: 
one-fi 

In 
pear 
furni: 
um a 
defici 
drast 
const 
fuel | 
little 
FOREI 
Headqu 


Enterec 


De 


——==_ 


overnment 
vf all Rus. 


Union jg 
the decep. 
hich haye 
yond Ger. 
Se Of ter. 
extent by 
Moscow's 
ed by the 
y that did 
ve a dap. 
ent belief 
ellectuals, 
kans, that 
(0 Fascism 


rope. This | 
Oviet-Ger. 


iS signif. 
| Occupied 
il or pto- 
to benefit 
from in- 
“the man 
t Foreign 
June 22, 
rime Min- 
1 between 
on the 
and intel-| 
© who are 
. but who 
if Britain 
| turning. 
the world 
ish as al 


; DEAN 


IN 


1g wat. 
rly in the 

von Rib 
rged thet 
ncluded 4 
1 only be 
sould not 
e the best 

skeptical 
1e Russe 


sian hos 
also los 
began #0 
rent. thet 
yrding ® 
arge Gtt 


—_ 


man forces were needed to protect Germany's bor- 
ders against Russia “that radical conclusion of the 
war in the west, particularly as regards aircraft, 
gould no longer be vouchsafed.” 

Under these conditions Germany could either try 
to reach a peace settlement or truce with Britain in 
order to obtain a free hand for action against the 
Soviet Union, or attempt to hold the western front 
while delivering a smashing blow against Russia. 
The Berlin government probably did put out peace 
feelers to Britain, perhaps through Rudolph Hess 
4s an intermediary, but British leaders were categori- 
cal in their resolve to continue fighting to the bitter 
end. The Army then reached the conclusion that a 
two-front war was inevitable. This time it was 
willing to take the risk because elimination of the 
land front in Western Europe and the Balkans 
enabled Germany to concentrate most of its forces 
in the east. 

THE NEED FOR MORE LEBENSRAUM. The 
second motive was most clearly expressed by Virginio 
Gayda, the Fascist spokesman, who declared that the 
new war was designed to secure a broader economic 
foundation for the reorganization of Europe under 
Axis auspices and to prevent the United States and 
Britain from starving out the continent. The Ger- 
mans admitted that the Russians had delivered raw 
materials and foodstuffs, but accused Moscow of 
sabotaging full economic cooperation by permitting 
endless delays and making impossible or difficult 
demands for counter-deliveries. 

Despite a series of military victories, the Axis 
powers have been unable to improve their economic 
position. Virtually all the countries they have con- 
quered or controlled are deficient in raw materials 
and foodstuffs. The Western European nations in 
particular have always depended heavily on imports 
from overseas. Although the food situation in Eu- 
tope is by no means desperate, the German people 
face the prospect of a deterioration, rather than an 
improvement in supplies. During the month of June, 
for example, German meat rations had been cut by 
one-fifth. 

In the long run, the supply of raw materials ap- 
pear even more critical. The European continent can 
furnish enough iron ore, coal, aluminum, magnesi- 
um and nitrates for the Nazi war machine, but it is 
deficient in almost everything else. In spite of the 
drastic curtailment in all absolutely non-essential 
consumption, Europe produces barely enough motor 
fuel and insufficient lubricants. It has no cotton and 
little wool. The supply of such important non-fer- 


Page Three 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: THE U.S. AND THE SOVIET- 
GERMAN WAR 
Speaker: William T. Stone 
Date: June 29 
Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 
Station: NBC, blue network 


rous metals as copper, lead, and even zinc, is in- 
adequate. Germany has had to rely on Russia for 
sufficient quantities of manganese, which is an es- 
sential purifying and alloying agent in steel-making. 
Moreover, the European continent produces no tin 
and only small amounts of steel-alloying metals 
such as nickel, tungsten, molybdenum, vanadium, 
etc., which are vital in the manufacture of machine 
tools, ordnance and ammunition. Germany had pro- 
vided for these deficiencies to an amazing extent 
by accumulating stock piles before the war, by care- 
ful rationing and conservation, and by developing 
substitutes. Yet its capacity in this respect is limited. 
After conquering Western Europe, it could not fully 
utilize the additional manufacturing facilities thus 
acquired simply because not enough raw materials 
were available. While the United States was plac- 
ing more and more of its rich resources at the dis- 
posal of Britain, Nazi Germany saw little prospect 
of increasing its own economic strength sufficiently 
to offset this assistance. 


ACCESS TO RUSSIA’S WEALTH. Although the 
Nazis had succeeded in imposing a counterblockade 
on the British Isles, they had failed to break the 
British blockade of the continent. The Germans 
were therefore compelled to seek some way out of 
their European prison and obtain access to addi- 
tional raw materials and foodstuffs. Neither Africa, 
nor the Near and Middle East contain much natural 
wealth. The U.S.S.R., however, is a rich reservoir 
of grain and minerals. In control of the Ukraine, 
the Caucasus and the Urals, the Nazis would no 
longer be at the mercy of the Kremlin for deliveries 
of oil, manganese, phosphates, grain and other vital 
products. Almost five years ago, on September 12, 
1936, Adolf Hitler frankly declared: “If the Urals, 
with their immeasurable treasure of raw materials; 
Siberia, with its rich forests, and the Ukraine with 
its limitless grain fields, were to lie in Germany, this 
country under National Socialist leadership would 
swim in plenty.” The Nazi legions have now set 
out to prove this contention. Their success or failure 
may determine the outcome of the war. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 36, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


ris 


JUNE 27, 


1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lrgt, Secretary; Vera MicHELes DEAN, Editor. 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Association, Incorporated. National 


under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


\ 
yo 


ys 


2 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JUNE 23.—As Washington recovered from the 
initial surprise of Hitler's offensive against the So- 
viet Union, Administration leaders faced the task 
of charting American policy in a situation which had 
changed profoundly almost overnight. Foremost 
among the new and perplexing problems thrust upon 
the government were three major questions: 


1. Should the United States follow the lead of Prime 
Minister Winston Churchill, who pledged Great Britain 
to give all possible aid to Russia and every nation which 
resists Nazi aggression? If so, should the Administra- 
tion extend material assistance to Russia under the pro- 
visions of the Lease-Lend Act? 

2. Should the United States intensify its aid to Brit- 
ain, throwing its full weight into the balance in the 
West while Hitler is occupied in the East, or should it 
hold aloof and await developments before undertaking 
new commitments ? 

3. Asa result of the German-Russian conflict, what 
policy should the United States adopt in the Far East? 
Can we hope to detach the Axis partner in Asia by con- 
ciliating Tokyo, or must we take a firm stand in the 
Pacific as well as the Atlantic? 


FUNDAMENTAL OBJECTIVES. If Washing- 
ton’s first answer to these questions seemed any 
less certain than London’s emphatic response to the 
German drive in the East, it was not because the 
President and his advisers were in doubt about the 
fundamental objectives of American policy. The ob- 
jectives are clear. They have been laid down by the 
Executive branch of the government in President 
Roosevelt's broadcast of May 27, and underlined 
more sharply in the special message to Congress on 
June 20, in which the President accused the German 
government of seeking to intimidate the United 
States and drive its commerce from the seas as part 
of the Nazi scheme for world conquest. Implicit in 
these official statements, as in every diplomatic and 
military move of the government during the past 
three weeks, was the basic assumption that Nazi 
Germany represents the chief threat to the security 
of the United States and the Western Hemisphere. 

Neither this assumption nor the broad objectives 
which stem from it have been altered by the sensa- 
tional turn of events. On the contrary, the Nazi of- 
fensive has strengthened the conviction that Hitler 
is the real enemy whose defeat is essential. Thus, in 
measuring the effect of Hitler’s colossal gamble, 
Washington officials see the military campaign in 
Russia as an unexpected opportunity for Britain to 
strike with telling effect in the West. The diversion 


may be long or short—according to the stren 
the Soviet Army—but at this moment it undoubteg 
exposes Germany to the threat of a two-front w 
and to that extent fortifies Britain’s position. 
The attitude of the Washington government wa, 
set forth on June 23 by Sumner Welles, Acting 
Secretary of State, in a statement which again de 
fined the paramount issue in terms essentially similar} 
to those used by Prime Minister Churchill the day}¥a. 
before. Speaking for the President, Mr. Welles cop. 
demned both Communism and Nazism as “intoler. 
able” to the people of the United States, but de | 
clared that the issue for this country at this time gn 
“is whether the plan for universal conquest” is p|~ ™ 
be successfully halted and defeated. Mr. Welles }0petu 
disclosed no immediate moves, but within the larger alt to 
framework of the Administration’s fundamental ob | the ' 
jectives his statement provided a fairly complete an. | #lian 
swer to the three specific questions. Russia 
If Hitler is the chief danger, then all other cop. |"! 
siderations must be subordinated to the primary ob {opt 
jective. And if the primary objective of American} Spe“ 
policy is to enable Britain to take advantage of Ger |whelm 
many’s occupation in the East, then it is no longer} ip the 
possible for the United States to hold aloof and} ais’ 
await developments. To do nothing in this greatest} {ted | 
crisis of the war would underwrite Hitler’s gamble | While 
and prove his contention that the democracies are |{H¢ P* 
incapable of understanding their own peril. Strategic ceeded 
considerations alone dictate that the United States | 08 ' 
intensify its aid to Britain as the first and most im- | 88! 
portant move, with the transfer of heavy bombers | Mt | 
and naval support in the Atlantic at the top of the the W 
priority list. long-r 
From this premise, it follows that the question of | muniq 
Lend-Lease aid to Russia must be secondary. This jal st 
does not, however, prevent the extension of material | kussis 
assistance to the Soviet Union as long as it resists | 1. 
Germany. It would be possible to issue a general | }ecom 
license for the release of frozen Soviet funds in the | ty a 
United States, and to permit machine tool shipments | '*ap | 
which have been held up in recent months. vide ¢ 
Japan presents a more difficult problem, but one tally 
which is not insoluble. Outright appeasement would | ptisin 
be unlikely to change Japan’s designs in Southeast: | direct 
ern Asia, but Tokyo is obviously concerned by the | Mosc 
actions of its partner in Europe and will tread cau: | Woulc 
tiously pending further developments. In this situa | Which 
tion, it is the course of wisdom for the United States libera 
to avoid provoking Japan while keeping it in sus land, 
pense. W.T. STONE 7 Mant 


