











‘ mei i. Entered as 2nd class matter 
Unive Savy O24 40! 1.gan 
— 
Sf Ann Arbor, Michigan 
pepronicaL RQVA 
Fs. GENEP AL LIBRARY ? y 
wy, Ot MM 
an UNITY. OF Mice. l> 19 
rat q, 
—| 
; Y 
me FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
y L 
Anny 
S of An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
ntial FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
Noa; 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Own 
fear. | Vor. XX, No. 18 JANUARY 17, 1941 
lude 


jobs JAPAN GAINS BY THAI INVASION OF INDO-CHINA 


sage, vera for the increasing severity of hostilities 
_ between Thailand (Siam) and Indo-China, the 
steps relative lull on the Far Eastern front has continued 
1 the | during recent weeks. Japan’s relations with the So- 
t de. | viet Union are still in an indeterminate stage, 
nain. | matked by failure thus far to renew the: fisheries 
> the | convention which expired on December 31, 1940. 
ack.” | In China some uneasiness has been caused by a rift 
time | between the Kuomintang and the Communists, al- 
isive, | though a threatened crisis seems to have been averted. 


1 the WARFARE IN INDO-CHINA. Since last Octo- 
ber, despite occasional rumors of demands for further 

t the | military concessions, Japan has made no openly ag- 
pro | gressive moves in Indo-China. Throughout this period, 
peed: however, unsettled conditions have prevailed on the 
most | Thailand - Indo-China border. Recent events have 
‘nud. | Suggested that Japan, unwilling to risk the conse- 
ranch | quences of direct moves on its own part in Indo- 
‘sions | China, may be planning to take advantage of the 
gress, | growing warfare between Thailand and Indo-China. 
© the | Until lately hostilities on the Indo-China border 
ional | have been of limited scope. They were confined for 
icting | the most part to belligerent declarations from Bang- 
itary kok to Hanoi, and to occasional local air raids by 
dy to} @ few planes on each side. During the past two 
lefeat | Weeks, these relatively minor incidents have been 
nt of | succeeded by warlike operations on a considerable 
‘thout | Sale. On January 9 the Indo-Chinese military forces 
asible | Withdrew five to ten miles from the Cambodian 
opose border, following Thai infantry attacks supported 
by extensive bombing operations. Fighting on the 
Cambodian front is occurring along the rail-and-road 
communication system that leads toward Saigon in 
EMS” | southern Indo-China. Reports from Hanoi claim that 
2; the | Japanese pilots are flying the Thai planes, and that 
- yout | Japanese military planes en route to Thailand have 
every | been making unauthorized landings in Indo-China. 
twotk| These hostilities have coincided with the begin- 
hing of negotiations on economic matters between 














YNE 





Japan and Indo-China. An important Indo-Chinese 
economic mission reached Tokyo at the end of De- 
cember, and preliminary conferences for a compre- 
hensive trade pact have since been held. No details 
as to the progress of these negotiations have been 
revealed, but it is understood that Japan is seeking 
to increase its imports of certain Indo-Chinese prod- 
ucts, notably rice, tin and rubber. Thailand’s inva- 
sion of Cambodia is weakening the position of the 
French authorities in Indo-China and making it less 
possible for them to resist Japan’s demands, either 
political or economic. 

THE KUOMINTANG-COMMUNIST RIFT. 
Serious tension between the Kuomintang and the 
Chinese Communists has raised the threat of re- 
newed civil strife in China. Since the beginning of 
the Japanese invasion in 1937 cooperation between 
China’s two major political groups has been effec- 
tively maintained, despite occasional periods of dif- 
ficulty. The last crisis occurred in 1939, but was 
settled in July of that year by Generalissimo Chiang 
Kai-shek’s intervention. 

In the course of the war two main centers of mili- 
tary operation by Chinese Communist forces have 
developed. The first, and most important, is located 
in North China, where the Eighth Route Army is 
the nucleus of a strong guerrilla movement which 
extends over several provinces. A subsidiary Com- 
munist force, known as the Fourth Route Army, has 
developed a similar guerrilla base north and south 
of the lower Yangtze River, between Nanking and 
Shanghai. Both the Eighth Route and Fourth Route 
armies are controlled by Communist officers, but 
under the general direction of the central military 
authorities at Chungking. The continued expansion 
of these armies has been viewed with distrust by 
some elements in the Chinese central government. 
The Communist leaders, on the other hand, main- 
tain that, despite inadequate central support in 


— 
ERE 9 OS RN ct AEN Ni OE A ON i, 


i 
% 














money and munitions, they have managed to ex- 
poe their operations and engage larger Japanese 
orces, thus enhancing their contribution to the com- 
mon military struggle. Underlying these problems 
are more basic differences, centering around the 
political and economic reforms in guerrilla districts 
which have curtailed the powers of the landed gentry 
and the merchants. These issues are also connected 
with the Communist demand for a wider extension 
of democratic rights throughout China, and are 
sharpened by the distress resulting from the infla- 
tionary rise of prices in free China. 

During the past autumn, the Chinese central au- 
thorities adopted a number of measures which nearly 
led to open conflict. Three lines of blockhouses, 
hemming in the Eighth Route Army, have been 
built in the northwest, and a force of 200,000 cen- 
tral troops has been concentrated behind these lines. 
In November, moreover, General Ho Ying-chin, the 
War Minister at Chungking, demanded that the 
Fourth Route Army transfer all its forces north of 
the Yangtze River by December 19. As the region 
in question was wrested from Japanese control by 
the Fourth Route Army after regular Chinese forces 
had been withdrawn, the leaders of the Fourth Army 


Page Two 











——a 


have resisted this order. In one locality, reports jp. 
dicate that a section of the Fourth Army disarmed , / 
detachment of 10,000 Kuomintang troops sent ty 
dislodge them. 


The fact that no major effort has been made ty 
enforce the orders against the Fourth Army suggests 
that the immediate crisis has passed. As Kuomintang. 
Communist collaboration is the key to China’s sy¢. 
cessful defense, a renewal of civil strife at this time | 
would have serious repercussions on the whole Ra | 
Eastern situation. The British, American and Soviet | 
Ambassadors to China are said to have warned both | 
Chiang Kai-shek and Chou En-lai, chief Communig | 
representative at Chungking, against the adverse 
effects which renewed civil conflict would have og 
the possibility of further aid from abroad. There js | 
some evidence that Japan’s peace feelers at Chung. | 
king in October and November helped to bring 
Kuomintang-Communist differences to the surface, | 
The reopening of the Burma Road, additional Amefi | 
can and British financial aid, and the Soviet loa, | 
agreements with China in January totaling $15,000, 
000 should, in this case, exert a stabilizing influence 
on China’s internal situation. 





T. A. Bisson 


GERMANY PLANS TO EXPAND TRADE WITH RUSSIA 


The part that the Soviet Union may eventually 
play in the broadening world conflict again came 
under discussion over the week-end of January 11 
with the signature of a new Soviet-German trade 
agreement and contradictory rumors of Moscow’s 
attitude toward German diplomatic and military 
maneuvers in the Balkans. The new trade agreement 
—signed on January 10 along with four border and 
population transfer treaties—represents a step in the 
execution of the “economic program” codistiioen 
by the two governments in a treaty concluded on 
August 23, 1939, as expanded by the agreement 
of February 11, 1940. The February agreement had 
provided for an exchange of goods valued at over 
one billion marks or $400,000,000. The agreement 
of January 10 regulates the trade turnover between 
the Soviet Union and Germany until August 1, 1942, 
and “provides for an amount of mutual deliveries 
considerably exceeding the level of the first year 
of operation” of the February 11 pact. The U.S.S.R. 
is to deliver to Germany industrial raw materials, 





Can the United States balk invasion? Read: 


U.S. STRATEGIC BASES IN THE 
ATLANTIC by A. Randle Elliott 


25c 


January 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 











oil products and foodstuffs, especially cereals, wal 
Germany is to deliver industrial equipment. While | 
no specific figures were mentioned in the agreement, 
the official German news agency, D.N.B., declared 
the new arrangement could be called an “economic 
plan.” | 


SCOPE OF SOVIET-GERMAN TRADE. Nv! 
detailed information is available from either Ger | 
man or Soviet sources regarding Soviet-German 
trade during the first year of the war. Deliveries of | 
wheat, oats and barley from Russia, however, havt | 
been described in Berlin as “‘satisfactory.’’ Of the| 
grains imported by Germany, about 80 per cent att 
said to be fodder. It has also been implied in Berlin 
that Germany might import the share of Russia’ 
exports which formerly went to Britain, estimated 
at £19,000,000 in 1938. Germany would be inter | 
ested in importing from the U.S.S.R. other agt 
cultural products and foodstuffs, such as corn, rice 
and meat, but of these Russia does not have at pre 
ent an exportable surplus. It is interesting to nott 
that German references to the “greatest grain deal| 
in history” coincided with reports that Russia ws 
sending a trade mission to Argentina to negotiates 
“giant” agreement for the purchase of grain, whid 
might then presumably be exported via Russia 
Germany. In other words Russia, technically a not 
belligerent, might serve as an intermediary for Get 
man imports across the Pacific of Latin Americal 








FO) 


Ent 








have 
f the | 
nt age | 
Berlin 
1ssia's 
mated 
inter: 
agth 
1, fice 
; pres 
) note 
1 deal 
a was 
‘jate 4 | 
which 
sia {0 
1 not 
r Get 
erical 

















—— 


foodstuffs at present barred from Western European 
ports by the British blockade. Since bulk shipments 
via the Pacific are impracticable, and Britain would 
gesist wheat shipments to Germany, this Soviet move 
may have the effect of arousing Argentine wheat 
growers against Britain. 

SOVIET OIL EXPORTS. Russia also does not 
have a large exportable surplus of oil and strategic 
raw materials needed by the Reich. Soviet crude oil 

roduction increased from 21.4 million tons in 1932 
to 32 million in 1939, with a further increase to 
4g.5 million scheduled for 1942 under the third 
Five-Year Plan. Soviet oil exports, however, declined 
from 6.1 million tons in 1932 to 1.4 million in 
1938, and Soviet deliveries of oil to Germany in 
1939-40 appear to have been about 900,000 tons. 
This decline in Soviet oil exports is due in large 
measure to enlarged home consumption, partly for 
the needs of the Red Army, and partly for the needs 
of agriculture, which is being increasingly motor- 
ized. That the Soviet Union hopes to expand its oil 
production in the future is indicated by its purchases 
of American oilfield and oil-refining equipment. As 
in the case of Rumania, however, the Nazis may 


_ discover that conclusion of a trade agreement is not 


sufficient to increase deliveries of oil products, and 
may be ultimately confronted with the necessity of 
intervening directly in Soviet oil production. 
SOVIET PURCHASES IN US. The most im- 
portant metals covered by the Soviet-German trade 


| agreements of 1939 and February 11, 1940 are 


manganese, chrome and antimony, exports of all of 
which to Germany totaled one million metric tons 
in 1939-40. It is of course conceivable that man- 
ganese previously exported to overseas countries, 
notably the United States, and now prevented by 
the Anglo-Italian war from passing through the 
Mediterranean, might be diverted to Germany. It is 
also conceivable that, as in the case of the antici- 
pated grain negotiations with Argentina, the Soviet 
Union might act as an intermediary for Germany 
in the purchase of strategic raw materials from the 
United States and other countries. Attention was 
called last week in Washington to the fact that the 
Soviet Union has become the third largest buyer 
of copper in the United States, purchasing 108,955,- 
000 pounds in 1939-40, and the largest foreign 
buyer of cotton (excluding barter shipments to 
Britain), purchasing 139,591 bales since August 
1940. The bulk of Soviet copper purchases consist 
not of domestically mined ores, but of copper ore 
concentrates which are sent to the United States by 


Page Three —— 














copper-mining companies in Latin America for 
processing and admitted in bond for subsequent sales 
abroad. It is of course difficult to determine the — 
extent to which purchases of copper and cotton in 
the United States are designed to offset the loss of 
other sources of supply by the Soviet Union owing 
to the war, and the extent to which Moscow then 
reships these products to Germany. 

Criticism of Soviet sales and resales to Germany has 
been expressed in Britain and the United States, British 
authorities being especially concerned with the possi- 
bility that the Soviet Union might become a dangerous 
leak in Britain’s blockade of the Reich. The Soviet 
Union, however, continues to maintain that it is a neu- 
tral power and therefore free—and willing—to trade 
with any country ready to accept its terms. Exports 
to Germany can no more be regarded as a sign of 
Soviet-German alliance than British and American 
exports to Japan, continued with limitations in spite 
of officially expressed sympathy for China, can be 
considered a sign of an Anglo-American alliance 
with Japan. It would be dangerous to jump to the 
conclusion that, because the Soviet Union trades 
with Germany, Moscow is also ready to accept any 
solutions Germany might impose on areas adjacent 
to Soviet frontiers. The Soviet Union has neither 
the industrial plant, the military equipment, nor the 
popular will, to become involved in a major conflict 
with Germany. But this does not mean that Moscow 
might not use its influence in Bulgaria and Yugo- 
slavia to counteract German pressure on these coun- 
tries. Contrary to general expectation that Bulgaria 
was on the point of joining Hitler’s “new order” 
in exchange for territorial advantages at the ex- 
pense of Greece, M. Bogdan Philov, Bulgarian 
Premier, declared on January 12, following his re- 
turn from Germany, that Bulgaria would maintain 
its neutrality, and would accept neither Nazism, 
fascism nor communism. On January 13 Tass, the 
official Soviet news agency, declared that if German 
troops were entering Bulgaria, it was without the 
knowledge or consent of the Soviet government. 
How long Bulgaria can maintain its precarious posi- 
tion between Germany and Russia will depend less 
on its own intentions than on the course of the Medi- 
terranean war, and on the effect this war will have 
on Turkey as well as the Soviet Union. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





What Has Happened to Europe? by Geoffrey T. Garratt. 
Indianapolis, Ind., Bobbs, Merrill, 1940. $2.75 
Bitterly keen observations on the various factors that 
produced the present European struggle. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 13, JANUARY 17, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera Micueces Dgan, Béitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


BS 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
JAN. 13.—As Congress prepares to take up the 
sweeping legislative program for “all-out” aid to 
Britain, no one in Washington can fail to sense the 
deep undercurrent of doubt and anxiety which runs 
through all discussion of the fateful issues now 
pressing for decision. Anxious questions are not 
confined to those outspoken isolationists, like Sena- 
tor Wheeler and Hiram Johnson, who challenge the 
basic assumptions of the President's position. They 
are raised by others who endorse the President's 
avowed aims, but hesitate to give so much power to 
one man. 


“HR 1776”—BLANK CHECK OR AUTHOR- 
ITY TO ACT? Some of the reasons for this hesi- 
tation are found in the provisions of HR 1776, as 
presented to Congress on January 10. In its original 
form, the bill would confer on President Roosevelt 
wider powers than those ever held by any Chief 
Executive of the United States, except when the 
country is actually at war. Designed to enable the 
government to act quickly in extending all necessary 
aid to Britain and its allies, it would make Mr. 
Roosevelt virtually the sole arbiter of American for- 
eign policy, subject only to such restraint as public 
opinion or Congress may exercise. If endorsed with- 
out reservation, it would tend to make the United 
States an avowed ally of Great Britain on terms and 
conditions fixed solely by the President. 

The bill itself is a short document of nine sections. 
It authorizes the President, ‘“‘notwithstanding the 
provisions of any other law’’ to manufacture, and 
to “‘sell, transfer, exchange, lease, lend, or other- 
wise dispose of” any defense article to any country 
he deems vital to the defense of the United States. 
It gives the President full authority to release for 
export any “defense article” of the army and navy, 
to exchange military secrets, and to permit a belliger- 
ent government to ‘‘outfit’” or “recondition” its war 
vessels in American ports. It places no limit on the 
amount of money which may be spent to carry out 
the purposes of the Act. The terms of this aid and 
the basis of repayment ‘‘shall be those which the 
President deems fit.” 

To understand the hesitation of Congress—and 
the basic question which its attitude poses for de- 
mocracy—it is necessary to look deeper than the 
provisions of this particular measure. With respect 
to the bill, there is a general belief in Washington 
that the Administration has asked for more than it 


expects to get, and that in the end it will accepp 
amendments and compromises, provided they do 
destroy the primary purpose. Congress, as a whole” 
recognizes the need for decisive action in emergency, 
but is not yet prepared to surrender all authority 
without any time limitations and without periodical 
accounting. In theory, at least, there should be no | 
insuperable obstacle to a compromise formula under | 
which the Executive would have sufficient power to 
meet emergencies, subject to Congressional limita. 
tion and review at stated intervals. 





A compromise along these lines may be worked 


; 


out within the next few weeks. But the issue is com- | 
plicated by at least two unresolved doubts which | 
hamper unity and concerted action. One concerns Mr, | 
Roosevelt himself. Some persons in Washington ask 
whether the President has thought through the pos. 
sible military consequences of further intervention 
at a time when our own defense program is admit- 
tedly lagging. Without additional assurance on this 
point, many who would otherwise support a broad 
delegation of power to the Executive continue to 
hesitate in the face of crisis. This hesitation has not 
been dispelled by Mr. Willkie’s endorsement, on | 
January 12, of the Administration’s “lend-lease’”’ bill, | 
with amendments. 


The second unresolved doubt concerns the long- 
term objectives of aid to Britain. It would be diff. 
cult for the American government to request a public 
statement of British war aims at a time when Britain 
is fighting for survival. But those who hesitate to 
give a blank check to the President are asking what 
kind of world order he has in mind at the end of 
hostilities, should Britain, with American aid, ob 
tain a victory over Germany. 


The basic question posed for the United States is 
whether democracy can act decisively in time of crisis, 
not by resort to the totalitarian methods of crushing 
all opposition, but by common consent. The dangers 
of indecision are obvious. But many members of 
Congress sincerely want to base their decision on 
fuller information regarding the ultimate objectives 
of the Administration than has as yet been placed at 


their disposal. W. T. STONE 








James Frederick Green will broadcast on Sunday, 
January 19; his subject is “The Debate Over the Presi 
dent’s Foreign Policy.” This is one of the regular FPA 
Sunday broadcasts, heard from 2:15 to 2:30 E.S.T. ovet 
the blue network of the National Broadcasting Company: 








VoL 


— 


wo 
Bri 


to ¢ 
ern 
Pie 
star 
got 
anc 
une 
Pre 


