FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XIX, No. 82 


—_ 


Just published 


THE BRITISH EMPIRE UNDER FIRE 
by JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


A discussion of the origins of the present European war and 
of the British Empire’s chances of surviving it, with chapters 
also on the history and development of the Empire, on the 
self-governing Dominions, the Crown Colonies and India. 


Headline Book No. 24 


—_—_—_—— 
— 


May 81, 1940 


25 cents 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


YUN +1 194 


Dr. William W. Bishop 
% University of Michigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Wich. 


GREAT BRITAIN PREPARES FOR 


INVASION 


HE Allied position was seriously jeopardized on 

May 27, when King Leopold—against the advice 
of his ministers—ordered the Belgian army to sur- 
render, thus further isolating the British and French 
troops in Flanders. Premier Reynaud, in a brief 
broadcast, denounced the King’s action, taken with- 
out consultation with the Allies. The Belgian sur- 
render opens a northern passage to the Channel 
ports, through which the Allied armies have until 
now been supplied. 

While German forces tightened their noose 
around the Allied armies in northwestern France 
and moved steadily up the Channel coast, the 


| Churchill government rushed preparations for de- 


fense of the British Isles. On only four occasions 
since 1066 have the British been endangered—in 
1588, by the Spanish Armada; in 1667, by the Dutch, 
who entered the Thames estuary and set fire to 
British shipping; during the Napoleonic wars; and 
in the World War, when German planes and zep- 
pelins raided London. Because of new weapons, 
however, an attack on the British Isles is far more 
feasible today than in previous centuries. To meet 
the imminent danger of invasion, the British govern- 
ment took several drastic measures in the past week 
—conscription of wealth and man power, suppression 
of treachery, and military precautions. In addition 
to this defense of the home front, the Churchill 
government endeavored to improve its diplomatic 
position by sending Sir Samuel Hoare, former Air 
Secretary, on a special mission to Spain; Sir Stafford 
Cripps, Left-wing leader in the Labor party, to the 
Soviet Union; and Sir Wilfred Greene, an economic 
expert, to Italy. While the negotiations with Italy 
were apparently unsuccessful, except for a reported 
agreement regarding navicerts, it is possible that the 
Cripps delegation may secure a trade agreement 
and pave the way for better political relations. 


MOBILIZATION OF MEN AND PROPERTY. 
On May 22 the British Parliament in less than three 
hours passed the Emergency Powers Defense Act— 
surpassing in stringency even World War legisla- 
tion—which virtually suspended the constitution for 
the duration of the war. The Act, which was im- 
mediately given effect through Orders in Council, 
empowered the government to (1) control all per- 
sons and property, (2) conscript labor and regulate 
conditions of employment, (3) control banks and 
finance, and (4) impose an excess profits tax of 
100 per cent. These measures, representing a com- 
promise of all political parties in the coalition gov- 
ernment and a sacrifice by all classes in the nation, 
were long overdue. Britain’s desperate position to- 
day results in part from the failure of the Chamber- 
lain government, which was contemplating a long 
war of attrition, to recognize the urgency of the 
situation after the outbreak of hostilities last Sep- 
tember. The propertied interests opposed complete 
mobilization of industry and curtailment of profits, 
while labor resisted efforts to weaken its position 
regarding hours, wages, collective bargaining, and 
introduction of women into the factories. Not until 
Germany had conquered southern Norway and 
pushed through the Western front were the British 
willing to adopt a “totalitarian” economy in order 
to fight the Nazi régime on its own terms. 


Profiting from the experience of Norway, Holland 
and Belgium, the British government moved speed- 
ily to suppress “fifth column” activities. On May 
23 Parliament supplemented previous legislation 
against sedition and treason by imposing the death 
penalty for serious cases of espionage and sabotage, 
and severely penalizing anti-war propaganda. On 
the same day, police raided the British Union, an 
openly fascist organization, and arrested its leader, 
Sir Oswald Mosley, and many of its members. A con- 
servative Member of Parliament, Captain Archibald 


H. M. Ramsay, was also arrested for fascist activi- 
ties. The government, meanwhile, interned large 
numbers of resident aliens, including Captain Frans 
von Rintelen, head of Germany's spy ring in the 
United States during the World War. 

Since German naval and air forces are expected 
to attack along the Channel, North Sea and Irish 
Sea simultaneously, Britain is particularly concerned 
over political conditions in Eire, where the Irish 
Republican Army continues to foment dissension. 
Increasing numbers of German tourists and journal- 
ists were reported to be entering Dublin, where— 
because Eire remains neutral—Germany maintains a 
legation. Premier De Valera, who secured emergency 
powers in January to combat the I.R.A., has called 
up additional reserve troops and has begun intern- 
ing pro-Nazi sympathizers. Inasmuch as Britain— 
under the 1938 settlement—transferred to Eire its 
three naval bases in southern Ireland and withdrew 
the last of its troops remaining in Eire, it depends 
on the De Valera government for protection of such 
ports as Dublin, Cobh, and Galway. Britain’s posi- 
tion is made especially difficult by Premier De 
Valera’s demand for the union of Eire and the six 
counties of Northern Ireland—a controversy which 
has raged ever since the Treaty of 1921. The British 
and Eire governments appear to be cooperating 


Page Two 


a 
—————n 


— 


closely, however, in checking the I.R.A., which js 
believed to have received German funds. 


MILITARY PRECAUTIONS. To organize tq. 
sistance to the expected invasion, the Churchill gov. 
ernment on May 26 appointed General Sir Edmund 
Ironside Commander-in-Chief of the Home Forces 
General Ironside, who replaced General Sir Walte; 
Kirke, had previously been Chief of the Imperial 
Staff. This post was filled by Sir John Dill, while 
General Viscount Gort remained Commander of 
the British Expeditionary Forces. The government, 
which has already o-ganized civilian groups to com. 
bat German parachute troops, took additional mili. 
tary precautions in London and other cities, and 
confiscated guns and ammunition from stores and 
sport shops. It also arranged for evacuation of 
children from most of the towns on the east coast. 
Whether the anticipated invasion takes place de 
pends almost entirely on the outcome of the present 
battle in France, where the Belgian surrender has 
made defeat of the Allied northern armies almost 
inevitable. Only a successful counter-attack by the 
French army south of the German corridor to the sea 
can prevent the Nazi forces from securing a firm 
foothold in the Channel ports and striking acros 


the Channel at Britain. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


NAZI ACTIVITIES IN MEXICO 


Last week, in a manner disturbingly reminiscent 
of 1916-17, alarming reports of increased German 
activity in Mexico filtered across the border. Since 
the successful German drive on Denmark, Norway 
and the Low Countries, the American republics have 
become deeply concerned with possible “fifth col- 
umn” activities, and Mexico admittedly would be 
a strategic center for disruptive measures. The Car- 
denas government is strongly anti-Nazi, and there 
is no evidence in that country of the deep resent- 
ment against the United States which produced the 
virtually pro-German attitude of 1914-16. The do- 
mestic Presidential campaign now in progress, how- 
ever, has created a cleavage in sentiment which 
might be turned to the advantage of saboteurs, 
whether German or not. In addition, the unsettled 
oil dispute continues to plague United States-Mexi- 
can relations, although the settlement concluded 
earlier this month with the Sinclair interests suggests 
a break in the long deadlock. These circumstances, 
combined with a press which publishes a great deal 
of anti-American material, provide a favorable at- 
mosphere for propaganda. 


In the flood of rumors and hypotheses generated 
by the Presidential campaign and the semi-hysteria 
over “Trojan horses,” it is impossible to obtain an 
accurate picture of the scope of Nazi activities in 
Mexico. Several facts, however, can be determined 


with a fair degree of certainty. The most striking of 
these is the pronounced increase in the number of 
German “tourists” and salesmen, which reached 
such proportions that the Mexican government has 
established a closer check on aliens, and the Army 
has laid plans for a counter-espionage service. Ac 
cording to the government, these and other measures 
have eliminated the danger of foreign activities. 
It is evident, however, that Nazi propaganda, paid 
for in part by a forced levy on the German colony 
and emanating from the German Legation and sem 
official news agencies, has reached a high peak. The 
object is hardly that of paving the way for inva 
sion. Instead, German meddling in this instance 
designed to stir up trouble which would occupy 
the attention of the United States, or, failing that, 
to insure “malevolent” neutrality on the part of 
Mexico in the event this country enters the war. 
Such calculations, however, appear to ignore the 
close economic ties between the United States and 
Mexico. Somewhat paradoxically, these ties have, if 
anything, been tightened since the expropriation of 
foreign oil properties. The United States purchasts 
about 70 per cent of Mexican exports, and it ha 
been estimated that expenditures of American tout 
ists in Mexico are running as high as 1,000,000,000 
pesos ($160,000,000) a year. Whether Mexico is 
neutral or a belligerent, it would find it decidedly 


a 
javanta geo 
Gates in tl 
fence that 
ninistratio: 
during the 
more than 
frst Six mx 
shipments 

inder war 
f supply 

ary and 

grategic C 
plies and 

valuable e 
Bat, while 
Mexico ca 


ELECT. 
ime, Lith 
the Presid 
arempt h 
the camp 
chief opp 
rightist, C 
the backg 
while far 
candidate 
It has the 
tives in ¢ 
possibility 
Nazi age 
purposes 
if they si 

With 
still no c 
surface, 
Camachc 
PRM (1 
(Confed 
(Confed 
however 
port, sir 
the CT) 
This bo! 
the diss 
with wt 
pathies 
meanwl 
Camach 
back hi 
other h 
capital, 
“white 


| cnet 


FOREIGN 
Headquarte 
Entered as 


Ss 


a P age Three — 


ydvantageous to cooperate closely with the United 
fates in the event of war, and there is every evi- 
fence that this is the sentiment of the Cardenas Ad- 
ginistration. Despite chaotic conditions in Mexico 
during the World War, exports to the United States 
more than doubled from 1914 to 1918 and, in the 
frst six months of the present conflict, the value of 
hhipments to the United States rose 30.5 per cent. 
Under war conditions, Mexico is an important source 
of supply for sisal and henequen, antimony, mer- 
ary and other minerals, to mention only a few 
grategic commodities. Mexico, as a source of sup- 
lies and a market for manufactured goods, is a 
viluable economic appendage to the United States. 
But, while this country can exist without Mexico, 
Mexico cannot exist without the United States. 


ELECTION PROSPECTS VAGUE. In the mean- 
time, little light has been shed on the prospects of 
the Presidential election, scheduled for July 7. Some 
atempt has been made to link Nazi influence with 
the campaign of General Juan Andreu Almazan, 
thief opposition candidate, and that of the extreme 
tightist, General Amaro, who thus far has stayed in 
the background. Yet the party headed by Almazan, 
while far to the right of the supporters of the official 
andidate, General Avila Camacho, is hardly fascist. 
Ithas the support of business interests and conserva- 
tives in general, American as well as Mexican. The 
possibility that this group might become a tool of 
Nazi agents appears decidedly remote, although the 
purposes of the Nazis would be almost as well served 
if they succeeded in promoting an armed revolt. 


With the election only a few weeks off, there is 
still no clarification of the confused outlook. On the 
surface, it would appear that the election of Avila 
Camacho is assured, since he has the support of the 
PRM (Mexican Revolutionary party), the CTM 
(Confederation of Mexican Labor), and the CNC 
(Confederation of Farm Workers). It is impossible, 
however, to gauge the effectiveness of the CTM sup- 
port, since there undoubtedly are large groups in 
the CTM which back Almazan more or less openly. 
This bolt from the official candidate in part reflects 
the dissatisfaction of many rank and file workers 
with what are construed to be the Communist sym- 
pathies of the CTM leadership. The Communists, 
meanwhile, are giving their active support to Avila 
Camacho, and they are generally believed ready to 
back him with arms if necessary. Almazan, on the 
other hand, is regarded by the upper middle class, 
capital, and even certain branches of labor as the 
“white hope” of Mexico. All things being equal, 


Almazan might be expected to halt, or even turn 
back slightly, the course of the Revolution and come 
to terms with foreign capital should he be elected, 
whereas under Avila Camacho the Revolution might 
merely slow down. Both sides expect trouble, and 
both sides have prepared for the armed revolt which 
is freely, if vaguely, predicted in all quarters. In 
this bitter internal political struggle, foreign machi- 
nations provide a further element of confusion. 
Between now and the time of elections, however, 
it is possible that larger issues growing out of the 
course of the European war will act as a stabilizing 
influence on domestic politics. 


Howarp J. TRUEBLOOD 


American White Paper: The Story of American Diplomacy 
and the Second World War, by Joseph Alsop and Robert 
Kintner. New York, Simon and Schuster, 1940. $1.00 
Two alert young newspapermen sympathetically trace 

the broad lines of American foreign policy since Munich, in 

a well-written narrative which owes its piquancy to the 

authors’ intimate contacts with certain Washington officials. 


This War, by Thomas Mann. New York, Knopf, 1940. $1.00 

In this brief essay, Dr. Mann eloquently castigates the 
Nazi leadership; reiterates his faith in the Western de- 
mocracies and their peace aims; and calls on the German 
people to throw off the Nazi yoke and conclude a peace 
providing for European confederation. 


Japan’s Emergence as a Modern State, by E. Herbert 
Norman. $2.00 


Japanese Industry: Its Recent Development and Present 
Condition, by G. C. Allen. $1.00 


The Problem of Japanese Trade Expansion in the Post- 
War Situation, by Miriam S. Farley. $1.00 


German Interests and Policies in the Far East, by Kurt 
Bloch. $1.00 


Australia’s Interests and Policies in the Far East, by J. 
Shepherd. $2.00 


New Zealand’s Interests and Policies in the Far East, by 
Ian F. G. Milner. $1.00 


American Policy in the Far East: 1931-1940, by T. A. 
Bisson. $1.25 


Inquiry Series, Institute of Pacific Relations, New York, 
1940. 


These seven volumes represent the first fruits of a sig- 
nificant research project initiated by the Institute of Pa- 
cific Relations in 1938. The I.P.R. Inquiry Series is de- 
signed to provide a fund of factual information and im- 
partial analysis on the major questions which will have to 
be considered in a Far Eastern peace settlement. Scholars 
from many fields have prepared studies of various aspects 
of the Sino-Japanese conflict, its effects on the interests 
of third powers, and the forms of adjustment which may 
prove feasible in a post-war era. The seven works under re- 
view have set a high standard in accuracy and informed 
scholarship, insuring that the Inquiry Series—which will 
eventually comprise more than a score of different contri- 
butions—will prove indispensable to all students of the 
Far East. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 32, May 31, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotrHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year, 


BS 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter bite 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


May 27.—Moving with extraordinary dispatch 
and without partisan opposition, Congress is rapidly 
completing its drive to give legislative approval to 
the President’s emergency defense program. During 
the past week the Senate has passed both the Army 
and Navy appropriation bills, by unanimous votes, 
authorizing a total of $3,297,009,000 to carry the 
program through the next fiscal year. Before the end 
of this week the House is expected to concur. 


THE NEW DEFENSE BUDGET. The extent to 
which the original defense program has been ex- 
panded by the new emergency measures may be seen 
in the following comparison: When the War De- 
partment bill passed the House about two months 
ago it carried a total appropriation of $784,999,000. 
As passed by the Senate it authorizes $1,500,023,000 
in cash, plus authority to make contracts for an 
additional $323,229,000 before June 30, 1941. The 
Navy Department bill, which passed the House in 
February, originally called for $965,779,000. This 
figure has been raised by the Senate to $1,302,265,- 
000 in cash and a further $171,491,000 in contract 
obligations. 


With these new funds, the War Department ex- 
pects to raise the strength of the Regular Army to 
280,000 men, supplemented by an expanded enlisted 
reserve; approximately double existing orders for 
new airplanes, increasing the authorized program 
from 5,500 planes to 8,066; and begin the procure- 
ment of matériel and mechanized equipment suffi- 
cient for a mobilized force of 750,000 men and 
250,000 reserves. The Navy Department will be able 
to hasten completion of 68 warships of all types now 
under construction, begin construction of 24 more, 
raise the enlisted strength of the Navy from 145,000 
to 170,000 men, and place orders for 2,970 new 
airplanes in addition to the 933 now scheduled for 
delivery and the 1,800 in service today. 


As the emergency program moves towatd com- 
pletion, however, it becomes increasingly evident 
that the voting of new funds and the purchase of 
new equipment for the armed forces is only one 
part of the vast problem now confronting this 
country. The unity achieved last week in voting 
budgetary expansion gives no lasting assurance that 
partisan politics will be adjourned, or that effective 
coordination will be accomplished, or that adequate 
planning will be undertaken in time. And it still 


leaves unanswered the question whether those jm. 
mediately responsible for American policy will have 
the foresight and vision to deal with the larger 


political and economic problems now pressing fo, 
solution. 


THE LARGER PROBLEMS. In his radio talk op 
Sunday night President Roosevelt dealt with some 
of these larger problems. He was calmer and more 
reassuring than in other recent utterances, promising 
that coordination of defense will be worked ou 
with the aid of leading industrialists, that labor will 
be ‘adequately represented” in Washington, and 
that there will be “no breakdown or cancellation” 
of the social gains of the past few years. The speed. 
ing-up of industrial production will be carried out 
largely by private industry, working with the gov. 
ernment, which stands ready to provide for the en. 
largement of plants and the construction of ney 
factories. Finally, while promising to deal vigorously 
with “fifth column” activities, which weaken a na- 
tion at its roots, the President undertook to safe. 
guard basic civil liberties. 


Despite these assurances and the somewhat calmer 
atmosphere prevailing in Washington this week, 
neither the Administration nor Congress has come 
to grips with the most formidable of these larger 
problems, which are primarily economic. On the 
domestic side, Administration leaders are consider- 
ing holding Congress in session to enact emergency 
taxes for financing the vast expenditure for arma- 
ment, but the tentative plans call for further borrow- 
ing and a probable increase in the national debt limit 
from 45 to 50 billion dollars. 


Externally we face the prospect of radical adjust- 
ments in our economy to meet the new conditions 
of a radically changed world. If we must adopt 4 
policy of Western Hemisphere defense, then it will 
be necessary to do more than build a two-ocean navy 
and continue the Hull trade program. At the very 
least, it will be essential to develop the full resources 
of the Americas, both to secure vital raw materials 
for ourselves and to increase the purchasing powet 
of the entire hemisphere. By ratifying the convent 
tion setting up an Inter-American Bank, which was 
signed on May 10, the Senate would be in a position 
to take an important first step toward such a program. 


W. T. STONE 


FORE 


An inter pret. 


FO) 


VoL. XIX, ! 
ee 


For a Sv 
position, 


ITALY’S 


S the 
of t 
for Germ 
was agair 
were exp 
Council ¢ 
such as t 
of indust: 
the suspé 
cancellati 
(which 
the Unite 
decision 
will mak 
hanging 
of Dam«c 
of the N 
WHA 
since the 
Italy mi 
Allies. I 
to Brita 
break-uy 
today ca 
which 
and adv 
press: ¢ 
and ent 
nomina. 
Malta, 
share o! 
Italy’s « 
belliger 
appeare 
Fascism 
Germa 
has rev 
at Salzl 
the Nz 


