idle for 
=s about 
. and 1) 
D to the 
dJoubtfil 
1917 0; 
arter the 
siderable 
le to th 


ntry ma 


PERIODIC 
SEX 
NTS 


41 ROOM 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


VAD + 


~f Wtane A‘ 
Wwe 


ot 4 " 
ees +53 


General L! 


. 
"\'* > pee 
“wiorary 


University 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


| You. XX, No. 21 


—_ 


Marcu 14, 1941 


AS the Nazis tighten their grip on the Balkans, 
and deploy their air and sea forces for a show- 
down with Britain in the Atlantic, the contours of 
the impending conflict assume increasing precision. 
As long as Britain resists and the British navy con- 
trols the Atlantic, German-dominated Europe re- 
mains a landlocked continent, cut off from access to 
overseas countries by the British blockade. To capi- 
talize on the victories won in eighteen months of 
war, Hitler must achieve at least one of two ob- 
 jectives. Either Germany will cut Britain’s sea com- 
| munications with the United States and the British 
Dominions, using not only its air force and sub- 
marines but also such tools as blockade-running by 
French ships; or else Germany will not succeed in 
paralyzing the resistance of the British, and will seek 
to consolidate its land empire on the continent in the 
hope of thus overcoming the economic difficulties 
created by the British blockade. 

RUSSIA’S DILEMMA. Should Germany have to 
follow the second course, the country in the direct 
line of Nazi invasion would no longer be Britain but 
the Soviet Union. That is why today the fate of 
Britain assumes crucial importance for Moscow— 
not because Moscow has any sympathy for the Brit- 
ish, but because the fate of Britain may determine 
the fate of Russia. From a coldly realistic, short- 
term point of view, it would seem preferable for the 
| Soviet government to have Germany invade Britain, 

and win the war in the West, since this might give 
'} Russia a breathing-space. Moscow’s decision, more- 
| over, is complicated not only by its unpreparedness 

for a major conflict with Germany, but also by its 
undiminished suspicion that the British, at a pro- 
pitious moment, may seek to divert Nazi war efforts 
| from the British Isles toward the U.S.S.R. Yet, in 
the long run, Russia’s position will be endangered 
whether Germany wins or loses the war in the West. 
For if Germany wins, it will have hegemony of the 


— 


_ 


WILL DEMOCRACY OR NAZISM SHAPE POST-WAR ORDER? 


European continent and, through its partner, Japan, 
will also share in control of Asia, thus menacing 
Russia with hostile encirclement; and if it loses, it 
may attempt to recoup its losses in the West at the 
expense of the Soviet Union—unless it first suffers 
internal collapse. 

WHERE IS EUROPE GOING? As the lines of 
the conflict tighten, the shape of post-war Europe is 
beginning to emerge from the fog of military and 
diplomatic battle. No one familiar with the history 
of the past twenty years can believe that it would be 
possible, at the end of the war, to restore in Europe 
the status quo of August 1939. The choice for Eu- 
rope is not between Hitler's totalitarian new order 
and return to the kind of anarchy, superficially modi- 
fied by the League of Nations, that existed before 
the outbreak of the war. The choice is between Hit- 
ler’s totalitarian ‘“‘new order,” and a “newer’’ order 
that Britain, with the aid of the United States and the 
British Dominions, might conceivably forge not only 
for Europe, but for the world. That choice exists 
only as long as Britain is undefeated. Should Britain 
be forced to yield, Europe would have no alternative 
but to bow to Hitler’s terms. The passive resistance of 
conquered countries, notably Holland and Norway, 
is posited on hope of British victory. To expect that 
this resistance will continue if Britain were defeated 
is to indulge in a dangerous illusion. 

Yet in retrospect it may well appear that Hitler— 
if he is not victorious—has performed a useful 
wrecker’s job, although at tremendous cost. For he has 
destroyed many of the institutions and practices, some 
of them feudal in origin, which in the past had 
blocked not only federation, but even the most 
primitive forms of collaboration in Europe. Under 
the hammer-blows of Nazi invasion and domination, 
the European peoples are painfully acquiring a com- 
mon political experience which may ultimately pro- 
vide a basis for peacetime cooperation. The Nazis, 


; 
¢ 
: 


taking a leaf out of the Communist book, effectively 
transformed what might have been international 
war into civil war. Today some of their opponents 
recognize that this war is not merely a conflict be- 
tween nations—or, as the Communists would say, 
between “rival imperialisms’—but a civil war, be- 
tween supporters of conflicting ideologies within all 
nations. This, in itself, tends to undermine national 
barriers on both sides, and reduce the hypnotic effect 
formerly exercised by the concept of national sov- 
ereignty. Similarly, the idea of some form of supra- 
national political organization, which would corre- 
spond to the growing internationalization of trade 
and communications, is no longer a monopoly of 
those whom the Nazis have contemptuously de- 
scribed as “‘pluto-democratic internationalists.” To- 
day the Nazis, as a corollary to the fiercely national- 
istic ideas on which they rode to victory in Germany, 
advocate the formation of vast continental units— 
developed, in their plans, not on the basis of free 
collaboraticn, but of domination by a self-appointed 
master race. 


Meanwhile, the war itself is carrying to a logical 
conclusion some of the tendencies latent in the 
process of industrialization. The Nazis and Com- 
munists vie with democratic leaders in invoking the 
interests, real or alleged, of industrial and white- 
collar workers. The economic necessities of war also 
hasten the leveling process that everywhere increases 
the privileges and influence of workers and peasants 
at the expense of the middle class which, in turn 
gained power in the eighteenth and nineteenth cen- 
turies at the expense of the monarchy, the aristocracy 
and the Church. 


The question might then be asked: what real dif- 
ference will there be, at the end of the war, between 
what is known as democracy, and what is known as 
Nazism? If the two systems will eventually total up 
to the same thing, why should Europe, and the 
world, continue the struggle? So far as can be de- 


NAZIS PRESS “DRANG NACH OSTEN” 


The Balkan offensive initiated by the Nazis when 
they occupied Bulgaria on March 1 again demon- 
strates Hitler's ability to win important victories by 
waging a “war of nerves.”” Yugoslavia, in turn, seems 
to be yielding to this method. Persistent unofficial 


Here are three Foreign Policy Reports which will help you 
understand the complex problem of our defense effort: 


DEFENSE ECONOMY OF THE U.S.: 


I. Problems of Mobilization 
II. An Inventory of Raw Materials 
III. Industrial Capacity 


25c. EACH 
Order your copies NOW! 


Page Two 


termined today, two important differences remain~ 
differences in the basic assumptions of the two sys. 
tems, and in the methods by which they are carrie), 
into effect. In contrast to the ideas popularized by thy 
French Revolution, which proclaimed the liber | 
equality and fraternity of all men and, by infereng 
of all national groups, the Nazi revolution is base 
on belief in the permanent inequality and subjectig, 
of all men and nations except the Germans. In cop. 
trast to the ideal of most religious faiths, which x 
sume the intrinsic value and perfectibility of ead 
individual, totalitarian systems assume that th! 
individual is merely a tool of the society into whic 
he is born, and is by nature subject to corruption 
through temptation, threats or force. 

The assumptions of the two systems have also dete. 
mined their choice of methods. The Nazis have car.| 
ried out their ideas through arbitrary force, exer. 
cised by a small, self-appointed group of leades 
who designate themselves as the élite, and are not 
responsible to the people whose interests they clain 
to represent. The procedure hitherto followed ip 
democratic countries has been to act through mor, 
or less peaceful compromises, effected by leaden 
who, no matter how great the authority that might 
be entrusted to them, remain responsible to the 
people. The admitted fact that the democrati 
peoples have often fallen short of their professed 
ideals does not necessarily mean that democracy i} 
incapable of developing a formula for reconstruction | 
of Europe, and the world, which might offer a con 
crete and desirable alternative to Nazism. It dos 
mean the need to reconsider and reform democrag, 
to reconcile political institutions developed in the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries with the ew 
nomic necessities of mass-production in the twentieth 
century—and thus demonstrate, by practical meas! 
ures, that a reformed democracy, rather than Nazism 
or Communism, may yet prove the wave of the future 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 
} 


reports from Belgrade indicate that the Yugoslai 


government will shortly sign a non-aggression pat 
with Germany. While the text of the treaty appat 
ently gives the Nazis no military, political or ec 
nomic advantages, it is reasonable to assume thi 
Belgrade will receive further demands after the pad 
is signed. To counteract the effect of the German pat 
on pro-Russian elements in Yugoslavia, it is reported 
that the government will issue a joint declaration 0 
friendship with the Soviet Union. 


By contrast to the Yugoslavs, the Greeks, in tht 
face of overwhelming odds, show few indications 0! 
weakening. The Greek High Command, confrontel 
with the problem of defending the long border with 


— 


Bulgari 
engaged 
tended 
on a ni 
have gi 
Italian 
failed t 
Whi 
territor 
the Tu: 
They 4 
degree 
larged 
military 
BRI’ 
closer 1 
that Ti 
of Syri: 
the Pe 
Numer 
the Bri 
in pre] 
denied 
keepin, 
Minist 
on Mz 
British 
tions d 
Iraq. 
Syriz 
territo: 
ject to 
France 
in Syri 
for the 
cept th 
ence ¢ 
shorta. 
cities. 
sulted 
merce 
virtua! 
matel; 
Syria, 
If t 
may d 
ter los 
natior 
ties w 
lishm 
Franc 
territc 
FOREIG 


Headqua 
Entered 


=> 


cracy is} 
truction | 
r a COM 
It does 
nocragy, 
in the 
he eo 
ventieth , 
| meas 
Nazism 
future 


EAN | 


ugoslar | 
on. patt 
appar 
Or ec 
me. that 
the pact 
lan pac 
eported | 


ation of 


, in the 
tions of 
fronted 
ler with 


—— 
—_ 


Bulgaria while a large part of the army is already 
engaged in Albania, will probably abandon the ex- 
tended arm of eastern Thrace and take up positions 
on a narrow front based on Salonika. The British 
have given the Greeks words of encouragement and 
Italian munitions captured in Libya, but have so far 
failed to send military reinforcements. 

While Turkey appears reluctant to fight unless its 
territory is actually invaded, there is little doubt that 
the Turks will resist when attacked by Nazi troops. 
They are good soldiers and possess a remarkable 
degree of national unity, but they will need an en- 
larged air force and increased supplies of modern 
military equipment which only Britain can furnish. 


BRITISH WATCH SYRIA. As the war draws 


closer to the Near East and the possibility increases 
that Turkey may fight at Britain’s side, the position 
of Syria, lying across the land routes from Egypt and 
the Persian Gulf to Turkey, assumes importance. 
Numerous reports from Vichy, Paris and Rome that 
the British are massing troops in northern Palestine 
in preparation for an invasion of Syria have been 
denied by London, but it is apparent that Britain is 
keeping a close watch on the territory. The Foreign 
Minister of Iraq, Nuri Pasha as-Said, arrived in Cairo 
on March 6 to consult with Anthony Eden, the 
British Foreign Secretary. Presumably the conversa- 
tions dealt with Syria, which has a long frontier with 
Iraq. 

Syria—or, properly speaking, the French mandated 
territories of Syria and the Lebanon—has been sub- 
ject to the Vichy government since the collapse of 
France. Italian and German armistice commissions 
in Syria are attempting to obtain material advantages 
for the Axis, but thus far they have gained little ex- 
cept the enmity of the native population. The pres- 
ence of the commissions, coupled with the food 
shortage, has produced serious unrest in Syrian 
cities. On March 8 protracted riots in Damascus re- 
sulted in the death of four persons. Foreign com- 
merce is at a standstill, and even internal trade is 
virtually impossible, owing to lack of fuel. Approxi- 
mately 60,000 French and native troops remain in 
Syria, with impaired efficiency and scant supplies. 

If the British attempt the occupation of Syria, they 
may do so in the name of Syrian independence. Af- 
ter long and violent agitation by Syrian and Lebanese 
nationalists, the French negotiated and signed trea- 
ties with them in 1936 which provided for the estab- 
lishment of independent states on the model of Iraq. 
France never ratified the treaties, however, and the 
territories are still technically under League mandate, 


Page Three 


FPA RADIO SCHEDULE 


Speaker: William T. Stone 

Subject: “After the Lease-Lend Bill—What?” 
Date: Sunday, March 16 

Time: 2:15 p.m., E.S.T. 


Station: NBC, blue network 
We welcome suggestions for our broadcasts. 


although actually French control is direct and com- 
plete. Nuri Pasha may have been speaking for Britain 
when he declared at Baghdad after visiting Turkey 


and Syria that Syria should have complete inde- 
pendence. 


The interest of the Iraqi Foreign Minister and his 
small group of followers in the developments precipi- 
tated by the war is in sharp contrast to the apathy 
displayed by the Arabs of the Near East. Generally 
speaking, the Arab peoples prefer to remain passive 
while great decisions are being made around them. 
To a limited extent, this attitude may be ascribed to 
Axis propagandists, who have been active in the 
Near East for at least five years. More important is 
the Arabs’ fear of Germany. They calculate that in 
case of a Nazi victory, their place in the “new 
order’ will be better if they do not resist. On the 
other hand, they have already obtained from the 
British almost all they can expect and, in the event 
of an Allied triumph, are confident that they will at 
least preserve their present position. 

Appeals to the Arabs to join Britain in the fight 
for democracy and the independence of small states 
are as ineffective in the Near East as they proved in 
Europe. Nor does the call to free fellow Moham- 
medans now under Axis domination in Albania, 
Libya and French North Africa produce a popular 
response. Islam seems as impotent in unifying the 
Arab world as Christianity is in the Western world. 

Louts E. FRECHTLING 


GEN. McCOY LEAVES FOR LATIN AMERICA 

Members of the Foreign Policy Association will be 
interested to know that General McCoy, as head of 
a civil air mission, left Washington on March 5 on a 
28,000-mile trip during which he will visit every 
country in Latin America. On behalf of the Inter- 
American Escadrille, Inc., General McCoy will study 
youth civilian flying groups in Latin American coun- 
tries similar to those already in existence in the 
United States. He will work in close cooperation with 
Mr. Nelson A. Rockefeller, coordinator of commer- 
cial and cultural relations between the American Re- 
publics. General McCoy will return to New York 
in May. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 21, Marcu 14, 1941. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


EBJoo 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FraANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES DEan, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


National 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


2 eg LTE EO 
: 


aN 


| 
. 
| 
| 
! 


enon aed 


—— 


Washington News Letter eee 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Mar. 10.—After two months of intense and occa- 
sionally bitter debate, Congress has finally given 
President Roosevelt a freer hand to conduct Ameri- 
can foreign policy and carry out the program of full 
aid to Britain. Congressional endorsement was as- 
sured on March 8, when the Senate passed the lease- 
lend bill by a vote of 60 to 31. 


FINAL TERMS. Despite the 2 to 1 majority rolled 
up in the Senate, the final vote failed to establish the 
complete unity which had been hoped for. Never- 
theless, the bill in its final form meets most of the 
essential terms and conditions laid down in advance 
by the Administration. It clearly achieves the two 
stated objectives: it permits the Executive to transfer 
American-made or government-owned war materials 
to Great Britain and its allies, and it provides a 
method for financing further British orders after 
existing credit facilities have been exhausted. The 
powers of the President are not materially altered by 
the additional limitations imposed in the Senate. Al- 
though Congress reserves the theoretical right to 
terminate emergency powers by concurrent resolu- 
tion, the Executive holds undisputed initiative in car- 
rying out the program and shaping American policy. 

The Senate amendments, however, give Congress 
somewhat greater authority by tightening control of 
future appropriations. Under the Byrd amendment— 
accepted reluctantly by Administration leaders — 
Congress must appropriate additional funds or au- 
thorize new contracts before the President can manu- 
facture or transfer any defense equipment in excess 
of $1,300,000,000, the top limit fixed in the bill. 
This means that the President must go back to Con- 
gress at once with a new appropriation bill asking 
for three to five billion dollars more. Some observers 
fear that the Byrd amendment will lead to endless 
debate over the details of future transactions, with 
Congress attempting to say just how many planes, 
tanks aud guns shall be allocated to Britain. Most 
Administration leaders, however, interpret this clause 
as requiring merely a blanket authorization, or the 
earmarking of a certain percentage of future defense 
appropriations to meet British needs. 


NEXT STEPS. The Executive has already cleared 
the way for prompt action. During the past two 
weeks, President Roosevelt has created an informal 
Cabinet council, whose members include the heads 
of the State, War, Navy and Treasury Departments, 


with Harry Hopkins sitting in as secretary. While the 
functions of this group are presumably limited jg 
coordinating the work of existing government agen. 
cies, its real task is to formulate policy, under the 
direction of the President. 


Important decisions are being reached in at least 
three separate fields. First, the Administration must 
decide how many airplanes, guns, naval vessels and 


other military equipment can be spared by our own | 


a 
| Von. XX, 
—————————— 


armed forces. Here, the policy group is guided by the | 


technical advice of the Chief of Staff and the Chief 
of Naval Operations, but in reaching a decision, it js 
clear that the final word rests with the President and 
his civilian advisers. 


The second urgent problem is to consolidate Brit. 
ish and American purchasing programs. This will be 
no easy task. In the past, the British purchasing mis 
sion has encountered serious difficulties in dealing 
with four or five separate government agencies 
in charge of procurement, even though it has been 
free to negotiate contracts on its own specifications 
with private manufacturers. Now that all contracts 


will clear through our own procurement agencies, | 


there will be far greater need for effective coordina. 
tion. For, despite the President's efforts, there is still 
a sharp divergence of authority between the OPM 
and procurement branches of the Army and Navy. 
The OPM is responsible for planning production, 
but the Army and Navy procurement officers fix all 
specifications and determine what, and how much, 
is needed. The new policy group may provide a tem- 
porary answer but, if standardization is to be 
achieved, most Washington observers believe the 
President will find it necessary to place full respon- 
sibility in a single agency. 


The third problem is whether American naval ves 
sels are to be used for convoy duty. On this issue the 
President and his Cabinet committee have given no 
hint of immediate action. When Congress voted 


down amendments designed to restrict military of | 


naval operations to the Western Hemishere, how- 
ever, it recognized that the constitutional powers of 
the President as Commander-in-Chief could not be 
curbed by legislation. Thus the President is free to 
act, by extending an American naval patrol two- 
thirds of the way across the Atlantic, or by direct 
convoy, if in his judgment either of these steps is 
necessary to guard the vital supply route to Britain. 


W. T. STONE 


FTE 

in | 
Minister 
its Axis 
as a gest 


| the circu 


; 


fectivene 
in assert 
uncerta it 
ultimate 
stacles t 
this back 
conferen 
Tokyo tl 
action ir 
visit wil 
is likely 
emphasi 
anese Cil 
PROS 
nouncen 
Japanes: 
opened 
to the 1 
commur 
the Fore 
ings wil 
with the 
isting 
lieve th: 
closely 1 
The | 
Bast, ar 
any Ma 
obvious 
East As 
pact wi 
Which < 
fegion, 


