








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL. XV, No. 49 OCTOBER 2, 1936 





CURRENCY STABILIZATION and WORLD RECOVERY 
by John C. deWilde 
An analysis of the chaotic currency 
conditions of the last few years. 
25c. 
August 28, 1935 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 





Entered as  second- 
class matter December 
>, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. YQ under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


\Y or 




















CURRENCY STABILIZATION—A CHALLENGE TO ACTION 





DECISIVE stimulus has been imparted to 

world economic recovery by devaluation of 
the French franc, followed by that of the Nether- 
lands guilder and the Swiss franc, and the an- 
nouncement on September 25 that the United 
States, Britain and France would cooperate to 
stabilize international exchange rates at the re- 
sulting new levels. This readjustment of curren- 
cies by international agreement not only marks 
a hopeful sign of international cooperation, but 
should put an end to the prevailing economic stag- 
nation in the gold bloc countries and remove a 
number of obstacles to the revival of international 
trade and credit. 

Collapse of the gold bloc means the end of the 
drastic deflation by which France, Switzerland 
and the Netherlands have sought in vain to offset 
the advantages obtained by other countries 
through devaluation. In France the Blum gov- 
ernment abandoned the deflationary policy in 
June. The Popular Front secured the adoption of 
wage increases, a 40-hour week, and other mea- 
sures—all of which had an inflationary effect and 
further widened the disparity between French and 
foreign prices. Fearing, however, that devalua- 
tion would bring about a panicky rise in prices 
to the disadvantage of wage-earners and rentiers, 
the government undertook to maintain the gold 
value of the franc. The economic situation con- 
tinued to deteriorate. Government finances went 
from bad to worse as the “baby bond” issue failed 
to produce more than a few billion francs and as 
the necessity for rearmament added further bur- 
dens to the Treasury. A new flight of capital set 
in which reduced the gold stocks of the Bank of 
France from about 55 billion francs early in Aug- 
ust to approximately 50 billion at the end of Sep- 
tember. Faced with these conditions, the cabinet 
reluctantly decided to devalue the franc by an 
amount ranging between 25.19 and 34.36 per cent. 
Exchanges were closed and the convertibility of 


the franc virtually suspended until Parliament, 
hastily convened in extraordinary session on Sep- 
tember 28, approved the bill providing for deval- 
uation and the creation of an exchange stabiliza- 
tion fund of 10,000,000,000 francs. At the same 
time, the government devised a series of measures 
to curb price increases and protect civil servants, 
wage-earners and bondholders against any rise in 
the cost of living. 

Devaluation of the franc was quickly followed 
by similar action in Switzerland and the Nether- 
lands. On September 26 the Swiss Federal Coun- 
cil decided to devalue the Swiss franc by the same 
percentage. Thereupon the Netherlands govern- 
ment declared it “impossible to maintain its pres- 
ent monetary policy” and instituted a gold em- 
bargo. On September 28 Premier Colijn an- 
nounced the creation of a 300,000,000-guilder sta- 
bilization fund. The guilder will be allowed to 
seek its own level, but the ultimate degree of de- 
valuation will probably not exceed 20 per cent. 

Readjustment of these currencies should have 
beneficial results, both internally and internation- 
ally. It will aid domestic recovery in the coun- 
tries involved by stimulating a rise in wholesale 
prices, thus enabling agriculture and industry to 
operate at a profit and extend their production. 
Even though it may not bring about an immediate 
expansion in the volume of exports, devaluation 
will at least enable these countries to sell goods 
abroad at remunerative prices. By reestablishing 
confidence, it should lead to the gradual repatria- 
tion of capital which has fled abroad. This in 
turn should ease the financial situation, particu- 
larly in France where the government must bor- 
row at least 17 billion francs before the end of 
the year. The revaluation of gold stocks will also 
yield a tidy profit to straitened national ex- 
chequers. In France alone it is estimated that 
from 17 to 22 billion francs will accrue to the 
Treasury. 














Internationally the effects are more limited. The 
economic improvement and increased purchasing 
power of the former gold bloc countries will bene- 
fit the rest of the world. Currency realignment 
will make possible the gradual removal of those 
quotas and other trade restrictions primarily im- 
posed to protect national currencies. Yet before 
international trade and credit can be restored to 
anything approximating normal conditions, the 
currency realignment must include Germany, 
Italy and Poland, all of which maintain the nom- 
inal value of their currencies by drastic exchange 


restrictions. The inclusion of Germany is par- - 


ticularly important, because the Reich is the larg- 
est trading nation on the continent and its compli- 
cated exchange restrictions, together with its net- 
work of clearing and barter agreements, have 
been a considerable factor in the restriction and 
distortion of world trade. Although devaluation 
would make it unnecessary to subsidize exports 
and would enable Germany to get rid of its bur- 
densome machinery for the regulation of foreign 
trade, the German government indicated it is un- 
willing to depreciate the mark under present cir- 
cumstances. Its gold and foreign exchange re- 
serves are so depleted that it would be obliged to 
retain its exchange controls even after devaluation 
unless it were assured temporary financial aid 
from abroad. 

Unfortunately, the constructive economic action 
of the past week was not paralleled by favorable 
political developments. In Geneva, where the 
League Assembly has been meeting since Septem- 
ber 21, projects for League reform fail to reconcile 
the widely divergent opinions among the powers. 
Although a revolt of the small nations led by the 
Soviet Union thwarted a Franco-British scheme 
to suspend the Ethiopian delegation from the As- 
sembly pending a World Court opinion, this ges- 
ture is rather reminiscent of the proverbial lock- 
ing of the stable door after the horse has been 
stolen. It will not return Ethiopia to the Ethio- 
pians, but will only lead Italy to continue its boy- 
cott of the League and refuse any collaboration 
in Europe. Meanwhile, the British suggestion 
that the long-awaited conference of Locarno pow- 
ers be held toward the end of October has failed 
of acceptance. The German government persists 
in its refusal to subscribe to a multilateral East- 
ern European Locarno and in its determination to 
push its program of bilateral non-aggression 
agreements in this region. The Soviet Union and 
the Little Entente, supported by France, insist 
that this refusal proves Germany’s aggressive de- 
signs in the East and they therefore decline to dis- 
associate a Western from an Eastern Locarno. 


Page Two 








In Spain, too, the situation looks exceedingly 
dark now that the installation of a Fascist gov- 
ernment in Madrid seems probable. In a speech 
delivered before the League Assembly on Septem- 
ber 25, the Spanish Foreign Minister bitterly at- 
tacked the international agreement not to supply 
arms to either side in the civil war, and openly ac- 
cused the Fascist powers of aiding the rebels. 

So long as the political horizon remains clouded, 
constructive economic steps are likely to remain 
of limited effect. Economic and political appease- 
ment must inevitably march hand in hand. Under 
present circumstances a comprehensive political 
and economic agreement would seem almost im- 
possible. If European powers would compromise 
their views on suggestions already advanced, how- 
ever, an accord along the following lines might 
prove practicable: . 

1. Inclusion of Germany and Italy in the agreement 
to realign currencies, this step to be facilitated by the 
cooperative extension of a short-term credit to the Ger- 
man Reichsbank and possibly the Bank of Italy by the 
central banks of Britain, France and the United States; 


2. Appointment of a commission of experts to in- 
vestigate the whole problem of raw materials and its 
relation to colonies and world trade; 

3. Conclusion of a Western Locarno along lines sub- 
stantially approved by all the powers affected and in- 
volving non-aggression pacts between Germany and its 
Western neighbors, to be guaranteed by Britain and 
Italy; 

4. An agreement under which Germany would return 
to the League and all major European powers would 
subscribe to a declaration reaffirming the principles of 
Articles X, XI, and XVI of the Covenant. These articles 
guarantee the territorial integrity of League members, 
declare that any threat to peace (including one in 
Eastern Europe) is a matter of concern to the League, 
and provide for sanctions against any aggressor. In 
return for these concessions on Germany’s part, plans 
for an Eastern Locarno would be at least temporarily 
abandoned; 

5. A joint declaration by which the major European 
powers would agree not to take advantage of the 
conflict in Spain by obtaining any exclusive rights, such 
as naval or air bases, on Spanish territory. 


The conclusion of any such agreement would 
undoubtedly be attended with great difficulties. It 
calls for concessions by almost all countries and 
its individual points are likely to be attacked. 
Nevertheless, it may have the merit of linking eco- 
nomic and political measures in a bold attempt to 
seek a comprehensive settlement. Moreover, the 
proposal would put Germany’s professed aspira- 
tions for peace to an acid test. Should Hitler re- 
ject such a plan in substance, the erection of an 
armed, iron-bound coalition against Germany 
would be the only alternative. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. ‘ol. XV. No. 49, Octoper 2, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Leste Bugit, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DegAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., umder the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








I 





al 
mT. 








LANDON ATTACKS HULL TRADE PROGRAM 

In a vigorous attack on the practice of tariff 
reciprocity under the New Deal, Governor Landon 
on September 24 apparently closed the loophole 
left open by the Republican platform for the pro- 
motion of international trade. Speaking at Minne- 
apolis the Republican candidate condemned isola- 
tion but asserted that the present trade policy had 
“sold the American farmer down the river.” 
Prices of cheese, cattle and other products had 
heen lowered by the Hull trade agreements, he de- 
clared; farm imports had increased while agricul- 
tural exports represented the smallest proportion 
of our foreign trade in recent history. The rem- 
edy for this “scandalous” state of affairs, the Gov- 
ernor intimated, lay in the conclusion of agree- 
ments for the exchange of non-competing com- 
modities only; the abandonment for the present of 
the unconditional most-favored-nation principle 
under which tariff reductions are extended to all 
nations except Germany and Australia; and legis- 
lative approval of agreements before they go into 
effect. 

Secretaries Hull and Wallace struck back sharp- 
ly at the Governor on September 25, denying that 
the trade program had injured American agricul- 
ture. The price decline in Cheddar cheese, Secre- 
tary Wallace stated, has been seasonal. With im- 
ports at only 1.9 per cent of domestic production, 
prices have recovered from the low point stressed 
by Mr. Landon until in August they were at the 
highest level for that month since 1929. For some 
time the Administration has been emphasizing the 
fact that the unprecedented drought, and not the 
trade agreements program, is primarily respon- 
sible for the relatively unfavorable agricultural 
export situation. 

Impartial critics may wonder how it is possible 
to encourage American exports by bargaining if 
we are willing to take in return only non-com- 
neting commodities. most of which are already 
on the free list and virtually indispensable if our 
standard of living is to be maintained. They may 
well ask how, if tariff reductions are not general- 
ized, the United States can avoid discrimination 
against its own exports by countries which regard 
our preferential arrangements as discriminations 
against them. They will fail to see how a subsidy 
on the domestically consumed portion of our crops, 
advocated by the Governor, can escape being re- 
garded abroad as a disguised form of dumping; 
or how such a scheme can be effective without pro- 
duction control to prevent the subsidies from 
reaching intolerable proportions. Finally, they 
will perceive no hope for a more rational Ameri- 
can tariff structure if agreements are to be nego- 
tiated in the glare of publicity and submitted to 
the approval of a Congress susceptible to group 
pressure contrary to the national interest. It is 
unfortunate that Governor Landon chose to mis- 


Page Three 








represent the agricultural import situation with- 
out mentioning the benefits secured for farm ex- 
ports under the Administration’s trade program, 
which will become more apparent when surpluses 
again exist. These benefits should be of especial 
value if the economies of France, Switzerland and 
the Netherlands, with which we have agreements, 
respond favorably to the new currency alignment. 
DavID H. POPPER 


Key Economic Areas in Chinese History, by Ch’ao-ting 
Chi. London, George Allen & Unwin, 1936, for Amer- 
ican Council, Institute of Pacific Relations. $3.00 
A new interpretation of China’s economic history which 

supplies a clue to the understanding of civil wars and 

dynastic changes under the Empire through an analysis 
of the regional character of Chinese economy and the po- 
litical réle played by public water-control works. 

Eastern Menace. London, Union of Democratic Control. 
6d. 

A 96-page pamphlet, giving an excellent resumé of 
Japan’s advance in the Far East since 1931 and the ef- 
fects on Chinese political and economic life. 

Pacific Adventure, by Willard Price. New York, Reynal & 
Hitchcock, 1936. $3.00 
Interesting narrative account of a trip through Japan’s 

mandated islands. 

Gomez, Tyrant of the Andes, by Thomas Rourke. New 
York, Morrow, 1936. $3.50 
The incredible story of South America’s most oppressive 

modern dictator. 

Mexican Martyrdom, by Wilfrid Parsons, S. J. New York, 
Macmillan, 1936. $2.50 
The plight of the church vividly pictured by illustration 

and anecdote. 

The Caribbean since 1900, by Chester Lloyd Jones. New 
York, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1936. $5.00 
A political and economic survey centering on the rela- 

tions of the United States with the republics of this area. 

Storm Over the Constitution, by Irving Brant. New York, 
Bobbs-Merrill, 1936. $2.00 
A brilliant argument in favor of a broad construction of 

the constitution. 

Social Security in the United States, by P. H. Douglas. 
New York, Whittlesey House, McGraw-Hill, 1936. $3.00 
Detailed analysis of the Federal Social Security Act. 

I’m for Roosevelt, by J. P. Kennedy. New York, Reynal 
and Hitchcock, 1936. $1.00 

Half-Way with Roosevelt, by E. K. Lindley. New York, 
Viking, 1936. $2.75 
Sympathetic and impressive summaries of the New Deal. 

Face of Revolution, by Michael John. New York, Mac- 
millan, 1936. $2.50 
Keen close-ups of troubled political scenes. 

Kenya: Contrasts and Problems, by L. S. B. Leakey. 
London, Methuen, 1936. 7/6 
An interesting study in African sociology. 

Europe at the Crossroads, by Philip Dorf. New York, Ox- 
ford Book Company, 1935. $1.50 
Useful, visualized review of present situation. 

Social Planning for Canada, by The Research Committee 
of the League for Social Reconstruction. Toronto, Nel- 
son & Sons, Ltd., 1935. $3.75 
A pioneering examination of the problems confronting 

Canada, written from the Socialist point of view. 

The Atlantic and Slavery, by H. A. Wyndham. New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1936. $4.50 
An admirable history of the slave trade. 






































































































































































































































ee 

















ne 
























































PUBLISHING HOUSE NOW DISTRIBUTES 
HEADLINE BOOKS 

During the summer an interesting and important arrange- 
ment to distribute HEADLINE BOOKS was concluded with the 
widely known firm of Grosset & Dunlap. This means 
that the promotional energies of this large firm, with its 
staff of 70 field representatives, will be at work placing 
HEADLINE BOOKS wherever books are sold. This chain of 
distribution will be helped by the personal work of every 
member of the Foreign Policy Association who takes the 
trouble to ask his local dealer for the books. The following 
note from the October Atlantic Monthly emphasizes the 
importance of this work: 


“Unfortunately, ‘Headline Books’ have not yet made their 
way into many bookstores, partly because booksellers have 
not felt a demand for them, but principally because the 
publishers have undertaken a type of book unusual for 
them, one which their ordinary system of promotion and 
distribution is not geared to handle. The fate of this ven- 
ture will depend largely upon that mysterious element 
known as ‘word-of-mouth advertising.’ Your bookseller 
will order these books for you, but do not berate him if he 
is unable to show them to you at once.” 


Headline Books Chosen by Chautauqua 
HEADLINE BOOKS are included this year as “‘one”’ of the 
four outstanding books of the year to be used by the mem- 
bers of the Chautauqua Literary and Scientific Circles. This 


course of home reading was begun in 1878 and annually 
interests thousands. 


Educational Services for Group Meetings 
To encourage the use of HEADLINE BOOKs by groups for 
their discussion programs, new and unusnal materials are 
available this year. F.P.A. members could help the 
Popular Education Department by bringing to the attention 
of ministers, club leaders and teachers the availability of 
the following services: 

1. Complete Discussion Programs are prepared for 
each HEADLINE BOOK. These are planned to cover four 
group meetings and provide, through the use of display 
charts, objective tests, panel discussions, debates, games, 
etc., some interesting activity for each meeting. 

2. For groups desiring a single meeting around a 
HEADLINE BOOK topic, programs for one-meeting dis- 
cussions are available. 

3. A packet of charts, reproduced in poster size from 
HEADLINE BOOKS, is now ready as a platform help to 
speakers, leaders and teachers. 

4. For public meetings in the community, sample panel 
discussions have been worked out. These can be used 
by the average group for successful public meetings. 
Two such programs are ready: ‘“Who is Guilty in Asia?” 
—an inquisition and trial; and “Has World Organiza- 
tion Failed ?’"—a hearing. 

As an indication of the value of these materials, we have 
just completed for the Marathon Committee of the Na- 


F.P.A. NOTES 











tional Committee on the Cause and Cure of War an order 
for 2,000 kits, which include the HEADLINE BOOKS, War 
Drums and Peace Plans and America Contradicts Herself, 
together with a discussion program based on these books. 


An increasing number of teachers, club leaders and 


speakers are making use of these services of the Department 
of Popular Education. 


ALBANY WORLD AFFAIRS INSTITUTE 


The Albany branch is sponsoring a community institute 
on world affairs with the cooperation of a large number of 
local organizations on Thursday, November 19, 1936. In 
addition to round-table discussions during the day, the pro- 
gram includes a luncheon meeting and a large public eve- 
ning meeting at Chancellors Hall on “America’s Position 
in the Present World Crisis.”’ 


STUDENT WORK 


The F. P. A. will continue this year the policy of offering 
the special membership to high school and college students 
at the rate of 60 cents a semester or $1 for the academic 
year. Last year 1589 students took advantage of this mem- 
bership and this winter we should like to increase materially 
the number of young people who rely on F. P. A. meetings 
and publications for their information on international 
questions. 

To promote clearer thinking, various types of student 
activity are being carried on in our Branches. 

BOSTON has worked out careful plans for inaugurating 
regular forums for students, to be held after each discussion 
meeting. Preparations were begun last spring by inviting 
for luncheon a group of college students and one of high 
school pupils, representing many of the educational institu- 
tions in the Boston area, and planning with them the gen- 
eral lines of these forums. This initial step will be followed 
up this fall, when definite plans for the first forum will be 
made. A teachers’ advisory committee will also be formed 
and plans for a teachers’ institute are being considered. 

ALBANY also had a few successful student forums for 
high school young people last winter, and will devote one 
section of its forthcoming institute exclusively to student 
mectings. 

CINCINNATI awards prizes of F. P. A. memberships to 
students showing exceptional interest in international prob- 
lems and has recently sent us the names of 24 such prize 
winners. 

ST. PAUL supplies free bus transportation to F. P. A. 
meetings for students coming from a distance. 

PHILADELPHIA provides luncheons at reduced rates for 
students, and averages more than 100 of these young 
people at each meeting. 

We are hoping that this year other Branches will give 
thought to interesting the students of their communities in 
the problems vexing the world. 








