— Dr. William ¥. Bisho Entered as 2nd class matter 
Jn De 
am pin ‘3 . gan | ; 

7 Ann fe ». | ah 5 
ee 
reason, 
gradi 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


30 fap. An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
7 by FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
Of the 22 East 38th Street,, New York, N. Y. 
er cent, 
ontinue | Vou. XXI, No. 19 FEBRUARY 27, 1942 
ie AGGRESSIVE TACTICS NEEDED FOR MILITARY VICTORY 
ate—in 
ipping, g HE month of February 1942 will be remembered IS THE TIDE TURNING? One of the most val- 
e lead as one of the darkest in the history of Britain uable features of President Roosevelt's address was 


he war | and the United States, but also as one in which both that it placed in proper perspective the setbacks suf- 
n gath-| peoples girded themselves anew for the long struggle fered by the Allies. While the reverses in the South- 


ver the| ahead. In this country, an incipient tendency toward west Pacific area are disheartening, there are some 
1 back-| defeatism and pointless criticism of our allies has signs that the tide might be beginning to turn. It is 
rned to} been halted by the President’s address on February true that the Japanese, under an umbrella of su- 
1g neu-| 23. Mr. Roosevelt's speech dealt effective blows perior air strength, had not halted after the fall of 
e Near} against those who are playing into Axis hands by Singapore but at once began a great enveloping 
idarity,| spreading fantastic rumors or demanding a policy movement against Java. Their forces landed on 
ence at! of home defense exclusively—a policy which would Bali and Sumatra, islands close to the east and west 
of the} isolate us from our Allies and permit their destruc- extremities of the Dutch citadel; and they hampered 
gz in at} tion one by one. It pledged this country to an of- the arrival of reinforcements by two damaging air 
. fensive strategy as soon as sufficient forces can be raids on Port Darwin, Australia, and by the occupa- 
suspen-| <teated and transported over the immense maritime tion of the Portuguese section of the island of Timor. 
1 many} distances to the battlefields. All the evidence of this Yet, provided these reinforcements can pierce the 
Service| war indicates that only by maintaining such an ob- Japanese screen and reach their destination in a con- 
abroad| jective can a nation avoid psychological collapse tinual stream, the prospects for holding the Allied 
ks con-| and military defeat. fortress are not entirely unfavorable. Although 


red of-| On its side, Britain too has prepared for the su- seriously hampered by weakness in the air, Dutch, 
edge in} preme effort to stem the enemy tide as a prelude to British Imperial, and American forces are prepared 


e been| victory. On February 19 the war cabinet was reduced for a stubborn defense of the mountainous territory 
1 Stock-| to seven men, three of them free of departmental of the island, which has many concealed airports 
opened | duties and hence able to assume some of the broad and other centers of resistance scattered along its 
aces as| planning and executive functions of the overbur- 600-mile length. The concentrated Allied fleets of 
on P| dened Prime Minister. Four days later, Mr. the Far East, under command of Admiral Helfrich, 
cia and | Churchill dropped from the government five senior are seriously damaging Japanese transports and the 
_handi- | Ministers who had been criticized as hold overs from naval escort guarding the invasion forces. In the 
600 of-| the Chamberlain period or as men unsuited for their long run, the fate of the island will doubtless be 
depend-| posts. There was some disappointment, however, determined by the number of fighter planes at the 
‘ar East| because of the retention of Lieut.-Col. Leopold S. disposal of the defenders, and by the extent of ef- 
- an ex-| Amery, an old-style British imperialist, in the Indian fective coordination which is possible between the 
States.| Office, despite Chiang Kai-shek’s plea for Indian land, sea and air arms of different nations. 
ality of} self-government. On February 24 Viscount Cran- Should Java fall, Japanese forces could turn west- 
tes had] borne, newly appointed Colonial Secretary, did state ward in an effort to effect a junction with the Nazis 
e today | that the British government was “in favor of India’s at some point in the Middle East. Then more than 
its own} political freedom,” but left it to the Indian leaders, ever, the cohesion of the Allies would rest on re- 
ppox | Who are torn by dissension, to devise a scheme ‘“‘satis- tention of superior sea power and acquisition of 


factory to all.” superiority at critical points in the air. In recent 


weeks, Britain and the United States have been 
seriously challenged on the high seas. German naval 
forces are massed in home harbors, ready for forays 
against the North Atlantic supply lines to the Soviet 
Union and the British Isles, or for support to an 
invasion of Britain. A powerful French flotilla, 
headed by the battleship Dunkerque, is now sta- 
tioned at Toulon, where it may some day sally forth 
to assist the Axis in the Mediterranean. The sub- 
marine weapon is being skillfully used by the enemy 
to harass Allied maritime communications. The at- 
tacks against United States and Brazilian vessels in 
the Western Atlantic and the Caribbean have had a 
perceptible effect on morale in Latin America. Still 
more important, the toll in tanker tonnage, the shell- 
ing of refineries in Aruba and California, and the 
capture of those situated in the Netherlands East 
Indies, could have a crippling effect on the whole 
Allied war effort. For the first time, the United 
Nations are facing the prospect not only of seeing 
their own blockade become ineffective, but also of 
having their sea lanes and lines of supply under 
direct attack. 

TIME FOR OFFENSIVE TACTICS. Neither this 
eventuality nor the possibility of a new German of- 


Page Two 


aeneeeemmeed 
a 


—y 
— 


fensive in the spring is fatal to the Allied cause. The 
United Nations’ margin of sea superiority still ¢. 
ists, although it is dangerously small in relation t 
the extended battle area; and the margin of poten. 
tial superiority in other aspects is immense. What jj 
most essential now is aggressive, unified military 
and political leadership fully alert to the signif. 
cance of modern weapons, in which the civilian po 
ulations may repose their confidence. They cannot 
be given a blueprint of military operations to come 
but they must be made to feel that everything pos 
sible is being done to harry the enemy during the 
period of preparation. This involves defensive 
strategy coupled with offensive tactics—the policy 
of carefully planned risks now to avoid greater peril 
in the future. As one example, American submarines 
which would no doubt be useful in future flee 
operations might be thrown against Japan’s se 
communications, just as Axis submarines are 
launched against our own. Naval and air raids are 
valuable for psychological as well as military pur 
poses. They would help to erase the discouragement 
over the defeats at Pearl Harbor and Singapore, an 
to inculcate a fighting spirit essential for victory 
Davip H. Popper 


WASHINGTON QUERIES VICHY’S ACTIONS 


Recent action by the State Department suggests 
that the United States’ policy toward the Vichy gov- 
ernment, which has been maintained with little 
modification since July 1940, is under review and 
may be radically revised. On February 19 Mr. Sum- 
ner Welles, Acting Secretary of State, announced 
that a second—and more pointed—inquiry had been 
addressed to Vichy concerning reports that France 
was collaborating actively with the Axis. He re- 
ferred to British charges that the French were 
furnishing supplies to the Axis forces in North 
Africa and turning over merchant and naval vessels 
in Indo-Chinese ports to the Japanese. The Ameri- 
can government viewed these developments with in- 
creasing apprehension. On February 13 Mr. Welles 
indirectly indicated American dissatisfaction with 
Vichy by noting that the Act of Havana would not be 
evoked to eject the Free French from St. Pierre and 
Miquelon, although the Department had previously 


More than 20 vessels have been torpedoed in 
American waters—how does this affect our ship- 


ping problem? Read: 


U. S. Shipping and the War 


by Joseph W. Scott 


25¢ 


January 15 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPorTS (issued on the 
Ist and 15th of each month. Subscription, $5 a year; to 
FPA members $3). 


denounced the de Gaullist occupation in strong terms. 

BASES OF OUR VICHY POLICY. When France 
was forced to sue for an armistice in June 1940 and 
its government devolved on Marshal Pétain, the 
United States continued to maintain a diplomatic 
representative in Vichy. The State Department ap- 
parently hoped to demonstrate to the French that 
this country would not abandon them in their dark- 
est hour. But there was also a more practical pur 
pose. By supporting those elements in Vichy which 
opposed the openly pro-Axis group of Admiral Jean 
Darlan, Washington hoped to strengthen French 


—— 


january 2 
of food a 
As fur 
the gove! 
this count 
bean isla 
stead, an 
geutraliza 
cember li 
has not 1 
governme¢ 
and Miqu 
nounced 
the agree 


RESUI 
policy are 
fo use al 
Indo-Chi 
Africa, t 
charged « 
5,000 tor 
well as \ 
ported tr 
Rommel’ 
don repc 
French | 
months 
1938; ce 
to 250,0 
from Fre 
directly | 
released 
of the f 
pied Fra 

Suppo 
‘tend tha 
more mz 
had not 
yet been 


resistance to German demands for collaboration. 


The armistice of Compiégne did not require the| 


Vichy French to give active aid against their erst 
while allies or to permit their territories to be used 
by the Axis as bases for attack. It was especially im 
portant, in the State Department's opinion, to pre 
vent Germany from taking control of French North 
and West Africa, with its strategically located naval 
bases in the Mediterranean and the Atlantic Ocean 
Fearing that unrest in Africa resulting from food 
shortages would give the Germans an excuse to if 
tervene and “restore order’ in that strategic area 
the United States opened limited trade with Frenc! 
Moroccan ports in June 1941. In November, afte 
Vichy had removed General Maxime Weygan¢ 
from his post as delegate-general in French Nort 
Africa, the trade was stopped. It was resumed 0! 


bases pl 
advanta; 
' Allied v 
| time, sit 
| special 
| adheren 
The 
ment w 
trials, v 
appear 
former 


public i 


FOREIGN 
Headquarte 
Secretary ; 

N. Y., un 


Qs 


terms, 
France 
10 and 
n, the 
omatic 
mt ap- 
h that 
- dark: 
iL pur-| 
which 
l Jean 
French 
ration. 
re the 
r efst- 
e used 
lly im- 
0 pre 
North 
| naval 
Ocean. 
1 food 
to if 
> area, 
French 
, after 
eygand 
North 
1ed on 


— 


ynuaty 27, 1942, when a French ship with a cargo 
of food and other essentials sailed from New York. 

As further evidence of good will toward Vichy, 
the government has resisted popular demands in 
this country for the occupation of the French Carib- 


tat bean islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe. In- 


stead, an agreement providing for trade with and 
neutralization of the islands was announced on De- 
cember 18, 1941. At the same time, the Department 
has not recognized the Free French as a de facto 
government. When the de Gaullists seized St. Pierre 
and Miquelon, Secretary of State Hull promptly de- 
nounced the act as an ‘‘arbitrary action contrary to 
the agreement of all parties concerned.” 


RESULTS OF U.S. POLICY. The results of this 
policy are debatable. Vichy allowed German planes 
to use airfields in Syria, and virtually turned over 
Indo-China to the Japanese. With respect to North 
Africa, the British Minister of Economic Warfare 
charged on February 10 and 11 that France had sent 
5,000 tons of motor fuel, 4,000 tons of wheat, as 
well as wine and olive oil to Libya, and had trans- 
ported trucks in French-flag ships to Marshal Erwin 
Rommel’s forces. Five days earlier, Lloyds of Lon- 
don reported that imports of foodstuffs received in 
French Mediterranean ports during the first eight 
months of 1941 were appreciably higher than in 
1938; cereal imports, for example, rose from 175,000 
to 250,000 tons. Presumably these products came 
from French Africa and, if they were not received 
directly from the United States, they may have been 
teleased because of the American shipments. Part 
of the foodstuffs, at least, passed through unoccu- 
pied France to German-held territories. 

Supporters of the State Department's policy con- 
tend that unoccupied France might have given even 
more material aid to the Axis if American assistance 
had not been forthcoming. The French fleet has not 
yet been turned over to the Nazis, nor the African 
bases placed at their disposal. It is argued that this 
advantage, although negative, is of value to the 
Allied war strategy. It may, however, be lost at any 
time, since Vichy’s attitude is not motivated by any 
special friendship for the United Nations, or by 
adherence to democratic ideals. 

The nature and ideology of the Pétain govern- 
ment will be revealed in the conduct of the Riom 
tials, which opened on February 19. These trials 
appear to be an attempt to discredit the leaders of 
former Popular Front cabinets and the Third Re- 
public itself. Perhaps the principal factor which has 


> Page Three 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: ALLIED STRATEGY FOR VICTORY 
Speaker: David H. Popper 
Date: Sunday, March 1 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 


For station, please consult your local newspaper 


thus far caused Hitler to refrain from occupying the 
rest of France is the attitude of the French people 
on both sides of the demarcation line, who have 
demonstrated by sabotage, attacks on German 
soldiers, and acts of defiance that they do not wish 
to become slaves in the “New Order.” The United 
States should encourage the resistance of the French 
people rather than placate the men of Vichy. A 
somewhat more favorable attitude toward the Free 
French, who are giving active aid to the Allied 
cause on many fronts, might have a tonic effect on 
France itself. But it must be borne in mind that 
many elements supporting Pétain are not necessarily 
pro-Nazi even though their attitude has helped 
Hitler. 


CARDS HELD BY VICHY. American diplomats 


are playing for high stakes in Vichy, for the 
strategic value of the territories and materials of 
war still held by the Pétain régime has risen ap- 
preciably in the last few months. Beside the bases 
in North and West Africa, the naval station at 
Diego Suarez on Madagascar Island assumes im- 
portance as the belligerents struggle for control of 
the Indian Ocean. In the midst of the Axis drive for 
control of the seas, utilization of the French Navy, 
which includes three battleships afloat if not ready 
for combat, 10 cruisers, about 50 destroyers, and an 
equal number of submarines, would create serious 
difficulties for the United Nations. If the French 
ships in Indo-China are transferred to the Japanese, 
Tokyo’s southward drive will be facilitated. De- 
cisions reached in Vichy during the next few weeks 
may have a vital effect on the course of the world 
conflict. 


Louis E. FRECHTLING 


The Fight for the Pacific, by Mark J. Gayn. New York, 
William Morrow, 1941. $3.00 


A discussion of Far Eastern politics, centering on 


Japan’s clash with the older empires, by a first-hand ob- 


server who has lived long in the Orient. Written early in 
1941, the author sees the outlines of the conflict which 
broke out on December 7. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 19, Fepruary 27, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Wirtiam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Largr, 


Association, Incorporated. National 


Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor; Davin H. Popper, Associate Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
Bw is Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


nie 2 peel aS mt 


LOE aah Da 


AS 


me 


Washington News Letter 


Fes. 24.—After two and a half months of war in 
which the United States and its allies have been 
dealt a series of staggering blows, the mood of 
Washington is a mixture of grim determination 
. and uncertainty as to the most effective way of rally- 
ing the American people for all-out war. In his 
broadcast of February 23, President Roosevelt gave 
a lucid analysis of the strategic and production prob- 
lems confronting the United Nations, but he did 
not communicate to the country the spark needed to 
enkindle national enthusiasm. 

NEED FOR NEW SPIRIT. Yet it is increasingly 
evident that such a spirit—similar to that of Russia, 
China, the ~"_.werlands, and the British Isles at the 
height of the air raids —is essential to give the 
United States courage to endure the dark days ahead. 
The difficulty of arousing this spirit is partly due 
to the failure so far of government agencies, such 
as the Office of Facts and Figures, to establish a 
creative partnership between the government and 
the people. In part, it is due to the remoteness of 
the conflict from our daily experience, and to the 
uneasy feeling throughout the country that, at a 
moment when sacrifices are expected from the man 
in the street, many special interests in government, 
labor, farming and industrial circles give no indica- 
tion of abandoning “business as usual.” 

One cannot escape the conclusion, however, that 
what is needed, above all, to fire the enthusiasm of 
Americans and their allies is unification of Allied 
wart aims. The question — “what are we fighting 
for?”"—cannot be dismissed as the agitation of a 
“Cliveden set” whose members remain unidentified. 

The blunt fact is that, so long as some of the 
United Nations continue their former policies in the 
Far East, a fatal discrepancy will persist between 
their avowed belief in the “four freedoms... 
everywhere” and’ their actual practice. It is recog- 
nized in Washington that, no matter what may be 
the outcome of the war in the Pacific, the days of 
Western domination over backward Oriental coun- 
tries are definitely over. The issue at stake is not 
whether the Western powers, by defeating Japan, 
can re-establish their influence and prestige in the 
Far East, but whether, by giving effective aid now 
to anti-Japanese Asiatic peoples, they can assure 
the ascendancy of China and India which, at the end 
of the war, might be ready to cooperate on an equal 
basis with Britain and the United States in the peace- 
ful development of Asia. 

TWILIGHT OF IMPERIALISM. Many non- 


American observers believe General MacArthugy 
success in the Philippines is due, in part at least, § 
the fact that he is fighting with the active cooper. 
tion, not merely the passive acquiescence, of the 
Filipinos, whose attitude is influenced by the prom. 
ise of complete independence in 1946 given to the 
Philippine Commonwealth by the United States jp 
1935. Had similar assurances been given in time by 
Britain to the peoples of India and Malaya, it js 
argued, the story of Singapore and Rangoon migh; 
have proved different in many respects. It is with 
this thought in mind that Dr. van Kleffens, Dutch 
Foreign Minister, announced in Washington op 
February 23 that, after the war, the Netherlands wil| 
give the Dutch East Indies a status similar to that 
promised for the Philippines—with the qualification 
that it will continue to control the islands’ foreign 
relations and military affairs. 

To the extent that the United Nations publicize 
their war aims and implement them in the midst of 
war, to that extent they will deprive Nazi propa 
ganda of one of its favorite themes. The Nazis are 
doing everything in their power to split the United 
Nations. At a moment when Germany is establish 
ing an empire where the peoples of Europe are sub 
jected to discriminations and cruelties that surpass 
the worst excesses of colonial imperialism, the 
Nazis seek to win India, China and the Arab world 
by assailing the colonial record of the Westem 
powers. This only makes it all the more urgent to 


give the peoples of the Near and Far East the con) 


viction that, by fighting at the side of Britain and 
the United States, they are fighting for their own 
ultimate liberation from all Western domination 


F 


——— 
Vou. XX 
_ io 


BY ti 
on 
the first 


thereby 
of their 


remote 


| the ques 


At the ¢ 
shek af 
power 
that pas 
point in 
London 
predicte 
that a “ 
—presu 
masses 
both Le 
belief tl 
a transi 
OBS” 
pressing 
in the v 


STALIN’S WAR DIPLOMACY. In this connec 
tion, Britain and the United States might do wel 
to study the war aims diplomacy of the Soviet Union. 
Again and again, the Kremlin has distinguished be 
tween imperialist wars of expansion and wars of 
national liberation—justifying China’s war against 
Japan, for example, as falling in the latter category. 
Stalin, in his speech on the 24th anniversary of the 


Red Army, indicated also that Russia distinguishes} 


between the Nazis and the German people—thus 
leaving open the possibility that the Germans them 
selves might join the struggle for world liberation 
from totalitarian rule. The slogan of liberation for 
all peoples, embodied in the Atlantic Charter, and 
particularly stressed by President Roosevelt thi 
week, remains to be translated into concrete terms 
by all the United Nations. | VERA MICHELES DEAN 


| politica 
of a sol 
India, a 
is divic 
dia anc 
native 
third o 
the poy 
are tec] 
the Bri 
existens 
religion 
with 2 
80 mil! 
| inces © 


and the 


