: govern- 
supplies 
de avail- 
'S are in 
be trans- 
Ouman- 
$ not yet 
ents, the 
ave been 
vell ma- 
‘or naval 
of ma- 
\ merican 
iting ex- 


conomic 
slications 
nting its 
mst mak- 
1 as loud 
emotions 
ection in 
nt’s sup- 
the chief 
and con- 
gram of 
machine. 
he Presi- 
d by the 
Jemocra- 
against 
‘lements, 
> that of 
29, con 
ed States 
* encour 
> govern 
serils of 
than the 
YTONE 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


a 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XX, No. 38 


JuLy 11, 1941 


—_—_ 


TOKYO WEIGHS COURSE IN GERMAN-SOVIET WAR 


AS the war in China enters its fifth year, Tokyo 
is confronted with a new series of problems 
geated by the German-Soviet clash. The Nazi in- 
vasion of the Soviet Union has automatically cut 
Japan's trade connections with Germany, from which 
it was receiving machinery and technical equipment 
no longer available in other markets. Japan’s al- 
ready overstrained economy must be readjusted to 
cope with this additional and obviously unexpected 
difficulty. 

Even more disturbing to Tokyo are the political 
and strategic implications of the Soviet-German war, 
especially if hostilities are protracted. Under such 
conditions, British and American ties with the So- 
viet Union, both military and economic, will tend to 
grow closer—a result which will necessarily be re- 
fected in the Far Eastern situation. In the past, So- 
viet munitions have been supplied to China in 
considerable amounts, and these supplies will con- 
tinue to be sent, according to reports from Chung- 


‘king. In the new situation, Soviet bombers and 


wbmarines at Vladivostok aud the Soviet Far Eastern 
Army, as well as Anglo-American naval and air 
power, become potential elements of a Far Eastern 
front against Japan that already includes the Chinese 
armies. 

TOKYO SEEKS A POLICY. Prospects of this 
political realignment in the Far East have created 
a difficult problem for Japanese diplomacy, which 
has tended thus far to move with extreme caution. 
An extraordinary series of meetings was held at 
Tokyo in the ten-day period from June 22 to July 2. 
They included no less than five liaison conferences 
between Cabinet members and the High Command, 
separate conferences of army, navy and government 
oficials, and a number of personal reports to the 
Emperor by the highest officials. These preliminary 
meetings were climaxed on July 2 by an Imperial 
Conference—the fourth since the China war broke 


out in 1937, and the eighth in Japanese history. In 
the noncommittal announcement which followed, it 
was said that the Imperial Conference had reached 
decisions ‘‘on important national policies to meet the 
current situation.’” Domez, the Japanese news agency, 
stated that these decisions were expected “to be 
gradually translated into action.”” The cautious word- 
ing of these statements would seem to indicate that 
Tokyo plans no immediate action of a decisive na- 
ture, but intends to guide its policy by the progress 
of events. Japan’s neutrality pact with the USS.R., 
and the clear proof that Germany was the aggressor, 
enables it to hold its hand, for the time being at 
least, without thereby infringing its alliance with the 
Axis powers. 

The fact that the triple alliance is still being main- 
tained, however, was made apparent on July 1, when 
Germany and Italy extended formal diplomatic rec- 
ognition to Wang Ching-wei’s puppet régime at 
Nanking. Similar action was taken by the Axis satel- 
lites in Europe, including Rumania, Hungary and 
Spain. Two different interpretations of this move are 
possible. If it was merely an Axis concession to hold 
Japan in line, it may indicate that the triple alliance 
has run into difficulties. On the other hand, it may 
involve a secret arrangement by which Japan, at 
some opportune moment, will render direct assistance 
to the Axis. In this case, additional Japanese pres- 
sure against the Anglo-American positions in south- 
east Asia might logically be expected. Germany has 
consistently sought to use Japan as a means of di- 
verting Anglo-American forces to the Pacific, al- 
though it might press Japan to move into Siberia if 
the Nazi drive into Soviet territory bogs down. 

Several reports suggest that Japan is preparing to 
extend its influence in Indo-China and Thailand, but 
no definite action along these lines has yet occurred. 
On July 3 the Japanese government requisitioned 
two of its vessels engaged in carrying chrome ore, 


cocoanut oil, hemp and other Philippine products 
to the United States. One vessel, already at Kobe, 
was ordered to unload “at the risk and expense of 
the owners of the cargo,” while the second will prob- 
ably discharge its cargo at Manila. At his press con- 
ference on the same day, Acting Secretary of State 
Sumner Welles declared that Japan was within its 
rights in requisitioning the ships and that the United 
States had previously taken similar action with re- 
gard to American vessels. The current shortage of 
Japanese shipping is probably sufficient explanation 
of this action, although it may have constituted a 
reprisal for restrictions placed on the export of cer- 
tain Philippine products to Japan. Tokyo has also 
curtailed sailings on one of its shipping lines to New 
York, but no general recall order has been issued. 


REACTIONS IN WASHINGTON. In dealing 
with the new conditions in the Far East presented by 
the German-Soviet war, Washington has adopted 
the same attitude of restraint displayed by Japan. Re- 
ferring to the Imperial Conference, Acting Secretary 
of State Sumner Welles declared on July 3 that the 
United States “naturally hopes that Japan’s new for- 
eign policy will be of such a character as to make for 
maintenance of peace in the Pacific area.” An issue of 
some difficulty may develop over the shipment of 
American supplies to the Soviet Union by way of 
Vladivostok. The President’s decision on June 25 


BRITISH IMPROVE POSITIONS AS NAZIS DRIVE EAST 


Throwing the full weight of its armed forces 
against the Red Army, the German High Command 
has continued to exploit successfully the initial ad- 
vantage of its attack on the U.S.S.R. by pushing 
well beyond the pre-1939 boundaries of Russia from 
the Gulf of Finland to northern Rumania. Nazi 
strategists apparently hope to smash the Soviet po- 
litical structure by inflicting crushing defeats on the 
Red troops and by capturing Moscow, the nerve 
center of the Union. Thereby they would gain con- 
trol of the resources and industries of Russia before 
the defenders can effectively carry out the “scorched 
earth” policy enunciated by Premier Joseph Stalin in 
his radio address of July 3. 

Out of the welter of conflicting claims on the 
progress of the opposing armies, only a few reports 
appear well founded. The main German drive is not 


For a survey of the U.S. power industry and trans- 
portation system, READ: 


DEFENSE ECONOMY OF THE USS.: 
TRANSPORTATION AND POWER 


by John C. deWilde 


25¢ 


July 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


Page Two 


—=:2 


not to invoke the Neutrality Act in the SovietGe, 
man conflict opened the way to such shipments, On 
July 4 Tokyo’s Cabinet spokesman declared, in ap 
swer to a German correspondent’s question, thy 
the Japanese government was considering the 
sibility of expanding Japan’s territorial waters hy 
yond the limits of the three-mile zone—a moy 
which would block the routes of access to Vladj. 
vostok. The Cabinet spokesman’s statement was 
evidently a trial balloon, designed to test Soviet and 
American reactions. 

Unless Japan should undertake further aggressive 
action, there would seem to be small likelihood of 
a drastic change in the Far Eastern situation durig 
the immediate future. Both the United States an¢ 
the Soviet Union have every incentive to prevent the 


development of critical issues in their relations with 
Japan at this time. The U.S.S.R. will not be likely 
to afford Japan any pretext for disavowing the 
Soviet-Japanese neutrality pact. Tokyo, on the othe 
hand, cannot be unaware that under present circum. 
stances closer Anglo-American-Soviet collaboration 
in the Far East—which it most fears—will probably 
be stimulated by aggressive moves on its part. It 
remains to be seen whether German pressure, or 
Japan’s willing collaboration with the Axis, will lead 
Tokyo to take irrevocable steps. 
T. A. Bisson 


toward the Ukraine, as expected, but from Eas 
Prussia and Poland toward Moscow. Mechanized| 
Nazi units have overrun most of White Russia and 
have penetrated as far as the Stalin line, 100 miles 
behind the border, where most of the Russian de 
fense forces are still intact. The issue of this battle, 
one of the most significant in history, is still in doubt | 

Concentration of the German war effort on the 
eastern front has not only given the British and Al- 
lied armies a welcome respite but has enabled them| 
to launch a major air offensive over western Europe. 
With several hundred planes participating in single 
raids and with flights by day as well as night—often 
unopposed by the Luftwaffe—the R.A.F. has appar 
ently inflicted heavy damage on important industrial 
objectives well within the boundaries of the old 
Reich, as well as the invasion ports on the Channel 
coast and airfields in occupied France. 


Meanwhile the Allied forces in the Middle Eas 
are rapidly bringing to a close two campaigns 0 
secondary importance, and preparing to meet tht 
new threat introduced by the German drive inti 
Russia. Progress of British and Free French units 0 
the Syrian front has been slow, apparently becaus 
comparatively small forces were employed and be 
cause much reliance was placed on persuasion 4s? 


— 


methc 
soldie 
the A 
from 

Palest 
Vichy 
fused 
Turke 
transi 
he mt 


stren 
mean 
ened | 
and t 
ranea 
Britis 
asar 
noun 
Archi 
as Cc 
ment 
of th 
in the 
Britis 
shore 
Th 
been 
of th 
one ¢ 
defer 
victo! 
drive 
ing f 
Nazi 
almo 
fore 
India 
FOREI 


Headqu 
Entered 


<> 


—= 
OViet-Ger. 
ments, Qp 
ed, in ap. 
tion, that 
3 the pos 
waters be. 
—a move 
to Vlad;. 
ment was 
Soviet and 


ag gressive 
=lihood of 
ion during 
States and 
revent the 
tions with 
t be likely 
wing the 
_ the other 
mt circum. 
laboration 
| probably 
ts part. It 
‘essure, of 
, will lead 


_ BIsson 


from East 
{echanized 
Russia and 
100 miles 
ussian de- 
his battle, 
1 in doubt 


rt on the 


sh and Al: | 


bled them 
rn. Europe. 
x in single 
*ht—often 
has appat- 
industrial 
f the old 
e Channel 


iddle East 
ypaigns of 

meet the 
drive inte 
h units of 
ly becaust 
d and be 


asion as 4 


— 
——— 


method of winning over the French and native 
soldiers. Since the opening of hostilities on June 8, 
the Allies have advanced through the Syrian desert 
from Iraq and moved slowly up the coast from 
Palestine. General Henri Dentz, commanding the 
Vichy army, was reported on July 4 to have re- 
fysed an armistice, but unless aid reaches him via 
Turkey, whose leaders have refused to permit the 
transit of French troops or the sale of war matériel, 
he must soon capitulate. 

The surrender on July 4 of the remaining Italian 
detachments in the Galla Sidamo province of Ethi- 
opia leaves at large only a few thousand troops of 
the 250,000 who garrisoned Italian East Africa when 
the British began their offensive in December 1940. 
When the remaining centers of Italian resistance in 
the wild country north of Lake Tana in Ethiopia and 
southwest of Assab in Eritrea are reduced, the Allied 


troops in East Africa will move northward to rein- 
force the Army of the Nile. 


The steady flow of American matériel to Egypt, 
now estimated at almost a shipload daily, matched 
by the arrival of troop reinforcements from British 
Dominions and colonies east of Suez, ought to 
strengthen the Allied forces in North Africa. In the 
meantime, the Axis army in Libya has been weak- 
ened by the withdrawal of almost all German planes 
and by the sinking of supply ships in the Mediter- 
ranean by British naval and air action. Further 
British moves in the Middle East may be expected 
asa result of far-reaching organizational changes an- 
nounced on July 1. The replacement of General Sir 
Archibald Wavell by General Sir Claude Auchinleck 
as Commander in the Middle East, and the assign- 
ment of Captain Oliver Lyttleton, formerly President 
of the Board of Trade, to handle political questions 
in the Middle East as a direct representative of the 
British Cabinet, portends increased activity on the 
shores of the eastern Mediterranean. 


The transfer of Wavell from Cairo to Delhi has 
been interpreted in some London circles as indicative 
of the desire of the British government to entrust to 
one of its foremost generals the preparation of the 
defense of India. This explanation presumes the 
victory of Hitler over the Russians, followed by a 
drive across Turkestan or the mountain range stretch- 
ing from the Himalayas to the Caucasus. While the 
Nazis have demonstrated their ability to perform 
almost impossible feats, some time must elapse be- 
fore they can expect to appear on the borders of 


India. 


Page Three 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: U.S. OCCUPATION OF ICELAND 
Speaker: A. Randle Elliott 
Date: Sunday, July 13 
Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 
Station: NBC, blue network 


A second group of observers regards Wavell’s 
shift as an expression by the British Cabinet of its 
dissatisfaction with the conduct of the campaigns in 
Greece, Crete and Libya, and possibly of disagree- 
ment between Churchill and Wavell over future 
movements in the Middle East. The division of 
Wavell’s powers between a new commanding officer 
and a representative of the London Cabinet may in- 
dicate the Prime Minister's intention to maintain 
closer control over the situation. 


If the British are to seize the initiative again in the 
Mediterranean theater, they must strike soon, pos- 
sibly clearing the Axis forces out of Libya or ob- 
taining strategic positions in Turkey from which to 


threaten Germany’s flank. Louts E. FRECHTLING 


Union Policies and Industrial Management, by Sumner H. 
Slichter. Washington, The Brookings Institution, 1941. 
$3.50 
In this exhaustive survey of the system of industrial 

jurisprudence which has grown up as a result of collective 
bargaining, Professor Slichter points ou both its construc- 
tive accomplishments and its deficiencies. Parts of the book 
are particularly relevant to a consideration of the labor 
aspects of national defense. 


Chemistry in Warfare, by F. A. and M. S. Hessel and W. 
Martin. New York, Hastings House, 1940. $2.00 


A good book, written in terms intelligible to the layman. 


From Marx to Stalin, by J. E. Rossignol. New York, 
Crowell, 1940. $3.00 
The author subjects the Marxist theories to a searching 
criticism. 


Australia and the United States, by Fred Alexander. Bos- 
ton, World Peace Foundation, 1941. Cloth, 50 cents; 

Paper 25 cents 
Canada and the United States, by F. R. Scott. Boston, 

World Peace Foundation, 1941. Cloth, 50 cents; Paper, 

25 cents. 

Two very useful pamphlets in a new series, entitled 
“America Looks Ahead” and edited by S. Shepard Jones. 
In clear, direct style they outline recent developments and 
future problems in the increasingly close relationship be- 
tween the United States and British Commonwealth coun- 
tries. 


The Conditions of Economic Progress, by Colin Clark. 
New York, Macmillan, 1940. $5.00 


Professor Clark, a pioneer in the study of national in- 
comes, draws up an international comparison of real in- 
comes and makes a penetrating analysis of all the factors 
bearing on economic progress. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 38, Jury 11, 1941. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Beis 


J 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELEs Dgan, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


National 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

Juty 7.—With the occupation of Iceland by 
United States bluejackets and Marines, announced by 
President Roosevelt on July 7 as a step to protect the 
strategic outposts of the Western Hemisphere, the 
status of the armed forces and the progress of the 
national defense program became a matter of pri- 
mary concern in Washington. Last week, even be- 
fore the President’s move was made public, defense 
officials were scanning a series of official reports and 
taking stock of the defense program after a year of 
intensive preparation and expansion. 

DEFENSE BALANCE SHEET FOR 1941. The 
most encouraging report came from the Treasury, 
which showed an impressive increase in Federal ex- 
penditures for the fiscal year ending June 30, with ap- 
proximately half of the total outlay of $12,712,000,- 
000 going to national defense. Direct military ex- 
penditures rose from $1,559,000,000 in 1940 to 
$6,048,000,000 in 1941, covering actual outlays for 
the Army and Navy, emergency ship construction, 
defense housing, selective service, and special funds 
allocated to the President, as well as the cost of 
deliveries under the Lease-Lend Act. As reported by 
the Treasury, however, these outlays did not include 
indirect defense spending by various civil depart- 
ments, or disbursements by the RFC and other lend- 
ing agencies outside of the regular budget. 

Equally impressive was the sharp rise in the 
monthly rate of defense spending, which rose from 
$150,000,000 in May 1940, to $473,578,000 in De- 
cember, and $836,606,000 in May of this year. The 
current rate cf spending is well over 10 billion dol- 
lars a year, which exceeds the rate of defense expen- 
diture in 1918. 

On the credit side of the ledger, the Army can 
point to the orderly induction of 594,000 selective 
service trainees, which, with the Regular Army and 
the National Guard, now comprise an organized 
force of 1,441,500 officers and men in active service. 
Overseas garrisons in the Philippines, the Canal 
Zone and outlying possessions have been doubled 
in less than a year to form the largest peacetime es- 
tablishment ever maintained by the United States. 
The Navy, with more than a hundred new combat 
vessels under construction, is considerably ahead of 
schedule on its huge two-ocean program, and the 
“fleet in being” is-at full fighting strength. As a 
whole, the armed services are undoubtedly in a more 
advanced state of preparation than when the United 


States entered the Worid War in 1917. 
On the other hand, some of the shortcomings 
the armed forces are frankly acknowledged by 
eral Marshall, the Chief of Staff, in a semi-annyjl 
report to the Secretary of War made public op 
July 3. General Marshall points out that in order to 
build up units of the new Army, the War Depart. 
ment has had to fill out Regular Army and National 
Guard divisions with large numbers of trainees and 
raw recruits. In many units, the proportion of traineg 
is so large that to withdraw them at the end of 
their year’s service would leave only a skeleton force 
To meet this situation, General Marshall “urgently 
recommended” that Congress modify existing laws 
So as to permit extension of the period of service for 
trainees and Guardsmen beyond one year, and te. 
move restrictions on service outside this hemisphere 

Equally serious shortcomings are revealed in the 
latest reports on industrial production, procurement 
of strategic materials and the delivery of modem 
equipment for the U.S. Army and Navy and for 
Great Britain. Official releases from OPM acknowl 
edge a continuing shortage of raw materials and 
machine tools, which is reflected most sharply in 
the lagging rate of aircraft and ordnance production. 
While American aircraft factories turned out 1,40 
military planes in April, it now seems unlikely that 
this figure will be greatly exceeded during the critical 
summer months. Shortages of modern ordnance 
equipment are particularly acute, and production of 
37-mm. anti-aircraft guns, 105-mm. howitzers and 
heavy machine guns is not yet up to schedule. 

That these deficiencies are due only in part t 
shortages of essential materials is indicated in 4 
voluminous report compiled by the House Military 
Affairs Committee and made public on June 28. The 
report, which was approved by a 16 to 9 vote of the 
committee membership, presents a critical analysis 
of the entire defense effort and seeks to find com 
structive remedies for what it terms the ‘failures 
of the program. By far the most serious criticism 8 
the lack of adequate planning, and the failure to 
provide for effective administration. In particular, 
the committee cites the failure to entrust to a ft 


sponsible head the full authority to carry out the will | 


of Congress and the country. Most Washington ob 
servers agree with the committee that delays and 
bottlenecks will not be removed until steps are taken 
to provide some kind of master planning board. 
under a responsible coordinator with power to act 
W. T. STONE 


— 
Vo. X 


provid 
In this 
missar 
Staffor 
they ¥ 
| port 0: 
Germa 
nor CO 
by mu: 
Giv. 
Churcl 
labora 
nated 
intend 
the ““t 


avoid, 
States 
| Germz 
| POS 
how tl 
on the 
first o: 
rom 
famili 
the N; 
Soviet 
ania, 

Germ: 
three | 
Kiev— 
this in 
a$ pos 
Soviet 
Polan 
as the 


Line”. 


ree 


