ce Of the 


- failed 
ecial pri 
tocks was 


measures, 
of all the 
from out: 
d States is 
ern Henj. 
than ade. 
ver, that, 
00, which 
aller agri. 
Y plight of 
and Asia 
inadequate 
iccount for 
ile Ameti- 
» of 3,000, 
Europe has 
rage 2,000 
. Although 
> alarming 
sident Tru- 
as tO ascer- 
nission has 
t. 
vell as hu- 
nternation- 
> Westem 
ined Food 
ited States, 
ber of the 
» to supply 


00,000 tons | 


to draw on 
id the Bal- 
in an area 
urope.” As- 
ayton com 
om Russia 
FB alloca 
alleviating 
he Western 
lies larger 
conference 


- Asia, held’ 


cluded that 
blem would 


R BOLLES 


Pw AY 


‘wt ® we TA * 


Parone AL, Seem 
1 JHPARY 


MAY 1 0 1946 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 29 


May 8, 1946 


r is now widely recognized that the principal task 

of the Foreign Ministers of the United States, 
Britain, Russia and France in the negotiations that 
opened in Paris on April 25 is to find a basis for 
workable relations between the Western powers 
and the U.S.S.R. rather than to determine peace 
conditions for the Axis countries and their satellites. 
This task must be accomplished during a period of 
history when all nations—not Russia alone—are in 
the midst of a painful transition from national to 
international concepts of security. The national con- 
cept emphasizes outright control of strategic bases, 
sources of raw materials, and other attributes of 
sovereignty, while international organization for 
collective security presupposes joint action with re- 
spect to military preparations for defense, access to 
taw materials, and alleviation of economic and 
social maladjustments susceptible of leading to 
armed conflict between nations. In an effort to find 
a workable alternative to the current emphasis on 
national security, Secretary of State Byrnes proposed 
on April 29 that Russia, Britain, France and the 
United States sign a 25-year treaty to keep Germany 
disarmed. Whether this proposal will be regarded by 
the other Allies as an adequate guarantee against 
German resurgence remains to be seen, but Mr. 
Byrnes’ suggestion marks an important departure 
from traditional American diplomacy. 

That profound differences exist between the 
theories and practice of capitalism and communism 
is obvious to all. But is it possible to assert that 
divergences in foreign policy between the Western 
powers and Russia are traceable solely to this anti- 
thesis, or do all nations, irrespective of their internal 
systems, have certain comparable aspirations which 
might be reconciled by mutual adjustment ? 


The United States and Britain have been inclined, 


CONFLICTS AMONG VICTORS CONTINUE TO DELAY PEACE SETTLEMENT 


since V-E Day, to take the view that Russia, aban- 
doning the Communist internationalism which once 
aroused such suspicion and alarm abroad, has re- 
verted to old-fashioned imperialism (apparently no’ 
less alarming than its previous course) by demand- 
ing control over the Dardanelles, special rights 
and privileges in northern Iran and northern Man- 
churia, a trusteeship over the former Italian col- 
ony of Tripolitania and, in general, equality with 
the Western powers in decisions on problems all 
over the world. Such a while admittedly 
exercised in the past by other great powers which 
even today retain the fruits of their conquests and 
acquisitions, has, according to Washington and 
London, been made obsolete by the invention of 
modern weapons, notably the atomic bomb, whose 
secret process of manufacture is still being care- 
fully guarded by the United States, Britain and 
Canada. 

ARE BASES OBSOLETE? Starting from the 
premise that we have now entered a new world, 
Secretary of State Byrnes at the London Conference 
of Foreign Ministers presented a State Department 
plan for the creation of a United Nations trustee- 
ship over Italy’s colonies in Africa. This project met 
with lukewarm reception in Britain which, recalling 
the hard struggle of British and Dominion troops 
against the Axis forces in Africa, would prefer a 
larger share in the administration of Italy’s colonies, 
strategically situated along Britain’s Mediterranean 
life line. Nor did it win support in France, which is 
in favor of having the United Nations grant Italy 
a trusteeship over these colonies. The American 
project, however, which is reported to have been 
submitted again in Paris, has the great merit of 
seeking to apply the principles of the United Na- 
tions Charter to territory taken from an enemy coun- 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


— 


SOS DS @ emcees 208 28. DO OF: . 
a eae “s ee oa . ‘ ~ Sons YI - ~ 


try, and thus prevent a nationalist scramble for the 
spoils of war. If the American proposal should be 
accepted, would it not seem logical to make a sim- 
ilar arrangement for the former Japanese islands 
in the Pacific which, like Italy’s colonies, are im- 
portant primarily for strategic reasons? 

Australia and New Zealand, who favor regional 
arrangements for security rather than sole owner- 
ship of former Japanese islands by the United 
States, have already raised this question at the Brit- 
ish Dominions conference now sitting in London. 
Washington itself had recognized the international 
principle in its request of October 1945 for Iceland 
bases which, it stated, would be used on behalf of 
the Security Council of the United Nations—al- 
though even on these terms the government of Ice- 
land decided to decline our request after criticism 
of it had been expressed in Moscow. Hitherto, how- 
ever, because of strong Army and Navy opposition 
to State Department views on trusteeship of terri- 
tories taken from enemy states, the Administration 
has limited expressions of policy on the crucial issue 
of the Pacific islands to vague and ambiguous press 
conference statements. 


No layman, and probably no responsible military 
expert, can yet contend with assurance that the 
atomic bomb has rendered all strategic bases obso- 
lete. But if it has, obsolescence would have to be 
considered not only in the case of Russia, but also 
in the case of other great powers which already 


Page Two 


— 
—— 


possess such bases, or seek to acquire new ones, 
Otherwise the impression -will develop that the 
United Nations organization, to quote the phrase of 
the Italian representative at Geneva during the Ethi. 
Opian war, uses “two weights and two measures,” 
Nor should the issue of capitalism versus commy. | 
nism be allowed to confuse consideration of this 
problem. It is clear that, for example, in the case 
of Spain, the Western powers are engaged in 4 
struggle with Russia for influence over that country, 
This struggle, however, is only partly over the ques. 
tion whether Spain remains under the dictatorshi 
of Franco, restores monarchy, sets up a liberal demo. 
cratic régime, or accepts the Communist system. The 
importance of Spain is due primarily to its position 
at the Straits of Gibraltar whose strategic signifi 
cance, from the point of view of the United States 
and Britain, appears not to have been materially 
altered by the atomic bomb. q 


It might be fair to ask whether the Western pow- 


ers would have a better chance to obtain, and retain, 


— 


in cont 
will off 
Accord: 
constitu 
racy be 
popula 
pressio! 
parties 
Man” ° 
stitutio 
of the 
as thos 
“the di 
ment,” 
Constit 
referre 
and ‘re 
semini: 

In re 
Sociali: 
leaders 


a foothold in Spain if they actively supported the | sstrict 
cause of the Spanish Republicans instead of con. | tion 0! 
tinuing to hesitate over intervention against Franco, | sights, 
This question is inextricably linked with the prob- | # the 
lems of political and economic reconstruction of | body « 


Europe, which will be discussed in another article. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The second in a series of articles on the 
peace negotiations in Paris.) 


CONSTITUTION FOR FOURTH REPUBLIC MAKES ASSEMBLY SUPREME 


For the fourteenth time since the Revolution of 
1789 France has under consideration a new consti- 
tution, which it is to accept or reject by referendum 
on May 5. Since the special committee of the Con- 
stituent Assembly which framed the new law worked 
behind closed doors, there was no official indica- 
tion of the form the constitutional draft would take 
until the text was laid before the Assembly on 
April 9. However, General de Gaulle’s resignation 
as President on January 21, on the ground that the 
Socialist and Communist parties had joined in pro- 
posing a strong parliament at the expense of the 
executive, had indicated that the proposed consti- 
tution would vest supreme authority in a single- 
house National Assembly. 


According to the draft text “the National As- 
sembly alone has the right to legislate,” and it is 
also empowered to elect the President of the Re- 
public and the Premier. The supremacy of the As- 
sembly is further assured by the assignment of 
essentially honorary functions to the President and 
the confinement of the Premier's powers to the 
execution of the laws. In an effort to avoid the kind 
of governmental instability that created so many 
difficulties before World War II, the constitution 


provides that the Assembly can be dissolved during 
the first half of its five-year term only by a resolu- 


of the 


| public 
| of spe 


and fi 
only te 


An 


| behal f 


thoug! 


tion voted by a two-thirds majority of the Deputies. | %¢ ' 
During the second half of the life of the Assembly | France 


dissolution may be pronounced by Presidential de- 
cree, following a decision to this effect by the 


cabinet, provided two ministerial crises have oc- 


curred during the same annual session. 
CONSTITUTION MEETS OPPOSITION. If 


the vote taken on the constitutional draft in the Con- | 


stituent Assembly on April 19 is any indication of 


what the national reaction will be, the constitution | 
will be adopted by a narrow majority. In the As- | 


sembly the vote was divided 309 to 249, with the 
Popular Republican Movement (MRP), one of the 


three strongest parties, opposing the constitution, | 
while the Communists and Socialists approved it. | 


The split that the constitutional issue has brought 
about in the coalition government formed by these 


| 


IS ¢ 


RE 


three groups reveals the gulf which separates the = 


MRP and the Communists and indicates that the 
Socialists, after attempting to play the role of con- 
ciliator, have aligned themselves with the Com 
munists on this critical issue. 

One question which is being heatedly discussed 


FOREIG 
Headqu: 
itor, 
Please a 


> 


ee, 
——_—=: 


Ww Ones, 
that the 
hrase of 
the Ethi. 
Casures,” 
commu- 
Of this 
the case 
red in a 
country, 
the ques. 
tatorship 
al demo. 
‘em. The 
position 
C signifi. 
ed States. 
aterially. 


ern pow- 
id retain, 
yrted the 

of con- 
t Franco, 
he prob- 
iction of 
© article. 


e—— 
—_™ 


in connection with the constitution is whether it 
will offer adequate protection to democratic rights. 
According to the Communists and Socialists, the 
constitution is well designed to safeguard democ- 
racy because, by assigning supreme power to the 
pularly elected Assembly, it insures effective ex- 
pression of the will of the majority. The Leftist 
ies also point to certain specific “Rights of 
Man” which are set forth in the preface to the con- 
stitution to demonstrate the democratic character 
of the document. A number of these rights, such 
as those concerning rest and leisu.e, education, and 
“the duty to work and the right to obtain employ- 
ment,” are identical with those found in the Soviet 
Constitution of 1936, while others, such as those 
referred to in the statement that ‘“‘all men are born 
and ‘remain free and equal before the law” are 
feminiscent of the Declaration of Independence. 

In reply to the contention of the Communists and 
Socialists that the constitution is democratic, MRP 
leaders insist that democracy rests less on the un- 
restricted will of the majority than on the protec- 
tion of fundamental rights of the minority. These 
tights, the MRP declares, cannot be assured as long 
as the majority is represented in a single legislative 
body enjoying supreme power, particularly in view 
of the constitutional provision that when “the Re- 


DEAN 


EME 
d during 


a resolu- 
Deputies. 
Assembly 
ential de- 
t by the 


have oc 


ION. If 
the Con- 
cation of 
nstitution 
1 the As 
with the 
ne of the 
istitution, 
sroved it. 
; brought 
by these 
irates the 
that the 
e of con- 
he Com- 


discussed 


public is proclaimed in danger,” rights to freedom 
of speech and movement, secrecy of correspondence 
and right of assembly can be suspended, subject 
only to nominal rights of legal redress. 


A major argument advanced by the Socialists in 
behalf of the constitution is that the document, even 
though imperfect, should be adopted in order to 
end the period of provisional government that 
France has had since liberation from Nazi rule. 
This argument will undoubtedly carry much weight 


Page Three 


In preparation for the European Peace Conference, 
the Foreign Policy Association has published the 
following FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS: 


| THE PROBLEM OF TRIESTE 
by C. Grove Haines 


AXIS SATELLITES IN EASTERN EUROPE 
by Cyril E. Black 


U.S. POLICY IN EUROPE 
by Vera M. Dean 


THE FUTURE OF ITALY’S COLONIES 
by Vernon McKay 


25c each 


REPoRTS are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 


Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


iia meet 
oe 


since the interim government has failed to establish 
confidence in its ability to solve the present eco- 
nomic crisis. Although the MRP recognizes the 
strength of this argument, it replies that unsatis- 
factory provisional arrangements are preferable to 
the acceptance of a régime that will, in its opinion, 
lead to dictatorship. 


REALITIES BEHIND THE DEBATE. As is usu- 
ally the case in discussions of constitutional issues, 
much of the debate has been taking place in a 
legalistic stratosphere far removed from such pro- 
saic realities as the economic interests and desire 
for political power of the various contestants. In 
reality the disagreement between the MRP, on the 
one hand, and the Communists and Socialists, on 
the other, mirrors a struggle between divergent 
points of view toward nearly every aspect of French 
economic and political life. The MRP tends to rep- 
resent the middle classes which have held power in 
France more or less uninterruptedly since 1870. Al- 
though a large part of this group recognizes the 
need for far-reaching social changes, it nevertheless 
wishes to carry out these changes gradually and 
without sacrificing traditional individual rights. By 
contrast, the Communists and Socialists, however 
much they may differ with each other as to tactics 
and ultimate goals, stand for working-class suprem- 
acy, and believe that, as a result of the desperate 
economic conditions prevailing in France, they will 
win a majority in the next general elections. Under 
these circumstances the Leftist parties favor an As- 
sembly which will enjoy supreme power and enable 
them to carry out their proposed reforms without 
the restraining influences of a second chamber or a 
powerful executive. Perhaps the strongest argument 
the Left can advance in behalf of a sovereign As- 
sembly is that a nation which needs to proceed 
swiftly with the enormous tasks of reconstruction 
cannot afford a system of checks and balances simi- 
lar to that which operates in the United States. 


WHINIFRED N. HADSEL 


American Foreign Policy, by Edwin Borchard. Indianapo- 
lis, Ind., National Foundation Press, National Founda- 
tion for Education in American Citizenship, 1946. $1.00 
An analytical summary of trends since 1776 that is of 

interest to the general reader. 


Nationalities and National Minorities, by Oscar I. Janow- 
sky. New York, Macmillan, 1945. $2.75 


An effort to find a solution to the problem of minorities 
in the great borderland between Russia and Central Eu- 
rope by applying the principle of “national federalism,” 
rather than that of homogenous national states. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 29, May 3, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
| Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHeLes DAN, 


| Mito, Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


S81 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


POLITICAL AIMS ABROAD INFLUENCE U.S. FOREIGN LENDING PROGRAM 


One of the most striking features of the Senate 
debate on the proposed British loan, which began 
on April 16, is the extent to which a growing num- 
ber of public men believe that, in granting credit 
to other countries, we help ourselves. In his s 

_on April 22 giving unexpected support to the loan, 
Senator Arthur Vandenberg, Republican of Michi- 
gan, emphasized that the loan was in our ‘“‘self- 
interest” because without it the world would remain 
divided into economic blocs which deny American 
exporters and importers world-wide access to mar- 
kets and raw materials. While the program of 
lending will certainly facilitate trade between coun- 
tries, our goal of binding the world together eco- 
nomically may require the United States to imple- 
ment lending with extensive programs of direct 
internal assistance to individual countries. 


ECONOMIC ADVANTAGES OF LOANS. 
Loans, taken by themselves, can be of obvious im- 
mediate benefit to the economy of the United States. 
Should Congress approve the British loan, the 
United Kingdom is committed, within a year after 
the credit becomes available, to abolish the dollar 
pool of the sterling area on current transactions. 
This pool makes the sterling area almost inaccessible 
to American trade. The elimination of the pool, 
moreover, would enable many nations to buy from 
the United States goods which they now must seek 
elsewhere, because their membership in the sterling 
area requires them to trade with one another. 

The countries participating in the sterling area 
are—in addition to the United Kingdom—the Brit- 
ish Commonwealth countries (except Canada and 
Newfoundland); India; British possessions and 
mandates in North and South America, Africa and 
Asia; Transjordan (which has been offered its in- 
dependence); and three independent states, Iraq, 
Egypt and Iceland. These countries agreed during 
World War II to pool their dollars in Britain rather 
than use them to buy from the United States. The 
British indebtedness in pounds to the other coun- 
tries in the area equals $13,000,000,000. Britain is 
not in a position to permit unlimited conversion of 
these blocked balances into dollars, and must indeed 
take steps to scale down these debts. The loan, how- 
ever, will permit free use of dollar balances arising 
out of future transactions. 

The two credits for $40,000,000 and $50,000,000 
to Poland, which the State Department announced 
on April 24, also redound immediately to this coun- 
try’s economic advantage. The $50,000,000 is to 
be used for the purchase of American war surpluses 


overseas, and the $40,000,000 for the purchase of 
locomotives and coal-cars in the United State 
Moreover, in accepting the credits, the Polish goy. 
ernment undertakes to favor “the elimination of al 
forms of discriminatory treatment in internation] 
commerce and the reduction of tariffs and othe 
trade barriers.” The objective of the United States 
is thus to encourage Poland to subscribe to the pro. 
gram of freer, multilateral trade which the forth. 
coming International Trade Conference is expected 
to work out. Recently, Poland has negotiated with 
the Soviet Union and other countries bilateral trad 
agreements whose provisions have not yet been offi. 
cially made known to the United States. 
BROADER PROGRAM NEEDED. Whether 
loans to Britain and Poland will help United States 
trade over a long-term period is not clear. Neither 
country will be able to adopt a fully multilateral 
trade policy unless its domestic economy is put ona 
sound basis. The nations on the continent of Euro 
need materials, technical assistance and capital for 
the restoration of their transport systems and manv- 
facturing industries. The program of relatively free 
trade which the United States is proposing for the 
world has a limited appeal for nations now faced 
with desperate economic conditions. This country 
itself has recently shown that domestic uncertainty 
often governs foreign commercial policy. For ex 
ample, the Department of Commerce on March 19 
placed restrictions on the export of some steel prod- 
ucts necessary for the construction of houses. While 
the world would head for disaster if all countries 
tried to solve their internal economic difficulties by 
national or regional trade autarchy, these problems 
cannot be solved without the aid of countries whose 
economic conditions are relatively favorable. 
United States foreign economic policy will not 
achieve its goals until the Administration decides 
whether the lending program is primarily a political 
Or an economic instrument. “In the view of this 
government . . . economic freedom and political 
freedom are interdependent,” the State Department 
declared when it announced that, as part of its obli 
gation under the $40,000,000 railway rolling-stock 
credit, Poland had agreed to hold free elections. 
This statement, while basically true, makes it diff 
cult for American citizens to understand that the 
United States has a ‘‘self-interest’”” in the improve 
ment of trade, irrespective of political consideré 
tions. Uncertainty about the nature of the goveri 
ment’s lending program weakens the popular suppott 
it might otherwise obtain here. BLAIR BOLLES 


1918- 


Vou. XX 


ITT! 
Par 
the tern 
satellite 
appears 
because 
the Bys 
renewal 
restore 
allies, a 


US. 
draft o 
and de: 
is props 
agenda 
nounce: 
Americ 
this tre 
sla as € 
last Di 
time or 
tov. So 
posal v 

Fron 
which 
tanglin 
pose O1 
portant 
ism, ar 
The ve 
traditic 
unders' 
this pr 
premat 
Congre 
dize it: 
in the 


