recruits to 
tive choice, 
the line of 
id the reor. 
alls for in. 


position of 
vercome, in 
as another 
- candidates 
ore the war 
ny and the 
are making 
on June 29 
reign Sery. 
0 members 


meanwhile, 
stematically 
' temporary 
a “foreign 
used from 
war Foreign 
avy officers, 
leges. giving 
reign coum 
_ contribute, 
ose relation- 
ire. 
*ROGRAM. 
will necessi- 
.e reformers 
vestions for 
and abat- 
tion, which 
n the candi 
rather than 


. It has also 


lish a train 
‘0 fit officets 
| enable the 
o fail, after 
bility. Since 
high polit 
ency, in its 
f a Foreign 
ry and Naw 
leration. 

R BOLLES 


INDS 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vor. XXIV, No. 39 


—_—- 


Juuy 18, 1945 


PUBLIC DISCUSSION NEEDED TO CLARIFY POLICY ON JAPAN 


a apparent determination of the Japanese to 
continue inflicting heavy losses on our troops in 
spite of the fact that Japan’s ultimate military posi- 
tion is hopeless has produced a widespread feeling 
in the United States that our intentions toward the 
enemy must be clarified if we are not to pay an un- 
necessarily high price for victory. Such clarification, 
it is hoped, might induce the Japanese to accept un- 
conditional surrender short of utter military defeat 
or, at least, might ease our problems in handling the 
enemy country during the period of postwar occu- 
pation. The need for making up our minds as soon 
as possible on policy toward Tokyo has also been 
underlined by the difficulties now facing us in 
Germany. 

Current demands for a new statement of Ameri- 
can policy reflect varied points of view. Statements 
that the Japanese are already willing to discuss peace 
with us, but that we are holding back, indicate a 
desire for a negotiated peace and willingness to com- 
promise with important elements among Japan's 
tulers. More widespread is the demand that we “‘de- 
fine unconditional surrender,” so that the Japanese 
will know we do not mean to enslave or exterminate 
them. This was actually done by President Truman 
in a special V-E Day broadcast, but critics appar- 
ently feel that a more specific declaration is re- 
quired. There are also many observers who empha- 
size first of all the necessity of indicating clearly 
that, in addition to defeating Japan’s present war 
machine, we want to root out the internal condi- 
tions responsible for Japanese aggression. 

DO WE KNOW WHAT WE WANT? Since it 
is unlikely that anyone in Washington, London or 
Chungking knows in detail what the Japanese people 
and leaders are thinking today, the application of 
policy toward Japan must be highly flexible. Yet 
we cannot deal with the Japanese in an effective 


political fashion if we are confused in our attitude 
toward the Emperor or enemy industrialists. Nor 
can we afford uncertainty in our approach toward 
new, anti-militarist groups that may arise in the 
enemy country. At the same time it is essential that 
our policies, in addition to being clear, contribute 
to the establishment of a permanently non-militaris- 
tic Japan. 

Perhaps the most important principle to recog- 
nize is that Japanese aggression has been supported 
by virtually the entire nation—not simply a small 
militaristic clique. This means that the responsibility 
of Japan’s leaders for the war extends to the Em- 
peror, imperial court, bureaucracy and industrial 
circles as well as to the Army and Navy. Some in- 
dividuals, of course, may have been less enthusiastic 
than others about carrying out particular acts of 
aggression, but there is no record of any top leader 
or group withholding support from the actions taken 
or refusing to benefit from the fruits of Japanese 
victories. 

It would therefore seem extremely shortsighted 
for Americans to make elaborate distinctions among 
the various sections of Japan’s rulers on the 
basis of past actions. Yet some of our officials 
unquestionably are deeply influenced by their ex- 
periences during the twenties and thirties, when the 
Japanese court, foreign office and business circles 
with which they were most familiar appeared quite 
westernized in their manner of life and 
We have since learned that this westernization did 
not represent the reality of Japanese politics and 
that the elements best known to American official- 
dom could not be depended on to avert Japanese 
aggression. Future cooperation with these individ- 
uals and groups would seem a poor guarantee of 
American interests. 

JAPAN MUST BREAK WITH PAST. Instead, 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


f 
| 
E 
| 
i 


it would seem wise to center our attention on the 
Japanese people, who may prove less docile than 
many Americans expect, in the hope that new tenden- 
cies will develop in Japan as a result of wartime 
experience. Although we need not exclude the neces- 
sity of working with some figures of the present 
regime in the period following Japan’s defeat, our 
general actions at that time and our current propa- 
ganda should indicate that we do not base our hopes 
on these individuals. Our main effort should be to 
encourage the Japanese people to break with the 
imperial system, even though we cannot predict 
their sesponse. Some observers may fear that this 
would foster instability in postwar Japan, but it will 
ree cost us far less in the long run to help 
uild new economic and social foundations for an 
unaggressive Japan than to repair in haste the weak- 
ened social structure of the nation we are now de- 
feating. 

It is of the utmost importance in developing our 
policy toward Japan to express our views in such a 
way as not to destroy the concept of unconditional 
surrender. The Japanese are looking for any sign of 
weakness on our part and would be greatly en- 
couraged by indications of indecision or willingness 


Page Two —— 


a 


to stop the war short of complete victory. It would 
also be unrealistic to suppose that a full clarifica. 
tion of American objectives can be achieved through 
a single, unilateral declaration. What we say in oy 
daily propaganda to Japan and the concepts that 
guide our plans for the occupation of Japan are more 
crucial than any individual statement. The probabij. 
ity that the Russians will enter the Far Eastern wa, 
also suggests that a decisive declaration on Japan 
may have to be an international, four-power dom 
ment. 

Meanwhile, it would be desirable to have extensive 
discussion of the future of Japan in this country, 
Such discussion would be aided if the State Depart. 
ment could indicate publicly that it looks toward 4 
far more thorough renovation of Japan than that 
involved in mere removal of a few militarists. It is 
time to recognize that the theory behind our Japan 
policy ought to be at least as broad as that implicit 
in our public statements on Germany, in which we 
recognize that aggression was the work not only of 
the Nazi party and the General Staff, but also of the 
Junkers and Germany's industrial leaders. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(The last in a series of articles on American Far Eastern Policy.) 


FARRELL REGIME’S ECONOMIC MEASURES UNITE ITS OPPONENTS 


In the face of mounting popular opposition, the 
military government of Argentina seems undecided 
whether to try its fortunes at the polls sometime 
early next year or to abandon all pretense of govern- 
ing with the approval of the people and challenge 
its critics to provoke civil war. At the Army-Navy 
Independence Day Dinner on July 6, President Edel- 
miro Farrell pledged himself to call completely free 
elections before the end of the year and to hand 
over the government to those who are then elected 
by a majority of the people. But on the same occasion 
Vice-President Juan Perén delivered a fighting mes- 
sage to the armed forces, in which he accused the op- 
position of plotting insurrection and declared that 
if a struggle occurred, he would be ready to shed 
his blood “in an action which will know no quarter.” 
It is not yet clear what the sentiments within the 
Army leadership are concerning the elections, but 
both men took occasion to deny assertions that the 
régime in recent months has lost some of its follow- 
ing among the armed forces. 


BATTLE OF MANIFESTOES. These statements 
were called forth by one of the most remarkable 
demonstrations of popular disaffection with the gov- 
ernment which has ever been made in a country 
where public opinion is severely suppressed. Almost 
all important sectors of opinion, except the workers, 
have seized the opportunity to express open disap- 
proval of national policies at a moment when world 
attention is focused on the internal situation in 


Argentina, and the Buenos Aires government cannot 
very well undertake reprisals if it is to justify its re 
cent entrance into the United Nations. Only the labor 
unions have not come out against the régime, and 
their failure to do so may be ascribed not so mudi 
to their approval of its social policies, as to the fact 
that union leadership has largely been replaced by 
supporters of Perén. In normal times, the organ 
izations representing Argentina’s commerce and in 
dustry, on the one hand, and the spokesmen for agti- 
cultural and livestock interests, on the other, who 
have recently issued statements protesting the price 
and wage ceilings decree of Jume 2, would make 
strange bedfellows. And it must be admitted that 
their objection to state interference in private entet- 
prise extends as well to the “very advanced social 
policy” of the government. 


These groups recognize that temporary measufé 
to curb the inflationary increases in incomes and 
monetary circulation are imperative. But the new 
ceilings on prices and wages are criticized because of 
the arbitrary fashion in which they were fixed with 
out consultation with the interested producers and 
trade groups and without regard to prevailing pro 
duction costs. As the list of articles affected by the 
decree is extremely elastic and apparently includes 
all items destined for use and consumption by the 
public, it is predicted that the new measures will 
create great disturbance throughout industry, caus 
ing evasions of the price regulations, deterioratio# 


— 
of the qu 
manufact 
ynemplo 
IND 
THW ALE 
contend 
contribu! 
§0 per 
1944 de: 
of a litt] 
over the 
a consid 
jnto ari 
figures { 
been ap 
centers, 
tures are 
consequi 
per the 
econom| 
capital 
groups < 
in the s 
gentina, 
accord | 
to reve! 
their m: 
commis: 
in acco 
each in 
differen 
the ado 
minimu 
improv 
brough' 
ered p: 
which 1 
put, es 
consum 
assurar 
equipr 


the Lat 
years | 
ence | 
which 
did rer 
Such 
spared 


FOREIG! 
Headquai 
second-cl 
One moni 


=> 


—== 
. It would 
| clarifica. 
=d through 
say in our 
cepts that 
NM are more 
© probabil. 
astern war 
on Japan 
ywer docu. 


e extensive 
is country, 
ite Depart. 
$ toward a 
than that 
arists. It is 
our Japan 
at implicit 
which we 
1ot only of 
also of the 


OSINGER 


stern Policy.) 


NTS 


1ent cannot 
stify its te- 
ly the labor 
égime, and 
ot so much 
to the fact 
‘eplaced by 
the organ. 
rce and in 
en for agti 
other, who 
g the price 
‘ould make 
mitted that 
ivate entet- 


nced social 


'y measures 
comes and 
it the new 
| because of 
fixed with- 
ducers and 
vailing pro 
cted by the 
tly includes 
tion by the 
sasures will 
lustry, caus 
leterioration 


=—_ 


of the quality of the product, and even restriction of 
manufactured output and trade with consequent 
ynemployment. 

INDUSTRIALIZATION PROGRAM 
THWARTED. Industrial and commercial groups 
@natend that rising government expenditures have 
contributed in large part to the inflation. Despite a 
§0 per cent increase in real government income, the 
1944 deficit has reached the unprecedented amount 
of a little over 1 billion pesos—a 300 per cent rise 
over the 1940 deficit. Many Argentines believe that 
a considerable amount of this spending has gone 
into arms production, although there are no official 
figures to substantiate this. Large sums have also 
been appropriated for establishment of recreation 
centers, housing projects and the like. Such expendi- 
tures are scored not only because of their inflationary 
consequences but also on the ground that they ham- 
per the future development of Argentina’s industrial 
economy, since they constitute a drain on the small 
capital resources of the nation. The producers’ 
groups do not believe that prosperity can be achieved 
in the social-revolutionary climate prevailing in Ar- 
gentina, in which government agencies arbitrarily 
accord economic benefits to one group today, only 
to reverse the procedure tomorrow if necessary. In 
their manifesto, they suggest the creation of “parity 
commissions which . . . shall draw up real agreements 
in accordance with the particular circumstances of 
each industry or trade and the peculiarities of the 
different zones of the country, without prejudice to 
the adoption, according to the same norms, of a vital 
minimum wage.” But since, in the long run, an 
improvement in standards of living can only be 
brought about by increased production at low- 
ered prices, they ask release from the restrictions 
which now prevent industry from increasing its out- 
put, especially those concerning fuel or electricity 
consumption, export prohibitions, and transport, and 
assurance that import needs, including new plant 
equipment, will be filled. 

NO HELP FROM ABROAD. It must be admitted 
that Argentina's economic difficulties do not arise 
from unsound domestic policies alone. Almost all 
the Latin American countries in the past two or three 
years have suffered inflation, and Argentina’s experi- 
ence has been no exception. Those governments 
which actively cooperated with the United States 
did receive some help in the form of allocations of 
such industrial equipment and fuel as could be 
spared. Argentina’s quotas were minimal, however, 


Page Three 


and apparently were not enlarged as a result of the 
visit of Avra Warren, head of the Division of Ameri- 
can Republics of the State Department, to Buenos 
Aires, shortly after the United States recognized that 
government. Nor is it likely that, after Assistant Sec- 
retary Will Clayton’s report on June 25 to the Senate 
Military Affairs Committee that of 108 Axis eco- 
nomic spearheads in Argentina, not one had been 
eliminated, Argentina can expect increased ship- 
ments from the United States in the foreseeable 
future. 


It is difficult to see how the military régime of 
Buenos Aires can extricate itself from the vicious 
circle in which it finds itself as a result of its un- 
popular domestic economic measures and its un- 
acceptable foreign policy. If, despite the opposition 
of extremists within the Army, the free elections 
promised by President Farrell can be held, the gov- 
ernment, even with the support it allegedly has 
among Argentine labor, must fall. In a meeting at- 
tended by over 1,000 prominent party members, the 
Radical Party—through which Perén had hoped to 
arouse middle class opposition to the “economic 
oligarchy . . . which governed so many years ’—de- 
clared itself unequivocally opposed to the govern- 
ment. The outcome of the recent elections in Peru, 
where the democratic candidate of the erstwhile out- 
lawed APRA party, Dr. José Luis Bustamente, won 
by a wide margin over the “official” candidate, holds 
promise that in Argentina, too, if the people are free 
to speak their mind, the issue can be solved demo- 


cratically. OurvE HOLMES 


Civil Aviation and Peace, by J. Parker Van Zandt. Wash- 
ington, Brookings Institution, 1944. $1.00 


Mr. Van Zandt, an expert in aviation, here analyzes the 
relation of civil aviation to its potential use for military 
purposes. Concluding that the latter is but a minor aspect 
of the problem, the author proposes the freest and widest 
possible development of aviation in the future. 


American Policy Toward Palestine, by Carl J. Friedrich. 

Washington, Public Affairs Press, 1944. 

Brief statement of the history of America’s official pro- 
nouncements toward Palestine. The most important docu- 
ments from the Congressional Resolution of 1922 through 
the proposed Congressional Resolution of 1944 are repro- 
duced in the Appendix. 


The Great Decision, by James T. Shotwell. New York, 
Macmillan, 1944. $3.00 
The director of the Division of Economics and History 
of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace pre- 
sents in outline the conditions and organization necessary 
in establishing a world security system. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 39, Jury 13, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lagr, Secretary; Vera Micuetes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 
on¢ month for change of address on membership publications. 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


at 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


it 
. 
‘hy 
BS 
ne 
. 
aI 
© 
8 
% 
cs 
rp 
a) 
. 
* 
. 
8 
it 
$ 
. 
e. 
. 
i 


| Washington News Letter 


BIG THREE TO DEFINE RESPONSIBILITIES IN EUROPE 


President Truman told the closing session of the 
San Francisco conference on world organization that 
the signing of the United Nations charter was but 
a “first step” toward the establishment of a coopera- 
tive system of security. The Potsdam conference of 
President Truman, Marshal Stalin and Prime Min- 
ister Churchill will give the United States, Britain 
and Russia an opportunity to carry forward another 
step the doctrine that the great powers have joint 
and equal responsibility for the settlement of inter- 
national problems, wherever they may arise. Such 
problems as the Straits, control of Berlin, Tangier, 
and Syria and the Lebanon reveal the need for co- 
operative action by all the nations concerned. 


AGENDA COVERS EUROPE AND ASIA. The 
goal at Potsdam is agreement on settlement of the 
outstanding political and economic problems the 
war has left behind in Europe, with some attention 
to military problems in Asia. The Big Three will at- 
tempt to agree on unified policy toward China, aimed 
at the union of the Chungking and Yenan govern- 
ments. The chief issue is the treatment of Germany, 
for previous conferences and diplomatic exchanges 
have failed to define explicitly the nature of allied 
policy. The misunderstanding that arose on July 4 
among the occupation armies of the United States, 
Britain and Russia concerning sources of food for 
Berlin reflects some of the difficulties that joint Al- 


lied occupation of Germany is temporarily bound to 
create. 


Methods for hobbling Germany economically in 
the interest of lasting peace will be decided on when 
the Potsdam conference receives the recommenda- 
tions of the Reparations Commission, which has been 
conferring in Moscow for more than a month. Ed- 
win W. Pauley is the chief American representative 
on that commission. “Absolute insurance against Ger- 
man or Japanese rearmament—ever again—comes 
first with us,” Truman announced on May 15 in a 
statement on reparations. 


The political rehabilitation of the Axis satellite 
states in eastern Europe, especially Hungary and 
Austria, poses another urgent problem for the con- 
ference. Truman, Churchill and Stalin are expected 
to consider the criticism that the tripartite occupation 
of such a small state as Austria creates needless eco- 
nomic hardship, and to prepare the way for the re- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


turn of Austria to the society of nations as an inde. 
pendent state. A broadly-based provisional goverp. 
ment, of which Bela Miklos is premier, still governs 
Russian-occupied Hungary. The lack of agreement 
among the Big Three concerning their interests in 
the eastern satellites defeated by the Red armies— 
Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria—has caused cop. 
siderable friction which the Potsdam conferees will 
seek to alleviate. 


POLICY OF JOINT ACTION ADVOCATED. 
The joint interest of the three governments repre. 
sented at the meeting in Potsdam extends southward 
from Europe into the Mediterranean region and 
especially to the entrances of that great waterway. 
The Soviet Union on June 22 presented a note to the 
Turkish government outlining, according to unofi. 
cial information, the basis on which Russia would 
negotiate a new treaty to replace the Russo-Turkish 
treaty of 1925 denounced in Moscow on March 20. 
One Soviet requirement is said to be that Turkey 
accord to Russia a privileged status in the Straits, 
which link the Black and Aegean Seas. On July 1 
the United States, Britain and France opened con- 
versations about the future status of Tangier, which 
guards the Strait of Gibraltar, entrance from the 
Atlantic Ocean into the Mediterranean, and on July 
3 Moscow asserted an interest in the conversations. 
It has been suggested that at Potsdam the Big Three 
will try to reach a general agreement granting equal 
rights to all the powers not only for the Straits and 
Tangier but perhaps also for the Suez Canal and 
Bab el Mandeb, with due regard for existing treaty 
and contractual arrangements. 


Any hesitation on the part of the United States 
now to assume its full measure of responsibility in 
the European task would jeopardize the world’s 
chance for lasting peace and compromise the great 
effort this country has made-on behalf of internation- 
al cooperation, symbolized by the drafting of the 
United Nations Charter. At Yalta President Roose 
velt agreed that the United States would concert with 
Britain and the Soviet Union “during the temporary 
period of instability in liberated Europe.” At Pots 
dam President Truman is expected to carry Americat 


foreign policy forward by defining further this coun 


try’s peacetime responsibilities on the continent. 


Biair BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


EP( 


ha 


defeate 
joint 01 
thus fa 
Big Th 
July 1¢ 
tablish: 
many < 
dinate 

In juds 
many, 

not he 


fundat 
thoriti 
matel; 
comm 
wheth 
shoul: 
Durin 
the U 
princi 
fighti 
the c 
siren 
the g 
and « 


