









jue 261943 
General Library Entered as 2nd class matter 


University of Yichigan 


Ann Arbor, Nichiean 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





JuLy 28, 1943 











ns 

A 

a 

— PGRIGDICAL RUV® 

mu GENERAL LIBRA® 

il UNIV. OF MICH 

by a 

mn. of 

- Ex. 

ttle. 

AVOT- 

rmna- 

“sent 

fect 

na Vor. XXII, No. 40 

S re. 

1 the 

pie: eeESIDENT ROOSEVELT’S decision on July 15, 
ompt to abolish the Board of Economic Warfare and 
> day deprive the Reconstruction Finance Corporation of its 
ugan | functions abroad, and the merging of the BEW and 
‘solu. of RFC subsidiaries financing foreign purchases in a 
Post: | new Office of Economic Warfare under the leadership 
Y 48 | of Leo T. Crowley, Alien Property Custodian, have 
gton, two important aspects in the field of foreign affairs. 
Wil First, these measures are intended to dispel the alarm- 
noe ing impression created abroad by public airing of dis- 
which putes about major policies between top officials of 
esolu the Administration. Second, and most important, they 
PPO! tepresent one more step in the direction of coordi- 
ce. Ia nating all government activities touching on foreign 
t and policy, instead of permitting them to be dispersed, as 
ae they have been in recent years, among nearly a dozen 
y evell) agencies—the State Department, the Board of Eco- 
Com nomic Warfare, the Lend-Lease Administration, the 
chai! Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs, 
BSt- | the Department of Agriculture, the Department of 
€ last! Commerce, the Treasury and, most recently, the Office 
of i of Foreign Relief and Rehabilitation—to name the 
neal most important. 

‘louse, | STATE DEPARTMENT EMERGES AS VIC- 
nsored} LOR. In the struggle for power that has been labeled 
Trade} the Battle of Washington, the agency concerned with 
ocratic| foreign policy which appears to be emerging~as the 
yst de, Victor is the one whose alleged faults and deficiencies 
ing , had served, for several years, as justification for the 
y maj} <teation of many new offices—the State Department. 
public| By an executive order of June 3, 1943, which was 
ations| 0t made public until July 18, President Roosevelt 
r, that! Mstructed Secretary of State Hull to set up, within 
failurey the State Department, an office for the coordination 
Jationse Of economic policy—which Mr. Hull has done, ap- 
on. pointing Assistant Secretary of State Dean Acheson 
roTr | 4S head of the newly formed Office of Foreign Eco- 
43 4 romic Coordination. This Office is to serve as a clear- 

inghouse for the activities of all other agencies re- 








U.S. STREAMLINES CONDUCT OF ECONOMIC POLICY ABROAD 


lated to economic affairs in liberated areas as the war 
progresses, and to coordinate the foreign policy 
aspects of wartime controls and operations. It is rec- 
ognized in the President’s order that the State De- 
partment cannot act as an operating unit for the per- 
formance of functions entrusted to these other agen- 
cies, but it is intended that their operations abroad 
should be fitted into the framework of an over-all 
foreign policy as carried out by the department pri- 
marily charged with the conduct of this country’s 
foreign affairs. 


COORDINATION NEEDED. The coordination 
urged by the President has aroused fear and misap- 
prehension among those who believe that the State 
Department, by reason of tradition, selection of staff, 
and personal views of some of its chief executives, 
is ill-prepared to handle with sufficient imagination 
and flexibility the vast and challenging tasks that are 
bound to confront the United States in the post-war 
period. Yet those who have been working in the 
field for the various agencies concerned—notably in 
North Africa—believe, irrespective of their political 
opinions, that some kind of coordination is absolute- 
ly essential if the United States is to have anything 
like a coherent policy during and after the war. Their 
reports indicate that, under the system as it has exist- 
ed up to now, meetings of American representatives 
of the various agencies in North Africa were a 
miniature Tower of Babel, with BEW, Lend-Lease, 
Treasury, State Department, and other officials each 
speaking their own language, and trying to develop 
their own idea of this country’s policy. 

The criticisms lavished on the State Department 
in recent years sometimes tend to disregard the fact 
that the American Foreign Service is composed of 
many hard-working, modest, intelligent men who 
have served the country devotedly, often under very 
trying circumstances, and during the pre-war years 
presented for the most part as accurate a picture of 

















the events that led to the present conflict as any re- 
ceived by the foreign offices of non-totalitarian coun- 
tries. That the information they furnished was not 
always put to better use was by no means primarily 
the fault of the State Department. It was in far great- 
er measure the fault of some members of Congress 
who, even on the eve of the invasion of Poland, per- 
sisted in their disbelief that war was in the making. 

That the State Department has many organiza- 
tional weaknesses, and could be greatly strengthened 
by the inclusion in its ranks of personnel drawn from 
all walks of life, would be admitted by some of its 
best friends. But, if it is agreed that the State De- 
partment needs to be reorganized, then the best thing 
would seem to be to reorganize it, instead of hedging 
it about by new agencies in the vague hope—a hope 
shattered by the developments of the past few weeks 
—that these agencies will somehow painlessly emas- 
culate the State Department. Meanwhile, it must be 
admitted that the creation of these new agencies, 
with personnel recruited from circles that the State 
Department had not tapped, has roused the latter to 
take fresh initiatives, and to seek advice in hitherto 
unexplored quarters. 

THE ROLE OF AMGOT. The task of improv- 
ing and rejuvenating the administration of our for- 
eign policy assumes increasing importance as Amer- 
ican forces, side by side with the British, Canadians 
and French, establish their first contact with Euro- 
pean territory—a contact which is bound to create 
countless new problems in terms of relief, adminis- 
tration of occupied areas, finance, relationships with 
new political groups, and so on. While all these prob- 
lems must and should be handled by technical ex- 
perts, as they are being handled by the British in 
Italy's African colonies, they must not be dealt with 
in such a way as to encourage divergences among the 
American agencies engaged in the task, thus con- 
fusing our Allies and encouraging our enemies. 

Initial measures in liberated areas, as arranged in 
advance, are being taken by the Allied Military Gov- 
ernment of Occupied Territory, known as AMGOT, 
which in Sicily is under the direction of General 
Alexander, appointed by the Allies as military gov- 
ernor of Sicily and adjoining islands. This military 
government, exercised jointly for the present by Brit- 


MARTINIQUE SHAKE-UP SEVERS LAST WESTERN LINK WITH VICHY 


On July 14, Bastille day, Admiral Georges Robert, 
Vichy High Commissioner for French Possessions in 
the Western Hemisphere, resigned from his post and 
was replaced by an appointee of the French Com- 
mittee for National Liberation, Mr. Henri-Etienne 
Hoppenot. With this transfer of Martinique and 
Guadeloupe from allegiance to the German-con- 
trolled Vichy régime to a pro-Allied French authority, 
the prolonged negotiations between Admiral Robert 


Page Two 








— 
—— 


ain and the United States, is designed to restore and 
maintain order in occupied territories, in collabora. 
tion with local authorities, until such time as the mil. 
itary commander in the field decides that administra. 
tion can be entrusted to bodies freely elected by the 
people. On the efficacy and common sense of such 
government in the areas first occupied by the Allies 
will depend not only the length of the war, but also 
the success of post-war reconstruction. 

The responsibility of AMGOT is all the more im. 
portant because of the emphasis laid by Axis propa- 
ganda on what defeat will mean to Germany and 
Italy—most recently by Carlo Scorza, secretary of the 
Fascist party, who on July 18 answered the appeal 
of Mr. Churchill and President Roosevelt for a revolt 
of the Italian people against Fascism by painting in 
the darkest colors the future reserved for Italy by the 
United Nations. It is not by words, but by deeds, that 
the Allies can demonstrate to the peoples of liberated 
countries, whether friends or enemies, that they are 
bringing not another form of oppression, but an op- 
portunity for the free expression of popular choice, | 


One point in Scorza’s speech, however, deserves 
special consideration. He touched on a very sensitive 
point when he told the Italians that the Allies, in 
case of victory, would relegate them to the role of 
waiters in tourist hotels and purveyors of cheap art 
and amusement to Anglo-Saxon travelers. No one 
familiar with Italy can forget that the thing many 
Italians resented most was not that the Western de- 
mocracies were powerful, but that they paid no at- 
tention to the achievements, or desire for achieve- 
ments, of modern Italy. It is not enough to urge the 
Italians to revolt against Fascism and, at the same 
time, hold them up to contempt for alleged lack of 
courage, as some commentators have done. It is with 
a sense of true humility, with an appreciation of the 
matchless heritage bequeathed by the Old World to 





the New, and of gratitude for the courage of those | 
within Europe who held the fort until we could get | 
ready, that the military and civilian administrators of | 
the Allies should approach the task of reconstructing 
a continent whose recovery is essential to our own | 
stability in the post-war world. | 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


and the United States have come to an end. The last 
of the French possessions in the Western Hemisphere 
still subservient to the Nazi “new order’ has now 
been brought under United Nations control. 
Admiral Robert's resignation after nearly a yeat 
of negotiation seems to have been due at least as 
much to the increasing discontent and spirit of fe 
bellion of the population of Martinique and Gua- 
deloupe against his régime as to the economic pres 








——, 


> and 
bora. 
> mil. 
istra- 
y the 

such 
A llies 
t also 


‘e im- 
fOpa- 
y and 
of the 
ppeal 
revolt 
ng in 
”y the 
;, that 
rated 
2y are 
iN Op- 
hoice, 


serves 
isitive 
es, in 
dle of 
ap art 
O one 
many 
rn de- 
no at- 
hieve- 
ge the 
- same 
ack of 
s with 
of the 
rid to 
_ those 
Id get 
tors of 
‘ucting 
r own 


EAN 


LY 


he last 
sphere 
iS now 


a yeat 
east as 
of re 
1 Gua- 


iC pres 





~ 








—— 
—_—_ 





sure exerted on him by the United Nations, which 
had suspended all shipments of foodstuffs to the 
jslands since November 1942. In recent months, 
many hundreds of the inhabitants had fled to jc’n 
the Allied forces or to escape from their unbearable 
plight. After his arrival in Martinique, the new Com- 
missioner disclosed that the population had been in a 
state of active revolt against the Admiral for some 
time. Various civil demonstrations had occurred, and 
last month a group of several hundred soldiers, led 
by a captain, had taken possession of an army camp 
just outside the capital, Fort-de-France, refusing to 
surrender their position unless Admiral Robert re- 
signed. 

The two other French possessions in the Western 
world—French Guiana on the South American main- 
land and the islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon off 
Canada—had already severed their allegiance to 
Vichy some time before, the former in March 1943, 
when the pro-Vichy administration was ousted to be 
replaced by a pro-Allied régime, the latter in Decem- 


| ber 1941, when former Free French Admiral Muselier 


debarked by surprise and organized a plebiscite which 
iestored the rule of the French Republic. 


STRATEGIC IMPORTANCE OF ISLAND. Matr- 
tinique, a small, mountainous island of only 385 
square miles, 1,200 miles by air from the Panama 
Canal and 1,600 miles from Florida, possesses a 
strategic significance far greater than its size would 
suggest. Its importance in the present war is due 
mainly to its extremely favorable location between 
two deep sea lanes leading to the Panama Canal, and 
to its excellent natural facilities, such as a first-class 
15-mile-square inner harbor at Fort-de-France, reput- 
edly spacious enough to accommodate a whole fleet. 
To prevent enemy use of this harbor, with its large 
machine shops for the repair of sea and undersea 
craft, as well as escape to Nazi-controlled France of 
the warships and airplanes stationed there, Allied 
warships and naval aircraft have been keeping watch 
on the island since the latter part of 1940. The agree- 
ment just concluded between the United States and 


IS INDIA RIPE FOR NEW 


Recent first-hand reports on the situation in India 
suggest that political and economic conditions there 
are still far from satisfactory. At first glance the 
matter may not seem serious, since, as compared with 
the critical days of the summer of 1942, this sub- 
continent of almost four hundred million people is 
teasonably quiet, and the danger of invasion has been 
greatly reduced. In fact, India is now viewed chiefly 
in an offensive spirit as a base for an Allied drive 
into Burma. Yet this change in outlook in no way 
lessens the importance of rallying the Indian populace 
to support of the war effort. There is little doubt, ac- 
cording to reliable observers, that Indians by and 


Page Three 





—— 
ee 


the new administration provides that the ships, which 
have been lying idle for three years and are badly in 
need of repair, will be immediately sent to this coun- 
try for reconditioning, preparatory to their inclusion 
in the Allied armada. 


POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC IMPLICA- 
TIONS. The installation of the new Commissioner 
will no doubt be the starting point for the restoration 
of republican government in the French Antilles. As 
a first measure toward this goal, Mr. Hoppenot, on 
the day following his arrival, abrogated the anti- 
democratic laws set up by the previous administra- 
tion. Before the Vichy administration, the islands 
enjoyed a far more democratic régime than that of 
most other European possessions in the Carribean. 
Local legislative assemblies were elected by universal 
male suffrage, as in France, and the islands were rep- 
resented in Paris both in the Chamber of Deputies 
and the Senate. Admiral Robert suspended all elec- 
tions, dismissed the pro-Allied officials, and interned 
any one who openly embraced the cause of the de- 
mocracies. 

Economic rehabilitation is another task awaiting 
the new régime. As in the case of most countries of 
the Caribbean area, Martinique and Guadeloupe suf- 
fer from a single-crop economy, in this case sugar 
and its by-products, especially rum, which were ex- 
tensively exported to France before the war. Large 
amounts of foodstuffs, even coffee and fish, had to 
be imported. After the semi-starvation brought about 
by the recent Allied ban on food shipments, the relief 
action now undertaken by the United States—lend- 
lease supplies are reported already at hand in the har- 
bor of Fort-de-France—will reduce the sufferings of 
the population. To achieve permanent improvement 
of living standards, however, a vast program of re- 
habilitation, including greater diversification of local 
crops, will have to be undertaken. Some of the $250,- 
000,000 worth of gold brought to Martinique by the 
Emile Bertin before the surrender of France might 
well be used in this task of economic reconstruction. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


BRITISH OVERTURES? 


large do not regard their country as being in the war, 
despite India’s military production and the growth 
of the Indian Army. This situation, it is said, is likely 
to continue until the country receives a more definite 
stake in the outcome of the conflict. At the present 
time anti-British sentiment and the desire for inde- 
pendence are of a most widespread character, affect- 
ing even uneducated persons who in many cases are 
not aware of political developments, but are discon- 
tented over economic conditions. 

SHORTAGES OF FOOD. The part played by 
economic difficulties in molding Indian popular opin- 
ion can hardly be overestimated. Our newspapers have 








—=———_——————————[SSSSS._ Page Four 


given us the impression that India’s unsettled state 
arises primarily from arguments over political or re- 
ligious questions, but shortages of food and essential 
civilian goods are perhaps equally compelling factors 
in the situation. It is worth noting that last summer 
and fall, when American attention was riveted on na- 
tionalist plans for civil disobedience and the arrests 
of Gandhi, Nehru and other leaders, large numbers 
of Indians, especially in the cities, were standing in 
line for hours on end in an effort to buy the necessities 
of life. Since then matters have deteriorated further, 
as indicated by an Associated Press dispatch of July 2 
from New Delhi reporting widespread appeals for 
food and almost daily lootings of grain stores. Such 
a situation cannot be remedied through any one meas- 
ure, but to execute even the best-planned policy, it is 
necessary to enlist the support of the general popula- 
tion, especially the peasants. 


POLITICAL AGREEMENT REMAINS POSSI- 
BLE. Few actions could be better calculated to lay 
the basis for an effective economic program than the 
formation of some type of provisional coalition gov- 
ernment for the duration of the war—a new admin- 
istration which would include the leading Indian 
groups, especially the Indian National Congress and 
the Moslem League. All purely military matters 
would be left in British hands, and the problem of 
independence could be handled through a clear-cut 
pledge of post-war freedom, perhaps by the King of 
England, who is also Emperor of India. These sug- 
gestions, it is true, bear a general resemblance to the 
unsuccessful Cripps proposals, but a great deal of 
water has passed under the bridge since that time, 
and the Indian groups might reconsider their posi- 
tion if a new formula were presented. Moreover, the 
Cripps suggestions contained many items of detail 
that were unsatisfactory to one or another group. The 
omission of all vexatious points concerning the post- 
war period, except the single platform of indepen- 
dence, might facilitate an Indian-British working 
agreement. Under a provisional Indian government, 





Just published — 
RELIEF AND REHABILITATION 


by Herbert H. Lehman 
Director, Office of Foreign Relief and 
Rehabilitation O perations 


25c 


July 15 issue of ForEIGN Poticy REPORTS 
REPoRTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 








Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members $3. 











i 
——— 


empowered to deal with important aspects of the 
country’s internal situation and participation in the 
war effort, India could be expected to make a larger 
contribution to victory. 

The objection most commonly raised to the idea 
of an Indian coalition administration is that the Mos. 
lems will have nothing to do with it; or, at any rate, 
that Mohammed Ali Jinnah, proponent of Pakistag 
and leader of the influential Moslem League, is ip 
transigent on the subject of cooperation with other 
groups, particularly Congress. Those who know Mr. 
Jinnah are convinced that this is a mistaken picture 
of his views. They are convinced that he would be 
willing to compromise on Pakistan in favor of a 
coalition government, if this could be arranged. The 
chief difficulty, it would appear, arises not from the 
Moslem League or any other Indian organization, 
but from the fact that the leaders of the Indian Na. 
tional Congress, the most important nationalist body, 
are in prison and therefore cannot take part in any 
discussions for unity among Indian groups. If the 
Viceroy were to advance new proposals for settle 
ment, and at the same time release the Congress lead- 
ers, it is considered likely that agreement could be 
reached. 


AMERICA’S INTEREST. The United States is in- 
terested in the Indian situation first of all because 
of the importance of having a sound base for a cam- 
paign in Burma. Whatever the reasons for the failure 
of last winter's drive toward Akyab may have been, 
the United Nations cannot afford to repeat that set 
back on a larger scale this fall. Moreover, the pres- 
ence of American troops in India, often in out-of 
the-way places, connected with the coastal cities by 
rather tenuous lines of communication, creates spe 
cial concern over internal developments that might 
produce disorder. Not least important, American 
prestige in Asia is involved. This prestige—described 
by Mr. Willkie as a leaking “reservoir of good 
will” —has been impaired by our failure to playa 
more active role in connection with difficulties in 
India last summer and at the time of Gandhi's fast 
early this year. The United States has naturally been 
anxious to avoid any action that might injure the 
American-British partnership, but the question arises 
whether, after the lapse of a year, London might not 
be willing to consider making a fresh approach i 
India. Certainly such a move would be welcomed hete 
and would cement, rather than weaken, the close fe 
lationship established on the field of battle in North 


Africa and Sicily. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 40, Juty 23, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor. Entered # 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F.P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 





>” 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





—_-uaimammaee = 4 Pe eee Se re ae elUmwmDlUCU OD 


