a% 


Pee 





RBA rR ePP Beas? & 


B28 &€ Sco 2 » 


d” 


p 
a 


nal 
101: 


‘ing 
sent 
use 
ble, 
ome 


“ Beas 








Entered as 2nd class matter 


ichigan Novi 1948 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 2 


OcrToBEeR 29, 1943 





BRITISH POST-WAR OUTLOOK CLOUDED BY FEAR OF UNEMPLOYMENT 


‘ Britain, as in this country, there is general opti- 
mism regarding the military situation in Europe. 
This feeling is tempered, it is true, by disappointment 
with the slow progress of the Allied armies in Italy, 
and by frustration at the absence of the Second Front, 
but Russian victories in the great bend of the Dnieper 
outweigh all other considerations in the military field. 
To a much greater extent than in the United States, 
however, optimism in Britain is combined with wide- 
spread apprehension about the post-war period. 

FEAR OF POST-WAR UNEMPLOYMENT. AI- 
though apprehension about international reconstruc- 
tion exists and serious concern is felt at the failure of 
Allied statesmen to formulate a declaration as stir- 
ting as President Wilson's Fourteen Points, fear goes 
much deeper with respect to domestic problems. No 
one expects the spiritual revival predicted at the time 
of the Blitz to materialize, and hopes that the ‘‘ser- 
vice” rather than the profit motive would provide a 
“just’” economic system have disappeared. 

Many, whose views of the future are inevitably 
based on memories of the past, cannot forget the un- 
employment and poverty of the inter-war years. Prime 
Minister Churchill’s Four-Year Plan has not con- 
vinced the people that the government is prepared to 
take the action necessary to avoid repetition of pre- 
war conditions. Notwithstanding the Beveridge Plan 
for social security, and various schemes for land re- 
form, educational reform, and reconstruction of 
bombed areas, many feel that the government has no 
general program that will provide full employment 
and a rising standard of living for the average man. 
Although the British government has gone further 
than the American government in mapping out post- 
war reforms, there is greater dissatisfaction in Britain 
than in the United States with what has been done. 

Possibly, as Mr. Gallup points out, the demand for 
teform in democratic countries moves in cycles and 
the British are in a mood for reform while the Ameri- 


cans are not. But a more likely explanation might be 
found in these three factors: 1. There has been in 
Britain no war boom comparable with that in the 
United States to make the people forget pre-war con- 
ditions. 2. The British nation, now in its fifth year of 
war, is suffering physical fatigue, which tends to in- 
duce pessimism. 3. Whereas the majority of Ameri- 
cans expect post-war prosperity within the framework 
of private enterprise, reform to a large body of the 
British public would mean more, not less, govern- 
ment control of business than in the pre-war years. 
This belief in government control is undoubtedly 
heightened by admiration of the military power and 
moral unity of the Russians during the war, just as 
the victory of American democracy over the slave sys- 
tem strengthened democratic forces in Britain before 
the Reform Bill of 1867. 


MORE GOVERNMENT CONTROL EXPECT- 
ED. Belief in greater government participation in 
economic affairs is not limited to workers and intel- 
lectuals, or to the Labor party. It is held by many 
businessmen and Conservative party members. In- 
deed, despite individual differences between groups 
such as miners, farmers and businessmen—perhaps 
as great as those between similar groups in the United 
States—there is a wide measure of agreement that 
the government must exercise general supervision 
over large areas of economic activity, including regu- 
lation of industry, use of the land, and distribution of 
commodities. This does not mean that workers or 
businessmen contemplate any such concentration of 
power as that in the Soviet system or that either 
group is prepared to give up political liberties in 
moving in the direction of greater state control of 
economic life. What it does mean is that representa- 
tives of both capital and labor are prepared to see 
economic questions settled to a larger extent within 
the administrative process and to a lesser extent by 
pressure groups in Parliament. 




















What causes apprehension in Britain is that so lit- 
tle has been done to make the post-war pattern clear. 
There is disappointment that more specific promises 
have not been made with respect to the Beveridge 
Plan, and that no Ministry of Social Security has been 
established to put the scheme into effect. The Welsh 
miners and the Clydeside workers would like to know 
how the government plans to maintain full employ- 
ment in the mines and the shipyards after the war, 
and are skeptical of the Labor party as well as the 
Conservatives. Some circles of the intellectual Left 
fear that Labor members of the Churchill government 
have already sold out to the Conservatives, as they 
feel Ramsay MacDonald did in 1931, and that the 
only possible result is a corporate state in which trade 
unions will share the spoils with big business. 

CORPORATE STATE UNLIKELY. This fear 
hardly seems justified, and there is good reason to 
believe that, when the war is ended, such men as 
Herbert Morrison and Ernest Bevin will lead the 
Labor party into active opposition. In do doing, their 
program would differ from the Conservative more in 
degree than in kind. A Labor government would be 
more likely to give full effect to the proposals of the 
Beveridge Plan, to nationalize an industry like min- 
ing, and to abandon financial orthodoxy. But, in es- 


PageTwo 








i 





tablishing greater peacetime controls over economic 
activity, Labor would be limited by opposition to 
excessive interference in the daily lives of the British 
people, and by the need to maintain Britain's ego. 
nomic position in the world. Internal reforms which 
might weaken that position would not attract a Labor 
any more than a Conservative government. 


On the other hand, the Conservative party may be 
expected to keep in step with public opinion, al. 
though following rather than leading it. A Conserya. 
tive government would not hesitate to maintain con. 
trols to strengthen the domestic economy or to pro. 
mote British foreign trade. But the corporate state, 
however attractive to a few reactionary elements, js 
no more in the Conservative than in the Labor tradj- 
tion, and certainly not in line with the political and 
social development of modern Britain. As a result 
of the war—and the lessons learned regarding the 
advantages and disadvantages of rationing, price con- 
trol, and general supervision of economic activity— 
as well as the present temper of the British people, 
it can be expected that Britain will enter the post-war 
period with more government control of economic 
life than the United States. 


HowarD P. WHIDDEN, Jr. 


COMMON ALLIED POLICY NEEDED TO AVERT CIVIL STRIFE IN GREECE 


At the three-power Moscow conference, which 
opened on October 19, the political complexion of the 
post-war governments that will emerge in Europe's 
liberated nations is undoubtedly an important issue. 
As observers of the enemy-occupied countries have 
frequently pointed out, any attempts to restore dis- 
credited institutions and leaders may be expected to 
encounter strong resistance and add months of civil 
strife to the war against Nazism. During recent 
weeks, specific warnings along this line have been 
sounded in the case of Yugoslavia, and similar ad- 
monitions are now being made in connection with 
Greece as a result of a New York Times dispatch 
from Cairo on October 17, which reported a clash 
between two Greek guerrilla organizations in the cen- 
tral portion of the country on October 9. 

DANGER OF CIVIL WAR. The present situation 
in Greece is far from clear, for American friends of 
the Greek guerrillas discredit the report of civil war 
as propaganda fabricated by the Greek King in Cairo 
to picture a badly rent nation in need of his efforts to 
restore unity. They insist that the King’s only hope 
of returning to Greece after the Nazis are forced out 
lies in dividing the strong opposition to him at home, 
and they also intimate that he relies on Anglo-Ameri- 
can support for carrying out his unpopular policy. In 
defense of the contention that the guerrillas are 
united, these sources point to an official annnounce- 
ment from London on October 15 that Greek patriots 


fought a heavy engagement with the Nazis in the 
location where civil war is reported to have broken 
out a week earlier. Moreover, they declare that the 
guerrilla organizations have frequently demonstrated 
their unity—most notably on August 10, when they 
sent a joint delegation to Cairo to confer with Allied 
military authorities and to express their opposition to 
the return of the King until a plebiscite is held to 
determine whether post-war Greece should be a 
monarchy or a republic. Confirmation of either ver- 
sion of events in Greece is lacking because of heavy 
censorship in the eastern Mediterranean area. 

All observers agree, however, that whether or not 
civil war is now raging, there are in Greece the germs 
of post-war struggle which might endanger the re 
construction of the nation and seriously impair rela 
tions between the U.S.S.R., Britain and the United 
States. Among the movements which might be ex 
pected to oppose the restoration of any vestige of the 
pre-war dictatorship established by the King and 
Premier Metaxas in 1936 is the Popular Liberation 
Front, the largest and most powerful of the guerrilla 
groups. Its political views are known to be definitely 
Leftist, and its membership includes many Greek 
Communists. Two other important guerrilla organiz& 
tions, the Greek National Democratic Army and the 
National and Social Liberation Group, are liberal 
rather than radical in their outlook but nevertheless 
unalterably oppose reestablishment of the pre-waf 


a 


régime 
porter | 
Near 

rather 


RU: 
groun 
the Ui 
policie 
interes 
securit 
4 régil 
Krem| 
ernme 
indica 
eratio! 
ments: 
Soviet 


its str 
Frenc 
be cor 
restor 
Unde: 
relatic 
post-V 

BR 
Russi: 
in Gr 
on th 


_—, 


Fon 
dis. 
For 








u 


sT & Oo. Ff 


tion 
rilla 
itely 
reek 
niza- 
| the 
eral 
eless 
- wat 








—_——— 
—_ 


régime. On the other hand, the King and his sup- 
porters in Cairo and in the Royal Greek Army of the 
Near East want popular elections to be held after, 
rather than before, their return to Greece. 


RUSSIA AND SECURITY. Against this back- 
ground of potential discord the U.S.S.R., Britain and 
the United States are called upon to formulate their 

licies toward a liberated Greece. Moscow's chief 
interest in this Balkan nation, as in its neighbors, is 
security, and the Soviet government therefore wants 
arégime in Athens friendly to the U.S.S.R. That the 
Kremlin will not tolerate the establishment of a gov- 
emment or bloc hostile to the Soviets has already been 
indicated by Russian opposition to the plans for fed- 
eation proposed by the Yugoslav and Greek govern- 
ments-in-exile in January 1942. At the same time, 
foviet attempts to secure a friendly post-war Greece 
ae being aided by the increasing popularity and 
prestige of the Red Army. 


Another step in the direction of closer Soviet- 
Greek relations was taken this summer, when Mos- 
cow changed its official attitude toward the Orthodox 
Church. Although most Greeks treat their priests in 
acasual manner which would surprise many Ameti- 
ans, religion plays an important part in the daily 
lives of the Greeks, who may therefore place great 
emphasis on removal of the religious barrier between 
themselves and the U.S.S.R. Finally, the Kremlin, by 
its strong support of the Yugoslav Partisans and the 
french National Committee, has indicated that it can 
be counted upon to encourage groups which oppose 
restoration of the old order within their countries. 
Under these conditions, Russia’s prospects for good 
lations with the majority of the Greek people in the 
post-war period are undoubtedly bright. 

BRITAIN AND THE MEDITERRANEAN. Like 
Russia, Britain feels that a friendly post-war régime 
in Greece is essential to its welfare. This belief rests 
om the conviction that, despite the advent of cargo 








For able analyses, and objective and constructive 
discussions of post-war problems, read these 
Foreign Policy Reports: 


What Future for Italy? 
What Future for Germany? 
What Future for Japan? 


25c each 


FOREIGN PoLicy REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th 
of each month. Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3.00. 





Page Three 














planes, the Suez Canal and ports along the eastern 
Mediterranean will be extremely important for a long 
time to come. In setting out to assure the existence of 
a Greek government that would help safeguard Brit- 
ish access to these points, the Foreign Office begins 
with several factors in its favor. Among these is the 
huge reservoir of good will built early in the nine- 
teenth century when Britain helped the Greeks secure 
their independence. During the Battle for Greece in 
1941 there were countless examples of friendship be- 
tween the Greek people and the British armed forces, 
and this close cooperation has since been maintained 
by British liaison officers and the Greek guerrillas. 
Although similar ties between the United States and 
Greece have been few, American prestige is nonethe- 
less very high and of political consequence. 


The popular support which Britain and the United 
States now enjoy in Greece, however, may be im- 
paired by the attitude adopted by London and Wash- 
ington. Although Greece must be liberated before it 
can be discovered what institutions the people want, 
a ‘‘wait and see” policy must be accompanied by as- 
surances that Greece will not be saddled with a gov- 
ernment maintained by force. Lacking such assur- 
ances, there is not only danger of civil strife in Greece 
but also the possibility that exclusively pro-Soviet 
sympathies will be created among the Greek people. 
These eventualities can be avoided only if the 
U.S.S.R., Britain and the United States agree that 
Greece must have a truly representative post-war gov- 
CORTES. Winirrep N. HaDsEL 


F.P.A. 25-YEAR HISTORY 


As a member of the Foreign Policy Association you 
will receive this week a copy of “Twenty-Five Years 
of the Foreign Policy Association.” This brief history 
shows the accomplishment of the F.P.A. over the last 
quarter of a century—a record you helped to make. 
We are most eager to have as members of the Associ- 
ation all persons, who, like yourself, are interested in 
world problems. We hope you will pass your copy 
of the history along to interest a new member in the 
Association. 





Japan: A Geographical View, by Guy-Harold Smith and 
Dorothy Good, with the collaboration of Shannon 
McCune. New York, American Geographical Society, 
1943. $1.50 


A highly valuable factual account, designed to bring 
together a mass of information about Japan. Throws light 
on the connection between Japanese aggression and the 


country’s geography, resources, population and economic 
life. 





POREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 2, OcrosEr 29, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President 3; Dorotuy F. Lagr, Secretary; Vera Micue_es Dean, Editor. Entered as 
ttond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


te month for change of address on membership publications. 


Ss 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








Washington News Letter 




















Oct. 25.—The United States has no reason to hope 
that General Pedro Ramirez’ government in Argen- 
tina will sever relations with the Axis powers and 
thereby close the last formal avenue for the entrance 
of Nazi influence into the Western Hemisphere. The 
resignation from the Cabinet on October 13 of the 
three strongest advocates of a diplomatic break per- 
mitted government control to fall into the hands of 
extreme nationalists, who support authoritarianism 
in domestic affairs and, under the cover of a foreign 
policy of ‘‘friendship for all,” advocate maintenance 
of relations with the Axis. 


EXPLOSIVE POSSIBILITIES. During the past 
two weeks, however, the reorganized Cabinet has 
pursued such a dictatorial policy that the democratic 
spirit of resistance among the people, highlighted by 
a ‘Professors’ Manifesto”” of October 15, has been 
greatly strengthened. The elements of an explosive 
conflict which are present today in Argentina’s inter- 
nal political situation may ultimately force the down- 
fall of the Ramirez government. 

The pilots of the extremist Cabinet are Alberto 
Gilbert, Minister of Foreign Affairs; General Luis C. 
Perlinger, Minister of the Interior, and Gustavo 
Martinez Zuviria, Minister of Justice and Public Edu- 
cation. Perlinger and Zuviria, an anti-Semitic nation- 
alist who writes under the name of Hugo Wast, are 
new appointees, while Gilbert was Minister of the 
Interior urtil recently. The Cabinet officers who re- 
signed are Jorge Santamarina, Minister of Finance; 
Brigadier General Elbio Anaya, Minister of Justice 
and Public Education; and Vice Admiral Ismael Gal- 
indez, Minister of Public Works. As John W. White 
reported to the New York Herald Tribune from San- 
tiago, Chile, on October 23, the government reorgani- 
zation is ‘a signal victory for the pro-Nazi army 
officers” in Argentina. 

While the Ramirez régime headed toward one ex- 
treme, public opinion in Argentina moved rapidly 
in the other direction. The Manifesto, published on 
October 15 and signed by 153 persons, called on the 
government to return to constitutional democracy and 
to fulfill its obligations in the hemisphere solidarity 
program. Ramirez on October 16 ordered the dis- 
missal of “government employes” whose names were 
among the signers. These “government employes’ 
included several score faculty members of the 
state-controlled universities at Buenos Aires, Cér- 
doba, La Plata, and Tucuman. 

The Manifesto and the Ramirez order created a 


crisis in Argentina. Rector Alfredo Palacios at |, 
Plata University refused to dismiss signers of the 
Manifesto who were members of his faculty, ang 
Minister of Public Education Zuviria closed the insti. 
tution. So many professors were dismissed from 
Buenos Aires University that it was unable to func 
tion adequately. Students boycotted its classes and the 
classes of the other two universities, and on Octobe; 
23 Zuviria outlawed the students’ organization, Fej. 
eracién Universitaria Argentina, warning that the 
“severest measures will be adopted” in case of dis 
order at the universities. 


TWO ANTI-SEMITIC MOVES. The disturbance 
has inspired the workers, and the United Press cor. 
respondent in Montevideo received reliable reports 
that “a general labor strike threatened as a protes 
against the attitude of the Ramirez government.” The 
government has displayed its authoritarian tendencies 
by attacking religious freedom as well as freedom of 
thought. On October 23 the Interventor in Entre Rios 
province suppressed Jewish and Masonic welfare ané 
mutual aid societies by withdrawing their corporate 
charters. This measure is particularly interesting be 
cause the Interventor of Entre Rios is Col. Ernesto 
Ramirez, the President’s brother. Earlier in Octobe 
the Ramirez government ordered that Yiddish lan 
guage newspapers print editorials in Spanish as well 
as Yiddish. Lack of facilities for printing in Spanish 
forced the temporary suspension of the Yiddish 
papers and on October 15 brought this rebuke t 
Argentina from President Roosevelt: 

“I cannot forbear to give expression to my owl 
feeling of apprehension at the taking in this hemis 
phere of action obviously anti-Semitic in nature and 
of a character so closely identified with the most re 
pugnant features of Nazi doctrine.” 

A number of American Republics have pressed Ar 
gentina to abandon its strict neutrality, but to n0 
avail. The Foreign Offices of Colombia, Costa Rica, 
and Guatemala cabled Buenos Aires on Columbui 
Day suggesting that General Ramirez’ government 
break with the Axis. The Chilean Biological Society 
and a group of thirty-six medical professors in Chil 
sent communications to two of the Manifesto signet 
severely condemning the policy of the government 
that dismissed them. The State Department announcel 
on October 23 that seventy-nine firms in Argentifi 
had been added to the black list—the catalog of bust 
ness houses and individuals suspected of trading wit 
enemies of the United States. BLAIR BOLLES 


1918—-TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 





191 


| 


VoL. 


PAI 


No 


|i 


will 
tory j 
whict 
CUSS | 
woul: 
powe 
mold 
even 
on al 
conse 
woul 
today 
frien 
confl 
arise, 
tion | 


tual 

as tk 
clear 
the d 
in Ri 
mate 
three 


defe: 


of ar 
Russ 
com 
these 
prob 
indi 


chin 


