


PERI Pate Me 
GENERAL Libi' 
URIV. OF Bice 








d the 
renge, 
sition 
in the 
- it 
pe he 
at no 
elieve 
issian 
bases 
chaps 
irchill 
Russia 
A llies, 
anese 


TT 


Ss 


JUN 9 1943 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 33 


JUNE 4, 1943 





IN a candid and balanced report of this country’s 
war effort James F. Byrnes, newly appointed 
Director of War Mobilization, speaking at Spartan- 
hurg, South Carolina, on Memorial Day, paid high 
ibute to our military and war production achieve- 
ments during a year and a half of participation in 
World War II. As Mr. Byrnes pointed out, the 
United States has already fought almost as long as 
it did during World War I, suffering, as yet, far 
fewer casualties. Those Americans who feel that 
Britain, and China, and Russia, which have suffered 
incomparably more than we in terms of loss of lives, 
of property, or both, are not always sufficiently ap- 
preciative of our contribution to the war may well 
ponder this part of Mr. Byrnes’s recapitulation. But 
he also declared that “this will be a much tougher 
lwar,” and that “thus far we are only on the outer 
fringes of this war so far as personal deprivation on 
the home front and the loss of blood on the battle- 
front are concerned.” 


ALLIES CATCHING UP WITH AXIS. At the 
ame time, Mr. Byrnes left no doubt that, in spite of 
much confusion, overlapping, and struggle for per- 
wnal power among government officials in Wash- 
| lagton, as well as among industry, labor and farmers 

throughout the country, the United States has accom- 
| plished an outstanding job in meeting the war pro- 
(duction objectives set by President Roosevelt — 
objectives which, at the time, appeared fantastic. 
Of the figures cited by Mr. Byrnes, the most spec- 
tacular, and the one most fraught with significance 
ata time when the Allies are concentrating on round- 

the-clock bombing of Germany and Italy, is that 
the 100,000th airplane manufactured since the war 
Pfogram was launched came off the assembly line 
on May 31. The United States, together with Russia 
and Britain, “have at length caught up with the 
Axis,” and “are forging rapidly ahead.” 

It is against the background of actual achieve- 











EXPANDING POWER CREATES NEW RESPONSIBILITIES FOR UNITED STATES 


ments, and potential dangers which must yet be 
faced before the United Nations can hope for vic- 
tory, that current discussions about the future of the 
world must be projected. There is, on the one hand, 
a tendency on the part of some Americans to over- 
estimate the contribution made by this country to the 
winning of the war, and to insist, in consequence, 
that the United States should claim a major share 
in the making of the peace. On the other hand, there 
is an equally dangerous tendency to view this global 
conflict as of concern to the United States only in the 
Asiatic theatre of war, and to decry or oppose aid 
to other sectors. Yet it would seem that no one could 
fail to understand today, first, that the war in Asia 
is intimately and irrevocably linked to the war in 
Europe and Africa; and, second, that if it had not 
been for years of stubborn, and at times desperate, 
resistance on the part of Britain, Russia, China, and 
the conquered peoples of Europe, the United States 
would have found it impossible to catch up as it has 
so successfully done on its lack of military prepara- 
tions in an atmosphere of relative calm and security. 


U.S. POLICY NEEDS CLARIFICATION. These 
considerations might help us to define the course 
that the United States could, or should, follow once 
the war is over. Just as this country was not able to 
escape through nonintervention, or to win the war 
alone once it had been attacked, so it will be unable 
to win the peace alone, or to carry out a world-wide 
relief and rehabilitation program through its own 
unaided efforts. We shall need other countries in 
time of peace as we have needed them in time of 
war. And while the other United Nations are hop- 
ing that we shall not turn to isolationism, as we 
did in 1919, neither do they want us to embark on 
a policy of imperialism on the plea of reforming, or 
re-educating, or rehabilitating the world. All that 
is being asked of us—and all that was asked of us 
during the inter-war years—is that we should play a 














— 





part in world affairs commensurate with our re- 
sources, and should henceforth assume responsibil- 
ity for the use of our power, which at the end of the 
war will be enhanced manifold by our vast war 
production effort. 

But until we ourselves have defined the role we 
want the United States to play, it is difficult, in some 
cases impossible, for other nations to define their 
policy. This was clearly indicated in the series of 
s es that Dr. Benes, President of Czechoslovakia, 

elivered during the past two weeks in Chicago and 
New York. Dr. Benes anticipates the defeat of Ger- 
many in the not too distant future, and believes that 
“the final disaster of the Axis Powers will be of a 
much greater scope than that of 1918.” At the same 
time, he believes that the situation of the world 
when this disaster does take place “will be far more 
difficult than it was in November 1918.” He recog- 
nizes that the small nations of Europe sometimes 
carried nationalist intransigence beyond the bounds 
of reason, and that “returning to normal” does not 
mean returning to the exact state of affairs that 
existed in Europe before Hitlet’s rise to power. But 
he remains firmly opposed to any attempt by the great 


CHINA FACES MOST ACUTE 


The routing, on June 1, of five Japanese divisions 
which were directing a many-pronged attack at 
Chungking, and the significant increase in Chinese 
and American air power, have raised the spirits of 
the Chinese people. But despite this success, there is 
no doubt that Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek’s gov- 
ernment is threatened by a situation of unparalleled 
seriousness. Enemy forces have seized substantial por- 
tions of rich, rice-producing territory in Hunan and 
Hupei provinces at a time when the country can ill 
afford to lose any part of the year’s crop. This means 
that Free China, which for many months has been un- 
able to cope with a disastrous famine situation in 
Honan province, must now expect even more difficult 
food conditions. One symptom of the dangerous state 
of affairs is the rapid upward movement of rice prices 
in Chungking during the past month. 

JAPAN IS WEARING CHINA DOWN. Ameri- 
cans, on the whole, understand that Japan is waging 





Available at reduced rate — 


BOUND VOLUME XVIII 
Foreign Policy Reports 


24 issues of Foreign Policy Reports 
(March 1942-March 1943) with cross-index. 


$4.00 a volume 


Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 East 38th Street, New York 











Page Two — 


CRISIS IN SIX YEARS OF WAR 











powers to obliterate the identity of small natiog 

Dr. Benes looks to post-war collaboration betweg 
Britain and the Soviet Union, envisaged in the Anglo 
Soviet treaty of May 26, 1942, as the foundation 
stone of European reconstruction. Without the Soyig 
Union, he believes that it will be impossible fo, 
Europe to prevent a new German Drang nach Ostey, 
He hopes that the United States will participate jy 
the task of world reconstruction, but his hope j 
tempered to a noticeable degree by the experience of 
1919. Those of us who may wonder why the spokes. 
men of the United Nations are not always as precise 
in their concepts of the future as we would like them 
to be must remember that, hitherto, the foreign pol. 
icy of the United States has had less precision, and 
proved more unpredictable, than that of its present 
Allies. The greater our power becomes, with the 
rapid expansion of our industrial production, the 
more important it is that this power should be used. 
not irresponsibly or haphazardly, but with a coherent 
idea of the commitments we are ready, not merely to| 
advocate, but actually to fulfill. | 





VERA MICHELES DEAN 


a war of attrition against the Chinese, but there is 
still a marked tendency to measure Tokyo's succes; 
in terms of the capture of important centers rather 
than the deterioration of China’s powers of resistance. 
A campaign for Chungking would, of course, rep 
resent a supreme test of China’s endurance, while 
a fourth Japanese attempt on Changsha, key trans 
portation point, would imperil the economic founda | 
tions of the régime. Yet, if such drives do not take 
place, there will be no reason for complacency, since 
Japanese efforts on a smaller scale may have catas-| 
trophic effects on China after the wear and tear of| 
six years of war. ‘ 

In fact, although Japan has seized no prominent 
objectives in the current fighting, Free China is al- 
ready feeling new pressure simply because important 
routes for the smuggling of commodities from Jap: | 
anese-occupied areas have thereby been closed. For’ 
some years China’s most significant “foreign” souttes 
of supply has been its own territory under enemy | 
control, and this has been particularly true since the 
cutting of the Burma Road early in 1942. Now in| 
flation has reached a point at which it is not unusual’ 
for commodity prices to be 60 or 70 times the pit 
war levels of 1937. In some places rice is reported; 
to have risen more than a hundred-fold in the pas 
six years, and it is said that, because of the scarcity 
of cotton, only the very wealthy can afford to buy 
clothes. Western visitors to hard-pressed China tel 
the same story of growing weariness, and there # 
much speculation as to whether the government cal 
hold out for one year, two, or more. 








~~ es we = 2 2hClUce 








lation 
Sovie 
le fo, 
Osten, 
ate ip 
Ope is 
nce of 
pokes. 
>FECISE 
> them 
N pol- 
1, and 
resent} 
th the 
n, the 





herent | 
rely to 


ere is 
UCCESS 
rather 
stance, 
», fep. 
while 
trans} 
yunda: | 
t take 
, since 
catas- 
ear of 
. 
ninent | 
is al-| 
ortant 
n Jap- 
1. For 
source » 
enemy | 
ce the 
yw if | 
nusual | 
e pre 
a) 
e€ past 
carcity 
10 buy 
ra tell 
ere is 
nt cal 














wee. 
—_—_ 





JAPAN REVISES POLICY TOWARD PUPPETS. 
One important political threat is the modified Jap- 
anese policy toward Wang Ching-wei and his puppet 
entourage at Nanking. In a clever effort to strength- 
en its position in occupied China and to weaken 
morale in Chungking, Tokyo has recently concealed 
jts iron fist with a velvet glove. In March Premier 
Tojo visited Nanking, and on March 30, the third 
anniversary of Wang's régime, Tokyo “relinquished” 
its concessions and extraterritorial rights in China 
to the puppet administration. Financial aid has also 
been extended to Wang, and it is reported that Jap- 
anese commanders have been told to adopt an easier 
policy toward the Chinese population. 

Although these temporary bribes and gestures 
cannot alter the real nature of Japanese rule in occu- 
pied China, they may have some effect on morale in 
Chungking where, under the pressure of severe in- 


_ flation, there has been a sharp trend to the right in a 


government that has at all times been conservative. 
It is hardly a secret that the position of Chiang Kai- 
shek, who is pledged to a policy of resistance in 
cooperation with the United Nations, has been weak- 
ened during the past year. Under the circumstances, 
even Japan’s pretenses of a more liberal policy could 
have serious results. 

WHAT CAN BE DONE? There now seems little 
reason to doubt that Chungking’s critical condition 
was an important topic in the recent Roosevelt- 
Churchill discussions, and that much thought was 
given to ways of lessening the pressure on the Chi- 
nese. Unfortunately, Japan is in a position to strike 
out in China on a large or small scale at almost any 
time it desires, while the offensive power of the 
United Nations, although growing, is not easily ap- 
plied in that theatre of operations. In a sense, a great 
tace is under way between Japan and the Allies, with 
Tokyo trying to force China out of the war before 
being obliged to deal with major offensives in the 
Pacific area. The military stakes are high: they are 
nothing less than the capacity of the United Nations 
to retain their primary land base in Asia. Viewed in 
this light, the welcome reconquest of Attu island 
in the Aleutians can have little immediate effect on 
the most critical aspects of our Far Eastern position, 
although it may prove beneficial to Chinese morale. 

The first requirement of the Chinese front is more 
airplanes with which to attack the advancing Jap- 
anese forces, and these is reason to hope that the 
number of available aircraft will continue to increase. 
Secondly, any action in the Pacific area that diverts 


Page Three 








———————_—_—_—_ 





an important sector of the Japanese air force will 
be very helpful. Thirdly, China needs a large-scale 
land operation, such as the reinvasion of Burma, to 
pin down Japanese troops and supplies. We will 
know this fall, when the heavy Burma rains are over, 
whether plans for such a move were laid in Wash- 
ington by the American and British military staffs. 

POLITICAL ACTION IMPORTANT. The 
United Natigns could also aid Chungking in its 
efforts to combat Japan’s policy of undermining 
China’s spirit of resistance. One significant step in 
this direction was the abandonment of extraterri- 
toriality by the United States and Britain through 
treaties signed with China early this year. It is also 
likely that the dissolution of the Comintern has 
weakened Wang Ching-wei’s propaganda, since the 
bogy of communism has been one of his main 
weapons in the struggle to win- support in- Chung- 
king. A third step that might have considerable effect 
would be the early repeal by the United States Con- 
gress of all measures for Chinese exclusion, and the 
placing of Chinese immigration on a quota basis. 
Although this would result in the entrance of no 
more than 100 Chinese in any one year, the psycho- 
logical effect of equal treatment would be very great 
in China and throughout the Far East. It would con- 
stitute a most effective answer to Japan’s propaganda 
that China is regarded as a racially inferior member 
of the anti-Axis coalition, and might do much to 
lessen the anti-foreign sentiment that has been grow- 
ing in Chungking since Pearl Harbor. Not least im- 
portant, it could play a political role in stimulating 
China’s defense against Japan’s latest military moves. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 





I Flew for China, by Royal Leonard. New York, Double- 

day Doran, 1942. $2.50 

Experiences in China of an American aviator, who 
served first as a personal pilot of Chang Hsueh-liang and 
later of Chiang Kai-shek. The author’s understanding of 
Chinese affairs is superficial, but he gives an interesting 
picture of what he saw as well as a foreigner’s growing 
respect for China and its people. 


Foreign Capital in Southeast Asia, by Helmut G. Callis. 
New York, Institute of Pacific Relations, 1942. $1.25 
A careful study of foreign investments in government 
bonds and business enterprises before Pearl Harbor. The 
territories dealt with include the Philippines, Netherlands 
East Indies, Formosa, Malaya, Thailand, Indo-China and 
Burma. 


Kwangsi, Land of the Black Banners, by Rev. Joseph 
Cuenot. St. Louis, B. Herder, 1942. $2.75 


Translation from the French of ean account of Catholic 
missionary work in South China during the early 1920's. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 33, JuNE 4, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MICHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


B81 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








Washington News LE etter 





sitter, 








JUNE 2.—The sudden resignation on June 1 of M. 
Peyrouton as Governor-General of Algeria has unex- 
pectedly clouded the prospects for agreement between 
General Charles de Gaulle, leader of the Fighting 
French, and General Henri Honoré Giraud, head of 
the French Administration in North Africa. Yet, the 
formation on May 30 of a council of seven to govern 
the empire and represent the people of metropolitan 
France marked an important stage in the restoration 
of France’s position as a belligerent power and of its 
influence in the councils of the United Nations. The 
objective that American and British diplomacy has 
been striving for ever since the invasion of French 
North Africa last November seemed on the point of 
realization. 

De GAULLE-GIRAUD UNITY. Under the terms 
of the preliminary agreement proposed by Gen- 
eral Giraud in his note of May 17 and accepted 
by the French National Committee in London on 
May 24, he and General de Gaulle each named 
two other vonferees, and these six designated one 
other by majority vote on May 31. This commission, 
to which two other members may be appointed later, 
is to administer French affairs within its sphere of 
control until all the departments of France have been 
liberated, whereupon the law of February 15, 1872 
(generally referred to as the Tréveneuc Law) will 
be applied. This law came into being during the 
unsettled period after the Franco-Prussian war, and 
provided that whenever the legal powers of the 
French government and the National Assembly 
ceased to exist, the Conseils Généraux would take 
action. These bodies were empowered to elect the 
Senate, under the French system of indirect suffrage, 
and to appoint delegates who would then take “‘those 
urgent measures required for the maintenance of 
order and in particular those which have as their ob- 
ject the restoration to the National Assembly of its 
full independence and exercise of its right.” 

Both French leaders had made sacrifices to ar- 
rive at a compromise. The de Gaullists had ob- 
tained the exclusion from the actual governing body 
of resident Governors like Marcel Peyrouton of Al- 
geria, Charles Nogués of Morocco, and Pierre 
Boisson of French West Africa, for all of whom they 
have a deep aversion. On the other hand, General 
de Gaulle had dropped his demand for immediate 
creation of a provisional French government. This 
concession represented a notable success for the 
United States, which has taken the stand throughout 
that the future government of France shall be left to 


FOR VICTORY °* 





the free choice of the French people once their terri- 
tory has been liberated from German occupation. 

Washington’s objection to recognizing either Gen- 
eral de Gaulle or General Giraud as the head of a 
French government is that neither has a legal man- 
date to act in this capacity such as that possessed by 
other governments-in-exile. General de Gaulle, who 
appears to enjoy a greater popular following than 
General Giraud, has by force of circumstance been 
recognized as head of the anti-collaborationists by 
the Leftist groups in France, although his move. 
ment includes several notable Rightist figures, while 
General Giraud represents preponderantly the con- 
servative and military elements in French North 
Africa. The United States has taken the point of view 
that it should not meddle in French politics by rec- 
ognizing either or both of these movements jointly 
as incarnating French national sovereignty. The 
Tréveneuc Law, by providing a procedure for the 
return of power to the French people as soon as they 
can freely govern themselves, suggests a method that 
may possibly be adopted in other occupied countries 
of Europe after they have been freed of the Nazi 
yoke. 

CONSEQUENCES OF UNION. Developments in 
Algeria have demonstrated again the difficulties in 
the path of arriving at such unification. Both de 
Gaulle and Giraud are extremely ambitious and in- 
flexible men, and their followers are not yet by any 
means reconciled. Much progress, however, has been 
made since the Casablanca meeting in January, when 
the two French leaders only with great difficulty 
could be brought to shake hands and to concur in a 
vague statement that they had the common goal of 
beating Germany. 

It is to be hoped, however, that the union of Gen- 
erals Giraud and de Gaulle will be finally achieved 
despite all momentary hitches, for such an agreement 
would be bound to have a stimulating effect on the 
people of metropolitan France, who have been con- 
fused and perturbed by the quarrels of Frenchmen 
abroad. It is of the utmost importance that any dis- 
cord be eliminated before Allied invasion of Europe, 
so that the entire French population may rise with 
undivided loyalty to fight on the side of their lib 
erators. The prospects of successful conclusion of ne- 
gotiations between the two French leaders was doubt- 
less a factor in inducing Admiral René Emile Godfroy 
to place at the disposal of the Allies the French wat- 
ships which have been mobilized at Alexandria since 
the fall of France. JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





TA aoonn astoooda nw 





