ng in the 
Opriation 
Lid to the 
nistration 

oblem of 
> include 
- time be. 
ressional 
repercus. 
tion bill, 
a's stand 
$a strong 
hay insist 
rom lend. 


d to the 
arate pro- 
inswer to 
over the 
eased aid 
gave as 
et 19 that / 
the need § 
her quar 
unting to 
the Soviet | 
be forth. 
agencies 
0,000,000 } 
et Union | 
eral Loan | 
4 Supplies } 
}100,000; 
. and had | 
very. | 
ith Soviet | 
1sufficient | 
e Russian 
s will be 
ritish mis 
nd meats ) 
ndon last ) 
Americal | 
nad beet | 
sures, pre 
can ship 
howevel, 
f supplies | 
| 


STONE 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Ann Arbor, Mich. § 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XX, No. 50 


OcTosBer 3, 1941 


—_ 


ANTI-NAZI REVOLT SPREADS IN EASTERN EUROPE 


HE arrest of the Czech Premier, General Elias, in 

Prague on September 28 and the subsequent ex- 
ecution of 24 persons for plotting to reestablish an 
independent Czech state have again focused attention 
on the revolt against Nazism in Slav countries. The 
Slav peoples, particularly the Poles, Czechs and Serbs, 
have suffered more severely under German rule than 
those of Western Europe. While their spirit of re- 
sistance has flagged at times from want of encourage- 
ment, it has recently been kindled anew by Russia’s 
determined fight against the Nazis. 

Russia, the traditional, although not always consis- 
tent, protagonist of the Slavs, continued to enjoy a 
large measure of popular sympathy in Eastern Europe 
even under the Soviet régime. After the Nazi inva- 
sion, the Soviet government was quick to capitalize on 
this sympathy. In August a Conference of Slav 
Peoples, convened in the Soviet capital, issued an ap- 
peal to “oppressed Slav brothers” throughout Europe. 
It repudiated the reactionary form of Pan-Slavism 
which had been ‘“‘utilized by Russian Czarism for its 
imperialistic aims,’’ but stressed instead the common 
goal—“to smash Hitler’s armies and destroy Nazism” 
so that all Slav peoples ‘“‘may peacefully and freely 
develop their own state systems.” 

To check an uprising in Bohemia, Berlin an- 
nounced on September 27 that Reinhard Heydrich, 
ight-hand man of Heinrich Himmler, the Gestapo 
chief, had been assigned to take over the duties of 
Baron Constantin von Neurath who was “tempo- 
tarily” relieved of his office as Reich Protector of Bo- 
hemia and Moravia for “reasons of health.” The fol- 
lowing day General Alois Elias was arrested for 
Preparation to commit treason and high treason”; 
and a state of emergency was proclaimed in six Czech 
districts, including Prague. Finally, on September 29 
the Nazis revealed that 24 Czechs, including three 
former generals, had been shot on the charge of plan- 


| Ming a revolution. 


GUERRILLA WAR IN YUGOSLAVIA. Mean- 
while, Dr. Ante Pavelitch, the Italian-imposed leader 
of Croatia, has had such difficulty in keeping order 
within his domains that Italy has found it necessary 
to reoccupy the Dalmatian coastal zone between the 
Adriatic Sea and the Dinaric Alps. The Ustachis, 
who are the mainstay of the Pavelitch régime, have 
clashed frequently with Serbian guerrillas, and a 
number of them are said to have deserted to the 
enemy. On September 23 it was reported from Rome 
that fifty “Communists and Jews” had been executed 
as ‘‘the intellectual instigators’ of bomb explosions 
in the telephone exchange at the Croatian capital. 

In the Serbian remnant of Yugoslavia Premier 
Milan Neditch, who was installed as ruler in Bel- 
grade by the Germans, has disclosed the existence of 
a state of ‘‘civil war.” His troops have been engaged 
in a series of “battles” with guerrilla bands who sally 
forth from inaccessible mountain strongholds to blow 
up bridges and railway tracks or ambush small de- 
tachments of Germans. Whole villages have fallen 
into the hands of the guerrillas. Unable to cope with 
this growing resistance, General Neditch had had 
to call in additional German reinforcements. On Sep- 
tember 27 Budapest reported that German dive- 
bombers, operating in conjunction with General 
Neditch’s troops, had virtually destroyed the town of 
Uzice on the Belgrade-Sarajevo railway. 


The exiled governments, all of which are repre- 
sented in London, have done much to fan the spirit 
of anti-Nazi revolt in occupied Europe. Their success 
has encouraged the formation of other national coun- 
cils. At the end of September a simultaneous move- 
ment was launched in Britain and the United States 
to free Hungary from Nazi domination. In London a 
committee has been formed under the leadership of 
former Premier Michael Karolyi, and in the United 
States a similar organization has been set up by Tibor 
Eckhardt, exiled head of the Small Farmers party. 


————_ Page Two 


On September 27 it was also announced that a Free 
Austrian National Council, with headquarters at 
Toronto, had been established under the chairman- 
ship of Dr. Hans Rott, a former member of the 
Schuschnigg government. In London, meanwhile, 
General Charles de Gaulle formally organized a pro- 
visional government on September 25 by appointing 
a Free French National Council. 

INTER-ALLIED CONFERENCE. While the 
primary task of these governments or committees is to 
crystallize opposition to Nazism in conquered Europe 
and to assist Britain in winning the war, they can also 
perform important work in laying the foundation for 
a new and better Europe in the event of victory. The 
latter task was emphasized at the meeting in London 
on September 24 of the Inter-Allied Conference, 
which was attended by representatives of Britain, the 
Dominions, the Soviet Union and the free govern- 
ments of nine occupied European countries. The Con- 
ference unanimously endorsed the 8-points of the At- 
lantic Charter drawn up by President Roosevelt and 
Prime Minister Churchill as the guiding principles of 
a peace settlement. The Conference demonstrated, 
however, that much work remains to be done before 
all the governments see eye to eye on the practical ap- 
plication of these principles. It indicated, too, that the 
leadership of Britain and the United States would not 


ARGENTINE AIR PLOT STIRS 


The occupation of all military air bases in Argen- 
tina by Argentine troops on September 23, in a series 
of spectacular moves which have not yet been fully 
explained, quickly became an issue in the long poli- 
tical controversy between the government of Acting 
President Ramén Castillo and the Radical party, 
which controls a majority of votes in the Chamber 
of Deputies. 

A subversive plot was apparently forestalled when 
government forces took over important military air- 
dromes in Cérdoba and Parana, and later extended 
their precautions to other parts of the country. On 
September 25 General Angel Maria Zuloaga was re- 
moved from his post as head of the military air arm, 
and at least two other key officers were arrested. As 
further army air corps men were summoned for ques- 
tioning about the plot, which was centered in three 


ANNOUNCING— 
New York LUNCHEON Discussions, to be held on 
the following Saturdays, at 12:45 p.m.: 
Note change of dates in first two meetings. 
October 25 January 10 


November 8 February 7 
November 29 February 28 
December 13 March 21 


On October 25th there will be an all day forum including 
luncheon to discuss ‘““The Foreign Policy of the United 
States and Our Defense Program.” 


—S fe 
be blindly followed in all cases. The Netherlands | yjce P 
representative, for instance, sharply criticized the tw 
Anglo-Saxon powers for adding the reservation “with 
due respect for their existing obligations” to thei, 
declaration thet all countries should enjoy “access op 4 new 
equal terms to the trade and to the raw materials of electior 
the world.” ) ly dete’ 


The most concrete step taken by the Inter-Alliey | CO 
Conference was to establish a central bureau unde | RACIE 
Sit Frederick Leith-Ross for the purpose of formulae. | taken S 
ing and coordinating a program to meet Europe's ) up witl 
urgent need for foodstuffs and other raw materials popula 
once hostilities cease. The British government has | eon0™ 
been accumulating certain reserves which can be used | by Pua 


immediately for the relief of Europe. These efforts | 88,000 
will now be internationalized and geared more closely | pots: 
to the anticipated needs of European countries. They trading 
will obviously require the cooperation of the United | release 


States. Although not participating in the London de. | plies tc 
liberations, the United States did communicate jts | tit 4¢ 
readiness “at the appropriate time to consider in what provide 
respects it can cooperate in accomplishing the aims | Allies 
in view.” Sir Frederick Leith-Ross is expected in terials 
Washington some time in October to discuss this ) ised the 
question with the Economic Defense Board headed | sa; 


i 


by Vice President Wallace. copper. 
JOHN C. deWILpE | most 0 


POLITICAL CONTROVERSY po 


| In cont 
heavily German-populated provinces, patriotic mani- ) Camac 
festations in Buenos Aires assumed a strongly pro- | spoken 
democratic character. Radical members of the Cham- | United 
ber of Deputies charged that the conspiracy was of } openin 
totalitarian origin, and that Acting President Castillo | totalin, 
had “joined in the plotting.” Castillo, in turn, at | tion of 
tributed the foiled uprising to Radical party members, ) régime 
Nationalists, ‘‘and others.” For the moment, at least, , of all- 
the international aspects of this latest attempted Latin | this cc 
American coup have been obscured by internal poli | agreen 
tical rivalries, but Argentine government spokesmen | tries, 2 
and Radicals alike have left little doubt that foreign Italian 
elements were involved. Fave 

The Argentine Cabinet, which represents a minor \ republ 
ity of the Conservative party, has insisted on pre comme 
serving “‘strict neutrality’ throughout the war, al | this co 
though popular sentiment in Argentina has increas | war m 
ingly favored open cooperation with Britain and the | the As 
United States.* The most important factor in arous | tecalle 
ing the Argentine public has been the revelations of ) tothe’ 
the Congressional committee investigating Nazi ac | that ai 
tivities. This committee, headed by Radical Deputy | the bl: 
Rail Damonte Taborda, published its fourth repor 0m } sions | 
September 30. A secret anti-Nazi inquiry has been | 
under way for some time in the Senate, controlled by | Mine 


the conservative National Democratic party of which / tatered a 
Bo 


*See ‘Trends in Latin America,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, September 19, 
1941; Pan American News, September 25, 1941. 


— 


herlands Vice President Castillo is a member. It has been ex- 
| the two in Argentina that the Senate inquiry may yet 
on “with { come out into the open, and that in deference to 
to their ular sentiment Sefior Castillo may publicly outline 
access on | 4 new pro-democratic policy before the December 
rials of { glections in Buenos Aires province, which have usual- 
ly determined elections for the Presidency. 


er-Allied ECONOMIC COOPERATION WITH DEMOC- 
1u under | RACIES. The Argentine government has already 
Ormulat. | taken several important economic steps toward lining 
Europe's ) uP with the democratic powers, partly in response to 
materials , popular opinion and partly in an effort to adjust its 
nent has ! economy to current needs. Late in August it took over, 
1 be used | by purchase, 16 Italian merchant ships, totaling over 
efforts | $8,000 tons, which had been laid up in Argentine 
€ closely | ports. Since these vessels will be used primarily for 
es. They trading with the United States, their operation will 
© United | release additional American tonnage for carrying sup- 


ndon de. | plies to Britain. Early last month, moreover, Argen- 
‘icate ity | tina accepted an Anglo-American trade deal which 
- in what provided for the disposal of farm surpluses to the 
the aims | Allies and barred future sales of strategic war ma- 


ected jn / tefials to the Axis. The government has now prom- 
cuss this ) ised the Americas the exclusive use of Argentine tung- 
| headed | sten, beryl, aluminum, mica, manganese, iron and 

copper, in line with measures previously taken by 
WILDE | most of the other Latin American countries. 


MEXICO SUPPORTS INTER-AMERICANISM. 


| In contrast to Sefior Castillo, President Manuel Avila 
tic mani- ) Camacho of Mexico has been one of the most out- 
gly pro- spoken champions of full cooperation with the 
e Cham- | United States. His unusually detailed message at the 
y was of } opening of Congress on September 1—a document 
Castillo | totaling 175 pages—provided the first full explana- 
turn, at: | tion of his program. During the nine months of his 
nembers, ) régime, he declared, his foreign policy has been one 
at least, \ of all-out cooperation for continental defense. In 
ed Latin | this connection he cited the Mexico-United States 
nal pol | agreement for reciprocal use of air bases in both coun- 
okesmen | tries, and Mexico’s seizure of 10 German and two 
foreign | Italian vessels to prevent sabotage in its harbors. 
Favoring increased trade with all of the American 
a minor } republics, Mexico on July 15 signed an important 
on pf | commercial treaty with the United States, under which 


war, al | this country became the exclusive buyer of strategic 
increas | wat materials which previously had gone in part to 
and the | the Axis powers. Mexico, President Avila Camacho 


in arous | recalled, had also rejected Germany’s note objecting 
tions of ) to the United States blacklist, and had full confidence 
Nazi a¢ | that any differences arising from administration of 

Deputy | the blacklist could be ironed out by friendly discus- 
epor.on } sions between Washington and the Mexican govern- 


Page Three 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: WHAT IS LEFT OF U.S. 
NEUTRALITY? 
Speaker: A. Randle Elliott 
Date: Sunday, October 5 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T. 
Station: NBC, blue network 


ment. The President further predicted that all pend- 
ing problems between the two governments, notably 
the three-year dispute over Mexican oil expropria- 
tions, would be brought to an “early and satisfactory” 
solution—a solution which may have been prevented 
in September by the refusal of United States oil men 
to accept a $9,000,000 token payment (to have been 
provided through a United States loan to Mexico), 
with further compensation to be agreed upon later. 
Finally, President Avila Camacho declared, Mexico 
does not recognize conquests by force anywhere in 
the world, and is unalterably opposed to totalitarian 
penetration of the Western Hemisphere from either 


Europe or Asia. A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 


Berlin Diary, by William L. Shirer. New York, Kmopf, 

1941. $3.09 

A very readable and yet thoughtful account of Europe’s 
march toward war and the first year of the conflict, as seen 
by an American correspondent in the German capital. 
Without pretending to give the “inside story,” Mr. Shirer 
presents many significant observations on the Germany 
that lies behind the censorship. His comments cn German 
morale and on the collapse of France are especially inter- 
esting. He believes that after subduing Europe and Africa, 
Hitler contemplates war against the United States. 


Modern Democracy, by Carl L. Becker. New Haven, Yale 
University Press, 1941. $2.00 
A brief, but profound and stimulating, appraisal of 
“democracy as it was ideally projected and democracy as 
it actually functions today.” 


I Was a Nazi Flier, by Gottfried Leske. New York, Dial 
Press, 1941. $2.50 
This purports to be the diary of a Luftwaffe pilot partici- 
pating in the Battle of France and the bombing of London 
and later was shot down over England. Its author is re- 
vealed as almost completely subservient to Nazi propa- 
ganda—the ideal product of the Hitler régime. 


Who’s Who in Latin America, by Percy Alvin Martin. 
Stanford University, Stanford University Press, second 
edition, 1940. $5.50 
A biographical dictionary, indispensable for the serious 

student of Latin American affairs. 


Mahan, by Captain W. D. Puleston. New Haven, Yale Uni- 
versity Press, 1939. $4.00 
A really outstanding biography of the father of United 
States naval strategy, this book will be of enduring in- 
terest to all concerned with problems of American defense. 


yas been | —— 


-olled by — POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 50, Ocropsr 3, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
: | Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera Micurres Desan, Editor. 
of which Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


| S181 


ptember 19, i 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
Sept. 29.—The Administration drive to modify 
or repeal the Neutrality Act gained momentum this 
week following the introduction of a resolution call- 
ing for outright repeal and formulation of plans to 
lift the ban on arming of American merchant ships. 
While Congressional leaders indicate that they will 
not press for action until the second lease-lend appro- 
priation has been disposed of, the lines are forming 
for another struggle over foreign policy. 


WHAT IS LEFT OF NEUTRALITY? In discus- 
sing the basic issue, certain questions of fact have 
been raised with respect to the present status of the 
Neutrality Act of 1939. Just how much of the orig- 
inal law has been repealed or nullified, and what 
provisions are still in effect ? Where and how do these 
continuing provisions conflict with the foreign policy 
to which the United States is now committed? In 
what ways is the Executive hampered in fulfilling the 
commitment to give all-out aid to the countries re- 
sisting the Axis? Can existing restrictions be further 
modified by Executive action, or is new Congressional 
legislation imperative? — 

Before considering the status of the Neutrality Act 
of 1939, it should be noted that most of our earlier 
statutes defining the duties of a neutral under the 
rules of international law have already been super- 
seded by new legislation or nullified by Executive de- 
cree. These earlier statutes were invoked by the Pres- 
ident in his first neutrality proclamation of Septem- 
ber 5, 1939, which set forth some 28 specific regula- 
tions to be observed within the jurisdiction of the 
United States in conformity with domestic law and 
customary usage. Among the rules then invoked were 
the customary prohibitions against enlistment in the 
armed forces of warring nations, fitting out or arming 
belligerent vessels or furnishing supplies to belliger- 
ent warships. Most of these traditional limitations 
were swept away with the passage of the Lend-Lease 
Act, which automatically canceled any existing legis- 
lation contrary to its provisions. Subsequent Executive 
orders or Presidential proclamations have annulled at 
least 25 of the 28 regulations, thus eliminating almost 
the last vestige of neutrality under the law of nations. 

Despite the abandonment of traditional neutrality, 
the Act of 1939 remains on the statute books and, 
with certain exceptions, its legal restrictions are still 
in force. Since the repeal of the arms embargo in 
October 1939, Congress has not directly amended any 
portion of the existing law, although in effect it 


nullified the prohibition on loans and credits (See, 7) | 
by permitting the transfer of defense materials ang | 
services under the Lend-Lease Act. Other provisions | 
—such as the restrictions covering travel on Amer. 
ican vessels (Sec. 5) and the use of American por 
by belligerent ships (Secs. 10-11)—have been te } 
laxed by Executive rules and regulations. Apart from } 
these modifications, however, the law remains yp. | 
changed. 

Of the provisions still in force, three are in o 
conflict with the purposes of the lend-lease program | 
and the declared policy of the President. These are: | 
Sec. 2 (a) forbidding “any American vessel to carry 
any passengers or any articles or materials’’ to any | 
belligerent state named by the President; Sec. 3 te 
quiring the President to define “combat areas’ 
through which no American vessel may pass; Sec. 6 
forbidding the arming of American merchant vessels 

With respect to transportation of war supplies~ / 
other than arms and ammunition—the President has | 
some discretion in defining combat areas and finding | 
the existence of a “state of war.” Thus by removing | 
the ‘combat area” in the Red Sea, and by failing to } 
find a ‘state of war’’ between Germany and the Soviet | 
Union, President Roosevelt has enabled American / 
ships to carry supplies to Suez and Vladivostok 
At the request of the State Department, the Attomey | 
General gave an opinion on September 15 holding 
that the term ‘United Kingdom” as used in the Neu: | 
trality Act applies only to England, Scotland, Wales \ 
and Northern Ireland, thus permitting American ves 
sels to enter any of Britain’s possessions not express / 
ly named in proclamations. | 

Under the law as it stands, however, the President 
has no discretion to permit American vessels to entet | 
any port in the United Kingdom, or any port of aay \ 
European belligerent, or even the Atlantic ports of | 
Canada. While the law allows American ships t0 
proceed through the “inland waters” of the Bay of | 
Fundy to St. John, it forbids them to enter Halifax 
The net effect of these mandatory restrictions has 
been to force the transfer of more than 500 Americat 
vessels to foreign registry and in numerous other 
ways to invite a policy of subterfuge. It must be ap 
parent, however, that the basic contradictions between 
the Neutrality Act and the declared policy of the 
United States cannot be removed by measures within 
the technical discretion of the Executive. The com 


) 


flict can be resolved only if both Congress and the } ; 
} and f 


Executive are prepared to face the issue squarely. 
W. T. STONE 


Si 


Berlin 
regard: 
tériel. 

year, ¢ 
on Oct 
never - 
know 
Germa 
fresh 
progre 
form ¢ 
on Oct 


CL/ 
claime 
sian f 
guns ¢ 
planes 
that t 
who | 
Soviet 
in Cre 
break 


gorica 
lished 
Soviet 


his fig 


killed 


well ; 


> On ¢] 


Germ 


9,000 


