



S, 


ly 


OREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 










Vout. XVI, No. 41 


AvucustT 6, 1937 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














— 


MEXICO’S SOCIAL REVOLUTION 
by Charles A. Thomson 


Mexico’s significance in contemporary world movements 
is little realized. It has long been the scene of a peaceful 
process of socialization, and the revolution was given new 
impetus by the election of President Cardenas in July 1934. 
This report describes the policies toward labor, education 
and the Church under Cardenas’ paternalistic dictatorship. 


August 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Dr. William W. Bishop 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











LULL IN NORTH CHINA—A PRELUDE TO WAR? 





ITH the successful conclusion, on July 31, 
of the Japanese army’s campaign to estab- 
lish control over the area between Peiping and the 
sea, another phase in the hostilities between China 
and Japan has been completed. At Peiping and 
Tientsin, and in East Hopei, provisional govern- 
ment organizations staffed by Chinese notorious 
for their subservience to Japan have been set up. 
The Japanese army is consolidating its positions, 
repairing traffic arteries ravaged by guerrilla 
warfare, and tightening its grip on the two stra- 
tegic railways running to the south. 

The rapidity with which the Chinese resistance 
collapsed when subjected to the pressure of a large- 
scale Japanese attack clearly illustrates the diffi- 
culties involved in combating Japan’s_ well- 
equipped troops. One day after the Japanese ad- 
vanced on Peiping—several hours before the ex- 
piration of their ultimatum on July 28—Chinese 
defenders had withdrawn from the city, to the 
west of the Yungting River. But in his thrust 
toward Peiping, the Japanese commander serious- 
ly depleted the forces guarding his base at Tien- 
tsin, as well as the garrison at Tungchow, seat of 
, the puppet East Hopei régime. The Chinese Peace 
Preservation Corps, although largely armed and 
trained by the Japanese to preserve local order, 
quickly took advantage of this opening to execute 
a short-lived revolt which was only quelled with 
the aid of destructive aerial bombardments at 
Tientsin and Tungchow. Establishments regard- 
ed as anti-Japanese centers, notably Nankai Uni- 
versity, were gutted. 

A pause of uncertain duration, characterized 
by local clashes, may now be expected. Despite 
the expressed Japanese desire to localize the con- 
flict and avoid a general war with China at this 
time, military preparations are ostentatiously pro- 
ceeding at Tokyo. Credits are being voted, de- 
fense loans raised, special taxes imposed, Japanese 
shipping mobilized for transport of troops and 





supplies to China, and naval vessels prepared for 
combat or blockade operations off the Central and 
South China coasts. It is possible, however, that 
this activity is designed to dragoon Nanking into 
acceptance of an autonomous régime in Hopei and 
Chahar. This was intimated by Prime Minister 
Konoe on July 28, when he stated that many per- 
sons ir. the Nanking government, including Gen- 
eral Chiang Kai-shek, “understand Japan,” whose 
purpose is merely to preserve China’s territorial 
integrity against Occidental aggression. The im- 
plication of this scarcely veiled gesture toward 
Chiang is that Japan, in its creeping conquest of 
China, would welcome his assent to a local settle- 
ment. Indeed, Tokyo would only weaken its own 
position if it pressed Chiang so hard that he was 
compelled either to embark on a general war or 
give way to a successor at Nanking who would 
certainly be more firmly opposed to Japan. Never- 
theless, Prince Konoe’s statement made it perfect- 
ly plain that Japan’s ultimate goal is undisputed 
hegemony in Eastern Asia. 

On the Chinese side, Nanking has issued reso- 
lute pronouncements calling for resistance and 
has apparently dispatched some troops along rail- 
ways leading toward the conquered area from the 
south and west. The door is still open, however, 
for a compromise settlement on the basis of the 
status quo. It would in fact be difficult for China 
to wage war unless the Japanese advance further. 
With undisputed control of the air, the Japanese 
forces can continue to observe Chinese troop move- 
ments and cripple railway transport, thus hinder- 
ing large troop concentrations in Southern Hopei. 

While the interests of Western powers will be 
adversely affected by extension of Japanese con- 
trol in the Peiping-Tientsin area, there is no evi- 
dence that any state or group of states is prepar- 
ing to resist Japanese aggression. The Nine Pow- 
er Pact of 1922, guaranteeing China’s territorial 
integrity, has not been invoked, apparently be- 


% University of Michigan Libra 
















































Pt 4 rec Se a ene 


SL Am Se 
Se PETER Ti 


ere Te IS IT TE he 
ws 


aa Sepa 











cause none of the Great Powers is willing to risk 
war either for the protection of its material inter- 
ests in China, or for maintenance of the principles 
of international law. In the United States the 
President has been urged to state what action he 
will take under the neutrality law of 1937. Some 
observers, pointing out that the legislation was de- 
signed to meet the situation caused by a European 
rather than a Far Eastern conflict, oppose applica- 
tion of the act at least until it is absolutely clear 
that the war has transcended the scope of a local 
incident. Others desire that the act be applied, in 
the belief that this will assist in keeping the United 
States neutral if the conflict spreads. 


The Administration’s attitude in the face of 
these contentions was expressed by Senator Pitt- 
man, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee, on July 29. Defining the purpose of 
the act as “the protection of our own peace and the 
lives of our citizens,” he emphasized the impro- 
priety of public discussion of the subject by gov- 
ernment. officials; outlined the difficulty of de- 
termining when a. state of war exists; and de- 
clared that premature invocation of the act would 
impair efforts to bring about cessation of hostil- 
ities and protect American citizens in the fighting 
zone. If whole-hearted collective action in the 
Far East were possible, it might conceivably be 
wise for the United States to participate in inter- 
national action to halt Japan. No development of 
this type, however, is now apparent. The situa- 
tion in the Far East demands caution in the appli- 
cation of the neutrality act until it is clear that a 
general war of considerable duration is under 
way. When such a condition arises, the United 
States should unhesitatingly apply the law, evacu- 
ate its citizens, and withdraw its troops and naval 
vessels from China. DAVID H. POPPER 


YUGOSLAVIA DEBATES A CONCORDAT 


Sanguinary riots and grave political disturb- 
ances accompanied the recent debates in the Yugo- 
slav Chamber of Deputies which ended with the 
last-minute approval on July 24 of a Concordat 
with the Vatican regulating the status of the Yugo- 
slav Catholic Church. The Concordat was signed on 
July 25, 1935, after negotiations dating back to 
1922 had been finally pressed to conclusion through 
the personal intervention of the late King Alex- 
ander. Since that time its ratification has become 
a purely political issue, threatening the very ex- 
istence. of the present government. 

Since 1929 the:state has passed laws regulating 
the juridical status of all the “recognized”’ con- 
fessions. within its borders except the Roman 
Catholic, which comprises 37.5 per cent of the 
population. The Concordat is designed not only to 


Page Two 








place Catholics on an equal footing with the others 
in this respect, but also to unify the amazing 
tangle of ecclesiastical jurisdictions resulting from 
the existence of six different concordats, inherited 
from the various states which ruled present-day 
Yugoslavia before the World War. The Orthodox 
Church, which represents 48 per cent of the people, 
charges—not altogether fairly—that the Concor- 
dat places the Catholics in a privileged position in 
the state. It has carried on a violent campaign 
against the Concordat during the past seven 
months, and on July 25 took the unprecedented step 
of excommunicating all the deputies and members 
of the government, including Premier Milan Stoy- 
adinovitch, who had endorsed its ratification, 
Popular excitement was further stirred by the 
fatal illness of the Orthodox Patriarch Varnava, 
who died on July 24, a few hours after the Cham- 
ber of Deputies had approved the Concordat. Un- 
founded rumors alleged that the Patriarch had 
been poisoned and suffered a martyr’s death. His 
funeral on July 28, from which all the excommuni- 
cated government officials were barred, was the 
occasion for popular demonstrations which were 
rigorously checked by the police. 


The political motives which led Premier Stoy- 
adinovitch, himself Orthodox, to press a project 
so unpopular with the Serbian community are 
difficult to discover. Apparently the major fac- 
tor in the struggle was Father Koroshetz, leader 
of the Slovene Clericals, one of the three coalition 
parties which two years ago formed the Serbian 
Radical Union and placed Stoyadinovitch in pow- 
er. It may be supposed that ratification of the 
Concordat was the principal condition of the 
Slovenes’ entry into the government party, which 
could not maintain power without them. The govy- 
ernment also desired to placate the Catholic Croats 
and perhaps. even to forestall political difficulties 
by making religious concessions to the Croatian 
party, which still remains in opposition to the 
Stoyadinovitch quasi-dictatorship. The Croats 
themselves, who had no part in the preliminary 
negotiations for a Concordat which vitally con- 
cerns them as Catholics, have remained severely 
aloof from the present controversy. 

The Stoyadinovitch cabinet, strengthened by its 
dictatorial control of press and police and with the 
tacit support of the chief Regent, Prince Paul, has 
thus far maintained its position. The present con- 
flict may nevertheless prove the first step in the 
upheaval which political observers have long pre- 
dicted in Yugoslavia. HELEN FISHER 





The Struggle for the Pacific, by Gregory Bienstock. New 
York, Macmillan, 1937. $4.00 
A rather unconvincing attempt to interpret Far Eastern 
diplomatic developments in terms of “geopolitics.” 





FORZIGN’ POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 41, Aucusr 6, 1937. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West. 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lesiig BuBLL, President; EstHern G. OGpgn, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dean, Editors 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


National 


FO 


Ani 


| 


scrik 
and 

softl 
easil 
If 
sacr 
tem} 
cons 
shru 
into 
Afte 
and 

Fra: 
proc 
July 
seri 
reve 
ance 
com 
the 

pro 
cent 
) vail 
dev 
wer 
ture 
cen 


bud 
ere 
inc: 
the 
call 


Tre 
19% 
abc 
cur 








