







ile 
ice 
Sia 
»b- 
20 


ab- 
yns 


ike 


its, 
the 
ern 
ons 
age 
rd- 


as | 
meé | 


eck 
ob- 


eve 


Lin 
ny, 
ons 
her 
icts 
the 
ign 


AL Poe 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XIX, No. 8 


wo—X—X 


WHY EUROPE WENT TO WAR 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


DEecEMBER 15, 1989 





A brilliant, critical evaluation of the European 
conflict, remarkable for its scope and clarity. 


December issue of World Affairs Pamphlets 


—_ 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Or, 
éJ* 7 
“ & eT 
cS 7 
ye . 


i. 


eJ7.ef> 
a a 
4 











General Library 
University of Uichigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 











en 
TS 


FINNISH RESISTANCE ALTERS EUROPEAN PICTURE 





INLAND’S continued resistance to Soviet inva- 
sion, and its appeal, on December 10, for the 
assistance of the “civilized world,” injected new 
factors into Europe’s complex situation which may 
have far-reaching effects on the course of the war. 
EFFECT ON GERMANY AND ITALY. The 
Nazis officially professed unconcern for Finland's 
plight, which they blamed on anti-German machina- 
tions by Britain and Sweden’s Foreign Minister, M. 
Sandler. They also denied reports from Stockholm— 
prominently featured by the Soviet press—that Ger- 











many had sent arms to the Finns and allowed refuel- 
ing on its territory of Italian planes bound for Fin- 
land. Neutral observers in Germany, however, 


| believed that the Germans (millions of whom, like 


the Finns, belong to the Lutheran faith), were sym- 
pathetic to Finland’s cause, and alarmed by Soviet 
inroads in the Baltic region, hitherto regarded as a 
German sphere of influence. Nor could the Nazi 
press disguise the fact that, while the Fascist Grand 
Council reiterated Italy’s support of the Rome-Berlin 
axis, the Italian government permitted anti-Soviet 
demonstrations, and promptly sent airplanes and 
pilots to Finland. The Nazis, moreover, feared that 
the Soviet Union, now that it is at war, will be even 
less able than before to spare foodstuffs and raw 
materials for Germany. 

In analyzing the policy of the Hitler government, 
which has proved highly opportunistic both in do- 
mestic and foreign affairs, one can exclude no pos- 
sibility, however startling. Germany, absorbed by its 
life and death struggle with the Allies, may feel gen- 
uinely unable to check Soviet advances toward the 
west and northwest. But it may also be purposely 
encouraging Soviet invasion of Finland, in the hope 
that the Allies, alarmed by the spread of commu- 
nism, will accept Hitler's peace terms, and join him 
in an anti-Soviet crusade which would have the 


support of Italy and Franco Spain. Or, if Dr. 
Rauschning is correct in his belief that Nazism is 
“The Revolution of Nihilism,” it may be pursuing a 
reckless ‘‘after me the deluge’ course, with no con- 
sideration of ultimate consequences for Germany or 
Europe. 


EFFECT ON THE ALLIES. Finland’s decision to 
resist Moscow heightened the dilemma which has 
confronted the Allies since September 17 when the 
U.S.S.R. invaded eastern Poland, ostensibly to restore 
order in that region. The Allies are determined not 
to let any subsidiary conflicts divert them from their 
principal objective—the defeat of Hitlerism. While 
they sympathize with Finland, and are ready to aid 
the Finns with armaments and supplies, they are 
loath to take any action which might involve them 
in war with the Soviet Union—especially since they 
suspect that Hitler would welcome extension of the 
theatre of war, in the hope that the Allies might then 
have to disperse their forces, now concentrated 
against Germany on the Western front. 


The reluctance of the Allies—especially Britain— 
to break with Moscow affected the proceedings of 
the League Council, summoned on December 9 at 
Finland’s request, and of the League Assembly, con- 
voked the following day. While the Latin American 
members of the League, at a safe distance from the 
European scene, demanded expulsion of the Soviet 
Union from the League, Moscow’s neighbors — 
Sweden, Norway, China, Iran, Turkey and Rumania 
—counseled moderation, on the ground that expul- 
sion might precipitate a general war with the U.S.S.R. 
without materially aiding the Finns. Should the 
League merely condemn Soviet invasion of Finland 
it may lose its eight South American members* 
~ ©The following South American states are members of the League: Argen- 
tina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela. Of 


these, Chile, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela had planned to withdraw before 
the outbreak of the Soviet-Finnish conflict. 









































































(four of which had already taken steps to withdraw 
before the Soviet-Finnish conflict), and become a 
predominantly European organization. Particularly 
difficult is the position of China, which sympathizes 
with Finland, but needs supplies from the Soviet 
Union, and fears that League condemnation of Soviet 
action might drive Moscow into an agreement with 
Japan at China’s expense. 

EFFECT ON EUROPEAN NEUTRALS. Fin- 
land’s resistance may also have the effect of forcing 
European neutrals to reconsider their increasingly 
precarious position. The Finnish case has made it 
abundantly clear that neutral countries cannot hope 
to escape involvement in war merely by proclaiming 
their neutrality. In attempting to walk the neutrality 
tightrope, they constantly face the risk of antagoniz- 
ing both sides. The more acute the conflict becomes, 
the more Germany and the Allies will scrutinize 
every action of the neutrals for possible signs of un- 
neutrality. Moreover, these states, by abstaining 
from official assistance to endangered neighbors 
—as in the case of Norway and Sweden to- 
ward Finland—merely play into the hands of Ger- 
many and the Soviet Union, which are then free to 
destroy their intended victims one by one. Events 
may soon force the remaining neutrals to decide 
whether they prefer to side with the Allies against 
Germany (and possibly the Soviet Union), or with 
Germany (and possibly the Soviet Union) against 
the Allies. 


Page Two —_ 








—— 


EFFECT ON THE SOVIET UNION. Perhaps 
the most far-reaching effects of all may be felt in the 
position, both internal and external, of the Sovig 
Union. The success of the Finns in holding off ny. 
merically superior Soviet forces, and even stagi 
counter-attacks, has raised serious doubts abroad 
and possibly also in the U.S.S.R.—regarding the 
efficiency of the Red Army. Should these doubts hy 
substantiated by future developments, fear of the 
Soviet Union, which has haunted Eastern Europe, 
may diminish; and countries hostile to Moscow ma 
seize this opportunity to strike simultaneously 
Russian imperialism and international communism 
It should be pointed out, however, that while Sovie 
troops—long trained to believe that the U.S.S.R. had 
no warlike designs on other countries—may show no 
enthusiasm for an invasion of Finland, they might 
reveal a greater fighting spirit if Soviet territory wer 
invaded and Russian nationalism aroused. At the 
same time, there is no doubt that the Soviet gover 
ment, by attacking Finland, has alienated most of 
the sympathy it had formerly enjoyed among groups 
of the Left in foreign countries. If France and Britain 
are alive to their opportunities, this disillusion with 
Soviet (as well as Nazi) methods may mark a tum 
ing-point in Europe from a period of revolution to- 
ward a period not of restoration—no longer possible 
or desirable—but of genuine reconstruction. 





VERA MICHELES DEAN | 


ITALY SEEKS TO SAFEGUARD ITS POSITION IN BALKANS 


While four of the five great powers of Europe— 
Germany, Great Britain, France and the Soviet Union 
—are involved in hostilities, Italy continues to 
strengthen its position in the Mediterranean and 
Balkans under the guise of “non-belligerency.” Ap- 
parently eschewing the term “neutrality” because it 
implies impartiality and pacifism, Italy seeks both 
the diplomatic and commercial rewards of a “non- 
belligerent” while insisting on the traditional rights 
of the “neutral.” On December 8 the Fascist Grand 
Council, issuing the first official statement of Italy’s 
position since the outbreak of war, reaffirmed the 
Rome-Berlin axis and warned all belligerents against 
trespassing in the Balkans. In its concise and rather 
ambiguous communiqué, the Grand Council defined 
Italian policy as follows: 


1. It approved the “non-belligerency” of Italy which, 
in its opinion, has prevented the spread of hostilities to 
southeastern Europe. 


2. Relations between Italy and Germany remain fixed 
by their alliance and the ‘exchange of views which took 
place before and after at Milan, Salzburg and Berlin.” 


3. Italy is interested directly in anything that happens 
in the Danube basin and the Balkans. 


4. Italy will safeguard its maritime trade “in the! 
most explicit manner.” 


The most striking feature of the communiqué was 
the second point regarding the Italo-German military 
alliance, which was formulated at Milan on May 6-7, 
1939, but was apparently modified in subsequent dis 
cussions. Count Ciano is believed to have refused 
Italian military aid against Poland during his con- 
versations with Hitler at Salzburg in August and at 
Berlin in October, and the Grand Council’s declara- 
tion may thus be a warning to Germany that the’ 





alliance is still subject to interpretation. At the same 
time, this declaration dashes cold water on any hopes! 
the Allies may have had for immediate Italian sup | 
port. The final point, regarding Italy's commercial | 
rights, is a forthright challenge to the Allied block | 
ade, which is damaging neutral as well as Germat) 
interests. Although Italy has been profiting as a trans 
shipment point for the belligerents, especially for 
German trade with South America, it is already 
compelled to reduce consumption of many imports— 
such as gasoline, coal, coffee, cacao, sugar, and iron 





and steel—in order to conserve its resources, secufe 
foreign exchange, and meet the dislocation of normal 
trade. 








— 


PRI 
intere: 
both 
welco 
water: 
only 
Intern 
had d 

act | 
he ] 
avow' 
three 
naval 
sistan 
becau 
this t 
first $ 
Italy’ 
again 
what 


*Cf. 
ber 10, 





ism, 
Viet 
had 
’ no 
ight 


vere 


ern 
t of 


UPS 


with 


. to 
sible 


the 


tary 
6-1, 


con: 
d at 


lara: 


ame 
OFF 
sup- 


rcial 


rans 
for 
eady 


iron 
cure 
rmal 








ae 
— 


PRESSURE IN THE BALKANS. By restating its 
interest in the Balkans, Italy is apparently warning 
both Germany and the Soviet Union that it will not 
welcome further fishing in these persistently troubled 
waters.* The Grand Council’s declaration appeared 
only two days after an article in the Communist 
International, official journal of the Comintern, 
had demanded that Rumania sign a mutual assistance 

act with the Soviet Union ‘“‘similar to those with 
the Baltic States.” This article was quickly dis- 
avowed, however, by the Soviet government. Since 
three of the Baltic states were compelled to surrender 
naval and air bases in return for their mutual as- 
sistance pacts and the fourth—Finland—was invaded 
because of its refusal to make similar concessions, 
this threat to Rumania is regarded at Rome as the 
first step in a Soviet advance toward the Dardanelles. 
Italy's efforts to secure a united front in the Balkans 
against either German or Soviet pressure are some- 
what hampered by its close relations with Hungary, 








*Cf. “Italy Tightens Its Neutrality,"’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, Novem- 
ber 10, 1939. 


Page Three 








which desires a share in any partition of Rumania. 
It was reported on December 10, furthermore, that 
Germany has guaranteed all of Rumania’s frontiers 
—except the Bulgarian border—in return for eco- 
nomic concessions. Such a move would invite Bul- 
garia to press for the Dobruja while checking the 
Soviet Union’s designs on Bessarabia. 

Perhaps the most important factor in Balkan unity, 
however, is Turkey, which—like Italy—is endeavor- 
ing to resist the pressure of Germany and the Soviet 
Union: Turkish newspapers launched an attack last 
week against Franz von Papen, German Ambassador 
to Ankara, who was accused of spreading false re- 
ports that Turkey and the U.S.S.R. were concen- 
trating troops on their borders. The Turkish press, 
which called for the expulsion of von Papen, charged 
that Germany was seeking to divert Moscow from 
the Baltic to the Black Sea. With the help of the 
Allies, and possible support from Italy, Turkey hopes 
that both Germany and the Soviet Union can be 
warded off before they divide Rumania and approach 
the Dardanelles. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Europe in the Fourth Dimension, by V. Poliakoff (Augur). 
New York, D. Appleton-Century Company, 1939. $1.25 
A noted observer of the European scene sets forth his 

conclusions on individual rights and spiritual realities in 

international politics, with Europe as his laboratory. 


Democratic Sweden, edited by Margaret Cole and Charles 
Smith. New York, Greystone Press, 1939. $3.00 
An excellent review of Swedish social democracy: its 
government, economy and policies. Prepared from investi- 
gations in Sweden by sympathetic but objective members 
of the New Fabian Research Bureau, this symposium con- 


tributes much to a firm grasp of Sweden’s position in world 
affairs. 


England and the Continent, by Carlo Scarfoglio. New 
York, Fortuny’s, 1939. $2.75 
Interestingly written arraignment of British policy to- 
ward the rest of Europe. 


The New German Empire, by Franz Borkenau. New York, 

Viking, 1939. $2.00 

In rather sweeping terms the author expounds his thesis 
that Nazi Germany aims at world domination, not only di- 
rectly through the conquest of territory, but indirectly 
through world-wide Fascist revolutions. Although valuable 
for its analysis of the motivating factors of German ex- 
pansion, this book is already “dated.” 


Battle Against Time, by Heinrich Hauser. New York, 
Scribner’s, 1939. $3.00 


This remarkable balance-sheet of Hitler’s régime, drawn 
up largely from personal observation, can be heartily 
recommended. 


Recent Articles in Japanese Periodicals, by Secretariat, 
Institute of Pacific Relations. New York, February, 
1939. $0.25 


A useful pamphlet, containing eleven articles translated 
from Japanese periodicals which cover important current 
economic and political subjects. 


War in Our Times, edited by Hans Spever and Alfred 
Kahler. New York, Norton, 1939. $3.00 


A detailed study of the economic and social effects of 
modern war, prepared by the Graduate Faculty of the 
New School for Social Research in New York. 


Not Peace But a Sword, by Vincent Sheean. New York, 

Doubleday Doran, 1939. $2.75 

This famous journalist continues his personal history in 
Spain and Czechoslovakia, with occasional excursions else- 
where in Europe. Although his narrative adds little to our 
knowledge of diplomatic developments, it offers brilliantly 
written descriptions of ordinary human beings—individual- 
ly and collectively—confronted by war and terrorism. Mr. 
Sheean’s opening chapter on England and his now famous 
story of Jim Lardner are particularly effective. 


Affairs of China, by Sir Eric Teichman. London, Methuen, 
1988. 12s. 6d. 


An exeellent survey of China’s modern political develop- 
ment by a British official with thirty years’ service in that 
country. It also contains chapters on the policies of the 
foreign powers, and the historical background of their 
vested interests: the treaty port concessions, customs, ex- 
traterritoriality, loans, and railways. The book is especial- 
ly valuable for its indications of the British point of view 
on Chinese questions. 


The A BC of the Federal Reserve System, by Edwin W. 
Kemmerer. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1938. 
$2.50 
In this new edition of a good, brief account of our fed- 

eral banking machinery, the author maintains that the 

Federal Reserve System has been greatly weakened by 

recent legislation. 


France and Munich: Before and After the Surrender, by 
Alexander Werth. New York, Harper, 1939. $3.50 
A sprightly, yet penetrating account of French foreign 
relations and public life from 1987 through April 1939, de- 
tailing the rise and fall of “appeasement” policies in Paris. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 8, DscemMBER 15, 1939. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


<> 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FrRaNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHgres Dgan, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 





Bat ee eg al 


Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 

National Press Building 

Dec. 11.—There are still too many uncertain 

factors in the réle now being played by the Soviet 

Union for any one to foresee how far this new politi- 

cal and military element may alter the relation of 

the United States to the war. Yet the impact of the 

Soviet attack on Finland has already left its mark 

on Washington, and begun to shift the direction of 
American foreign policy at more than one point. 


AID TO FINLAND. To gauge the extent of this 
shift it is only necessary to look back some six weeks 
when Congress, at the President's request, repealed 
the arms embargo and substituted the cash-and-carry 
formula. At the time, this new formula seemed to 
meet the demands of the President and the desires 
of Congress and the American people. It retained 
the strict ban on loans and credits while allowing 
us to give tangible aid to Britain and France—with 
whom we sympathized—under the cloak of impar- 
tiality. But today, in the case of Finland, the cloak 
is cast aside. Washington has felt no public pressure 
for applying the Neutrality Act and, on the contrary, 
has faced a strong demand for positive measures to 
aid Finland. By a curious turn in domestic politics 
and public opinion, the most vocal demand for posi- 
tive measures has come from some of the Adminis- 
tration’s sharpest critics, including the Republican 
National Committee. 


Last week the Administration took the first step 
toward extending tangible aid to the Finnish gov- 
ernment and people. On December 6 President 
Roosevelt instructed Secretary Morgenthau to hold 
the Finnish debt payment of $234,693—due on De- 
cember 15—in a separate account with a view to 
Congressional action authorizing its return to Fin- 
land. Several Administration leaders have expressed 
the belief that Congress will not only approve this 
action, but will vote to return other back payments 
and possibly suspend future debt instalments. 


On December 10 Jesse H. Jones, Federal Loan 
Administrator, announced the opening of govern- 
ment credits of $10,000,000 for the purchase of 
“agricultural surpluses and other civilian supplies,” 
in the United States. The credits will be furnished 
by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation and the 
Export-Import Bank, and extended to the Finnish- 
American Trading Corporation organized in New 
York by the Finnish Minister. It is doubtful, how- 
ever, whether the full credits for Finland can be 
made available before Congress meets in January, 





as the Export-Import Bank has virtually reached the 
statutory limit of its commitments, which are fixed 
at $100,000,000. Moreover, unless Congress amend; | 
the existing law, Export-Import Bank credits canny 
be used for war materials or airplanes, which Fin. | 
land is anxious to secure from the United States. 
For the present, the White House and the State | 
Department have reached no final decisions 
further steps. The pressure for breaking off diplo | 
matic relations with the U.S.S.R. has begun to subside | | 
and there are no immediate plans for withdrawal 
of Ambassador Steinhardt from Moscow. Such ac | 
tion, it is argued, would be a futile gesture—unles; | 
implemented by stronger measures— and would’ 
merely deprive the State Department of a useful | 
source of information without affecting Soviet policy, 


PEACE RUMORS. One reason for hesitation in| 
taking stronger measures is the lingering hope) 
that the United States may eventually be in a| 
position to use its good offices for a peace settlement | 
Washington officials see little prospect for such a 
settlement at this time, and discount the current 
rumors of a “peace offensive” by Hitler and Musso- 
lini to line up the Western powers against Moscow | 
Such a move would be tantamount to peace on| 
Hitler’s terms, and there is no indication here that| 
Britain and France are even prepared to listen to an 
offer from the present German government. On the, 
other hand, should it be possible to negotiate even- 
tually with a government in Germany, headed by 
some one other than Hitler, and should the peace! 
terms promise something more substantial than 2) 
temporary truce, the Roosevelt Administration might| 
be prepared to assume the rdle of mediator. | 


Still another reason for hesitation is found in the) 
diplomatic struggle which is coming to a head i 
the Far East. The State Department has no desite 
to throw Japan into the arms of Russia, but at the 
same time it is equally wary of the invitation t 
appease Japan by a “compromise” settlement which’ 
would sacrifice China and recognize Japan’s “new 
order” in East Asia. Washington officials profess 
not to fear a Soviet-Japanese alliance, for the reason 
that Moscow apparently has very little to offer Japan 
Hence they continue to maintain a firm attitude an¢| 
discourage any talk of a deal between Japan and the| 
Western powers. But whatever the outcome of thi] 
tug of war, the Far East, rather than Europe, appeat 
likely to be our area of greatest tension in the com 
ing weeks. 





W. T. STONE | 





An it 


¥, 


blow 
estué 
cess 

ocea 
raid 
with 
had 

voy 


| the. 


com! 
skill 
man 
gun 
une? 
fous 
on it 
refu 
ities 
to r 
l7t 
a fo 
Plat 
thes 
scut 
Or t. 


L 
The 
pote 
on | 
nav 
sels 
Wa 
or | 
san 
| larg 
cou 





