J 


L are small 
lend-lease 
2,500,000, 
‘he United 

any other 
$793,000, 
-d with re- 
e six coun- 
or the sec. 
s the costly 
1 displaced 


gee camps 


that began 
D worth of 
the Soviet 
for liber- 
eas of the 
> obviously 
e V-E Day, 
n only one 
The caloric 
), Belgium 
15. Mean- 
iced wheat 
pecially in 
sroblem in 
hirid coal, 
ons. 

The world 
the whole 
A holds its 
first was in 
second in 
suggestion 
relief, the 
nections of 
tinct—that 
s unable to 
ports coun- 
nerican fe- 
ll assist, us 
‘ing a bare 
of military 
Yet in es- 
three feed, 
dren. They 
n 


BOLLES 
NDS 


AUG 1 3 1945 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


You. XXIV, No. 42 


Aueust 8, 1945 


HE results of the British elections, announced on 
July 25, prove to have been a surprising and over- 
helming victory for the Labor party. Although 
wice before in the inter-war period Labor spokes- 
men have directed His Majesty's Government, never 
iefore has the Labor party held an absolute majority 
in Parliament. In the first general election since 1935, 
the voters on July 5 conclusively repudiated Con- 
grvative party or coalition rule so characteristic of 
government in Britain during the past generation. 
In doing so Britain has also turned from the recent 
dynamic war leadership of Winston Churchill, al- 
though all observers attest to his continued personal 
popularity. The new Prime Minister, Clement R. 
Attlee, before his return on July 27 to Potsdam to 
tke his place among the Big Three, announced the 
ore of his cabinet in which Ernest Bevin will hold 
the post of Foreign Secretary. Herbert Morrison be- 
ame Lord President of the Council and will act as 
kader of the House of Commons in this capacity. 
Hugh Dalton took over the Treasury post as Chancel- 
lt of the Exchequer, while Sir Stafford Cripps was 
designated as President of the Board of Trade. 
LABOR’S PROGRAM AND POWER. Specula- 
tion with respect to the domestic and foreign reper- 
assions of Labor’s victory will continue well beyond 
August 15, the date set for the opening of the new 
Patliament and the speech from the Crown which 
will be prepared by the Labor Ministers. Although 
the King’s speech can be expected to chart in broad 
lms the aims of the new government, many months 
may elapse before definite legislation is introduced 
it the Commons indicating the course Britain will 
pursue, particularly in internal reforms. The main 
question asked by Americans is whether the Labor 
party will implement the many socialist aims with 
Which it has been so long identified. Its program of 
adequate housing, greater social security, revival of 


UNSOLVED PROBLEMS CHALLENGE BRITAIN’S LABOR PARTY 


export trade, and full employment differs little 
from the stated aims of the Conservative party. But 
Labor’s long-term plans to nationalize the mines, 
inland transport and other public utilities, certain 
heavy industries like steel, and the Bank of England 
mark the socialist character of the new government. 

Yet the British Laborites can not be called doc- 
trinaire theorists. Nor are the Prime Minister and 
some of his prominent followers extreme socialists. 
Moreover, it is agreed that the mandate of the new 
government also includes the votes of large sections 
of the middle class who have not heretofore been 
identified with the Labor party. Many of the most 
able new leaders represent the trade union movement 
in the party, historically its most numerous as well as 
its more conservative element. It is to be noted, how- 
ever, that of all important British parties Labor 
makes the least distinction between its Parliamentary 
Party and the National Party. For Laborites—wheth- 
er in Parliament or not—are bound by the rather 
rigid discipline imposed by the party’s constitution. 
For this reason the more articulate and radical ex- 
ponents like Harold J. Laski, who is at present 
Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Na- 
tional Labor Party, carry some weight in Parlia- 
mentary circles. 

Unlike the situation in 1924 or 1929, when Labor 
was in power with J. Ramsay MacDonald as Prime 
Minister, the new government will be under no ob- 
ligation to defer to lesser liberal parties for adequate 
support. Britain may indeed face a return to full two- 
party government rather than consecutive coalitions 
made up of many disparate elements. In addition, 
the Labor cabinet brings to power men of long ex- 
perience in Parliament who for the past five years 
have shared full responsibility for the conduct of 
the war government. Under the new mandate given 
by the electorate, the Labor party will doubtless be 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be rebrinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


able to abandon much of its former cautiousness in 
tackling the reforms it has been urging. 


LABOR LOOKS ABROAD. But irrespective of 
party differences, both Britain’s internal problems 
and its foreign position will remain relatively con- 
stant. All observers agree that trade expansion re- 
mains Britain’s most urgent task. The crucial need 
to revive and materially expand export trade, how- 
ever, will prove no easier for the Labor party than it 
would have been for the Conservatives. Yet full em- 
ployment, increased social welfare benefits, educa- 
tional advances, health improvement and housing 
all depend on the reconstruction of British foreign 
trade. Labor has contended that nationalization of 
the country’s basic industries and services would best 
aid this program of internal reforms. But neither the 
party nor individual Laborites have urged any drastic 
change in Britain’s foreign economic policy. 

Britain under a Labor government must hope not 
only to reconstruct its domestic industries; it must 
also immediately seek an improvement in its foreign 
trade position. For this reason it is expected that the 
new government will energetically maintain Empire- 
Commonwealth relationships. In India the Labor 
party may adopt a more aggressive approach in fos- 
tering Indian self-government since the Simla con- 
ference between the Indian Nationalists and the 


Page Two 


se 
—— 


Viceroy, Lord Wavell, broke down on July 14. Buy 
in the past the Labor party has not differed sharply 
from the Conservatives on India, and it is question. 
able whether the new government will favor q 
drastic readjustment of Britain's economic ties with 
India. 


Britain may also find that the attitude of the 
United States toward the Labor party’s plans for na. 
tionalization will hamper the achievement of British 
economic aims abroad. Press reports indicate that cer. 
tain American business interests are fearful lest aid 
to Britain assist in subsidizing wholesale nationaliza. 
tion abroad. Yet Britain must necessarily remain de. 
pendent on United States economic assistance—at 
least during the reconversion period—irrespective of 
hesitancy or fear in this country about the prospects 
of socialization by Labor. If Britain's problems te. 
main unchanged, however, so does the necessity for 
Anglo-American cooperation in economic relations, 
Only by jointly attacking the problem of expanding 
trade, increasing productivity, and assuring full em. 
ployment in the world’s two most highly developed 
industrial centers can both Britain and the United 
States tackle the urgent tasks of domestic reconstruc. 
tion under conditions of international economic and 


political stability. GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


U.S. INTEREST REQUIRES COOPERATION WITH ATTLEE GOVERNMENT 


The Senate's ratification of the United Nations 
Charter on July 28 by an overwhelming majority of 
89 to 2, and the election of the Labor party in Britain 
on July 5 by a sweeping vote that surprised both 
its friends and foes, should have a strongly stabiliz- 
ing influence on Europe at a moment when that war- 
torn continent faces a grim winter that could all 
too easily become a season of dangerous discontent. 
By ratifying the Charter promptly, and with prac- 
tically no dissent, the Senate has sought to give in- 
controvertible evidence that this country is deter- 
mined not to return to a policy of isolation from the 
rest of the world, and is ready to assume its share of 
responsibility for the prevention and suppression of 
aggression. 

RATIFICATION OF CHARTER ONLY FIRST 
STEP. Even more encouraging is the growing recog- 
nition that the Charter is but the first step toward 
the creation of an effective system of international 
security. True, some of the Senators who voted for 
the Charter expressed doubts about its efficacy, and 
others mades mental reservations about its future 
implementation. But outstanding Senators, notably 
Ball of Minnesota, Republican, and Fulbright of 
Arkansas, Democrat, showed that they are fully 
aware of the fact that an attempt might be made to 
empty the Charter of all content by limiting the 
power of the American delegate on the Security 


Council and the use of the military forces this coun. 
try is pledged to place at the disposal of the United 
Nations organization. To avert this possibility Pres 
ident Truman, in a message from Potsdam on July 
28, stated that he will submit the agreement specify 
ing our military assistance to the United Nations or 
ganization for ratification by a majority of both 
Houses of Congress, not by a two-thirds majority of 
the Senate, where an attempt might have been made 
to whittle down this countty’s obligations under the 
Charter. 

The Senate’s action should assure other countries 
that they can count on continued and responsible 
participation by the United States in world affaits. 
The victory of the Labor party gives hope on another 
point—that a political transition portending impor 
tant economic and social adjustments can be effected 
in orderly fashion by a democracy in spite of all the 
strain and suffering borne by the British during si 
years of war. Those to whom the phrase “Labor 
party” spells revolution and anarchy immediately 
jumped to the conclusion that the swing to Labor 
would encourage a Leftist trend in Europe. Actually, 
a trend to the Left has been increasingly noticeable 
all over the continent since 1939. The peoples of 
Europe, like the British, have shown a profound 
yearning for change, for something as different 4 
possible from the conditions that favored, or at leas 


a 


did not 
ried OU 
furope 
democré 
expressi 
yolve, < 
crimina' 
and the 
growth 
1939, O 
EUR! 
The gre 
vailing 
countric 
could b 
reactiot 
Nazis 
fo equé 
treme | 
the mc 
middle 
progre: 
the pro 
unders' 
autocra 
was n¢ 
Vistula 
from | 
seemec 
ments 
the sal 
danget 
perate 
econor 
turn te 
Poli 
Foreig 
geogre 
fer fr 


_ 


JU: 


FOREIC 
Headqu: 
second-« 
One moi 


=> 


— 


<a 
July 14. But 
ered sharply 
1S question. 
ill favor a 
uc ties with 


tude of the 
lans for na. 
nt of British 
cate that cer. 
rful lest aid 
nationaliza- 
7 remain de. 
sistance—at 
‘espective of 
he prospects 
sroblems te. 
necessity for 
ic relations, 
f expanding 
ing full em 
y developed 
the United 
Cc reconstruc- 
“onomic and 


‘CLELLAN 


NMENT 

es this coun- 
F the United 
sibility Pres. 
Jam on July 
nent specify: 
Nations or- 
ity of both 
; majority of 
e been made 
1s under the 


er countries 

responsible 
rorld affairs. 
e on another 
ding impor 
n be effected 
te of all the 
h during six 
rase ‘Labor 
immediately 
ng to Labor 
pe. Actually, 
ly noticeable 
» peoples of 
a profound 
different as 
d, or at least 


—— 
—— 


did not avert, their defeat. Such change can be car- 
ried out peacefully in the countries of Western 
furope which, like Britain, have a long tradition of 
democracy and established machinery for the free 
expression of the popular will. But change may in- 
yolve, and has already involved, violence and re- 
gimination in countries like some in Eastern Europe 
and the Balkans where conditions favorable to the 
growth of political democracy had not existed before 
1939, or had barely begun to develop. 


EUROPE NEEDS STRONG MIDDLE PARTIES. 
The greatest danger to Europe’s future was the pre- 
vailing feeling on the part of moderate groups in all 
countries that little or nothing in the way of change 
could be achieved by peaceful means, that to defeat 
reactionary elements which had shown affinities with 
Nazism and Fascism it would be necessary to turn 
to equally brutal and arbitrary elements on the ex- 
treme Left. Britain’s bloodless transition will hearten 
the moderates—and Europe urgently needs strong 
middle groups which are eager to work for social 
progress, but unwilling to sacrifice human liberties in 
the process of achieving it. The experience of Russia, 
understandable in terms of that country’s history of 
autocratic political rule and economic backwardness, 
was not a guide for most of Europe west of the 
Vistula. Yet in the absence of constructive leadership 
from Britain and the United States, which often 
seemed fearful of change and ready to support ele- 
ments regarded by the Europeans as reactionary for 
the sake of maintaining order, there was a growing 
danger that more and more Europeans, made des- 
perate by years of war, subjection to Nazi rule, and 
economic dislocation in the wake of liberation, would 
turn to Russia for guidance in the post-war period. 

Political change, as Ernest Bevin, the new British 
Foreign Secretary once observed, does not alter 
geography, and the Laborites may not markedly dif- 
fer from the Conservatives on many issues of for- 


JUST PUBLISHED— 


ROOSEVELT’S FOREIGN POLICY 
by Blair Bolles 


25c 


An appraisal of the fundamental changes in the foreign 
policy of the United States, from negative isolationism to 
responsible international cooperation which took place 
during the Roosevelt Administration. 
August 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPorTS are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


Page Three 


eign policy affecting Britain’s security. What will 
change is not the basic motif of British foreign pol- 
icy, but its mode of application, its tone. The Attlee 
government has an opportunity to provide a strong 
balance wheel in Europe—not against Russia, be- 
cause the Laborites are in a far better position than 
the Conservatives to seek genuine cooperation with 
Russia, free from both suspicion and sentimentality 
—but against the feeling of futility and despair that 
was spreading over the continent like a creeping 
paralysis, threatening to destroy the last vestiges of 
democracy. 

It is of the utmost importance that the American 
people should understand this situation, and should 
not, through uninformed fear of what the Labor gov- 
ernment may do to private enterprise, range the 
United States against Britain on the major issues of 
our times. We must remember that such feeble ef- 
forts as were made by the countries of Europe be- 
fore 1939 to dam the rising tide of Nazism were 
balked again and again by fear in London that “so- 
cialism,”” as typified by the moderate Blum 3Zovern- 
ment in France, might prove a threat to Britain. Dis- 
astrous as this attitude proved for Europe, it also 
proved disastrous for Britain until, in the dark days 
of Dunkerque, the British, by sharing the sufferings 
of the continent, recovered the sympathy of their 
European neighbors. Had a Conservative government 
been returned by a large majority, Britain might have 
drifted farther and farther apart from Europe. The 
Labor party, which shares the aspirations of mod- 
erate Europeans for social progress based on personal 
freedom, now has a chance to recapture for Britain 
the position of leadership it enjoyed in the nineteenth 
century as the proponent of political democracy and 
the defender of human liberties. 

VERA M. DEAN 


CORRECTION 


The Foreign Policy Association is very happy to 
correct an error that inadvertently occurred in the 
Washington News Letter published in the Foreign 
Policy Bulletin of July 6, 1945. In that letter Blair 
Bolles stated that ‘Foreign Service examinations 
would be given to 400 members of the armed ser- 
vices.” The correct information is that, in coopera- 
tion with the War and Navy Departments, the De- 
partment of State is holding an examination on No- 
vember 19 and 20 to recruit approximately 400 For- 
eign Service officers, unclassified, from the armed 
services. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 42, AuGusT 3, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dornotuy F. Luger, Secretary; Vena Micuzeies Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Ss: 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington Neus Letter se 


SOFT PEACE ADVOCATES ENCOURAGE JAPAN TO FIGHT ON 


Their hopes for the return of peace aroused by the 
intensive bombing raids and naval shellings to which 
the allied forces are subjecting Japan, the American 
people today are tempted to hurry the war to its 
conclusion by steps which in reality can only pro- 
long it. 

An ever-growing number of American journalists 
and political spokesmen have been urging since early 
in May that the Allies announce a surrender policy 
for Japan based on some consideration besides un- 
conditional surrender. Senator Warren Magnuson, 
Democrat, of Washington, told the Senate on July 
24 that such appeals serve only to encourage the 
enemy to fight on in the hope of obtaining better 
terms. President Truman on July 26 accepted in part 
the argument of the advocates of modified surrender 
policy. With Winston Churchill and Generalissimo 
Chiang Kai-shek he issued to Japan an “ultimatum” 
which, while retaining the unconditional surrender 
formula, offered in vague words a set of terms for 
post-capitulation treatment far easier than those pro- 
jected for Germany. The Japanese government at 
once demonstrated the soundness of Magnuson’s pre- 
diction by rejecting the ultimatum. 

JAPAN FACES THE CRISIS. The Japanese gov- 
ernment has exploited the movement in this country 
for modification of unconditional surrender to stiffen 
popular resistance. Japanese propagandists are tak- 
ing advantage of every possible weak point in this 
country’s international relations. They stress Amer- 
ican uncertainty with respect to Russia’s intentions 
in Asia and advise the Chinese government to doubt 
the aims of the United States. 

At the same time, the Japanese government is pre- 
paring the population for a serious military test with 
the Allies in the home islands. The Tokyo newspaper 
Asahi on July 25 warned that a “gigantic offensive” 
against the islands “has now entered upon its most 
decisive stage.” On the same day General Jiro 
Minami, president of the totalitarian party, the Po- 
litical Association of Great Japan, predicted that 
“further difficulties” lie ahead for the Japanese in 
the form of “intensified raids and the strain of liv- 
ing conditions.” ‘The Japanese people are different 
from the German nation,” Prime Minister Suzuki is 
quoted as saying by Asahi. “When the Japanese fight 
with their backs to the wall, they will most assuredly 
display tremendous power. . .. When the worst comes 
to the worst, they will show their true mettle.” 


FOR VICTORY °* 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


The Japanese, nevertheless, permit signs of war. 
weariness and apathy to enter their published and 
broadcast reports. Takeo Tada, Naval Minister, said 
on July 19: “Among the people it is regrettable that 
there are some who, discouraged by the real facts 
of this fierce war, become resigned to an attitude of 
aimless and destructive disinterest and abandonment, 
or those who are cartied off by an impatient frame 
of mind, neglect their duties and become idle and 
resentful.” The unsatisfactory food situation cop. 
tributes to this attitude. The ration of staple food. 
stuffs was cut 10 per cent for the summer months. 
The Japanese Board of Technology is trying to popu. 
larize the consumption of acorns, whose ‘“‘nourish. 
ment is equivalent to whole rice,” according to the 
Japanese radio. Inflation now threatens further to 
shake the people’s support of the war. 

U.S. PREPARES FOR THE FINISH. Although 
the Truman-Churchill-Chiang ultimatum can be read 
as an invitation to the Japanese people to put pres- 
sure on their leaders, the military campaign-planning 


of the United States assumes that civilian discontent ' 


will not cause the Japanese resistance to collapse 
until it is obvious that the military situation is hope. 
less. That point has not yet been reached. The Jap- 
anese still have material for continuing the war ina 
large army and in a supply of aircraft which current- 
ly are being held back from the struggle. The 
mountainous terrain of the Japanese islands gives the 
enemy hope that an invasion will prove a difficult 
feat. But the overwhelming comparative strength of 
the Allied forces is certain to force Japan into an 
exhausted defeat unless advocates of soft surrender 
in this country weaken our military operations by a 


renewal of their campaign. To forestall such a devel: | 


opment, President Truman would be wise, on his 
return from Potsdam, to explain not to the Japanese 
but to the American people the issues at stake in the 
Far Eastern war. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


China’s Crisis, by Lawrence K. Rosinger (Research Ass 
ciate on the Far East, Foreign Policy Association). New 
York, Alfred A. Knopf, 1945. $3.00 


Believing that our historic friendship for China has been 
compounded of excessive sentimentality, Mr. Rosinger has 
sought to present a realistic study of the political forces at 
work in China, the economic crisis and the conflict between 
Chungking and the Communist régime in Yenan. Mr. 
Rosinger contends that liberal reforms in China will con- 
tribute to closer cooperation in the Far East among all 
the great powers, Russia included. 


) 


You. X2 


WI 
HE 


of 
and int 
Althou 
new W 
“impet 
ing OV 
nants ¢ 
the ru! 
The 
asked | 
soon t 
still to 
far gr 
recons 
Chine: 
his ste 
the Ja 
“they 
like o 
But it 
the th 
sea ar 
they | 
which 
man < 
the p 
Japan 
point, 
could 
atom: 
Th 
many 
fore : 
of th 
dam 
cance 


W 


