1 order to 
abassadon 
1 the past, 
of the po 
cient both 
its leader. 
executive 
the Presi- 
istances to 
y is made 
scene. 
LENT. As 
1an is Said 
seorge C 
» the tem 
ep toward 
rerests and 
ions raised 
round the 
ping issue 
few yeats 
d interna: 
onalist ex 
as and 0 
oward the 
e in coop 
aith in the 
d his hope 
k together. 


BOLLEs 


Fe 1 g 1945 


2 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


, *? . 
Weta ¥ we o * 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 9 


DecemBmr 14, 1945 


UNO’S SUCCESS DEPENDS ON PROMPT PEACE SETTLEMENT 


HE announcement on December 7 that the For- 

eign Secretaries of the United States, Britain and 
the U.S.S.R. would meet in Moscow on December 15 
for the exchange of views on atomic energy and 
other international issues of concern to the Big 
Three is the first official indication that an effort will 
be made to break the deadlock produced by the 
Council of Foreign Ministers in London. When Pres- 
ident Truman, on November 29, said at a press con- 
ference that there would be no further Big Three 
meetings, he presumably meant that he anticipated 
no conferences in the near future between heads of 
states, such as had been held during the war at 
Teheran, Cairo, Yalta and Potsdam. This seems to 
be a wise decision, for while the world is still in a 
state of grave emergency which requires the constant 
attention of heads of states, frequent conferences be- 
tween them have a distinct disadvantage. The public, 
in each country, expects dramatic actions on the part 
of presidents and prime ministers who, knowing 
that they must reach some kind of agreement or else 
suffer public obloquy, find themselves under danger- 
ous pressure to arrive at compromises which all too 
often are inadequately considered, and ambiguously 
drafted so as to avoid splits between the conferees on 
fundamental issues. 

UNO CANNOT MAKE PEACE TERMS. At the 
same time, President Truman, by adding that in ninety 
days the United Nations Organization should be able 
to tackle the problems now outstanding between the 
Big Three, created the misleading impression that he 
expected the UNO to undertake the task of drafting 
the peace settlement for Europe which, seven months 
after V-E Day, still remains to be done. The Allied 
statesmen had never intended to saddle the UNO 
with the task of peace-making. On the contrary, it 
had been definitely decided not to follow the ex- 
ample of the Paris Peace Conference, which had 


tried both to make the peace and to build the League - 
of Nations, with the result that the League Covenant, 

having been made an integral part of the peace 

treaties, dwindled in public esteem as the peace trea- 

ties came into disrepute both in the victorious and 

the defeated nations. It was intended, this time, to 

let the UNO start with a clean slate, free from such 

onus as might eventually attach to the peace terms 

imposed on Germany, Italy and Japan. The victors, 

therefore, are not in a position to shuffle off the bur- 
dens of peacemaking on to the UNO, which is now 
organizing itself in London, with the hope that it 
may start to function there in January. 

There is no reason, however, why the admittedly 
arduous work of clearing the ground for an agree- 
ment between the Big Three concerning the terms of 
the peace settlement in Europe should not be carried 
on by their Foreign Ministers and regularly accred- 
ited diplomatic representatives. In fact, it can hardly 
be expected that Foreign Ministers and diplomats 
will be able to perform their appointed tasks effec- 
tively if they always face the possibility that their 
painstaking efforts will be disregarded or repudiated 
by their respective heads of states at intimate confer- 
ences from which experts have all too often been 
excluded. At the Yalta Conference President Roose- 
velt, Prime Minister Churchill and Marshal Stalin 
agreed that ‘‘permanent machinery should be set up 
for regular consultation between the three Foreign 
Secretaries.” The Yalta agreement provided that the 
Foreign Secretaries would ‘“‘meet as often as may be 
necessary, probably about every three or four 
months.’ These meetings were to be held in rotation 
in the three capitals, the first being planned for Lon- 
don, where a meeting was held in September. 

PEACE COUNCIL OF THREE—OR FIVE? But 
this first meeting was transformed into a Council of 
Foreign Ministers, representatives of France and 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


China being added to the Big Three. This Council 
(as distinguished from the regular consultation be- 
tween the Foreign Ministers of the Big Three pro- 
vided for at Yalta), was established by the Potsdam 
Declaration which stated that the Council of Foreign 
Ministers, “representing the five principal powers,” 
was to continue “the necessary preparatory work for 
the peace settlements”—presumably both in Europe 
and Asia. This Council was “normally” to meet in 
London, which was to be the seat of its Joint Secre- 
tariat. The first task of this Council was to draw up 
“with a view to their submission to the United Na- 
tions,” treaties of peace with Italy, Rumania, Hun- 
gary, Bulgaria, and Finland. The Council was also 
to be “utilized” for the preparation of a peace settle- 
ment for Germany “to be accepted by the govern- 
ment of Germany when a government adequate for 
the purpose is established.” The Potsdam Declara- 
tion, however, further stated that, “for the discharge 
of each of these tasks the Council will be composed 
of the members representing those states which were 
signatory to the terms of surrender imposed upon the 
enemy state concerned.” For the purpose of the peace 
settlement for Italy, France was to be regarded as a 
signatory to the terms of surrender, but in the case 
of Rumania, Hungary and Bulgaria it would seem 
that the United States, Britain and Russia, and in 
the case of Finland, Britain and Russia only, should 
have been in consultation, without the participation 
of France and China. It was on this question of pro- 
cedure that the Council of Foreign Ministers finally 
foundered. The most practical procedure for the Big 
Three, now that they have resumed the pattern set at 
Yalta, would be to reach agreement with each other 


U.S. LOAN TO BRITAIN AVERTS WORLD ECONOMIC CLEAVAGE 


After recurring rumors of a breakdown in Anglo- 
American economic discussions, the successful con- 
clusion of the Washington negotiations that lasted 
three months is an encouraging move toward world 
stabilization. The very magnitude of the agreement 
concluded on December 6 is significant in view of 
the difficulties that have attended other international 
meetings since the end of the war. The agreement, 
which is subject to ratification by the American Con- 
gress and the British Parliament, establishes a basis 
for cooperation between the world’s two most im- 
portant commercial nations, and prepares the ground- 
work for more general international action in the 
field of trade. Parliament is being asked at the same 
time to adhere to the Bretton Woods plans for the 
International Fund and Development Bank. Al- 
though the Fund has had many opponents in Britain, 
it now appears possible also that the Bretton Woods 
financial agencies will be accepted in view of the aid 
offered to Britain by the new loan. Russia’s adher- 
ence to the Bank and Fund is also needed before the 


== Page Two 


———— 


On as many points at issue as possible, and then sub. 
mit their decisions for scrutiny and discussion by , 
peace conference to which all nations which contri}. 
uted to the winning of the war in Europe would fy 
invited—as, indeed, was envisaged in the Potsdam 
Declaration. 

Actually, during the dark weeks that have elapsed 
since the breakdown of the London Council of Fo, 
eign Ministers, considerable work has quietly bee, 
done by the Foreign Offices and accredited diplo. 
matic representatives of the Big Three—work which, 
if undertaken in time, might have averted the Log. 
don stalemate. Meanwhile, however, a tendency has 
developed to use the atom bomb as a justification fo, 
thoroughgoing revision of the machinery established 
at San Francisco before it has even had an opportup. 
ity to get started. It has been obvious for years that 
international organization could not function effec 
tively if each member nation continued to insist op 
untrammeled exercise of its sovereignty. But the 
contention now advanced in some quarters that 
world government, which obviously will not be 
achieved overnight, is the only alternative to destruc. 
tion of the world by the atom bomb tends to obscure 
the fundamental issue at stake. Even the most in. 
genious control by a world government of the atom 
bomb, and of other weapons already known or yet 
to be invented, will not of itself solve the difficulties 
between nations that lead to wars. The international 
machinery now in existence, with all its faults and 
weaknesses, would serve our purpose for the time 
being if we are really determined to coordinate our 
national needs with the interests of the international 


community. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


end of the year, and it is hoped that the U.S.SR, 
which originally favored the plans more than Britain, 
will now accept them. 

ANGLO-AMERICAN AGREEMENT. In one 
stride three encouraging steps have been taken under 
the new Anglo-American agreement. First, in con- 
trast to the situation following World War I, no 
serious controversy will now arise among the Allies 
with respect to war debts if the Anglo-American set- 
tlement of lend-lease and mutual aid proves a prece- 
dent for other countries coming under that program. 
Second, the loan which has been arranged to aid 
Britain’s foreign economic recovery attests to the 
ability of the two countries to continue their wartime 
cooperation in a field where differences between 
them are most likely to occur. Third, the agreement 
also proposes that a world trade conference be con- 
vened next summer to consider the adoption of lib 
eral rules for foreign trading, the abandonment of 
all but a minimum of restrictive commercial prac: 
tices, and the creation of a World Trade Organiza- 


— 
tion. Th 
and Soc: 


tion, thr 
fortified 


Unde 
States \ 
amount 
liquidat 
$25,000 
granted 
owed tc 
amount 
taken w 
fifty ye 
visions, 
duced t 
waive t 
periodic 
when 1 
balance 


BAR 
as in ar 
promis 
tion’ O 
In the. 
ited on 
United 
nationa 
reward 
nations 
Master 
any fut 
ternatic 
ing a ¢ 
the fut 
sence ¢ 
be forg 
of the 
Witl 


may m 


Just 


REP 
—_—,-— 
— 


FOREIG) 
Headquar 
second-cl; 
one mont 


oa 


—= 
then sub. 
ion by a 
1 COntrib. 
would be 
Potsdam 


© elapsed 
1 of For. 
tly been 
>d diplo. 
tk which, 
the Lop. 
lency has 
ation for 
tablished 
/pportun- 
ears that 
on effec. 
insist on 
But the 
fers that 

not be 
» destruc. 
> obscure 
most in- 
the atom 
mM Of yet 
ifficulties 
rnational 
tults and 
the time 
nate our 
rational 


DEAN 


E 


U.S.S.R., 
. Britain, 


In one 
en under 
in con- 
ar I, no 
re Allies 
ican set- 
a prece- 
rogram. 
1 to aid 
; to the 
wartime 
between 
reement 
- be con- 
n of lib 
ment of 
jal prac 
ir ganiza- 


ae 
——— 


tion. This new body is to be attached to the Economic 
and Social Council of the United Nations Organiza- 
tion, thus giving added hope that the UNO will be 
fortified by collective action on economic problems. 


Under the terms of the agreement the United 
States will extend to Britain a “line of credit” 
amounting to $3,750,000,000 and, in addition to 
liquidating lend-lease obligations amounting to 
$25,000,000,000, a loan of $650,000,000 will be 
ranted fcr settling remaining lend-lease claims 
owed to the United States. Whether or not the total 
amount of the three and three-quarters billion is 
taken up within five years, repayment to extend over 
fifty years will then begin. Because of technical pro- 
visions, the two per cent interest charges will be re- 
duced to a somewhat lower figure. Britain may also 
waive the payment of interest charges, but not the 
periodic amount due on principal, during those years 
when its international payments are seriously un- 
balanced. 


BARGAIN FOR BOTH PARTIES. This bargain, 
as in any contractual arrangement, represents a com- 
promise of original objectives, but legal “considera- 
tion” or benefits have been secured by both parties. 
In the lend-lease settlement both nations have prof- 
ited on the terms of that original arrangement. The 
United States, which undertook the program for its 
national defense, has already reaped much of that 
reward in the successful conclusion of the war. Both 
nations, in accordance with Article VII of the 
Master Lend-Lease Agreement, have now avoided 
any future debt conflict like that which impeded in- 
ternational financial and economic cooperation dur- 
ing a considerable part of the inter-war period. In 
the future the benefits to be derived from the ab- 
sence of any such conflict—although they may soon 
be forgotten—will perhaps outweigh the importance 
of the strictly monetary features of the new loan. 


With the credit now to be made available, Britain 
may more quickly recoup its vital foreign trade with- 


Just published— 


A NEW BRITAIN UNDER LABOR? 
by Grant S. McClellan 


25¢c 


November 15 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
Reports are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscriptions $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


—— 


Page Three 


eeepeamnel 


out recourse to further excessive extension of state 
controls over exports and imports. Its foreign ex- 
change difficulties will be lessened, and sterling will 
once more become a freer currency. The agreement 
also binds Britain to adjust some of its external finan- 
cial obligations by allowing the conversion of ster- 
ling funds now blocked in London, like those owed 
to India, so that such countries may use them for 
purchases elsewhere than in Britain. For the United 
States the loan represents not only a sound commer- 
cial investment. In terms of the whole agreement we 
recognize our position as a full-fledged creditor na- 
tion. This is evident both in the solution of the lend- 
lease debt and in our commitment to pursue further 
tariff reductions. At the same time we have obtained 
the binding agreement of Britain to reduce its finan- 
cial restrictions within the sterling area and work 
toward the lowering of commercial barriers within 
the British preferential trading system. 


WORLD TRADE “CHARTER.” These commit- 
ments, which go beyond the immediate loan provi- 
sions, and the plans for calling a world trade meet- 
ing could only have come about if Britain were as- 
sured some relief from its present economic crisis. 
Temporarily, the bargain will appear to be a very 
hard one for Britain, which originally hoped for an 
outright grant. But if the major industrial nations 
can launch their future trade on healthy terms, then 
there is real hope that international trade as a whole 
may be expanded. Needless to say, the necessity for 
world trade expansion still remains paramount, de- 
spite the United States aid to Britain foreshadowed 
under the new agreement. Recent revision of esti- 
mates raises the volume of export increase Britain 
must undertake from 50 per cent to 75 per cent 
above pre-war levels. In view of the American drive 
to secure export markets, it is obvious that the United 
Nations will prosper only by substantially increasing 
total trade. In competing for the increased trade, 
however, serious tensions were bound to occur be- 
tween this country and Britain. Now the two na- 
tions have agreed, not only on the touchy subject of 
the loan itself, but on the necessity of reducing tariffs 
and other barriers to trade, and the future regulation 
of cartels and commodity agreements. Other coun- 
tries can now hope to adjust their relations with these 
two great trading nations free from the threatening 
prospect, which might otherwise have arisen, of hav- 
ing to choose sides with either the sterling or the 
dollar bloc. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 9, DzcempEr 14, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 


Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Screet, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lest, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor, Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


o¢ month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Q's: 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


TREND TOWARD INTERVENTION MIRRORS EXPANDING U.S. INTERESTS 


During the past twelve months the United States 
has increasingly resorted to intervention in the affairs 
of other nations—a policy it had previously tried to 
avoid outside the Western Hemisphere. As a result 
of developments in China and in the Balkans, the 
United States now practices intervention in all parts 
of the world where national interests are deemed to 
require special protection. The first meeting of the 
United Nations Assembly and the Big Three confer- 
ence in Moscow will give this country opportunities 
to systematize our intervention so that it may serve 
constructive purposes, and not cause damage to 
world peace. 


SAD WESTERN HEMISPHERE EXPERIENCE. 
The growing pressure for a policy of intervention is 
one of the many strong forces now hammering at 
the concept of unlimited national sovereignty whose 
modification in a slight respect the Senate accepted 
on December 4 when it approved, 65 to 7, legisla- 
tion permitting the President to make armed forces 
available to the United Nations Organization Secur- 
ity Council without Congressional authorization. The 
United Nations Charter itself in Article 34 limits the 
sovereignty concept by granting the Security Council 
the right to investigate “any dispute or any situation 
which may lead to international friction or give rise 
to a dispute, in order to determine whether the con- 
tinuance of the dispute or situation is likely to en- 
danger the maintenance of international peace and 
security.” 

Experience with previous interventions has shown 
the United States the shortcomings of lone-hand ac- 
tion, especially in our relations with other American 
republics. Although the series of Latin American in- 
terventions undertaken by the United States during 
the twentieth century undoubtedly brought material 
benefits to the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Cuba and 
Nicaragua, all the nations to the south of us came to 
resent this country’s interference in their affairs. The 
threat to inter-American solidarity created by that 
resentment has prevented the United States from 
openly intervening since 1934, even in the case of 
Argentina, whose domestic and foreign policies are 
at the present time regarded by the Administration 
as hostile to our interests. 


INTERVENTION IN CHINA. In spite of our 
none too happy Latin American experience, the 
United States has recently intervened unilaterally in 
China’s internal affairs by giving military assistance 


to the Chinese national government which strength. 
ened it in the desultory civil war it is waging with 
armed Communist factions. On December 7 Secre. 
tary of State James F. Byrnes announced modification 
of our intervention policy in Asia, which up to that 
time had made no distinction between the recognized 
government of Chiang Kai-shek and China as a ng. 
tion. That government, Mr. Byrnes said, “must be 
broadened to include the representatives of those 
large and well-organized groups who are now with- 
out any voice in the government of China.” The 
United States, however, has not abandoned its inter. 
vention in China, officially justified on the ground 
that the presence of American forces is necessary to 
effect the surrender of the Japanese. By contrast, in 
Iran, in whose affairs Russia is accused of interven. 
ing, the United States has proposed the withdrawal 
of all Big Three military forces by January 1 and an 
international agreement on nonintervention. 


AGREEMENTS FOR COLLECTIVE INTER 
VENTION. At the same time the United States has 
hesitated to use existing instruments for collective 
intervention, such as the one agreed on at the Mexico 
City Conference of 1945 for the Western Hemi 
sphere, which has never been invoked. While hon- 
ored more in the breach than in the observance, 
the principle of joint intervention to preserve the 
peace appears to have found general acceptance 
among nations and, with the publication of Um 
guay’s note of November 22 on this subject, has 
been given a fresh interpretation. The note suggests 
the need for an agreement among the American Re 
publics enabling them to take steps against a régime 
that persistently violates the essential rights of its 
citizens, on the ground that such conduct “‘sooner of 
later produces grave international repercussions.’ 
The proposal was unquestionably motivated by feat 
of Uruguay’s big neighbor, Argentina, and at once 
received the “unqualified adherence” of the United 
States. Mutual suspicion and fear of its possible mis- 
use to the advantage of this country, however, may 
impede ready acceptance of the Uruguayan proposal 
by the Latin American nations. Moreover, as in the 
case of the Chapultepec agreement, the question 
arises as to how machinery for intervention in the 
Western Hemisphere can be harmonized with obligs 
tions undertaken by the United Nations under the 
San Francisco Charter. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


1918 


F 


Vou. XX 


TRUM 


HE 

dete 
settled | 
a Chur 
Preside: 
15. Th 
proval 
spokesn 
press as 
positior 
that mz 
stress tl 
particul 
mentin; 
disagre 
whole, 
recent 


HUE 
ident’s 
of a t 
former 
for it | 
icy of 
govern 
civil w 
our mi 

Such 
to res} 
the en 
criticis 
States 
of the 
the sit 
impro' 
while | 


harmo 
ment, 


