





inland’s 
orthern 
serman 
pendent 
upplies. 
Recent 
h hope 
the day 
~f Stalin 
1 Russia 
;, more: 
view of 
cast on 
the Fin- 
1e chau- 
and an 


govern 
ssly en- 
aggran- 
ges that 
ishes of 
1zi pow 
egic st 
> Krem- 
ango in 
nsidera- 
illing to 
' Europe 
ny. The 
» of the 
d “com: 
d in his 


LIOTT 


[DS 








* 
HICAL Roe 
penis . 1 BRARY 
“ _ mICH. 


FOREIGN 


U = . 
Aiversity of Mich 


MAR 12 1943 | 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


igan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


POLICY, BUBEEEIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 21 


Marcu 12, 1943 





CHINA MOST LIKELY FRONT IF JAPAN PLANS MAJOR OFFENSIVE 


lf the Battle of the Bismarck Sea, during March 2-4, 
had been simply a contest of opposing aircraft 
in which a numerically inferior American force lost 
only 4 planes while putting 102 Japanese machines 
out of action, the result could be considered an im- 
pressive instance of the weakening of enemy air 
power. The additional fact that 3 enemy cruisers, 
7 destroyers, 12 merchant ships and some 17,000 
troops and personnel were sent to the bottom trans- 
forms the event into a major blow to Japanese 
strategic plans and clearly contributes to the safety 
of Australia. The immediate objective of the ill- 
fated Japanese convoy was the reinforcement of Lae, 
northern New Guinea base threatened by advancing 
United Nations troops. If successful, the move would 
also have helped to protect Rabaul, key point on 
New Britain which still remains beyond our grasp. 


In addition, it may have been intended as one step 


in the direction of Australia. 

WILL JAPAN TAKE THE OFFENSIVE? Pre- 
dictions as to whether Japan’s fundamental inten- 
tions are offensive or defensive have been noticeably 
lacking in dispatches from Australia and other Far 
Eastern areas since the beginning of the month. Gen- 
eral MacArthur’s communiqué of March 1, which 
warned of the “growing reinforcement in all cate- 
pories of enemy strength in the island perimeter 
enveloping the upper half of Australia,” concluded 
in ambiguous fashion that Japan was “‘taking up a 
position in readiness.’’ Beyond this, all that is known 
publicly is that since the Battle of Midway, early 
last June, the Japanese have made no major offensive 
move, although they sought to retake Guadalcanal 
and have made efforts to advance on New Guinea 
and in China. It has therefore been generally as- 
sumed that their chief purpose is to consolidate as 
thoroughly as possible the vast territories they won 
$0 quickly in the months following Pearl Harbor. 

A policy of consolidation is feasible as long as 


the United Nations are limited to a war of mod- 
erate attrition in the East. But can the Japanese con- 
tinue their policy if in the next six or nine months 
the instruments of attrition—airplanes, ships, sub- 
marines—are greatly augmented? We are, it is true, 
quite properly concentrating our major force against 
Germany, but it is also more than likely that air 
transport into China will soon increase considerably, 
and more warplanes will be made available for the 
Chinese fighting front. Moreover, with the end of 
the monsoon next fall a large-scale invasion of 
Burma may begin. It would seem that if Japan gen- 
uinely expects such actions to take place, it can hardly 
avoid planning anticipatory countermoves this spring 
or summer. 

Certainly it would be an illusion to think that 
Japan has lost its offensive power. The Japanese 
ground forces may be stronger than before Pearl 
Harbor, since their natural expansion should more 
than compensate for slight sacrifices of men and 
equipment during the past year. The air force -with- 
out doubt has suffered much and is apparently 
seeking to avoid combat, but this may indicate an 
intention to concentrate on a single strategic objec- 
tive rather than to expend men and machines in dis- 
persed contests. As for the Japanese Navy, despite 
serious setbacks, it undoubtedly remains a powerful 
fleet, capable of striking heavy blows. These facts 
do not mean that Japan necessarily has any intention 
of making a major move now, but they suggest that 
some time before we are ready to take the offensive 
in Asia the enemy may attempt a strong counterstroke. 

ON WHAT FRONT? In view of the Japanese 
defeat at Midway and the resulting shortage of air- 
craft carriers, a drive against our positions in the 
Central Pacific seems unlikely. If this is so, a feint 
in the Aleutian area can probably be discounted, 
since such a move would have most meaning as the 
second arm of a pincers whose first arm was reach- 








——— PaeTwo = — 


ing toward Hawaii. An attack in the Aleutians might 
nevertheless be useful if Japan were planning to 
strike at Siberia, but conditions for a campaign in 
northern Asia appear definitely unfavorable. In the 
south Pacific the Australian front seems reasonably 
safe, especially since an enormous naval force would 
be required to hit at it directly. While Japan would 
probably hesitate to risk its fleet, even though the 
air and sea forces ranged against it were numerically 
inferior, offensive-defensive blows in the south Pacific 
cannot be ruled out. 


There also remain as possible objectives India 
and China, the latter being the primary United 
_ Nations front in Asia, since it alone—apart from 
Siberia—can bring us into contact with the mass of 
the Japanese Army and give us land bases close to 
the Japanese homeland. Not only would Japanese 
action on the mainland be far easier than a cam- 
paign in the waters of the south Pacific, but a drive 
against eastern India would, if successful, cut off 
Allied air aid to China and destroy for a long time 
all possibility of a large-scale reinvasion of Burma 
designed to reopen the Burma Road. Yet, the 
strength of India’s defenses has increased markedly 
in the past year, despite the difficulties of the politi- 
cal situation, and the beginning of the monsoon 
season in May will create conditions unfavorable for 
an offensive on either side. Moreover, in view of 
the present isolation of the China front, the objec- 
tives of a campaign in India, in so far as an effect 
on Chungking is sought, can perhaps be achieved 
more cheaply by action in China itself. 

THE DANGER TO CHINA. If, as seems quite 
likely, Japan expects that it may ultimately have to 








—— 





withdraw from important island bases in the south 
Pacific, no compensatory move could be of greater 
value than an effort to deprive the United Nations 
of the China front. Although it is true that at the 
moment the Japanese appear to have been pushed 


back in their effort to cross the Salween river jg ' 


Yunnan province, the danger to China remains 
grave. It is no secret that the Chinese military front 
has deteriorated considerably in recent years, so that 
Japan now maintains less than half a million troops 
there—and not all of these may be indispensable— 
as compared with perhaps a million in the earlier 
years of the Far Eastern conflict. 

The decline is also indicated by political tension 
within China as well as by the weakened physical 
condition of many Chinese troops. Some of the 
causes are well known: the cutting off of China 
from sources of foreign supplies, plus the erosive 
effects of five and a half years of Japanese invasion, 
It must also be admitted that certain shortcomings 
of Chinese political and economic policy have had 
serious results. Nor is it by any means clear, despite 
the genuine difficulties faced by Chungking, that in 
one or another sector the equipment present might 
not permit a more aggressive military program. 
What is required is an increasingly vigorous effort 
on the part of the United Nations to help China, 
combined with Chinese determination to surmount 
many heartbreaking obstacles and to strengthen 
their front from within. A double effort of this type 
can thwart possible Japanese plans to destroy Chinese 
resistance in a period when the promise of outside 
aid is growing brighter. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


VAST REHABILITATION TASKS WILL CONFRONT UNITED NATIONS 


As new air blows are inflicted on the nerve centers 
of Europe in preparation for invasion, there is in- 
creasing need for the Allies to adopt practical plans 
for future relief and reconstruction in the liberated 
countries. At the end of this war, starving popula- 
tions will have to be fed, millions of men and women 
driven from their homes will want to return, indus- 





What is the trend of public opinion in Canada 
on post-war problems? Do Canadians think inter- 
national political collaboration essential? Do they 
understand the economic issues at stake? Are they 
ready to join the Pan American Union? Do they 
want to break their tie with Britain? Read— 


WHAT CANADIANS THINK 
ABOUT POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION 
by 5 prominent Canadian editors 


March 1 issue of ForriGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











tries will have to be rebuilt or reorganized for peace 


production, and the output of field and factories will 
have to be expanded to absorb the millions of re- 
leased soldiers and war workers. Before the final 
victory of the democracies, some of these problems 
will emerge on a smaller scale in territories gradu- 
ally liberated from the Nazi yoke. The United Na- 
tions cannot, therefore, afford delay in drawing up 
plans for post-war economic reconstruction, for it is 
largely on their shoulders that this colossal burden 
will rest. Moreover, establishment of a well-planned, 
large-scale relief action may be one of the most ef- 
fective ways of easing the transition from war to 
post-war economy. 


RELIEF MEASURES. The first job facing the vic 
tors on every front, and especially in Europe, will be 
that of providing the peoples of the liberated terti- 
tories with sufficient food to insure their progressive 
physical recuperation after years of inadequate diet. 
The fulfillment of this task is so urgent that it will 








— 


sOuth 
‘eater 
tions 
t the 
ished 


er in | 


Naings 
front 
) that 
roops 
ble— 
arlier 


nsion 
ysical 
f the 
China 
rosive 
asion. 
mings 
> had 
espite 
lat in 
might 
gram. 
effort 
“hina, 
nount 
gthen 
s type 
hinese 
utside 


GER 


Ss 


peace 
5 will 
of re- 
» final 
blems 
pradu- 
d Na 
ng up 
yr it 1S 
yurden 
anned, 
ost ef- 
var to 


he vic- 
will be 
1 terri- 
ressive 
re diet. 
it will 











— 
— 


have to precede all political reorganization, and at 
first will have to be dispensed by the advancing mili- 
tary units themselves. Then, in the second stage, this 
program should be administered by an agency espe- 
cially equipped for large-scale service, such as the 
Office of Foreign Relief and Rehabilitation Opera- 
tions, set up in the United States in November 1942, 
or a future United Nations Relief Council. 

Preparations for carrying out this job competently 
started many months ago in Washington and Lon- 
don. An Inter-Allied Relief Committee, represent- 
ing Great Britain and the governments-in-exile, was 
established in the British capital in September 1941. 
The head of this committee, Sir Frederick Leith- 
Ross, spent some time in Washington last summer, 
and presumably laid the foundations for an over-all 
United Nations relief organization. Director Leh- 
man has stressed the fact that the present United 
States relief agency is only the nucleus of what is 
hoped will soon be a full-fledged United Nations 
agency, with representatives from all the nations 
concerned on its governing body and administrative 
staff. Negotiations to this end have already been 
started, through the State Department, with the 
interested Allied powers. An unofficial Washing- 
ton dispatch of March 4, 1943 further suggests that 
the contemplated United Nations Relief Council 
may be headed by ex-Governor Lehman, with Sir 
Frederick as its first technical officer. Meanwhile, 
comprehensive studies of the probable needs of the 
countries now under Axis domination are being 
made, and special supplies of food and medicines are 
being stored at convenient points in the Old as well 
as the New World, in preparation for the day when 
they can be used in a zone under Allied military 
control. In these future operations, the practical ex- 
perience the Allies have gained in aiding foreign 
populations in North Africa during the past few 
months will stand them in good stead. 


TOWARD A POST-WAR ECONOMIC COUN- 
CIL? When the war is won, the next logical step 
would be development of this inter-Allied relief or- 
ganization into a central world food pool in which 
all nations, victor and vanquished, would participate. 
It would be a mistake to believe that the United 
States alone—assuming even the best will on the 
part of the American people—could feed all the 





|undernourished peoples of the world. Food produc- 


tion cannot be accelerated at the same rate as that 
of industrial goods and, although the United States 
is one of the richest agricultural countries, it could 


Page Three 








a 
S emeenanetill 


————== 








at best feed only a small part of the world’s popu- 
lation of over two billion. If international relief 
is to work at all, it will require the participa- 
tion of all the other large food-producing United 
Nations, plus the pooling of the food output of the 
liberated countries. Such a world system might well 
be based on principles similar to those adopted for 
wartime lend-lease. 

Even after the immediate problem of relief is, 
met, the need for preventing starvation in some parts 
of the world while there are huge surpluses in 
others will require world-wide control of food. 
That the establishment of such a plan is under way 
was indicated by President Roosevelt's announcement 
on February 23 that a preparatory United Nations 
conference on post-war world food problems would 
be held in the near future. On March 1 Acting 
Secretary of State Sumner Welles elaborated on the 
President’s statement by declaring that the meeting 
would propose a program for discussions among the 
Allied countries with a view to the creation of a 
permanent international agency. No specific state- 
ments have yet been released regarding the agenda 
of the conference. It can be assumed, however, that 
preparations are already well under way, and that 
this meeting may represent the first public step to- 
ward the establishment of a joint United Nations 
economic council. The existence of such a central 
agency might well pave the way, when the time 
comes, for the permanent and binding world-wide 
economic cooperation which the Versailles peace 
settlement neglected to provide. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


(The first of a series of four articles on post-war economic 
reconstruction.) 





Political Handbook of the World, edited by Walter H. Mal- 
lory. New York, Harpers, for the Council on Foreign 


Relations, 1942. $2.50 

Valuable guide to governments, parties, leaders and 
press of all countries. This revision includes such details 
as texts of Vichy Constitutional Acts and a list of Ger- 
many’s territorial accessions. 


Slaves Need No Leaders, by Walter M. Kotschnig. New 
York, Oxford University Press, 19438. $2.75 


After surveying education in Europe between the two 
world wars and analyzing the impact of Nazism on Ger- 
man institutions of learning, Dr. Kotschnig, Professor of 
Comparative Education at Smith College, urges the im- 
mediate adoption of plans for post-war education on demo- 
cratic lines. He advocates the establishment of an Interna- 
tional Educational Agency, one of whose tasks would be to 
assist the efforts of German teachers to re-educate their 
own people, but opposes any attempt by the United Na- 
tions to direct or supervise German education after the 
war. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 21, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
second-class matter December 2, 
ote month for change of address on membership publications. 


MaRCH 12, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dagan, Editor. Entered as 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


} Association, Incorporated. National 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


>is: 








Washington News Letter 














MarcH 9.—The disclosure by Carlton J. H. Hayes, 
U.S. Ambassador to Madrid, in a speech at Barce- 
lona on February 26 that this country has been ex- 
porting oil, cotton, food, and other products in con- 
siderable quantities to Spain certainly fluttered the 
Congressional dovecotes. Senator Robert R. Rey- 
nolds, of North Carolina, chairman of the Senate 
Military Affairs Committee, called it a “damned out- 
rage’ and there was talk for a while of a Congres- 
sional inquiry into the matter. 

It is unfortunate that the government is at a dis- 
advantage as compared with its critics in that in the 
midst of the war it cannot show its hand without 
giving away the game. One thing, however, can be 
confidently affirmed. The so-called “appeasement’’ 
policy toward Spain is not a plot on the part of a 
handful of reactionary, pro-Fascist functionaries in 
the State Department to prop up a tottering Franco 
régime. It is a policy which has been approved by 
the joint chiefs of staff, as well as President Roose- 
velt, and has in addition the support of the British 
government. It is dictated by economic, military and 
political considerations alike. 

WHY WE PLAY BALL WITH FRANCO. Act- 
ing Secretary of State Sumner Welles pointed out in 
a statement to the press on March 1 that commerce 
with Spain is a two-way trade, and that there are 
certain Spanish commodities which are needed in 
our war effort. They include such goods as cork, 
wolfram, zinc, iron pyrites, woolen goods and dried 
fruits, while the British are in the market for 
high-grade Bilboa iron ore. Some of these products 
we want for ourselves, and others just to keep them 
from falling into German hands. Last winter, when 
exports of petroleum products from the United States 
were cut off and Spanish ships had ceased calling at 
American ports, our trade relations with Spain nearly 
reached the vanishing point, but in the past year, 
thanks largely to the efforts of the Board of Eco- 
nomic Warfare, a considerable exchange of goods 
beneficial to both countries has developed. 

The military argument for the government's Span- 
ish policy was pithily put by Senator Lister Hill of 
Alabama, Democratic whip, who declared: “If we 
can save the lives of American boys by the shipment 
of goods to Spain, I'm for shipping the goods.” 
Trade with Spain is designed to strengthen Franco's 
attitude of neutrality by providing him with com- 
modities Spain desperately needs, such as oil, ma- 
chinery, and railway equipment, which would be 


FOR VICTORY ° 


automatically cut off if his country became involved 
in the war. 

Left to himself Franco, it is believed here, will re. 
main neutral. Nobody in Washington of course is 
under any illusion as to where El Caudillo’s sym. 
pathies lie. His ideological affinities with the Axis 
have often been proclaimed and are indeed implicit 
in the nature of his régime. 

These factors, nevertheless, were not powerful 
enough to induce Franco to go to war in the av- 
tumn of 1940 when Hitler seemed an almost certain 
victor. They are hardly likely to prevail now, when 
it is clear even to the Germans that the best their 
Fuehrer can hope to get out of this war is a stale. 
mate. The experience of Mussolini in plunging his 
country into war, in the expectation that he was 
getting on the winning bandwagon, will certainly 
serve as a caution to the Spanish dictator. 


THE IBERIAN PACT. The belief that the Span- 
ish government intends to keep out of war was con- 
firmed last December when General de Jordana, who 
succeeded Serrano Sufier as Foreign Minister in Sep- 
tember, concluded his Iberian Neutrality Pact with 
Premier Oliveira Salazar of Portugal. The Spanish 
Foreign Minister stressed the fact that the purpose of 
the diplomatic adjournment was the strengthening of 
Iberian neutrality. This statement was taken at its 
face value in Washington, where Elmer Davis—who 
as head of the Office of War Information is probably 
the best informed man on the subject here—declared 
on December 23 that “all the evidence indicates that 
the Spanish government is quite sincere in its desire 
to remain neutral and collaborate with Portugal in 
an Iberian bloc outside the war.” 

Whether Franco would put up even a token re 
sistance if Hitler were to order his Nazi Panzer 
divisions, now massed on Spain's northern frontier, 
to enter that country is a different matter. It is here 
that the political aspect of the United States gov- 
ernment’s policy of sending supplies to Spain enters. 
It is hoped that the food and fuel we are sending 
will win the good will of the Spanish people so that, 
if and when American armies are obliged to enter 
Spain to resist Nazi troops, they will have the sup 
port and cooperation of the Spaniards. This policy 
is frankly a gamble, but Washington considers the 
quantities of food and fuel involved a small risk com 
pared with the immense stakes at issue. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 








