



the 
ent 
ion 


hat 
en 
ity, 
lile 
the 
yay 
er- 
his 
ral 


to | 


en- 
ind 
la 

of 
ol- 


the 
the 
ish 


onal 
itor, 





| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


in interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 








OL. aN No. 41 


AucusT 7, 1936 





RADIO BROADCAST 


Mr. Buell will speak on “The Revolt in Spain—Europe 
and the United States,” over the Columbia Broadcasting 
System’s national network on Thursday, August 6, 


from 9:30 to 10 P. M. Eastern Daylight Saving Time. 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at che Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











~tA« 
~~ @ “ee avaveohy 

Y 3% , ~ PQ man mish 
allies “Ss J 4 ~ONgErcess, 


793) in ton, D. Se 




















INTERNATIONAL RIVALRY OVER SPAIN 





N an effort to prevent the civil strife in Spain 
from developing into a general war, the lead- 
ing European governments are exchanging views 
with regard to the adoption of a joint policy of 
non-intervention. The French government took 
the initiative on August 1, when it announced that 
it Was sounding out the Mediterranean powers 
as to a European agreement “against the export 
of arms” to Spain and other forms of interven- 
tion. It added that France had refused to au- 
thorize the export of arms to either side; but in 
view of “the fact that one government has fur- 
nished war materials to the insurgents,” France 
would be obliged to reserve its liberty of action 
unless international agreement were reached. 
This French initiative was inspired by the rev- 
elation that Italy had allowed the flight of about 
21 military planes to Spanish Morocco for use in 
General Franco’s army, which is deficient in 
planes. When three of these planes crashed in 
French North Africa, the authorities discovered 
that the machines failed to carry the markings 
prescribed in international conventions, and that 
although the pilots and crews carried civilian pass- 
ports, they were in reality officers in the Italian 
air force. The sending of these planes to the un- 
recognized Spanish rebels constituted a violation 
of the international air convention of 1919 and the 
traffic in arms convention of 1925. 


In order to remove the danger of smuggling to 
the insurgents, the French authorities, on Au- 
gust 1, ordered four British planes, presumably 
destined for Portugal, to return from Bordeaux 
to London. Despite the French proposal of neu- 
trality, a German battleship, the Deutschland, 
patrolled the Ceuta harbor on August 3—osten- 
sibly to protect German citizens there—and thus 
succeeded in preventing the bombardment of the 
city by the Spanish government. On the same 
day 100,000 Russian workers in Moscow engaged 
in a gigantic demonstration on behalf of the 





“working people of Spain who are defending 
democratic liberties against Fascist reaction- 
aries.” The Central Council of Trade Unions is 
asking each Russian worker to contribute one half 
of one half per cent of a month’s wages to the Span- 
ish cause, which may produce a total of 200,000,000 
rubles ($40,000,000). 


While Britain apparently favors the French 
proposal for a European policy of non-interven- 
tion, both Italy and Germany are showing signs 
of hesitation. It is reported that General Franco, 
in return for support, has offered bases to both 
Mussolini and Hitler in the Balearic and Canary 
islands, as well as in Spanish Morocco. But neither 
France nor Britain can allow Spain thus to be- 
come a puppet of the Fascist powers; and in view 
of its onerous task of pacifying and developing 
Ethiopia, Italy is in no position to clash with the 
democratic powers over Spain. 


Meanwhile, the civil war is approaching its 
fourth week with unabated fury. The forces under 
General Mola, strengthened by the desertion of 
1,000 members of the Civil Guard, still remain in 
the Guadarrama mountains, while a provisional 
rebel government, established at Burgos, is mak- 
ing a bid for foreign recognition by appointing 
new ambassadors. General Franco has failed to 
effect a union with General Mola from the south, 
owing to the fact that the Spanish navy prevents 
the transport of rebel troops from Morocco to the 
peninsula. The Marxist militia is fighting with a 
determination and recklessness which has evi- 
dently surprised the rebel leaders who neverthe- 
less remain confident of ultimate victory. 

Under cover of civil war, the social revolution 
is advancing rapidly. On July 28 the government 
authorized the seizure of church property, in ac- 
cordance with the constitution of 1931, and ap- 
pointed a committee to control all industries. Two 
days later it confiscated the entire Spanish mer- 
chant marine, which was placed at the disposition 

















of the navy. On August 1 the government an- 
nounced the seizure of all electrical concerns, in- 
cluding two radio broadcasting stations. The 
Popular Front has appointed committees to con- 
trol all Madrid banks and government decrees have 
exempted Marxist militia members from payment 
of rents; reduced by half rents below $25 a month 
while maintaining taxes on landlords, and pro- 
claimed the 40-hour week and a 15 per cent wage 
increase. On August 3 the government national- 
ized the munition and aviation industries, while 
the Ministry of Industry declared that “national- 
ization of industries which have been abandoned 
by the owners will be final and without appeal if 
they do not obey our commands.” 


These measures, taken by a non-socialist gov- 
ernment, have not satisfied all the workers. It is 
reported that Communists, with little regard for 
the United Front policy adopted by the Third 
International last August, are burning churches, 
banks, and city houses. and are massacring nuns 
and priests and all persons owning or even sus- 
pected of owning property. In Catalonia, the 
government continues nominally in existence; but 
real power seems to have passed to the Central 
Committee for Anti-Fascist Militia, which has 
seized the Ford and General Motors plants in 
3arcelona. 


That the United States cannot remain unaffected 
by these disturbances is indicated by the strenu- 
ous efforts exerted by the State Department and 
the Foreign Service to evacuate American nation- 
als in Spain. As a result of these efforts, which 
included the aid of several merchant vessels and 
three warships in Spanish waters, American 
agencies had succeeded by August 3 in removing 
517 Americans and 107 foreigners of 15 nationali- 
ties from the country. Nevertheless, 450 Ameri- 
‘ans, some of whom have refused to take ad- 
vantage of the opportunity of evacuation, still 
remain in various areas. In urging Americans to 
leave Spain, Secretary Hull declared on August 3 
that, in any event, “the government will continue 
its every effort to protect them.” 

RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


CONFERENCE OF LOCARNO 
POWERS ASSURED 


A conference of the five Locarno powers some 
time this fall was assured when, on July 31, 
Germany and Italy accepted the invitation to 
participate. The abandonment of the remaining 
mutual assistance agreements in the Mediter- 
ranean, announced by Anthony Eden in the 
House of Commons on July 27, removed the last 


Page Two 








obstacle to Italian participation. Thereafter the 
Reich could no longer afford to delay. The two 
countries, however, indicated the need for careful 
diplomatic preparation, so that a conference be- 
fore September or October would appear to be out 
of the question. 


Up to the present Italy and Germany have won 
most of the moves on the European chess board. 
Italy’s return to the Locarno concert has been 
purchased not only by the ignominious surrender 
of the League, but by the reduction of the British 
Home Fleet in Mediterranean waters and the 
termination of the defensive pacts concluded be- 
tween Britain and Mediterranean powers last 
winter. The communiqué issued in London on 
July 23 after the Anglo-Franco-Belgian meeting 
clearly indicated the substantial concessions which 
Germany had obtained through its dilatory policy 
of the last five months. There appears no longer 
to be any question of punitive measures against 
Germany or of the non-fortification of the Rhine- 
land. Insistence on a reply to the British ques- 
tionnaire designed to elucidate the aims of German 
foreign policy seems to have been abandoned. 


There are some indications that the coming Lo- 
carno conference may be the last determined con- 
ciliatory effort by France and Britain to arrive 
at an understanding with Germany. The rearma- 
ment policy now pursued by the British govern- 
ment should strengthen Britain’s diplomatic 
position in the future. Anglo-French cooperation 
appears very close at present, and it is reported 
that Eden is in complete agreement with Premier 
Blum that Germany must not be permitted to 
exclude Eastern European and Danubian prob- 
lems from the forthcoming conference. Mean- 
while, the recent rapprochement between Britain 
and the Soviet Union has made further progress. 
On July 29 the British government undertook to 
guarantee bills up to £10,000,000 to be issued by 
the Soviet Trade Delegation in London for the 
purchase of British goods. Moreover, a British 
military mission is to attend the great military 
manoeuvres in the Soviet Union this fall. 

To a large extent, the key to the present situa- 
tion is held by Mussolini who, it has been reported, 
shares the British reluctance to split Europe into 
two irreconcilable camps. I] Duce, in need of peace 
in Europe, has again resurrected his ill-fated 
four-power pact, which he now hopes to extend 
to include the Soviet Union and Poland. Ger- 
many, however, may be unwilling to participate in 
such a pact unless the military alliances of the 
Soviet Union with France and Czechoslovakia are 


abrogated. JOHN C. DEWILDE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV. No. 41, AuGusr 7. 1936 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lestie BuEit, 


President; EstHER G. OGpen, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dran, Ex 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Pose Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








<il 


- Ds an | 





