—_——— 
——_—$— 


ia, the 
is fol- 
Tealy, 
Croat 
al au- 
ut ob- 
vhole. 
omous 

from 
yunced 
After 
ll au- 
Lithu- 
as not 
r full 
France 
xisting 
eps to 
ion of 
istance 
ut an 
ver he 


"LOR 


lume I, 
it. New 


2 in in- 
val poli- 
has ac- 
this re- 


i. & 
‘d, 1938. 


rrespon- 
ce Mon- 
' Musso- 
issue of 


upp, by 
$3.00 
es, from 
mer em- 

a con- 
. Krupp 
and of 
sided, it 
and the 


National 
iN, Editor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vout. XVIII, No. 9 DECEMBER 23, 1938 


—_—_ 


THE MILITARY CONSEQUENCES OF MUNICH 
by Major George Fielding Eliot 


A military survey of the principal powers of Europe, with 
a forecast of the military policies to be expected after the 
Munich accord of September 30 which, according to the 
author, served notice on the world that force underlies all 
international relations as a possible final arbiter. 


December 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents each 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


CROSS-CURRENTS 


INSIDE GERMANY 


by JOHN C. deWILDE 
Mr. deWilde has just returned from Germany, where he 
Spent eight months on a fellowship. 


10° present an undistorted picture of National 

Socialist Germany today is an appallingly diff- 
cult task. The foreign observer in the Reich is con- 
stantly impressed with the inadequacy of facile 
generalizations. In the Nazi party, as in all revolu- 
tionary movements, he can find the most disparate 
elements: on the one hand, knaves and self-seekers, 
and on the other, idealists who sincerely work for 
social and economic betterment. To be complete, 
his report must include not only evidence of horrible 
oppression and the destruction of individual liber- 
ties, but also a description of significant social re- 
forms and an analysis of the not altogether unsuc- 
cessful effort to establish an economic order provid- 
ing every German with “work and bread.” 


An honest observer will tend to avoid dogmatic 
statements and prophecies, if only because of the 
tremendous difficulty of finding out the true state 
of affairs in a country where all sources of informa- 
tion have either dried up or are under close control. 
Under such circumstances, for instance, it is well- 
nigh impossible to ascertain what German “public 
Opinion” is today. Unquestionably discontent with 
the régime is more widespread and more vocal than 
at any time in the history of the Third Reich. Until 
recently dissatisfaction was strongest among the in- 
telligentsia, but now it has widely penetrated the 
masses. When the crisis over Czechoslovakia brought 
the people face to face with war, there was no little 
criticism of a government irresponsible enough to 
tisk such a disaster just for the sake of adding three 
and a half million Germans to the Reich. The after- 
math of this crisis was characterized by a feeling of 
great relief, but was not attended by the jubilation 
Which had followed Anschluss in March. The Ger- 


man people had only just recovered from the war- 
scare when a new and violent wave of anti-Semitism 
broke over them. Although many Germans had 
previously been only too ready to justify the measures 
taken against the Jews, the ruthlessness and in- 
humanity of the new campaign shocked a large part 
of the population and converted even a few anti- 
Semites to a species of philo-Semitism. Many Ger- 
mans went out of their way to demonstrate their 
sympathy for the Jews, and one met with open ex- 
pressions of disgust almost everywhere. Among the 
propertied classes there were not a few who had 
the uncomfortable feeling that some day the forces 
of destruction might be directed against them. 


Yet it would be a mistake to attribute too much 
political significance to the present wave of discon- 
tent. The régime is speculating—and perhaps rightly 
so—on the shortness of human memory and indigna- 
tion. Although criticism is rife, most critics are 
resigned to the futility of opposition and see no 
alternative to the existing system. They strive to 
forget by concentrating with greater determination 
on their everyday tasks. The government keeps the 
people very busy and provides the panem et circenses 
they need. Although the “bread” may not be of the 
best and the “circuses” often too extravagant even 
for popular taste, they still give the Nazis a fairly 
broad basis of support, particularly among the less 
intelligent or less educated masses. 


As long as the people continue to have “work and 
bread,”’ the régime will probably remain in existence. 
Certainly one must confess that, for the present, 
the German economy is functioning fairly smoothly. 
The government has a tight grip on the economic 
reins, and there is little to warrant prophecies that 
the régime is running the danger of economic or 
financial collapse during the next few years. The 
relationship between the state and economic life in 


mae PI 


Germany has undergone a significant revolution, 
so that the authorities can direct the economic ener- 
gies of Germany into whatever channels they chose. 
The increase and maintenance of armaments at a 
high level, the establishment and extension of new 
industries in accordance with the Four Year Plan, 
the intensification of agricultural production, the re- 
construction of cities and the simultaneous provision 
of an adequate amount of consumers’ goods—all 
these tasks on which the National Socialist govern- 
ment is engaged require a tremendous amount of 
labor. Thus, it is not surprising that unemployment 
has been succeeded by a great scarcity of labor in 
almost every field. While much of this labor goes 
for unproductive purposes and imposes a heavy 
financial mortgage on the future, there has, by and 
large, been some improvement in the standard of 
living. With seven million people put back to work, 
the Germans undoubtedly have more money to spend 
than before. They may not always be able to buy 
what they want—such commodities as butter and 
eggs, for example, are still relatively scarce—but on 
the whole they are not badly fed or clothed. 


One source of danger to the régime is its marked 
predilection for foreign adventures, an appetite 
which has undoubtedly been whetted by its recent 
triumphs. The Nazis now tend to be over-confident 
and too contemptuous of the strength of their op- 
ponents. The acquisition of an exclusive sphere of 
influence in Central and Eastern Europe and the “‘ex- 
pulsion” of the Soviet Union from that region are 
their primary aims. If Memel and the colonies be 
excepted, it is probably true that the Nazis do not 
want to add more territory to the Reich. They plan 
to leave the peoples of Eastern Europe a certain 
amount of cultural autonomy and self-government, 
but.to control and direct their economic life and 
insist on the suppression of all anti-Nazi movements. 
With a Reich of almost eighty million people, the 
German government considers itself the rightful 
and natural heir to French predominance in this 
region. This claim to succession it may well be able 
to enforce, although not without friction and opposi- 
tion. Much more difficult of realization are its am- 
bitious schemes for the dissolution of the Soviet 
Union and the “emancipation” of the Ukrainians 
from what the Nazis characteristically call “Jewish 
Bolshevism.” In this direction they may one day 
over-reach themselves. 


However unpalatable it may be, the French and 
British, as well as other democratic powers, are face 
to face with a profound historical shift in the balance 
of power in Europe. After having done much to 
make Germany the predominant power in Europe, 
they must now swallow this bitter pill. Germany to- 
day can no longer be “stopped” short of a major 


Page Two — 


——$, 


catastrophic war and the decimation of the German 
people. Unless prepared to advocate such a policy, 
one must accept German hegemony on the continent 
as an established fact. No boycott movements, no 
amount of anti-fascist agitation can alter this fact 
or the character of the German régime. Undoubtedly 
the Nazis will seek to carry their gospel to other 
lands; but their philosophy, like that of the Soviet 
Union, will not strike root as long as the seed falls 
on barren soil. Only prolonged unemployment, in- 
stability and ensuing discontent can fertilize the 
ground. A determined and concentrated effort to 
establish a properly functioning social and economic 
order at home will in the long run provide the best 
defense of democracies against the onslaught of 


fascism. JoHN C. DEWILDE 


BRITAIN STEERS UNCERTAIN COURSE 


Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain has continued | 


in recent weeks his policy of appeasing the dictators, 
despite frequent rebuffs from Berlin and Rome. At 
the same time, he has gradually assumed a firmer tone 
in defense of British and French interests. In his 
address on December 13 before the Foreign Press 
Association, boycotted by all German diplomats and 
correspondents in London, Mr. Chamberlain reit- 
erated his desire for conciliation but protcsted in- 
sults which Nazi newspapers had hurled at Earl 
Baldwin. Subsequent speeches by the Prime Minister 
and other Cabinet members proclaimed that Britain 
possessed both the moral strength and the financial 
resources to defeat Germany in war. To combat Ger- 
man trade competition, the Government introduced 
in the House of Commons a bill expanding the ex- 
port guarantee fund, used by the Board of Trade to 
insure commercial credits, from £50,000,000 to 
£75,000,000, of which £10,000,000 can be employed 
for “defense of national interests.” 


As an indication of his impatience, Mr. Chamber- 
lain on December 19 urged Germany to give some 
sign of its good will as a basis for further negotia- 
tions. Britain and France previously had requested 
Germany to respect the 1924 statute governing the 
autonomy of Memel and warned Italy against an 
attack on Tunis. While Mr. Chamberlain was re- 
affirming the Anglo-French alliance, his former 
Foreign Secretary, Mr. Anthony Eden, was visiting 
the United States, where he addressed the National 
Association of Manufacturers on December 9, and 
met many important business and political leaders, 
including President Roosevelt. Mr. Eden’s address, 
broadcast throughout the United States, stressed the 
vitality and spiritual content of democracy, and em- 
phasized the new national unity of Britain in the face 
of threats from totalitarian states. 


(Continued on Page 4) 


———_———. 
—————_ 


erman 
policy, 
1tinent 
its, no 
is fact 
btedly 
other 
Soviet 
d falls 
nt, in- 
ze the 
ort to 
nomic 
1e best 
cht of 


ILDE 


SE 


\tinued 
tators, 
me. At 
er tone 
In his 
1 Press 
its and 
n feit- 
ted in- 
it Earl 
{inister 
Britain 
nancial 
at Ger- 
oduced 
the ex- 
rade to 
00 to 
iployed 


amber- 
e some 
le gotia- 
quested 
ing the 
inst an 
was fe- 
former 
visiting 
Jational 
9, and 
leaders, 
iddress, 
sed the 
ind em- 
the face 


LIMITED OBJECTIVES SOUGHT AT LIMA 
by CHARLES A. THOMSON 


The following article was sent by Mr. Thomson from Lima, where he is at- 
tending the Pan-American Conference after a five-month tour of South America. 


LiMA, Peru, Dec. 15—The Lima Conference 
promises to be much less sensational than its ad- 
vance publicity. In concrete achievements, accord- 
ing to present indications, it will fall short of both 
Buenos Aires (1936) and Montevideo (1933). 
Delegates now prophesy that in the political field 
only two important accords are likely to take treaty 
form: coordination of existing inter-American trea- 
ties, and a convention strengthening and implement- 
ing the vague pledges for consultation incorporated 
in the treaties approved at Buenos Aires. 

The rumored pact for continental defense has been 
as definitely shelved as have the proposals for a 
League of American Nations and an American Court 
of Justice. It is denied in Lima that Washington ever 
contemplated conclusion of a formal treaty of such 
a character. Certainly Argentina's clear-cut opposi- 
tion to “special pacts’ against aggression, as ex- 
pressed in the address of Foreign Minister Cantilo, 
ended discussion of this project for the present. Few 
of the Lima delegates believe that an armed attack 
by the fascist powers is in any degree imminent. The 
press and public opinion in the United States, it is 
charged, have overplayed the menace. South Ameri- 
ca’s Pacific coast republics feel themselves com- 
fortably remote from possible attack. Argentina re- 
fuses to become alarmed. Only in Brazil does some 
serious apprehension exist; and there fear centers not 
on the possibility of invasion, but of a sudden do- 
mestic coup, with military and financial backing 
from the totalitarian states. In view of the prevail- 
ing attitude, Argentina has won considerable sup- 
port in Lima for its policy pledging cooperation 
should attack “threaten the independence or the sov- 
ereignty of any State in this part of the world,” but 
meanwhile demanding freedom of action for each 
country. Thus the ‘‘no-entangling-alliances’’ doctrine 
of the United States is accorded the ironical flattery 
of imitation in the southern part of the hemisphere. 


Yet the practical problem facing the delegates 
here concerns not armed attack, but the infiltration 
of German and Italian propaganda. On this point 
substantial unanimity is now evident. It is not the 
United States alone which has announced its de- 
termined opposition to ideological penetration, for 
various Latin American delegations have revealed 
their awareness of this threat. They are plan- 
ning to block the use of German and other foreign- 
resident colonies in their countries as the basis 
for disruptive drives. Brazil has proposed that the 
American republics refuse to recognize the prin- 
ciple of political minorities in this hemisphere. 


Uruguay has introduced a project on the legal status 
of foreigners, condemning any political or cultural 
control over immigrants by the countries of their 
origin. Bolivia has presented a resolution attacking 
“reactionary racism,” and Cuba a project calling 
for the repudiation of all persecution “for racial and 
religious motives.” Foreign Minister Cantilo stressed 
the same note in his address, and ranged Argentina 
beside its sister nations with a declaration of opposi- 
tion to the introduction into the Americas of “ideals 
in conflict with our own, régimes threatening to our 
liberties, theories subversive of the social and moral 
peace of our peoples, political fanaticisms and 
fetichisms.” 

Discussion of the two pacts on peace organization 
and consultation has so far been held behind closed 
doors. The need for unifying and coordinating the 
confusing collection of conciliation and arbitration 
treaties which form the body of inter-American 
peace machinery has long been evident. One method 
of achieving this objective is outlined in the Mexi- 
can Peace Code, which earlier came before the Mon- 
tevideo and Buenos Aires conferences and which 
includes, together with conciliation and arbitration 
provisions, a definition of the aggressor and a plan 
for sanctions. The adverse report on sanctions and 
determination of the aggressor, presented on the 
eve of the Conference by the Commission of Ex- 
perts for Codification of International Law, practi- 
cally dooms that phase of the Mexican project. The 
United States delegation has prepared an alternative 
plan, whose details have not yet been made public. 
But this plan, or a compromise between it and the 
Mexican Code, will apparently not be brought to 
the Conference floor until conversations now under 
way have insured unanimous support. Similar nego- 
tiations are in process on the proposal to amplify 
and implement the practice of consultation among 
the American states. At Buenos Aires the United 
States unsuccessfully offered a proposal to create a 
permanent consultative commission, but revival of 
this initiative here depends on the ability to iron out 
differences with Argentina, which has taken the lead 
in opposing Washington’s policy. 

While the prospects of achievement at this gath- 
ering are limited, conversation with many delegates 
reveals a stoical philosophy concerning a possible 
scarcity of new treaties. Remembering the fate of 
other pacts which in their time were hailed as epoch- 
making, they argue that less formal, more elastic 
agreement may for the present prove of greater value. 


a ae 


—— 


Sp ee 


ee re 


i 
4 
f 


BRITAIN STEERS UNCERTAIN COURSE 
(Continued from Page 2) 


The present uncertainty of the British public with 
regard to European affairs has been shown in the 
seven parliamentary by-elections which have taken 
place since the Munich agreement. The results of 
these contests, fought almost entirely on issues of 
foreign policy and defense, show no clear trend 
either for or against Mr. Chamberlain, but indicate 
that a general election in the near future would 
probably not lead to his defeat. Of the six seats won 
by Government candidates in the 1935 general elec- 
tion, two have been retained with only a slight loss 
in majority, two have been retained with majority 
reduced by one-half, and two have been lost to the 
Opposition. Independent candidates proved unusu- 


Page Four 


ally successful: Mr. Vernon Bartlett, popular radio 
commentator, inflicted one of these two defeats, and 
Professor A. D. Lindsay, Master of Balliol College, 
greatly reduced the Government’s winning majority 
at Oxford. The Labor party has increased by one- 
half its majority in the constituency which it won in 
1935. Another important by-election is being fought 
this week in West Perth, Scotland, where the Duchess 
of Atholl is running as an Independent against a 
Government candidate, after being repudiated by 
the Conservative party in her constituency. No dras- 
tic change in British public opinion can be expected 
at present, unless the German government increases 
its persecution of Jews and completely defeats Mr. 
Chamberlain's efforts at appeasement. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


One-Fifth of Mankind, by Anna Louise Strong. New York, 
Modern Age, 1938. 50 cents 


A careful summary of the salient facts of China’s 
struggle against the Japanese invasion, this volume is 
easily the most readable and most effective account of the 
war. The author revisited China last winter, and talked 
with the leaders and people in Canton, Hankow and the 
north. Chapters on the migration into the interior, on 
Chinese women, on the Eighth Route Army, on refugee 
work, on wartime dramatics, and on everyday life give a 
vivid picture of the war’s effects on the Chinese people. 


Twilight in Vienna, by Willi Frischauer. Boston, Houghton 

Mifflin, 1938. $3.00 
The Last Five Hours of Austria, by Eugene Lennhoff. 

New York, Frederick A. Stokes, 1938. $2.50 

Two accounts of the annexation of Austria, written by 
Viennese journalists. Twilight in Vienna is a vivid de- 
scription of pre-Hitler Austria, emphasizing the poverty, 
social disintegration, and political strife which undermined 
the Republic. As a supporter of Dollfuss and Schuschnigg, 
Mr. Frischauer blames the Vienna Socialists for destroy- 
ing the national unity. Mr. Lennhoff provides an exciting 
narrative of the period between the Berchtesgaden nego- 
tiations on February 12 and the Anschluss of March 12. 
Most of the book deals with the final hours of the crisis 
and the author’s escape to Hungary. 


Europe Rehoused, by Elizabeth Denby. New York, W. W. 

Norton, 1938. $3.50 

A brief, useful survey of architectural, economic and 
political issues involved in the housing programs of six 
European countries, illustrated by photographs and draw- 
ings. Finding the Swedes and Viennese most successful in 
housing developments and the French least progressive, 
Miss Denby offers suggestions for improvement of British 
slum clearance projects. 


A History of Argentina, by Ricardo Levene. Chapel Hill, 
N. C., University of North Carolina Press, 1937. $4.00 
A translation of one of the best one-volume histories of 

Argentina, representing a school that places ideals above 

economic facts as molders of a nation. 


This is Democracy: Collective Bargaining in Scandinavia, 
by Marquis W. Childs. New Haven, Yale University 
Press, 1938. $2.50 


The author of Sweden: The Middle Way examines labor 
relations in Europe’s “model countries,” emphasizing the 
confidence which exists between employers, union leaders 
and the government, and the bargaining techniques used 
in settling their differences. While not always thorough 
or well-organized, his survey of democracy at work de- 
serves the attention of the American public, which might 
profitably apply many lessons from Scandinavian experi- 
ence to labor problems in the United States. 


The Martyrdom of Spain, by Alfred Mendizabal, with a 
preface by Jacques Maritain. New York, Scribner’s, 
1938. $3.00 
A Spaniard’s study of the background of his country’s 

travail, written with thorough objectivity yet not divorced 

from sympathetic understanding. Maritain’s philosophic 
plea for reasoned judgment adds value to this excellent 
book. 


A Study of the Capital Market in Post-war Britain, by 
A. T. K. Grant. New York, Macmillan, 1937. $4.50 
A careful investigation of the relation of investment to 
industry, commerce, and banking, valuable for any stu- 
dent of economic trends in recent years. 


Blackmail or War, by Geneviéve Tabouis. Harmondsworth, 

Middlesex, England, Penguin Books, 1938. 6d. 

A loosely written history of the recent diplomacy of 
Europe, enlivened by a host of amusing if apocryphal 
anecdotes about the personalities involved. The author, 
a top-ranking French journalist, calls for firm, united 
resistance by Britain, France and the Soviet Union against 
Fascist threats, but weakens her position by an unjustified 
“holier-than-thou” attitude and an utter lack of interest 
in compromise suggestions for European appeasement. 


My England, by Edward Shanks. New York, Funk and 
Wagnalls, 1938. $2.50 


A sprightly and informal commentary on English life, 
with many astute remarks on political institutions. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 9, DecEmMBER 23, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Legsiigz BuELt, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


pes! 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


FC 


Ani 


=—- @& a & 


Dece1 


