—- 
—— 


ath. 
with 
itler” 
efore 
truc. 
it he 
ason- 
on a 
f the 
id an 


con. 
vork- 
alists 
y re- 
erate 
Paul 
yught 
ough 
orks. 
bora- 
erals 
acing 


ER 


ennis. 


New 


ng of 


York, 


ia the 
ay H. 
npany 
ic im- 
John 
iation 


tholic 


Rose. 
$3.50 
ch in 
tween 


York, 


National 
Editer. 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research St: 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


if 


VoL. XV, No. 36 JULY 3, 


1936 


THE UNITED STATES SILVER POLICY 
by John Parke Young 


The purpose of the Administration silver program, the 
resulting rise in the price of silver, and the effects on 
the United States and other countries are analyzed in this 
report. 


July 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Entered as  second- 
class matter December 

1921, at che Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879, 


Division, 


— 
a 
{ : — 
YN odical 
2 


Vv of Congress, 


Agshington, D. C.- 


IMPROVEMENT IN EUROPE? 


HIS week the League Council and Assembly 

are meeting in Geneva for the purpose of 
ending sanctions against Italy. Such action may 
be impeded by Argentina’s demand for ap- 
plication of the non-recognition doctrine, and by 
a personal appeal which Haile Selassie intends to 
make to the Assembly. It seems probable, how- 
ever, that the Ethiopian dispute will be liquidated 
on terms acceptable to Italy. The removal of 
sanctions will disappoint many League supporters, 
but may contribute to European appeasement if 
it ends fear of an Anglo-Italian war, and facili- 
tates Italy’s return to the Stresa front against 
Germany. 


Taking advantage of the recent Anglo-Italian 
deadlock, Nazi Germany during the month of June 
continued its efforts at economic penetration in 
Central and Eastern Europe. In early June Dr. 
Schacht visited various Balkan capitals, ostensibly 
for the purpose of concluding new commercial 
agreements. Most of the Balkan states have cred- 
its “frozen” in Germany, and can receive payment 
only in German manufactures. As a result of 
Schacht’s barter policy, German purchases of ag- 
ricultural products and raw materials from the 
Balkans have increased enormously. During the 
past two years Yugoslavia alone has doubled its 
exports to Germany, and now will increase them 
still further. This year, moreover, Germany 
is expected to take 60 per cent of Bulgaria’s ex- 
ports, in contrast to 26 per cent in 1932. 


Should Germany come to dominate the trade of 
Central Europe and the Balkans, the days of French 
political supremacy in this area would be numbered. 
An effort to strike at this supremacy seems to 
have been made by Colonel Beck, Foreign Min- 
ister of Poland, who visited Belgrade late in May. 
His visit gave rise to the report that Beck was 
assisting Hitler in an effort to create an anti- 
Soviet block composed of Germany, Poland, Hun- 
gary and Yugoslavia. 


Fear of a German coup in another quarter was 
aroused on June 26, when Albert Forster, the Nazi 
leader in Danzig, bitterly assailed Sean Lester, 
League High Commissioner, and said that the 
League in the Free City had become “super- 
fluous.” His opinion was endorsed the next day by 
the semi-official Deutsche Diplomatische Korres- 
pondenz. 


In an effort to check the German offensive, the 
Little Entente states—Czechoslovakia, Rumania 
and Yugoslavia—held a conference in Rumania on 
June 6, which, for the first time, was attended 
by the heads of all three states. Here decisions 
to oppose Hapsburg restoration in Vienna and 
union of Austria with Germany were renewed. 
The military staffs of these states subsequently 
met to discuss coordinated military action in 
Central Europe, and on June 22 the Little En- 
tente held an economic conference. Although 
these states still seem to be divided over their atti- 
tude toward the U.S.S.R., the Little Entente re- 
mains intact and politically at least Yugoslavia 
remains in the pro-French camp. 


A more serious check to Germany may develop 
from a speech made on June 18 by Foreign Min- 
ister Eden in the House of Commons, when he 
announced that since the British government 
alone had taken the initiative in imposing sanc- 
tions against Italy, it was its duty to take the 
lead in lifting them. The British government 
had no apologies to make for the past, but now 
nothing but war with Italy could restore the in- 
dependence of Ethiopia. The Mediterranean se- 
curity pact concluded last December, however, 
would continue in effect for the time being, while 
the government would maintain a Mediterranean 
“defensive position” stronger than that which 
had existed before the Ethiopian dispute. As for 
the future, the government was determined “that 
the League should go on.” Turning to Germany, 
Mr. Eden declared that it was important for 


Europe to be assured that Germany intended to 
respect the political status quo, except as it might 
be modified by negotiation; and expressed the hope 
that Hitler would soon reply to the May 6 ques- 
tionnaire. In coming to terms with Italy, Britain 
has strengthened its hand against Germany. 

Hopes for a European settlement were also 
aroused by the foreign policy declaration of the 
Blum government in France on June 23. While 
favoring the lifting of sanctions against Italy, the 
government said it was determined to solve the 
European security problem through the present 
framework of the League reinforced by regional 
security agreements. France would seek an un- 
derstanding with Germany and press for a new 
disarmament convention. The government would 
introduce legislation to nationalize the manufac- 
ture of war material. A European commission 
should be established to study the economic needs 
of European nations and to promote economic re- 
covery. It is significant that the declaration did 
not repeat the demand made by France on April 1 
that Germany sign an agreement not to question 
any European frontier for 25 years. 

Thus it appears that France, Britain and Italy 
are again being driven by common interests into 
an anti-Nazi coalition supported by the Soviet 
Union and the Little Entente. The object of this 
coalition, moreover, seems to be to bring Germany 
back into the European system rather than isolate 
it. Italy, however, may yet break with France and 
the Little Entente over the question of the Haps- 
burg restoration. Meanwhile, German economic 
penetration of the Balkans is increasing and Nazi 
propaganda is virulent in both Czechoslovakia and 
Rumania. The internal situation in France re- 
mains critical, and despite Mr. Baldwin’s state- 
ment of June 23, declaring that Britain did not 
intend to let Europe look after itself, important 
British circles advocate the adoption of a policy 
of isolation. The future of Europe still depends 
primarily on Franco-British collaboration. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


FOREIGN POLICY IN PARTY PLATFORMS 


Four years ago the American party platforms 
showed an encouraging trend toward interna- 
tionalism, with the World Court and consultation 
under the Kellogg Pact approved by both major 
parties. This year world cooperation has fared 
badly. Senator Borah has persuaded the Repub- 
licans to repudiate two previous platforms and 
three Republican Presidents by coming out against 
the World Court; in the very next paragraph, 
however, the platform promises to promote inter- 
national arbitration. The Republican ban is also 


Page Two 


extended to the League of Nations and “any en- 
tangling alliances in foreign affairs.” The Demo- 
crats, although pledged to continue the good neigh- 
bor policy, promise to “guard against being 
drawn, by political commitments, international 
banking or private trading, into any war which 
may develop anywhere.” Even the Socialists, who 
in 1932 advocated League membership with reser- 
vations, omit mention of this subject in 1936. 
The new Union party, sponsored by Father Cough- 
lin, demands complete isolation, and is consistent 
in adding a provision to keep our armed forces 
at home under all circumstances. Republicans, 
Democrats and Unionists alike ask for adequate 
defense forces, although the Republicans express 
willingness to cooperate in arms limitation. The 
Socialists, toning down their 1932 plea for com- 
plete disarmament by example, demand drastic 
reduction in armaments, with stronger neutrality 
laws. 

The deepest cleavage between the two major 
parties is in the economic sphere. The Republi- 
cans roundly denounce the reciprocal tariff trea- 
ties and the Democrats as warmly defend them, 
both in accordance with 1932 policies. In general 
the Republicans alone have remained true to their 
old faith. They still want high protective duties 
and restoration of the flexible tariff. In 1932 the 
Democrats advocated a “competitive tariff for 
revenue,” but this year have abandoned that 
phrase in favor of a cautious statement asking 
continuation of mutual tariff-reduction agree- 
ments—adding that they “will continue as in the 
past to give adequate protection” against “unfair” 
competition and foreign dumping. The Union 
party also demands protection against currency 
manipulation and low-wage foreign products. The 
Socialists do not mention the tariff, although in 
1932 they were demanding the creation of inter- 
national economic organizations to deal with such 
questions. 

The war debts position is exactly reversed. In 
1932 the Republicans avoided the issue, while the 
Democrats called for full collection. This year 
the Republicans want to collect every penny, 
while the Democrats are silent. Both major par- 
ties demand a sound currency. The Democrats 
want to avoid fluctuations, but go into no further 
detail; Landon has committed the Republicans to 
an early return to the gold standard. The Repub- 
licans also offer to cooperate with other nations 
toward stabilization, “as soon as we can do so 
with due regard for our national interests and as 
soon as other nations have sufficient stability to 
justify such action.” 

HELEN FISHER 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 36, Jury 3, 1936. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
RAYMOND Les.ige BUELL, President; EstHER G. Open, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


| 


at 


OL. 


| 


con’ 
Lea 
dete 
and 
svi 
to 1 
anc 
sup 
pel 
pol 
lief 
opi 
Wo 
of 

of 


