ae ee 


i 


| a 





e 
al 
ef 


er 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





You. XVIII, No. 33 JUNE 9, 1939 


—_ 





THE F.P.A. ON THE AIR 


During the month of June, the F.P.A. will be on the 

. air each Thursday, from 8:30 to 8:45 p.m., over Station 

WNYC. The program, entitled “Foreign Policy Forum,” 

is an informal, unrehearsed discussion of international 
affairs. 


Mr. Buell, Mr. Stone, Mr. Bisson and Mr. Green will 
participate in the June 8 broadcast — “Britain Seeks 
Empire Unity.” 


At « 

Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 


RIODICAL ROoOr Office at New York, 
NER A tena > N. Y., under the act 
UNI of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 


University of Michigan 


ann Arbor. Mich. 











HITLER COMBATS 


ENCIRCLEMENT 





ESPITE the delay in negotiations for an Anglo- 
French-Soviet entente, the German government 
can find little comfort in the present international 
situation. For some time it hoped at least to neu- 
tralize the Soviet Union in the event of another 
crisis. A damper had been put on anti-Communist 
agitation in the German press and official speeches, 
and Britain, rather than the U.S.S.R., had been casti- 
gated as the villain which was thwarting the Reich's 
just claims to more Lebensraum. After being encour- 
aged by the removal of Foreign Commissar Litvinov, 
the Nazi government has now heard Premier Molo- 
tov reaffirm in no uncertain terms the Kremlin’s 
desire to participate in an anti-aggression front. 
While Berlin welcomed the Soviet suggestion for 
closer trade relations with Germany, it is quite aware 
of the difficulties in the way. Last year Soviet-German 
trade sank to a record low, and the first quarter of 
the current year has witnessed no recovery. The 
Russians want adequate credit arrangements, but the 
Germans are reluctant to export valuable machinery, 
for which there is a pressing need at home, without 
some immediate guid pro quo in raw materials and 
foodstuffs. 


GERMANY’S NON-AGGRESSION PACTS. 
Meanwhile, the German government has been re- 
assuring the smaller countries in Europe that they 
have nothing to fear from the Reich. Although Nor- 
way, Sweden and Finland have politely declined its 
offer of non-aggression pacts, Denmark, as a neigh- 


| bor of Germany, found it expedient to sign such an 


agreement on May 31. This country has an active 
minority of about 30,000 Germans which, with un- 
official help from the other side of the border, has 
been agitating for a return to the Reich. In exchange 
for a Danish pledge of neutrality, Germany has 
now undertaken not to resort to war or “any other 
kind of force” against Denmark, and has expressly 


acknowledged Denmark's right to engage in normal 
trade with all belligerents. 


Similar pacts with Estonia and Latvia were signed 
on June 7. Both these states already have non-aggres- 
sion treaties with the Soviet Union and apparently 
regard identical undertakings with the Reich as an 
additional safeguard. The non-aggression accord con- 
cluded between Germany and Lithuania following 
the surrender of Memel was implemented on May 20 
by two economic agreements providing for a rather 
moderate expansion of reciprocal trade and furnish- 
ing Lithuania with two free zones in the port of 
Memel. The construction of an entirely new free port 
by the Reich is also contemplated. 


YUGOSLAVIA AND THE AXIS. In an obvious 
effort to counteract the Anglo-French “encirclement” 
drive, the German government has concentrated most 
of its attention during the past week on Yugoslavia. 
The Yugoslav regent, Prince Paul, who arrived in Ger- 
many for a week’s visit on June 1, has been lavishly 
entertained. Hitler publicly assured him that the 
common borders of their countries had been “estab- 
lished for all time’—a promise intended to set at 
rest fears that the Reich might one day lay claim to 
the German minority of half a million in Yugo- 
slavia. While Berlin can hardly hope to win Bel- 
grade’s open adherence to the Italo-German alliance, 
it does expect to develop still further its economic 
relations with Yugoslavia. Already Germany has cap- 
tured more than half of this country’s foreign trade. 
The Reich attaches great importance to the negotia- 
tions for a new economic agreement now proceeding 
in Cologne. Yugoslavia not only can supply Ger- 
many with considerable quantities of foodstuffs, but 
in mineral resources it is the richest of all Balkan 
countries. It possesses important deposits of copper, 
bauxite, lead and zinc, and also has some antimony, 




















chromium and sulphur pyrites. At present this min- 
eral wealth is being exploited largely by French and 
British capital, but Germany is rapidly obtaining a 
greater share in Yugoslavia’s economic development. 
While realizing that Belgrade is unwilling to re- 
strict exports to free exchange countries, Berlin ex- 
pects to use its great bargaining power to secure 
participation in new enterprises designed to increase 
the output of both raw materials and foodstuffs. 
NAZI SUCCESSES IN HUNGARY. The Reich 
found some encouragement in the results of the 
Hungarian elections of May 28 and 29. Hungarian 
Nazi parties polled one-third of the vote, and cap- 
tured 43 out of the 260 seats in the Chamber of 
Deputies. Since they can count on the sympathy of 
at least part of the 180 successful government can- 
didates, the Nazis will be able to wield considerable 
influence. Germans were so active in propaganda on 
behalf of the Hungarian Nazis that Foreign Min- 
ister Count Csaky issued a public warning against 
elements ‘‘who think they obtain merit in high Ger- 


MOSCOW RAISES PRICE OF ANGLO-SOVIET PACT | 


Premier Molotov’s speech of May 31 to the 
Supreme Soviet disappointed French and British 
diplomats, who had expected the U.S.S.R. to accept 
Britain’s draft of a mutual assistance pact without 
further qualifications, but did not by any means close 
the door to further negotiations with the Western 
powers. While admitting that Britain and France 
had undergone a change of heart since Munich, M. 
Molotov expressed grave doubts “whether these 
countries are seriously desirous of abandoning the 
policy of non-intervention, the policy of non-resis- 
tance to the further development of aggression.” 
Under the circumstances the Soviet Union, ostenta- 
tiously left out of the Munich negotiations, had to 
remain vigilant. In answer to the original British 
plan for Soviet assistance to Poland and Rumania— 
subsequently developed, at Russia’s insistence, into 
a project for a Triple Entente—M. Molotov defined 
his government's three principal demands. He called 
for conclusion of an effective mutual assistance pact, 
defensive in character, between Britain, France and 
the U.S.S.R.—partially achieved in the British draft 
submitted before May 31; a guarantee by these pow- 
ers to the states of Central and Eastern Europe, “‘in- 
cluding all European countries bordering on the 
U.S.S.R. without exception”; and a concrete agree- 
ment among them “regarding the form and extent 
of immediate and effective assistance to be given to 
each other and to the guaranteed states in event of 
attack by aggressors.” 

These demands were based on two considerations, 
which the Soviet government regards as essential: 
complete reciprocity, involving recognition by France 


Page Two 














— 
—— 


man places by trying to make things difficult fo 
us” and “‘tactlessly interfere with our internal life” 
Despite the moderation of the Teleki government, 
it is becoming increasingly difficult for Hungary to 
steer a course independent of Nazi Germany. [p 
Rumania the position of the government is stronger, 
There, on June 1, King Carol bolstered up his per- 
sonal régime by elections to the Chamber of Depy. 
ties in which only candidates of his own National 
Renascence party were allowed to run. 

The present situation demonstrates that Germany 
is still utilizing every opportunity to extend its po. 
litical and economic influence. Even an Anglo-French. 
Soviet alliance will not close all avenues of expan. 
sion in Europe. German-Polish issues stand tem. 
porarily adjourned because Germany is not prepared 
to risk a conflict at this time. Another crisis may not | 
come until after the harvest has been gathered, | 
Meanwhile Hitler is cleverly utilizing the “menace 
of encirclement” to rally the German people be 


hind him. JOHN C. DEWILDE 





and Britain that the Soviet Union, once an outcast, 
is now their equal and not a country to be courted or 
discarded at their pleasure; and acknowledgment of 
the Soviet thesis that peace is indivisible and that an 
attack anywhere in Europe must bring the projected 
Triple Entente into operation, without any of the 
reservations implicit in the League Covenant, to 
which the British draft pact was to be closely 
geared. 

Soviet leaders, unlike some of their French and 
British colleagues, have never had any illusions re- 
garding the scope of Hitler's expansion program; 
nor have they failed to notice that, since Munich, the | 
spearhead of German press attacks has been directed 
not against communism, but against Western democ- 
racy. For the first time in twenty years the Soviet 
government is in a position to make Britain pay a 
high price for its collaboration, and there is noth 
ing either enigmatic or unnatural in its desire to 
charge what the traffic will bear. Nor is there any- 
thing particularly sinister, as some commentators 
appear to believe, in M. Molotov’s statement that 
the U.S.S.R. is ready to develop trade relations with 
Germany and Italy—especially since Mr. Chamber- 
lain has not allowed the “stop-Hitler’’ movement t0 | 
affect Britain’s trade relations with the Fascist dic | 
tatorships. What many observers find disturbing is 
that the Soviet government, which was thought to 
shape its foreign policy exclusively in accordance 
with ideological considerations, is no more averse 
than other régimes to playing the game of poweft 
politics. And in this game Soviet leaders, who have 
a shrewd understanding of Fascist methods, may 











We 


vic 
thi 


evi 


the 
Su 


ace 


ast, 
1 of 
t of 
t an 


cted 


, to 
sely 


and 
| fe 
am; 

the 
cted 
noc: 
viet 
ay a 


e to 
any- 
tors 
that 
with 
iber- 
it to 
dic- 
1g 1s 
it t0 
ance 
verse 
owef 
have 
may 








—_—_ 
—_—_ 


prove more adept than the democracies—although 
there is always the risk that they may overplay their 
hand by asking a price unacceptable to the Western 
powers. 

WILL USSR IMPOSE BALTIC GUARANTEE? 
The real test of the diplomatic struggle now waged 
in Europe will come over the Baltic states, which 
represent a sort of no man’s land between the em- 
battled ranks of the British coalition and the Rome- 
Berlin axis. The Soviet Union is convinced that 
British guarantees to Poland, Rumania, Greece and 
Turkey fail to protect it from German aggression 
through Finland, Latvia and Estonia, whose terri- 
tory is contiguous with that of the U.S.S.R., and 
who may prove unwilling or unable to defend their 
neutrality. The chief difficulty is that these Baltic 
states—incorporated in the Russian Empire until 
1917—have shown no enthusiasm for Soviet guar- 
antees of their independence, which they consider 
as tantamount to an invitation for German invasion. 
While all three states fear domination by the Third 
Reich, they remain distrustful of communism. They 
are anxious to preserve their neutrality against en- 
croachments from either side but, if they had to 
choose between German or Russian protection, they 
might well prefer the former. It is not beyond the 
realm of possibility that the Soviet government, 
which is working to build up a security system of 
its own in Eastern Europe, with the cooperation of 
Poland and Turkey, may find it advisable to impose 





Page Three 














its guarantee on the Baltic states to forestall German 
penetration in that region. Such a guarantee, in turn, 
might be regarded as a provocation by the Third 
Reich, and might be the prelude to either German 
or Soviet invasion of the Baltic states. 

The fate of the Anglo-Soviet negotiations hinges 
on Britain’s willingness to meet Moscow's terms in - 
full. Some observers see in the adamant attitude of 
the Soviet Union an attempt to force a political re- 
shuffle in Britain resulting in a cabinet which, unlike 
that of Mr. Chamberlain, would have no mental 
reservations about collaborating with Russia. Even 
if this were one of the motives actuating Moscow, 
it could hardly redound to the benefit of British 
Communists. While the Labor party, dominated by 
the trade unions, supports an Anglo-Soviet pact, it 
is as opposed as ever to a united front with Com- 
munists in domestic politics. It is much more likely 
that the really decisive influence brought to bear on 
Mr. Chamberlain in favor of the Soviet pact will 
come from the dissident group in his own Conserva- 
tive party, which has provided more dynamic opposi- 
tion than the Laborites. This group, headed by Win- 
ston Churchill and Anthony Eden, has long advocated 
cooperation with the Soviet Union, and may succeed 
in forcing the government to accept its policy, as it 
did when Mr. Chamberlain—in its opinion only half- 
heartedly—followed its lead on conscription and 
establishment of a Ministry of Supply. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


We Shall Live Again, by Maurice Hindus. New York, 

Doubleday, Doran, 1939. $3.00 

An excellent survey of the Czechoslovakia that was, di- 
vided into three parts: a warm-hearted appreciation of 
the republic’s inhabitants and their magnificent achieve- 
ments; an eye-witness account of the stunning series of 
events of September 1938; and a declaration of faith that 
the Czechs will rise again. 


Survey of International Affairs, 1937, by Arnold J. Toyn- 
bee and V. M. Boulter. Issued under the auspices of the 
Royal Institute of International Affairs. New York, 
Oxford, 1938. 2 volumes. $17.50 
The latest addition to this indispensable series, distin- 

guished by its keen analysis, its encyclopedic scope, and 
its admirable style, constitutes a trenchant introduction 
to the study of the crises of 1938 and 1939. The first vol- 
ume traces the European developments of 1937, the origin 
and progress of the Far Eastern conflict, and the rise of 
unrest around the shores of the Mediterranean. The second 
consists of a detailed study of the Spanish Civil War and 
of the motives and interests of the European powers af- 
fected by it. 


Europe Since 1914, by F. L. Benns. New York, Crofts, 4th 
edition, 1939. $5.00 


An expansion of a useful survey of post-war Europe. 


The Chamberlain Tradition, by Sir Charles Petrie. New 
York, Stokes, 1938. $2.50 


The Man Who Made the Peace: Neville Chamberlain, by 
Stuart Hodgson. New York, Dutton, 1938. $1.50 


Two eulogies of Prime Minister Chamberlain, who re- 
ceives unstinted praise for his diplomacy during the Sep- 
tember crisis. Sir Charles Petrie provides an interesting 
but wholly uncritical narrative of the distinguished family. 


Japan: Government-Politics, by Robert Karl Reischauer. 
New York, Nelson, 1939. $2.00 


A valuable handbook, analyzing Japanese political 
thought, the evolution of Japan’s government institutions, 
the establishment and organization of constitutional gov- 
ernment, and its functioning since 1889. An admirable in- 
troduction for the layman, as well as suggestive and il- 
luminating for the student. 


Germans in the Cameroons, by Harry R. Rudin. New 
Haven, Yale University Press, 1938. $4.00 


A painstaking and reliable study of German colonial ad- 
ministration in the Cameroons from 1884 to 1914. While 
shunning comparisons with other colonial administrations 
because of differing conditions, the author concludes that 
German rule in the Cameroons was enlightened and 
humane. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 33, JUNE 9, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lgsiig BUBLL, President; DorotHy F. Legr, Secretary; Vena MicHetes Dgan, Eéiter. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


181 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 

National Press Building 

JUNE 5.—Efforts to revise the Neutrality Act in 

line with Secretary Hull's proposals, temporarily 

suspended for the duration of the visit of King 

George and Queen Elizabeth, will be resumed next 

week when the Administration begins a race against 

time to secure some action before the adjournment 
of Congress. 


MR. HULL’S NEUTRALITY FORMULA. The 
prospects for definitive revision of the existing law 
were increased last week when Mr. Hull broke his 
long silence and took the initiative in calling for 
abolition of the arms embargo provision. In identi- 
cal letters dispatched on May 27 to Senator Pittman, 
Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Commit- 
tee, and Representative Bloom, Acting Chairman of 
the House Committee on Foreign Relations, the Sec- 
retary of State outlined seven specific proposals for 
dealing with the neutrality problem. These proposals 
are: 

1. Abolition of Section 1 of the present Act, which would 
compel the President to prohibit exports of ‘arms, am- 
munition and implements of war”’ to all belligerents on 
the outbreak of war. 

2. Adoption of new provisions (not in existing law) for- 
bidding American vessels to enter “areas of combat 
operations as defined by the President.” 

3. Adoption of new provisions to restrict travel by Ameri- 
can citizens in such areas. 

4. Re-adoption of provisions requiring transfer of title to 
a foreign purchaser of any articles or materials sold to 
belligerent nations. (This provision lapsed when the 
‘so-called cash-and-carry clause—Section 2—expired on 
May 1, 1939.) 

5. Renewal of existing prohibition of loans and credits to 
belligerents. 

6. Renewal of existing regulations governing solicitation 
of funds for belligerents. 

7. Continuation of the National Munitions Control Board 
and the system of arms export and import licenses. 


At first glance, these proposals seem to represent 
an important concession to isolationist sentiment in 
Congress and a compromise with the principles on 
which the Executive has based its recent foreign 
policy. They offer no encouragement to advocates 
of the Thomas amendment, which authorizes the 
President to impose embargoes against aggressor na- 
tions, and they fail to provide a basis for positive 
action in the Far East. In supporting restrictions on 
the exercise of traditional neutral rights, moreover, 
Mr. Hull has apparently gone a long way toward 
accepting the position of non-interventionists in Con- 


gress. But these concessions are more apparent than | 


real. For the core of the Administration formula jg 
the abolition of the automatic arms embargo, which 
would permit the United States to place its armament 
plants at the disposal of Britain and France in the 
event of conflict with the axis powers in Europe. 


PROSPECTS IN CONGRESS. This, of course, | 


will be the crux of the debate in Congress. The iso. | 


lationists, who are preparing to wage a bitter fight 
for retention of the arms embargo, insist that its 
elimination will not only open the way to the same 


policies which led the United States into the World | 


War, but will also be tantamount to an alliance with 
Britain and France. The Administration’s answer, as 
given in the Hull statement, is that if we go in for 
embargoes on exports for the purpose of keeping 


ourselves out of war, the logical thing to do would | 


be to make our embargoes all-inclusive—a_ policy 
which even Congressional isolationists admit is im- 


possible. 


While Mr. Hull has not publicly endorsed any of 
the bills now pending in Congress, the State Depart- 
ment is quietly throwing its weight behind the Bloom 
resolution (H.J.Res.306), which comes closest to 
meeting the Secretary's specifications. In addition to 
covering Mr. Hull’s principal points, the Bloom 
resolution gives the President far wider discretion 
in invoking the law and applying its separate pro- 
visions. Thus, while the Pittman bill gives Congress 


the right to invoke the Act if the President fails to | 





find that a “state of war’’ exists, the Bloom resolu- | 


tion not only leaves this power with the Chief Execu- 
tive, but compels him to issue a proclamation only 
if he finds ‘‘that it is necessary to promote the security 
or preserve the peace of the United States. ...” 


Another reason for supporting the Bloom resolu- 
tion is the fact that the chief hope for securing action 
in Congress now rests with the House. The Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee is still deadlocked on 
the Pittman bill and is unlikely to take any action 
for many weeks. Administration leaders, however, 
seem reasonably certain that the House Committee 
will report a “satisfactory” measure within the next 
two or three weeks and that it will pass the House 
before the end of June. This will carry the issue to 
the Senate about July 1, when the real contest will 
begin, and will allow at least a month for debate 
before the expected adjournment in August. 


W. T. STONE 








| 


catec 
reacl 
whe! 
inces 
lain’ 
disp 
and 

effor 
lems 
that 
illus 
way 
had 

resis 
men 
The 
beer 
frig) 
cape 


fax, 
Lor 
in tl 


in ¢ 
pres 
the 
vidi 
nize 
will 
eco 
all 

clar 
whi 
ject 


