


irked 


com- 


shich | 


> Mr. 
n ask 
_pos- 


ntion 


dmit- 


1 this 
road 
ue to 
S$ not 
t, on 


” bill, 


long- 
diffi 
public 
ritain 
ate to 
what 


nd of | 


1, ob 


ates 1s 
crisis, 
ishing 
angers 
ers of 
on on 
ectives 
ced at 


INE 


unday, 
- Presi- 
r FPA 


T. over 
npany: 











Entered as 2nd class matter 
ry 
Valversity of Nichi 


General Lip, 
Jf 1A 


aa (24 94gy 


Ann Arbor, Nich, 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XX, No. 14 


JANUARY 24, 1941 





AXIS LEADERS PLAN GERMAN DRIVE IN MEDITERRANEAN 


a Ae in the Mediterranean may be intensiued 
following the secret conference between Hitler 
and Mussolini which, according to a German com- 
muniqué of January 20, “resulted in complete agree- 
ment on their views concerning all questions.” The 
Axis leaders, accompanied by their Foreign Minis- 
tes and high army officials, must have discussed 
primarily the terms and extent of further German 
assistance to Italy. Almost simultaneously a German 
mission of 35 economic experts headed by Dr. Karl 
Clodius arrived in Rome, apparently for the purpose 
of working out an arrangement to supply Italy with 
raw materials which it urgently needs. 

Although I/ Duce realizes that additional German 
aid will inevitably curtail Italian gains in a post- 
war settlement, continued Italian reverses in Africa 
and Albania have left him with no alternative. Just 
how the Germans will reinforce the faltering Italian 
troops in Albania—whether through Italy or the 
Balkans—remains shrouded in mystery. The contin- 
ued movement of German troops and supplies into 
Rumania indicates that a drive into Greece through 
Yugoslavia or Bulgaria may still take place. 


FRANCO-GERMAN RELATIONS. The position 
of France in relation to the Mediterranean war was 
ptobably also reviewed by Hitler and Mussolini. It 
would greatly facilitate Germany’s campaign against 
British forces in the south if the Reich obtained a 
port on the Mediterranean, and Hitler may now seek 
to exact this further concession from the Pétain gov- 
etmment. The meeting of Marshal Pétain and M. 
Pierre Laval, on January 18, reopened several out- 
standing questions of Franco-German relations. Ne- 
gotiations for increased cooperation between Vichy 
and Berlin were interrupted on December 13 by the 
unexpected dismissal of M. Laval as French Vice 
Premier and Foreign Minister. An official com- 


muniqué after the January 18 meeting, however, 
announced that “the misunderstandings which 
brought about the events of December 13 were dis- 
pelled.”” Despite M. Laval’s apparent preference for 
increased collaboration with Germany, and the 
Marshal’s desire to avoid antagonizing the Reich, 
an official spokesman at Vichy made it clear on 
January 20 that the immobilized French fleet would 
not be used against Britain and that France would 
“continue to assure and safeguard” its overseas em- 
pire. With General Weygand in command of French 
troops in Africa, the possibility that French colonial 
forces might join the British affords Marshal 
Pétain a degree of bargaining power to resist Ger- 
man pressure for active support of the Axis. 


GERMAN AIR FORCE AIDS ITALY. The Ger- 
man air challenge to Britain’s naval supremacy in 
the Mediterranean, which took a new turn on Janu- 
ary 17 as German planes struck eastward at the 
Suez Canal area, has been developing during the past 
few weeks into a major campaign. Germany's pene- 
tration into this southern theatre of war—originally 
reserved for Italy in Axis plans—has apparently re- 
sulted from Italy’s inability to carry out the dive- 
bombing operations required to inflict serious dam- 
age on a battle fleet from the air. In order to be 
reasonably sure of success in bombing such a small 
target as a ship or a single military objective of lim- 
ited size, a plane must either be equipped with deadly 
accurate bomb-sights or dive at the target. The 
Italian air force, according to all available informa- 
tion, lacks the superior sights and the right kind of 
planes to engage in large-scale dive-bombing. Brit- 
ain’s command of the Mediterranean has not been 
threatened by either the Italian navy or the Italian 
air force since Rome declared war against the British 
last June, although it has been clear that in the long 

















run the success of Italy’s war effort in Africa would 
probably depend on its ability to maintain naval sup- 
ply lines. 

German airplane formations participated in Medi- 
terranean warfare for the first time on January 10, 
when Stuka dive-bombers attacked a British military 
convoy southwest of Sicily. As a result of this en- 
gagement and German-Italian air attacks against 
British warships in Valletta harbor at Malta on Jan- 
uary 16 and 19, one of Britain’s three aircraft car- 
riers in the Mediterranean, the newly built I//ustri- 
ous, was put out of action for a considerable period, 
and the modern 9,100-ton British cruiser Southam p- 
ton sunk. British planes began a series of retaliatory 
bombing raids on the German-Italian air bases at 
Catania, Sicily, on January 12, and the Italian air- 
drome at Marizza, Rhodes, on January 17. Axis at- 
tacks from other nearby bases, however, will seri- 
ously complicate Britain’s problem of supplying Al- 
lied forces in Africa and Greece through the Strait 
of Gibraltar and the western Mediterranean, and 
may even increase the hazards of shipping further 
reinforcements to Greece in eastern waters. 


BRITISH SUCCESSES IN AFRICA. Italian re- 
verses on the battle fronts in Libya and East Africa 
may have been the deciding factor in Germany's 
decision to enter the Mediterranean at this time. 


Page Two 








—= 





Since the British recaptured Sidi Barrani on Decep, 
ber 11 and Solum on December 16, they have move) 
steadily into Italian territory. Following the captuy 
of Bardia on January 5, British troops began to 
circle the next Italian fortified zone at Tobruk, 
British armored cars penetrated as far as the 
virons of Bomba, 55 miles west of Tobruk. M 
while, the Royal Air Force has harried the reor 
ization of Italian defenses at Tobruk, Derna 
Bengazi. | 

In East Africa the Italian forces have retreatej 
before a determined British advance which begy 
on January 9, and which culminated on January 13 
in the recapture of Kassala. Italy’s loss of this tow 
in the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, taken by Fascist forcg 
last July, brought to a sudden close the Italian threat 
to invade Khartoum and the great cotton-growing 
region along the upper Nile. Farther south, alon 
the border of Kenya Colony, Italian forces have aly 
given up advanced posts which they seized last sum. 
mer. Germany's aid to Italy in the Mediterranean js 
apparently designed to arrest British successes on the 
African fronts before Italy might be compelled tp 
stop fighting there. If hostilities should cease ip 
Africa, a good share of Britain’s strength would kk 
freed for use against the Reich. 


A. RANDLE ELLiotr | 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The War: First Year, by Edgar McInnis. New York, Ox- 
ford, 1940. $1.50 
Originally published under the sponsorship of the Cana- 
dian Institute of International Affairs, this volume is a re- 
markably objective survey of the events of the first twelve 
months of war. It should be useful to writers, teachers and 
— Maps, a chronology and texts of treaties are in- 
uded. 


The Structure of Manufacturing Production, by Charles 
A. Bliss. New York, National Bureau of Economic Re- 
search, 1939. $2.50 
The author gives a cross-section of our manufacturing 

industries as of 1929, differentiating the products by major 
classifications and setting forth the proportion contributed 
by materials, wage and salary earners, capital, etc. The 
usefulness of this survey is impaired by the lack of com- 
parable data for other years. 





While Congress debates the Lend-Lease Bill, read: 
FINANCIAL HELP FOR BRITAIN? 
The Pros and Cons 
by John C. deWilde 


10c 


A brief study guide presenting arguments 
on both sides of this momentous question. 











British Relations with China: 1981-1939, by Irving § 
Friedman. $2.00 


The Chinese Army, by Evans Fordyce Carlson. $1.00 
Inquiry Series, Institute of Pacific Relations, New York 
1940. 


These two studies continue the authoritative series d 
monographs in the Inquiry Series of the I.P.R., dealig 
with problems arising from the Far Eastern conflict. Tk 
first study, after a brief historical introduction, gives: 
detailed and illuminating analysis of Britain’s policy i 
the Far East from the Manchurian crisis to the outbred 
of war in Europe. The second provides a useful descrip 
tion and evaluation of China’s armed forces, with especia 
ly rich materials on guerrilla techniques and organizatin 


The President: Office and Powers, by Edward S. Corwit 
New York, New York University Press, 1940. $5.00 
This historical and analytical study of the Presidency! 

a landmark in its field. Of particular interest today are th 

survey of Lincoln’s “dictatorship” during the Civil We 

emergency, and the suggestions for change in the compo 
tion and functions of the Cabinet as a safeguard again 
dangerously personalized Presidential power. 


The Fleet Today, by Kendall Banning. New York, Ful 
and Wagnalls, 1940. $2.50 
An interestingly written account of the selection of nav 
recruits and their training in the various branches of 
service. Recommended for men considering enlistment. 


ee 


\ 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 14, January 24, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


1941. 





e's! 


Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHeies Dan, Ei 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Natio 





Yr we oO 


ome 





etreated 
] began 
uary 1g 
1S town 


t force 
n threat 
2rOWing. 


» along 
Ave also 
ist sum 
inean js 
| on the 
alled to 
ease in 
ould be 





Economic cooperation between the United States 
and Latin America is being worked out at present 
in terms of commodity agreements, United States 
aid for long-range industrial and agricultural projects 
in the southern republics, and loans by Washing- 
ton to tide the other American countries over financial 
emergencies. In late November the Inter-American 
Financial and Economic Advisory Committee, which 
has been sitting in Washington since November 15, 
1939, reached agreement on a coffee convention. 
Under the agreement, exporting countries are as- 
signed quotas for U.S. and non-U.S. markets, in an 
efort to stabilize marketing conditions and raise 
coffee prices. The committee is now collecting in- 
formation on problems related to cotton and cacao. 


ECONOMIC AID. Meanwhile, the Inter-Ameri- 
can Development Commission is pushing its own 
program for developing non-competitive small in- 
dustries in Latin America through joint U.S.-Latin 
American capital outlays. It has announced the for- 
mation of a local cooperating group in Brazil, the 


| first of a number of such committees to be estab- 


LIOTT 


rving § 


. $1.00, 
‘w York, 


series d\ 
dealing 
lict. The 
gives 
yolicy it 
outbrea 
descrip 
especial 
nization 
Corwin 
5.00 
dency 
y are the 
vil We 
compos 
agains 


k, Fut 


of navi 
s of th 
ment. 





lished throughout the Americas. Agricultural tech- 
nicians are also at work. Four rubber survey groups 
have been touring tropical Latin America, selecting 
favorable sites for immediate planting. This is essen- 
tially a long-term program, since no sizable flow of 
tubber from Latin America—the original source of 
that commodity—is possible for six or seven years. 


With various credits to Latin American republics 
up for consideration by the Export-Import Bank, 
particular attention has been focused on the long 
drawn out negotiations with Cuba. The difficulty 
here arises from the fact that the Cuban Congress 
passed a pretentious $50,000,000 loan bill in Sep- 
tember 1940 without ascertaining previously whether 
or not the various items listed—including sums to 
balance the Cuban budget—properly fell within the 
sphere of Export-Import Bank loans. During the 
past few months attempts have been made to 
straighten out this misunderstanding. Washington 
is reported willing to extend financial aid, though 
not necessarily in the amount or for the purposes 
arbitrarily specified by Cuba’s ill-starred loan bill. 


ELECTIONS IN PROSPECT. Two Latin Ameri- 
can republics, Venezuela and Haiti, are to choose 
Presidents this spring. In April the Venezuelan Con- 
gress will meet to pick a successor to Eleazar Lopez 


TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA 


By JOHN I. B. McCULLOCH 


Contreras, who has governed Venezuela since the 
death of Dictator Gémez in December 1935. Al- 
though he faithfully served Gémez as War Min- 
ister during the latter's lifetime, Lopez Contreras has 
subsequently brought Venezuela a long way from 
the ruthless dictatorship that characterized the 
Gémez régime. Today the country might be described 
as a semi-democracy, with certain tacit limitations 
on rights of political organization and free speech. 
Enjoying enormous influence throughout Venezuela, 
Lopez Contreras could doubtless secure his own re- 
election should he so desire. Barring, however, un- 
foreseen developments on the international front, 
the President appears determined to relinquish office 
at this juncture. The most likely candidate to suc- 
ceed him is Diédgenes Escalante, Venezuelan Ambas- 
sador in Washington. 


In Haiti, as in Venezuela, a President is to be 
selected by Congress in April. It now appears that 
the present incumbent, Sténio Vincent, hopes to re- 
main in office, and that a newly selected hand-picked 
legislature will put through a Constitutional amend- 
ment to this end. According to the provisions now 
in effect, no president can govern for more than 
two periods; and Vincent has already served his two 
terms. Among many Haitian intellectuals, profound 
resentment has been caused by this fresh illustration 
of continuismo, or indefinite self-continuance in 
power. This practice appears to have taken firm root 
by now in all the Central American republics with 
the notable exception of Costa Rica, and in all the 
island republics of the Caribbean save possibly Cuba, 
where Batista’s elevation to the presidency in Octo- 
ber merely gave a legal form to the power which 
he had previously exercised as Chief of Staff. 


Of even greater interest, perhaps, are the Chilean 
congressional elections scheduled for March 2. Popu- 
lar Front hopes of upsetting Rightist majorities in 
both Houses of Congress at this time are somewhat 
weakened by disruptive tendencies within the Popu- 
lar Front itself, as a result of Socialist attacks on the 
Communist party. Recently the Socialists announced 
their intention of withdrawing from the Popular 
Front and organizing a new “‘leftist Bloc,” which 
would exclude the Communists. 

Although a new President will not be chosen in 
Colombia until 1942, the candidacy of ex-President 
Lopéz has already been a major issue in Colombian 
politics for many months. 


For more extensive coverage on Latin American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS, a bi-weekly newsletter edited by Mr. McCulloch. For sample 
copy of this publication, write to the Washington Bureau, Foreign Policy Association, 1200 National Press Building, Washington, D.C. 

















ton News L etter 

















~ aang AL ROOR 
LIBRARY 
WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 

JAN. 20.—As President Roosevelt began his his- 
toric third term today, he gave greater emphasis to 
the crisis confronting democracy in the world of 1941 
and underlined more sharply the call for decisive 
action. 

In his inaugural address, the President made no 
direct reference to the pending bill for full aid to 
Britain or the program of action it is designed to im- 
plement. Recalling the task of the people in Wash- 
ington’s day, and in Lincoln’s day, he invoked the 
spirit and faith of America in defense of democracy 
and warned against the “peril of inaction.” Today, 
he declared, ‘the task of the people is to save that 
Nation and its institutions from disruption from 
without. . . . In the face of great perils never before 
encountered, our strong purpose is to protect and 
perpetuate the integrity of democracy. . . . For this 
we must muster the spirit of America, and the faith 
of America.” 

CALL TO ACTION. Prior to the inaugural ad- 
dress, however, the application of these basic prin- 
ciples to the present situation abroad had been 
sharply outlined before the Foreign Affairs Com- 
mittee of the House by leading members of the 
Cabinet appearing in support of the lend-lease bill. 
Their testimony left little doubt of the emergence 
of a new and stronger foreign policy predicated less 
on the conflict of ideologies than on the necessity of 
preventing control of the seas from passing into the 
hands of hostile powers. 

The vital importance of sea power, in terms of our 
own security in the Western Hemisphere, was the 
central theme of all the statements heard last week. 
In urging Congress to give the President wide dis- 
cretion to meet any contingency that might arise, 
Secretary Hull warned that the United States is 
faced with the grim necessity of subordinating all 
other considerations to the elementary requirements 
of “self-defense.” Confronted with “forces of con- 
quest now on the march across the earth, self-defense 
is and must be the compelling consideration” in the 
shaping of our own foreign policy. But the primary 
reason why America must act to support Britain is 
that “control of the seas by law-abiding nations is 
the key to the security of the Western Hemi- 
sphere. . . .”” Were Britain defeated, “and were she 
to lose command of the seas, Germany could easily 
cross the Atlantic—especially the South Atlantic— 





unless we were ready and able to do what Britain j 
doing now.” 


Secretary Stimson underlined the same point whep 
he declared that this country is faced with a crisis 
that is “much more acute” than the emergency of 
1917. It is imperative that our industry and our plants 
should be working at top speed, he said, ‘to furnish 
vital weapons of defense to Great Britain in order 
that she may meet the threat which is confronting 
her this spring and summer, and thus preserve her 
fleet as a bulwark in the Atlantic Ocean.” 

Colonel Knox, as Secretary of the Navy, stressed 
the importance of sea power even more emphatically, 
“The struggle now going on’ he said, “is funda- 
mentally an attempt by Germany to seize control of 
the sea from Great Britain. That is why, from a 
military viewpoint, the war has so vital an interest 
to the United States.” Only Great Britain and her 
fleet can give us the time we need to build ships, 
to train their crews, to develop our outlying bases 
and to gear our industry for defense. 


When spokesmen for the Administration had com- 
pleted their case, few members of the Foreign Af 
fairs Committee or of Congress were left in doubt 
as to the nature of the decisive measures which are in 
store if British sea power is destroyed. While Con- 
gress continues to debate the granting of power to 
the President, there is a growing recognition that 
the last technical remnants of neutrality are disap- 
pearing, and that, unless we act ourselves, our future 
course may be determined by other powers. 


While Ambassador Kennedy's speech, on Janv- 
ary 18, reflected the inner conflict in the minds of 
many members of Congress who still hesitate to ac- 
cept the full implications of the Administration's 
position or the grim alternative of an Axis victory, it 
is not likely to affect the outcome of the debate or the 
trend of American foreign policy. Meanwhile, Wash 
ington realizes that passage of the lend-lease bill 
will not of itself provide much greater assistance to 
Britain, unless the production of war material is 
increased. This task has now been taken in hand by 
the newly organized Office of Production Manage 


ment. W. T. STONE 





A. Randle Elliott will broadcast on Sunday, Janu 
ary 26; his subject is “New Axis Moves in Europe.” This 
is one of the regular FPA Sunday broadcasts, heard 
from 2:15 to 2:30 E.S.T. over the blue network of the 
National Broadcasting Company. 








