







ang 
‘ron 
lect. 
ures 
: in 
cial 


ton, 


ions 










@BNBRAL LIBRARY 


General Library | 
University of Michi eipfed ss 2nd classe 


Ata ASR ARGell” SEP 1.6 1944 


GUY. OF Migu 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Yo. XXIII, No. 48 





[BE occupation by Russian forces of key points in 
Bulgaria which were being used by Germany 
ives a new fillip to the discussion aroused by some 
sobservers who, while opposing Nazism, are asking 
whether a victorious Russia will dominate post-war 


| Europe. Since their fears, as noted last week, could 


affect the character of the peace the Allies make with 
Germany, it is essential to scrutinize them frankly. 


RUSSIA’S AIMS IN EUROPE. Recent military 
'developments on. the eastern front—Russia’s inva- 
‘sion of Rumania, Finland's withdrawal from the war, 

and now the surrender of Bulgaria—do not portend 
any fundamental change in earlier estimates of Mos- 
cow’s aims in Europe. So far as the official record 
indicates, the U.S.S.R. does not seek to acquire new 
territory on the continent. Its announced territorial 
claims remain limited to the Baltic states, eastern Po- 
land, and the section of Finland it obtained under the 
' Moscow treaty of 1940 that terminated the first 
Russo-Finnish war—all areas which were part of the 





sely 

does 
- 

pite | 


ork, 


for 
ated 


jom 


ent, 
cily 
109 





onal 
d # 
least 








Tsarist Empire before its break-up in 1917. Nor has 
the Soviet government yet indicated that it intends 
to extract the last pound of flesh from such German 
satellites as Finland and Rumania. On the contrary, 
the impression of foreign representatives in Moscow 
is that the demands of the Russians fall considerably 
short of “unconditional surrender.” And the treat- 
ment of areas so far liberated by the Russian Army— 
notably in Poland and Rumania—is, according to 
the reports of American correspondents on the spot, 
of a character to assure the population that their re- 
ligious beliefs and economic practices will not be 


disturbed by the occupying forces. 


Does this mean that the Russians are not con- 
cerned about the internal situation of the liberated 
countries, and will withdraw unconditionally once 
Germany has been defeated? No, it does not—any 
more than it could be said that Britain and the United 
States have no concern about the internal situation in 


SEPTEMBER 15, 1944 


NATIONAL SECURITY KEY TO RUSSIA’S FOREIGN POLICY 


Italy, or even that of our allies, Belgium, France, the 
Netherlands and Norway. London and Washington 
have displayed a lively interest in the future political ~ 
development of France, and have taken an active 
part—in the opinion of some, an unsatisfactory part 
—in the affairs of Italy. It is doubtful that they 
would feel compensated for the military and eco-_. 
nomic effort they are now making for the liberation 
of Europe, or would feel reassured about post-war 
prospects, if governments inimical to them should 
suddenly emerge in Paris or Rome. The Russians, for 
their part, are determined that, when they do transfer 
to native régimes the administration of areas where 
they are now fighting the Germans, these régimes 
will not be hostile either to Russia as a nation or to 
its political, economic and social institutions. 

It does not follow that governments in each of the 
countries bordering on Russia are to be composed 
solely of Communists or fellow-travelers, The Rus- 
sians have not opposed the agreement concluded by 
Marshal Tito with Yugoslav Prime Minister Dr. 
Subashitch, appointed by King Peter of Yugoslavia, 
and have not rejected the aid given to their cause by 
King Michael of Rumania, whose peace emissaries 
are now in Moscow. What the Russians have firmly 
opposed has been any attempt by the satellite coun- 
tries to masquerade as friends of the United Nations 
while retaining their ties with Germany and con- 
tinuing, sub rosa, to inflict loss of life and matériel 
on Russia. A policy of double-talk on the part of Axis 
satellites would presumably be just as objectionable 
to Britain and the United States as to Russia. 


DOES MOSCOW CLAIM ITS OWN “ORBIT”? 
Does this mean that Russia claims an exclusive sphere 
of influence over Eastern Europe and the Balkans? 
Are we on the point of witnessing the formation of 
what Walter Lippmann calls “orbits,” with Russia 
in full control of areas east of Germany, leaving the 
“Atlantic Community” to its Western Allies, and the 






A iaiencneed ms 5 seme ilitinina as _: 


“hi 


a ie re 
Ne ot tort 


me eS Tt 


ihe PAE SD 











a 


= Page Two 





Far East to China? Current developments give no 
evidence of such a trend, which in any case is im- 
practicable in an air-minded world. Russia, it is true, 
has a special interest in Eastern Europe and the Bal- 
kans, just as the United States has in Latin America, 
and Britain in France and the Low Countries. But 
Moscow does not appear to be excluding its Allies 
from participation in the affairs of states bordering 
on the U.S.S.R., and is meanwhile taking an interest 
in other areas of the world. Although in the Polish- 
Russian controversy, as yet unsettled, Moscow at first 
played a lone hand, more recently it has consulted 
Britain and the United States concerning the terms 
of its truce with Finland and its declaration of war 
on Bulgaria (which up to September 5 had been at 
war with Western powers but not with Russia). 
While there is no doubt that the Soviet government 
considers Eastern Europe and the Balkans as an area 
where its future security is particularly at stake, it 
has shown itself ready to consider measures of world 
security now under discussion at Dumbarton Oaks. 
The greater the degree of confidence that can be 
established between Russia and the other United 
Nations—and this can be done only by day to day 
dealings, not merely by documents—the more prom- 
ising will be the prospect of post-war collaboration in 
Europe. The more we hesitate, on the other hand, to 
support a security organization that would require us 
to take military action outside the Western Hemi- 
sphere, the more we actually encourage Russia to rely 
on its own strength and on special arrangements with 
border states to protect itself against future aggres- 
sion by Germany. 

WILL RUSSIA PROMOTE COMMUNISM? Is 
Russia, however, promoting Communist doctrines in 
the liberated areas, and will it use its influence to 
spread Communism beyond its security zone? In 1940 
the Russians gravely miscalculated the temper of the 
Finns. Today, they are showing far more penetrating 
understanding of border countries, conditions in 
which may differ from those existing in Russia in 
1917. The respect for religion and private property 
expressed by the groups in Poland and Yugoslavia 


TITO’S SUCCESS FORESHADOWS POLITICAL ROLE OF UNDERGROUND 


The Red Army's long-anticipated arrival in the 
Balkans and its junction with the Yugoslav Par- 
tisans on September 7 reinforces with military 
cooperation the close political tie between Moscow 
and Marshal Tito. This cooperation will undoubt- 
edly play an important part in speeding the defeat of 
the Nazis in southeastern Europe. By reaching across 
Yugoslavia to meet the Russians at the Bulgarian 
frontier, the Partisans destroyed the only important 
railroad running north and south in the Balkans and 
trapped an estimated 250,000 Germans in the south- 
ern part of the peninsula and the Adriatic and 
Aegean islands. But serious as the defeat of these 








a 
——ewe | 





that have collaborated with Russia, and the-comport.} TIT 
ment of the Russians in Rumania would indicate} y:+;¢. 
that Moscow is inclined to adapt its policy to circum-|}.. Bz 
stances, provided always the fundamental condition} 
is fulfilled that the governments of border countries} yi, ¢ 
maintain genuinely friendly relations with Russia. Burope 


But, quite aside from any positive action Russia} compe 
might take on behalf of its own doctrines, we cannot] Russia 
escape the fact that political and economic conditions} yed p: 
in the wake of war may well encourage the most quarte 
radical tendencies among peoples who, having lost} Tito is 
all but life, now have nothing to lose except a life} easter: 
of hardship and uncertainty. This is particularly true} Russia 
of most of the countries of Eastern Europe, where}jhat bh 
people lived close to the margin even before the wat;}policy 
but reports from Italy indicate that conditions border- 
ing on chaos, always conducive to revolution, may] The 
not be restricted to any geographic area. It is entirelyp@'OY% 
credible that native Communists will take advantage|**4". 
of existing unrest to assume greater power and influ} Polit'« 
ence—but, if they do, it will be because the removal nized 
of Nazi rule will have left a vacuum of authority, Ss 

u 


Today, in spite of many disillusionments, it is still) Dsuir 
to Britain and the United States, but especially to thi a. 
country, that the peoples of Europe are looking for am 
leadership as they face, with the gravest anxiety, the exile 
manifold problems of the post-war period. If we fail artis 
to fulfill the expectations we have aroused by our SS der 
condemnation and defeat of armed totalitarianism, | 
we shall have to blame not Russia, but our own in- -s 
capacity to assume moral leadership. We have con c . 
vinced the world that we possess unrivaled talents “high 
for industrial production and military organization} ©) 
in time of war. What do we and the British intend lhe yi 
to do to demonstrate that we also command sufficien 


mediat 












areas 
talents to carry forward the tasks of reconstruction. 
It is none too early to answer this question, which sit 

one must hope is on the agenda of the Roosevelt ag 
. ; that t 
Churchill conference in Quebec. postp 
VERA MICHELES DEAN  felecti 

(The second in a series on Europe's problems as seen 
from the United States.) 

JU 


Balkan forces will be for Germany, the strategic Loss i 
of Bulgaria may be felt even more keenly in the 
Reich since the Red Army is already using this former 
Axis satellite as a base for its attack on Hungary, the 
last remaining part of the German system of outef : 
defenses. Thus Germany faces invasion over the tra- 
ditional Danubian route at the very moment whe 
the Western Allies are attacking the Siegfried Line} ___ 
Moreover, as the Russians move toward German 
from the southeast, their progress may be hastene 








FOREI 
Headqu 
second. 


by the fact that the route for American lend-lease sup one m 
plies has been shortened as a result of the Red Army’s 
occupation of Bulgaria’s Black Sea bases. 






















| TITO WINS RECOGNITION. The long-range 
}political consequences of the Red Army’s arrival in 
{the Balkans promise to be as important as the im- 
jmediate military results. It is worth noting that in 
this region, long the scene of conflict among the 
_}Buropean powers, Britain—now the only possible 
Siafcompetitor for prestige—has given full approval to 
hot} Russia's new position. This is indicated by the contin- 
nsfued presence of Randolph Churchill at Tito’s head- 
ostfquarters and Prime Minister Churchill's meeting with 
Ost}Tito in Rome on August 13. As the battle for south- 
ife}eastern Europe moves into its final stage, therefore, 
rue}Russia is playing the uncontested role in the Balkans 
ere}that has traditionally been the goal of its foreign 


a policy regardless of the régime in power. 
et- mas ' 
rayf Lhe precise form Russia’s post-war influence 


elyjinroughout the Balkans will take is not yet entirely 
roepcieat. But in Yugoslavia the shape of the nation’s 
Ayppolitical future has emerged and been officially recog- 
yajgnized in the agreement reached on June 16 by the 
ityggovernment-in-exile under its new Premier, Dr. Ivan 
til Subashitch, and Marshal Tito and supplemented by 
high ruins declarations from both parties. The signifi- 
Fogg cance of these statements lies in the fact that they 
the mark Tito’s complete victory over the government-in- 
‘ai exile, which had formerly publicly condemned the 
Partisans and supported their Chetnik opponents 
under General Mikhailovitch. In what amounts to a 
‘}oomplete reversal of policy for the exiled régime, 
the Subashitch cabinet on August 8 issued a declara- 
~ Ation declaring that it recognized Tito’s army as the 
. _§ highest expression” of the nation’s resistance, called 
_,qgon all Yugoslavs to join these forces, and expressed 
jhe view that Tito's political organization in liberated 
; Jareas of Yugoslavia is essential in carrying on the 
ich wat. The government also abandoned its intransigent 
aie POSition with respect to the monarchy, and agreed 
that the question of the future of the king should be 
Hpostponed until it could be submitted to a post-war 
y Felection. 












, 


in 





JUST PUBLISHED— 


oa U.S. FOREIGN POLICY AND THE VOTER 


the by Vera Micheles Dean 

ner 2 5¢ 

7 September 15 issue of FOREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
ite. 


REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
tra Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 
1¢ 








Page Three 








ne. 








As a result of this agreement, the Partisans have 


registered a triumph for another of Europe’s resist- 
ance movements as opposed to exiled régimes. There 
can be little doubt that the government formed in 
Yugoslavia after the Germans are expelled will fol- 
low the pattern being set in France, where exiles— 
regardless of the conscientiousness and skill with 
which they have performed their duties—are being 
replaced by men who lived through the years of 
enemy occupation and are intimately acquainted with 
the temper of the people. It can be expected, there- 
fore, that post-war Yugoslavia will be shaped along 
lines desired by the Partisans rather than by the pres-- 
ent exiled government, despite the latter's belated 
efforts to win the confidence of the resistance move- 
ment. Under Partisan leadership the nation’s political 
structure will undoubtedly be federal, with Croats 
and Slovenes assigned more important roles than“ 
pre-war Yugoslavia, and the régime in power will 
stand for a high degree of nationalization of com- 
mercial and industrial property. Moreover, the 
Yugoslav Communist party, enjoying the new pres- 
tige won through its important position in the 
war, can be expected to be a major political force. 
In foreign affairs, this new Yugoslavia will be closely 
linked to the U.S.S.R., and will demand rectifications 
of its northern border with Italy. 


POLITICAL SETTLEMENT NOT ENOUGH. 
But no political and territorial settlement alone will 
be capable of solving the great problems Yugoslavia 
will face at the end of the war. It is estimated that 
the Yugoslavs have suffered proportionately higher 
casualties and property loss than any other people in- 
volved in the war as the price of their guerrilla war- 
fare against the Axis, civil war, and the Germans’ 
determination to leave the South Slavs permanently 
weakened. It is, therefore, the question of food, re- 
lief and economic rehabilitation that will have prior- 
ity among the Yugoslavs once the Germans are 
driven out. Under these circumstances, it is not sur- 
prising that the government-in-exile has promised 
Tito it will pay particular attention to preparations 
for the reconstruction of the country after the war 
“in harmony and collaboration with competent insti- 
tutions and organizations of the United Nations.” 
During the period of relief and reconstruction Yugo- 
slavia will turn to UNRRA and private American 
relief projects, for Russia—despite its great prestige 
in the Balkans—will be able to offer little economic 
aid to its neighbors. 


WINIFRED N. HADSEL 





any 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 48, SgpTEMBER 15, 1944, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


1ed Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lget, Secretary; Verna MicneLzs Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


up one month for change of address on membership publications. 


ly F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


ip 181 





Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


a cei 
a i 


aes 


— 
es 


wre SS 


Bae 


—————————— — 
al ‘Z ba ee Sy 


ar 
2 Cee Se 


oo 
SS mS 


ee 








Washington News Letter Sas 





sAL R' 
ai LIBR 
E oF A | 








SENATE ATTITUDE IMPORTANT FACTOR AT DUMBARTON OAKS 


Whatever decision is reached at Dumbarton Oaks, 
and at the subsequent conference of the United Na- 
tions which is to produce a final draft agreement for 
a world security organization, will i receive 
the approval of the governments of Britain, Russia 
and China, despite fundamental differences in their 
political structure. The United States government, 
however, can accept the decision only after the Senate 
has approved it according to regular constitutional 
procedure under which, if the President submits the 
draft agreement as a treaty, a two-thirds supporting 
vote would be required. For this reason, the Senate 
is an absent but powerful partner in the present dis- 
cussions. The State Department drafted the plan sub- 
mitted at Dumbarton Oaks only after it had sought 
to ascertain what measures the Senate would support. 
For that reason, the visiting delegations have been 
inclined to accept, in the main, the plan presented 
by this country. 


SENATE'S ATTITUDE UNCERTAIN. Debate 
in the Senate on September 5 indicated that some Re- 
publicans oppose American participation in a secur- 
ity organization that would command the use of 
force to keep international law and order. Senator 
Harlan J. Bushfield, Republican, of North Dakota 
said that the present plan would give the President 
the power to declare war, and make him “the abso- 
lute despot of the American people, a true dictator 
in all sense [ sic} of the word.” 

While probably few Senators would take this op- 
positionist attitude, the nature of the Senate’s vote 
on the Dumbarton Oaks program is unpredictable. 
There are already indications that debate will center 
on a side issue, as it did in the case of the ‘Versailles 
Treaty—not on whether the United States is to col- 
laborate after the war with its present partners, but 
whether the Senate is to be a party to every decision 
made under the prospective system of collaboration. 
In scouting Bushfield’s fears, Senator Vandenberg, 
Republican, of Michigan said the Senate would have 
an opportunity to determine in advance the instruc- 
tions given the United States delegate with regard 
to voting on questions relating to the use of force. 
Yet the American plan submitted when the Dum- 
barton conference opened on August 22 did not 
specifically call for Senate ratification of each vote 
cast by the American member of the Council. During 
August Wendell Willkie advised a number of Con- 
gressmen that the President should have power to 


FOR VICTORY °* 


use the military forces of the United States in ful T 
fillment of this country’s obligations to presery¢ 
peace through a system of collective security. 


NEED FOR QUICK ACTION. On the issue off qa 
continuing Senate participation in the world organ 
ization, our traditional domestic concerns collide with 
our world interests. Throughout the history of the 
Republic, the Senate has sought to dominate the goy.! 
ernment’s foreign policy decisions, considering this| ~~ 
procedure in harmony with the democratic process 
Yet, to be effective, a security organization must be EV 
able to act quickly, and Senatorial review is oftet}+-),; 
slow. Moreover, the program now being assiduously T ies 
and sincerely formulated by United Nations diple Lt be 
mats could be defeated by a combination of 33 Sena ‘lita 
tors (two-thirds of the Senate plus one) opposing the .. = 
Dumbarton Oaks plan either because they object ti} 4 el 
collective security—as Senator Burton K. Wheeleg} 
Democrat, of Montana stated in a radio debate of 4 a 
September 7—or because they object to lack of pro a hd 
vision for continuing Senate participation. With a 
this possibility in mind, Secretary Hull last week ar} y 4, 
ranged to confer with a group of Senators on the re} 4 1 
sults achieved at Dumbarton Oaks. Rte. 

The attitude of Republican Senators when the vot Queb 
is taken will provide in some measure a test of thé) ~. 
strength of Governor Dewey’s party leadership. Onl bach 
August 23 and 24 Mr. Hull conferred on the Dum}... 
barton Oaks plan with John Foster Dulles, Mf) 4... 
Dewey's representative on international affairs, ané ite 
Mr. Dulles gave his general approval to the pro 4 ke 
posals. In an address on foreign policy in Louisvillé) » 
on September 8, Mr. Dewey said that a specific tad 
for this country is to help “establish a world orgatil a 
ization in which all nations may share as sovereigi 
equals, to deal with future threats to the peace of the] | 
world from whatever source, and on a permanent} a 
basis.” He made no reference to the question of com) ®&*° 
tinuing Senatorial participation, and confined his ob Teh 
jections to the Administration’s foreign policy, the sult 
secrecy which surrounds the negotiations at Dum} ‘" ‘ 
barton Oaks, and the possibility that small nations Brit 
may be denied a voice in the security organization's} ©S‘ 
decisions. In regard to the latter point, it was - whe 
ported on September 11 that a clause to grant small} Sit! 
powers the right to be consulted whenever theif Chu 
forces were to be used to put down aggression & join 
now understood to be in the joint security plan. s. 

Bia Boties | U.S 


con 














BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS ffa: 








