es of te. 
e as the 
action op 
ad hinted 
“Palestine 
Palestine, 
e gover: 
Palestine 
1e leader. 
the Jew. 
told the 
Was aSso- 
ficially in 


ement in ) 


ai Leumi, 
proposed 
tion army 
an inde- 


cessation 
t political 
rms. Yet 
enty days 
-, the two 
sent their 
> govern 
‘e further 
ittees are 
iains that 
rernments 
ht of the 
sacred in 
vigorous 
ie United 
tion with 
vice from 


BOLLES 


JUL 23 t04¢ 


et. ROU 
om weak” Entered as 2nd class matter 
nay. or mee General Library 
—1946 Univers ty ae M h 
We +¢ o 
8an 
A cum f§ whanau Wate . 
wR 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vout. XXV, No. 40 


JULY 19, 1946 


WiLL ECONOMIC RIFT LEAD TO EAST-WEST DIVISION OF GERMANY? 


HE heated debate on Germany that concluded 

the meeting of the Foreign Ministers in Paris on 
July 12 contributed little to the immediate solution 
of the basic problems confronting the Allies in the 
Reich, but it did help to clarify Big Four policies 
toward that country. Now that each of the great 
powers has made an official declaration of its views, 
it is possible to define with greater accuracy than 
before the areas of harmony and discord that exist 
among the four occupying powers. 


WHERE COMMON GROUND IS FOUND. 
Superficially, at least, the Foreign Ministers’ dis- 
cussion indicated that all four powers agree it is 
neither desirable nor practical to strip Germany 
of productive capacity and reduce it to an agrarian 
state. As Foreign Minister Molotov declared on 
July 10, “such a course would result in undermining 
the economy of Europe, in the dislocation of world 
economy and in a chronic political crisis in Germany 
that would spell a threat to peace and tranquillity.” 
This pronouncement by the Soviet representative 
bears so close a resemblance to numerous British 
and American statements on Germany’s economic 
needs that it could easily have been made by Foreign 
Secretary Bevin or Secretary of State Byrnes. The 
Russian suggestion that the so-called “level of in- 
dustry proposal” for Germany — announced on 
March 28 and designed to reduce German industry 
by 1949 to half its pre-war production—might have 
to be revised upward, also echoes the strong oppo- 
sition that Britain particularly has been offering to 
this plan. Moreover, when Mr. Molotov proceeded 
to the related question of the Ruhr and declared 
that, without this industrial center, “Germany can- 
not exist as an independent and viable state,” he 
took the same general position as that which London 
and Washington have consistently maintained. The 


discussion also revealed formal agreement among 
Russia, Britain and the United States on the desir- 
ability of setting up German central economic ad- 
ministrations, under Allied supervision, as a neces- 
sary step toward the establishment of a government 
for all of Germany. Although the French continue 
to maintain that the creation of these central Ger- 
man administrative bodies “should be bound up 
with an examination of (France’s) propositions rela- 
tive to the future of the Ruhr and Rhineland,” 
President-Premier Bidault made a notable conces- 
sion to the views of other Allies by approving “‘the 
provisional treatment of Germany . . . as an economic 
unity, without waiting for a discussion of the future 
status of the territories in question.” 


SELF-SUFFICIENCY VERSUS REPARATIONS. 
Despite Allied agreement at Paris that German eco- 
nomic revival is essential to the self-sufficiency of 
the occupied country itself and the reconstruction 
of Europe as a whole, the Western powers and 
Russia hold this view for such different reasons that 
their unanimity on the diplomatic level has not been 
carried over into actual administrative practices. 
To the British and Americans, whose zones are de- 
ficient in essential food production, it is of the great- 
est importance that Germans in the west be per- 
mitted to become self-supporting by exchanging their 
raw materials and manufactured products for food 
and essential consumers’ goods from the Russian 
zone. The Russians, on the other hand, regard the 
restoration of German industry as desirable primar- 
ily because they hope to harness German produc- 
tion to Soviet reconstruction. During the past year, 
accordingly, Russian occupation authorities have re- 
fused to exchange goods from their zone for im- 
ports from the west, on the ground that such imports 
are due to them as reparations and hence do not 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


require any payment. In reply to this argument the 
British and Americans have pointed out that the 
Potsdam agreement on reparations specifically pro- 
vided that the Soviet government is entitled to re- 
ceive only existing capital equipment—not goods 
from current production needed to maintain German 
self-sufficiency—from the western zones in addition 
to whatever reparations it collected from its own 
sector. 

The Russians, however, refused to accept this 
argument. As a result, Britain and the United States 
have been obliged to keep their zones on a “dole” 
which is annually costing Britain approximately 
$320,000,000 and the United States about $200,- 
000,000. It is, therefore, primarily because of the 
immediate and practical necessity of making Ger- 
many capable of paying for its own basic necessities 
of life, that Britain and the United States insist on 
administration of the entire country as an economic 
unit. At the same time, the Western powers do not 
want to see Russia integrate the economy of its zone 
with that of the Soviet sphere to such an extent as to 
prevent the ultimate reestablishment of economic 
links between eastern and western Germany. 

ONE GERMANY OR TWO? The failure so far 
of American and British efforts to secure the co- 
operation of Russia in administering Germany as 
a self-sufficient economic unit was indicated on 
July 9 when Mr. Molotov declared that Russia in- 
tended to obtain from Germany $10,000,000,000 


Page Two 


——— 
— 


worth of reparations—a sum so large that it would 
clearly have to be collected out of current produc. 
tion of the western zones as well as existing capital 
equipment. Confronted by Soviet insistence that 
reparations take priority over Germany's own cur. 
rent needs, Mr. Byrnes announced on July 11 that 
the United States proposes to “join with any other 
occupying government in Germany for the treat. 
ment of our respective zones as an economic unit,” 
and in his radio report to the American public og 
July 15 he reiterated this plan. Even if it is as 
sumed that the French will join the other westerm 
zones, this development will hardly succeed in mak. 
ing the western zones entirely self-sufficient, for the 
German economy has long been based on a balance 
between the breadbasket in the east and the indus. 
trial plants of the west. Nevertheless, an economic 
union of the western zones will undoubtedly help 
improve conditions throughout this area by facili. 
tating the exchange of skilled labor, coal and iron 
from the British zone, and electrical power, tex. 
tiles and industrial machinery from the American 
sector. Because the creation of a western German 
economic union will inevitably have political reper. 
cussions, this move on the part of the United States 
and Britain may mark a far more important devel- 
opment in Allied occupation policy than the general 
announcement by the Big Four of their diplomatic 
agreement on major issues in Germany. 


WINIFRED N. HApDSsEL 


BRITISH FEEL U.S. OVERSIMPLIFIES PALESTINE ISSUE 


The brutal massacre of Polish Jews in Kielce on 
July 4 accentuates the urgency of the.task confront- 
ing the Anglo-American representatives who began 
in London on July 12 a new phase of the already 
prolonged deliberations on Palestine. Meeting in 
secret at the Cabinet offices in historic Whitehall 
Palace, the delegates are expected to discuss the 
extent and nature of the aid the United States will 
give Britain if the ten recommendations of the 
Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry are formally 
adopted. A previous group of experts has already 
worked out technical details for moving 100,000 
Jews into Palestine, but the decision to take this 
step must await governmental action. 

PESSIMISM IN LONDON. The new talks 
opened in an atmosphere of pessimism. Reports 
from London suggest first, that the British will not 
consider the proposal for admitting 100,000 Jews 
apart from the other nine recommendations; and 
second, that the British government will reject all 
ten recommendations unless the United States prom- 
ises military aid, as well as financial assistance and 
transportation facilities. If the British do insist on 
these conditions, agreement on definite action seems 
impossible. 

Why are the British so reluctant to act? The 


answer lies in the fact that the Arab world is as im- 
portant to them for strategic reasons as the Carib 
bean area is to the United States. Realizing the need 
for Arab friendship, Britain is reshaping its Middle 
Eastern position in the hope of reconciling the 
Arabs to its security aims. Since this policy entails 
withdrawal from Egypt, and possibly Iraq, the 
British would like to create a “Gibraltar of the 
Middle East’’ in the Palestine-Transjordan region. 
If such a base is to be strong, it should be surrounded 
by as friendly a population as possible. In the Brit- 
ish view, this raises the admittedly cruel dilemma 
of whether to placate Jews or Arabs. 

Although the Zionist conception of the Arab 
League as primarily a British tool is open to ques- 
tion, it is true that the movement toward Arab 
unity has been fostered for some time by the British 
Foreign and Colonial Offices. Some British army 
men, however, who were alienated by Arab hos- 
tility during the war, fear that the Arabs, having 
driven the French out of the Levant, will turn their 
undivided efforts against the British once the Zion- 
ist threat has been removed. According to this view, 
which is also held by many Zionists, a Jewish state 
in Palestine offers Britain the best hope of satisfy- 
ing its strategic requirements. The Jews, it is de- 


— 
dared, 
would Nn 
states en 
ional a 
ideals. | 
has mad 
Britain c 
ensure tl 


WILL 
British 
terests 1 
through 
luctant 
effort to 
report's 
ened, at 
oil and 
sian hel 
assault 
Zionists 

Althc 
military 
sessed | 


they do 
aided b 
boring 

the Ha 
and tha 
trouble 
than th 
to grat 
Arabs 

sian CC 
help as 
the As 
more t 
lraqui, 
tian le 
troops, 
Russia: 
Kurdis 


SHA 
exist 
agree 
to det 
peace 
the ar 
prevai 
ultim< 
what 
tion o 
for g 
respo 
| Whet! 
| Comr 


—= 


it would 
t produc. 
& Capital 
nce that 
OWN cur 
- 11. that 
iny other 
he treat. 
ic unit,” 
ublic op 
it is as 
western 
in mak 
, for the 
. balance 
1e indus. 
-conomic 
dly help 
ry facili- 
and iron 
ver, tex- 
\merican 
German 
al reper- 
=d States 
it devel- 
» general 
plomatic 


ADSEL 


is as im- 
e Carib- 
he need 
Middle 
ing the 
y entails 
aq, the 
of the 
region. 
rounded 
he Brit- 
lilemma 


ie Arab 
[oO ques- 
d Arab 
» British 
h army 
ab_ hos- 
having 
rn their 
1e Zion- 
is view, 
sh state 
satisfy- 
t is de 


| 


——— 
— 


dared, would be loyal to Britain both because they 
yould need British protection from hostile Arab 
gates encircling them, and because of their tradi- 
ional attachment to Anglo-American democratic 
ideals. Moreover, Jewish industrial development 
has made Palestine the only Middle East state where 
Britain could find the production that would help to 
ensure the maintenance of a strong base. 


WILL ARABS CHALLENGE BRITAIN? The 
British government, however, with widespread in- 
terests in Iraq, Cyrenaica, Suez and other points 
throughout the Arab world, is understandably re- 
juctant to arouse further Arab antagonism. In an 
efort to prevent British fulfillment of the Palestine 
report's recommendations, the Arabs have threat- 
ened, at various times, to resort to arms, to refuse 
oil and other commercial concessions, to seek Rus- 
sian help, to appeal to the United Nations, and to 
assault Jewish communities in other Arab states. 
Zionists dismiss these threats as mere bluff. 

Although the Palestine Arabs do not have the 
military Organization, training or leadership pos- 
sessed by the 70,000 men of the Jewish Haganah, 
they do have arms, and believe that they would be 
aided by volunteers and arms smuggled from neigh- 
boring Arab states. Zionists contend, however, that 
the Haganah can handle any such unlikely danger, 
and that in any case the Haganah can make far more 
trouble for Britain if it does not adopt the report 
than the Arabs can if it does. As for Arab refusals 
to grant concessions, Zionists point out that the 
Arabs prefer American or British to possible Rus- 
sian concessionaires. Arab threats to seek Russia’s 
help are also ignored by the Zionists, who believe 
the Arab landlord ruling class fears communism 
more than western influences. It is asserted that the 
lraqui, who for a while hoped to follow the Egyp- 
tian lead in demanding the withdrawal of British 
troops, abandoned this scheme when the threat of a 
Russian-inspired movement for an autonomous 
Kurdistan arose. Similar feelings on the part of the 


APPARENT CONTRADICTIONS IN 


SHANGHAI — Whatever differences of opinion 
exist on other questions, most Chinese observers 
agree that the United States has the decisive power 
to determine whether there shall be genuine internal 
peace in China, all-out civil war, or continuation of 
the ambiguous state of neither war nor peace that 
prevails today. This means that the Chinese will 
ultimately hold America responsible for much of 
what happens here, and that the Far Eastern posi- 
tion of the United States will be affected accordingly 
for good or ill. The Chinese are aware of their own 
tesponsibilities, but politically conscious people— 
whether they belong to the Kuomintang or the 
Communist Party, whether they are third-party lib- 


Page Three 


Egyptian government are indicated by its decree of 
July 13 dissolving eleven educational, cultural, 
scientific, social and labor organizations which it 
accuses of propagating subversive ideas. The chief 
impetus for the Arab threat to call in the Russians 
comes from Lebanon and Palestine. As for an Arab 
appeal to the United Nations, the Zionists declare 
that they have their own case to present to that or- 
ganization. The Zionists show a growing realization, 
however, that the Arab League, is a force to be reck- 
oned with. 


REVIVAL OF PARTITION IDEA. To the Brit- 
ish the whole problem presents such complexity that 
there is great irritation in London over what is re- 
garded as the American tendency to oversimplify 
the issues involved. In their discouragement, some 
Britishers are turning again to the plan proposed by 
the Peel commission in 1937, to partition Pales- 
tine into Jewish and Arab states. On July 11 The 
Manchester Guardian and The Economist were te- 
ported to have suggested partition in case the report 
of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry is 
found unworkable. Two days earlier Dr. Chaim 
Weizmann, President of the Jewish Agency in Pal- 
estine, declared that “many Jewish people and much 
public opinion everywhere” favor partition, and that 
it “must not be rejected as a possible solution.” 

But the need for getting 100,000 Jews into Pal- 
estine remains urgent. It is a humanitarian need 
which transcends all selfish political interests, and 
should not be postponed until a decision on the fu- 
ture status of Palestine is reached. The Arab Higher 
Committee on July 7 drafted a letter to President 
Truman suggesting that he open the doors of Amer- 
ica “if he is really in sympathy with the Jews and 
their plight in Christian Europe.” Morally, this Arab 
plea is unassailable, but practically, Zionists consider 
it unrealizable. Without further delay, however, 
Britain and the United States could bring 100,000 
Jews into Palestine. 

VERNON McKay 


U.S. POLICY PERPLEX CHINESE 


erals or non-partisans—realize that their actions are 
affected by the role of the United States, and espe- 
cially by our country’s relations with Russia. 

CONDITIONAL OR UNCONDITIONAL SUP- 
PORT. The record of the past ten months since 
Japan’s surrender raises the question whether the 
United States has used its extraordinary influence in 
China effectively to promote internal peace. It may 
be argued that the task is too great for any foreign 
country, but in that case it is still not too late to 
alter our course. Quite apart from this, however, the 
Chinese believe there have been serious shortcom- 
ings in our policy. 

In the first place there was the fiasco of the Hur- 


ley diplomacy, which threatened to involve us to 
the hilt in a full-fledged Chinese civil war on the 
Spanish model within two months after the end of 
World War II. Then came a brief respite with 
President Truman’s policy statement of December 
15, ambiguous in some respects, but nevertheless a 
welcome declaration of the need for a democratic 
coalition government in China and the intention 
of the United States to make aid to China condi- 
tional on the achievement of political and military 
unity. Yet after December 15, as before, the Chi- 
nese felt there was a serious gap between the lan- 
guage and action of American policymakers. 

EFFECTS OF MARSHALL’S MISSION. General 
Marshall—who, everyone agrees, has worked with 
the greatest diligence to achieve peace—was sent 
here to mediate in the conflict between the govern- 
ment and the Communists. During his first visit to 
China the more warlike elements in the Kuomintang 
became worried over the possibility that the United 
States, acting as an impartial mediator, would really 
make its support conditional on fundamental re- 
forms. Largely as a result of this factor, peace- 
minded Chinese leaders were able to bring about 
political and military agreements that held great 
hope for the future. But no sooner were those pacts 
on paper than the reactionary group within the 
Kuomintang began to work for their abandonment. 
At the same time the crisis that developed in Man- 
churia over the presence of Russian troops and 
Chinese Communist activities in that area against 
government forces seriously clouded the foreign and 
domestic scene, and created tension between the 
United States and Russia. 

When this happened, the United States appears 
to have abandoned the policy of giving conditional 
support of Chiang Kai-shek which it had announced 
last December. Taking into consideration the tense 
state of American-Soviet relations rather than the 
realities of the Chinese situation, Washington 


ORDER NOW— 


ISSUES BEFORE PARIS PEACE CONFER- 
ENCE by Vera Micheles Dean 


Analysis of decisions reached by Council 
of Foreign Ministers, with texts of principal 
documents. 


25 cents 


August 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


Page Four 


——— 


adopted measures which encouraged the militarigy 
in China and prejudiced the possibility of a peac 
ful settlement. For there should be no misunde, 
standing of one fact: that, while all groups in thi 
country have made their mistakes, the most actiy 
war-making force resides in the small group of milj. 
tary men and civilians who constitute the extrem, 
right wing of the Kuomintang. This group, why 
now dominate the government, based their poli 
in the past on an outmoded agrarian system; and 
have no program that would enable them to surviy 
in peaceful political competition with other groups 
They therefore seek to prevent the establishment 
of genuine internal peace. 

POLICY DURING THE TRUCE. The uncondi 
tional character of American support of the Central 
government has at no time been clearer to the 
Chinese than in the Nanking negotiations held sing 
the Manchurian truce was initiated on June 7. On 
June 14 it became known that the United State 
wished to train an army of 1,000,000 Chinese troops 
Although the announcement indicated that both 
government and Communist forces would receive 
training, it was universally regarded here as a meas 
ure of military support for the government. Shortly 
thereafter President Truman also announced that 
China would receive lend-lease assistance until all 
Japanese have been repatriated from this country. 
Extensive interviews with government officials, 
third-party liberals, and Communist representatives 
indicate that no leading Chinese felt the United 
States has been acting as an impartial mediator and 
giving its assistance to “China” rather than to 4 
specific government in a specific internal struggle 
The only difference in view among those expressing 
an opinion was that the war-minded leaders indi- 
cated their satisfaction with American assistance, 
while the others intimated or openly stated their dis 
like for American military aid under existing con- 


ditions. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(The first in a series of articles on United States policy in China.) 


The Peoples of the Soviet Union, by Corliss Lamont. New 
York, Harcourt, Brace, 1946. $3.00 


A useful survey of the geographic, economic and ethno- 
graphic conditions of the many peoples who make up the 
U.S.S.R., and of the national minorities policy of the 


Soviet government, by a warm admirer of the Soviet 
system. 


The Big Three, by David J. Dallin. New Haven, Yale Uni- 
versity Press, 1945. $2.75 


A hard-headed appraisal of Russia’s relations with its 
wartime allies, by a leading Russian critic of the Soviet 
government in this country. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 40, Jury 19, 


ie 


1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, 


Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Yeat. 
Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and fomposed and printed by union labor. 


National 


1918 


wear! 
Gene 
ciliat 
Com 
has | 
whic 
Gerr 
agre 


