





URtY, OF mice. 








York, 


e and 
rd the 
litical 
y, but 
ps are 
curity. 


National 
tered a 
at least 


PERIODICAL KOW™ 
GENERAL LIBRARY 






% Uatversity of Michigan Library 
Ann Arbor. Mich. ical 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 








An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIV, No. 48 


SEPTEMBER 14, 1945 





hw first meeting of the Council of Foreign Min- 
isters of the Big Five (created by the Potsdam 
Declaration) , which opened in London on September 
| 11, coincides with sessions of the Preparatory Com- 
| mission which is endeavoring to set in motion the 
machinery of the United Nations organization. No 
detailed agenda has been announced in advance by 
the Council of Foreign Ministers. But its meetings 
are intended to serve as a series of peace conferences, 
: alminating eventually in the conclusion of peace 
settlements with Germany and Japan. The decisions 
they adopt will determine for years to come the 
work that UNO must accomplish if we hope to 
avert another war. The citizens of the United Na- 
tions have been rightly urged by their governments 
to support UNO. Yet little attempt has been made 
| to furnish the general public with the elementary 
information it must have about the plans of the 
Foreign Ministers if it is to understand and support 
UNO, which will then be expected to translate these 
plans into terms of daily international living. Secret 
diplomacy seems more current today than in the 
| grimmest days of the war. No one should expect 
| details of day-to-day negotiations. But neither can 
citizens in democratic countries be expected to wax 
enthusiastic about foreign policies presented to them 
like a pig in a poke. 

FUTURE OF ITALY’S COLONIES. So far the 
. Most tangible item of news is that the Foreign Min- 
isters will discuss the terms of peace treaties with 
Italy, and with satellites of the Axis in Eastern 
Europe and the Balkans—Finland, Hungary, Ru- 
mania and Bulgaria. These peace treaties are essential 
preliminaries to the admission of those countries to 
the United Nations. Britain and, to an even greater 
degree, the United States are reported to be anxious 
to make a final settlement with Italy which would 
speed that country’s political and economic recovery. 





FOREIGN MINISTERS GRAPPLE WITH PROBLEMS LEFT IN WAKE OF WAR 


But the countries which suffered most from Italy’s 
war depredations—Albania, Greece and Yugoslavia 
—demand reparations or territorial adjustments, or 
both, and will find it difficult to understand if their 
interests are disregarded by the great powers. Of all 
the territorial problems in that area, that of Trieste 
is most troublesome, since Marshal Tito’s demand 
for the Adriatic port and its hinterland not only 
arouses violent Italian opposition but is also viewed 
with anxiety by Americans and Britishers who see it 
as an entering wedge for Russian expansion to the 
Adriatic. 

The status of Italy's colonies in Africa, moreover, 
is proving a bone of contention. Britain, seriously 
menaced in the early stages of the war by Axis con- 
trol of Italian North and East Africa, cannot view 
with equanimity the unqualified return of these col- 
onies to Italy. It might understandably claim these 
colonies on grounds of security, just as Russia has 
insisted on control of strategic zones along its bor- 
ders in Europe and Asia, and the United States has 
declared that it needs bases in the Pacific. Had Italy 
been treated throughout as an enemy state, this 
course might prove feasible. But Italy since 1943 
has had the status of ‘‘co-belligerent,” and has 
contributed a share, small as it may seem to the 
United Nations, to the final ousting of the Germans 
from its territory. The outright seizure of its col- 
onies by Britain might seem a poor augury for the 
post-war era of United Nations collaboration. True, 
Britain could avail itself of the provisions of the San 
Francisco Charter concerning non-self-governing ter- 
ritories, and place the Italian colonies, once it had 
acquired them, under the Trusteeship Council of the 
United Nations. To this course, however, objections 
have been raised both in London and Washington— 
notably by those who fear that Russia, which is a 
member of the Trusteeship Council, would thus gain 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 








wa ogg Pe ERY (ot TEE MS PD ee SS ae 


ee 


Sy Mare Se 


Se eee ie er Ow) eee g ee ee eet 


+! 





the right to intervene in the affairs of North Africa. 

ELECTION SNAGS IN BALKANS. Russia, in 
turn, is said to object to Anglo-American interven- 
tion in former enemy countries where it has been 
asserting its influence, especially Rumania and Bul- 
garia. The United States and Britain, in accordance 
with the Big Three pledges of Yalta and Potsdam 
concerning the holding of democratic elections in 
Europe, have protested that the Fatherland Front 
(composed of Communists, Social Democrats, mem- 
bers of the Zveno party and one faction of 
Agrarians) which rules Bulgaria has used non-demo- 
cratic methods, and have insisted that elections 
should be postponed until all anti-Fascist political 
parties have an opportunity to vote without fear of 
persecution for their opinions. They have also been 
critical of the Russian-supported government of Pre- 
mier Groza in Rumania, who heads the National 
Democratic Front, and have stated that King Michael 
II has appealed to the Big Three to aid in the es- 
tablishment of a democratic régime. This develop- 
ment has been excoriated by the Moscow press, 
and Groza received an enthusiastic reception on 
his visit to Russia last week. Having declined 
to recognize the political régimes of Rumania 
and Bulgaria, the United States and Britain can 
hardly negotiate peace settlements with these coun- 
tries until the internal conditions of which they com- 
plain have been altered to their satisfaction. But if 
they balk at concluding peace treaties with Ger- 
many’s satellites, Russia can counter by opposing a 
settlement with Italy. And meanwhile the Western 
powers have not been any more prompt than Russia 





Page Two 








i 
—— 


in urging unfettered elections in countries where 
they exercise influence, having apparently reached 
the conclusion that conditions are not yet favorable 
for elections in either Italy or Greece. 


The fundamental difficulty raised by these and 
other questions that may be placed on the agend, 
of the Council of Foreign Ministers is that termina. 
tion of military hostilities has not brought to Europe 
a feeling of security or hope of economic stability 
Despite the stern program imposed on Germany at \ 
Potsdam, it would be naive for Europeans who haye 
suffered most from German aggression to assume 
that the menace of German militarism has really 
been eradicated when they see the restiveness of 
American troops, who are anxious to go home and 
feel little desire to maintain the long-time occupa. > 
tion that would be necessary to assure Germany’s ful. 
fillment of the Potsdam terms. Under the circum. 
stances, it is not surprising that Russia continues to 
work out its own security measures while at the same 
time cooperating with the Western nations in the 
establishment of UNO. Yet the measures under. / 
taken by Russia in turn add to the prevailing feeling | 
of insecurity. And as a counterbalance to Russia, | 
General de Gaulle has proposed to Britain the crea- 
tion of a Western European bloc, which is opposed 
by Moscow. This vicious circle can be broken only 
if the Big Five succeed in rising above the narrow | 
concepts of their respective national interests, and | 
apply in their daily decisions the solemn pledges they 
exchanged at San Francisco. 





VERA MICHELES DEAN 





U.S. AND BRITAIN WEIGH PLANS FOR MUTUAL ECONOMIC AID 


In the two-month period since the Labor party 
came to power in Britain the main lines of its domes- 
tic policy have been stated, and Foreign Secretary 
Ernest Bevin has emphasized the continuity of Brit- 
ain’s foreign policy. For the time being the Labor 
Cabinet has received much support outside Labor's 
ranks. This is largely due to the fact that Britain 
has had to face up so quickly to the reconversion 
problems ushered in by the unexpectedly early end 
of the war and the stoppage of lend-lease supplies 
from the United States. Once Parliament reconvenes 
on October 9, the Conservative opposition may pre- 
sent a stiff rejoinder to Labor’s plans for implement- 
ing the program set forth in the King’s speech of 
August 15. Virtually all groups in Britain, however, 
agree in their analysis of the country’s fundamental 
economic problems. For this reason Ambassador Vis- 
count Halifax and Lord Keynes will press the British 
case for economic assistance from the United States 
with as much vigor as might be expected from any 
outright Labor representatives in their conversations 
with American officials which opened in Washing- 


ton on September 10. 

U.S.—BRITISH BARGAINING. It is still too 
early to predict what final arrangement may be made | 
for assisting Britain in the immediate future. Leaders 
in both countries, however, admit Britain’s precati- 
ous economic position and realize that its future 
will be shaped by the action of the United States. 
It is all the more surprising, therefore, that the crisis 
over ending lend-lease shipments was allowed to 
arise in such an acute form. Washington observers 
do not believe the termination of lend-lease was de 
signed to embarrass the Labor government, which is 
determined to carry out a socialist program at home 
that is anathema to many Americans. Perhaps it was 
hoped by this step to conciliate certain American 
groups known for their anti-British attitude genet- 
ally. It may be that President Truman, by his sum- 
mary action on the lend-lease arrangements, wished 
to arouse Congress to a real appreciation of our fe 
sponsibilities with respect to the economic problems 
of Britain as well as our other Allies. In any case, it | 
must be hoped that Congress will give prompt com | 








and 
nda 
ina- 
Ope 
ity, 


Fat > 


ave 
ime 
ally 

of 
and 


pa 7 


ful. 


» to 
me 
the 


let- ¢ 


ing 
sia, 
a- 
sed 
nly 
‘OW i 
und 
hey 


too | 
ade 

lers 

afi- 

ure 

tes. | 
isis 
to 
ef 
de- 
1 is 
me 
was 
can } 
ef | 


red 


ms 
, it | 
on- 








——— 
—_ 





sideration to President Truman’s recommendation of 
September 6 for the extension of lending facilities 
by increasing appropriations for the Export-Import 
Bank and the abolition of the Johnson Act which 
rohibits loans to Allied Governments of World 
War I which defaulted on their debts. Or, if further 
loans appear inadvisable in view of the excessive 
debt incurred by Britain during the war, then Con- 
gress would be well advised to consider an allocation 
based on the formula used in the case of the $500,- 
000,000 sent to China in 1942. 

Both the United States and Britain hold trump 
cards in the present negotiations. The United States, 
eager to enter more fully into trading areas hereto- 
fore restricted largely to Britain, can press for re- 
duction of British imperial preferences. Britain can, 
with equal reason, create an even tighter trading 
bloc. For expansion of foreign trade has become es- 
sential to Britain’s future world position, and hope 
for domestic reconstruction in Britain — whether 
along socialist lines proposed by the Labor party or 
otherwise—depends almost entirely on the country’s 
ability to recoup its export markets. Perhaps the most 
hopeful aspect of this bargaining process, which 
would have had to take place sooner or later, is that 
both nations face common problems and seek com- 
mon goals. If these are kept uppermost in the minds 
of negotiators now engaged in ironing out British- 
American differences, a lend-lease settlement may 
yet be reached which, in keeping with the language 
of Article VII of the master lend-lease agreements, 
would look toward the freeing of international trade 
and the promotion of world prosperity. 

COMMON AIMS AND COMMON TASKS. 
Not only do both countries hope for a period of ex- 
panding trade, but their domestic aims are in many 
ways similar, especially their desire to maintain full 
employment. Britain faces no immediate unemploy- 
ment problem in the period of reconversion. Rather 
it hopes to maintain most wartime price controls and 
production regulations in an effort to shift produc- 
tion promptly to those enterprises best calculated to 
aid in reviving the export trade. In this country, on 
the other hand, there is every likelihood that sub- 
stantial unemployment will develop during the re, 
conversion period. Yet the eventual goal of full em- 
ployment that is common to both nations was never 
more clearly apparent than in the program presented 
to Congress by President Truman in his speech of 
September 6. Full recognition that our goals are es- 
sentially identical should tend to remove the hesi- 


Page Three 





——— 
Seanenemennel 





tancy with which many groups in the United States 
view Labor’s proposals for British reconstruction. 

President Truman’s recommendations strongly 
endorsing the Murray Full Employment Bill may 
be compared to Laborite support for the polli- 
cies outlined in the White Paper on Employment 
during the wartime coalition régime. Legislative 
measures based on that report, which the Labor Min- 
isters will doubtless introduce in Parliament, may be 
even more concrete and far-reaching than originally 
expected. British concern about housing, which 
played such an important part in the recent election, 
is also paralleled by President Truman’s suggestion 
that broad and comprehensive legislation be enacted 
to help private enterprise build between 10,000,000 
and 15,000,000 houses in the next ten years. Similar 
plans may also be noted in such other fields as sup- 
port for agriculture, liberal provisions for veterans’ 
aid, extended unemployment compensation, and in- 
creased social security benefits. Plans for educational 
reform, hospitalization, and health benefits are also 
comparable. 

That these common goals are to be sought on the 
basis of different economic theories need not pre- 
vent the kind of cooperation in economic affairs 
which the two nations have achieved in prosecuting 
the war. Nationalization of the central banking ser- 
vices in England and of the coal industry—proposed 
at the opening of Parliament on August 15—will 
appear as radical innovations to many Americans. 
Yet when it is realized that the mining industry has 
long been under virtual government direction, due 
either to conditions of depression or necessities of 
war; and that the Bank of England worked in the 
closest cooperation with the British Treasury, full 
nationalization of such industries or services will not 
seem revolutionary. Whether the process of national- 
ization is used, or greater dependence is placed on 
the automatic functioning of free enterprise, it is 
imperative both for political and economic reasons 
that Britain and the United States achieve as nearly 
as possible conditions of full employment. If through 
failure to coordinate our policies along this line the 
two nations drift toward economic autarchy, it will 
not only prove far more difficult for both to achieve 
a high level of prosperity, but the world at large will 
suffer again from economic tensions which, once 
developed in heavily industrialized nations, are 
bound to spread to other countries. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


(The first of two articles.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 48, SEPTEMBER 14, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. ~ National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lugr, Secretary; VERA MicHELEs Dean, Eéitor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





LO ben Dt EL UA and tes, 


4 
{ 
7 


Washington News Letter 














WILL STATE DEPARTMENT CHANGES STIFFEN POLICY ON JAPAN? 


The State Department is reexamining Allied pol- 
icy toward Japan to determine whether the best in- 
terests of the United Nations and the hope for 
lasting peace require sterner supervision of Japanese 
officials and affairs than the United States has exer- 
cised in the first days of the occupation. Policy today 
is in a state of flux. The leaders and people of Japan 
are disturbing the State Department by their appar- 
ent lack of repentance for embarking on the costly 
and ruinous adventure of war and by signs that the 
nation whose Emperor surrendered “uncondition- 
ally” is spiritually undefeated. The problem of policy 
is complicated by the fact that the Allies took a hope- 
ful and lenient attitude in the first stages of dealing 
with Japan and that certain responsible sources of 
Japanese opinion occasionally reveal an understand- 
ing of the country’s true position. Whatever the de- 
cision on policy, the United States intends to take the 
leadership in setting the course for treatment of 
Japan. Secretary of State Byrnes has no intention of 
raising the Japanese matter at the meeting of the 
Allied Council of Foreign Ministers that opened in 
London on September 11. 


STATE DEPARTMENT CHANGES. The possi- 
bility of a change in policy toward Japan is height- 
ened by the withdrawal from the State Department 
of two men whose influence contributed strongly to 
the decision of President Truman to invite an offer 
of peace from Japan in the Potsdam Declaration of 
July 26, and subsequently to accept in modified form 
the conditional peace offer of August 10. They are 
Joseph C. Grew, who resigned as Under Secretary of 
State on August 15, and Eugene Dooman, who re- 
tired on September 1 from the Foreign Service and 
resigned as adviser in the State Department on Jap- 
anese affairs. Both men, during their long tours in 
the Department and in Japan before the war, stead- 
fastly believed that leniency and patience would lead 
to a basis of understanding between the two coun- 
tries. The attack on Pearl Harbor did not wholly 
dissuade them. 


The retirement of Mr. Grew and Mr. Dooman 
did not result directly from the puzzling conse- 
quences of the lenient policy the United Nations 
have followed in victory over Japan. Their departure, 
however, gives new authority to a group of men in 
the Department whe have less faith in our recent 
enemy. Dean Acheson, the new Under Secretary, is 
an advocate of sternness toward Japan. John Carter 
Vincent, chief of the Division of Chinese Affairs, 


who is now exerting a greater influence than former. 
ly in matters relating to Japan, has been more in. | 
clined than Mr. Grew or Mr. Dooman to look for | 
support of the United States among other than the | 
conservative groups in Asia. 


The instrument of surrender signed on the USS. . 


Missouri on September 1 paves the way for a sterner 
policy should the decision to invoke it be reached, 
“The authority of the Emperor and the Japanese 
Government to rule the state,’” says one article of 
the surrender, “‘shall be subject to the Supreme Com. 
mander for the Allied Powers [General Douglas 
MacArthur}, who will take such steps as he deems 
proper to effectuate these terms of surrender.” The 
government of Prince Higashi-Kuni, formed on 
August 16, has the bearing now of a régime that re. 
gards itself as a partner of the conquering Allies. 
Foreign Minister Mamoru Shigemitsu said on Sep- 
tember 7 that “the Allies will present all necessary 
requests through the Japanese government” and that 
there would be no military government for Japan. 
This was confirmed by General MacArthur in a 
statement of September 9, although the Supreme 
Commander used the word, “orders,” instead of “te- 
quests.’” In stating the desire of the United Nations 
to create a peaceful, democratic, non-militaristic 
Japan, he said that the occupation forces would be 
called on for action only if Japan did not comply 
satisfactorily and that “the existing Japanese econ- 


omy will be controlled only to the extent necessary | 


to achieve the objectives of the United Nations.” 
PROBLEMS OF U.S. MILITARY POLICY. 

General MacArthur's order of September 10 direct- 

ing the abolition of the Japanese Imperial General 


Headquarters is an essential routine move, which | 


does not of itself indicate the character of the course 
to be followed in the future. Adoption of a stern 
policy of control toward Japan depends in some de- 
gree on the decisions reached in this country respect- 
ing United States military policy. Several hundred 
thousand occupying troops would be required for 
the successful realization of such a policy, which 
could not be implemented should the size of the army 
be reduced precipitously. While it is perhaps irksome 
to be assigned for a long period to occupation duty in 
those distant islands, occupying soldiers can find 
solace in the thought that their presence reduces the 
likelihood of a new outbreak by Japan, whose bel- 
ligerent fury cost this country many lives during the 
past four years. 
BLAIR BOLLES 


— 





191 


| 


VoL 


| 


wn” 
~—_ 





