—$—___ 
ee 


>. The 
April, 
aid to 
*S pro- 
‘royed., 
plants 
nother 


uuibeck 
> ports 
armies 
it. But 
cks on 
tinued 
haven. 
oy the 
)0-mile 
> wipe 
50 per 
'-boats. 
veaken 
*r cent. 
e little 
nths— 
rs over 
is not 
sidered 
second 
not be 
British- 
lieving 
repara- 
reason 
to take 
reason 
an Op- 
> JR. 


; both of 
Treasurer, 


ity holders 
mortgages, 


he owners, 
t of stock 
» company 
$ upon the 
, the name 
iven; also 
feae’s ful! 
ider which 
yoks of the 
ran that of 
any other 
‘ect, in the 


rporated. 

.N, Editor 
1942. 

ary Public. 

ork County 


National 
Entered as 


PBRIVDICAL KUUM 
@BNBRAL LIBRARY 
wely. uF mich. 


OCT 17 1942 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


VoL. XXI, No. 52 


OcToBER 16, 1942 


UNITED NATIONS ASSUME POLITICAL OFFENSIVE IN PACIFIC 


SP enDENT ROOSEVELT’S Columbus Day ref- 

erence to plans for ‘‘new offensives against 
Germany and Japan’ has given official point to 
Wendell Willkie’s statement of October 7 in Chung- 
king that ‘the time has come for an all-out armed 
offensive everywhere by all the United Nations.” 
Similarly, Mr. Willkie’s declaration that “no foot of 
Chinese soil . . . should be or can be ruled from now 
on except by the people who live in it” appears not 
to have been a purely personal opinion, for it was 
followed on October 9 by American and British 
statements that negotiations with China for the re- 
linquishment of extraterritorial and related rights 
and privileges would be undertaken in the near fu- 
ture. This represents a significant change from the 
earlier Anglo-American position that this step would 
be taken only after the war. 

Extraterritoriality—the right of foreigners to be 
tried in special courts and not under the courts and 
laws of China—is a principal feature of the “Un- 
equal Treaties’ imposed by the Western powers in 
the nineteenth century and long regarded by the 
Chinese as a symbol of their semi-dependent status. 
The first breach in the treaty system occurred at the 
end of World War I, when the Soviet government 
telinquished Russia's special rights, and the defeated 
European countries were deprived of theirs. 

As a result of the Japanese invasion of Manchuria 
in 1931 and the seizure of the principal Chinese cities 
since 1937, these rights have lost almost all practi- 
cal meaning for the United States and Britain. Yet 
the formal move toward renunciation is of consid- 
erable political significance, for it indicates to the 
Chinese that, after the defeat of Japan, the most im- 
portant legal barrier to full Chinese independence 
will no longer exist. 

FRANK SPEAKING ON ASIA. The entire state- 
ment issued by Mr. Willkie in Chungking deserves 
careful reading, for he spoke with extraordinary 


directness on issues that are of great moment in 
winning the war. He declared flatly that in the coun- 
tries he visited the common people hope for a United 
Nations victory, but that “they all doubt in vary- 
ing degrees the readiness of the leading democracies 
of the world to stand up and be counted upon for 
the freedom of others after the war is over.” “This 
doubt,” he warned, “kills their enthusiastic partici- 
pation on our side.” 

In a reference which clearly included not only 
China, but India and the colonial territories of South- 
east Asia as well, he stated that steps must be taken 
at once to secure the active support of the billion 
people of Asia, who ‘are determined no longer to 
live under foreign control.” Without their help, he 
said, it will be “enormously difficult” to win the 
war and “nearly impossible” to win the peace. Nor 
can we any longer appeal to them on the ground 
“that Japanese rule would be even worse than West- 
ern imperialism.’ Most important of all, these issues 
cannot be “hushed up until victory is won,” for “sin- 
cere efforts to find progressive solutions now will 
bring strength to our cause.” 

CHINA’S VIEWS EXPRESSED. Mr. Willkie’s 
words and actions were significant not simply as a 
message from America—the extent of official sanc- 
tion of his views is not entirely clear—but because 
they arose from the very atmosphere of Chungking. 
In expressing liberal American thought on the sub- 
ject he also stated what every politically conscious 
Chinese was longing to hear a responsible American 
say. This—apart from the fact that he is the most 
important foreigner to visit China during the war 
—is why he was applauded so tumultuously by the 
Chungking press. At the same time, fortified by the 
effects of his friendly attitude, he was in a position 
to make certain public suggestions to the Chinese 
concerning their own war effort. It is reported that 
his criticism of persons responsible for hoarding and 


fi 


a 


‘Sah a 
. = A, 


Cte 


ates 
+ 


_ cas 


er eee 
Me tS Aes 


profiteering, although phrased in general terms, had 
encouraging effects on forward-looking circles in 
Chungking. 

THE WAR IN THE PACIFIC. Meanwhile, the 
military position in the Pacific has registered notice- 
able changes. As Prime Minister Churchill stated in 
Edinburgh on October 12, the New Guinea situa- 
tion has taken a turn for the better. After infiltrating 
Allied lines in the difficult Owen Stanley Mountain 
area and coming within almost 30 miles of Port 
Moresby, the Japanese began to withdraw in late 
September and now appear to be in the region of the 
gap that leads through the range. This is the result 
of constant United Nations air attacks on Japanese 
supply lines and bases, for so tenuous are the links 
between front and rear that the bombing of a single 
crossing—the Wairopi bridge near Kokoda—appar- 
ently had critical repercussions, especially in con- 
junction with attacks on the northern coastal base at 
Buna. 

Gains have also been made in the Aleutians. At the 
end of August, according to an announcement of 
October 3, American troops occupied positions in the 
Andreanof section of the island chain. Somewhere in 
this group, which stretches to within 125 miles of 
Kiska at the nearest point, bases were established for 
the operation of bombers and fighter craft. Attacks 
are now made almost daily on Kiska, but the Jap- 
anese appear to have vacated Attu and Agattu islands 
to the west, perhaps to simplify their supply problems 


Page Two — 


——— 


in anticipation of intensified American attacks, o, 
perhaps as a prelude to final -withdrawal. 

The major fighting in Pacific waters is taking place 
in the Solomons, where the Japanese have directed 
their energies toward recapture of the airfield on 
Guadalcanal. Night after night in the past month 
they have landed small forces on this island. These 
operations have been combined with constant air 
activity during the day. American communiqués of 
October 13, however, announced that the marines 
had extended their positions on Guadalcanal, while a 
United States task force on October 11-12 had sunk 
one heavy Japanese cruiser, four destroyers, and a 
transport at a cost of one of our destroyers and 
“minor to moderate damage’’ to other ships. The 
Japanese are reported to have lost 260 planes so far 
in the Battle of the Solomons, and to have had 4g 
ships sunk or damaged. On the other hand, it became 
known on October 12 that three American cruisers 
went down in the opening phase of the operations 
last August. On October 9 the largest concentration 
of Allied heavy bombers yet assembled in one raid in 
the southwest Pacific dropped 60 tons of explosives 
and incendiaries on the Japanese base at Rabaul, New 
Britain—north of the Solomons—and followed this 
up with 40 tons more the next day. Although these 
actions are encouraging, they should be regarded as 
symptoms of the continuing struggle in the Pacific 
rather than as developments of a decisive character. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


ALLIES AND AXIS STRUGGLE FOR NEUTRALS’ RAW MATERIALS 


As the war goes on and reserves of raw materials 
stocked for war purposes dwindle rapidly, the need 
of acquiring all available strategic materials becomes 
more urgent for the belligerents. Economic warfare, 
under such conditions, plays a role of ever-increasing 


_ importance, as the Allies and the Axis powers vie 


with each other to secure the valuable resources of 
neutral countries. 


TURKISH CHROME. A typical example of the 
economic struggle for neutral products is furnished 
by the efforts of both the United Nations and Ger- 
many to secure the Turkish output of chromite, an 


WHAT AMERICANS THINK 
ABOUT POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION 


In New England, by Walter K. Schwinn 

In the South, by Virginius Dabney 

In the Middle West, by William H. Hessler 
In the Northwest, by Herbert Lewis 


25c 


October 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


ore which is the source of an important strategic 
metal, chrome. This metal is used in many steel 
alloys, and is therefore in great demand now that the 
steel industries of both sides are working at top 
capacity to produce guns, tanks and other war ma- 
terial. Turkey, after the U.SS.R., is the largest 
chrome producer in the world, turning out some 
200,000 metric tons of ore each year. Unlike Russia, 
which uses most of its production, Turkey sells prac 
tically all its chromite to foreign countries. Fortu- 
nately for the United Nations, the entire output of 
Turkish chromite goes at present to Britain. In ac 
cordance with an Anglo-Turkish pre-war agreement, 
it is earmarked for repayment of a £10-million Brit 
ish loan granted in 1938 for the erection of various 
industrial plants, notably the Iron and Steel Works 
of Karabuk, in northern Anatolia. 

Since the conclusion of this agreement, the Turks 
have faithfully kept their promise in spite of re 
peated, and at times frantic, pressure on the part of 
German emissaries to obtain Turkish chrome ore 
In October 1941, on the conclusion of a new Turco 
German Trade Agreement, the Nazis finally per 
suaded Turkey to promise that, after the expiration 
of the Anglo-Turkish agreement on January 8, 1943, 


it WOU 
ore 1 
Turk: 
porta 
the e 
value 
Turk 


must 
of w 
Turk 
capac 
perie 
was | 
abilit 
diffic 


sult 


whic 
on n 
tung: 
senti 
tools 
and 
cemt 
Unit 
Burr 
Burt 
ter n 
prod 
that 
Port 
ingl 
meti 
put 

beer 
Port 
neg 
men 
ain, 


——__, 
—_—___<___ 


cks, or 


2 place 
lirected 
ield on 
month 
. These 
ant air 
qués of 
Marines 
while a 
id sunk 
and a 
rs and 
s. The 
; so far 
had 48 
became 
cruisers 
erations 
itration 
raid in 
>losives 
il, New 
red this 
h these 
rded as 
Pacific 
aracter, 
NGER 


trategic 
ry steel 
that the 
at top 
Var ma- 
largest 
it some 
Russia, 
ls prac 
Fortu- 
itput of 
. In ac 
eement, 
on Brit 
various 
W orks 


e Turks 
; of re 
part of 
me ofe. 
r Turco 
lly per 
piration 
8, 1943, 


—_ 


it would supply Germany with 90,000 tons of chrome 
ore in 1943 and the same quantity in 1944. The 
Turks, however, have prudently made a very im- 
portant reservation in the pact. Germany, before 
the end of 1942, must deliver war matériel to the 
value of 18 million Turkish pounds; moreover, 
Turkish chrome deliveries during 1943 and 1944 
must be balanced by equivalent German deliveries 
of war matériel. Germany's prospects of receiving 
Turkish chrome will therefore depend on its own 
capacity to “deliver the goods.” In view of past ex- 
perience—the dispatch of Turkish goods to the Reich 
was once before suspended owing to Germany's in- 
ability to effect deliveries—and of the increasingly 
difficult position of German war industries as a re- 
sult of prolonged fighting on the Russian front, it 
appears doubtful that Hitler will be able to send 
war matériel to Turkey next year. 

PORTUGUESE TUNGSTEN. Another ore for 
which the United Nations and Germany are vying 
on neutral soil is wolframite, one of the sources of 
tungsten. This rare steel-hardening metal is an es- 
sential element in the manufacture of metal-cutting 
tools, cores in armor-piercing bullets, armor plates 
and gun breeches. Before the Japanese attack in De- 
cember 1941, the largest supplier of tungsten to the 
United Nations was China, with Burma second. Since 
Burma has been occupied by Japanese troops and the 
Burma Road closed to the United Nations, the lat- 
ter must depend for their supply of this metal on the 
production of the United States, complemented by 
that of Latin America, Australia and Portugal. The 
Portuguese output, therefore, has become increas- 
ingly important in economic warfare. From 2,810 
metric tons of concentrates in 1938, Portugal’s out- 
put of tungsten rose to 4,858 tons in 1940, and has 
been rising ever since. Until recently, most of the 
Portuguese tungsten ore has gone to Germany, but 
negotiations are now under way for a trade agree- 
ment between Portugal, the United States and Brit- 
ain, which would assure the Allies a fair share of the 
Portuguese output. The success of these negotiations 
will depend to a large extent, however, on the ability 
of the Allies to supply Portugal with products it 
needs, such as oil, coal, steel, fertilizer and chemicals. 

BLOCKADE-RUNNING. The conquest of the 
Dutch East Indies, Malaya and Burma has put at the 
disposal of Japan vast quantities of rubber, tin, 
tungsten and other rare minerals which are badly 
needed by German war industries. These resources, 
however, are of no use to the Axis powers in Europe 
as long as they cannot be shipped from occupied Asia 


Page Three 


to Germany or Italy. With Russia barring land pas- 
sage, there is now no possibility of transportation 
over land routes. It was to be expected, therefore, 
that the Axis powers would try to use the only road 
open to them—the long, relatively little patrolled 
southern sea lanes—and run the blockade imposed 
by the United Nations on German-controlled Europe. 
There is reason to believe that the Axis has achieved 
a certain amount of success in eluding Allied con- 
trol. Certain quantities of raw materials badly needed 
by German industries have reached North Africa 
and Germany, apparently through the vast spaces of 
the South Pacific, around Cape Horn and up the 
South Atlantic to Vichy-controlled French West 
Africa. Patrolling such enormous stretches of water 
is exceedingly difficult for the United Nations, whose 
fleets are badly needed on other sea lanes more vital 
to their war operations. On the other hand, although 
the Japanese have requisitioned a fairly large num- 
ber of foreign ships in the Far East, their lines of 
supply have now been so extended—the distance by 
sea from Tokyo to Singapore, for instance, is about 
equal to that of New York to Lisbon—that they can 
hardly afford to divert a large number of ships to 
the blockade-running trade. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


Economic Survey of the Pacific Area. Part I, Population 
and Land Distribution, by Karl J. Pelzer. 1941. $2.00. 
Part II, Transportation and Foreign Trade, by Katrine 
R. C. Greene and Joseph D. Phillips. 1942. $2.00. 
Part III, Industrialization of the Western Pacific, by 
Kate L. Mitchell. 1942. $2.50. 

These three volumes, published by the Institute of 
Pacific Relations of New York, essential for any library 
on the Far East, present a well-rounded economic survey 
of developments in the various Pacific countries. The first 
two parts are chiefly of reference use, but Miss Mitchell’s 
work on industrialization is a well-written, penetrating 
discussion designed for the general reader. 


American Unity and Asia, 

John Day, 1942. $1.25 

A collection of vigorously written speeches and articles 
on the necessity of winning the colored peoples of the 
world to the side of the United Nations. Although some- 
times overemphasizing the purely racial aspects of the 
problem, the author correctly indicates that the fight 
against inequality both at home and in our dealings with 
the colored nations of Asia is an essential part of our 
war effort. 


by Pearl S. Buck. New York, 


Strategic Materials and National Strength, by Harry N. 
Holmes. New York, Macmillan, 1942. $1.75 
A handy, easy-to-read primer in which the President of 
the American Chemical Society shows what raw materials 
are really essential to the material strength of the United 


States and how substitutes can be found to fill present de- 
ficiencies. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 52, Octroser 16, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Three Dollars a Year. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Re oe 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by unio 


n labor. 


Washington News L etter 


sibben, 


Oct. 13.—The decision of President Juan Antonio 
Rios on October 12 to cancel his projected visit to 
the United States this month as a consequence of the 
. “stab-in-the-back” speech by Acting Secretary of State 
Sumner Welles in Boston on October 8 constitutes 
the severest diplomatic defeat that the United States 
has sustained in Latin America since our entrance 
into the war. For this latest development in the re- 
lations between the two countries now makes it vir- 
tually certain that Chile will not.in the near future 
give effect to the recommendations of the Rio de 
Janeiro conference in January, to which its own dele- 
“gates subscribed by severing diplomatic ties with 

the Axis. The hope of Pan-American unity in the 
present world crisis seems to have vanished. Chile 
and Argentina, now more than ever committed to a 
policy of neutrality, are out of step with the other 
nineteen American republics. 

When in his Boston speech the usually tight-lipped 
Mr. Welles deliberately taxed Chile and Argentina, 
without naming them, with permitting their ter- 
titory to be used as a center of Axis propaganda, 
espionage, and sabotage, he was intent on clearing 
up once and for all the widespread belief that ex- 
isted in Chile that the United States was satisfied 
with Chile’s present policies. The immediate occa- 
sion for Mr. Welles’ explosion, in fact, was the prom- 
inent featuring in the Chilean newspapers of an ob- 
scure paragraph in a U.S. Department of Commerce 

Bulletin, stating that this country was continuing to 
' draw valuable supplies, particularly copper, from 
Chile. This fact, of course, was true, but the Chilean 
press was seeking to create the impression that the 
United States was not anxious for Chile to break 
relations with the Axis, lest it lead to an interference 
with the flow of supplies. 

SINISTER ROLE OF SENOR BARROS. To what 
extent this misapprehension on the part of the Chil- 
eans was sincere and to what extent it was used as an 
excuse for deferring action is difficult to say. When 
Nelson A. Rockefeller, Coordinator of Inter-Ameri- 
can Affairs, visited Santiago last month, he was sur- 
prised to find that President Rios was under the mis- 
taken impression that the United States was perfectly 
content with Chile’s attitude. 

Mr. Rockefeller also discovered that the most mis- 
chievous personality in the government was Ernesto 
Barros Jarpa, a talented lawyer who is now Chile’s 
Foreign Minister. He appears to be greatly under the 
influence of his cousin, the Chilean Minister to 


FOR VICTORY ° 


Berlin, who was described by high authority in Wash= 
ington as being ‘more Nazi than the Nazis.” 

Sefior Barros not only has been making it difficulf 
for Claude Bowers, U.S. Ambassador in Santiago, to 
see President Rios, but he has a way of toning dowm 
and emasculating, in the Spanish translations that 
are sent to the Chilean President, the strong notes 
of Secretary of State Cordell Hull expressing th 
anxiety of the United States over the presence of Axis 
agents on Chilean soil. On one occasion when Mr, 
Bowers was striving to make President Rios realiz 
the importance of breaking relations with the Axis 
before he visited Washington in order that ther 
would be no suspicion that he was acting underj 
North American pressure, Sefior Barros injected him- 
self into the conversation by quoting some remarks] 
that Mr. Hull had made at a press conference, ex- 
pressing pleasure over the Chilean President's com: 
ing visit, as proof that the Ambassador was misin= 
terpreting the real stand of his own government. 
Sefior Barros has not had it all his own way in the 
Chilean Cabinet. A rival group, led by the ambitious] 
Minister of the Interior, Leonardo Guzman Cortés, 
who is strongly pro-United States, has consistently’ 
urged a break with the Axis. But in the last few 
weeks, the pro-Axis Barros wing of the Rios Cabinet 
has clearly held the upper hand. 

A DISAPPOINTMENT TO WASHINGTON. 
Chile’s defection comes as a great disappointment to: 
the State Department, which has always made a dis- 
tinction between the position of Chile and that of 
Argentina. It was believed that while Argentina, in 
refusing to fulfill its Rio de Janeiro obligations, was _ 
motivated largely by suspicion of ‘Yankee imperial-] 
ism’ and jealousy of United States influence in South 
America, Chile was only holding back because of” 
worry over its 2,600-mile-long coast, so vulnerable) 
to attacks from Axis submarines. Then, too, it was 
noted that while the Argentine Cabinet of President 
Ramon Castillo was solidly united in favor of a pol-] 
icy of neutrality, Chile’s ministry was divided. 

But probably the most telling argument against a 
break with the Axis is still Chile’s long coast-line. 
This fear is cleverly exploited by the Axis radio 
which frequently reminds Chile that it will make 
itself liable to attack if it severs diplomatic ties. Axis 
broadcasts also constantly harp on the theme that the J 
United States is trying to reduce the South American 
republics to the status of colonies. 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


misin- 
ment. 
in they 
itious 
cortés,9 


st-line. 4 
radio 
make} 


hat the 


