e€ contac 


be con. 
an active 
it seems 
ts will be 

strategy 
wO COUn- 
race both 
>, Ameti- 
els might 
1 protect 
Kingdom 
s of the 


SErVICe in 


forces in 
se a Con- 
e Pacific. 
statement 
not only 
Far East 
be under 
tablished 
‘ain have 
;ompared 
t or nine 
Navy has 
orces be 
own fact 
-d in the 
fenses of 


ned dut-{ 


Il British 
: position 
ndly the 


st week's 
STONE 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


ve 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXI, No. 6 


—_—_— 


NOVEMBER 28, 1941 


VICHY “COLLABORATION” PRECIPITATES..ULS. ACTION 


HE retirement on November 20 of General 

Maxime Weygand, Delegate-General of the 
Vichy government for French Africa, the British in- 
vasion of Libya, rumors of all-out “collaboration” 
between Vichy and Berlin in the Mediterranean, and 
the summoning of some of the occupied countries to 
aconference in Berlin on November 25, fifth anni- 
versary of the signing of the anti-Comintern pact, 
are all threads which weave into two patterns: the 
pattern of Germany's efforts to consolidate its “new 
order” in Europe before the United States begins to 
play an active part in the conflict; and the pattern 
of Britain’s efforts to break the deadlock on the 
Continent by defeating the Axis powers in Africa. 


WILL FRANCE HELP GERMANY? General 
Weygand’s departure is explained by his reluctance 
to accept the rdle of collaborator with the Germans 
in Africa which had apparently been demanded of 
him by those elements in Vichy who are pressing 
for rapprochement between France and Germany. 
It is reported that, as the price of this rapproche- 
ment, France would be expected to grant Germany 
the use of its Navy and of its ports in North Africa, 
notably Bizerta. In addition, French troops would be 
charged with “passive” defense of France’s Atlantic 
coast against the British—thus presumably relieving 
German garrisons for service on the eastern front, 
where the Germans resumed their offensive against 
Moscow on November 23, and on November 22 
claimed the capture of Rostov. In return, the Nazis 
announced that they had reduced the cost levied 
against France for the maintenance of German 
toops of occupation from 400,000,000 to 300,000,- 
000 francs a month, retroactive to May 10; and it 
has been intimated in Paris that compliance with 
Nazi demands would bring the release of a million 
and a half French war prisoners. 

Should Vice-Premier Darlan, a bitter enemy of 


Britain, induce Marshal Pétain to accept Hitler’s 
terms on November 26, when Pétain is to meet 
Marshal Goering in Paris, the balance of power in 
the Mediterranean might suddenly shift against 
Britain. When the British, on November 19, 
launched their invasion of Libya, they appeared, for 
the first time during the African campaign, to have 
superiority over the Axis powers in tanks and air- 
planes (many of them American-built), and enjoyed 
the advantage of being able to supply their troops 
from ships which seemed to have undisputed com- 
mand of most of the Mediterranean. If the Germans 
now obtain the use of French ships and crews, as 
well as bases in French North African ports, they 
might be able to break out of Europe, where they 
have achieved superiority on land, onto the high 
seas, where they have hitherto found it difficult to 
challenge British naval power. It is primarily with 
this aim in view that the Germans had been steadily 
pressing Vichy for one concession after another in 
French North Africa, and had been sending increas- 
ing numbers of German “tourists” to that region. 
While General Weygand had not been expected 
to defy Marshal Pétain, it had been hoped in Lon- 
don and Washington that he would take a firm stand 
against permitting use of French territory in Africa 
by the Germans in their struggle against Britain. 
Some sources claim that the Nazis had demanded 
Weygand’s ouster on the ground that, in case of 
British victory in Libya, he might oppose retreat by 
Axis troops into French Tunisia. Although the Gen- 
eral’s withdrawal is still shrouded in secrecy, it ap- 
pears to have been connected with the inspection of 
France's African empire from which General 
Huntziger, French War Minister, was returning 
when he was killed in an airplane accident on No- 
vember 12. General Huntziger, it is reported, was 
bringing back a survey unfavorable, in some respects, 
to the policy of “collaboration” with Germany. Im- 


hsteeneentiianee _~ 


mediately following the retirement of Weygand, 
the Vichy Colonial Secretary, Rear Admiral René 
Platon—who, like Darlan, is regarded as a “‘col- 
laborationist”—suddenly left for a visit of inspection 
to the strategic port of Dakar in French West Africa. 
Meanwhile, the command of the armed forces in 
French Africa, previously -held by Weygand, has 
been divided between General Alphonse Juin (re- 
leased from a German prison camp earlier this 
year), who becomes Commander-in-Chief in North 
Africa, and General Jean Barrau, who assumes a 
similar post in West Africa. 


THE UNITED STATES AND VICHY. General 
Weygand’s removal brought relations between the 
United States and Marshal Pétain to a critical point. 
It is by no means certain that the United States will 
want to break off relations with Vichy which, aside 
from other considerations, represents a useful 
“listening-post,” but some sentiment has been un- 
officially expressed in Washington in favor of rec- 
ognizing General de Gaulle’s Free French move- 
ment. Already, on November 11, President Roosevelt 
had authorized lend-lease aid to the Free French 
forces in Africa and Syria; and on November 24 
the Economic Defense Board announced that it 
had revoked all export licenses for French North 
Africa, together with all permits for exportation 
of petroleum products to Spain and Tangier. That 
Vichy’s policy is not a matter of indifference to the 
United States was indicated on November 4, when 
it was announced that certain decrees of the Pétain 
government, providing the death penalty for “com- 
munistic and anarchistic activity’’ dating back as far 
as ten years, and forbidding listening to British or 
other “‘anti-national’’ radio broadcasts, would be 
applied to the French overseas possessions of Guade- 
loupe, French Guiana, St. Pierre and Miquelon— 
the first time that the “new order’ of Europe has 
been directly projected into the Western Hemi- 
sphere. Fear of Nazi-inspired action by the Vichy 
government on this side of the Atlantic was appar- 
ently the principal reason for Washington's decision, 
announced on November 24, to send United States 


Page Two 


_ of the anti-Comintern pact, was still engaged in ne 


—<— 


troops to Surinam (or Dutch Guiana), whig 
borders on French and British Guiana, as well as q 
Brazil. This decision was taken under an agreemen, 
reached with Brazil and with the Netherlands gov. 
ernment in London. 

Meanwhile, the British invasion of Libya, whic, 
had apparently caught the Axis by surprise, and q 
November 25 had brought the British more thay 
half-way to Tobruk, is bound to have an influeng 
on European developments out of all proportion ty 
its actual importance. From Berlin it was announced 
that Finland, Bulgaria, Croatia, Rumania, Slovakis 
and the Japanese-sponsored Nanking government 
would sign the anti-Comintern pact on Novembe 
25, thus joining the six previous signatories—Ger. 
many, Italy, Japan, Manchukuo, Spain and Hun. 
gary. On the eve of this meeting the Germans had 
put increasing pressure on France and Turkey, whic)| 
were urged to join the “new order” and thus sig. 
nalize their resistance to “world bolshevism’— 
represented, according to the Nazis, by Russia, 
Britain and the United States. While France's de 
cision still hung in the balance, Turkey, apparently 
impressed by Russia's resistance and by British mili. 
tary preparations in the Near and Middle East and 
in Africa, seemed to have rejected Nazi demands 
for “coordination” of its policy with that of Ger. 
many. And Japan, one of the original co-signatories 


gotiations with the United States regarding a pos. 
sible basis of agreement in the Pacific. The British 
campaign in Africa will not decide the war. It may 
not even relieve the Russians, hard-pressed around 
Moscow—except that the Germans may have to 
shift a part of their air force from the eastern front 
to Africa. But what the British apparently hope to | 
accomplish by their African campaign is to achieve | 
mastery of the Mediterranean; to forestall a ‘stab in | 
the back” by German forces using French North 
Africa as a base; to rally Turkey to their side; and | 
ultimately to establish in Africa a base from which 
they might attempt an invasion of the European con- 
tinent through Italy or the Balkans. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN | 


BRAZIL-ARGENTINE TREATY STRENGTHENS HEMISPHERE DEFENSE 


The successful conclusion of Argentine-Brazilian 
trade talks, on November 21, marked an important 
milestone on the road toward economic and political 
integration of the Western Hemisphere. The new 
treaty, officially negotiated for the purpose of estab- 
lishing “in progressive form . . . a customs union .. . 
between Argentina and Brazil,” stipulates that each 
of the two signatories will grant duty-free entry to 
goods produced by new industries in the other coun- 
try over a period of ten years. Both governments, 
moreover, promise not to institute new duties on 


Argentine and Brazilian goods now produced on 3 | 
small scale, and even agree to accord such goods 
especially favorable treatment which will not be 
granted to other competitors. The two countries also | 
undertake gradually to reduce or eliminate duties on 
each other’s major non-competitive goods, so long 
as such reductions or removals will not harm exist 
ing production of these goods in either country. 
This treaty is the most far-reaching of a series of 
similar pacts which include the River Plate regional 
agreements among Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, Bo 


— 


livia an 
and tk 
agreem 
tion by 
countri 
regiona 
convent 
of regi 
Argent 
ties to 
be wor! 
In acce 
Brazil 

each © 
govern 
their f 
each O' 
are in 

comme 
courag 
cent U 
ernme! 
nation 


by Arg 


ECC 
The it 
her 21 
and A 
by the 
place 
extenc 
Amer! 
war. | 
prom 
ica by 
marke 
Its los 
state 
eign | 
Argen 


*For a 
Policy B 


_— 


RE 


—:! 


, Whig 
ell a$ Op 
sTeement 
ads ov. 


1, which 
, and op 
re than 
Nfluenc 
tion to 
nounced 
Slovakia 
ernment 
ovember 
-~s—Ger- 
id Hun. 
ans had 
y, which 
hus Sig. 
vism’— 
Russia, 
ice’s de. 
parently 
ish mili- 
East and 
Jemands 
of Get 
rnatories 
d in ne. 
y a pos 
> British 
. Tt may 
around 
have to 
rn front 
hope to 
achieve 
“stab in 
» North 
de; and 
n which 
ean COn- 


OEAN 


SE 

ed on a 
2 goods 
not be 
ries also 
uties on 
so long 
m exist- 
ntry. 

eries of 
regional 


lay, Bo- 


= 


via and Paraguay, concluded on February 6, 1941, 
and the Argentine-Brazilian trade and credits 
agreements of April 9, 1941. A formal recommenda- 
tion by the River Plate conference urged the five 
countries to study the possibility of organizing a 
regional customs union. Although several notable 
conventions and resolutions aimed at the promotion 
of regional trade, the conference also resolved—on 
Argentina’s insistence—that any specific trade trea- 
ties to expedite commerce across frontiers should 
be worked out by individual two-party conversations. 
In accordance with this provision, Argentina and 
Brazil on April 9 agreed to facilitate the entry of 
each other's leading export products, while both 
governments contracted to open special credits in 
their respective central banks for the purchase of 
each other’s surplus goods. All of these agreements 
are in full accord with the purpose of United States 
commercial policy at the present time, which en- 
courages the regional interchange of goods. The re- 
cent United States trade pact with the Argentine gov- 
emment, for example, exempts from most-favored- 
nation treatment concessions which may be granted 
by Argentina to other River Plate countries.* 


ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL OBJECTIVES. 
The immediate economic objective of the Novem- 
ber 21 and April 9 treaties was to expand Brazilian 
and Argentine exports, which have been curtailed 
by the European war. Both countries now hope to 
place their foreign commerce on a sounder basis by 
extending trade between themselves: that is, in Latin 
American markets which remain open despite the 
war. In the long run, the new treaty is expected to 
promote the industrial development of South Amer- 
ica by creating a large, unified Brazilian-Argentine 
market for manufactured products of both nations. 
Its long-range political significance was indicated in 
statements by both the Argentine and Brazilian For- 
eign Ministers. Dr. Don Enrique Ruiz-Guifiaza, of 
Argentina, said that the agreement would “be the 


‘For a discussion of the U.S.-Argentine pact of October 14, see Foreign 
Policy Bulletin, October 24, 1941. 


Page Three 


READ— 


AFRICA AND THE WORLD CONFLICT 
by Louis E. Frechtling 


25¢ 


A survey of Africa’s strategic importance in the world 
struggle. This is the October 15 issue of FoREIGN POLicy 
Reports, which are published on the 1st and 15th of each 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: AFRICAN WAR SPEEDS DEFENSE 
OF AMERICAS 

Speaker: A. Randle Elliott 

Date: Sunday, November 30 

Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over NBC 

For station, please consult your local newspaper 


foundation of closer friendship and unalterable 
union” between Brazil and the Argentine; Brazilian 
Foreign Minister Oswaldo Aranha, who officially 
visited Chile just before and Uruguay just after con- 
cluding the agreement with Argentina, stated that 
the trade treaty was intended “to suppress frontiers 
and bring nations closer together.” 

Dr. Aranha’s intense activity in Argentina—where 
he visited the Ecuadorean and Peruvian Ambassa- 
dors in an effort to hasten a settlement of the 
Peruvian-Ecuadorean border conflict—as well as in 
Chile and Uruguay, led to the belief that he was 
trying to promote an all-American front for Western 
Hemisphere defense. Most of the Latin American 
governments have already come out actively in sup- 
port of continental solidarity for defense, but up to 
now Argentina’s policy of strict neutrality has kept 
it aloof from these efforts. Brazil, one of the 
leading exponents of inter-American solidarity, is on 
excellent terms with all of Argentina’s immediate 
neighbors—Chile, Bolivia, Paraguay and Uruguay— 
and enjoys sufficient prestige to take the initiative in 
any new move for the promotion of Pan-American 
security. Its association with United States defense 
plans was graphically illustrated when American 
troops moved into Surinam on November 24. At 
that time, Brazil officially indicated its cooperation 
by maintaining ‘‘military vigilance” on the Brazilian- 
Guiana border. Referring to the agreement reached 
between Brazil, the United States and the Nether- 
lands, Dr. Aranha stated that the mc.e into Surinam 
was essential to safeguard the colony’s vitally impor- 
tant supplies of bauxite (source of aluminum), and 
that Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Uruguay are now in 
complete accord on matters pertaining to hemisphere 


defense. A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 
ANNUAL MEETING 


The date of the Foreign Policy Association annual 
meeting is now definitely set for Saturday, Decem- 
ber 13. In order to present a distinguished visitor 
from abroad we have announced several other dates 
in accordance with changes in his plans. His visit has 
been postponed and we therefore return to the date 


month. Subscription, $5 a year; to FPA members, $3. — c 
originally announced, December 13. 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 6, NovEMBER 28, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Streer, New York, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES Dean, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Burs 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor 


Three Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


ettbesn, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


Nov. 24.—Reports of an impending “global” 
settlement between Mexico and the United States, 
which have been current since early September, were 
at last corroborated on November 19 with the sign- 
ing in Washington of a series of important agree- 
ments by the two governments. The United States 
Treasury undertakes to provide Mexico with $40,- 
000,000 for the stabilization of the peso (presum- 
ably at the rate of 4.85 to the dollar), and to pur- 
chase 6,000,000 ounces of Mexican silver monthly 
at 35 cents per ounce. To finance Mexico’s road- 
building program, the Export-Import Bank will ex- 
tend credits of $30,000,000, in three equal instal- 
ments. Mexico, for its part, will make a second 
$3,000,000 payment on agrarian and “general” 
claims owed United States citizens, and will continue 
payments at a yearly rate of $2,500,000 until a total 
of $40,000,000 has been paid over. Finally, an under- 
standing has been reached in principle for the nego- 
tiation of a reciprocal trade pact. 


THE OIL ISSUE. The agreement of November 19 
does not, unfortunately, provide a definitive solution 
of the troubled “oil question,” which has plagued 
Mexican-U.S. relations since the expropriation by 
the Mexican government of United States and 
British-owned petroleum properties in March 1938. 
A new method of approach to this problem is, how- 
ever, outlined in an exchange of notes between Sec- 
retary of State Hull and Mexican Ambassador Cas- 
tillo Najera. The Mexican government will make an 
immediate deposit of $9,000,000, as part payment to 
the expropriated companies. Each government will 
then choose an expert appraiser; these, working to- 
gether, will attempt to establish the nature and size 
of further payments. Should the experts be unable 
to agree, direct diplomatic negotiations will be re- 
sumed. Nothing in the agreement is to be interpreted 
as setting a “precedent”; this latter clause is pre- 
sumably intended as a reply in advance to those who 
argue that other Latin American countries will be 
encouraged to expropriate United States property. 

In a statement issued shortly after the signing of 
the agreement, Secretary Hull pointed out that ‘‘the 
American interests involved will retain full liberty 
of action in determining the course they will pursue 
before, during, and after valuation proceedings.” 
As had been generally foreseen, oil company execu- 
tives flatly rejected the arrangement. Pointing out 
that they had twice previously refused a settlement 


along similar lines (or. October 8 and November 
13), oil men argue that the understanding tends ¢ 
“validate the original confiscation,” that it impli 
payment over a period of years by a government 
“hopelessly in default,” and that it is vague and am. 
biguous. Obviously, a great deal hinges on the iden. 
tity of the individual chosen as United States expert, 
and on whether or not consideration during a 
praisal is given to so-called “‘sub-soil rights,” and 
to the exploration and development expenses in- 
curred by the companies. 

The United States government would very na- 
turally have preferred an understanding with Mex. 
ico in which the oil firms could have concurred, 
That Washington chose at this time to circumvent 
the oil issue in favor of a broad general agreement 
reflects the present emphasis on close continental 
solidarity. Except for the road-building credit (part 
of which is to be used for completion of the Pan- 
American Highway), nothing in the November 19 
settlement directly involves defense issues. The 
agreement does, however, set the stage both econom- 
ically and psychologically for a further inter-gearing 
of U.S. and Mexican defense preparations. 

The Mexican government receives certain very 
tangible advantages from the present agreement, 
and stands to gain even more if a reciprocal trade 
treaty with the United States is successfully nego- 
tiated. Observers are skeptical, however, that the 
settlement of November 19 will be immediately 
followed by the vast influx of North American capi- 
tal which has been steadily predicted ever since the 
accession of Manuel Avila Camacho to the Mexican 
Presidency a year ago. Two factors must be kept in 
mind in this connection: the existence of a priority 


system in the United States—with the resulting dif- | 
ficulty of transferring machinery and equipment— | 


and the attitude of North American businessmen 
On the whole, business interests have been heartened 
by a gradual swing to the right in Mexican politics, 
dramatically symbolized early in October by the ele- 
vation to Cabinet rank of the President’s conserva- 
tive-minded brother, General Maximino Avila 
Camacho. The settlement of November 19 repre- 
sents essentially, however, a victory for that wing of 
the Mexican government which stands closest to 
former President Cardenas. It was this element 
which — in the persons of Ambassador Castillo 
Najera and Finance Minister Sudrez—carried the 
recent negotiations through to a successful conclusion. 


JOHN I. B. McCuULLocH 


. —— 
Vou. XX 
als 


ESP 
in} 

for a Fé 
moves | 
critical 
rapid n 
Indo-Ct 
preparit 
gotiatio 
renewe 
Novem 
the Ax 
parleys. 
were pi 
tary sti 
might | 


ARN 


| last cru 
| to end 

crisis, | 
A new 
| war we 
| carious 


| Toky 
| for a 

| by Pret 
| ing len 
| on No 
| Ment, 1 
geance 
atic aff 
with J 
said, ‘ 
dence.’ 
Minist 
was “‘t 
tries fa 
actual 


