





sr Ob- 
f the 
ited 
the 
t on 
For 
one 
Ltory 


T 












PERIODICAL ROOM 
1@NERAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF MICH 


Ann Arbor. 





Library 


Sep as 2nd class matter 
-*Versity of Michigan Ep 26 1942 : 


Nichtizan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL. XXI, No. 49 


SEPTEMBER 25, 1942 





WAR PACTS OPEN NEW CHAPTER IN U.S.-MEXICAN RELATIONS 


T IS now nearly four months since Mexico, aroused 
by the sinking of two of its tankers by German 
submarines, declared war on May 30, 1942 on Ger- 
many and its Axis partners. During that period, our 
southern neighbor has taken various measures to in- 
crease its contribution to the war effort of the United 
Nations. Its chief contribution is and will remain 
economic in character. Mexico will continue to 
supply the war industries of the United States with 
badly needed raw materials, especially metallic ores 
and concentrates. But belligerent Mexico is now also 
offering other economic and military advantages to 
its allies. 


MILITARY PREPARATIONS. From the military 
point of view, the main advantage of Mexico's entry 
into the war is that the land, sea and air defense of 
the vulnerable Mexican Pacific Coast can be under- 
taken jointly by the United States and Mexico. In 
this way the April 3, 1941 agreement for the recipro- 
cal use of air bases is conveniently enlarged. To pre- 
pare this defense, as well as to meet any menace to 
the country or its southern neighbor, Guatemala, 
President Manuel Avila Camacho on August 18 
signed a decree introducing compulsory military 
service for men from 18 to 45 years of age. Although 
the number of men called will necessarily be small 
at the beginning because of lack of equipment, the 
new decree nevertheless provides the necessary basis 
for gradual development of a modern Mexican army. 
It is supplemented by the acquisition in the United 
States, under lend-lease agreements, of war matériel, 
including several bomber planes; the building of 
military barracks near Mexico City and in Cuer- 
navaca; and the appropriation, announced on Sep- 
tember 11, of seven million pesos (or some $1,440,- 
000) for the purchase of 150 torpedo boats of the 
“Mosquito” type, indicating a sizable increase in sea 
defenses. (Before its entry into the war, Mexico's 
navy was reported to have three 2,000-ton gunboats 


and eleven patrol vessels.) Finally, the appointment 
on September 1, of former President Lazaro Cardenas 
to the post of Minister of National Defense will as- 
sure popular support to future war measures that 
may be taken by the Mexican government. 
FINANCIAL COOPERATION. One of the latest 
steps in the development of Mexican-United States 
financial relations is the agreement of August 13 
prohibiting the circulation within Mexico of all 
American paper currency except $2 bills. This agree- 
ment has stopped the use of Mexico as a clearing- 
house for American currency confiscated by the Axis 
in Europe and sold back to the United States. Other 
steps of an economic character include the allocation 
of various United States loans for the development 
of such war activities as expansion of mining out- 
put, construction of steel mills, earmarking of the 
total guayule rubber output for the United States 
through 1946, extension of the Pan-American ligh- 
way from Mexico City to the Guatemalan border, 
and improvement of the Mexican railroad network. 
This latter is overloaded because of increased ship- 
ments of goods due to a decrease in seaborne traffic 
through the submarine-infested Gulf of Mexico. 
SUPPLYING OF MAN POWER. Another valu- 
able economic contribution by Mexico to the produc- 
tive capacity of the United Nations is the agreement 
concluded with the United States in August, in which 
Mexico undertook to send several thousand agrti- 
cultural workers into our harvest fields. This pact 
is especially interesting because it may open the way 
for a new kind of international labor exchange. As 
Vice President Henry A. Wallace stressed in the 
speech he delivered in Spanish at Los Angeles on 
September 18 in ceremonies marking Mexico's In- 
dependence Day, the Mexican workers will be 
brought into the United States “not on the basis of 
low wage competition, as in the past, but with the 
wholehearted assistance and protection of the two 


aR Bt see a. 


eT enn 


 SeEmnapedneatmerteria ae 
A IE AE ee 

















governments.” The new agreement provides a mini- 
mum wage of 30 cents an hour for the Mexican 
laborers, a figure somewhat above the average paid 
to farmhands in the southwestern states, where most 
of the Mexican workers will be sent. This provision 
is ex to eliminate employers whose only aim 
is exploitation of cheap labor. 

The agreement also covers transportation and re- 
patriation costs, and indicates that the workers are 
to be furnished with living quarters and board. In 
addition, it stipulates that they shall benefit from ac- 
cident insurance, provides for medical care, schools, 
and freedom from military service. This last point 
is particularly important in view of the Nazi word- 
of-mouth propaganda, still strong in Mexico, which 
tries to obstruct this form of collaboration by spread- 
ing rumors that Mexican workers going to the United 
States will be drafted into the American army, never 
to come back. 

The Mexican government, for its part, appears 
anxious to make this experiment in “planned”’ sea- 
sonal migration a success of permanent benefit for 
the nation. With this end in view, it is studying a 
system whereby the temporarily expatriated agricul- 
tural workers would be able to save a substantial per- 
centage of their earnings and invest it in farm im- 
plements purchased in the United States. On their 
return home, the Mexican government would supply 
these landless workers with land on which they 
could use their new farm machinery and start an in- 
dependent life. 


It is too soon as yet to judge the results of this 


Page Twe 








_——. 
—_ 


plan; only a short time has elapsed since the agree. 
ment was signed, and there- has been no rush to 
employ Mexican workers, although for several 
months California and Texas growers have been 
calling for Mexican farmhands. The new agreement 
might well mark the starting point of a new era in 
United States-Latin American relations—an era in 
which the welfare of the people in the countries in- 
volved will come ahead of the vested interests of 
economic groups. If it succeeds, even on a small scale, 
it could do more to create sympathy for the United 
States in Latin America than anything else. In coun- 
tries where the largest part of the rural population 
does not read, concrete deeds are a far more effective 
means of propaganda than printed material. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


{Mr. Hediger has just returned from a month’s visit to 
Mexico. During his stay there he delivered three lectures in 
Spanish at the National University of Mexico, on the special 
invitation of the Rector of the University. Two of these 
lectures were on Nazi Exploitation of Occupied Europe, a 
subject covered by Mr. Hediger in ForEIGN Poticy Re- 
PorTS for June 1 and August 15, 1942, and one on Séra- 
tegical Raw Materials and the War. The lectures were at- 
tended by a large audience composed of high military off- 
cials, representatives of various government departments, 
bankers, professors at the School of Economics, and stu- 
dents, ial were broadcast over the University radio station 
throughout Mexico and Latin America. In response to the 
interest aroused by these lectures, the University of Mexico 
is publishing them in pamphlet form. In addition, the full 
Spanish text of Mr. Hediger’s two ForEIGN Poticy Re- 
porTS will be published in book form by Ediciones Minerva 
of Mexico City.} 


SECOND FRONT ISSUE UNRESOLVED AS 1942 WANES 


While the gigantic struggle for control of the ruins 
of Stalingrad waxed and waned, Allied censorship 
permitted the partial unveiling of another struggle 
—that waged by Britain and the United States, on 
the one hand, and the Soviet Union on the other, 
concerning the opening of a second front in West- 
ern Europe. Stripped of diplomatic language, the 
issue is not whether a second front is desirable 
(Washington and London, in identical statements 
issued on June 12, agreed as to “the urgent tasks of 
creating a second front in Europe in 1942’’), but 
whether at this time it is feasible. The Russians, 





Just Published— 


MEXICO: THE MAKING OF A NATION 
by Hubert Herring 
Headline Book No. 36 *  25¢c. 


Brief history of Mexico; Analysis of land problems; Dis- 
pute over oil; Conflict with the Church; and Impact of 
the war—by a man who knows the country intimately. 


Order from FPA, 22 East 38th St., New York 











fighting against desperate odds, believe that the Al- 
lies, who have hitherto expended a far smaller num- 
ber of lives, have enough men for a land attack on 
the Germans. In this, Moscow tends to minimize 
or overlook the difficulties—with which they are 
unfamiliar—of transporting men and material over 
an expanse of water. By contrast the British, who. at 
this juncture would have to bear the brunt of an as- 
sault on Nazi-controlled Europe, believe that the 
practical possibility of invasion should be carefully 
weighed before committing the United Nations to 
what might prove a common disaster. 

CANADA’S REPORT ON DIEPPE. The cau- 
tiousness of the British—which, it is believed, has 
the approval of Canadian and American military 
leaders in the British Isles—finds support in the of- 
ficial report issued by Canada’s Defense Minister, 
J. L. Ralston, on September 18. This report reveals 
that the Canadian contingent, the major component 
of the Allied raiding force, suffered a 67 per cent 
loss in dead, wounded and missing; that the Atlantic 
coast has been heavily fortified by the Germans; 
and that the element of surprise, essential for the 








as S 
state 
on § 
an i 
of 1 
Stat 
on : 
mat 


ond 
still 
con 
chai 
whe 
unc 


rep 


Was 
altl 
con 


Fra 





‘ive 


Al- 
um- 
: On 
nize 
are 
over 
oO. at 
1 as- 
the 
ully 
s to 


cau- 
has 
itary 
> of- 
ster, 
veals 
nent 
cent 
antic 
ans; 


the 





—— 
—7"_—™ 





success of invasion, is extremely difficult to achieve. 
On the credit side, however, the report indicates the 
feasibility of a concerted attack on German fortifi- 
cations by land, sea and air, provided—and this re- 
mains the principal qualification—the Allies have 
enough specially trained men at their disposal. The 
outlook for an invasion of Europe is thus, to quote 
an old Austrian saying, serious, but not hopeless. 
Its success will depend, first and foremost, on the 
concentration in the British Isles of additional men 
who can be trained in commando tactics—men who 
will have to come from Canada and the United 
States. The continued flow of troops and equipment 
to Britain depends, in turn, on Allied success in 
keeping the Atlantic free of German submarines, 
as Secretary of Navy Frank Knox pointed out in a 
statement to the American Legion in Kansas City 
on September 19. In the final analysis the success of 
an invasion of Europe will hinge on the willingness 
of the people of Britain, Canada and the United 
States to endorse heavy sacrifices in terms of lives 
on a potential Western front, in the hope of thus 
materially shortening the war. 


RISING BAROMETER? As the debate over a sec- 
ond front continues, countries in Europe which are 
still, in one sense or another, on the fringes of the 
conflict, have become an important barometer of 
changes in the international atmosphere. In Ankara, 
where German Ambassador von Papen has labored 
unceasingly to win Turkish support for Germany, 
Wendell L. Willkie, President Roosevelt's personal 
representative, was accorded a warm reception, and 
was assured that Turkey would fight if attacked— 
although the British fear that Ankara may soon be 
confronted with German demands for transit privi- 
leges or the use of airdromes in Asia Minor. In Spain 
Franco's changing of the guard has as yet produced 
no outwardly visible results, but it is understood that 
the new Foreign Minister, General Jordana, will insist 
on more scrupulous adherence to neutrality. In the 
countrywide municipal elections held in Sweden on 
September 20, the Swedish Nazis lost their only 5 
seats, and the Communists won 39—a gain of 17— 
while the dominant Social Democratic party lost 34 
seats, but still maintained its overwhelming major- 
ity with a total of 829. The Communist gains, made 
in the face of a propaganda campaign from Berlin to 
the effect that Sweden had become ‘‘a hotbed of Com- 
munism,” were attributed to growing dissatisfaction 
with the number of concessions made by the govern- 
ment to the Germans. 


Page Three 








In the meantime Finland, which is in the am- 
biguous position of being at war with Britain and 
the Soviet Union while maintaining diplomatic re- 
lations with the United States, was once more thrust 
into the limelight on September 19, when the Fin- 
nish Minister to Washington, Hjalmar J. Procope, 
issued a statement outlining the terms on which his 
country might conceivably “cease fighting.” In this 
statement M. Procope declared that “no peace pro- 
posal has been made to Finland, still less any prom- 
ise of restitution of territories belonging to her, and 
least of all any guarantee of lasting security.” He 
denied that Finland is threatened with a food short- 
age, or lacks financial resources to continue the war. 
The aim of the Finnish nation, he said, “is to keep 
her land in her own hands until a lasting peace 1s 
built upon real guarantees’’—on the assumption that, 
if Finland were occupied or invaded, no great power 
would be willing to reopen hostilities against the 
invaders to drive them out of Finnish territory. 
The phrase about Finland’s desire to “keep her 
land” does not make clear whether the Finns merely 
claim the territory they controlled in 1939, at the 
outset of the Russo-Finnish war, or also Eastern 
Karelia, Russian control over which was recognized 
by the Treaty of Dorpat of 1920, but which is now 
demanded by Finnish nationalists. While reports 
from Helsinki deny that Finland is seeking a sep- 
arate peace, M. Procope’s statement appears to be a 
trial balloon to sound out American public opinion, 
which on the whole has remained friendly to the 
Finns—and possibly indicates a latent doubt regard- 
ing a final Nazi victory. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 





Latin America, by Preston E. James. Boston, Lothrop, Lee 
and Shepard, 1942. $6.00 


A distinguished geographer so approaches his subject 
that a mass of facts in no way obscures his understanding 
portrayal of the Latin American nations. 


Pattern of Mexico, by Clifford Gessler and E. H. Suydam. 
New York, Appleton-Century, 1941. $5.00 


A most attractively illustrated descriptive work on Mex- 
ico, highly suitable as background for tourists. 


The Problems of Lasting Peace, by Herbert Hoover and 
Hugh Gibson. New York, Doubleday, Doran, 1942. $2.00 
A former President of the United States and a former 

American diplomat jointly analyze the forces that, in their 

opinion, are shaping the modern world, and outline a post- 

war order which would combine international cooperation 
with restoration of free enterprise. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 49, SEPTEMBER 25, 1942. 


second-class matter December 


eS 





Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MICHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 
2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


National 


Three Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





Sarto sealer 


Washington News Letter 








fo, predbergy 








SEPT. 21.—Relations between the United States 
and Vichy, which have been steadily deteriorating 
since Pierre Laval returned to power on April 15, 
dropped to a new low on September 15 when Secre- 
tary of State Cordell Hull bluntly denounced the pro- 
Nazi politician’s decree for the conscription of French 
labor to work in German war factories as “wholly 
inconsistent with France's obligations under interna- 
tional law.” The sternness of Mr. Hull’s admonition 
made it clear that any attempt by Vichy to draft 
hundreds of thousands of skilled French workers for 
service in Nazi munition plants would be considered 
by the United States government as an overt act of 
hostility, and would be followed by severance of 
diplomatic ties. 

Shortage of Nazi man power, which becomes stead- 
ily more acute as Hitler keeps throwing Germans into 
the holocaust in Russia, is one of the vital factors 
on which the United Nations are counting to break 
the German war machine. A move by Laval to re- 
lieve the drainage on German man power by sending 
French slave labor into the Reich would be consid- 
ered in Washington as much of an act of deliberate 
hostility as the handing over of the French fleet to 
the Nazis. In fact, the quasi-ofhicial Army and Navy 
Journal declares that “the peril from the fleet is 
secondary to that which would result from the gen- 
eral use of French labor in Axis factories.” 


THIRD REPUBLIC HEARD AGAIN. Fear of 
the political consequences of Laval’s latest collabora- 
tion project probably lay behind the grave warning 
addressed to Marshal Pétain and Pierre Laval by 
Jules Jeanneney, president of the French Senate, and 
Edouard Herriot, president of the Chamber of Depu- 
ties. In this communication, published in the Ameri- 
can press on September 10, the two eminent political 
leaders of the defunct Third Republic told Pétain 
that if, without authorization of the Parliament, he 
were to “try to draw France into war against our 
allies which you yourself declared ‘honor forbids, 
we by this letter protest in advance in the name of 
national sovereignty.” 

It is characteristic of the anomalous relations now 
existing between Washington and Vichy that on Sep- 
tember 11 Secretary Hull publicly extolled the “rare 
courage’’ of the two French parliamentarians who in 
the same letter had taxed Pétain with assuming un- 
authorized dictatorial powers. Other recent develop- 
ments reflecting the growing tension between the 


FOR VICTORY ° 


Administration and the Vichy government were Mr. 
Hull’s scathing denunciation on September 15 of the 
mass expulsion of Jewish refugees from unoccupied 
France; the State Department’s endorsement on Sep. 
tember 10 of the British move to occupy all of 
Madagascar; and Washington’s curt rejection on Sep- 
tember 8 of Laval’s protest against American bomb. 
ing raids over France. 


WILL U.S. ACT ON DAKAR? If the break with 
Vichy really should occur this time, it may well arise 
over Dakar, whose strategic importance has been 
greatly enhanced by Brazil's entrance into the war, 
United States military authorities are pressing for 
the occupation of this French West African port and 
their organ, the Army and Navy Journal, hinted in 
this week's issue that “events may compel us to co- 
operate with the British in seizing that base because 
it might serve as a jumping off place for planes op- 
erating against our South American ally.” 

The Army has little patience with the “appease. 
ment policies” of the State Department. According 
to information available in diplomatic circles in 
Washington, there are no German troops in Dakar. 
Following a visit of Pierre Boisson, Governor Gen- 
eral of French West Africa to Vichy, the Pétain- 
Laval government on September 1 formally denied 
that Germany had asked for bases in Dakar. The 
French collaborationist press, however, has been pre- 
paring French opinion for a clash over Dakar by 
references to the “Anglo-American menace to our 
African Empire.” 

The United States Army and Navy do not want 
to take any chances. They are weary of the inter- 
minable negotiations that the State Department has 
been conducting since May 9 with Admiral Georges 
Robert, Vichy High Commissioner, for the guaran- 
teeing of the neutrality of France’s Caribbean pos- 
sessions. The Army asserts, too, that the British got 
nowhere when from May to September they sought 
to negotiate a settlement with the Vichy authorities 
in Madagascar to prevent that island from being 
used as a base for Nazi submarines. 

Meanwhile, British action in Madagascar, of which 
the French National Committee in London was noti- 
fied in advance, has had the indirect effect of lessen- 
ing the tension that had developed between General 
de Gaulle and British authorities in the Levant overt 
the situation in the French mandate of Syria. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 














