British 
Wash- 
partial 
1€ pfo- 
aterials 
the dis- 
nd cot- 
While 
d legis- 
ocks of 
are far 
ies. On 
nd any 
cultural 
tration. 


has not 
rced to 
of the 
is trade 
nd our 
red that 
to the 
gic ma- 
cies. ... 
urrange- 
yf other 
icquired 
hem on 


s of the 
ome ob- 
whether 
s of the 
-d States 
rinciples 
and the 


STONE 


Ae 
Orr yor 


of 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


AF 
\ 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


() 


egilion of current international events by the Research Staff 


FZ FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
a 


You. XVIII, No. 30 


May 19, 1939 


— 


by Paul B. Taylor 


An analysis of the transformation of Czecho-Slovakia 
into a sphere for German expansion, forecasting the 
methods likely to be used by Nazi Germany in Eastern 
Europe generally. 


——— 


GERMANY’S EXPANSION IN EASTERN EUROPE 


May 15 issue of FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS .. . 25 cents 


MAy 2 oO 1025 


Vw. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, ae the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


— 


! 


NEW MOVES TO RESTRAIN ROME-BERLIN AXIS 


NOTHER vital link in the European coalition 

against the Rome-Berlin axis was forged on 
May 12 when Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain 
announced in the House of Commons that Turkey 
and Britain had undertaken to come unreservedly 
to each other’s aid “in the event of aggression lead- 
ing to war in the Mediterranean area.’ The scope of 
this undertaking, which is to be embodied in a 
definitive agreement, was not fully revealed, but it is 
apparently comprehensive enough to include the 
Black Sea and the Balkans as well as the Mediter- 
ranean proper. It will probably be followed by a 
similar Franco-Turkish pact said to have been de- 
layed by Turkish demands for fuller authority in the 
Sanjak of Alexandretta. Since Turkey controls the 
strategic Straits giving access to the Black Sea, its 
accession to the Franco-British bloc constitutes a 
major diplomatic victory for the democratic powers. 


PROSPECTS FOR ANGLO-SOVIET PACT 
IMPROVED. Announcement of the Turkish ac- 
cord, which had been regarded as contingent on a 
Soviet-British agreement, was also hailed as an in- 
dication that negotiations between London and 
Moscow were proceeding satisfactorily. The British 
government has been anxious to restrict its obliga- 
tions toward the Soviet Union as far as possible. It 
has asked the Soviets to pledge assistance to France 
and Britain whenever the latter become involved in 
war as the result of carrying out their commitments 
to protect Poland and Rumania. In defending these 
two countries, Mr. Chamberlain intimated on May 
10, the British and French would be helping Russia 
as well; and Moscow would not be obliged to give 
aid until Paris and London lived up to their under- 
takings. Unwilling to be merely the tail to the 
Franco-British kite, the Soviet government is seek- 
ing a much more comprehensive alliance, based on 


. 


complete reciprocity and equality. According to an 
obviously inspired editorial in the Moscow news- 
paper Izvestia, the Kremlin wants the agreement 
also to protect the U.S.S.R. in case the country is 
either attacked or fulfills Soviet commitments to 
neighboring states. That Moscow is trying to make 
its own defensive arrangements is demonstrated by 
the recent visits of Vladimir Potemkin, Vice-Com- 
missar of Foreign Affairs, to Ankara, Sofia, Buchar- 
est and Warsaw. 

The views of London and Moscow seem hardly far 
enough apart to preclude agreement in the near fu- 
ture. In Britain both Parliament and the Foreign 
Office are pushing the cautious Chamberlain govern- 
ment to make further concessions and disregard the 
possible repercussions of a Soviet pact on the Vatican, 
Spain and Portugal. The Soviet Union also seems 
anxious not to take an intransigent position. Signifi- 
cantly enough, it has ignored suggestions of a non- 
aggression pact sent up as a trial balloon in Berlin. 
Although the agenda of the forthcoming session of 
the League Council includes no items of importance, 
the Kremlin is sending M. Potemkin to Geneva on 
May 22. There he will have an opportunity to ex- 
change views directly with Viscount Halifax, Brit- 
ain’s Foreign Minister. 


RAPPROCHMENT OF WARSAW AND MOS- 
COW. The anti-German front has been reinforced, 
too, by Warsaw, which has now apparently cast all 
caution to the winds. Poland was strengthened in its 
attitude on May 11 when Mr. Chamberlain again 
publicly assured the world that Britain was terribly 
“in earnest” in its refusal to countenance attempts 
to change the situation in Danzig “by force in such 
a way as to threaten Polish independence.” The 
Polish government has largely overcome its deep 
distrust of the Soviet Union and is apparently ef- 


——————————————— Page Two 


fecting a far-reaching rapprochement with Moscow. 
On May 8 it was announced that the Kremlin had 
accredited a new Ambassador to Warsaw, after a 
lapse of two years. Following conversations between 
Foreign Minister Josef Beck and M. Potemkin, it 
was even reported that Poland was prepared to be- 
come a direct partner in the pact of mutual assistance 
now being negotiated in Moscow and London. 


Another source of encouragement to London was 
the rejection of the non-aggression pacts proffered 
to the Scandinavian countries by Chancellor Hitler. 
Despite the tempting nature of the offer, the Foreign 
Ministers of the four nations decided in conference 
on May 9 that acceptance under present circumstances 
would tend to make them parties to a German po- 
litical combination. 

SOME DISCOURAGING FACTORS. Less heart- 
ening to the anti-German forces was the disappoint- 
ing character of the Anglo-Rumanian economic 
agreement signed on May 11. The credit of £5,000,- 
000 opened for the purchase of British goods is 
unexpectedly modest and, while the British are ex- 
pected to take more Rumanian oil, lumber and 
grain, the important undertaking to buy 200,000 tons 
of the next wheat crop has been made dependent on 
the rather doubtful condition that the wheat will be 
made available at world prices. This accord once 
more demonstrates the difficulty of offering Balkan 
countries an effective alternative to close economic 
collaboration with Germany, which absorbs more 
than half of this area’s foreign trade. 

In Yugoslavia, moreover, even less progress has 
been made by Anglo-French diplomacy. The con- 
tinued failure of the Belgrade government to ratify 


———, 
——— 


the tentative agreement reached with the Croats oy 
April 29, together with the visits of the Regen 
Prince Paul, in Italy and Germany, seem to indicate 
that Yugoslavia is gradually drifting into the Rome. 
Berlin orbit. It is reported that Yugoslavia and Hup. 
gary will soon sign a pact of friendship and nop. 
aggression under Italian auspices. Belgrade also ap. 
pears to have lodged a protest in Ankara againg 
Turkey's action in concluding the accord with Britain 
without consulting its Balkan allies. 


CHECKS ON THE ROME-BERLIN ALLIANCE 
Aside from courting Yugoslavia, Germany and Italy 


responded to Anglo-French maneuvers by agreeing 
at Milan on May 7 to conclude a formal alliance 
Conversion of the Rome-Berlin axis into an alliance 
does not vitally affect the existing situation. As the 


most exposed partner in the combination, Italy may 


be counted on to urge Germany to pursue a cautious 
policy toward Poland. In a surprisingly moderate 
speech, delivered at Turin on May 14, I/ Duce de 
clared that there were no problems in Europe at| 
present big or acute enough to justify a general war, 
The Italian government may have inspired the Vat: 
can’s efforts to sound out European capitals on the 
possibility of convening a conference to settle the 


German-Polish conflict. In Berlin, as elsewhere, 


these soundings seem to have met with no response. 
Germany appears to be biding its time, waiting for 
a more opportune moment to strike at Poland. Un- 


doubtedly Berlin is perturbed by the apparent suc 
cess of the “encirclement” policy, but it still hopes 
that circumstances more favorable to its designs will 
develop in the fall. 

JOHN C. DEWILDE 


BRITAIN REVEALS ITS PALESTINE “SETTLEMENT” 


‘Publication of the long-awaited plan of the British 
government for the future status of Palestine, finally 
scheduled for May 17, may partially appease the 
Palestine Arabs but seems unlikely to bring peace to 
the Holy Land. To judge by an unofficial summary 
of the new statement of policy, all the delicate ne- 
gotiations conducted since the opening of the tri- 
partite conference of Arabs, Jews and Britons at 
London on February 7 have failed basically to alter 
the British proposals.* Britain remains committed 
to the establishment of an independent Palestinian 
state after a transitional period which will begin as 
soon as peace is restored—an outstanding conces- 
sion to the Arabs. Yet the British hedge this devel- 
opment about with so many safeguards and grounds 
for delay that it would be rash to presuppose the im- 
pending creation of an Arab government in the 
country. 


*“Britain Proposes Independent Palestine,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, 
March 3, 1939. 


STEPS TOWARD SELF-GOVERNMENT. Ac 
cording to advance reports, the plan will fully pro 
tect British commercial and strategic interests. Britain 
will continue to stand guard over the rights of both 
Arabs and Zionists. A national assembly with British 
representation is in due course to draft a constitution 
for the new state, which must be approved by London. 
The transition period will be divided into a number 
of steps ostensibly leading toward autonomy. At 


the first stage enough Arab and Jewish representé | 


tives will be nominated in proportion to their respec 
tive populations to form a majority on the legislative 
Advisory Council and, under similar ratios, some 
of these will be appointed to fill half the posts o# 
the Executive Council. After two years, if conditions 
permit, the Advisory Council will be transformed 
into a legislative body with an elected Palestinias 
element, while Palestinian members of the Execu 
tive Council will be placed at the head of certaif 


— 


rOats Op 
Regent, 
indicate 
> Rome. 
1d Hun. 
nd nop. 
also ap. 

against 
1 Britain 


LANCE 
ind Italy 
agreeing 


alliance. | 


alliance 


. As the | 


taly may 
Cautious 
noderate 


Duce de | 


1rope at 
=ral war, 
he Vati- 
s on the 
ettle the 
sewhere, 
response. 
iting for 
and. Un. 
rent suc 
ill hopes 


igns will 


WILDE 


NT. Ac 
ully pro 
s. Britain 
s of both 
th British 
nstitution 
London. 
a number 
omy. At 
~presenta 
ir respec 
egislative 
ios, some 
posts on 
onditions 
nsformed 
alestinian 
ne Exect 
»f certain 


——— 
vm 


executive departments. The British High Commis- 
sioner, however, will retain certain “reserved’’ pow- 
ers which—if experience in India and various British 
colonies is any criterion—will include the most es- 
sential state functions. 

Later steps in the slow progress of the country to- 
ward self-government are only vaguely outlined: 
the British government merely hopes that the evo- 
lutionary process may be completed within ten years. 
Meanwhile, should economic conditions permit, 
Britain will sanction the entry of 75,000 Jewish im- 
migrants in five years in order to establish the Jewish 
population at one-third that of the entire country. 
Further immigration will require both British and 
Arab acquiescence. The High Commissioner will be 
empowered, moreover, to restrict new purchases of 
land by the Zionists. 


WILL CONFLICT CEASE? Such a plan, calcu- 
lated to crystallize the Jewish National Home as a 
protected minority element in a community advanc- 
ing toward self-government, might once have been 
successfully applied in Palestine. Today, after three 
years of bloodshed, almost all basis for mutual trust 
and cooperation seems to have vanished. Zionists 
tegard the plan as nothing short of a betrayal and 
a capitulation to Arab violence. They see themselves 
condemned to another ghetto and are threatening 
passive resistance to the new régime. The Arabs, 
whose intransigence has paved the way for the gains 
they have thus far won, have little confidence in 
British desires for gradual evolution toward inde- 
pendence. They will be tempted to continue their 
obduracy in the hope of forcing the British govern- 
ment to hand essential posts and powers over to them 
as quickly as possible. In essence they demand that 
an Arab oligarchy be ensconced in authority—a de- 


Page Three 


velopment which might be fatal for the Jewish popu- 
lation. Since Britain seems unwilling to abandon the 
Zionists entirely but prefers to maintain a balance 
of forces, indefinite continuance of the existing . 
three-cornered conflict appears in prospect. Under 
such circumstances Britain will inevitably retain a 
decisive voice in the affairs of the Holy Land. No 
other solution, short of resort to force, is conceivable 
until Zionists and Arabs discard their extreme na- 
tional pretensions and reach an agreement on the 
basis of a bi-national Palestine in which both may 
prosper. 

It may not be entirely fortuitous that the British 
government did not publish its Palestine plan until 
after the release on May 10 of a report by a special 
commission which had investigated the possibilities 
for settlement of refugees in British Guiana. While 
the commission did not consider this inaccessible 
tropical territory suitable for immediate large-scale 
settlement, it felt that the “potential possibilities” of 
the region justified an experiment in colonization. 
The project would involve the expenditure of perhaps 
$3,000,000 to settle 3,000 to 5,000 carefully selected 
young men and women in trial villages. Not until at 
least two years had passed would it be possible to 
evaluate the real potentialities of the region. Even 
assuming, therefore, that the financial, climatic and 
other obstacles to large-scale settlement in Guiana 
can be overcome, the mainstream of refugee emigra- 
tion must for some years be directed toward tem- 
perate zone territories so largely inhabited by English- 
speaking peoples, and perhaps toward Palestine and 
its environs. Any implication that settlement in 
Guiana or similar areas can compensate for shutting 
off the flow to Palestine is therefore incorrect. 


Davi H. POPPER 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The Struggle for Religious Freedom in Germany, by A. S. 
Duncan-Jones. London, Gollancz, 1938. 8s. 6d. 


Cross and Swastika, by Arthur Frey. New York, Macmil- 
lan, 1938. $2.50 


These two books supplement each other admirably. The 
first supplies a good chronological account of the clash 
between State and Church in the Third Reich. The sec- 
ond, covering only the Evangelical Church, deals more 
with the issues underlying the struggle and points out 
clearly how the Church in part paved the way for its own 
persecution through its previous temporization with na- 
tionalism. 


The Government of Greater Germany, by James K. Pollock. 
New York, Van Nostrand, 1938. $1.75 
While this book provides a brief, competent survey of 
the present governmental structure of the Third Reich, it 


would have been improved by a more detailed, analytical 
approach. 


The Nazi Primer, translated from the German with a 
preface by Harwood L. Childs. New York, Harpers, 
1938. $1.75 . 

This official handbook used for the education of the 
Hitler Youth provides an enlightening, though not sensa- 
tional, exposition of the Nazi outlook on race and Ger- 
many’s place in the world. 


Arabian Antic, by Ladislas Farago. New York, Sheridan 
House, 1938. $2.50 
An absorbing account of a journalist’s adventures in 
the little-known territories surrounding the Red Sea, 
with particular reference to the Italian effort to replace 
Britain as the foremost European influence in that area. 


An Atlas of Current Affairs, by J. F. Horrabin. New York, 
Knopf, 1939 (fifth edition, revised). $1.50 


Material on the debacle of Austria and Czecho-Slovakia 
brings up to date this useful little annual. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 30, May 19, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND LgsLig BuELL, President; Dorotuy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHELtes Dgan, Edéitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


< 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News L etter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


May 15.—At a time when international relations 
are conditioned more and more by the balance of 
power, it is not surprising that American foreign 
policy should also be influenced by strategical con- 
siderations. Last week Washington observers took 
note of three apparently routine events which seemed 
to emphasize the growing importance of military and 
naval factors. These were: 


1. A Navy Department order of May 10 announcing the 
reorganization of the Cruiser Division of the Battle Force; 


2. Selection of Admiral William D. Leahy to be Gov- 
ernor of Puerto Rico, following his retirement as Chief of 
Naval Operations ; 


3. The visit to Brazil of Brigadier General George C. 
Marshall, recently named to succeed General Malin Craig 
as Chief of Staff of the United States Army. 


The significant feature of the reorganization of 
the Cruiser Division is the transfer of five cruisers 
from the Atlantic to the Pacific. The effect of the 
order will be to dismember the recently created At- 
lantic Squadron and to strengthen the main Battle 
Force by creating three cruiser divisions which will 
be maintained at full fighting strength in the Pacific. 
The transfer is in line with the policy of. the Navy 
Department to keep the United States fleet intact 
as a single operating unit, and not divided into sep- 
arate forces. Coming at this time, only a month 
after the order transferring the fleet to the Pacific, 
it is also interpreted as a strategic move indicating 
the concern with which the Administration is fol- 
lowing Japan’s activities in Southeastern Asia. 

The selection of Admiral Leahy confirms reports 
that the Administration has approved plans for de- 
veloping Puerto Rico as a major defense outpost in 
the Caribbean. The strategic importance of the island 
has been increased by the rapid development of 
air power. Its value was demonstrated during the 
naval maneuvers in the Caribbean, when airplanes 
based on Puerto Rico were assigned an important 
role in the defense of the Panama Canal and the 
interception of the attacking fleet. Congress has al- 
ready voted nearly ten million dollars for a naval 
air base at San Juan, and it is now revealed that ad- 
ditional funds are to be made available for a large 
army air base. Admiral Leahy was appointed by 
President Roosevelt primarily because of his intimate 
knowledge of the new defense program. 


The visit of General Marshall to Brazil is also 


a 


linked with the Western Hemisphere defense pro. 
gram, and considerable significance is attached to 
the forthcoming conversations with General Pedro 
de Goes Monteiro, the Brazilian Chief of Staff. Ac. 
cording to reports in Washington, however, the trip 
had its origin in a move by Germany to invite the 
Chief of Staff of the Brazilian Army to Berlin this 
month. On learning of this German move, Senhor 
Aranha, the Foreign Minister of Brazil, is said to 
have intervened with President Vargas on the ground 
that acceptance of the invitation would give an 
erroneous impression of Brazilian policy. Shortly 


afterwards the invitation to Berlin was declined, | 


with the explanation that General Monteiro was 


compelled to remain in Rio de Janeiro to receive a — 


courtesy call from General Marshall. The Brazilian 
Chief of Staff will return the visit later this summer. 


NEUTRALITY STALEMATE. Meanwhile, in 
Washington, Congress appeared to be approaching a 
stalemate on the issue of neutrality revision. When the 
public hearings came to an end last week, the division 
of opinion in the Senate and House committees was 
almost as great as when the hearings began. None 
of the pending proposals has secured a majority, and 
no acceptable compromise is yet in sight. 


ee 


The only decision reached by the House commit- | 


tee is an informal agreement to “do nothing’ until 
the Senate has reported a bill. In the Senate Com- 
mittee, the Pittman “cash and carry’ resolution has 


a slight edge over other proposals, but is still at | 


least two votes short of the necessary majority. It is 
opposed by Senator Borah and seven or eight advo- 
cates of the existing law, and also by Senator John- 
son and several others who favor repeal of all ex- 
isting legislation and a return to the rules of interna- 
tional law. This combination, while unable to unite 
on any positive formula, is held together by its op- 
position to further Presidential discretion and to all 
embargoes against aggressor nations, and is appat- 
ently strong enough to block the Pittman proposal or 
any similar measure. 

In this situation, no action is likely unless or until 
the Administration comes out publicly with its own 
recommendations. Despite reports that the Adminis- 
tration is considering the extension of its “moral” 
embargo on airplane exports to other war materials 
consigned to Japan, there is no indication so far 
that the State Department is about to intervene 
decisively. 

W. T. STONE 


Nea 


—————— 
eee 


—- eo Or 


