ICE 


uell a 
ary 1. 
ound- 

pro- 
liscuss 
blems 
erican 
> peri- 


1amed 
vill be 
onnel. 
search 


espon- 
of the 
ch De- 


Tracy. 


by pic- 
‘ial and 
ion and 
or each 
-. Tracy 
with re- 
‘nt over 
is state- 
enerally 
cational 


Chicago, 
5.00 


riculture 
56 farm 
929-1933 
te, soils, 
n, nutri- 
affecting 
» second 
he third 


muel N. 
25 

Chicago 
political 
ublic ad- 
veen the 


Nationa! 
AN, Editor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XVIII, No. 2 NOVEMBER 4, 1938 


SHADOW OVER EUROPE, by Shepard Stone 


What new demands is Hitler likely to make? Shadow Over 
Europe shows how the Treaty of Versailles and post-war 
conditions contributed to Hitler’s rise to power, and presents 
a challenging picture of the Nazi dictatorship, its domestic 
policies and its dreams of empire. From it you will learn 
what the Nazi dictatorship means to the average German 
and what it means to the rest of the world. 


Headline Books, No. 15 


25 cents each 


Entered as second: 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


HAS JAPAN WON THE WAR? 


W ITH Canton and Hankow falling to Japanese 

arms in rapid succession during the closing 
weeks of October, the war in China has entered a 
new phase. While in Japan these victories will tend 
to consolidate the position of the army extremists, 
previously strengthened by Hitler’s triumph at 
Munich,* they do not presage the collapse of Chinese 
resistance or the end of the war. In this new phase, 
the Sino-Japanese conflict seems likely to be marked 
by even greater dispersal of Japanese armed forces 
in China’s interior provinces, and by increased 
Japanese pressure on the political and economic in- 
terests of the Western powers in the Far East. 


In the assault on Canton, Japan’s military and 
naval forces carried through the speediest and most 
successful operation of the war. A landing on Bias 
Bay, some 75 miles east of Canton, was successfully 
accomplished on October 12. Supported by other 
columns, which effected landings on the Pearl River, 
this force rapidly overwhelmed Chinese resistance 
and entered Canton on October 21. The reported 
surrender of General Yu Han-mou, commander of 
the Chinese southern forces, has not been confirmed. 
Suspicion of a betrayal on this front will be lessened 
if it should turn out that General Yu is still com- 
manding the Chinese armies which withdrew north- 
ward along the railway. Reports from Chinese mili- 
tary headquarters claim that the withdrawal from 
Canton was deliberately effected in order to draw 
the Japanese forces into the interior. Meanwhile, the 
long-sustained Chinese defense of the Hankow area 
was also breaking down. With the railway cut north 
of Hankow and threatened to the south, the Chinese 
command ordered a general evacuation before re- 
treat was made impossible. The withdrawal was 
effected in good order, without serious losses of men 


***Asiatic Sequel to the Munich Accord,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, October 
21, 1938. 


or munitions, and Japanese vanguards entered Han- 
kow and Wuchang on October 25. 

These events were accompanied by an umprece- 
dented barrage of “peace” propaganda, emanating 
chiefly from Hongkong. A United Press report from 
that city on October 22 went to the length of asserting 
that Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek had flown to 
Hongkong and was suing for peace. The answer to 
such reports was given by the Generalissimo himself 
on October 28, when he stated that “‘the spirit of 
national solidarity” was increasingly evident and 
“this spirit is the foundation of our resistance.” 
Stressing the long period devoted to “development 
of West China, where bases for operations are estab- 
lished,” he declared that China would “prolong re- 
sistance until victory is ours.’ This message, emanat- 
ing from an unidentified military headquarters, was 
addressed to the second session of the National 
People’s Political Assembly—which convened on Oc- 
tober 28 at Chungking, the provisional capital. 

It is already evident that a ‘‘decisive victory” has 
once again eluded Japan’s grasp. As at Hsiichow 
in May, the Chinese central armies have not been 
crushed, and are prepared to continue the struggle. 
For months past, the factory and industrial equip- 
ment of Hankow has been gradually dismantled and 
sent up-river. No important defections have occurred 
in China’s leadership, even among the supposed 
wavering elements. Some ten days before Hankow’s 
fall, General Chu Teh, commander of the Eighth 
(Communist) Army, conferred with Generalissimo 
Chiang Kai-shek and then returned to the northern 
front. The Japanese forces are now compelled to 
fight on widely separated fronts in north, central and 
south China. Their next major objective is the 500- 
mile stretch of railway, still in Chinese possession, 
running from south of Hankow to north of Canton. 
It may be months before this line is completely oc- 


SSS = 
er — 


cupied. Another difficult campaign must be fought 
for control of the western end of the Lunghai Rail- 
way, from Chengchow to Sian. These operations will 
hardly permit release of sufficient Japanese troops 
to cope with the guerrilla forces, which will develop 
their organization and spread their control in the 
regions behind the railway lines. Japanese exploita- 
tion of the conquered areas, consisting of railway 
corridors cut off from the economic life of the hinter- 
land, cannot prove profitable enough to lessen ma- 
terially the economic strain on Japan. Against this 
prospect, the Japanese can set off few specific gains. 
Occupation of Canton and Hankow has partially 
restored the prestige of Japanese arms and will add 
to China’s difficulty in importing munitions. Neither 
of these results, however, seems likely to break down 
Chinese resistance in the near future, as Japan’s War 
Minister has admitted. 

Japan’s economic difficulties, together with the 
weaknesses manifested by the Western democracies, 
have stimulated an increasingly aggressive attack by 
Tokyo on foreign interests in the Far East. A Jap- 
anese spokesman at Shanghai declared on October 26 
that Japan could not accept responsibility for damage 
inflicted on the property of third powers in China. 
Three days later Japan reiterated an earlier protest 
to France against shipment of munitions consigned 
to China via the Haiphong-Yunnan railway through 
Indo-China. This warning is thought to presage Jap- 
anese occupation of Hainan island, a Chinese pos- 
session from which Japan could threaten French 
Indo-China. Leaders of the Tohokai, a nationalist 
“splinter’’ party in the Diet, have demanded virtual 
seizure of the foreign concessions and settlements in 
China. At the same time, Japan is steadily closing 
the ‘open door” in the occupied areas. 


The American note to Japan, dated October 6 and 
released at Washington on October 27, carefully 
enumerated the methods by which Japanese authori- 
ties are squeezing out foreign economic interests. 
Exchange control, tariff alterations, monopolistic 
companies, censorship of mail and telegrams, restric- 
tions on freedom of residence and travel by Ameri- 
can nationals, and other measures are being employed 
by the various puppet régimes to break down foreign 
business rights in China. For the first time, this note 
hints at the possibility of reprisal by pointing out that 
the United States has not discriminated against 
Japanese nationals in its territory through establish- 
ment of “embargoes, import prohibitions, exchange 
controls, preferential restrictions,” and _ similar 
measures. This sentence formulates a legal basis on 
which the United States could move to restrict Jap- 
anese access to the American market, which has been 
furnishing Japan with the bulk of its war supplies. 


T. A. Bisson 


Page Two 


FRANCE FALLS BACK ON ITS EMPIRE 


The thirty-fifth annual congress of the French 
Radical Socialist party, held at Marseilles from Oc- 
tober 26 to 29, has charted the course by which 
France hopes to extricate itself from its international 
and internal difficulties. Admitting the collapse of 
the French system of alliances in Eastern Europe, as 
well as the League of Nations, Premier Daladier, 
Foreign Minister Georges Bonnet and Edouard Her- 
riot joined in advocating a new start in French for- 
eign policy. Daladier envisaged direct agreements 
with Germany and Italy, based on the “sole defense” 
of “national interests” —a suggestion hailed with ap- 
proval by the Nazi press. Stoutly denying that the 
Munich agreement constituted a French defeat, the 
Premier was nevertheless constrained to focus 
France’s creative energies on a new objective—a 
defense of French national security by increased em- 
phasis on the development of the Empire and the 
maintenance of free communications between it and 
the mother country. The new conception of France as 
a maritime, Western European and colonial power, 
rather than a contestant with the Reich for European 
hegemony, was adopted by the Congress, which on 
October 29 passed a resolution urging the government 
“to reject energetically all colonial claims of a terri- 
torial type’’ as far as French colonies are concerned, 
and “‘to limit possible negotiations exclusively to a 
study of fair redistribution of raw materials.’ The 
delegates also sent up a trial balloon regarding pos- 
sible American assistance in the reconstruction of 
Europe, by calling for an international conference to 
remedy the world’s economic disorders. 

To fulfill this abrupt reorientation of French for- 
eign policy, M. Bonnet is already seeking a general 
declaration of friendship from Berlin similar to that 
brought back from Munich by Mr. Chamberlain. 
Such a declaration would reassure Frenchmen who 
fear that the Hitler-Chamberlain accord may prove 
a step toward complete diplomatic isolation of 
France. Germany has, as yet, made no concrete offer 
in response to these advances. 


French insistence on the territorial status guo for 


French colonies may be interpreted as an attempt to | 


stabilize the existing strategic situation of the Third 
Republic with respect to the Reich. Having yielded 
supremacy in Eastern Europe to Adolf Hitler, 


France wants, in return, to continue undisturbed ex- , 
ploitation of its colonial empire. Nazi leaders, how- | 


ever, can see no reason to abandon their colonial 

claims for mere recognition of their European 

position, which the French are now in any case pow- 

erless to oppose. On October 29 General Franz 

Ritter von Epp, leader of the German Colonial 

League, demanded the return of Germany's pre-war 
(Continued on Page 4) 


E 
French 
m Oc- 
which 
ational 
pse of 
ype, as 
ladier, 
d Her- 
ch for- 
ements 
fense”’ 
ith ap- 
vat the 
at, the 
focus 
1ive—a 
ed em- 
nd the 
it and 
ance as 
power, 
ropean 
lich on 
roment 
a terri- 
cerned, 
ly toa 
.’ The 
1g pos- 
‘ion of 
ence to 


ch for- 
general 
to that 
erlain. 
*n who 
y prove 
ion of 
te offer 


quo fot 
smpt to 
> Third 
yielded 
Hitler, 
bed ex- 
s, how- 
colonial 
1ropean 
se pow- 
| Franz 
-olonial 
pre-war 


Washin gton News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 1—During recent months Washington cor- 
respondents have learned to watch the timing as 
well as the content of State Department pronounce- 
ments. As a general rule, they have discovered that 
timing is just as important as content, and often more 
revealing. Last week was no exception. For in mak- 
ing public its strongly worded note to Japan on Oc- 
tober 27, the State Department chose a moment when 
Tokyo was obviously looking for the reaction of the 


Western Powers to the occupation of Canton and the 
fall of Hankow. 


The “Open Door” in China. The note was 
actually delivered by Ambassador Grew in Tokyo 
on October 6, just ten days after Munich and before 
the Japanese drive on Canton had been formally 
launched. But even at that time, Washington knew 
enough of Tokyo's plans to anticipate developments. 
While officials here did not expect Canton to fall as 
quickly as it did, they knew that the launching of 
this southern drive would be followed shortly by a 
campaign to eliminate the remnants of Western in- 
fluence in China. They suspected that this campaign 
would be directed primarily against Britain and 
France—at least in the beginning—and that the 
United States would be approached with greater cau- 
tion. Moreover, Washington clearly suspected that 
Britain and France, being still vulnerable in Europe, 
might be inclined to consider a safe retreat along the 
lines of a Far Eastern Munich settlement. 


The fact that publication of our protest to Tokyo 
followed within twenty-four hours the President's 
radio address to the New York Herald Tribune 
Forum was apparently a coincidence, without special 
significance. There is no evidence, at any rate, that 
Mr. Roosevelt's ringing denunciation of ‘force’ in 
international relations was framed as a base for any 
clear-cut policy in the Far East. His declaration that 
“there can be no peace if national policy adopts as a 
deliberate instrument the threat of war’’ reflected an 
attitude which has been voiced before, but contained 
no hint of a new program. 


The State Department note, on the other hand, 
contained something more than a mere protest 
against repeated violations of the Open Door. By 
citing specific instances in which Japan has dis- 
criminated against American trade in Manchuria 
and the areas now under Japanese domination in 
China, Mr. Hull laid the legal basis for a future bill 


of complaints. He implied that the United States 
does not intend to recognize Japan’s new position in 
Asia. And by calling attention to the “disparity be- 
tween the treatment accorded American nationals 
and their trade” in China, and the equality of treat- 
ment ‘accorded Japanese nationals and their trade” 
in the United States, he plainly hinted at the possi- 
bility of reprisals. 


Trade Reprisals? But just what reprisals are con- 
templated is far from clear. Concerted embargoes 
with other interested powers are scarcely possible if 
Britain is moving toward a ‘Munich accord” with 
Japan. And the fact that the Administration has 
taken no steps to appoint a new Ambassador to 
Moscow hardly indicates a great desire to collaborate 
with the Soviet Union. 

One mild measure of retaliation is possible under 
the Trade Agreements Act. Section 350 of the 
amended Tariff Act authorizes the President to with- 
hold the benefits of the reciprocal trade treaties in 
the case of any country which resorts to “discrimina- 
tory treatment of American trade.” This punitive 
measure has been applied to Germany on the ground 
of discriminatory treatment. Before it could be ap- 
plied to Japan, however, it would be necessary for 
the United States to denounce the general commer- 
cial treaty of 1911 with Japan, which requires six 
months’ advance notice. Moreover, even if the com- 
mercial treaty were abrogated, the reprisal would 
have little effect on Japan, as not more than two per 
cent of Japan’s imports (amounting to only $1,- 
774,000 in the first nine months of 1937) benefit 
from existing trade agreements with other powers. 


Another, more effective, method of retaliation 
might be to extend the “moral embargo” on airplane 
shipments to other vital war materials sold to Japan. 
The monthly reports of the Munitions Control Board 
indicate that Secretary Hull’s recent plea to Ameri- 
can airplane manufacturers has had considerable 
effect. The records show that no licenses for the ex- 
port of military planes have been issued to Japan 
since June, while actual exports dropped from $561,- 
270 in. July to $133,220 in August, and to zero in 
September. The fact that airplane manufacturers are 
operating close to capacity on United States govern- 
ment orders and orders from other foreign countries 
may have something to do with this record of com- 
pliance. In any case, most Washington observers are 
quite certain that something more than a moral in- 


junction will be necessary to cut down exports of 
petroleum, scrap iron and other vital materials im- 
portant to Japan. And so far, no hint of outright 
embargoes has been heard in Washington. 


W. T. STONE 


FRANCE FALLS BACK ON ITS EMPIRE 
(Continued from Page 2) 


colonies “as a whole,” with compensation for any 
territory not retroceded. In view of Britain’s appar- 
ent willingness to ‘consider colonial transfers in 
Africa, and France’s complete dependence on Britain, 
it is difficult to see how Paris can avoid territorial 
concessions. A German establishment in Togoland 
and the Cameroons would jeopardize both the At- 
lantic and the Trans-Saharan imperial communica- 
tions which Premier Daladier intends to defend. 
Italy's sea power in the Mediterranean, moreover— 
particularly if enhanced by a fascist government in 
Spain—would constantly menace the vital routes be- 
tween France and North Africa. Japan’s advance in 
South China has already placed the French Far 
Eastern empire at Tokyo’s mercy. M. Daladier’s 
vision of a strong France, secure in the possession of 
its colonial empire, disregards the insatiable expan- 
sionism of all three totalitarian states. 


Page Four 


In internal affairs, the Radical Socialist congress, 
encouraged by evidence of a swing to the Right in 
the Senatorial elections of October 23, broke 
definitively with the Communist party and sounded 
the formal deathknell of the Popular Front. While 
France debated the merits of a “guided economy,’ 
in which the state would coordinate and stimulate 
industrial production without proceeding to the ex- 
tremes of fascism, the Daladier Cabinet, in a meet- 
ing on October 31, prepared to announce the decrees 
under which domestic economic revival was to be 
achieved. Labor organizations have already expressed 
their unwillingness to bear sacrifices unless capital 
does likewise. Should the Socialists oppose the semi- 
dictatorial powers which the Cabinet will probably 
assume, Daladier may choose to govern with the 
support of a small parliamentary majority composed 
of the Radical Socialists and the Right. Alternatively, 
he might use his strongest weapon—the threat of a 
dissolution of the Chamber and new elections—to 
secure Socialist toleration for his government. In 
either case, it seems unlikely that Left-wing forces in 
France can halt the trend toward authoritarianism 
necessitated by the diplomatic situation in Europe. 


Davip H. Popper 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Master Kung, by Carl Crow. 
Brothers, 1938. $3.50 


This bold recreation of the life and times of Confucius 
seeks to clothe the great Chinese sage, normally thought 
of as lifeless and unattractive, with flesh and blood. Where 
more authentic source materials are lacking, the author 
has chosen liberally from differing versions of episodes in 
Confucius’ career. While the result may not wholly con- 
form to latest Chinese scholarship, it successfully achieves 
its main purpose of making Confucius a living and like- 
able personality. The book is handsomely illustrated by 
some fifty traditional Chinese prints depicting various 
incidents in Master Kung’s life. 


New York, Harper & 


Force or Reason: Issues of the Twentieth Century, by 
Hans Kohn. Cambridge, Mass.. Harvard University 
Press, 1937. $1.50 


A distinguished scholar depicts the antithesis between 
the anti-intellectual cult of totalitarian force, and the ra- 
tionalistic, essentially democratic doctrine of liberalism. 
Professor Kohn urges us to meet the challenge of dictator- 
ship by striving for a more perfect social order, on an in- 
ternational basis, which will not do violence to man’s 
critical faculties or his social conscience. 


The March of a Nation, by Harold G. Cardozo. New York, 
Robert M. McBride & Co., 1937. $2.75 


The correspondent of the London Daily Mail, an ardent 
partisan of the Franco movement, reports the Insurgent 
campaigns during the first year of the Spanish war. 


The British Empire, by Charles F. Mullett. New York, 
Henry Holt, 1938. $5.00 


An historical survey of the Empire, very useful for 
textbook and reference purposes. 


The War Against the West, by Aurel Kolnai. New York, 

Viking, 1938. $4.00 

An exhaustive analysis of National Socialism, based 
upon the works of its leading publicists in recent years. 
The author contends that the Nazi program, which has 
put into practice the worst elements of pre-war German 
philosophy, threatens civilization and Christianity in the 
Western World. 


Observation in Russia, by Sidney I. Luck. New York, 
Macmillan, 1938. $2.50 
An interesting day-to-day diary by a member of the 
British Eclipse Expedition which went to Siberia in 1936 
to observe the total eclipse of the sun. 


I Know These Dictators, by G. Ward Price. New York, 
Henry Holt, 1938. $3.00 
It is difficult to determine whether this glorification of 
Hitler and Mussolini by a famous British newspaper cor- 
respondent is merely naive or downright insincere. 


Australia Advances, by David M. Dow. New York, Funk 
and Wagnalls, 1938. $2.00 
An informal and entertaining account of almost every 
aspect of Australian life. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 2, No...4per 4, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationa! 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lustre BUELL, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


eB 81 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


An 


Nov 


the 

mor 
pac 
Thi 
Lor 
intc 
tion 


