Entered as 2nd class matter 


Ceneral Lthearne AUG 1 1944 
PERIODICAL ee ee | 
_ AL oF Univarstts -.¢ 
1 ey OF MNCL a eee 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN: 


ne ofhcial 


| its ways, 


-American 
were en- 
20 Perén, 
ident and, 
[inister of 
nger is an 
ile Perén 
nited Na- 
licy and 
ffairs. On 
speech at 
ssequentiy| 
> appoint 
er. Peluffo 
Games at 
is led the 
uim from 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


A fourth | 
nd means 
tion is the 
nistration, 
Policy, to 
ondemned 
f another 
der Secre- 
pnition of 
changes in 
it inflame 
n June 25 
and rad 
’ remarks. | 
ng at the; 
ocates of 
Ss are per- 
President 


. 


BOLLES 
NDS 


Vou. XXIII, No. 41 


JULY 28, 1944 


NAZI ARMY PURGE MAY EASE ALLIES’ POSTWAR TASK IN GERMANY 


y HE dramatic series of events unleashed by the 

attempted assassination of Hitler on July 19, 
and the Cabinet changes in Tokyo that followed 
American occupation of Saipan, at moments tended 
to overshadow the tempestuous Democratic party 
convention of July 19-21. The rigid censorship im- 
posed on news from Germany makes it difficult to 
estimate the events of the past bloody week with any 
degree of accuracy. It has long been known that there 
was a bitter feud between the General Staff of the 
German Army and Hitler’s Elite Guard or SS, sworn 
to loyalty to the Fuehrer. And it had been often pre- 
dicted that, when any fissure appeared in the out- 
wardly ironclad home front, it would be caused by 
a revolt of the Army against Hitler—for one reason 
above others because the armed forces alone have the 
necessary weapons at their disposal. 


TERROR COMES FULL CIRCLE. Hitler’s own 
impassioned speech of July 20, and the statements of 
Goering and others, would indicate that a group of 
high officers—belonging apparently to the Junker 
group whom the Fuehrer derided as “nobility”— 
attempted to wrest power from the Nazis. But it 
looks more and more as if this coup was connected 
with the determined drive of Heinrich Himmler, 
dreaded head of the Gestapo and the SS, to wrest 
military power from the General Staff. On the eve 
of the attempt on Hitler’s life it had been reported 
from Stockholm—presumably via German sources— 
that Himmler would soon be appointed virtual dic- 
tator of Germany, supervening the authority of the 
Army. This plan, which may have crystallized the op- 
position of rebel officers, could be carried out with 
all the greater ease once Hitler, following the July 19 
coup, announced the need to “‘restore order’ in Ger- 


| many. The coup also gave him an opportunity to rally 


the Germans to a supreme effort against the United 
Nations. Today the terror that had been turned full 
blast in the early years of Nazi rule against Jews and 


so-called pacifists, socialists and communists and, 
later, after the outbreak of war, against movements 
of resistance in all conquered ‘countries, is being 
wreaked on the German people. No Wagnerian 
opera could match this grim tale of victims avenged 
by the very methods used to destroy them. The Army 
—last stronghold of what may have been regarded as 
tradition and sanity in Germany—is now being bat- 
tered down by the Nazis, in part, perhaps, because 
some of the high officers would not acquiesce in the 
“blood bath” methods the Nazis threaten to use 
throughout Europe. 


TWILIGHT OF GENERAL STAFF? From the 
point of view of the Allies—inhumane as this may 
sound—there is a distinct advantage in having the 
Nazis themselves blame the revolt squarely on Army 
officers (not on weak-kneed “socialists” or “liberals” 
as Hitler had done before 1933) ; and in having them 
dispose of members of the General Staff and other 
high officers. Had these officers succeeded in their at- 
tack on Hitler, this would not necessarily have 
proved a propitious turn of events for the United 
Nations. For they would probably have sued for 
peace, even on terms of “unconditional surrender,” 
instead of fighting to what they consider a hopeless 
bitter end, so as to salvage the very considerable 
miiltary and economic strength still possessed by 
Germany for a future trial of arms. In this respect 
the interview given by Lieutenant General Edmund 
Hoffmeister, a German prisoner in Moscow, is il- 
luminating. He did not express any regret for the 
havoc and suffering wrought by the German Army 
from end to end of Europe. What he regretted— 
analyzing them with scientific precision—were the 
strategic mistakes made by the Nazis in Russia, mis- 
stakes which, presumably, he and his associates, if 
given another chance, would strive on some future 
occasion to correct. The replacement of Nazi leaders 
by Army officers would introduce a certain element 


eat 


meow o- 
ee ° 


= 


ory 
Ne it ee. 


-- 7 -eecaup C-e- - 8 eee oct —-< 
* , 


OR tae i 8 


ME serane S928 
e- 


[a 


of rationalism into the German situation—but would 
not eliminate the danger of German militarism. 
True, some German officers proved less brutal than 
Nazi leaders in conquered countries. But they were 
either unwilling or unable to prevent acts which 
did not conform with their military code — and 
thus became accomplices of the Nazis. If, by an 
ironic twist of fate, Hitler should now exterminate 
the very people who from the start supported his 
rise to power because it offered hope of German 
remilitarization and expansion, that might take off 
our hands the difficult problem of what to do with 
the German General Staff after defeat of the Reich. 

It must be hoped that, as events move rapidly to 
a climax in Europe, the United Nations have elab- 
orated some specific plans about the treatment of 
Germany. So fat only the most meager intimations 
have trickled into the press concerning the work of 
the European Advisory Commission in London, in 
which representatives of the United States, Britain 
and Russia have been discussing the future of Ger- 
many—tegrettably without the official assistance of 
many of the countries that have suffered most from 
German conquest, notably France. The Russians have 
the advantage over Britain and the United States in 
that they have encouraged the formation in Moscow 
of the Free German Committee, among whose mem- 
bers are German Army officers, who in this crisis 
have broadcast urgent appeals to the German 
people to overthrow Hitler. But obviously it will not 
be enough to eliminate the Nazis, or even to find an 
alternative government which would accept uncon- 
ditional surrender. The most important step to pre- 
vent the resurgence of a militant Germany is the 
formation of a really strong and effective interna- 
tional organization that could assure the Germans 
an opportunity to live at peace with their neighbors, 


‘ but would check any attempt by them to resume a 


career of conquest. 

DEMOCRATS STRESS WORLD ORGANIZA- 
TION. The need for a strong international organ- 
ization is stressed by the Democratic party platform 
adopted on July 20 in somewhat more precise terms 
than by the Republicans. Historically, the Democrats 
have only a tenuous justification for their claim that 
the Democratic administration ‘awakened the na- 
tion, in time, to the dangers that threatened its very 
existence,” and “succeeded in building, in time, the 


Page Two 


a 
——e 


best-trained and equipped Army in the world, the} 


most powerful Navy in the world, the greatest Air 
Force in the world, and the largest merchant marine 
in the world.” One might well ask—"‘in time’’ for 
what? In time to witness the conquest of most of 
Europe by Germany and most of Asia by Japan? Just 
as the Democrats cannot claim a monopoly of clair. 
voyance about foreign policy before 1939, neither can 
they claim a monopoly of the vast effort that has 
since gone into the building of the nation’s armed 
forces—an effort in which all citizens, irrespective of 
party labels, have loyally participated. 

In looking to the future, the Democratic party 
platform adopts for the most part the wording of 
President Roosevelt's statement of June 15.* It 


——— 


minol 
aid W 
Bank 
devas 
the ec 


favors the establishment of an international organ- 
ization “based on the principle of the sovereign 
equality of all peace-loving States, open to member- 
ship by all such States, large and small, for the pre. 
vention of aggression and the maintenance of inter- 
national peace and security.” Such an organization, 
it declares, “must be endowed with power to employ 
armed forces”—as contrasted with the Republican 
phrase “peace forces’”—‘‘when necessary to prevent 
aggression and preserve peace.” The party pledges 
itself “to make all necessary and effective agreements 
and arrangements through which the nations would 
maintain adequate forces to meet the needs of pre- 
venting war and of making impossible the prepara- 
tion for war and which would have such forces avail- 
able for joint action when necessary.” 

The Democrats have found it as impossible as the 
Republicans to explain how an organization of sov- 
ereign nations will be able to take measures—such 
as the joint use of armed forces—which to many 
people may appear as an impaitment of sovereignty. 
Much educational spadework remains to be done by 
both major political parties on problems of world 
organization—and some of it will doubtless be done 
during the forthcoming campaign in answer to 
searching questions now being asked by the voters. 
And meanwhile United States proposals for world 
organization will be discussed in Washington during 
coming weeks with representatives of Britain, Russia 
and China. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


***Republican Platform Shows Contradictions on Foreign Policy,’’ Foreign 
Policy Bulletin, July 7, 1944. 


BRETTON WOODS AGREEMENTS FACE CONGRESSIONAL TEST 


The proposals for a Stabilization Fund and an 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Develop- 
ment which have come from the Monetary Confer- 
ence concluded at Bretton Woods on July 23 are the 
first plans for permanent post-war agencies to be 
sponsored by the United Nations. Not since the ill- 
fated London Economic Conference of 1933 have so 
many nations met to discuss such broad economic 


and firiancial problems. The agreements which the 
delegates have signed—without recommendations— 
will now be presented to their respective govern- 
ments for final action. The provisions for the Stabil- 
ization Fund and the International Bank will be 
closely scrutinized both from the point of view of 
the economic objectives of these two institutions, and 
of the character and structure of the post-war organ 


“Li 
Secret 
crease 
tions 
been 
duce 
consu 
Unite 
natio 
offset 
main 
an ac 
mark 
t chan, 
recog 
oblig 
worl 


Tl 
ity 2 
critic 

) sche 
| the s 
natic 
deal: 
that 
polit 
| dem 
tate 
reco 
the 

lem: 
spre 
/ Pres 
' lack 
tion 


C 
criti 
FORI 

? Head 
scon 
one 


= 


———__, 


—$—$—$<$<—— 


orld, 
atest Air 
it marine 


ime”’ for | 
most of 


an? Just 
of clair. 
ither can 
that has 
'S armed 
ective of 


iC party 
tding of 
15.* ff 
1 organ- 
overeign 
member- 
the pre- 
of inter- 
nization, 
» employ 
publican 
prevent 
pledges 
reements 
is would 
| of pre 
prepara- 
es avail 


le as the 
| of sov- 
2s—such 
fo many 
ereignty. 
done by 
f world 
be done 
swer to 
> voters. 


rr world | 


n during 
1, Russia 


DEAN 


‘y,'’ Foreign 


hich the 
ations— 
govern- 
e Stabil- 
will be 
view of 
ons, and 


. organ- 


= 


# zation the United Nations intend to establish. 


UNITED NATIONS PROGRAM. In his final 
message to the conference on July 22 Secretary Mor- 

thau summarized the purpose of the program 
gutlined at Bretton Woods. He indicated that a re- 
vival of international trade is indispensable if full 
employment is to be achieved. The Fund would pro- 
yide a reasonably stable standard of international 
exchange, and nations would be able to avoid the 
fuinous trade tactics of the pre-war years. Financial 
aid would be made available through the proposed 
Bank both for reconstruction needs in countries 
devastated by the war and for the development of 
the economic resources of other nations. 


“Long-term funds must be made available,” the 
Secretary said, “to promote sound industry and in- 
birease industrial and agricultural production in na- 
tions whose economic potentialities have not yet 
been developed. . . . They must be enabled to pro- 
duce and sell if they are to be able to purchase and 
consume.’ This program implies the necessity for the 


| United States to buy as well as sell goods in the inter- 


'national market, for it is essential that this country 
offset its export surpluses by imports in Order to 
maintain a regular outflow of capital—in other words 
an adequate supply of dollars on the world money 
market. Implicit in this reasoning are the need for 
meenees in the tariff policy of this country and the 
fecognition that we must undertake major lending 
obligations in accordance with our position as the 
world’s greatest creditor nation. 


The Bretton Woods proposals for monetary stabil- 
ity and international loans have occasioned much 
criticism. The most telling objection is that the 
hemes agreed upon by the conference presuppose 
the solution of broader problems in the field of inter- 
national trade. Many of these have not, in fact, been 
dealt with. There is little evidence in this country 
that a major revision of our tariff policy would be 
politically feasible at this time. In Britain, public 
demand for a policy of full employment may necessi- 
late external fiscal policies that will be difficult to 
feconcile with the exchange requirements outlined in 
the Stabilization Fund. -Anglo-American trade prob- 
lems are particularly important because of the wide- 
spread influence of the dollar-sterling relationship. 
j Press reports from the meetings were significantly 
lacking in any evidence that these fundamental ques- 
tions had been discussed by the conference. 


CONGRESSIONAL ACTION NEEDED. No 
ttiticism of the conference, however, can minimize 


Page Three 


the achievement of the technical experts at Bretton 
Woods, representing more than forty nations. But 
there is every indication that serious objections to 
the program will be raised, at least in the United 
States Congress, and possibly in the British Parlia- 
ment—although a debate on the Stabilization Fund 
was held in both the House of Lords and in the Com- 
mons previous to the Bretton Woods meeting. Dur- 
ing the conference itself Senator Robert Taft, Re- 
publican of Ohio, stated tha* in his opinion no agree- 
ment for an international monetary fund on the 
terms discussed at Bretton Woods would be ap- 
proved by either the Senate or the House. Appre- 
hension on this score had already been heard in 
London, during the House of Lords debate on May 
23 when Lord Perry, designating the United States 
as the father of the Fund, feared that “when it is ac- 
cepted,” he might “renounce his offspring” as was 
done in the case of the League of Nations. 


Congressional action on the Bretton Woods agree- 
ments will take time, if for no other reason than that 
an appropriation of nearly $6,000,000,000 will be 
involved. The United States quota for the proposed 
Stabilization Fund is $2,750,000,000, and for the 
proposed Bank, $3,175,000,000. Delay will also arise 
because of the technical nature of the proposed in- 
stitutions, for adequate explanations will have to be 
furnished by government officials to the country at 
large as well as to Congressional committees, 


CRUCIAL POSITION OF U.S. The Stabilization 
Fund has generated more opposition than the Bank, 
largely due to the fact that short-term lending for ” 
commercial purposes—so intimately bound up with 
fluctuations in the rate of exchange between different - 
currencies—appears more complicated than long- 
term capital investments, even though the latter be 
foreign investments. In both cases the size of the 


‘United States quotas has been criticized; and much 


of the opposition will eventually center on the charge 
that the two schemes have for their purpose the dis- 
tribution abroad of unlimited American capital. 


It is to be hoped, however, that discussion of the 
Fund and Bank will be conducted objectively. The 
United States occupies a crucial position in the de- 
velopment of world economic affairs in the decades 
immediately ahead, and its action on the Bretton 
Woods plans will be watched eagerly by every na- 
tion, since it will indicate the extent to which we are 
willing to cooperate in any wider economic or politi- 
cal organization envisaged by the United Nations. 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN: Vol. XXIII, No. 41, Jury 28, 1944. 


Published 


weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


@ Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHELEs Dean, Editor. Encered as 


scond-class matter December 2, 
ome month for change of address on membership publications. 


Bis: 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


zd (a 
- SS = ~ 
=. St Otome died 


e-e- 


Washington News Letter | 


sities, 


= 
= ~ =. eam 

apne se == 

“2° — Se o ee Oe SOF = oe 


On June 28, at the height of the battle to wrest 
Saipan from the eg Secretary of the Navy 
James Forrestal predicted that Allied forces before 
long would invade the Netherlands Indies, the Phil- 
ippines and Japan itself. The speed with which this 
prediction can be fulfilled, as well as the character 
of future Allied strategy in the Pacific War, will de- 
pend in some degree on the military policy of the 
new Japanese Cabinet formed on July 22. Officials 
in Washington regard the change in government as 
an attempt to improve the conduct of the war and, 
if possible, enhance Japan’s prospects for victory. 

JAPAN REMAINS HOPEFUL. Japanese leaders 
can still find sound reasons for believing in the pos- 
sibility of winning the war or, at least, of forcing the 
Allies to accept a compromise. Their forces, strongly 
entrenched in China along the Yellow Sea, the Sea 
of Japan and the East China Sea, form a shield 
against attack from the Asiatic mainland. The near- 
est Allied sea forces are more than 1,000 miles south 
and west of the Japanese archipelago. Japan’s eco- 


nomic strength is sufficient for many, although not . 


all, its war needs. The United States and Britain, 
however, do not agree that Japanese leaders have any 
solid grounds for optimism. The invasion of Guam 
on July 20 gave the Allies further confidence in their 
prospects for victory and Japan’s unconditional sur- 
render. 

The Cabinet change came as a result of the fall of 
Saipan on July 10, the most disturbing blow to mil- 
itary security and political equanimity that Japan has 
suffered during the war. Capture of Saipan gave the 
Allied forces a stronghold 1,439 miles from Tokyo 
which is usable as a bombing base, and demonstrated 
the weakness of the policy adopted by Japan in Feb- 
ruary, according to which the War and Navy Min- 
isters were their own Chiefs of Staff. The first reper- 
cussion of Saipan was the resignation on July 18 of 
General Hideki Tojo, Army Chief of Staff. The fol- 
lowing day Tojo retired as War Minister, and also as 
Prime Minister, a post he had held since October 17, 
1941. Aged 60, he was put on the retired list, but it 
is possible that he may later return to an important 
position. Field Marshal General Sugiyama, whom 
Tojo dismissed last February as Chief of Staff, is in- 
cluded in the new Cabinet as War Minister. 

An important objective of the Cabinet change was 
to arouse the Japanese people to greater effort in 
support of the war. Tojo’s extreme militarist attitude 
in dealing with civilian problems seems to have 


FOR VICTORY °* 


TOKYO CABINET CHANGE DESIGNED TO MEND ARMY-NAVY RIFT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


caused irritation to those not in uniform. As Goy. 
ernor-General of Korea, General Kuniaki Koiso, the 
new Prime Minister, has been following a policy of 
popular conciliation toward the Koreans, who last 
spring resisted Japanese efforts to mobilize them for 
labor duty. Aged 64, he graduated from the military 
academy in 1901. He was Overseas Minister in the 
Cabinet of Admiral Mitsumasa Yonai, and Prime 


Minister from January to July 1940. Like Tojo, he} You 


belonged to the Kwantung Army, whose war fervor 
found first expression in the Manchurian war in| 
1931. The officers of the Kwantung Army at one 
time advocated war with Russia. 


MORE POWER TO NAVY. The most important 


new appointment is that of Navy Minister Admiral] ™ 4 
Yonai as deputy Prime Minister, even though Domei, iat 
official Japanese news agency, describes it as ‘tem petw 
porary.” Allied observers have reason to believe the| ““' 


Navy has been dissatisfied with its subordinate role 
under Tojo in making policy decisions. To placate 
the Navy, Emperor Hirohito on July 20 took what 
is probably a unique step in Japanese political his 
tory. He requested two men—Yonai and Koiso—in- 
stead of one man, as is customary, to set up a suc 
cessor government to Tojo’s. Apparently disturbed 
by its differences with the Army, the Navy employed 
faltering tactics at Saipan, lost 2 carriers, 2 tankers, 
and a destroyer, and failed to block the progress of 
the United States attack. Indications of Yonai’s com 
cept of the Navy’s role in the future conduct of the 
war probably will not come until after the battle for 
Guam. Yonai was Commander-in-Chief of the Jap 
anese fleet from 1935 to 1936 and Minister of the 
Navy from 1937 to 1939. 


CABINET POST FOR INDUSTRIALIST. The, 
Koiso government is, in effect, a National Unity Cab- 
inet. The Prime Minister gave the important post of 
Minister of Munitions to the industrialist Ginjito 
Fujiwara. The Ministry of Munitions is the Japanese 
equivalent of our War Production Board. President 
of the Oji Paper Company, Fujiwara has extensive | 


interests in electrical power plants and is associated ‘ 


with the Mitsui combine. One of the foremost indus 


at 
to 


trial problems for Japan is the manufacture of cargo | «,. 


and transport ships. The Japanese government f€ | ,, 


cently admitted to the public on the radio that its 


1 


program for building wooden ships has fallen short) yj, 


of expectations. 


BLaiR BOLLES 


