General Library 
University of Michigern 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


st of the! 
ne of the 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 


irma and 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 

thods oft -XxiIL, No. bi 

ns welll , No. OctToBEr 6, 1944 
» division 

the Com DE-INDUSTRIALIZATION OF GERMANY—A DEFEATIST POLICY 

nues, HEN Mek. Churchill, in his address of Septem- saving of lives. But, in the long run, such surrender 
a ar ; ber 28 to the House of Commons, warned that would have been bought at a high cost, for it might 


fictory in Europe might be delayed until 1945, he 
“Niwas merely confirming the conclusion already reached 
iby the public when Allied forces did not succeed in 
Heveloping an operation intended to turn the Sieg- 
Mtied Line. We are now entering the most critical 
Wphase of the critical years in which it is our fate to 
lve—the phase which will decide not merely whether 
we can achieve military victory over Germany, but 
so moral victory over the ideas and practices of 
SiNazism. That is why it is imperative that the Allies 
atgdo everything in their power not only to encourage 
Mamong the liberated peoples a belief in democracy, 


lurley ara 
n Chinese} This question cannot be answered with any more 


Europe may be expected to end, and for the same 
ho on higteason. Because no one—either German or non-Ger- 
+ he hadylian—knows with any degree of certainty how non- 
-on pla fimilitary factors such as fatigue, disgust, despair or 
tries. Thejmope for improvement if war ceased, may operate on 
gamasses of people who for nearly twelve years have 
rliest po fiad no opportunity to express themselves freely. No 
ment is @pesponsible person has the right to be dogmatic on 
agyuis subject. Certain practical considerations, how- 
never, can be weighed in discussing our treatment of 
MGermany, which has aroused a serious, but legiti- 
Mmate, difference of Opinion both in the Roosevelt 
fbinet and in the European Advisory Commission 
m London. 


, politic 
ization 0h} WHAT DOES UNCONDITIONAL SURREN- 
prospectDER MEAN? The Allies are right to maintain un- 
vorld. @& thanged their position that the Germans must accept 
Bouts a tnconditional surrender. It is conceivable that, if we 

cepted German surrender on certain conditions, we 
N DS Whight obtain it at an earlier date, with resulting 


hasten the coming of other conflicts, with eventual 
loss of life greater than that required to win a de- 
cisive admission of defeat from the Germans. Any 
conditions we might formulate before the Germans 
lay down their arms might prove unfulfillable once 
we learn the existing state of things in Germany. 
Then our failure to fulfill such conditions would 
furnish dissatisfied Germans with a powerful weapon 
of propaganda—just as the alleged nonfulfillment of 
certain of President Wilson’s Fourteen Points helped 
Hitler to bolster his case. 


But the term “unconditional surrender” presum- 
ably applies solely to the military termination of hos- 
tilities. Once surrender has taken place, our treatment 
of Germany—whether “hard” or “‘soft’”—will be dic- 
tated by many considerations other than those that 
are purely military. On this point some confusion 
appears to exist in the minds of certain United Na- 
tions spokesmen, who give the impression that the 
necessarily unyielding character of military surrender 
will become part and parcel of the terms then im- 
posed on Germany. If we intend to influence the 
Germans to accept unconditional surrender, it would 
seem essential, as a matter of psychological warfare, 
to draw a distinction between the military stage and 
that which will set in once the Germans have laid 
down their arms. 

This distinction should be made, whatever may be 
our estimate of conditions within Germany. The 
question is often debated whether there are two Ger- 
manys. Most likely there are 57 varieties of Germans 
—all swayed by different personal likes and dislikes. 
What concerns us is that the 57 varieties seemed 
finally to be united on the same program of national 
military expansion. We shall get nowhere trying to 
figure out the percentage of anti-Nazis we may find 
when Hitler is overthrown. The Gestapo may know 


— = 


—but its job, obviously, is to destroy those who can 
be so classified, and the more we try to indentify 
publicly the Germans who are anti-Nazi, the more 
we help the Gestapo, and thus weaken the very 
elements in Germany who might eventually be help- 
ful to the United Nations. Our program toward Ger- 
many should be planned in such a way as to apply 
to any kind of Germany that may emerge out of the 
war—whether 100 per cent pro- or 100 per cent anti- 
Nazi. 

If the United Nations could reach agreement 
among themselves on some of the fundamental is- 
sues now under debate, many of the questions con- 
cerning Germany could be viewed, and decided, in 
clearer perspective. It has been said on several occa- 
sions during this war that the world cannot survive 
half-slave and half-free. Neither can we expect, over 
the long haul, to have one kind of world in Germany, 
and another outside. If we believe German militar- 
ism can be destroyed by breaking up Junker estates 
in East Prussia, can we oppose similar measures, let 
us say in Poland or Hungary? If we think that what 
Germany needs is a thoroughgoing revolution that 
would sweep out the Junkers and the big industrial- 
ists who supported Hitler, can we oppose or fear far- 
reaching social and economic changes in countries 
now fighting on our side against Fascism and Na- 
zism? And, conversely, if we fear revolutions in lib- 
erated countries, shall we be equally fearful of in- 
ternal changes in Germany? 

INDUSTRY ALONE DOES NOT CAUSE 
WAR. Our own inner indecision is strikingly re- 
flected in the proposals made concerning Germany's 
economic future. Those who advocate the destruction 
of German industry and the transformation of Ger- 
many into a purely agricultural community apparent- 
ly assume that wars start because certain nations 
have the industrial wherewithal to wage war. This 
illusion is even more dangerous than the illusion of 
the inter-war years that the mere sinking of fleets 
after the Washington Conference of 1921 or the 
signing of the Kellogg-Briand pact would bring 
about eternal peace. If the assumption about the mil- 
itary dangers of industry is correct, then we should 
proceed to destroy all industry everywhere. 

Such an assumption reveals unmitigated defeatism 


SSS SSS 


Christmas Gifts... 


SERVICE MEN and WOMEN 
F.P.A. MEMBERSHIP 


Special offer for men and women in the armed 
services which includes the weekly Foreign Policy 
Bulletin and six issues of the Headline Series. 


Send your gift orders promptly to the Foreign Policy 
- Association, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16. 


$3.00 


Page Two — 


concerning the capacity of human beings to control 
industrial civilization. Instead of destroying Ger 
man industry, should we not ask ourselves whethe; 
it can be used constructively if it is controlled by 
democratic committees of managers, technicians and 
workers, as proposed for France? This would not pre 
vent the United Nations from imposing controls og 
certain key industries in Germany which are primar. 
ily useful for war—such as synthetic oil, airplanes 
aluminum ingots, and so on. To make a clean sw 
of all German industry would be to deprive millions 
of Germans of the opportunity to make a livelihood 
We may think this serves the Germans right and is 
no concern of ours. But it would be, if millions of 
unemployed Germans produced a social explosiog 
in Europe. The only reason for taking all indust 
from Germany might be doubt as to the United Na 
tions’ capacity to prevent resurgence of German mili 
tarism. But if such doubt exists now, before the war 
is over, what assurance is there that the United Na 
tions will act in unison to de-industrialize Germany? 
The German menace in 1939 was not in the fa¢ 
tories of Germany, but in the minds of Germans whg 
saw profit and prestige in militarism and expansion, 
and in the indifference of the Western powers to 
the political implications of Nazism. The fact that 
the Germans behaved with a bestiality and a cunning 
unequaled in modern history should not blind us to 
the fact that, at another time, other peoples may be 
swayed by similar considerations to resort to waf 
That is why it is so urgently important to distinguish 
clearly between two tasks which, if confused, will 
both remain unaccomplished. One task is to make the 
Germans aware of their responsibility for the act 
of terror and brutality perpetrated by them, or if 
their name, during this war. For this task many mea 
ures are appropriate: among them are Allied military 
occupation of Germany, its duration to be determined 
by the degree of German collaboration with the Ak 
lies and by the international situation in general; 
United Nations direction of German industries, with 
a view to assuring the rehabilitation of liberated 
countries; elimination or control of certain industries 
used primarily for war, as indicated above; complete 
disarmament; punishment of individuals who of 
dered or condoned acts of brutality. But even if all 
these measures are strictly applied over a long period 
of time, we shall have only scratched the surface of 


the problem of security in Europe unless we address 
ourselves to the second task: and that is the creatioa 
of a system of international collaboration, based of 
continuous consultation and backed by the possibility 
of prompt resort to force if necessary, through which 
we might gradually—and, we must expect, with 
many setbacks—alleviate the political, economic and 
social conflicts and frictions that lead to war. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


pc 
ba 


Ez 
| m 
FC 
He 


sec 


on 


oe 


to controle 


ying Ger 
s whether 
trolled by 
icians and 
d not pre 
ntrols og 
re primar 
airplanes, 


-an SWe@D 


e millions} 


ivelihood, 
rht and 
illions it 
explosion} 
| industry 
nited Na 
man milf 
e the wap 
nited Nae 
sermany/ 
1 the fag 
nans whg 
xpansion, 
owers th 
fact that 
2 cunning 
ind us to 
s may od 
. to wall 
istinguish 
sed, will 
make the} 
the act 
m, or if 
ny meas 
1 military 
‘termined 
h the Ak 
general} 
ries, with 
liberated 
industiiy 
completé 
who of 
yen if all 
ng period: 
urface of 
e address 
> creation 
based on | 
ossibility 
gh which 
ect, with 
omic and 
f. 


DEAN 


The danger of widespread drug addiction among 
the war-shocked populations of Europe is emphasized 


by a recent article in the British medical journal 


Lancet, which warns doctors against indiscriminate 
rescription of sedatives to patients who have been 


bombed out, as well as against giving “such instruc- 
'tions as would enable the 


patients to take drugs 
whenever they feel they need it.’’ The need of seda- 
tives for civilian sufferers has increased as civilian 
bombing spreads over ever-widening areas. Military 
casualties also have become accustomed to the relief 
of morphine. 


THREE STAGES OF CONTROL. The Perma- 
nent Central Opiumi Board, established by treaties 
negotiated in Geneva in 1925 and 1931, called at- 
tention to this problem in liberated countries at its 
meeting in London on April 27, 1944, and reiterated 
this warning at its July meeting held under the rain 
of robot bombs which punctuated its recommenda- 
tions. The Board sees three stages for which pro- 
vision will be necessary. During the first stage, mili- 
tary occupation, all drugs in civilian hands should 
be reported and placed under control. Relief organ- 
izations will require licenses for import for civilian 
use; such supplies will be issued only on medical 
prescriptions checked by periodic reports. All fac- 
tories will be controlled and no new ones licensed 
except upon proof of need. 


Control in the second and third stages should de- 
velop out of measures taken during military occupa- 
tion, and lead to a system of national and interna- 
tional control, conforming to the 1925 and 1931 con- 
ventions. H. J. Anslinger, Commissioner of Nar- 
cotics, and Herbert L. May, Vice President of the 
P.C.O.B., member of the Foreign Policy Association 
Opium Research Committee, have already prepared 
for this stage through lectures at the University of 
Virginia and at Columbia to Army and Navy officers 
training as administrators for liberated areas both in 
Europe and in the Pacific. Directives have been is- 
sued for military commanders to be applied imme- 
diately on occupation. Experienced narcotic officers 
have been commissioned and assigned to military 
forces. Recently one of these Army officers has been 
coordinating plans in London with British military 
authorities, using the suggestions in the April re- 
port of the Permanent Central Opium Board as a 
basis for the immediate administrative controls in 
European \iberated areas. The importance of similar 


Page Three 


WAR ACCENTUATES OPIUM DANGER 


and Far East was emphasized at the July meeting 
of the Board. 


SCOPE OF DANGER. International action is the 
only answer to a danger which ignores national 
boundaries. Military authorities must now take their 
place in the international control machinery, Amer- 
ican public opinion should be informed as to the 
action currently taken in Italy, for instance, and in 
North Africa. It would also be useful to know what 
is being done to prevent the spread of drug addiction 
among our own troops, and to control the illicit 
traffic into the American market which, because of 
its high prices, is the ultimate goal of all large 
smuggling rings. 

In June 1944 the Swedish international police 
radio broadcast the theft in Belgium of enough mor- 
phine and codeine to supply the legitimate medical 
needs of that entire country for a year. The retail 
value of the stolen narcotics at present prices in the 
illicit market in the United States approximates 
$17,000,000. A theft on such a scale proves not only 
the venality of the “incorruptible Nazi officials,” but 
indicates that a well-organized, well-financed smug- 
gling group is still functioning. The purchase and 
distribution of such a quantity of narcotics could not 
be handled by the methods of the retail drug peddler. 
This proves the necessity for immediate action by 
the military authorities on the lines recommended 
by the Board. 

The aroused interest of the American public is the 
best insurance that the peril will be recognized and 
measures, necessarily international in scope, taken to 
keep this control machinery functioning during the 
war as successfully as it has in peace. 


HELEN HOWELL MOORHEAD 


ANNUAL FORUM 

In addition to the speakers announced for the all- 
day F.P.A. Forum to be held on Saturday, October 
7, at The Waldorf-Astoria on the theme “Program 
for Security,” there will be a showing at two o'clock 
of the film, “What To Do With Germany,” through 
the courtesy of THE MARCH OF TIME. Dr. Conant 
will speak on “The Effective Disarmament of Ger- 
many and Japan” at 1:30 p.m. 


Germany Will Try It Again, 
Reynal and Hitchcock, 1944. 
With heated conviction the 

of journalistic work in Germany, 


by Sigrid Schultz. 
$2.50 


New York, 


author, after long years 
stresses her belief that 


. : it must be made impossible for the Germans to start an- 
measures for southeastern Europe, Africa, the Middle other world war. 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 51, Ocroper 6, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


under the Act 


of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


EFI, 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by anion labor. 


NT Ee 2 i SacI ois 


(ote 
an che er 


FSET a ROY 
a pee 
“— =. 


Washington News Letter 


PLANS FOR SECURITY ORGANIZATION HINGE ON U.S. ELECTIONS 


The task of fashioning a plan acceptable to all the 
United Nations out of the discussion and exchanges 
taking place at Dumbarton Oaks rests now with 
President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill and 
Marshal Stalin. In his address to the House of Com- 
mons on September 28, Mr. Churchill expressed the 
hope that the three men might meet “before the end 
of the year.’ Better than their diplomatic represen- 
tatives, they could bring about the agreement on a 
Security system that Dumbarton Oaks has been un- 
able fully to achieve, and prepare the way for united 
decision by a formal conference of all the United 
Nations. (The United States would like to see such 
a conference convoked this fall.) Yet even the Big 
Three leaders would face barriers to agreement if 
they met before our Presidential elections and before 
the Allies have resolved their differences over Poland, 
which have once more become acute. 


POLISH ISSUE DISTURBS ALLIES. Until the 
November 7 elections have clarified the future course 
of American foreign policy, Britain, Russia and 
China are not certain whether this country will sup- 
port active international collaboration after the war. 
And, meanwhile, uncertainty as to whether the West- 
ern powers will try to isolate Russia in the future as 
they did in 1919 still inhibits Moscow. The focus of 
Russia’s doubts is Poland, for while the United States 
and Britain recognize the Polish government in Lon- 
don, the U.S.S.R., having broken off diplomatic re- 
lations with that government, deals with the Polish 
Committee of National Liberation in Lublin. Mr. 
Churchill on September 28 said: “I trust that the 
Soviet government will make it possible for us to act 
unitedly with them in this solution of the Polish 
problems.”” The Polish government removed one of 
the obstacles to united action on September 29 by 
dropping General Kazimierz Sosnkowski—who had 
been a particular target of Russian criticism—as com- 
mander-in-chief of the armed forces. His replacement 
by General Tadeusz Komorowski (known as General 
Bor), who commanded the ill-fated Warsaw uprising 
against the Germans, however, has precipitated an- 
other crisis. For the new commander-in-chief is ac- 
cused by the Lublin Committee and by Moscow of 
“criminally” ordering the uprising at a time when 
the Russians could give no effective aid to the Poles 
in Warsaw. 

U.S. FOREIGN POLICY AFTER NOV. 7? 
United States voters this year will elect a President, 


a new House of Representatives and 32 Senators. 
Britain, Russia and China gain little by coming to an 
understanding today with the administration of Pres- 
ident Roosevelt so long as they do not know whether 
he or Gov. Thomas E. Dewey will win the election. 
Although Governor Dewey in a speech at Louisville 
on September 8 endorsed the principle of collective 
security, the election of isolationists or ‘‘reservation- 
ists” to other offices could frustrate his or Mr. Roose- 
velt’s efforts to translate the principle into practice. 
On September 28 Senator Joseph H. Ball, Republican 
of Minnesota, a strong proponent of international 
political action for the United States, warned that 
“the character and convictions of the Congressmen 
that the people elect on November 7 will determine 
the way we go” in overseas affairs. 

Under the shadow of these uncertainties, the dele- 
gates at Dumbarton Oaks have declined to commit 
themselves to a firm and detailed security scheme. 
When, on September 29, the first phase of the dis- 
cussions ended with the departure of the Soviet dele- 
gation to make way for that of China, the conferees 
remained deadlocked on one major point. The Rus- 
sians, fearing to be outvoted by the Western powers, 
favored granting to each member of the council of 
the projected international security organization the 
right to veto proposals for action in international dis- 
putes involving a council member, while the Amer- 
icans and British advocated control of the council's 
action by majority vote. The Chinese, who stand with 
the United States and Britain, have proposed that a 
council member involved in a dispute refrain from 
voting. 

CHURCHILL CAUTIONS AGAINST HASTE. 
Aware of the historical apprehension which dis- 
turbs the Russians, Prime Minister Churchill told the 
House of Commons on September 28: “We ought 
not to be hurried into decisions upon which united 
opinion by the various governments responsible is 
not at present ripe.” One explanation of his advo- 
cacy of going slow is that both Britain and Russia 
want the territorial rearrangements made at the close 
of the war to be exempted from re-examination by 
the international security organization. The United 
States is inclined to accept this limitation, but advo- 
cates the development of a security program, in how- 
ever skeletal a form, in time for presentation to the 
United States Congress this winter. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


FOR VICTORY * BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


