gov- 
ings. 
ork- 
went 
until 
they 
iting 
is of 
dis- 
the 
the 
uted 
| the 
was 
x 
. the 
plot 
roy- 


the 
-iate 
this 
ver- 
vy to 
ntly 
ork- 
cent 
and- 
tory 
1 as 
lize. 
vere 
mana 
»ven 
and 
lary 
res- 
‘ised 
lian 
nder 
it in 
onth 
has 
iced 


lave 
The 
that 
cial 
n of 
fact 
inst 
n in 
ngly 


in inter pretati 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


of curre nt ini by the Research Staff 


VoL. XV, No. 44 AUGUST 28, 


1936 


CURRENTS OF WORLD RECOVERY 
by Winthrop W. Case 


This report reviews the industrial recovery since 1932; 
the capital and consumers’ goods industries; unemploy- 
ment; the lag in international trade; the effects of the 
Ottawa agreements; readjustments in the price structure; 
currency depreciation; exchange control; the future of the 
international gold standard and economic nationalism. 


lugust 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Entered as  second- 
lass matter December 

1921, at the Pose 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 


of March 4, 1879, 


“Library of Congress, 


ashington, D. C. 


NON-INTERVENTION 


IN SPAIN 


HE adherence of Germany, Italy and the So- 

viet Union to the non-intervention pact first 
proposed on August 1 by France’s Popular Front 
government has been hailed as assuring virtual 
success for this attempt to exclude outside inter- 
ference from the Spanish conflict. Mussolini’s be- 
lated acceptance, announced on August 21, was 
limited by certain reservations. He repeated his 
earlier stipulations that the ban on arms ship- 
ments would become effective only with the ad- 
herence to the pact of Britain, France, Germany, 
Portugal and the Soviet Union, and demanded in 
addition that all European nations manufacturing 
arms support the embargo. He did not insist, 
however, that non-intervention must be inter- 
preted as barring public subscription of funds and 
enlistment of volunteers for either Spanish fac- 
tion. On August 24 Berlin pledged establishment 
of an immediate embargo on all shipments of 
arms to Spain. On the same day the U.S.S.R. 
agreed to impose an embargo, contingent on sim- 
ilar action by other European powers including 
Portugal. Berlin’s promise of non-intervention 
in Spain was coupled, however, with the ex- 
tension of the term of conscription in German 
military forces from one to two years, on the 
ground that the civil war in the peninsula had 
revealed the menace to Germany and the world 
from “Soviet imperialism and Bolshevik mili- 
tarism.” 

British diplomatic pressure had apparently 
been strongly exerted in Berlin, Rome and Mos- 
cow to enlist support for the French initiative. 
As early as August 19 London banned the ship- 
ment of war supplies, including commercial air- 
planes, to both Spanish factions; and Sir Samuel 
Hoare, First Lord of the Admiralty, declared that 
Britain had “not the least intention of interfering 
in the internal affairs of Spain.” Holland and 
Belgium have imposed arms embargoes. But be- 
fore the non-intervention pact can become gener- 


ally effective the assent of Portugal remains to 
be secured. 

The successful conclusion of such an accord will 
materially lessen the threat to European peace, 
which for a time the Spanish conflict signalized. 
If the arms embargo is enforced—and the if is a 
large one in view of the ease of gun-running 
across Spain’s extended frontier with Portugal— 
this action should eventually redound to the ad- 
vantage of the loyalist forces at Madrid. Portu- 
gal is ruled by a Fascist dictatorship which 
strongly sympathizes with the rebels; and the 
Spanish insurgents depend to considerable degree 
on foreign supply for arms. But the government 
controls, in addition to a gold reserve totalling 
$700,000,000, the country’s two most important 
industrial centers—Madrid and Barcelona. In 
these cities factories are reported to be manufac- 
turing actively both munitions and airplanes. 

Meanwhile, fighting has continued indecisive. 
Although loyalist supporters admit that the revo- 
lutionaries control half the Republic, they contend 
that the rebel area holds only 8,000,000 people, 


while 15,000,000 live in the territory under gov- 
ernment sway. The rebels have apparently 


strengthened their dominance in western Spain 
along the Portuguese border, permitting the re- 
enforcement of the northern army by regular 
army units from Morocco, Foreign Legionnaires 
and some Moorish troops. On August 22 the be- 
ginning of a decisive attempt by the southern 
army to capture Madrid in five days was an- 
nounced. On the other hand, rumblings of re- 
volt in Spanish Morocco threatened to endanger 
the rebels’ control of that important province. 
Proposals for foreign mediation of the conflict, 
involving the United States, have come to naught. 
On August 17 Uruguay suggested “‘a cordial medi- 
ation to be offered to Spain by the American coun- 
tries.” Leading South American states approved 
the idea in principle, but pointed out the impossi- 


bility of formal mediation until the Spanish rebels 
had been recognized as belligerents. On August 
20 Washington informed the Uruguayan govern- 
ment it would not join in the proposed Pan-Amer- 
ican effort, since prospects for success were not 
such as to warrant departure from the “policy of 
non-interference in the internal affairs of other 
countries.”” American neutrality was being safe- 
guarded, it was announced, by the willingness of 
munitions manufacturers to refrain from ship- 
ping supplies to either side. The United States 
Shipping Board also brought pressure on lines in- 
debted to the government to support the ‘“‘moral 
embargo.” On August 24 the Spanish govern- 
ment assured Washington it would not seize the 
property of either foreigners or nationals with- 
out making due compensation. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


THE NATIVE PROBLEM IN AFRICA 


Legislation which will affect the whole problem 
of race relations in Africa has recently been 
adopted by the Union of South Africa. This leg- 
islation, which regulates the political, economic 
and social status of the Bantu population, com- 
prises three acts—the Native Trust and Land Act 
and the Representation of Natives Act, passed by 
the Union Parliament in June, and the Urban 
Areas Amendment Bill, certain to pass at the next 
session. The new policy is based on the double 
principle of native segregation and white trustee- 
ship. Members of Parliament made it clear that 
they were deliberately depriving the natives of all 
chance for effective political power, but empha- 
sized their responsibility for the education and 
economic development of the native groups. 

The Native Trust and Land Act sets up a cor- 
poration to acquire land for native settlement. 
Including the existing native reserves, the terri- 
tory thus open to natives will be about 12 per cent 
of the Union land area, though the native popula- 
tion outnumbers the white by more than three 
to one. Administration of the trust is dependent 
on financial aid from Parliament, and the gener- 
osity of such assistance will determine the degree 
of advancement to be attained in the new areas. 
Without large-scale government aid in erosion 
control and farming education, they may easily 
sink to the low level of existing reserves. 

The Representation of Natives Act deprives 
Cape Province natives of their historic franchise 
and substitutes a complicated system of communal 
voting. The six million Union natives are to be 
represented by four Europeans in a Senate of 
44 members, and by a native Council—of 12 


Page Two 


elected and 4 nominated native members—which 
serves in a purely advisory capacity. Though the 
Act enfranchises natives of all four provinces, the 
voting units have been chosen to insure the selec- 
tion of government-approved candidates in most 
instances. As a sop to the disfranchised Cape na- 
tives, the new legislation enables them to send two 
non-native representatives to the Provincial Coun- 
cil. As a further means of strengthening the 
“color bar” in the political field, the definition of 
“native” is stiffened so that a person of mixed 
ancestry cannot be admitted to the white voters’ 
roll if he has a native ancestor closer than a great- 
grandparent. 

The Urban Areas Bill intensifies the existing 
segregation of the million natives living in cities 
and towns. At the same time it increases the 
municipalities’ responsibility for health and san- 
itation in these areas. 

Passage of the bills adds importance to the cur- 
rent agitation in South Africa for incorporating 
the British protectorates of Swaziland, Basuto- 
land and Bechuanaland, all of which are in close 
territorial and economic relation with the Union. 
By the Union Act of 1909, Britain agreed to even- 
tual amalgamation, with the proviso that it would 
not hand over the territories without previous- 
ly consulting their population, both native and 
European, and the British Parliament. Since 
1933 South Africa has brought increasing pres- 
sure on London to carry out its pledges. The 
British government, basing its position on the 
White Paper of June 20, 1935 and the fact that 
the natives are understood to be almost unani- 
mously opposed to transfer, refuses to take 
immediate action. It has, however, invited the 
cooperation of the Union government in gaining 
the good-will of its future subjects, and South 
Africa has just voted a credit of £35,000 for soil 
erosion control in the protectorates. Whether such 
generosity will be more successful than the threats 
of economic retaliation recently made before Par- 
liament by Premier Hertzog remains to be seen. 


HELEN FISHER 


The Protectorates of South Africa, by Margery Perham 
and Lionel Curtis. New York, Oxford University 
Press, 1935. $2.00 
Arguments for and against the transfer of Basutoland, 

Bechuanaland and Swaziland to the Union of South Africa. 

Inside Europe, by John Gunther. New York, Harper, 
1936. $3.50 
Vivid panorama of current confusions. 

Liberalism Fights On, by Ogden L. Mills. New York, 
Maemillan, 1936. $1.50 
An anti-New Deal argument on behalf of “free govern- 

ment, free men and free enterprise.” 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 44, Aucust 28, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Leste Bueit, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; WeRA MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


