—— 
————<—== 


1 marker 
ent thar 
irried in 
the two 
In the 
it if the 
that in- 


lity, and 
§ Certain 
ie Presi. 
war Can 
military 


TONE 


» Willard 


pment of 


wenstein. 
50 

an noble 
rs before 
cts, deal- 
1933, are 


Marshall 


‘olk-ways 
igh rank. 
thnology, 
etics, re- 
tation is 
range of | 
rience in 


ew York, 


y foreign 


r Japan’s | 
e dispas- 
evidence } 


ay Dilts. | 


lequately 
s a most 
the Jap- 
rials, and } 


y, by Lt. 
cz, 1938. 


1 Czecho- 


National 


AN, Editor. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XVIII, No. 13 


—_—_ 


NUTRITION: A LEAGUE PROJECT 

by Frederick T. Merrill 
The League’s technical work assumes new importance at 
a time when international political collaboration is in 
eclipse. One of its most constructive accomplishments in 
recent years—and one which particularly affects human- 
welfare—is the subject of this report. Nutrition promises 

to be one of the League’s most successful projects. 


JANUARY 20, 1939 


January 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents each 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 


2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 


== .- 


“APPEASEMENT” 


ee 
a ene 


BRING PEACE OR JUSTICE? 


CAN 
A$ might have been expected, the visit of the 

British Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary 
to Rome on January 11-13 proved barren of im- 
mediate results. Both Signor Mussolini and Mr. 
Chamberlain expressed their desire for peace — the 
first demanding ‘“‘peace founded on justice,” while 
the latter urged “just and peaceful solution of inter- 
national difficulties by the method of negotiation.” 
Any hope that Mussolini might withdraw his troops 
from Spain was dashed by an official Italian an- 
nouncement of January 15, which indicated that im- 
provement in Franco-Italian relations must await 
consummation of Franco’s victory — measurably 
hastened by the capture of Tarragona — and warned 
the Western powers against intervention on behalf 
of the hard-pressed Loyalists. That this warning was 
carefully aimed at France was confirmed by the fact 
that, on the same day, the executive committee of 
the Radical Socialist party, which has hitherto sup- 
ported the Daladier-Bonnet policy of appeasement, 
expressed serious alarm at the extent of Franco’s 
territorial gains, and hinted at the possibility of aid 
to Barcelona. Nor did it escape Italian attention that 
on January 11, when Mr. Chamberlain and Lord 
Halifax paused in Paris for a diplomatic cup of tea 
with the French Ministers, M. Bonnet announced 


that a shipment of wheat would be sent into Loyalist 
territory. 


Meanwhile, however, reports from Geneva indi- 
cated that Lord Halifax, fresh from his Rome visit, 
was urging the French Foreign Minister to satisfy 
some of Mussolini's claims by creating a free -port 
in Jibuti, French Somaliland; granting Italy a share 
in the management of the French-controlled Suez 
Canal Company, a private enterprise; reducing toll 
rates in the canal, where Italian shipments have 
greatly increased since the conquest of Ethiopia; and 
placing the 94,000 Italians in Tunis on a basis of 


equality with the French population. Such a settle- 
ment would, for the time being at least, avoid the 
necessity of territorial concessions on the part of 
France. It was also rumored that Britain might con- 
sider a loan to Italy, whose financial resources have 
been strained by feverish rearmament and efforts to 
exploit Ethiopia. 

If, by these concessions, Britain hopes to detach 
Italy from the Rome-Berlin axis, Mr. Chamberlain 
may be doomed to disappointment. Not that Italy 
is enthusiastic about its collaboration with Nazi Ger- 
many, which is far from popular among Italians. 
But Mussolini, having sacrificed his influence in 
Central and Eastern Europe for the prospect of com- 
pensation in Africa and the Mediterranean, is no 
longer a free agent. Without Hitler’s aid, he would 
be unable to threaten France as he has done since 
Munich. His anti-Semitic campaign, profoundly re- 
pugnant to the temper of Italians, including many 
Fascists, represents part of the price he must pay for 
continuance of German support..This campaign, 
which within a few months has attained proportions 
unknown in Germany until 1938, was dramatically 
illustrated by the suicide on December 1 of a prom- 
inent Jewish publisher, A. F. Formiggini, who jumped 
off a tower in his native Modena. 

If Italy is forced to follow in the wake of Ger- 
many, even more subservient is the position of coun- 
tries like Hungary and Poland, which the Western 
powers have left strictly to their own devices. The 
new Hungarian Foreign Minister, Count Csaky, un- 
deterred by Hitler’s refusal to permit establishment 
of a Polish-Hungarian frontier across the territory 
of Carpatho-Ukraine, announced on January 13 that 
Hungary would join the anti-Communist pact link- 
ing Germany, Italy and Japan. Fear of communism— 
and Russia—also prevents Poland from forming a 
common front with the Soviet Union against German 


plans for the creation, with Carpatho-Ukraine as 
the nucleus, of an “independent” Ukraine which 
would include nearly 5,000,000 Ukrainians in Po- 
land, 30,000,000 in the U.S.S.R., and 800,000 in 
Rumania. Following a gesture of friendship toward 
Moscow, which may be implemented by a new com- 
mercial accord, Colonel Beck, in conformity with 
his policy of balancing one formidable neighbor 
against the other, visited Hitler at Berchtesgaden on 
January 5. There he apparently obtained assurances 
that Germany was planning no further sudden moves 
in Eastern Europe and, on the contrary, would now 
turn its attention to the problem of colonies, in which 
it was intimated Poland might ultimately share. This 
new orientation may explain the onslaught of the 
Nazi press on The Netherlands, where mysterious 
shots, it is alleged, were fired on official German 
premises. Whether Germany hopes to terrorize The 
Netherlands, as some observers believe, into sur- 
rendering its rich colonial possessions in the Far East, 
is one of many unanswered questions of European 
diplomacy. Such a move would be in line with the 
tactics of the Hitler government, which has hitherto 
avoided frontal attacks on the great powers, con- 
centrating its pressure on relatively weak neighbors. 

While Britain and France appear to have stiffened 
their stand during the last few weeks, when their 
own interests became directly affected, the dilemma 
of whether peace can best be assured by the grant 
or refusal of concessions to the Fascist dictatorships 
remains unresolved. After Munich, when the West- 
ern European democracies and, by implication, the 
United States, bowed to the necessity of placating 
Germany, it seems difficult to portray the European 
struggle for power in terms of democracy versus 
fascism. In the post-war period, dissatisfied powers 
were unable to obtain a hearing for their grievances 
by peaceful means. Only when they threatened war 
did the democracies display any willingness to con- 
sider alteration of the status guo. Whether such 
alterations do or do not represent “justice’’ is a fine 
point for debate by students of semantics. Hitherto 
the democracies, like the dictatorships, have been 
guided in international affairs by considerations not 
of abstract justice, but of concrete self-interest. Rec- 
ognition of this fact in no sense detracts from the 
value of democratic institutions as developed within 
the countries of the West. But it does raise serious 
doubts regarding the integrity of their present moral 
indignation at the behavior of Germany and Italy. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


REFUGEES TO AVERT GERMAN TRADE SLUMP? 
The negotiations proceeding in Berlin on ways 
and means of financing emigration of German Jews 


throw a revealing light not only on the methods of 
the National Socialist government, but also on Ger- 


Page Two 


a 
a 


many’s precarious foreign exchange position. Al. 
though the Nazis who engineered the anti-Semitic 
excesses of last November hardly considered the 
effects of such measures on the dwindling export 
trade of the Reich, officials responsible for main- 
taining the flow of imports essential to German 
armament and business were undoubtedly appalled 
at the prospect of a reinvigorated boycott of Ger. 
man goods. Now, however, these same officials have 
evolved an ingenious plan to exploit the action taken 
against the Jews for the purpose of promoting Ger- 
man sales abroad. It was advanced by Dr. Schacht, 
head of the Reichsbank, on a visit to London in De. 
cember, and is now being discussed in Berlin by 
George Rublee, chairman of the Intergovernmental 


Committee on Refugees set up by the Evian Con- | 


ference. 


The plan is as yet known only in broad outline. 
It involves the raising of an international refugee 
loan outside Germany, which might range from 
$200,000,000 to $400,000,000, to be “secured” by 
Jewish property remaining in the Reich. Interest and 
amortization charges on this loan would be met from 
the foreign exchange proceeds of whatever ‘‘addi- 
tional” exports other countries would be prepared 
to take from Germany. Since the plan provides that 
only a portion of the proceeds — some reports say 
no more than 15 per cent—be utilized for this pur- 
pose, acceptance of the proposal would bolster the 
Reich’s nearly depleted supply of foreign exchange 
and thus strengthen its economic position. 

Reich officials are without doubt seriously alarmed 
at the highly unfavorable development of the coun- 
try’s foreign trade. As the result of a sharp slump in 
exports, Germany, exclusive of Austria, had an im- 
port excess of 205 million Reichsmarks in the first 
eleven months of 1938, as compared with an export 
surplus of 422 million the previous year. Greater 
Germany had an even greater deficit—426 million. 
To what extent this import surplus has cut into the 
country’s gold and foreign exchange reserves is un- 
known, particularly since the greater part of these 
reserves have not been recorded in statements of the 
Reichsbank. Judging from figures on imports and 
exports of gold, as well as changes in the holdings 
of the central bank, Germany had accumulated about 
175 million marks in “hidden” gold reserves by the 
end of 1937. The Amschluss put at the Reich's dis- 
posal about 208 million Reichsmarks in gold and 
foreign exchange, as well as foreign securities con- 
servatively valued at 300 million. Possibly a for- 
eign exchange “cushion” was also accumulated from 
the export surpluses of 1936 and 1937 which ag- 
gregated 993 million marks. Official statistics admit 
to a net export of only 53.7 million marks of gold 

(Continued on Page 4) 


a, ) 
rn 


yn. Al. 
Semitic 
ed the 
export 
- main- 
serman 
ppalled 
f Ger. 
ls have 
n taken 
ig Ger- 
chacht, 
in De. 
rlin by 
mental 


n Con- | 


outline. 
refugee 
e from 
ed” by 
est and 
et from 

“‘addi- 
repared 
les that 
rts say 
nis pur- 
ster the 
‘change 


ilarmed 
e coun- 
ump in 
an im- 
he first 
| Export 
Greater 
million. 
nto the 
5s is un- 
yf these 
; of the 
rts and 
oldings 
d about 
; by the 
h’s dis- 
ld and 
ies con- 
a for- 
od from 
ich ag- 
s admit 
of gold 


~ 


We ashington News Letter 


—— 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

JAN. 16.—The generally favorable reception ac- 
corded to the President's message on national defense 
in the press and in Congress may be attributed to two 
factors. In the first place, as the Gallup poll and 
other weathervanes of public opinion appear to re- 
veal, the crisis atmosphere pervading Europe and 
Asia has convinced the American public that its 
military forces must be strengthened, and has en- 
hanced its willingness to accept uncritically all the 
increases proposed in this field. In the second place, 
the message seemed moderate in content simply be- 
cause it was published after a smokescreen of un- 
oficial proposals, sometimes verging on the fan- 
tastic, had led the nation to expect a gigantic effort 
to build up armament, particularly in the air. 

Yet, taken by itself, the Administration’s proposal 
for the appropriation of $300,000,000 for army air- 
planes and $21,000,000 for naval planes and air 
material tests is far from moderate. In terms of ma- 
teriel it means that the total number of American 
military aircraft may be raised from approximately 
3,600 to between 8,320 and 9,320 planes of all 
types, probably before July 1942. Coming on the 
heels of last year’s naval expansion program, the 
current preoccupation with army needs marks a long 
step forward in American rearmament. Some ob- 
servers are already yielding to the temptation to draw 
a rough analogy to our peace-time preparedness 
spurt in 1916. 

Non-Controversial Items. Analysts of American 
military policies find little fault with the President's 
plans to spend $150,000,000 for army equipment 
and facilities. The $110,000,000 needed for “‘critical 
items’ such as anti-aircraft guns, semi-automatic 
tifles, anti-tank guns, tanks, artillery and gas masks 
will be spent to provide the material basis for an 
army reorganization which is now under way—a 
feorganization designed to meet criteria of combat, 
mobility and fire power relevant to 1939 rather than 
1918. The provision of $32,000,000 for “educational 
orders” enabling industry to prepare for production 


| of purely military items in time of war merely ex- 


pands a project already begun. Improvement of sea- 
coast defenses, strengthening of the Panama Canal 
garrison, and even the proposal to train 20,000 
student airplane pilots in colleges each year are 
likely to find almost unanimous acceptance. 

The bulk of such opposition to the new program 
as may arise in Congress will undoubtedly center 


about those portions of the President's message 
which might conceivably further American prosecu- 
tion of a so-called “offensive” war. Despite the mili- 
tary view that even a war purely defensive in pur- 
pose may often require offensive strategy and tactics 
if it is to be won, popular opinion still tends to 
applaud measures for the defense of American ter- 
ritory while condemning any steps to apply pres- 
sure on those who might attack American interests. 
Thus, the President’s proposal to appropriate $44,- 
000,000 to begin work on the new naval base pro- 
gram of the Hepburn Board, submitted to Congress 
on January 3, will certainly draw fire from the “pro- 
neutrality’ bloc on Capitol Hill. In suggesting early 
priority for the construction of more than a score of 
air, submarine, destroyer and mine bases the Board 
departed from its terms of reference to advocate 
creation of a major naval and air base at Guam, 
3,400 miles west of Honolulu and only 1,400 miles 
from Yokohama. It also stressed the “immediate 
strategic importance” of constructing a chain of air 
and submarine bases stretching westward from 
Hawaii, at Midway, Wake, Johnston and Palmyra 
Islands. The recommendation for fortification of 
Guam and Wake, which would establish an Ameri- 
can naval position well to the west of the interna- 
tional date line, will be criticized on two counts. It 
cannot fail to be regarded as provocative in Japan; 
and it clashes sharply with a large body of military 
opinion which holds that Guam, flanked by Japanese 
mandated islands and relatively close to Japan, will 
be cut off from communication with Hawaii at once 
in case of war. 


The Air Program. In all probability, certain 
Congressional critics will also seek further informa- 
tion on several phases of the new army aviation pro- 
gram. Although they can scarcely hope to reduce 
the scope of the plan, they are preparing to press 
Administration spokesmen on the question whether 
the United States really needs upward of 8,000 op- 
erating military and naval airplanes. They point out 
that this figure is considerably higher than the total 
of first-line planes maintained in action by any 
other power today. The President's defense mes- 
sage asserts that the United States, today as in 1917, 
is unprepared for sudden attack, and that this consti- 
tutes a reason for aerial rearmament. But these 
critics contend that no major power is yet within 
effective aerial range of the United States. They main- 
tain that no air attack can be launched against this 


=~ —— Page Four 


country unless the attacker seizes sites for bases in 
the Western hemisphere—a development which the 
American navy is fully adequate to prevent. 

From a technical point of view, the air program 
is considered to be open to additional objections. 
With mass production on a three-shift basis, the 
American aviation industry can apparently turn out 
the number of planes required without major ex- 
pansion. Such production, however, presupposes the 
virtual “freezing” of plane designs and types in their 
present status and leaves the country with the pros- 
pect of possessing, at the end of two years, a tre- 
mendous fleet of aircraft which will rapidly grow ob- 
solete. More satisfactory long-range results might be 
attained by a gradual stepping-up of production 
which would allow more scope for incorporating 
the results of continual research and technical ad- 
vance. And although considerations of cost have 
faded into the background, it is also maintained that 
the new program may necessitate an annual expen- 
diture of $750,000,000 to $1,000,000,000 for replace- 
ment, personnel, and provision for ground facilities. 

In some quarters the view is held that the principal 
purpose of the plan is to bolster, psychologically or 


—— 
a 


physically, the European democratic front against 
aggression. There can be little doubt that a large 
and active American air force and aviation industry 
would hearten military authorities in London and 
Paris, provided the Neutrality Act were extensively 
revised or abandoned. But if—as Ambassadors Ken. 
nedy and Bullitt are said to believe —a crisis in 
Western Europe is to be expected this spring, the 
program will not have progressed sufficiently far to 
be of value. On the other hand, if the planes are ac 
tually to be used to participate in another European 
war—a purpose disclaimed by all official sources— 
the program would have to be far larger than it is. 
The new air program may therefore be attacked be. 
cause it falls between two stools. Too vast for the 
necessities of continental defense, it is too small for 
overseas warfare. 


Until committee hearings scheduled to begin this 
week are concluded, there will be little indication of 
the volume of Congressional criticism. In any event, 
there is small prospect that the Administration will 
fail to carry through any proposal on which it does 


ise. 
not care to compromise Davp H. Popper 


REFUGEES TO AVERT GERMAN TRADE SLUMP? 
(Continued from Page 2) 
in the first ten months of 1938, but in the absence 
of figures covering Germany's complete balance of 
payments with other countries it is almost impossible 
to gauge their accuracy. Presumably not all the re- 
serves have as yet been exhausted. 

Although Germany probably still has a reserve 
margin, indefinite continuation of the present trade 
deficit would spell disaster. The union of Sudeten 
Germany and Austria to the Reich has placed a 
heavy burden on the Reich’s balance of payments, 
since their import requirements are large and their 
exports have slumped badly. Yet it may be possible 
to reduce purchases abroad during the current year. 
The record grain harvest of 1938 may enable the 
Reich to scale down the heavy imports of grain 
needed in the last two years. Investments in the Four 
Year Plan, which involved a temporary increase 
in raw material needs, may be smaller in the future. 
The forests of Sudeten Germany and Austria may 
allow the Reich to dispense with a part of its im- 
ports of wood and lumber, while more intensive 
exploitation of Austria’s iron resources might slightly 
curtail its purchases of foreign ore. An increase in 
exports will be more difficult to achieve, particularly 
since renewed boycott efforts may negate the stimu- 


lus which economic recovery in other countries would 
otherwise have imparted. On the other hand, Ger- 
many will probably extend its trade gains in South- 
eastern Europe. The preferential allotment of raw 
materials to the manufacture of goods for export, 
combined with the threat to withhold government 
orders from companies which neglect export trade, 
may also promote German dumping abroad. 


If Germany could be persuaded to allot the major 
part of the returns from additional exports for ser- 
vicing the loan, the Schacht scheme might have 4 
more favorable reception than it has hitherto ob- 
tained. Its protagonists might then say that it has 
the merit, at least, of making Germany work to pay 
off Jewish property, the liquidation value of which 
is generally estimated at not much over 1,500,000,000 
Reichsmarks. On the other hand, few outside Ger 
many will favor the plan if its terms are such as t0 
make it primarily a cynical device enabling the Nazis 
to continue imports for armament, rather than 4 
genuine effort to alleviate the lot of the refugees. 
This would be particularly true if there were a wide 
spread expectation that the Nazi government would 
get into serious, perhaps insuperable, difficulties 
unless German exports recovered. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 13, January 20, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lgsiig BugLt, President; DorotHy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES Dzan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


81 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


