


BeSiP\ \ NJ 


ay 


a 
i 


nese 
eed 


War 

for 
°20- 
inge 
ubt- 
TOY: 


nave 


ce to 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 


pERIODICAL ae 
APNERAL LIGRAR 
LINIY. oF Mict 









FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 








duce 
shall 

own! 
er of 
intro 
ering 
t alse 
7 TLDE 





Vou. XX, No. 4 


NOVEMBER 15, 1940 





NAZIS INVITE SOVIET PARTICIPATION IN “NEW ORDER” 


ave visit to Berlin of Vyacheslav Molotov, Soviet 
Premier and Foreign Commissar, on Novem- 
ber 12 constitutes one more step in Hitler's plans 
for reconstruction of the world in accordance with 
Nazi ideas of a “‘new order.” Competitive bidding 
for Soviet support between Britain and the United 
States on the one hand and the Axis powers on the 
other reached a new climax in October, when Ger- 
many shifted a part of its land army from Western 
Europe to Rumania, presaging a thrust into the 
Balkans and the Near East.* Germany, it is believed, 
sought to allay Moscow’s apprehensions by offering 
Russia a share of war spoils at the expense of the 
British Empire — either the Dardanelles and some 
portion of Turkey, or access to the Indian Ocean 
through Iran and a sphere of influence in Afghanis- 
tan and India, where Russia and Britain have been 
in conflict since the middle of the nineteenth century. 


BELLIGERENTS’ OFFERS TO MOSCOW. The 
Nazis, in their bid for Soviet collaboration, had the 
advantage of offering not their own. possessions, or 
even territories they had already conquered, but 
those of Britain or Britain’s allies and associates. 
The British, by contrast, have been in the difficult 
position of having to win Moscow’s good offices 
either by recognizing Russia’s conquests in Eastern 
Europe and the Balkans (thus weakening their case 
against German territorial aggrandizement), or sur- 
tendering to Russia some part of their own territory 
or influence in the Near and Middle East. Far from 
tecognizing Russia’s gains in the Baltic, eastern Fin- 
land, eastern Poland and Bessarabia, Britain has criti- 
cized Soviet methods of conquest, has seized Baltic 
shipping in its ports, and has frozen the assets of 
Baltic countries, in spite of vigorous Soviet protests. 
Moreover, the presence at the Foreign Office of Lord 
Halifax, who has been critical of Moscow’s anti- 


eagemany Advances in the Balkans,’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, October 18, 


religious sentiment, has not tended to improve 
Anglo-Soviet relations. It would be unrealistic to 
believe that the Soviet government is eager to col- 
laborate with Nazi Germany in the creation of a 
Nazi-sponsored “new order.” But it would be equally 
unrealistic to believe that it is in a mood for col- 
laboration with Britain. Moscow's chief pre-occupa- 
tion today, as in the summer of 1939, is to preserve 
the neutrality of the U.S.S.R. and avoid any con- 
flict with either Germany or Japan. At the same 
time, it is not averse to capitalizing on the advan- 
tages it now enjoys in negotiations with both bel- 
ligerents. This view was clearly expressed by Mar- 
shal Timoshenko, Soviet Defense Commissar, on 
the twenty-third anniversary of the Bolshevik revo- 
lution on November 7, when he stressed peace and 
neutrality, and urged vigilance and preparedness in 
the present world situation, adding: ‘The Soviet 
Union has extended its borders, but we cannot be 
contented with what already has been achieved.” 


PROSPECTS FOR SOVIET-JAPANESE AGREE- 
MENT. While M. Molotov is visiting Berlin—the 
first time that a Soviet Premier has gone abroad— 
his government is engaged in negotiations for a non- 
aggression pact with Japan, whose new Ambassador 
to Moscow, Lieutenant General Tatekawa, was re- 
ceived by the Kremlin with unusual honors. It may 
be expected that Moscow will come to some kind 
of agreement with Tokyo but it.is not yet clear 
whether this agreement will be confined to Soviet- 
Japanese economic issues, or will be a broader settle- 
ment concerning recognition of spheres of influence 
in Asia, and cessation of Soviet aid to China. The 
principal advantage Russia would reap from an 
agreement with Tokyo would be to divert Japan's 
expansionist ambitions from China to the posses- 
sions of the Western powers in the Far East, just 
as in August 1939, through its non-aggression pact 
with Germany, Russia succeeded in diverting Ger- 

















man forces away from Eastern Europe toward France 
and Britain. 

Moscow, however, based its calculations on the 
belief that Germany and the Allies would exhaust 
each other, leaving the U.S.S.R. relatively free to 
fulfill its own plans for ‘‘socialism in one country” 
and eventual world revolution. When the Reich, 
after a series of spectacular victories in the West, 
sent portions of its seasoned army back to East- 
ern Europe, Moscow had to re-evaluate the risks 
of a major conflict with Germany, for which it is 
neither industrially nor militarily prepared. M. Molo- 
tov’s visit to Berlin indicates the Soviet Union is 
not convinced that Britain, even with increased 
American assistance, can win the war, and has de- 
cided to re-insure itself against a conflict with Ger- 
many by another territorial and economic deal. It is 
within the bounds of possibility that Soviet man 
power, as well as Soviet raw materials, may now be 
enlisted by German industry for the prosecution of 
war with Britain. This possibility was foreshadowed 
by Hitler in a fighting speech at Munich on Novem- 
ber 8, when he rejected any compromise with Britain, 
reafirmed his “unalterable determination to carry 
the conflict on to a clear decision” and, after sarcas- 
tic references to the industrial production of the 
United States and the British Dominions, declared 
that Germany's industrial production, which can 
“mobilize the power of almost all Europe,” is the 
highest in the world. 


EFFECT ON THE BALKANS. Should Germany 
and Japan reach parallel agreements with the Soviet 
Union regarding a “new order” in Europe and Asia, 
the position of neighboring countries which have 
been directly or indirectly supporting Britain’s cause 
would be immediately endangered. This would be 
particularly true of Turkey, which insists that it will 
not yield to the Axis powers, yet cannot afford to 
antagonize Moscow. Russia’s course would also af- 
fect the attitude of Bulgaria, which hopes to enlarge 


Page Two 








ee . 
——— 


its territory at Greece’s expense, and of Yugoslavia 
which in spite of outward compliance with Axis de. 
mands, has hitherto believed that Britain or Russi, 
might turn the balance in the Balkans against Ger. 
many. 

The tenacious resistance of the Greeks, who with 
the aid of British airplanes and guns have not only 
repulsed the Italians in the mountains of the Epirus, 
but have driven them back into Albania, has ip. 
jured Italy’s prestige in the Balkans—a development 
which may not be entirely unwelcome to Nazi Ger. 
many. At the same time, the disastrous Rumanian 
earthquake of November 10, which dislocated rail. 
road communications and damaged some of the oil 
fields, may delay Germany's military preparations 
for a thrust into the Balkans. Yet it is obvious that, 
even if military invasion is not attempted, the Axis 
powers can use threats, sabotage, propaganda and 
economic pressure to coerce countries which still re 
tain a shred of independence. On November 8 the 
immunity committee of the Hungarian Parliament 
charged that the Hungarian Nazis had plotted ty 
kidnap Regent Admiral Horthy, assassinate the Min. 
ister of the Interior, and name their leader, Ferenc 
Szalasi, as Premier. On November 5 the Yugoslay 
town of Bitolj was bombed by an unidentified air 
plane, variously alleged to be Italian, Greek and 
British. The subsequent investigation, which failed to 
fix responsibility on any one of the belligerents, pre. 
cipitated the resignation of the pro-British War Min- 
ister, General Neditch. Even more perilous seemed 
the situation of Switzerland, which after successfully 
maintaining its neutrality for a year, has been re 
cently subjected to increasing Axis pressure, and 
last week was accused by the Italian press of favor 
ing the British cause. On all fronts, Germany is ac 
celerating its efforts to consolidate Europe under 
Nazi rule, in the hope of winning the acquiescence 


of the United States, as well as Russia, in its “new 


order.” 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


EIRE AND AFRICA AFFECT BRITISH SEA POWER 


Prime Minister Churchill, giving a cautious ap- 
praisal of the war before the House of Commons on 
November 5, declared that ‘“‘we are far better off 





JUST OUT: the second in a series of studies on 
the economic aspects of national defense. 


DEFENSE ECONOMY OF THE U.S:: 
AN INVENTORY OF RAW MATERIALS 


By J. C. deWilde and George Monson 


25c 


November 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 











than any one would have ventured to predict fout 
or five months ago,” but declined to “prophesy 
about the battles which are yet to be fought.” Mr. 
Churchill expressed satisfaction that Britain had suc 
cessfully withstood Germany's air raids, which had 
taken a toll of 14,000 civilian dead and 20,000 
wounded in the past eight weeks, but, he added, had 
diminished in intensity since early September. While 
warning that a German invasion might be expected 
at any time, he asserted that the danger had beet 
reduced by both the approach of winter weather and 
the increasing strength of Britain’s military and aif 
forces. For several months, he claimed, Britain had 








; 
i 





sent 
East 
the 


Sud: 
Fret 


atta 


fout 
phesy 
Me 
1 suc 
1 had 
0,000 
|, had 
While 
ected 


r and 
rd aif 
n had 











 — 
—_—_ 





sent “scores of thousands” of troops to the Middle 
Fast and had “‘ceaselessly strengthened the fleet in 
the eastern Mediterranean,” with the result that ‘‘the 
balance of forces on the frontiers of Egypt and the 
Sudan is far less unfavorable than at the time of the 
French collapse.” The most serious threat, accord- 
ing to the Prime Minister, lay in Germany's renewed 
attack on British shipping and Britain's inability to 
use the ports of Eire for defense purposes. 


THE WAR AT SEA. Last week Germany em- 
ployed both airplanes and surface raiders with un- 
ysual success, while its submarines continued to at- 
tack British and neutral shipping over a wide area. 
On November 5, according to Berlin reports, Nazi 
warships—apparently including one of the Graf Spee 
class—destroyed an entire convoy of 15 to 20 ships, 
totaling 86,000 tons. Britain admitted the attack but 
declined to reveal the exact amount of shipping lost. 
Three days later German Stuka dive-bombers sank 
an unascertained number of ships near the British 
Isles, while on November 9 a single bomber dam- 
aged the Empress of Japan, a 26,000-ton Canadian 
Pacific liner now used as a transport. 

Britain finds resistance to the German onslaught 
more difficult than in the World War because it is 
denied access to several important bases in Eire, 
where previously British warships could secure fuel 
and supplies while on convoy service. Three Irish 
port-—Cobh (Queenstown), Berehaven, and Lough 
Swilly—are near the main routes to North America 
and considerably west of any British base. All three 
ports were relinquished by the British government 
in April 1938, when Premier de Valera and Mal- 
colm MacDonald, then Dominions Secretary, nego- 
tiated a set of agreements covering most of the out- 
standing economic issues between Eire and Britain.* 
Prior to that time, Great Britain—in accordance with 
the treaty of 1921 establishing the Irish Free State— 
had controlled and garrisoned these bases. Prime 
Minister Churchill, who had strenuously opposed 
the 1938 transfer, precipitated an acrimonious de- 
bate over Eire’s neutrality by describing the situation 
in his November 5 address as “a most heavy and 
gtievous burden and one which should never have 
been placed upon our shoulders.” 

Mr. Churchill's criticism was answered on Novem- 
ber 7 by Premier de Valera, who reaffirmed Eire’s 
complete neutrality in an address before the Dail. 
Declaring that there could be no question of open- 
ing these ports to Britain, Mr. de Valera warned 


*Cf. J. F. Green, ‘‘The British Dominions at War,’’ Foreign Policy Reports, 
February 1, 1940. 





Page Three 








that “any attempt to bring pressure to bear, no mat- 
ter from which side it might come, would lead only 
to bloodshed.” In view of the historic antagonism 
between England and Ireland, it seems highly un- 
likely that de Valera, who at the outbreak of war 
had to suppress the rebellious Irish Republican 
Army, will change his policy—unless Britain, in 
turn, agrees to the union of Eire and the six counties 
of Northern Ireland, which remained part of the 
United Kingdom under the 1921 treaty. Mr. 
Churchill has one trump card, however, since he 
might conceivably restrict British trade with Eire, 
which normally sells 81 per cent of its exports in 
the United Kingdom and secures both coal and 
manufactures there. On November 11 Eire’s Minister 
of Supplies, Sean F. Lamass, warned that shipping 
shortages had caused serious deficiencies of food, 
coal and gasoline, and might soon lead to rationing. 

CAPTURE OF LIBREVILLE. Not the least of 
Mr. Churchill’s problems has been the uncertain 
status of the French possessions in Africa, especial- 
ly after the withdrawal of General de Gaulle’s 
forces and British warships from Dakar on Septem- 
ber 23. The danger that the Axis powers might gain 
naval and air bases on the west coast of Africa was 
somewhat abated on November 10 by General de 
Gaulle’s capture of Libreville, located almost exactly 
on the equator and capital of Gabon, one of the 
four colonies within French Equatorial Africa. Al- 
though few details were available, the de Gaulle 
forces apparently took Lambaréne, an inland town, 
before surrounding the port of Libreville. London 
denied the charges of the Vichy government that 
British naval vessels had assisted in defeating the 
Libreville garrison. While Libreville does not com- 
pare with Dakar in economic and strategic value, it 
affords Britain an additional foothold in West Africa 
and command of both the French colonies and the 


Belgian Congo. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





Where Do We Go From Here? by Harold J. Laski. New 
York, Viking, 1940. $1.75 


A provocative discussion of the basic issues of the war, 
arguing that Great Britain, in order to win, must lead a 


European revolution against both the doctrine of State 
sovereignty and the vested interests of capitalism. 


The Imperial Soviets, by Henry C. Wolfe. New York, 
Doubleday, Doran, 1939. $2.50 


Shrewd, interestingly written analysis of the happenings 
that culminated in the German-Soviet pact of 1939. 


What’s Democracy to You? by Joseph Gollomb. New York, 
Macmillan, 1940. $1.75 


A short, popular description of the meaning of democ- 
racy and fascism in terms of every-day living. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 4, NoveMBER 15, 1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
» 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Laer, Secretery; Vara Micusras Daan, Editer. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. 


Beis 


4., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
Nov. 11.—Interpreting the election result as a 
clear endorsement of the major foreign policies of 
the Roosevelt Administration, Washington has be- 
gun to accelerate its program of aid to Britain. On 
his return to the capital on November 8, President 
Roosevelt announced that henceforth half of this 
country’s total production of war materials will be 
allocated to the British Empire. Airplanes of all 
types, as well as arms, ammunition and implements 
of war will be included under this ‘‘rule of thumb” 
division. On the same day, moreover, the Priorities 
Division of the National Defense Advisory Com- 
mission announced approval of the British applica- 
tion to place orders for 12,000 airplanes in addition 
to the 14,300 already under contract with American 
manufacturers. 


SHIPPING AND CREDIT PROBLEMS. With 
the prospect of a long war in which British sea 
power is pitted against German land and air su- 
premacy on the Continent, two other problems of 
momentous importance may soon be pressing for 
decision. These are Britain’s urgent demand for 
increased American assistance in countering German 
submarine and air attacks on shipping, and the more 
remote but no less vital question of financing Brit- 
ain’s future war trade with the United States. 


The gravity of the renewed Nazi attack on British 
shipping has been fully realized in Washington for 
some time, but the steps taken to date seem unlikely 
to meet the crisis which may arise if the losses of 
recent weeks continue.* It is true that the Maritime 
Commission has approved the sale of more than 100 
American merchant ships to Britain and Canada since 
the beginning of the war, and is now prepared to 
facilitate large-scale production of new merchant ves- 
sels for British order. It is also true that the building 
program of the Maritime Commission is running 
ahead of schedule, with 72 new ships launched since 
April 1939, and deliveries being made at the rate of 
one a week. These vessels cannot be transferred to 
Britain under existing legislation, however, and un- 
der the terms of the Neutrality Act no American ves- 
sel is permitted to enter the North Atlantic war 
zone. As a result, there is evidence of new pressure to 
amend the Neutrality Act in order to permit Ameri- 
can ships to re-enter the Atlantic trade this winter. 


But American aid may not be confined to mer- 





*Cf. “Britain Menaced by 


New Submarine Campaign,”’ 
Bulletin, November 8, 1940. 


Foreign Policy 


chant shipping. During the past few days there 
have been hints that London is seeking diplomatig 
support in Washington in an effort to secure access 
to the strategic naval bases in Eire. It is pointed out 
for example, that Mr. de Valera’s refusal to lease 
Irish bases to Britain places the British fleet at , 
dangerous disadvantage in combating the German 
submarine campaign, and that if Eire were to fall 
into the hands of the enemy, commerce between 
the United States and Britain would be threatened 
The same argument may be advanced in suppor 
of American naval convoys to relieve the strain on 
the British fleet and protect American export trade 
with Britain. 


The credit problem has not yet reached an acute 
Stage, but the campaign for repeal of the Johnson 
Act and the loan and credit provisions of the New 
trality Act has been revived with the introduction of 
a new resolution by Senator King of Utah which may 
win Administration backing. On the surface, Great 
Britain appears to have ample resources to meet it 
maximum purchases in the United States for at leas 
another year or 18 months. During the first year of 
the war, the purchases of Britain and Canada in the 
United States exceeded their exports to this county 
by $875,000,000. This adverse trade balance was met 
chiefly by imports of gold and the sale of British 
owned securities in the American market. Despite 
the sale of $155,000,000 in securities, the value of 
United Kingdom investments alone was estimated a 
approximately $2,650,000,000 in August 1940, with 
more than $1,000,000,000 in readily negotiable 
stocks and bonds. In addition, Canada and the United 
Kingdom still held about $696,000,000 in dollar bal 
ances at the end of July, and an undisclosed amoust 
of earmarked gold. 


Thus, if the visible items in the balance of trad 
represented the only drain on Britain’s financial 
sources, it would seem that the scale of war purchasé 
in the United States could be more than doubled with 
out resort to loans. Actually, however, the heavy iff 
portation of gold suggests that a number of invisibk 
items, such as advance payments for war orders am 
payments for expansion of American plant facilitié 
may have placed a greater strain on the British Trea’ 
ury than is generally realized. In any event, if ® 
war continues for three or four years as Prime Mi 
ister Churchill suggested on November 5, our final 
cial resources will become as important a factor ff 
Britain as our industrial resources. 

W. T. STONE 








VOL. 


M 


they 
anni 
of t 
tren 
the . 
with 
men 
fron 
tellit 
still 


El 
offic: 
in a 
cons' 
was 
Prerr 
Mos 
lead 
an 4 
close 
still 
bette 
nitior 
sume 
of tk 
the « 
Cities 
the ; 
north 
journ 

Th 
tions 
move 
of ot 
vemb 
the It 
Field 


