at Brit. 
limaxed 
e latest 
vers are 
ectly re 
1an who 
to Brit- 
> United 
n by any 
ons. 


Sing ap 
ents for 
> placate 
le prom 
se whom 
it strikes 
. defense 
fears of 
f surplus 
me needs 
and that 
lerations. 
siness as 
rmament 
ry goods 
Roosevelt 
sstility of 
j support 
will de 
statement 
n its his 
h it weit 
ability to 
the long 
g Britait. 


(GREEN 


ll 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


or, Mich. “£0 toy 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XX, No. 12 


— 


JANUARY 10, 1941 


HILE President Roosevelt, in his broadcast of 

December 29 and in his message to Congress 
on January 6 rejected talk of peace, some Ameti- 
cans, notably Senators Wheeler, Tydings and Van- 
denberg, believe that before proceeding to give 
Britain a measure of aid that might involve this 
country in war, the United States government should 
explore the possibility of a negotiated peace. An 
eight-point plan which might provide ‘‘a working 
basis for a just peace’’ was outlined by Senator 


IS A NEGOTIATED PEACE POSSIBLE? 


the task of carrying out its long-term objectives, or 
peace aims. Neither Britain nor Germany has of- 
fered a detailed blueprint of the order of things it 
plans to create once the war is over. But the Nazis, 
obviously dissatisfied with the pre-war situation, 
have already taken a series of measures on the Euro- 
pean continent that foreshadow their concept of a 
“new order.” The British, relatively satisfied with 
pre-war conditions, have been principally concerned 
with the restoration of rights and freedoms curtailed 


Wheeler on December 30. This plan included res- 
toration of Germany's 1914 boundaries, with au- 
tonomy for Poland and Czechoslovakia; restoration 
of independent France, Belgium, Holland, Norway 
and Denmark; restoration of German colonies; pro- 
tection of racial and religious minorities in all coun- 
tries; internationalization of the Suez Canal; no in- 
demnities or reparations; and arms limitation. In 
offering his plan, Senator Wheeler admitted that 
"a just peace is difficult, if not impossible, to ab- 
stractly define while war rages. It is too completely 
dependent upon the attitude of the belligerents.” 
Nothing could be more natural or more tempting 
than the hope of discovering a formula of peace 
which would prevent the continuance and expansion 
of war. In any discussion of war and peace, however, 
it is essential to distinguish between the short-term 
objectives of the belligerents, or war aims, and their 
long-term objectives, or peace aims. The British 
have defined their war aims as the need to ‘‘crush 
Hitlerism’’; the Germans have defined their war 
aims as the need to destroy the British Empire. After 
sixteen months of war, neither of the belligerents 
has achieved its short-term objective, but neither 
has abandoned the hope of ultimate victory. 
WHAT ARE BELLIGERENTS’ PEACE AIMS? 
Granted that Britain and Germany succeed in 
avoiding a stalemate, and that one of them fulfills 
its war aims, the victor will still be confronted with 


or destroyed by the Nazis, and have postponed defi- 
nition of their peace aims until the defeat of Hitler. 
Under the circumstances, is there a meeting-ground 
between British and German peace aims? Or is the 
conflict between them, as the British and Germans 
both believe, a conflict between two worlds, one of 
which must triumph at the expense of the other? 
The first, and most important, obstacle to a ne- 
gotiated peace, is that neither of the belligerents 
trusts the other. The British feel that a peace con- 
cluded with Hitler would be another, and far more 
disastrous, Munich—an uneasy truce which would 
give Germany leisure to prepare for a final blow 
against what would be left of the Western world. 
The Germans, for their part, fear that the British 
might seek to break up the German state, and re- 
duce it to the position of a second-class power. 
Another important obstacle to a negotiated peace, 
from the British point of view, is that a peace con- 
cluded today between Britain and Germany would 
be equivalent to a Nazi victory. At a peace confer- 
ence held today Germany, with its army and most 
of its industry intact, would insist on retaining its 
hegemony of Europe. It would demand a substantial 
share of Africa—far more than mere restoration of 
Germany’s pre-war colonies. It would insist on free 
access by a German-controlled Europe to the food- 
stuffs and raw materials of Latin America. Even if it 
did not insist on surrender of part of the British 


fleet, it would have obtained strategic bases in Eu- 
rope and Africa from which it could menace the 
British. The most that the British could expect from 
a negotiated peace would be to keep the British 
Isles, and to retain nominal control of those parts 
of the Empire that lie outside Africa—with their 
communications constantly threatened by combined 
German, Italian and Japanese forces. There is no 
indication that Germany would be prepared, as sug- 
gested by Senator Wheeler, to restore the inde- 
pendence of Western European countries, grant 
autonomy to Poland and Czechoslovakia (which in 
any case are demanding independence, not auton- 
omy), or restore Alsace-Lorraine to France. 

At the same time, there is growing recognition 
among the British that it will not be enough to 
“crush Hitlerism’—that while the short-term ob- 
jective is being hammered at day by day, the long- 
term objectives must be constantly borne in mind. 
The war itself is shaping the future peace. Not all 
the things that have been done in Europe by Hitler 
can be undone, even in the event of complete victory 
by Britain. Repugnant as Hitler’s “new order’ is to 
millions of people throughout the world, it may not 
prove possible, or even desirable, to restore in toto 
the order that existed in August 1939. Many Brit- 
ishers, and Americans, realize that what will be 
needed at the end of the war is not restoration, but 
reconstruction: not merely efforts to save democracy 
by adopting defensive tactics, but efforts to strength- 
en and advance democracy by taking the ideological 
offensive against Nazism. 


RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE UNITED 
STATES. It is at this point that crucial questions 
must be faced by the United States. If, as the British 


AXIS PREPARES TO COUNTER FALL OF BARDIA 


The fall of Bardia on January 5, after twenty days 
of siege, constitutes a notable victory for the British 
Army of the Nile and removes the greatest obstacle 
to rapid penetration of Libya by the Imperial forces. 
With suitable naval protection the town can now 
be used as a British base, for its harbor will accom- 
modate supply ships up to 4,000 tons and there are 
facilities for aircraft. The dogged resistance of the 
Bardia garrison has presumably enabled Marshal 
Graziani to strengthen the defenses of Tobruk, 65 
miles to the west, although the uncertainty of his 


For a broad background of defense facts, Read: 


U.S. AID TO BRITAIN 

U.S. DEFENSE: MOBILIZATION 
U.S. DEFENSE: RAW MATERIALS 
THE U.S. ARMY IN TRANSITION 
CANADA AT WAR 


SPECIAL OFFER—5 Foreign Policy Reports for $1.00 


Page Two 


ee 
———— 


see it, the alternative to a negotiated peace is com, 
plete and total defeat of Hitler, then Americans; 
want to know: can the British achieve this war aim) 
The answer, so far as can be determined, is thy 
the British cannot win a decisive victory over Hitle 
unless they receive a much larger measure of aij 
from the United States—aid that might eventually 
necessitate military intervention by this country. J) 
the opinion of some Americans, involvement of| 
this country in war is far more dangerous than the 
most disastrous negotiated peace. 

To avoid future disillusionment, like that whic 
followed 1919, Americans must realize that it will} 
not be enough for the British, with our aid, to wig! 
the war. We would also have to help the British 
win the peace. For it becomes increasingly evident 
that if Britain—with the aid of the United States 
succeeds in preventing German control of Europe, it] 
will, in turn, be faced with the necessity of main. 
taining some form of control over the European cop. 
tinent at the close of hostilities. Are we prepared 
not only to give further aid to Britain, even 4 
the risk of war with Germany, but also, once wa 
is over, to collaborate with Britain in the cop 
struction of a new order? Whatever form ow 
intervention takes—whether intervention in war «| 
intervention in peace—it creates obligations on the 
part of the United States. For either we shall bk 
obliged to implement our promises of aid to Britain 
by concrete actions, or else we shall be called on by 
the British to guarantee the negotiated peace. Whi 
is not yet always clearly understood is that th! 
United States is a great power; and a great pow) 
cannot indefinitely avoid responsibility. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


supply line from Italy places definite limits on the} 
Italian military effort. Whether the British can te 
sume their rapid advance depends to some degre) 
on the disposition of Italian air squadrons relieve 
of their mission of raiding Britain and ordered home 
as well as German planes which, according to # 
announcement on January 2, have also been stt 
tioned with the Italians. If the fuel situation pet 
mits full employment of Axis aviation in the Med: 
terranean theater, the extended British lines may i 
turn become precarious. 


Important though they are, these development 
must be regarded as subsidiary to the evident prep) 
arations for the German army's next forward movt 
which may be precipitated by Italy’s difficult situs 
tion. Every effort has been made to conceal the tim 
and location of the blow by creating simultaneot 
crises in widely separated areas. Britain, the ult 
mate objective, has been confronted with a ne 


——— 


menact 
which 
service 
before 
also he 
EIR 
bellige 
Eire, \ 
Britair 
neutra 
of vie 
State ; 
and pr 
Saint 
Germa 
serve t 
fended 
before 
Whi 
Irelanc 
conclu 
to all 
bellige 
Comm 
British 
curtail 
of ga: 
Since } 
placed 
Eire of 
items ; 
have t 
to ma: 
sumpti 
to enjc 
tem wi 
The 
have | 
mines 
to pre 
qualifi 
de Va 
fied be 
annout 
neutra. 
taste o 
to the 
that G 
so that 
to the 
Att 
sudder 


FOREIGN 
Headquar 
Entered a 


Qe 


—:_ 


S Com. 


er ican { 


it aim) 
is that 
Hitler 
of aid 
ntually 
try. Ip 
ent of 
1an the 


- which 
it will 
to win 
British | 
evident 
states— 
rope, it 
F main. 
an Con 
repared 
even at 
1Ce Wat 
ne con 


rm ou 
wat Of 
on the! 
shall be 
- Britain 
d ony 
> Wha 
hat th 
t powel 


DEAN 


; on the 


can fe} 


> degree 

relieved 
-d home 
ig to a 
een sit 
ion pet 
1e Med: 
; may if 


lopment 
ont prep 
rd move 
ilt situs 
the tim 
iltaneow 
the ult 
1 a ne 


Page Three 


menace in the shape of showers of incendiary bombs 
which caused serious fires in London until a civilian 
service was improvised to extinguish the missiles 
before they could start conflagrations. Tension was 
also heightened in Eire, Bulgaria and France. 

EIRES NEUTRALITY THREATENED. Both 
belligerents appear to be turning their attention to 
Fire, whose strategic importance in the Battle of 
Britain is so great that continued respect for its 
neutrality is problematical. From the British point 
of view, the re-acquisition of harbors in the Free 
State as naval bases would facilitate convoy duty 
and perhaps permit resumption of traffic through 
Saint George’s Channel into the Irish Sea. It is to 
Germany’s interest, on the other hand, either to pre- 
serve the existing status or to occupy the weakly de- 
fended Irish coast as a means of enveloping Britain 
before it is finally reduced. 

While Britain has not publicly demanded that 
Ireland compromise its neutrality, it has apparently 
concluded that, as a neutral, Eire must be subjected 
to all the inconveniences of other European non- 
belligerents, regardless of its link with the British 
Commonwealth. Through control of shipping, the 
British Ministry of Economic Warfare has therefore 
curtailed Irish imports to the point where stocks 
of gasoline and foreign foods are running low. 
Since January 1, moreover, the Board of Trade has 
placed under license all exports from Britain to 
Eire of cattle feed, fertilizer, certain tools and other 
items; and after January 22 Irish exporters will 
have to obtain navicerts guaranteeing that shipments 
to many markets are not destined for enemy con- 
sumption. In British opinion, Eire does not deserve 
to enjoy the benefits of trade under the convoy sys- 
tem without contributing to its effective maintenance. 

The German response to these measures seems to 
have been the dropping of bombs and magnetic 
mines on Eire from January 1 to 3—often enough 
to preclude the possibility of accident. Although 
qualified German sources denied responsibility, the 
de Valera government claimed that it had identi- 
fied both bombs and mines as of German origin and 
announced that it was protesting in Berlin. Some 
neutral observers considered the attacks a Nazi fore- 
taste of what would follow if Eire turned over bases 
to the British. London, however, professed to believe 
that Germany hoped to force the Irish into the war, 
80 that British troops and aviation would be diverted 
to the strengthening of Eire’s defenses. 

At the other end of Europe, German pressure was 
suddenly applied to Bulgaria, which with apparent 


Soviet support had recently shown signs of resistance 
to inclusion in the “new order.” While it is im- 
possible to draw positive deductions from the vague 
reports of German troop movements and diplomatic 
peregrinations throughout the Balkans, it is widely 
believed that Bulgarian adherence to the Axis is 
imminent and that it may be followed by military 
occupation, perhaps with compensation for the 
U.S.S.R. in other fields. The progress of the Nazi 
army may indirectly be of service to Italy by posing 
new strategic difficulties for the British in the Near 
East. 

FRANCE RESISTS NAZIFICATION. Mean- 
while events in France, as influenced by the will of 
the German conqueror, have demonstrated that the 
abolition of parliamentary government is not in itself 
an automatic bar to prolonged political crises. The 
latest development in Marshal Pétain’s attempt to 
secure a stable government enjoying both German 
confidence and French domestic support occurred 
on January 3, when Paul Baudouin, who once re- 
flected M. Laval’s point of view, resigned from the 
Cabinet. Although it was expected that Laval’s pow- 
ers might be handed over to a triumvirate consist- 
ing of M. Pierre-Etienne Flandin, Minister of For- 
eign Affairs, Admiral Jean Darlan, and General 
Charles Huntziger, no such move has yet taken 
place. Instead, Vichy is trying to resume negotiations 
for “collaboration” with Germany, which were 
broken off on Laval’s dismissal. Admiral Darlan, 
whose star is rising, visited Hitler in occupied 
France on Christmas Day for this purpose, but Ber- 
lin continues to hold aloof until the political situa- 
tion has been clarified to its satisfaction. 

There can be no doubt that Marshal Pétain des- 
perately desires to reach an agreement with the 
Reich, for French stocks of food and materials are 
declining, the budget situation is almost hopeless, 
and the lack of free communication between the 
two French zones is morally and politically destruc- 
tive. At the same time, the Marshal refuses to bring 
France into the war against Britain or permit the 
Nazis to utilize French naval bases and ships. A 
French order of January 4, placing General Henri 
Dentz, the new Syrian High Commissioner, under 
the orders of General Maxime Weygand in North 
Africa is symbolic of Pétain’s determination to re- 
sist in the colonies if the Nazis push him too far. As 
Admiral Leahy takes up his residence in Vichy, 
therefore, skillful American diplomacy may prove 
an important factor in the future development of 
Franco-German relations. Davi H. Popper 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 12, JaNuary 10, 1941. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Pelicy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNnxk Ross McCoy, President; Dornotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicuHeres Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


BS 151 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JAN. 6.—As the Seventy-seventh Congress organ- 
ized to meet the “unprecedented” issues confronting 
the nation in 1941, there was no doubt in the minds 
of Washington observers that the overwhelming 
majority in both Houses were prepared to act 
promptly on practical measures to accomplish the 
“swift and driving increase in armament production” 
called for by President Roosevelt in his annual mes- 
sage today. But after listening to Mr. Roosevelt's 
statement of national policy, after re-reading his ring- 
ing call for action, many members of Congress were 
still left in doubt as to the specific measures they 
will be asked to approve in the critical months ahead. 


A RESTATEMENT OF AIMS. The expectation 
that the President would specify some of the prac- 
tical steps necessary to implement his call for action 
was not realized in the message. Indeed, some sur- 
prise (and disappointment) was expressed that Mr. 
Roosevelt did not venture beyond the broad objec- 
tives outlined in his fireside chat of December 29. 
Already there had been widespread og 8a even 
if not complete endorsement, of the fundamental 
aims of American national policy; but Congress was 
waiting for detailed blueprints of the proposed acts 
and policies. 

In his message the President re-stated the funda- 
mental aims without equivocation. We are com- 
mitted, he said, to three things: 


“First . . . to all-inclusive national defense. 
“Second . . . to full support of all those resolute 
people everywhere who are resisting aggression 
and are thereby keeping war away from our 
hemisphere. . . . 

“Third . . . to the proposition that principles of 
morality and considerations for our own security 
will never permit us to acquiesce in a peace dic- 
tated by aggressors and sponsored by appeasers.”” 


In support of these policies, Mr. Roosevelt urged 
greater speed in rearmament and greater aid to 
Britain. Frankly expressing dissatisfaction with arma- 
ment production thus far, he called for “quicker and 
better results.” On aid to Britain, he recommended 
that “‘we make it possible for those nations to con- 
tinue to obtain war materials in the United States, 
fitting their orders into our own program.” He im- 
plied that a plan for carrying out the transfer of 
war materials to Britain may be furnished with the 
budget message later this week. Some of the prob- 


lems raised by the discussion of aid to Britain may 
also be clarified by the visit to London of Harry |, 
Hopkins, the President’s special emissary. 
Contrasting the “so-called new order of tyranny 
which the dictators seek to create’’ with the aims of 
democracy, the President proclaimed four essential 


human freedoms: freedom of speech and expression; 
freedom of every person to worship God in his own 
way; freedom from want; and freedom from fear, 
Defense of democracy, he added, must also include | 
such “simple and basic’’ things as providing jobs | 
and security for those who need it. | 

But when the President had finished his message, | 


the chief question in the minds of Congress te. | 


mained unanswered—what are the practical steps 
which may be necessary if we are to make good the 
indictment of the Axis powers? Mr. Roosevelt de. 
clared that, as long as the aggressor nations main- 


tain the offensive, ‘they, not we, will choose the } 


time and the place and the method of their attack.” | 
To many of his listeners this implied that the time 
had come for the United States to take the offensive. 
And yet, to the disappointment of some—and the 
relief of others—the answer was left in doubt. 
Various explanations are being advanced for the 
President’s failure to submit a more positive pro | 
gram of action. On the internal problem of speed. 
ing defense production, it is pointed out that most 
of the critical decisions must be made by Mr. Knud- 
sen’s coordinating council and the executive branch 
of the government. And in some cases final decisions 
have yet to be reached. In the opinion of Congress, 
however, this explanation cannot be applied to the 
policy of aid to Britain. The semblance of national 
unity has been achieved up to this time by restricting 
our support of Britain to measures short of military 
intervention. Congress may eventually be ready to 
Support any action necessary to prevent the defeat 
of Britain. But it has not yet reached the point of 
approving every action of the Executive without 
scrutiny or question. This offers the most plausible 
explanation for Mr. Roosevelt's hesitation to propose 
further specific measures. W.T. STONE 


Cm 


“U.S. DEFENSE—PROGRESS AND PROBLEMS’ 
is the subject of the FPA’s broadcast on January 12; the 
speaker will be David H. Popper. We welcome yout 
comments on these programs, which are heard every 
Sunday, from 2:15 to 2:30 E.S.T., over the blue network 
of the National Broadcasting Company. 


Vou. XI 
etiam 


XC] 
bet 
relative 
during 
viet U 
markec 
conven 
In Chit 
betwee 
though 
WA 


| ber, de 


militar 
gressiv 
howeve 
Thaila: 
sugges: 


quence 
China, 
growin 


Unt 


| have b 


the mc 
kok to 
a few 
weeks, 
succeec 
scale. ( 
withdr 
border 


by ext 


| Cambc 


commit 
southe 
Japane 
Japane 
been r 

The 


nin g ¢ 


