APR1 1944 


Genera) Library Entered as 2nd class matter 


bee 


Vaiverstty Of Wich: 





























f Ann Arbon wei vig 
u " “*°Rigag 
— 
it | 
m} 
«|| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
*X- 
on 
ite 
or. | An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association . 
ast FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 4 
oe: | 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. ( 
he | Vou. XXIII, No. 24 MagcH 81, 1944 i 
a | 
ed | PUBLIC SEEKS CLARIFICATION OF U.S. FOREIGN POLICY 
7 T is not a mere coincidence that on both sides of fect solutions will be found overnight for every | 
id the Atlantic the public is questioning President one of the complex problems of international re- 
he } Roosevelt and Mr. Churchill about their foreign pol- lations, greatly accentuated by the war. It is also i 
fx | icy. Nor is this questioning, which daily grows in generally understood — and Mr. Churchill pointed | 
of | volume, merely a captious effort to discredit the war this out in his address to the House of Commons on q 
re. | leaders of the respective countries, as is sometimes February 22—that by very reason of the fact that the if 
js. | Claimed. On the contrary, except for irresponsibles United Nations are engaged in a coalition war each 
he | who are always found on the fringe of any society in must, in varying degree, according to given citcum- 4 
time of crisis, it reflects genuine concern about the stances, adjust its respective policies to those of | 
he | future—about the way in which the United States others. The best we can hope for is a workable com- | 
yn, | and Britain propose to use victory once it has been promise between the conflicting interests of members | 
33, achieved. of the anti-Axis coalition, each of whom is doing its | 
es This is a natural concern, which cannot be an- best to consolidate its position in anticipation of q 
rat | swered either by frivolous jests or by pleas for post- victory. 
cal} | ponement of discussion until the conflict is over. WHAT WE CAN EXPECT. In working out each 
1a} | When democratic nations ask citizens to sacrifice successive compromise we must, of course, be con- 
ast | their lives for the common good, the men themselves, stantly aware of the fact that a dictatorship like 
“a | and their families and friends, have the right to call that of Stalin is in a far easier position to make 
Jo. | Within the limits of the possible for constant clari- clear-cut decisions on foreign policy than a demo- 
| fication of the aims served by this sacrifice. Nor is it cratic government like that of Britain or the United 
er. | falistic to insist on delay of post-war problems until States, which must take into account the extent to 
7” | hostilities are over when it is obvious to the merest which this or that course may win the approval of 
ite | Neophyte that the problems of boundaries and poli- the people and the support of its political opponents. 
re. | tical régimes in Europe, to give but two examples, But, with all these qualifications, there is still legiti- 
us) ate being settled in the course of the war itself. mate reason for public concern—as distinguished 
on | WHAT WE CANNOT EXPECT. There are, of from idle curiosity or partisan quibbling—regarding 
als | course, certain things which the public, in the very the application of the basic assumptions of our for- 
ory | nature of things, cannot expect the government to eign policy. People cannot but recall that, before 
he { do, either here or in Britain. We cannot expect mil- 1939, we also officially proclaimed our adherence to 
ns, | itary or political leaders to reveal, on the eve of an the ideals of international collaboration yet, when 
ter invasion which, if it were not successful, would prove it came to specific issues, Britain and the United 
ty, | 4ttagic catastrophe, the details of military plans con- States acted again and again as if they had never 
ho | Certed among the United Nations. Nor does the pub- heard of these ideals. True, in this respect the Anglo- 
he | lic expect to receive daily bulletins from the diplo- Americans were no worse than other nations. The 
,er | matic front. President Wilson’s famous phrase, “open trouble was however that, to a far greater extent 
ed covenants openly arrived at,” represents an aspira- than other nations, they did create the impression 





' tion which cannot, in practice, be achieved in most 





transactions among human beings, let alone nations. 
Nor does any reasonable person expect that per- 


that their conduct would be guided by moral con- 
cepts. 


In extenuation for this discrepancy between theory 





a ety ah + aman Seay inl i ite ase a 
9 et 
z oooh See nt 





* 
fi 


ff 
it 
+} 
4% 
f 


4 


>>>>E=ay~xy==>EaEEyeyryyE—eeEe «| Page TW 


and practice, the plea has been made that the gov- 
ernments of the two countries were powerless dur- 
ing the inter-war years to move ahead of their 
peoples who, admittedly, feared war, and acquiesced 
in successive compromises to avoid it. But if this 
plea is tenable, then there is all the more reason 
today why the leaders of the two great Western de- 
mocracies should try to enlist the support of public 
opinion for the main lines of policy they propose to 
follow. Like all human beings, they have made mis- 
takes in the past—not merely on details, but on in- 
terpretation of fundamental trends in world affairs; 
and there is no guarantee that they will not make 
mistakes in the future. Errors in judgment are costly 


a 
—— 








——_ 
in all spheres of activity; in international affairs they 
can cost millions of lives. Far from being resentfy| 
of the widespread discussion aroused by interna. 
tional issues in Britain and the United States, the 
governments of the two countries should welcome 
this evidence of greater public interest in what are 
for all of us matters of life and death, and encour. 
age the formation of intelligent opinion. For it js 


only with the understanding, not the blind, support | 


of public opinion that Britain and the United States 
can finally succeed in translating copy-book maxims 
about world collaboration into concrete workaday 
measures. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


WILL JAPANESE INVASION BREAK POLITICAL DEADLOCK IN INDIA? 


The battle of Burma which, as Prime Minister 
Churchill warned on March 26, ‘is not by any means 
decided yet,” presents an involved picture of simul- 
taneous Allied and enemy offensives conducted on 
widely separated fronts. In the Arakan region—the 


» western coastal area adjoining India—troops of the 


Indian Army have been making slow progress in the 
direction of the Burmese port of Akyab, which was 
the object of an unsuccessful British drive in the 
winter of 1942-43. Five hundred miles to the north 
several other United Nations forces are gradually 
converging on the Japanese base at Myitkyina in a 
campaign executed with great skill under Lieutenant 
General Stilwell in accordance with decisions reached 
at the Quebec conference of August 1943. 


ALLIED OBJECTIVES IN THE NORTH. The 
strategy now being pursued against the Japanese in 
Burma is one of limited objectives, but some of the 
goals are of considerable importance. This is par- 
ticularly true of Myitkyina, whose fall would make 
air transport from northeast India to China a much 
safer, easier task, by eliminating some of the danger- 
ous flying over extremely high mountains now neces- 
sary to avoid Japanese planes. At the same time, 
progress of the supply road under construction from 
Ledo in India across northern Burma to China would 
be facilitated. 

The taking of Myitkyina is an international task, 
involving Chinese, American, British, Indian, Gurkha 
and Kachin troops. The Chinese, trained in India 
with American equipment, probably form the largest 
group, and have demonstrated clearly their ability, 
when given modern weapons and training, not only 
to hold the enemy but to drive him back. On March 
7 they effected a junction with American troops in 
north Burma. This followed by two days the landing 
of British-Indian airborne troops, supplied by Amer- 
ican air transport and glider units, some distances to 
the south of Myitkyina in a daring move which 
threatened Japanese supply routes to the forces in 
that city. Meanwhile, north of Myitkyina, British offi- 


cers have been leading forces composed of Gurkha 
soldiers from the state of Nepal and Kachin tribes- 
men from Burma. 


JAPANESE INVADE INDIA. The Japanese have | troop 


replied to the various Allied actions by launching a 
three-pronged drive across the Indian frontier, ap- 
parently with the immediate objective of taking 
Imphal, capital of the British Indian state of Mani- 
pur. The situation in this area is extremely unclear, 
but it would be a grave error at present to assume 
that the Japanese do not have serious military in- 
tentions. For if they could take Imphal and then 
march up the all-weather highway from that city to 
the Assam-Bengal railway, they would cut the key 
supply line servicing Stilwell’s troops in north Burma 
and the plane traffic with China. The enemy is, of 
course, a long way from accomplishing this, and its 
shortage of aircraft will present serious difficulties. 
Yet the objective is one for which Tokyo undoubted- 
ly would be willing to pay a heavy price. Despite the 
many setbacks suffered by Japan in the Pacific, the 
Japanese army has been relatively untouched in the 
actions so far conducted by the Allies and, in man- 
power and training, is probably more powerful than 
before Pearl Harbor. Moreover, as Prime Minister 
Churchill remarked, the Japanese fleet, although un- 
willing to face the American Navy in the Pacific, 
may seek action in Indian waters. 

There is no indication that Japanese actions in the 


Indian theatre will take United Nations military | 


leaders by surprise. Not only did Mr. Churchill al- 
lude on March 26 to the presence in that area of “a 
powerful battle fleet under Admiral Somerville,” but 
more than three months ago, on December 13, 1943, 
in a broadcast which appears not to have been re 
called in recent days, General Sir Claude Auchinleck, 
Commander-in-Chief in India, declared that a land in- 
vasion of India was quite possible. “So far,” he said, 
“the Japanese have never crossed our land frontiets, 
but that is not because they could not do so. . . . They 
may yet try something of this kind in an attempt to 





cause 
but th 


| might 


these 
they 1 

PO: 
aspect 
ed by 
Japan 
and fF 
dians. 
weapr 


possit 


| 
Gove! 


use of 
This 
ship ¢ 





Bose, 


Gove 
fall ii 
the J: 
land | 
to m 


: soil. 











gand 
| thou; 


suma 
com 





mate 


« parti 





reite! 
ary | 
their 
lease 
amor 
4 pow! 
to be 


* 





FSi/ _ 


— | 


secon 
one f 





ha 


ive 


ster 


«| Foreign Policy Association, 22 East 38 St., New York 16. 





Qe 
— 





cause alarm and in order to assist their propaganda, 
but they can do us no real harm in this way. They 
might even try to land small parties on our coasts 
_,.. 1 assure you that we are constantly considering 
these possibilities and how to deal with them, should 
| they materialise.” 


POSSIBLE POLITICAL GAINS. The political 
aspects of the invasion of India have been highlight- 
ed by Premier Tojo’s statement of March 22 that 
Japan expects to “repulse the enemy military forces 
and put India completely in the hands of the In- 
dians.” He referred to two of Japan’s propaganda 
weapons in the struggle for Indian opinion: the 


| possibility of establishing a Free India Provisional 


Government on conquered Indian land, and to the 
use of the ‘Indian National Army”’ in the campaign. 
This army, organized by Tokyo under the leader- 
ship of the pro-Axis Indian leader, Subhas Chandra 
Bose, is said to be operating together with Japanese 
_ troops in the drive on Imphal. The “Provisional 
Government,” also led by Bose, was established last 
fall in Singapore and later transferred to Burma. If 
the Japanese can carve out for themselves an area of 
land on India’s eastern border, they may be expected 
to move the “Provisional Government” to Indian 
: soil. 


There is no way of estimating what effect propa- 
| ganda of this type may have in India but, even 
| though the so-called Indian National Army is pre- 
sumably small in numbers, there is little reason for 
complacency. The Indian situation remains a stale- 
mate, with the country quiet, but the main political 





« parties dissatisfied. The official British attitude, as 


reiterated by the Viceroy, Lord Wavell, on Febru- 
ary 17, is that the Congress leaders must renounce 
their non-recognition policy before they can be re- 
leased and that Indian groups must reach agreement 
among themselves before any transfer of political 
« power can take place. The Indians appear, however, 
| to be unlikely, for a variety of reasons, to take either 





For a detailed discussion of one possible outlet for 

| uprooted populations, read— 

THE AMAZON: A NEW FRONTIER? 
by Earl Parker Hanson 


25c 


March issue of HEADLINE SERIES 
Order from 





Page Three 


























of these steps solely on their own initiative, although 
they might respond to official proposals. 


A TIME FOR ACTION. The situation is one 
that seems ripe for some new move by the Govern- 
ment of India, designed to break the deadlock. The 
Viceroy has stated that he would “like to have the 
cooperation” of the nationalists and that he does not 
seek to have the Congress put itself “in sackcloth 
and ashes.” It would be thoroughly consistent with 
the moderate tone of these remarks if he would 
clarify the forms of cooperation that the Government 
has in mind and make it possible for the nationalist 
leaders and their organization to consult on this basis 
concerning changes in policy. The success of such 
actions, which could, at first, be of an exploratory, 
private character, might well be facilitated by the 
deep concern that must be arising among Indians 
over Japan’s invasion of their national soil. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 





Report on India, by T. A. Raman. New York, Oxford Uni- 
versity Press, 1943. $2.50 


An Indian journalist finds himself in essential agree- 
ment with the official British position on current Indian 
affairs. In the political sections the author shows a 
marked tendency to overlook facts that do not fit in with 
his thesis, but there is no doubt as to the excellence of the 
non-political chapters dealing with Indian history and life. 


The Vatican and The War, by Camille Cianfarra. New 
York, Dutton, 1944. $3.00 


Correspondent’s reminiscences of Rome before 1942— 
not always sticking close to the titular subject, toward 
which its attitude is sympathetic. 


The Long Balkan Night, by Leigh White. New York, 
Scribner’s, 1944. $3.50 


Intelligent first-hand account of the impact of the Nazi 


army on Hungary, Rumania, Yugoslavia and Greece dur- 
ing 1940-41. 


China Handbook, 1937-1943. Compiled by the Chinese Min- 
istry of Information. New York, Macmillan, 1943. $5.00 


An over-all factual survey of Chinese affairs during the 
past six years, covering such subjects as the Kuomintang, 
government structure, foreign relations, public finance, 
communications, courts and prisons, military affairs, edu- 
cation and research, industry and labor, mineral resources, 
the press, relief activities, and price control. Also in- 
cluded are a chronology of major events, a government 
directory, and a Chinese “Who’s Who.” Persons using this 
valuable reference work should bear in mind the fact that 
it is entirely official in its analysis of events and selection 
of subject matter. 


British Economic Interests in the Far East, by E. M. 
Gull. New York, Institute of Pacific Relations in asso- 
ciation with Oxford University Press, 1943. $3.00 
A carefully written account of Britain’s Far Eastern 

stake, with strong emphasis on the detailed facts of the 


past hundred years. Invaluable for the student of Far 
Eastern affairs. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 24, MarcH 31, 1944, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lugt, Secretary; Vera MicHeies Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 
oe month for change of address on membership publications. 


Se" 





1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





Washington News Letter 














MaRCH 27.— Criticisms last week by Wendell 
Willkie and Governor Thomas E. Dewey, each po- 
tentially a Republican nominee for the presidency, of 
the Washington Administration for its conduct of 
foreign affairs suggest that foreign policy will pro- 
vide the coming campaign with one of its most sharp- 
ly drawn issues. 


DISSATISFIED WITH FOREIGN POLICY. 
Dissatisfaction regarding foreign policy in some 
quarters seems to spring from the impression that the 
Administration is either confusing promises with 
policy or that it is withholding essential information 
from the public. President Roosevelt and Secretary of 
State Cordell Hull have pledged themselves in the 
past to uphold the principles of international collab- 
oration (the Moscow Declaration), of democracy 
on a world-wide basis (Four Freedoms), and of na- 
tional self-determination (Atlantic Charter), but so 
far the public can see little evidence that the pledges 
have been implemented in practice. 

President Roosevelt and Secretary Hull have sought 
in a number of ways to quiet the growing demand for 
clear action in foreign affairs. The President, at 
his news conference of March 24, declared that we 
have a foreign policy even if some people don’t think 
so. Mr. Hull issued a 17-point statement on foreign 
policy on March 22; expounded his views for more 
than two hours on March 24 to 23 Republican Rep- 
resentatives who have consistently favored interna- 
tional collaboration; announced that he will shortly 
deliver an address on foreign policy; and invited the 
members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee 
to confer with him after Easter on the development 
of a plan for fitting the United States into the world 
political organization envisaged by the Moscow 
Declaration. 

As evidence of the Administration’s direct and 
practical interest in world affairs, President Roose- 
velt on March 24 publicly requested the “free peoples 
of Europe and Asia” to admit refugees, particularly 
Jews oppressed in Nazi-held Europe, and Secretary 
Hull announced on March 25 that the United States 
would be represented at the conference of Allied 
Ministers of Education in London this spring. 

Mr. Hull’s 17-point statement represented an ad- 
mirable outline of objectives (all of which had been 
set forth in Washington previously), but the Secre- 
tary refrained from filling in the details of the outline. 
In brief, he said national interest is the basis of for- 
eign policy. He advocated international cooperation; 


FOR VICTORY ° 


creation of an international agency that could k 
the peace by force; settlement of international differ. 
ences by discussion, negotiation, conciliation and 
good offices; settlement of international legal dis. - 
putes in an international court; reduction of arms: 
acceptance of the Moscow Declaration; erasure of 
spheres of influence and alliances; surveillance over 
aggressor nations; lowering “excessive” trade bar. 
riers; stabilizing currencies; satisfaction of the At 
lantic Charter with the reservation that each nation : 
must “demonstrate its capacity for stable and pro. 
gressive government’’; continued acceptance of the 
principles of the sovereign equality of nations large 
or small, of nations’ rights to choose their own form 
of government, and of non-intervention. He also ex. 
pressed the view that a people willing to fight for 
liberty is entitled to liberty, and that free nations 
must prepare dependent peoples for “the responsibil. 
ities of self-government.” 

Mr. Roosevelt on March 24 added to the list 
when, in reading his statement on refugees, he said 
that its first paragraph was a very good answer to 
some people who are wandering around asking bell- 
hops whether we have a foreign policy. The pata- 
gtaph said: “The United Nations are fighting to 
make a world in which tyranny and aggression can- 
not exist; a world based upon freedom, equality and 
justice; a world in which all persons regardless of 
race, color or creed may live in peace, honor and dig- ° 
nity.” 

REPUBLICAN CRITICISMS. The pressure for 
clarification of American foreign policy comes not 
only from political opponents of the President and 
from isolationists, but also from those who have, 
favored international collaboration in the past. The 
point of view of the latter was summed up by Hal 
Holmes, of Washington, one of the 23 Republican \ 
Representatives who called on Mr. Hull. He said: 
“We haven't any definite policy except silence.’ | 
It is essential, however, at this critical juncture . 
to distinguish between the attacks made on President | 
Roosevelt by Republican leaders for election put-| 
poses, and genuine criticism of certain specific pol- ) 
icies of the Administration. Subsequent articles will 
analyze the controversies aroused by our policy 00 | 
France and our interpretation of the Atlantic Charter, « 
as well as measures already taken by the Administta- | 
tion in the direction of international collaboration. | 











BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 














as t 
and 
of * 
bett 
ped 
thet 
Stat 
lem 


of | 


» Ital 


/ 
Cor 
loo! 
Un: 
agr 
met 
enc 
strc 
biti 
for 
wh 
iza' 
wit 
tro 
in 
gre 
cra 
Sat 
on 
the 
—| 
Ste 
eve 
wh 
ist 
mc 


