- | FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


n- 
ye 
f- 
e- 

a 
SS 
is 
in 
r- 
er 
al 
an 


a, 
~ 


S: 
he 
‘a- 
on 
n- 


d. 


ok, 
36. 


nn, 
2n- 


an 


50- 
In- 


nic 
“he 


or- 


rk, 


the 
nic 
ex- 
ith 
mic 


rge 


on- 
and 
ted 
ess. 


ional 








a Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 
pICAL ROOF 


>»: | )R@AROREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


DEC $ 193 


Entered as second- 





2, 1921, at the Poss 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. » 














Vou. XVII, No. 5 


NOVEMBER 26, 1937 





CAN JAPAN BE QUARANTINED? 
by John C. deWilde 


Japan’s invasion of China has once more raised the 
question of imposing economic penalties against aggres- 
sor nations. This report discusses the effectiveness—and 
the danger—of isolating Japan by imposing an embargo 
on shipments of raw materials, and at the same time 
reviews the League’s experience in imposing sanctions 
on Italy. 


25 cents a copy 


ANNOUNCEMENT: December 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


General Library 


CS 
=] 


niversity of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











“JAPAN FLOUTS CONFERENCE, DRIVES ON IN CHINA 





— a failure by Senator Key Pittman in 
the United States and Foreign Minister Yvon 
Delbos in France, the Brussels conference was sched- 
uled on November 24 to conclude its humiliating 
endeavors to mediate the Sino-Japanese conflict. The 
stat of the conference sank rapidly when it became 
| apparent that neither the United States nor any other 

wer would take the lead in exerting pressure on 
Tokyo. With no adequate rejoinder to Japan’s curt 
refusal, on November 12, to accept their second in- 
vitation to mediate, the delegates took refuge in 
a mild reprimand adopted three days later, con- 
demning the illegality of Japan’s armed intervention 
in China in disregard of treaty provisions. Even 
this innocuous declaration, containing nothing 

stronger than the vague threat that the conferees 
“must consider what is to be their common atti- 
tude,” provoked the disapproval of the Italian dele- 
gate and a significant abstention on the part of the 
| Scandinavian nations. Tokyo’s response was a de- 
tisive statement issued by its Brussels embassy on 
November 16. Chiding the conference for its lack of 
unanimity, the Japanese proclaimed they could not 
“but laugh” at a situation in which the U.SSR., 
tegarded as a proponent of aggressive designs of its 
} own in China and in any case not a party to the 
Nine-Power Pact, condemns Japan for interfering in 
China’s affairs, while nations which have repudiated 
war-debt obligations castigate Japan as a treaty 
violator. 

Further evidence that leaders in the Western 
democracies have little faith in the possibilities of 
collective action was afforded by the revelation, on 
November 16, that the French government had for- 
bidden munitions shipments to the Chinese via Indo- 
China. Both Paris and Tokyo were quick to deny 
the intimation of Senator Henri Bérenger, chairman 
of the French Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, that 





Japan had sent an ultimatum threatening to occupy 
strategic Hainan Island and even certain Indo- 
Chinese ports unless such shipments were halted. It 
was implied, nevertheless, that there had been a 
“verbal warning,” to which the French government 
had responded with a “‘voluntary” embargo appar- 
ently imposed without public notice on October 13. 
Of little practical importance, since transport facili- 
ties from the terminus of the French railway to the 
Chinese battlefronts are poor, this announcement 
was not without effect on the morale of the Brussels 
delegates. 

As it achieved these signal successes at Brussels, 
Japan continued its military advance in China at an 
undiminished pace. Meanwhile, divesting himself of 
civil office in a government reorganization, Chiang 
Kai-shek is preparing for a stout defense of Nan- 
king, and transferring the Kuomintang government 
offices into the interior. On November 17 it was 
announced that Nanking’s supreme executive or- 
gans would be moved to Chungking, more than 
700 miles to the west, and beyond easy bombing 
range of Japanese planes. Most government minis- 
tries were grouped at Hankow, 300 miles west of 
Shanghai, while some were moved to Changsha, to 
the south. Although this move indicated a desire to 
draw the Japanese far into the interior, its ultimate 
success was predicated on the highly doubtful as- 
sumption that a decentralized Chinese government, 
starved for munitions and supplies, could maintain 
its unity. Foreign observers foresaw a possibility that 
Japan would set up a puppet government at Nan- 
king, recognize it as legitimate, and utilize control 
of communications to the interior to maintain Jap- 
anese influence over autonomous provincial régimes 
in areas too distant for direct Japanese control. 

If Chiang’s actions are indicative of a determina- 
tion to gamble on the inevitability of Japan’s collapse 





a Page Tw 


after a long campaign, Japan, on its side, shows 
every evidence of willingness to continue hostilities 
until all China is subjugated. Already, on Novem- 
ber 22, Japanese representatives at Shanghai claimed 
that as conquerors they were entitled to exercise all 
the sovereign rights of China in the International 
Settlement and the French Concession, including 
control of customs, mails, communications and 
Chinese courts. Officials in the foreign areas were 
“requested” to suppress anti-Japanese activities, evict 
Chinese government authorities, and put an end to 
Chinese censorship. A military spokesman had previ- 
ously warned that if Leftist and anti-Japanese activi- 
ties were not suppressed, the Army reserved the 
tight to take necessary measures. With only verbal 
support to be expected from their home govern- 
ments, the foreign inhabitants of the Settlements ap- 
peared to be facing the gradual destruction of their 
special privileges at the hands of the Japanese. 

At home, Japan was settling down under a mili- 
tary regimen which must necessarily continue for 
many months after cessation of organized Chinese 
resistance. The government has already decided to 
formulate a war budget for 1938, in which all mili- 
tary expenses, continuing at the present level, will 
be met through internal loans. An Imperial general 
headquarters with a purely military personnel, be- 
lieved likely to overshadow the civilian cabinet, was 
formally established on November 20 to supervise 
the conduct of the war. The Social Mass party, once 
hailed by some liberals as a real potential check to 
Japan’s militarists, adopted a party platform strongly 
tinged with Nazi doctrine on November 15. United 
and determined at home, triumphantly successful in 
flouting the efforts of the status quo powers abroad, 
Japan appears unassailable until the corrosive forces 
of war and poverty undermine its national structure. 


Davi H. Popper 


LORD HALIFAX VISITS GERMANY 

In sending Viscount Halifax, Lord President of 
the Council, to Germany, and in recently approach- 
ing Mussolini, the British government has made one 
more attempt to reach an understanding with the 
two fascist powers of Europe. British official circles 
have always deprecated all thought of an ideological 
division between democracy and fascism, and have 
persistently watched for a chance to bridge the ex- 
isting conflict of interests. Whether Lord Halifax's 
four-day visit to Germany, which ended on Novem- 
ber 21, will create such an opportunity is doubtful. 
While Lord Halifax had only a few hours to sound 
out Hitler at the latter’s mountain retreat, he had 
more extensive conversations with Foreign Minister 
von Neurath and also exchanged views with 
Goebbels and General Goering. The only immedi- 
ately tangible result will probably be an invitation 








—_—. 
ee 


to Baron von Neurath to return the visit in London 
some time in the near future. 

The initial obstacle to an Anglo-German rap. 
prochement lies in the prevailing uncertainty con. 
cerning Hitler's foreign aims. Hitherto the German 
government has steadfastly resisted all attempts to 
elicit a clear statement of its intentions. The British 
questionnaire of May 1936 remained unanswered, 
and von Neurath’s projected trip to London last 
June was cancelled largely because Berlin officials 
were unprepared to face embarrassing questions, 
Meanwhile Britain, as well as other countries, is stil] 
curious. Has Germany given up the plans for east 
ward expansion at the expense of the Soviet Union 
which are set forth in Mein Kampf and other au- 
thoritative Nazi utterances? Will Germany use its 
anti-Comintern pact with Italy and Japan as a new 
Holy Alliance for the purpose of intervening in the 
internal concerns of any country which this trio of 
powers considers threatened by communism? Whar 
are the extent and implications of the Reich's colonial 
claims? If the British government can secure answers 
to these and similar queries, something at least will 
have been gained.  ~ 

Some observers suspect that Britain might be will- 
ing to negotiate a deal by which Germany would 
renounce its colonial aspirations in return for a free 
hand in Eastern Europe. While certain conservative 
die-hards are undoubtedly anxious to protect the 
British Empire by such a manoeuvre, it is doubtful 
that the present government would acquiesce, at 
least as long as Mr. Eden remains at the Foreign 


Office. The Foreign Minister has often emphasized / 


that British unwillingness to accept definite com- 
mitments in Eastern Europe by no means implied 
toleration of aggression in that area; and on Lord 
Halifax's departure for Berlin, Eden’s press organ 
the Yorkshire Post, issued a solemn warnin 
cerning Germany’s Drang Nach Osten. \c may be 
however, that the ideas long sponsored by the in 
fluential Marquess of Lothian and certain other Con 
servatives will now find a favorable reception. Lord 
Lothian would leave the Reich free to exercise a pre 
ponderant political and economic influence in Cen 
tral and Southeastern Europe in exchange for an 
undertaking not to disturb the territorial status quo. 

Those who would direct Germany's expansionist 
ambitions entirely to Eastern Europe must contend 
also with Hitler’s determination to recover the for- 
mer German colonies. While foreign critics have 
pointed out that the entire exports of Germany's 
former possessions would constitute only a small 
percentage of the Reich’s total imports, Germans 
believe these colonies are susceptible of much mort 
intensive exploitation and could ultimately relieve 
the Reich to some extent from the pressure of world 


(Continued on Page 4) 


ft 
, 


| 











1ap- 


con- 


S to 
itish 
red, 

last 


Ons, 


Cast- 
nion 
ale 
e its 
new 
| the 
O of 
V hat 
ynial 
wers 
will 


will- 
ould 

free 
ative 
the 
brful 
at 
reign 
sized 


sll 





Wash ington News Letter 

















SS 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 23—The long awaited announcement that 
Britain and the United States had decided to nego- 
tiate a reciprocal trade agreement, made simultane- 
ously here and in London on November 18, has 
served the double purpose of launching a new and 
imposing offensive by the two leading democracies 
in the field of international economic cooperation 
while covering a retreat from Brussels, where signa- 
rories of the Nine-Power Pact have failed to find any 
effective basis for “concerted action” to end hostili- 
ties in the Far East. 

British trade agreement opens wide field. On its 
own account, the British trade agreement is regarded 
here as an event of paramount importance. Not only 
is it the keystone to the arch which Mr. Hull has 
been building for over three years, but it may prove 
to be the central support for an even more imposing 
trade agreement structure which will include the 
British dominions and other vital commercial cen- 
ters. If remaining details can be adjusted, the British 
agreement will pave the way to a series of supple- 
mentary accords which, it is fervently hoped, will 
open up an area of freer trade wide enough to check 
the trend toward economic nationalism. 

Behind the prosaic State Department announce- 
ment there is a dramatic story which extends back 
over more than a year of preliminary discussions. 
When first approached by Mr. Hull, London was 
cool if not unfriendly. The Conservative government 
was wedded to Imperial Preference and apprehen- 
sive about the American Neutrality Act. The ice 
was broken when Walter Runciman came to Wash- 
ington early in February, but little real progress was 
made before March, when Norman Davis, Ambassa- 
dor-at-Large, canvassed the situation with members 
of the British government in London. Then the 
Ottawa agreements, with their preferential tariffs be- 
tween members of the British Commonwealth, 
proved the major stumbling block. Washington flatly 
refused to proceed with the talks unless the Ottawa 
pteferences could be modified; London balked, 
and for some time the discussions seemed hopelessly 
wrecked on the rock of Imperial Preference. Finally, 
realizing perhaps the political consequences of re- 
fusal, Neville Chamberlain conceded the point and 
agreed in principle. Still the nub of the problem re- 
mained unsolved: the question then was how to 
compensate the Dominions for losses in the British 
market. The British suggested that it was up to the 


United States to compensate the Dominions by grant- 
ing simultaneous concessions to them; this, Wash- 
ington turned down on the ground that it would 
be required to make two concessions for each one 
granted by Britain. Once again a deadlock ensued 
which lasted until London capitulated. 

Under the formula finally agreed upon, Britain 
will grant the Dominions “compensating advan- 
tages” in return for concessions made to the United 
States at their expense. This will leave the Dominions 
free to bargain separately with the United States for 
advantages which had formerly been reserved to the 
mother country, and will make it possible for Wash- 
ington to approach the Dominions on a basis of 
full equality. As a result, Mr. Hull intends to push 
forward with a new Canadian agreement and to seek 
separate accords with Australia—now on the State 
Department “black list’ because of its discrimina- 
tion against the United States—New Zealand and 
South Africa. There is also. good reason to believe 
that negotiations will not stop with the British Do- 
minions, but will be extended soon to Argentina and 
Uruguay in South America. 

While welcoming this important break in the log 
jam, trade agreement officials are not discounting the 
obstacles which remain to be overcome. There are 
months of hard bargaining ahead before even the 
British agreement can be signed, and further con- 
cessions must be made by both sides. Finally, there 
is the bitter opposition which is bound to come from 
vested interests who believe that their private pre- 
serves are about to be entered. Already there are - 
warning cries from Congress, in which suspicions 
of undercover “political” commitments are joined 
with opposition to any further tampering with pro- 
tected industries. More will be heard from this quar- 
ter as negotiations proceed. 

Retreat from Brussels. One apparent reason for 
the haste in announcing the British agreement was 
the unhappy position of the Brussels conference, 
which is destined to end its fruitless labors tomor- 
row. The failure is now admitted, however reluc- 
tantly, by officials here. About the only accomplish- 
ment, in the American view, is the moral verdict 
registered by the conference, which “keeps the record 
straight” even if it offers no solution to the problem 
of halting the conflict in Asia. 

At the moment, this leaves American foreign pol- 
icy in a state of suspense. Congress has served warn- 
ing that it will have plenty to say about foreign 
policy — most of it negative— during the coming 








ae omens — 
— — meas 








weeks. While no formal step was taken last week 
to censure the President for his failure to apply the 
Neutrality Act, there is a strong undercurrent of 
Opposition to the measures implied in the President's 
“quarantine” s at Chicago. An indication of 
Congressional fears of war involvement, moreover, 
is found in the war referendum resolutions by Sena- 
tors LaFollette and Capper. These resolutions and 
the Ludlow referendum introduced in the House 
last year are certain to provoke debate before this 
session is over. 





LORD HALIFAX VISITS GERMANY 
(Continued from Page 2) 
wide economic nationalism. Moreover, the German 
people are anxious to strike from the Versailles 
Treaty that “colonial lie’ which held them morally 
unqualified to administer backward territories. While 
Hitler undoubtedly broached the subject of colonies 
with Lord Halifax, the latter was probably not very 
encouraging. The British government has always 
deprecated any discussion of this question and the 
Conservative party congress has recorded its unquali- 
fied opposition. Even the British who favor some con- 
cessions in this field fear that these may in the end 
lead to further German demands for a larger navy to 
protect the new possessions. Yet Chancellor Hitler, in 

















Page Four — — —. FC 


——— 


a speech delivered in Augsburg on November 21,) “” 
confidently predicted that the outside world would 
ultimately have to listen to the Reich’s colonial. 
claims. 


Whether some Anglo-German accord can be 
reached will depend not only on Britain’s willingness} V- 
to make concessions, but on Germany's need of an 
agreement. There is some possibility that the in. 
creasing economic and financial strain inside Ger. 
many may in the end compel the Nazi government 
to seek British aid. The country’s internal debt con. 
tinues to rise and the extension of German produc. 
tive capacity necessitated by the Four-Year plan and 
rearmament has aggravated the shortage of raw ma. | 
terials despite the increase in foreign trade. The ap. 
parent refusal of the government to accept Dr, | == 
Schacht’s resignation has led to rumors that some 
modification may take place in the policy of eco.) ~~ 
nomic autarchy hitherto followed by Germany, | 
Should the Reich decide to reintegrate its economy | T 
more closely with that of the rest of the world,|_. 








British assistance in the form of loans and trade ms 
facilities would be valuable. At present, however, f 
there are no substantial indications that such a de- ~ 
velopment is actually impending. me 
JOHN C. DEWILDE | and 

furt 

con 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf whi 


Prices in Recession and Recovery, by Frederick C. Mills. 
New York, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
1936. $4.00 


This excellent study comes to the conclusion that a 
more smoothly functioning economic order would be in- 
sured if the benefits of increasing productivity were wide- 
ly diffused through reductions in prices, leading to greater 
production and more employment, rather than through 
higher wages and profits. 


Why We Went to War, by Newton D. Baker. New York, 
Harper & Bros. (for the Council on Foreign Relations), 
1936. $1.50 

Neutrality for the United States, by Edwin Borchard and 
William Potter Lage. New Haven, Yale University 
Press, 1937. $3.50 


Representing diametrically opposed points of view, these 
two volumes are indispensable for any study of American 
neutrality policy in the light of wartime experience. Baker 
defends the impartiality of Wilson, who was forced into 
war by the German submarine; Borchard and Lage de- 
nounce the Anglophile bias of the President and his ad- 
visers, who surrendered American independence by their 
consistently unneutral actions. Typical are their com- 
pletely contradictory views on the Lusitania episode. 
Arguing for a return to Washington’s “Farewell Ad- 
dress,” the Yale scholars fulminate effectively against 
American dabblings in collective security during the post- 
war years. 


Britain Faces Germany, by A. L. Kennedy. New York, P®™ 
Oxford University Press, 1937. $1.50 I 


A sane appraisal of mutual mistakes in Anglo-German con 
relations, concluding with a lucid argument for a transfer 


ais le 

of some colonies in return for cooperation in European . 
appeasement. | rn 
mo 


Economic Planning in Australia, 1929-1936, by William | gn, 
Rupert Maclaurin. London, P. S. King & Son, 1937. 15s. - 


A comprehensive survey of depression and recovery, Ge 
which concludes that governmental planning and good 
luck combined to save Australia. The crisis brought on has 
by over-borrowing, falling prices, rigid wages and high | thy 
protection was alleviated by reduction of interest rates, de! 
public works, exchange depreciation and good weather. 
The empirical methods and shifting policies afford an in- | ©? 
teresting comparison with the American New Deal. | Fre 





Bismarck and British Colonial Policy: The Problem of " 
South West Africa, 1888-1885, by William Osgood | *™ 
Aydelotte. Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania all 
Press, 1937. $2.00 the 


A well-documented monograph dealing with the Anglo- | T¢ 
German diplomatic interchange which resulted in Ger- | 
many’s first African colonial acquisition. Contains in- 
teresting material on the development of pre-war imperl- W 
alism in the two countries and on Bismarck’s adroitness th 
in taking advantage of British blunders. th 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 5, Novemser 26, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 





Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasime Busit, President; Vera MicHetes Dagan, Editer. Entered as second-class mattet su 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. te: 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year ad 








