












































ade 


Ind 
Ot- 
lis- 


yre- 
ups 
1in- 


1 of 
sing 
lus. 


on 
lent 
en- 
led 
in- 
“esi- 
r to 


l on & 


nV a 


tice- 
ign- 


‘ 


for- 


ince, & 
ros: FF 


insi- 
rions 
* the 
omic 
1erly 
been 
and 
ident 
m of 
 eC0- 
bar- 
e ex 
od to 
ences 
luled 


rican 
A.T. 


— 
Nations: 
Editor 


r. 


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 





‘om- & 


VoL. XV, No. 5 


NOVEMBER 29, 1935 





OUTER MONGOLIA 
A NEW DANGER ZONE IN THE FAR EAST 
by T. A. Bisson 
Japan’s advance in Inner Mongolia; Outer Mon- 


golian issues; Founding of the Mongolian People’s 


Republic; Stages of the Mongolian revolution. 


November 20 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25c. 





Entered as second- 
class matter Dedember 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











Periodical Division, 
Library of Congress, 


Tashineton, D.C. 











JAPAN POSTPONES NORTH CHINA 


“AUTONOMY” 





APAN’S projected seizure of five north China 
provinces under the guise of an “autonomy” 

movement, confidently predicted for November 23 
at the latest, ended in an anti-climax on Novem- 
ber 24 with the proclamation of autonomy for a 
small area in northern Hopei and eastern Chahar 
provinces. The failure of the earlier program 
proved somewhat embarrassing to Tokyo, which 
advanced several conflicting explanations to ac- 
count for the obvious setback to Japanese plans. 
Although the original five-province scheme has 
temporarily miscarried, there is every indication 
that the newly established régime in northern 
Hopei will attempt to extend its sphere of control 
in the near future. 

From its earliest stages the north China au- 
tonomy movement had clearly been supported both 
by the Tokyo Foreign Office and the Japanese 
military. A series of conferences at Shanghai 
between Japanese diplomatic, military and naval 
officials had ended on October 21 in full agree- 
ment on a “new policy” regarding Chinese ques- 
tions. Preliminary demands were presented to 
the north China officials on October 29 in a note 
submitted by the Japanese Consul-General at 
Tientsin. On the same day the Japanese Ambas- 
sador, Akira Ariyoshi, declared in an interview 
at Shanghai that the “unsettled conditions” of 
“the five northern provinces” required the estab- 
lishment in north China “of a stable and reliable 
government of genuine permanency.” With this 
support from Japanese diplomatic officials the 
military, headed by Major-General Kenji Doihara 
of the Kwantung Army, brought pressure to bear 
on the Chinese generals of the northern provinces 
to establish an “autonomous” régime at Peiping. 
Major-General Doihara’s conferences with the 
north China generals were given added point by 
the mobilization of several divisions of the Kwan- 
tung Army at Shanhaikuan. By the middle of 
November the stage was set, and the proclama- 
tion of autonomy was scheduled for the week of 


November 18. On November 21, however, the 
five-province movement suddenly collapsed, and 
on November 24 an autonomous government re- 
stricted to north Hopei and eastern Chahar was 
proclaimed. 

At Tokyo official sources first claiméd that the 
five-province scheme had never been “authorized,” 
and then fell back on the customary assertion 
that a split had developed between the War and 
Foreign Offices. Since full Japanese diplomatic- 
military cooperation had existed in the early 
stages of the movement, it is clear that some un- 
expected opposition must have appeared to war- 
rant the later caution of the Foreign Office. No 
satisfactory explanation of the sources of this 
opposition has yet been made. Certain of the con- 
tributory factors, however, are fairly obvious. No 
popular support for the autonomy movement ex- 
isted in north China. Several of the Chinese gen- 
erals, notably Shang Chen in Hopei and Han Fu- 
chu in Shantung, were apparently unwilling to 
participate in the Japanese-sponsored program. 
At Nanking the project met with increasing re- 
sistance, attributed to British support. The possi- 
bility that Japan’s seizure of north China might 
foster Anglo-American cooperation at the London 
naval conference was also reported. 

Undoubtedly the decision to postpone the move- 
ment turned largely on the situation existing at 
Nanking, where the Fifth Kuomintang Congress 
has been in session since November 14. This 
Congress has been attended by a broad group of 
Kuomintang leaders, including Yen Hsi-shan and 
Feng Yu-hsiang from the north and a strong rep- 
resentation from the Southwest Political Council 
at Canton. The urgent demand of the Cantonese 
for resistance to Japan is seriously affecting the 
position of the pro-Japanese clique headed by 
Premier Wang Ching-wei, already weakened by 
the attempt to assassinate him on November 1. 
It is reported that many of Wang Ching-wei’s fol- 
lowers failed of re-election to the Central Execu- 






































tive Committee of the Kuomintang, and that his 
post may be taken by one of the southern leaders. 
Under these circumstances the Tokyo Foreign Of- 
fice may have thought it unwise to push through 
the north China autonomy movement at this time, 
since it would serve further to strengthen Wang 
Ching-wei’s opponents at Nanking. Japan’s re- 
luctance to take military action in face of the 
local “incidents” at Shanghai was possibly in- 
fluenced by similar considerations. 

Pending the final outcome of the Kuomintang 
Congress at Nanking, it is difficult to estimate the 
extent to which China may resist Japan’s aggres- 
sions. It is clear that strong sentiment for a final 
stand against Japan has arisen throughout the 
country, making it difficult for Chiang Kai-shek to 
continue his conciliatory policy. The message 
issued by Hu Shih and other leading educators of 
north China, calling on the Nanking government 
to use “the resources of the entire nation to main- 
tain its territorial and administrative integrity,” 
supplies further evidence of the popular demand 
for more effective opposition. In the present cri- 
sis, the Japanese military have hesitated to send 
troops into north China, preferring to work 
through the local Chinese generals. Should these 
generals refuse to join the newly formed autono- 
mous régime in northern Hopei, the Japanese 
may be obliged to engage on large-scale military 
operations to enforce the establishment of the 
proposed north China state. T. A. BISSON 


ANTI-BRITISH FEELING IN EGYPT 


After three years of comparative calm Egypt 
has been disturbed during the past fortnight by a 
series of riots, student agitations and popular 
demonstrations. Last week Egyptian editors and 
members of the Bar Association went on strike. 
It is rumored that young Egyptian nationalists 
are secretly arming. 

The immediate occasion for the disorders was 
Sir Samuel Hoare’s Guildhall speech of November 
9. After referring appreciatively to Egypt’s co- 
operation in League sanctions, the British Foreign 
Secretary discussed suspension of the Egyptian 
constitution. The 1923 constitution, he remarked, 
had proved unworkable and the 1930 one unpopu- 
lar. The disturbed internal situation made it un- 
wise, in his opinion, to draft a new organic law 
at the present time. 

Egypt, which after being a British protectorate 
during the World War was granted qualified in- 
dependence in 1922, has always regarded the con- 
stitutional issue as a matter of purely domestic 
concern. Britain has concurred in this view, 
contending that the British High Commissioner 
at Cairo has not interfered with constitutional 


Page Two — 








questions. Sir Samuel Hoare’s speech, however, 
is interpreted by Egyptians as proof that Britain 
has actually been blocking the country’s return to 
constitutional government. 

For five years Egyptian nationalists have been 
demanding restoration of the 1923 constitution, 
which gave the extremist majority control of par. 
liament. They never recognized the constitution 
of 1930, which virtually destroyed ministerial re- 
sponsibility to parliament and prevented the 
Chamber from initiating financial legislation. 
Last December this constitution was abolished by 
Nessim Pasha, the only nationalist Prime Minis. 
ter Egypt has had in five years. His action led 
Egyptians to anticipate an early return to the or- 
ganic law of 1923. Ten months later, when no 
constitution had yet been drafted, the nationalists 7 
withdrew their support from Nessim Pasha and |) ~ 
demanded his resignation. The recent disorders } 
indicate further opposition to the Prime Minister  — 
for permitting his policy to be dominated by Brit- 
ish interests. 

A new crisis has thus developed in the pro- 
tracted struggle between moderate and intransi- 
geant nationalists which began in 1922, when 
Britain abolished its wartime protectorate over 
Egypt. Both groups demand British withdrawal 
from Egypt, but disagree regarding the price f 
Egypt should pay to secure that withdrawal. The a 
Ethiopian war has emphasized the advantage of F 
having a clear-cut definition of Anglo-Egyptian [ 
relations. Alexandria has become an important f 
British naval base. British land and air forces 
in Egypt have been greatly increased. If war) *' 
should break out between Britain and Italy, Egyp- 
tians fear that their country might be converted 
once more into a British protectorate. 

Extremists insist that Nessim Pasha should now — 
be demanding concessions from Britain instead 
of granting them. Egypt, they argue, should aid f 
Britain against Italy only in return for a treaty 
liquidating all outstanding issues between the two 
countries and establishing Egyptian independence f 
on a permanent basis. Moderates, in reply, con- § 
tend that Egypt’s chance of securing independence Ff * 
will be stronger if it cooperates loyally with Brit- 
ain in the present crisis. They endorse Nessim f7| 
Pasha’s decision to apply sanctions against Italy fF)": 
and fear that extremist agitation will destroy 
Egypt’s prospects of ultimate emancipation. 


ELIZABETH P. MACCALLUM 


|---| 



















Mussolini’s Italy, by Herman Finer. New York, Holt, 
1935. $3.75 ¢ 
A comprehensive and valuable account of Italy’s political By *’ 

situation before the March on Rome, the character of ! 


Mussolini, and the doctrines and institutions of Fascism. Fy \ 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 5, November 29, 1935. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationa 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesire Bugiit, President; EstHer G. OGpen, Secretary; Vera MicHEies Dean, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 






