— 


cl 





nt, 
the 
ida 
nal 


la 
ites 
de. 
any 
ons 


han 


ain- 
ned 
and 
“ni- 
nds 
ver 

an 


the 


tain 
1 of 
per- 
hips 
tion 
» if 

the 
ease 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vout. XIX, No. 45 Avucust 30, 1940 














2, 1921, at the Post 
GEIODICAL Office at New York, 
UNI L LIBRARY N. Y., under the act 
« OF MICH of March 3, 1879. 
SECOND CLASS MAIL 





NEW F.P.A. HEADQUARTERS 
The new address after September 5, 1940 will be: 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION 
Midston House 
22 EAST 38th STREET 
New York, N. Y. 


The Association welcomes its members to these new quarters, where they 
will find improved facilities for study in a library well-stocked with books 
and periodicals on international affairs. 


—_—— 








| 





CANADA AND U.S. PUSH DEFENSE PLAN 





By JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


Mr. Green attended for three days the Canadian Institute on 
Economics and Politics at Lake Couchiching, Ontario, August 17-25. 


A’ the Permanent Joint Board for Defense held 
its first meeting in Ottawa on August 26, a new 
chapter was opened in the relations of Canada and 
the United States. The Joint Board, established after 
the conference of Prime Minister Mackenzie King 
and President Roosevelt near Ogdensburg, New 
York, on August 17-18, is authorized to “consider in 
the broad sense the defense of the North half of the 
Western Hemisphere.” The implications of these 
powers are so far-reaching that the Ogdensburg 
meeting, held exactly two years after President 
Roosevelt's guarantee of Canadian territorial integ- 
tity in a speech at Kingston, Ontario, seems destined 
to go down as one of the historic moments in both 
British Empire relations and American diplomacy. 


DIFFERING INTERPRETATIONS. The three 
countries most concerned in this defense agreement, 
and in the negotiations proceeding simultaneously 
over the lease of naval bases and transfer of destroy- 
ers, differ considerably in their interpretations of the 
triangular bargaining. For the United States, both 
the Joint Board and the leasing of bases fill danger- 
ous gaps in the Western Hemisphere defense sys- 
tem.* These plans, like the increasing diplomatic 
and economic cooperation of the twenty-one Ameri- 
can republics, represent fire insurance against the 
spread of the European and Asiatic conflagrations. 
Since no one can confidently predict world events in 
the next few years, or even the next few months, the 
United States is taking every possible precaution to 
protect its vital interests. A Nazi victory in the im- 
mediate future, or a prolonged period of stalemate 
and ever-spreading devastation, would obviously 
jeopardize the security of the Western Hemisphere 
nations. A British victory, moreover, would not auto- 


*Cf. Washington News Letter, Foreign Policy Bulletin, August 23, 1940. 


matically remove the present danger, as Great Brit- 
ain, weakened by air raids and submarine warfare, 
might not be able to maintain a balance of power in 
Europe or to check the spread of revolution. 

The British government has gone further in its 
interpretation, however, than any American spokes- 
man, and possibly further than the present negotia- 
tions warrant. Prime Minister Churchill, speaking in 
the House of Commons on August 20, hailed the de- 
fense discussions as follows: ‘Undoubtedly this 
process means that these two great organizations of 
the English-speaking democracies, the British Empire 
and the United States, will have to be somewhat 
mixed up together in some of their affairs for mutual 
and general advantage. For my part, looking out 
upon the future, I do not view the process with any 
misgivings. No one can stop it. Like the Mississippi 
it just keeps rolling along. Let it roll. Let it roll on 
full flood, inexorable, irresistible, to broader lands 
and better days.” Mr. Churchill probably sought not 
only to assure the more imperialistic members of the 
Conservative party that there was “no question of 
any transference of sovereignty,” but also to weaken 
German and Italian morale by proclaiming Anglo- 
American collaboration. Nothing could be better de- 
signed to give a fillip to the British war effort than 
such a declaration—though its effect on American 
opinion is less certain at this stage of the war. 

Canada welcomes the Joint Board and Naval base 
negotiations because they strengthen the defenses of 
the United States and Great Britain, upon both of 
which depend the Dominion’s territorial security, 
political independence and economic welfare. The 
Canadians, having voluntarily entered the war last 
September, are committed to a British victory and are 
making heavy sacrifices to preserve the Common- 
wealth. They realize, however, the necessity of close 
cooperation with the United States for any eventu- 
ality in Europe or the Far East. The triangular dis- 














cussions are therefore approved both by the elements 
of Canadian opinion which stress the Common- 
wealth relationship and by those who favor a sharper 
North American alignment. Canada, which has here- 
tofore remained aloof from Pan American Union, 
may soon begin to participate in the rapidly expand- 
ing political and economic activities of the Western 
Hemisphere. 


CANADA'S PRESENT POSITION. Canada is by 
no means a complete liability in the defense plans 
of the United States, for it has already been at war 
one year and has undertaken extensive military and 
industrial mobilization. Under its 1940-41 budget, 
the Dominion plans a minimum expenditure of $1,- 
148,000,000 of which $700,000,000 is designated 
for war purposes—a large sum for a population of 
11,000,000, which is less than the population of New 
York State, or only 8 per cent of that of the United 
States. Canada has 114,000 men in the Active Ser- 
vice Force at home, and 40,000 men in England, in 
addition to 100,000 men enlisted in the Non-Perma- 
nent Active Militia, corresponding to the United 
States National Guard. The Dominion has 113 naval 
vessels (mostly small auxiliary ships) on patrol and 
convoy duty in the north Atlantic, while the air 
force is expanding rapidly and the Commonwealth 
air training scheme already has 22 schools in opera- 
tion. It has fortified the Halifax naval base and other 
sections of the Atlantic coast, and established gar- 
risons in Newfoundland, a British Crown colony, as 
well as in Iceland, Bermuda, and the Caribbean. 
Canadian industry has not yet reached capacity pro- 
duction of airplanes and munitions, however, owing 
largely to British delays in placing orders in 1939. 

The Mackenzie King government has taken vig- 
orous measures, especially since the Blitzkrieg began 
in May, to make sure that Canada’s assistance will 
become fully effective next winter. On June 20, the 
Canadian Parliament passed legislation—similar to 
the grant of powers given to the Churchill govern- 


Page Two 








——— 


ment on May 22—mobilizing the entire human and 
material resources of the country. Three weeks 
later, Parliament adopted conscription, although Mr, 
Mackenzie King pledged he would never conscript 
men for service outside Canada; and all men and 
women over 16 years of age were required to regis 
ter during August 19-21. The government plans to 
begin compulsory military training about October 1, 
beginning with single men of 21 not engaged ip 
“essential” industries. The training will last only 39 
days, and will involve approximately 30,000 men 
every month. The registration proposal was vigor. 
ously denounced on August 2 by Mr. Camillien 
Houde, Mayor of Montreal, Canada’s largest city, 
Mayor Houde, a veteran politician who probably 
counted on widespread support among the French 
Canadians, was promptly arrested and interned. It js 
difficult as yet to estimate the effect of Mayor 
Houde’s stand, since the final registration returns 
have not been announced. 


FUTURE CANADIAN-AMERICAN RELA. 
TIONS. Defense cooperation will profoundly affect 
the relations of Canada and the United States, which 
have developed increasingly close economic and po- 
litical ties in recent years. The Joint Board creates an 
unusual situation in American policy, involving an 
agreement between a neutral and a belligerent. The 
measure is equally unprecedented in British Empire 
affairs, in that it brings a Dominion into the orbit of 
Western Hemisphere diplomacy. This development 
raises many exceedingly difficult questions regarding 
cooperation in foreign policy during and after this 
war, since the United States is now intimately in- 
volved in Canada’s relations with the British Com- 
monwealth. In event of a British defeat, for example, 
Canada would have to decide whether to continue the 
war, perhaps with the King and British government 
at Ottawa—a decision which would necessarily be 
affected to a considerable extent by the attitude of the 
United States. 


STRATEGIC MOVES IN THE NEAR EAST 


The ultimate outcome of the Battle of Britain, 
which remains in its indecisive, preliminary stage, 
may be considerably affected by developments now 
impending in the eastern Mediterranean. In this area 
the Italians are seeking to destroy the naval and 
military hegemony which the British have so far man- 
aged to retain despite the defection of France. The 
maintenance of this supremacy is not merely a matter 
of prestige for Britain, but is essential to enforce- 
ment of the blockade against the Axis powers. 

ACCESS TO OIL. So long as the British fleet con- 
trols the eastern Mediterranean, Germany and Italy 
cannot trade by sea with most of the Balkans and the 
Black Sea region of Soviet Russia. Vital supplies 


must still come overland by rail or via the Danube, 
where transportation facilities are heavily overtaxed. 
The air warfare in the West and the projected in- 
vasion of Britain make it particularly important for 
Germany and Italy to get unimpeded access to the 
oil of Rumania and the Caucasus. By taking over the 
direction of British and French oil companies within 
the last month, the Rumanian government took the 
preliminary steps necessary to assure virtually the 
entire oil output to Germany; but in practice there 
are probably not enough railway tank cars and river 
barges to transport it. Only the opening of communi- 
cations through the Mediterranean would make it 
possible to transport adequate quantities of oil to 





| 
| 








—_— 


Italy a 
defeat 
Axis | 
thoug 
enoug 
into t 
Ital 
motiv 
has hi 
ritori< 
know 
measi 
in his 
torate 
great 
Britis 
only | 
into 
Brita 
Near 


IT 
Italy 
in th 
hard 
whic 
base 
inva: 
bard 
attac 
vast 
few 
likel 
wea 
and 
the 





YoersFaeanerre il 


en 


be, 
ed. 


for 
the 
the 
hin 
the 
the 
ere 
vet 
Ini- 
> it 











—_——— 
— 





Italy and, via Trieste, to Germany. A decisive British 
defeat in the Mediterranean might even enable the 
Axis powers to tap the rich oil supplies of Iraq, al- 
though the British would presumably be provident 
enough to destroy the pipe lines which bring this oil 
into the Mediterranean ports of Haifa and Tripoli. 


Italy's projected campaign in the Near East is also 
motivated by other considerations. So far Mussolini 
has had only a negligible share in the sweeping ter- 
ritorial revisions effected by Hitler and Stalin. I/ Duce 
knows, however, that his future influence will be 
measured by the importance of the territorial pawns 
in his hand. The establishment of an Italian protec- 
torate over Greece and the conquest of Egypt would 
greatly reinforce his position. And the destruction of 
British naval power in the Mediterranean would not 
only realize Mussolini's ambitions to convert that sea 
into an Italian lake, but enable Italy to displace 
Britain as the predominant power throughout the 
Near East. 


ITALY TACKLES GREECE. The settlement of 
Italy's score with Greece seems logically the first step 
in this program. A direct attack on Egypt from Libya 
hardly appears feasible at this time. The coastal road 
which runs some 360 miles from the Italian naval 
base at Tobruk to Alexandria might be used for an 
invasion, but British warships could constantly bom- 
bard Italian columns proceeding by this route. Any 
attack farther south would have to be made across 
vast stretches of waterless desert relieved by only a 
few oases. The conquest of Egypt is therefore un- 
likely unless Britain’s naval power is first decisively 
weakened. Italian control of the Greek mainland 
and many of the Greek Islands would certainly put 
the Italian fleet in a much better position to chal- 
lenge the British. 

If the Italo-Greek crisis should develop into war, 
the Italians would probably have no great difficulty 
in marching about a hundred miles from the Al- 
banian frontier across northern Greece to Salonika. 
From this line Italian troops could extend their oc- 
cupation southward. Greece could put only 150,000 
equipped men in the field to resist such an invasion. 
On the sea the Italians would probably start by seiz- 
ing Corfu and then try to occupy the other Ionian 
Islands to the south. Sooner or later, however, they 


' would meet with resistance from the British fleet. 


TURKEY’S POSITION. The outcome of such a 
conflict is dependent in part on the attitude of Turkey 
which has a formal treaty of alliance with Greece 
dating from 1933. Although the Turks would un- 
doubtedly welcome an opportunity to oust the Ital- 


Page Three 








ians from the Dodecanese Islands which lie so close 
to Turkey's shore, it is by no means sure that they 
would rush to the assistance of Greece. Last June, 
when Italy entered the war against the Allies, the 
Ankara government invoked the escape clause in its 
alliance with Britain and France which provided that 
Turkey could not be put in a position where it would 
be compelled to fight the Soviet Union. Since that 
time Moscow’s policy of reconquering all the regions 
formerly held by the Czarist Empire has made An- 
kara even more suspicious and fearful of the Krem- 
lin. Soviet Russia might take advantage of Turkey’s 
involvement in war to claim the frontier districts 
of Kars and Ardahan which Moscow was obliged to 
cede to the Turkish Nationalists in 1921. For this 
reason the Turkish government might maintain a 
policy of armed neutrality. Such a course might also 
be influential in checking Bulgaria which would be 
sorely tempted to exploit an Italian invasion of 
Greece for the purpose of realizing its long-cherished 
ambition to recover a territorial foothold on the 
Aegean Sea. While Bulgarian expansion in this di- 
rection would not immediately threaten Turkey, it 
might be the prelude to an ultimate attempt to drive 
Turkey out of Europe and weaken its hold on the 
Straits. 


Up to the present Italy appears to have moved 
rather cautiously in enforcing its claims against 
Greece. Rome probably hopes that diplomatic pres- 
sure, reinforced by the threat of force, will be sufh- 
cient to induce Athens to renounce the guarantee of 
protection accorded by Britain in April 1939 and to 
place itself unreservedly at the disposal of the Axis 
powers. The German government is probably seek- 
ing to promote such a peaceful surrender, for it has 
no desire to see war break out in the Balkans at this 
time. For the same reason Berlin may have been 
instrumental in averting at the last moment a final 
rupture of the Hungarian-Rumanian negotiations 
over Transylvania. As long as Germany must reckon 
with the possibility of another winter of warfare in 
Western Europe, it is inclined to oppose any war 
which might jeopardize much-needed supplies from 


the Balkans. JouN C. pEWILDE 





Canada: America’s Problem, by John MacCormac. New 
York, The Viking Press, 1940. $2.75 


A timely survey, interestingly written, of Canada’s do- 
mestic problems and external relations, by the former Mon- 
treal correspondent of The New York Times. Since the book 
stresses the importance of Canada in American foreign 
policy and defense preparations, it provides an excellent 
background for understanding the Roosevelt-King nego- 
tiations. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 45, AuGusr 30, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera Micugies Dgan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Hw 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Buliding 

AuG. 26.—With the Joint Board on Canadian- 
American defense already at work, and negotiations 
with Great Britain for lease of naval and air bases 
and sale of destroyers proceeding rapidly, President 
Roosevelt and his advisors are giving some thought 
to the methods by which these emergency defense 
measures are to be carried out. One of the primary 
questions confronting the executive branch of the 
government is whether — or to what extent — Con- 
gress should be given a voice in the shaping of for- 
eign policy. 

EXECUTIVE CONTROL OF FOREIGN POL- 
ICY. The Administration has not yet reached a final 
decision on whether to proceed without action by 
Congress, but this course is being urged on the Presi- 
dent both in connection with the British and Canadian 
negotiations and the proposed sale or transfer of 
destroyers. 

The appointment of the United States members 
of the Joint Board, which includes Mayor LaGuardia 
of New York, representatives of the military, naval 
and air services, and the State Department, does not 
require Senate confirmation and raises no question of 
Congressional approval. Such a question might arise 
in the future, however, if the agreements reached by 
the Joint Board should go beyond the President's 
own powers of execution. Those who are urging Mr. 
Roosevelt to proceed by executive authority point to 
the broad powers conferred on the President by the 
constitution, and cite the recent Supreme Court de- 
cision in the Curtiss-Wright case (299 U.S.) and 
many other precedents upholding “the plenary and 
executive power of the President as the sole organ 
of the federal government in the field of interna- 
tional relations.” The right of the President to con- 
clude executive agreements— thus obviating the 
necessity for Senate ratification of treaties—has in- 


variably been upheld by the Court and has been used ~ 


frequently in the past. Apart from these legal prece- 
dents (which do not specifically meet the issue raised 
in the sale of destroyers), advocates of prompt ex- 
ecutive action hold that the need for haste overrides 
all other considerations. They believe that it would 
be fatal to submit such matters to Congress and risk 
prolonged debate at a time when even a few days de- 
lay might jeopardize the vital interests and defense 
of the United States. 

On the other hand, there are several reasons for 
executive restraint. It is obvious that the negotia- 
tions with Canada, for example, will involve political 


commitments of far-reaching importance. The fact 
that Canada is a Dominion of the British Empire and 
a belligerent, necessarily raises the more significant 
question of relations between this country and the 
British Commonwealth. While Canada and _ the 
United States have emphasized their common interest 
in the defense of the Western Hemisphere, British 
opinion, as reflected in Prime Minister Churchill's 
statement to Parliament on August 20, regards the 
triangular discussions as the beginning of a “common 
diplomacy” based on the community of vital interest 
between the United States and the British Empire. 
Without discussing the merits of this basic issue, sey. 
eral members of Congress—not all of whom are iso- 
lationists—contend that the Executive should at least 
give some indication that any final arrangements will 
be submitted to the Senate. If this procedure is not 
followed, it is pointed out, the Executive may be 
hampered by Congressional fears and suspicions 
which could be easily avoided by an assurance that 
democratic processes will not be abandoned. 

It will not be easy to reconcile the safeguarding of 
democratic processes with the demands for haste and 
the need for secrecy at critical stages of the negotia- 
tions. Nevertheless, the support of Congress will be 
essential in carrying out whatever agreements are 
finally reached, as Congress alone has the power to 
appropriate funds. However broad the legal powers 
of the President, the wisdom of ignoring Congress 
on an issue of this magnitude is open to question. 

LATIN AMERICAN RESPONSE. Meanwhile, 
the State Department is watching with interest the 
reaction of Latin America to the leasing of British 
naval and air bases in the Western Hemisphere. So 
far, there has been no rift in the unanimity of opin- 
ion recorded by the American Republics on all major 
defense issues at the recent Havana Conference. The 
move to bring Canada under the protective influence 
of the Monroe Doctrine is generally regarded as a 
logical and necessary extension of American policy, 
and there has been no apparent revival of the old 
fears of North American imperialism. However, the 
question of establishing United States bases in South 
American republics may raise difficult problems be- 
cause of the fear in several countries that this would 
lead to encroachments on their sovereignty. When 
the issue was tentatively raised with Uruguay several 
weeks ago, the suggestion was made that any naval 
or air bases on Uruguayan territory be established as 
Pan-American bases. Such an arrangement, if it could 
be worked out, might be preferable to the granting 
of exclusive rights to the United States. W.T. STONE 














er 
Vou. 


For 


leas 


EU 
HE 


| 





