the 


la’s 
1Z0, 
ital, 
Bil- 
ival 
ons, 
tial 
DTO- 

the 
rit- 
pril 
tish 
This 
1 of 
tan- 
pers 
ould 
rOV- 
ying 
pro- 
| 23 
ade. 
lood 
ence 
rent 


au- 
1 by 
t up 
' the 
litia 
‘ath- 
hist 
state 
pro- 
held 
F the 


)N 
Id M. 


‘y of 


lational 
Editor. 





“FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVI, No. 28 


May 7, 1937 





Entered as second- 
class macter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
‘Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


MAY Le 














— 


SOCIAL TRENDS IN THE THIRD REICH 
by John C. deWilde 


This report represents the first attempt to analyze how the 
National Socialist régime has affected the economic position 
of farmers, entrepreneurs and workmen. It reveals that 
despite the recovery of industrial production and national 
money income, there has been little or no improvement in 
real living standards. To carry out the rearmament and self- 
sufficiency programs the government has exacted sacrifices 
from all classes, especially labor. 


May 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


La) 
) 
* 
{ 
<< 
ti 
Cc 
oO 











! 


COMPROMISE NEUTRALITY 





OLLOWING a last minute agreement between 

Senate and House conferees, Congress on 
April 29 adopted the compromise “neutrality” 
bill to replace the temporary legislation expiring 
on May 1. In its final form the bill continues as 
“permanent” legislation the essential provisions 
of the acts of 1935 and 1936, including the em- 
bargo on arms and ammunition and the prohibi- 
tion of loans and credits, both of which apply to 
all belligerents on the outbreak of war, or to fac- 
tions engaged in civil strife whenever the Pres- 
ident finds that the peace of the United States 
may be threatened. In addition, the new law 
extends the scope of the earlier legislation by in- 
corporating one new temporary section and five 
new “permanent” provisions. 

The temporary provision, limited to two years, 
embodies the so-called “cash and carry” plan fav- 
ored in the House bill. This authorizes the Pres- 
ident (a) to forbid American vessels from carry- 
ing “certain articles or materials” other than 
arms and ammunition to any belligerent or any 
state where civil strife exists, and (b), to forbid 
the exportation of “any articles or materials 
whatever until all right, title and interest therein 
shall have been transferred to some foreign gov- 
ernment, agency .. . or national”—i.e., on a cash 
and carry basis. Under this discretionary pro- 
vision, the President is free to determine whether 
such restrictions are desirable, what articles or 
materials should be placed on the proscribed list, 
and what exceptions should be made for normal 
trade with Canada and Mexico in the event that 
either or both are belligerents. 

The new permanent features, which apply to 
any war between or among two or more states, 
or civil strife, provide that: 

1. American citizens shall be forbidden to 
travel on belligerent vessels, except under “such 


rules and regulations as the President shall pre- 
scribe.” 


2. American merchant vessels engaged in com- 
merce with any belligerent state shall be forbid- 
den to carry arms, armament or ammunition. 

8. Submarines or armed merchant vessels of a 
foreign state may be forbidden to enter a port or 
the territorial waters of the United States. 

4. Contributions to belligerents, factions or 
“asserted governments” shall be prohibited, ex- 
cept those used for medical aid, food or clothing 
to relieve human suffering, and all such contribu- 
tions shall be subject to the approval of the Pres- 
ident. (This provision is apparently designed to 
curb the activities of such groups as the Friends 
of Spanish Democracy.) 

5. The President may enumerate additional 
“implements of war” similar to those listed in his 
proclamation during the Ethiopian war, but no 
embargo shall be imposed on “raw materials or 
any other articles or materials.” 


The shortcomings of this compromise are obvi- 
ous. It is not “neutrality,” as its sponsors recog- 
nized in dropping the original title, and its prac- 
tical effect in future situations remains uncer- 
tain. The cash and carry plan would not pre- 
vent a trade boom in a major war of long dura- 
tion, and would favor any power with control of 
the seas. Controversies over neutral rights would 
be reduced but not eliminated. Under the new 
neutrality the United States retains its right to 
protect American ships carrying wheat or cot- 
ton to a neutral port. By his power to select 
“certain articles or materials” which would not 
be carried on American vessels, a wartime Pres- 
ident might easily become involved in contro- 
versy with a belligerent adversely affected by his 
ruling. 

Yet despite these shortcomings, the present bill 
probably represents the best compromise possible 
under existing conditions. It is acceptable, as an 
interim measure, precisely because it leaves open 
the fundamental decision as to the direction of 
American foreign policy. There is nothing in the 








2 ae 


: ae oe 
oes pean eee hye Retr mie iis Lbs 


<3 
Sea pepe tines 


a 





— Page Two 





present act to prevent the United States from 
pursuing a constructive policy of international co- 
operation designed to advance political and eco- 
nomic reconciliation in Europe. It permits Secre- 
tary Hull to press forward his reciprocal trade 
program and relieves Britain and France of the 
fear that American markets will be closed in time 
of war. At the same time it abandons in some mea- 
sure the traditional policy of the United States 
with regard to freedom of the seas. If the next 
two years bring about an appeasement in Europe, 
there will be no need for the neutrality act, and 
the temporary cash and carry plan can be recon- 
sidered in the light of the then existing situation. 
On the other hand, if the rearmament programs 
of Britain and France are not used to achieve a 
settlement and if the armament race hastens a 
conflict, the United States will not be irrevocably 
committed to participation in a struggle which 
may be waged for purely nationalistic ends. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 


JAPAN’S CONSTITUTIONALISM IN ECLIPSE 


The Japanese cabinet’s statement of May 3, 
indicating that it would remain in office despite 
its crushing defeat in elections held three days 
earlier, foreshadows continuance of the chronic 
constitutional crisis which has existed in Japan 
since the military revolt of February 1936. While 
the situation is extremely confused, Premier Sen- 
juro Hayashi’s declared intention to “correct the 
system of politics which has been twisted by the 
force of foreign ideas within the past sixty or 
seventy years, and establish a true system of con- 
stitutional politics peculiar to Japan” augurs ill 
for the weak semblance of parliamentary gov- 
ernment still evident in the country. 


The election took place after the cabinet had 
suddenly dissolved the Diet on March 31, osten- 
sibly because it obstructed the passage of impor- 
tant legislation but actually as a result of con- 
tinuing friction between the military and the po- 
litical parties. The militarists, who had been 
surprisingly tractable until approval on March 
29 of a budget containing record defense appro- 
priations, apparently sought to chastise the poli- 
ticians by forcing them to contest an election. 
From this point of view the dissolution proved 
a blunder. Both major parties struck back at 
the government’s dictatorial tactics and rightly 
denied they had unduly sabotaged government 
legislation. The much-discussed third party 
which, it was believed, the government would 
organize for its own support failed to make its 
appearance. After an unusually apathetic cam- 








—— 


paign in which the issues were largely restricted 


to vague generalities, the election on April 30—? 


characterized by widespread abstentions—result. 
ed in no striking changes save in the case of the 
mildly Left-wing Social Mass party. Although 
this group increased its representation from 18 
to 37 seats, it is still of small importance in a 
Diet of 466. 

The government’s failure to secure more than 
a negligible number of votes in the new parlia- 
ment has not improved the basic position of the 
political parties. Democratic forces in Japan are 
still confronted by a dilemma. Even if the par- 
liamentarians should maintain their united oppo- 
sition and succeed in harrying the non-party 
Hayashi cabinet out of office, the only possible 
successor, in view of the army’s intransigence, 
would necessarily be another aggregation of mili- 
tarists and bureaucrats. On the other hand, if 
the Seiyukai can be induced by the offer of three 
minor cabinet posts to support the government, 
the moral bankruptcy of the politicians will have 
been revealingly illuminated. 

In either case the probabilities are that there 
will be a steady drift toward authoritarian gov- 
ernment. Premier Hayashi has stated that he 
intends to summon the new Diet for a short 
special session this summer. Should the parties 
refrain from provoking a crisis on this occasion 
the government may carry on without difficulty 
until the regular session in February 1938. It 
appears likely that the cabinet will hold the threat 
of dissolution over the parties’ heads to secure 
acquiescence in this plan. If another election is 
forced, the Home Minister has intimated that it 
will be held under a new, semi-Fascist electoral 
scheme—to be established by urgent imperial de- 
cree—which would enable the cabinet to control 


the results. Davip H. PoPpPER 





The Private Manufacture of Armaments, by Philip Noel- 
Baker. New York, Oxford University Press, 1937. $3.75 
The first volume of the most important study of the 

effects of private armament manufacture upon interna- 

tional politics. 

China Hand, by James Lafayette Hutchison. 
Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Co., 1936. $3.50 
Personal history of a British-American Tobacco Com- 


New York, 


pany employee in China, from the pioneering days of 1911 | 


to the complicated and far flung organization of today. 
War or Peace? A Forecast, by John F. Kane: New York, 
Timely Books, 1936. $1.00 
The author proposes an international agency whose task 
it would be to deepen international understanding rather 
than to produce a state of “negative peace.” 
The Dangerous Sea, by George Slocombe. New York, Mac- 
millan, 1937. $2.50 
A journalist’s survey of political problems in the Medi- 
terranean. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 28, May 7, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMONpD Lesiig Buett., President; EstHeR G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





FC 


An 
Al 





RAL L 


y, OF 








