



























FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN mars 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff oa class matter December 
: “ry aC ae 2, 1921, at the Post 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year <a ary ‘ \ Office a New York, 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated oii 2° N. Y., under the act 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Fy of March 3, 1879. 
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 4 Gf 
\% ¥ i 
XV, No. 33 JUNE 12. 1936 % 2> a J 
VoL. AV, NO. dk JUNE 12, 1936 \ LOrM 39" / 
POLITICAL CONFLICT IN FRANCE LL peanypoete@engress 
by John C. deWilde / 
Political conflict between the Right, the Centre, and the Division of Acces3i0u3 wa 
Left; Work of the National Union Governments; Economic 


crisis and deflation; Controversy over foreign policy; Offen- 
sive against fascism; Croix de Feu and Front Paysan; Rap- 
prochement of Socialists and Communists; Trade union 
unity; The Popular Front. 


April 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Washinzton, D. C. 











THE FIRST FRENCH SOCIALIST GOVERNMENT 





HE French Popular Front government with 

the Socialist leader, Léon Blum, as Premier, 
took office on June 5 under most difficult circum- 
stances. On May 26 strikes had broken out in the 
metal trades and spread quickly to other branches 
of industry until, by the end of the first week of 
June, almost 1,000,000 workers were affected. The 
strikes appear to have been without union initia- 
tive, although the General Confederation of Labor 
participated in the settlement. There was no dis- 
order or sabotage; the men took possession of the 
plants, remaining there night and day while rela- 
tives brought in food. 


It seems that the strikes, which were marked by 
traditional French respect for property, were ap- 
parently a spontaneous mass demonstration de- 
signed not only to secure certain definite allevia- 
tions but to impress the incoming Left government 
that the rights and interests of its principal sup- 
porters must be respected. The strikers’ demands 
included a 40-hour week, with payment on the 
basis of 48 hours; lighter tasks for women; dis- 
charge of married women whose husbands have 
jobs; and recognition by employers of workers’ 
shop committees for collective bargaining. After 
a fortnight during which the strikes became in- 
creasingly widespread, an agreement was reached 
on June 8 in a conference between representatives 
of employers and workers, presided over by 
Premier Blum. In his first ministerial declara- 
tion on June 5, M. Blum had stated that the gov- 
ernment would immediately initiate legislation for 
a 40-hour week, collective wage contracts and paid 
vacations; these promises formed the basis of the 
settlement which it is hoped will terminate the 
strikes. If these measures are put into effect, 
French labor will have won a considerable victory 
by a strike of enormous proportions, conducted 
without violence and with only minor public in- 
convenience. 


Although the first achievement of the Blum 


government appears to be a victory for the Left, 
the Cabinet’s tenure of office is at best precarious, 
depending as it does on a united front which will 
be difficult to hold together. There are 35 mem- 
bers in the new ministry, of whom 16 are Social- 
ists, 14 Radical Socialists, one Socialist Unionist 
and one dissident Communist — the Communist 
party having refused to participate in the govern- 
ment. For the first time in French history three 
women are members of the government, although 
women have not as yet the right to vote in France 
and the women ministers therefore have no politi- 
cal affiliations. Among the members of the gov- 
ernment, however, there are many familiar names, 
which cast some doubt on the fundamental char- 
acter of France’s New Deal. Camille Chautemps 
is Minister of State, Edouard Daladier is Vice- 
President of the Council and Minister of Defense, 
Pierre Cot is Minister of Air, and Yvon Delbos, 
an unknown quantity in foreign affairs, is Foreign 
Minister. All are Radical Socialists and their 
posts are among the most important in the Cab- 
inet. On the other hand, Vincent Auriol and 
Roger Salengro, holding respectively the port- 
folios of finance and the interior, are Socialists; 
Pierre Vienot, a Socialist and an outstanding ex- 
pert on German affairs, is Under-Secretary at the 
Quai d’Orsay. M. Blum, moreover, has already 
ousted the former governor of the Bank of France, 
Jean Tannery, and replaced him by Emil Labeyrie. 
The latter, a financial authority with Left sym- 
pathies, is a member of the Court of Accounts 
which reviews annually the financial accounts of 
the government. Blum’s announced program in- 
cludes nationalization of the munitions industry, 
reform of the statutes of the Bank of France, and 
modification of the decree laws in favor of civil 
servants and war veterans. 


M. Blum is reported to have reassured worried 
bankers and financial magnates during the four- 
week interregnum before the new government 


eet SP 


ae 

















took office that he did not intend to make revo- 
lutionary changes and, as a result, the gold drain 
from France stopped at least temporarily. Never- 
theless, it already seems apparent that the French 
Socialists have learned from the British Labour 
party, and Premier Blum will not become a second 
Ramsay MacDonald. Whether he will be strong 
enough to break the strangle-hold of the Bank of 
France on French affairs remains to be seen. 
Blum is committed to keep the franc on gold, but 
the strike settlement will increase labor costs 
while the government’s program calls for large 
expenditures on public works. It seems impos- 
sible that France will not be forced to devaluate. 


The new government has not yet announced a 
definite policy in foreign affairs, except to renew 
allegiance to the League of Nations. There is, 
however, growing apprehension in France regard- 
ing the results of Mussolini’s Ethiopian victory 
and it is likely that French policy will tend toward 
closer cooperation with Britain. Nazi Germany 
remains the major problem of any French govern- 
ment, whatever its political complexion, but it is 
too early to forecast the effect—if any—that the 
new ministry will have on the European situation. 


MILDRED S. WERTHEIMER 


REVOLUTION IN NICARAGUA 


On June 6 President Juan B. Sacasa was forced 
out of office by General Anastasio Somoza, chief 
of the Nicaraguan National Guard. Beginning 
on May 28 members of the Guard had overthrown 
local officials in many cities and set up govern- 
ments of their own choosing. The Fascist-minded 
Blue Shirts cooperated in this move. For a time 
President Sacasa attempted resistance, but his po- 
sition was hopeless and he was finally compelled to 
resign and leave the country. The reins of gov- 
ernment were temporarily assumed by Interior 
Minister Irfas, who summoned Congress in special 
session on June 9 to designate an executive for the 
unexpired portion of Sacasa’s term. 

For some months Somoza’s campaign for the 
Presidency in the November elections has kept 
Nicaraguan politics in turmoil.* The Constitu- 
tion barred his candidacy on two counts: (1) his 
relationship with the President (nephew by mar- 
riage), and (2) his position in the armed forces. 
But his followers have scoffed at legal obstacles. 
or at best demanded constitutional amendments 
in the hope of legalizing their leader’s position. 


Dr. Sacasa—mild, pacific, indecisive—had made 
the primary purpose of his administration to keep 


*"Clouds on the Central American Horizon,"’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, 
February 7, 1936. 


Page Two 








the country at peace. He wished to prove that 
Nicaraguans could live in concord and avoid do- 
mestic disturbances which might threaten another 
United States intervention. In apparent pursuit 
of this goal, Sacasa failed to take effective action 
against General Somoza, when in February 1934 
members of the National Guard treacherously 
seized and shot General Sandino—although the 
latter was in Managua on a Presidential safe-con- 
duct. The same motive led Dr. Sacasa to foster 
conversations between leaders of the Conservative 
and Liberal parties, whose traditional rivalry has 
caused recurring strife, in the interest of a single 
slate for the November elections. The Conserva- 
tives, led by General Emiliano Chamorro, were not 
averse to such a move, in view of their decisive 
defeats in the marine-supervised elections of 1928 
and 1932. An agreement signed on May 12 pro- 
vided for bi-partisan support of a ticket headed by 
Liberels. In return, the Conservatives were as- 
sured two cabinet posts and other government of- 
fices. This agreement, however, failed to win the 
approval of General Somoza, whose drive for 
power had placed him in position to dictate, sooner 
or later, his own designation as President. Thus 
the sequel to United States intervention in 
Nicaragua seems likely to follow the pattern al- 
ready set in the Dominican Republic, where a 
marine-trained guard has been used to set up and 
support a tyrannical dictatorship. 


Latin-American fear that the Nicaraguan situa- 
tion might result in United States interference 
was evidenced by representations to the State De- 
partment on the part of Chile and Peru. On 
June 4 Secretary Hull declared that the United 
States would adhere to a strict non-intervention 
policy. In accord with its moral support of the 
1923 treaties, Washington had formerly refused 
to recognize Central American rulers who achieved 
power by force. But the recognition in January 
1934 of the Martinez government in Salvador 
apparently signalized the abandonment of this 


policy. CHARLES A. THOMSON 





The French Parliamentary Committee System, by R. K. 
Gooch. New York, Appleton-Century, 1935. $2.75 


An excellent study of the most important cog in French 
parliamentary machinery. 


Government Control of the Economic Order, edited by B. 
E. Lippincott. Minneapolis, University of Minnesota 
Press, 1935. $1.75 


A number of economists and political scientists examine 
in a rudimentary way the practical and theoretical prob- 
lems of government control over economic life. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV. No. 33, JUNE 12, 1936, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasime Bugit, President; Esther G. Open, Secretary; Vera MICHELES Dkan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matcer December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








a“ 


OL 


| 





