es, 
———— 


r inter. 
London 
‘estern, 
srussels 
de bar- 
capital] 
ister of 
y trade 
out the 
lling to 
larger 
is week 
) group, ” 
holding 
month, 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XVI, No. 26 


APRIL 23, 1937 


—_ 


THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF THE U.SS.R. 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


Far-reaching controversy has been aroused by the new Soviet 
constitution which, according to Stalin, is based on principles of 
“extensive socialist democracy.” This view is challenged by 
Trotzky who regards the document as “tan immense step back 
from socialist to bourgeois principles.” Mrs. Dean examines the 
constitution both in the light of Marxist doctrine and of the actual 
course followed by the Soviet Union under Stalin’s leadership. 


inavian 
elgium, 
iminate 
States | 
:presen- 
ir. Nor- 
states- 
economic 
VILDE 


pf, 1937. 


t colorful 


ithony J. 
$3.00 
‘ssions of 


ue of Na- 


idespread 
many in- 


»g in Ger- 


r, gleaned 


ambridge, 


the ulti- 
rity. 

Sdwin W. 
ty Press, 


our bank- 
es recent 
1oney and 


Gerhard 


rope, with 
sible basis 


d. National 
EAN, Editor. 
Year. 


April 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Wt nth 
Mew wii @ 


EUROPEAN POWERS SEEK GENERAL SETTLEMENT 


HE announcement on April 16 that Premier 

Van Zeeland of Belgium—entrusted by France 
and Britain with the task of exploring the possi- 
bilities of international economic collaboration— 
will visit President Roosevelt in June, has crys- 
tallized recent rumors that the two great European 
democracies might take the lead in proposing a 
general political and economic settlement. Ac- 
cording to these rumors Britain, strengthened by 
its rearmament program, would depart from the 
policy of avoiding commitments east of the Rhine 
and, in collaboration with France, would guaran- 
tee non-aggression treaties concluded by Germany 
with Poland, Lithuania and Czechoslovakia. Such 
a move would lessen France’s responsibility for 
protection of peace in Eastern Europe, reassure 
the Soviet Union, and possibly permit modifi- 
cation of the Franco-Soviet pact, which has 
hitherto proved the most serious obstacle to 
German participation in negotiations for a West- 
ern Locarno. This general settlement would not 
involve cessions of European territory to Ger- 
many but, according to the most optimistic ver- 
sion, might include return by France of the 
African colonies it obtained from Germany under 
League mandate. It is thought that the Hitler 
government, alarmed by the progress of French 
and British rearmament, and realizing that it 
cannot keep pace with the Western democracies, 
would welcome an opportunity to limit armaments 
at existing levels, provided it obtains economic 
and colonial advantages. The ground would thus 
be laid for international conferences on trade and 
arms limitation which would inaugurate an era 
of genuine appeasement. 


Among the many straws in this new wind blow- 
ing over Europe are Dr. Schacht’s visit to Brus- 
sels, reports of a German-Soviet rapprochement, 
relaxation of tension over Spain, and signs of a 
rift in the Italo-German alliance. During his con- 
versations with Premier Van Zeeland on April 


13-14 Dr. Schacht, German Minister of Eco- 
nomics, is thought to have discussed not only vari- 
ous projects for improving trade relations be- 
tween the two countries, but the prospects for 
international economic negotiations, in which 
Belgium might play the réle of mediator between 
Germany and the Western democracies. While 
rumors of a Soviet-German rapprochement have 
been denied by both Berlin and Moscow, the Hitler 
government, as well as the German Reichswehr, 
has always favored economic collaboration with 
the U.S.S.R.; and it is reported that the Soviet 
Union, discouraged by the slow progress of ne- 
gotiations for a military accord implementing the 
Franco-Soviet pact, might not be averse to a re- 
orientation of foreign policy. 


Most striking of all has been the sudden relaxa- 
tion of tension over Spain, which only three weeks 
ago threatened to become the scene of a European 
conflict. The British government, determined 
to avoid any clash with Insurgents blockading 
the Loyalist port of Bilbao, has warned all British 
ships, even those carrying foodstuffs—not pro- 
hibited by the non-intervention agreement—to 
remain outside Spanish territorial waters. This 
policy, which plays into the hands of the In- 
surgents and threatens Bilbao with starvation, 
was denounced by the Labor party in the House 
of Commons on April 14, but a Laborite vote of 
censure was rejected by 345 votes to 130. 

Britain’s determination to avoid a Mediter- 
ranean conflict was matched by Italy on April 15, 
when Count Grandi, Italian Ambassador to Lon- 
don, reversed his previous position and told the 
non-intervention committee that he was ready to 
consider means of withdrawing foreign ‘“volun- 
teers” fighting on both sides in the Spanish civil 
war; whereupon the Soviet representative, M. 
Maisky, agreed not to press his charges of an 
Italian “invasion” of Spain. This new spirit of 
conciliation enabled the non-intervention commit- 


sity of Michigan Library 


. 7 5 a 
a 


tee to inaugurate on April 19 the oft-postponed 
system of control over volunteers and war material 
bound for Spain by land or sea. 


That Mussolini’s change of front on Spain may 
be due to disappointment with the results of the 
“Rome-Berlin axis” is indicated by Italy’s recent 
manoeuvres in Southeastern Europe, where its 
interests clash with those of Germany. It seems 
increasingly clear that the Italo-Yugoslav pact 
was designed not only to protect Italy from rear- 
guard attack in case of a Mediterranean conflict 
with Britain, but to provide a barrier against Ger- 
man penetration in the Balkans, and may be fol- 
lowed by an attempt to bring the two other Little 
Entente countries—Rumania and Czechoslovakia 
—within the orbit of the Rome bloc composed of 
Italy, Austria and Hungary. This policy would 
find favor in Vienna, where Dr. Schuschnigg is 
energetically checking Nazi agitation, as well as 
in Budapest, where Premier Daranyi has taken 
strong measures against the Hungarian Nazi 
organization which had planned a putsch in early 
March. The Austrian Chancellor, alarmed by re- 
ports that Mussolini, in exchange for German 
support in Spain, had agreed to forego his oppo- 
sition to Anschluss and to block Hapsburg restora- 
tion, has been actively engaged in negotiations 
with Hungary and Czechoslovakia. He apparent- 
ly hopes to avoid the pitfalls of both Anschluss 
and restoration by developing an independent 
Austrian foreign policy based on reconstruction 
of a Danubian bloc embracing Austria, Hungary 
and the Little Entente. 

While recent developments in Europe offer 
ground for hope, it would be idle to minimize the 
obstacles which stand in the way of a general 
settlement. Chief among these, according to some 
observers, is Britain’s reluctance to abandon its 
rearmament program and liberalize its trade poli- 
cies. Although British rearmament has undoubt- 
edly proved one of the strongest factors in cre- 
ating a more conciliatory attitude on the part of 
Germany and Italy, continuance of the armaments 
race is not conducive to relaxation of economic 
tension. The prospects for European appease- 
ment would be immeasurably improved if Britain, 
while proceeding with rearmament and offering 
to use its new armaments on behalf of collective 
security, would at the same time display a genuine 
desire to consider Germany’s economic and colonial 


demands. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


PHILIPPINES ECONOMIC STUDY BEGINS 


The meeting on April 19 of a joint preparatory 
committee to study the economic future of the 


Page Two 


ey 
——e, 


Philippines marks the first concrete attempt to 
revise the inequitable trade provisions of the 
Philippine Independence Act. The committee, 
whose personnel was announced on April! 14, ig 
composed of six Filipino and six American ex. 


perts who will work under the direction of Francis ee 
B. Sayre, Assistant Secretary of State. The 

American members are prominent government Pa 
officials led by Joseph E. Jacobs, chief of the Boo! 
Office of Philippine Affairs in the State Depart- think 
ment; the Filipinos, under the chairmanship of In 
José Yulo, Philippine Secretary of Justice, are stud 


leaders of the powerful coalition supporting Presi- 
dent Quezon in the Islands. The committee’s re- 
port is expected late this year, and its recommen- 


dations may be presented to the next session of | == 


Congress as a program of action acceptable to 
both parties. 


The function of these experts, as set forth in a 
joint statement of President Quezon and Dr. Sayre 
on March 18, is to draw up a plan for termina- 
tion of preferential trade relations between the 
two areas “at the earliest practicable date con- 
sistent with affording the Philippines a reason- 
able opportunity to adjust their national econ- 
omy” to the new status. Subsequently a trade 
agreement on a non-preferential basis will regulate 
commerce between the two countries. President 
Quezon’s suggestion that independence be granted 
the Commonwealth in 1938 or 1939 will be con- 
sidered only in connection with its effect on the 
program of readjustment in trade relations. 


From the economic point of view, it is realized 
that preferences, especially for sugar, must be 
accorded the Islands at least until 1946 and very 
possibly after that date. The existing provisions 
for a sharp rise in American trade barriers from 
25 to 100 per cent of the tariff and abolition of all 
quotas, both to take place in 1946, are generally 
recognized as ruinous to the Philippines. The, 
committee is therefore expected to urge a less) 
abrupt transition and also to recommend positive 
measures to decrease the Island’s excessive depen- 
dence on the export of sugar. By diversifying 
agriculture and encouraging mining and _ sec- 
ondary industries, much can be done to improve 
the status of the Philippines as a competitor in | 
the world market. Early independence would 
permit the Islands to make trade agreements with 
foreign countries and alter tariff barriers. But 
this salutary effect of freedom by 1939 must be 
balanced against the unwillingness of many mem- 


bers of Congress to extend any economic conces- | 


sions whatever to the Philippines once inde- 
pendence is granted. DAVID H. PopPER 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 26, Aprit 23, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasuim Bugwt, President; EstHar G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera Micuetes Daan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


ee 


EE 
r¢ 
have | 
While 
pate i 
provic 
lieve | 
appea 
territ 
tion t 
gure 

The ¢ 


Itali: 
secu! 
tern: 
or A 
clud: 
| has | 
whe! 
ner 

Ital; 
sour 
its i 


