ission 
10,000 
| will 
ilable 

This 


al im- 


LAG. 
\visory 
of de- 
luding 
is get: 
‘ogress 
planes, 
nonth, 
1,133. 
tarded 
Is. Al- 
ing at 
e filled 
vill be 


im and 


on and 
ry have 
»f new 
its tax 
-ontract 
nission. 
with its 
‘tion of 
ginning 
located. 
than 10 


Jashing- 
am will 
The ap- 
or with 
re neces 


1 before 
WILDE 


“ Tr. e 
*& wOiversit +f wee 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


Risch 
©4500p 


wu 
w+ Oa f , ; . wa , ee 
¥d ~ + Mawliia HY AyYy 
SAu 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 5 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XX, No. 2 


—_ 


NOVEMBER 1, 1940 


AXIS POWERS SPEED CONSOLIDATION OF EUROPE 


HE long-threatened war in the Balkans broke 

out on October 28 when Italian troops, which 
for weeks had been massing on the Greco-Albanian 
frontier, invaded Greece following expiration of a 
three-hour ultimatum accusing Greece of aid to 
Britain and asking permission to occupy strategic 
Greek bases to guarantee the country’s “‘neutral- 
ity.” On October 25 the official Italian news 
agency, Stefani, charged that a Greek band had 
penetrated Albania, attacking an outpost, and that 
"Greek and British agents” had perpetrated a bomb 
outrage in the Albanian port of Santa Quaranta (re- 
named by the Italians Porto Edda). The Greek 
government, in a communiqué of October 27, vig- 
orously denied the Stefani charges, and the following 
day Premier Metaxas rejected the Italian ultimatum, 
declaring “the moment has arrived for Greece to 
fight for her independence and honor.”” Twelve hours 
after the Italian invasion, Athens officially an- 
nounced that Britain would give “unlimited sup- 
port” to Greece, whose territory it had guaranteed 
in April 1939. Meanwhile the poorly equipped Greek 
amy, estimated at 100,000 men, with an air force of 
only 125 planes, bore the brunt of attack by ten 
Italian divisions, estimated at 200,000. 


Italy's principal objective is to seize Greek harbors 
and bases, especially the port of Salonika, with the 
aim of crushing the British fleet in the Eastern Medi- 
terranean. It is difficult to see how Britain can effec- 
tively aid Greece against Italy, except by occupying 
some of the Greek islands, notably Crete, and using 
them, in turn, to cut Italian communications. While 
Turkey, whose territory is also guaranteed by Britain, 
had indicated that it would come to Greece's assis- 
tance in case of Italian invasion, the Turkish gov- 
etmment, in the absence of any clear intimation of 
the course Russia might adopt, abstained from inter- 
vention on the side of Greece. 


PETAIN ACCEPTS HITLER’S “NEW ORDER.” 


Italy's invasion of Greece was one of a series of 
rapid moves by the Axis powers to consolidate their 
control of Europe, and oust Britain from its few 
remaining footholds on the continent. On Octo- 
ber 24 Marshal Pétain, disregarding warnings and 
admonitions by President Roosevelt, King George VI 
and Prime Minister Churchill, reached an agree- 
ment in principle with Hitler, transforming the 
four-month armistice between the two countries into 
a settlement providing for French collaboration with 
Germany's “reconstruction of peace in Europe.” The 
details of this agreement, which was unanimously 
approved by the Vichy Cabinet on October 26, 
remain to be worked out. On October 28 Vice 
Premier Laval, who had conducted the preliminary 
negotiations in Paris, assumed the post of For- 
eign Minister, hitherto held by Paul Baudouin, to 
arrange the “details.” Contrary to earlier reports, 
which had forecast Nazi demands for military as- 
sistance by Fgance against Britain, official sources in 
Vichy declared that collaboration with Germany 
would be confined to political and economic matters. 
From Switzerland came persistent rumors that 
France would cede Alsace-Lorraine to Germany and 
the Riviera as far as Nice to Italy; would share with 
Italy its rule over Tunisia and with Spain its rule 
over French Morocco; and would defend its naval 
bases in the Mediterranean and in Africa against 
British seizure, thus protecting Axis operations in 
Egypt and the Near East. In return, the Pétain gov- 
ernment would be permitted to extend its rule to a 
part of occupied French territory, move its head- 
quarters from Vichy to Paris or Versailles, secure 
the release of nearly two million French war prison- 
ers still held by the Germans, and obtain German 
assistance in the industrial reconstruction of France. 


WILL AXIS LAUNCH PEACE OFFENSIVE? 
Just before receiving Marshal Pétain, Hitler had 
held a long conference with General Franco on the 


ee 


Spanish border, apparently in an effort to enlist his 
assistance in an attack on Gibraltar. While the Span- 
ish press is calling for national unity, and suggests 
that events of the utmost importance are about to 
take place, it is not yet clear whether Spain is ready 
to follow Italy's example, and shift from non-bel- 
ligerency to active participation in the war. Proceed- 
ing with his diplomatic Blitzkrieg, Hitler on Octo- 
ber 28 met Mussolini in Florence to map out 
further steps in the far-flung Axis campaign, de- 
signed simultaneously to end the resistance of the Brit- 
ish Isles and to break Britain’s hold on the Mediter- 
ranean at Gibraltar and Suez. This offensive was timed 
to coincide with the last week of the political cam- 
paign in the United States, and to confront the Amer- 
ican public, whatever the outcome of the elections, 
with the fait accompli of Europe united under Nazi 
rule, and Britain irrevocably isolated from the con- 
tinent. 


Hitler's diplomatic moves, which some observers 
regard as a prelude to a bid for peace, are power- 
fully aided by the war weariness of the European 
peoples, who consider almost any alternative prefer- 
able to renewal or extension of the conflict—especial- 
ly as long as British and American assistance in 
breaking the Nazi strangle-hold remains problemati- 
cal. While the conquered peoples welcome every 
reference to “peace,” by whatever means it may be 
achieved, fear of involvement in the war dominates 
American discussions of foreign policy. Both candi- 
dates for the Presidency have assured the voters that 


Page Two 


ee . 
—— 


they do not favor “appeasement,” and believe ip 
the utmost degree of national defense as well as all 
possible aid to Britain but, at the same time, declare 
that they will not involve the country in war. Wheth. 
er these seemingly contradictory sentiments yijlj 
continue to shape American foreign policy after 
elections, or will be channeled in the direction of 
either war or “appeasement,” is a question of im. 
mediate concern not only to the United States, but 
also to the war-torn continents of Europe and Asia, 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


NEW MONTHLY FEATURE FOR BULLETIN 
To meet the increasing demand for information 
on Latin America, the Foreign Policy Association } 
inaugurates with this issue of the Foreign Policy 
Bulletin a new monthly feature—TRENDs IN Latiy 
AMERICA—a full-page article devoted to current de 
velopments in that region. It will be prepared by 
John I. B. McCulloch, who has traveled widely in 
Latin America. Mr. McCulloch, author of the Head. } 
line Book, “Challenge to the Americas,” is editor and 
co-founder of the Inter-American Quarterly, and also 
editor of the fortnightly Pan American News, pub 

lished by the Foreign Policy Association. 

Pan American News is recommended to F.P.A 
subscribers who wish to make a special study of | 
Latin American affairs. Sample copies may be 0b- | 
tained by writing to the Washington office of the| 
Foreign Policy Association, 1200 National Press 
Building, Washington, D. C. 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF | 


Documents on American Foreign Relations, July 1939- 
June 1940, edited by S. Shepard Jones and Denys P. 
Myers. Boston, World Peace Foundation, 1940. $3.75 
The second volume of a new series to be published an- 

nually, this compendium of primary source material on our 

foreign affairs will be of the greatest value to specialists 
and scholars. 


I Saw France Fall: Will She Rise Again? by René de 
Chambrun. New York, Morrow, 1940. $2.50 


This is an absorbing, well-related narrative of a French 
officer’s life, first, in the Maginot Line; second, as liaison 
officer with the British in France; and, third, during the 
Blitzkrieg in Belgium and Northern France. M. de Cham- 
brun’s experiences make more profitable and interesting 
reading than his sweeping criticisms of the French gov- 
ernment after 1936 and his fulsome praise of the Vichy 
régime. 


JUST OUT 


DEFENSE ECONOMY OF THE UNITED 
STATES: PROBLEMS OF MOBILIZATION 
By J. C. deWilde and George Monson 


25c 


November 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


Battle Shield of the Republic, by Major Malcolm wuellll 
Nicholson. New York, Macmillan, 1940. $1.50 


A stimulating critique of the American Army, marred by 
misstatements and misrepresentations. While the author 
blames the War Department for failings in our military 
organization for which Congress and the people are primar. 
ily responsible, he attacks many recognized flaws in Army 
methods and systems, and strikes some telling blows at the | 
existing system of training and promotion for officers. De 
spite its defects, this book will contribute greatly to am 
understanding of the public debate on the Army which is| 
almost certain to occur in the near future. ' 


Defense for America, edited with an introduction by Wil | 
liam Allen White. New York, Macmillan, 1940. $1.00 
A series of eloquent arguments for aid to the Allies, by 

a group of well-known national figures. 


Elements of International Relations, by F. A. Middlebust 
and Chesney Hill. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1940. $3.25 | 


A well-written introductory textbook. 


Twin Stars of China, by Evans Fordyce Carlson. NeW 
York, Dodd, Mead, 1940. $3.00 


An excellent picture of the China war by an Americal! 
marine officer who lived and marched with fighting detach 
ments of guerrilla troops, and who observed several! of the 
important positional battles. More than a mere narrative 
of the war, it also analyzes China’s leadership and outlook, 
the broad strategy of the Chinese struggle, and the growth 
of new Chinese social and political institutions under strest 
of national emergency. 


It is 
tween 
Nazi | 
mal i 
provid 
Havan 
to be « 
one A 
the fo 
lection 
to hav 
States 
Sumne 
gates, 
diplon 
Washi 
sible v 
Shoulc 
taining 
notabl: 
sultatic 
of the 
tion f£ 
Germa 
Hemis 


MIL 
far as 
Americ 
dividec 
Durins 
rankin; 
tary ar 
guests 
Staff. ’ 


| been p 


the fiel 
strengt 
Americ 
ally re 
Orders 
some c 
States, 
Americ 
on wat 


be abl. 


On | 
Ing ha 
— 
FOREIGN 
Headquart 


Entered a: 


Beis 


TIN 
mation 
ciation ) 
Policy 
LATIN 
ent de 


Wheeler: 


arred by 
e author 
military 
e primar. 
in Army 
ws at the 
icers. De 
tly to an 
which is 


n by Wil- 
.. $1.00 
Allies, by 


liddlebush 
40. $3.25 


ison. New 


Americal 
ng detach 
sral of the 
narrative 
1d outlook, 
the growth 
nder stres# 


TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA — 


It is significant that the renewed negotiations be- 
tween Berlin and Vichy, possibly foreshadowing 
Nazi use of French bases, coincided with the for- 
mal inauguration of the “emergency committee” 
provided for by the Act of Havana adopted at the 
Havana Conference of 1940. This committee was 
to be constituted as soon as two-thirds of the twenty- 
one American republics appointed delegates. Since 
the fourteenth republic, Ecuador, announced its se- 
lection on October 24, the committee may be said 
to have come into existence on that date. The United 
States representative is Under-Secretary of State 
Sumner Welles, and all the Latin American dele- 
gates, except the one from Brazil, head the regular 
diplomatic missions of their respective countries in 
Washington. Consultation should therefore be pos- 
sible with a minimum of delay in case of emergency. 
Should Nazi Germany appear on the point of ob- 
taining one of France’s New World colonies, 
notably Martinique, the committee, following con- 
sultation, would presumably authorize one or more 
of the American republics to take action. Such ac- 
tion might require military intervention against 
Germany by the United States or other Western 
Hemisphere countries. 


MILITARY AND ECONOMIC FRONTS. As 
far as relations between the United States and Latin 
America are concerned, interest is at the moment 
divided between the military and economic fronts. 
During the month of October, two groups of high- 
ranking Latin American army officers toured the mili- 
tary and industrial centers of the United States as 
guests of General George C. Marshall, Chief of 
Staff. The Latin Americans are reported to have 
been particularly impressed with accomplishments in 
the field of aviation, and with evidences of industrial 
strength. This extensive contact between North 
American and Latin American officers may eventu- 
ally result in a series of military understandings. 
Orders for military equipment may be placed by 
some of the Latin American countries in the United 
States, although it is not clear at this moment how 
American manufacturers, already working overtime 
on war orders for Britain and the United States, will 
be able to export armaments to Latin America. 


On the economic front, the United States is mak- 
ing haste slowly with its program of aid to the 


a 


By JOHN I. B. MeCULLOCH = 


Latin American republics, and the center of inter- 
est has shifted to economic developments within 
Latin America itself. Argentina and Brazil are at 
present working out the details of a trade agreement 
arrived at “in principle” early in October. Two chief 
points are involved: first, a proposal for an exchange 
of surpluses; second, a plan whereby new indus- 
tries to be developed in either of the contracting 
countries would be guaranteed against a raising of 
tariff barriers in the other. An Argentine-Chilean 
agreement, along the same general lines, is also in 
prospect. While Washington, in the past, has 
frowned on barter agreements, it is realized in this 
country that present negotiations may contribute in 
some measure to freeing Latin America from a 
dangerous over-dependence on European markets. 

DOMESTIC POLITICS. Since midsummer there 
have been several changes of administration in the 
Latin American countries. In Ecuador, a republic 
plagued with chronic political instability for the last 
fifteen years and faced at present by an unusually 
grim economic outlook, Carlos Arroyo del Rio was 
inaugurated as President on September 1. A former 
corporation lawyer who has represented many im- 
portant foreign firms. Arroyo has the advantage of 
business experience, but is handicapped by a lack of 
popularity with the average citizen. In Panama, 39- 
year-old Arnulfo Arias took office on October 1 
with a Cabinet of relatively young and inexperienced 
Ministers; less than three weeks later, his govern- 
ment was proposing an extension of the Presidential 
term from four to six years. In Cuba, Colonel Ful- 
gencio Batista, who has dominated island affairs for 
the past seven years, was installed as President on 
October 10. Supported by an unwieldy coalition of 
seven parties which range from Communists to the 
conservative group of ex-President Menocal, Batista 
assumes his duties under the “semi-parliamentary” 
system provided for by Cuba’s new constitution. A 
change of administration has also taken place in 
Paraguay. Following the death of energetic, highly 
respected President José Félix Estigarribia in an air- 
plane crash September 7, Estigarribia’s War Min- 
ister, Higinio Morinigo, succeeded to office. Al- 
though Morinigo promised to adhere to his predeces- 
sor’s policies, he has entrusted the key posts in his 
government to army men, and has arbitrarily decreed 
his own continuance in office till 1943. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 2, NovemBgr 1, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


arters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicuHeres Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


S181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 

National Press Building 

Oct. 28.—In his review of American foreign 

policy before the National Press Club on October 26, 

Secretary Hull made two pointed references to sea 

power which assume particular significance in rela- 

tion to developments in Europe and Asia and recent 
shifts of American military and naval forces. 


Referring to the programs of the totalitarian na- 
tions, Mr. Hull declared that ‘they have as a fixed 
objective the securing of the control of the high 
seas.” And pointing to the defense of the United 
States, he asserted that ‘‘there can be nothing more 
dangerous for our nation than for us to assume that 
the avalanche of conquest could under no circum- 
stances reach any vital portion of this Hemisphere. 
Oceans give the nations of this Hemisphere no guar- 
antee against the possibility of economic, political 
or military attack from abroad.” Should the ‘“would- 
be conquerors” gain control of other continents and 
perfect their control of the seas, they might well be 
able ‘‘to strike at the communications lines, the com- 
merce and the life of this Hemisphere’ and ultimate- 
ly “compel us to fight on our own soil, under our 
own skies, in defense of our independence and our 
very lives.” 

These carefully worded statements serve to rein- 
force President Roosevelt's warning in his Dayton 
speech,* that when we speak of defending the West- 
ern Hemisphere “we include the right to the peace- 
ful use of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.” More- 
over, in the present situation, they give added 
emphasis to the series of military and naval steps 
which have accompanied Washington's diplomatic 
moves in Europe and the Far East. 

SEA POWER AND DEFENSE STRATEGY. 
Concern over the possible military consequences of 
the negotiations between Chancellor Hitler and the 
Vichy government of France was evidenced in 
Washington early last week. On October 24, the day 
Marshal Pétain conferred with Hitler, President 
Roosevelt sent an urgent message to the Vichy gov- 
ernment warning that close military collaboration 
with Germany might compel the United States and 
the other American Republics to occupy French pos- 
sessions in the Western Hemisphere under the terms 
of the Act of Havana. The message, which was 
handed to the French Ambassador in Washington 
by Under-Secretary Sumner Welles, referred specifi- 
cally to Martinique and French Guiana. 


*Cf. Washington News Letter, Foreign Policy Bulletin, October 18, 1940. 


Even earlier, however, the War and Navy Depart. 
ments had announced several measures, some of 
which appeared to be dictated by the changing 
strategical situation. As early as October 3, the 
Navy Department had revealed the creation of g 
Patrol Force in the Atlantic, composed of three capj. 
tal ships, five heavy cruisers, some 50 destroyers, one 
aircraft carrier and numerous auxiliaries, totaling 
about 125 vessels. While most of these vessels were 
already in the Atlantic, it was reported last week | 
that the Patrol Force will be further strengthened 
by the addition of six or more cruisers now in the 
Pacific. While this reinforcement may be explained 
partly on the ground of tactical necessity, it serves 
as a reminder of the potential threat in the Atlantic. 

The main force of the United States fleet remains | 
in the Pacific, with most of its strength concentrated 
at the base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, and no im- 
mediate change in fleet plans has been announced. 
On October 9, however, the Navy Department dis. 
closed plans for the purchase of approximately 53 
merchant ships and passenger vessels to be converted 
for use as fleet auxiliaries. More than 25 of these 
ships have already been secured. The list includes a 
number of modern vessels operated by the United 
States Lines, the Baltimore Mail Line and the Ameri- 
can Export Lines, suggesting the possibility that 
some of them may be intended for use as transports. 
In addition, on October 24 steps were taken to} 
strengthen the defenses of the Philippines by trans- 
fer of two squadrons of pursuit planes for the use 
of the Regular Army there. It is estimated that each 
squadron will include from eighteen to twenty-seven 
planes—an important addition to the existing force of 
about 150 craft, of all types, now stationed in the 
Islands. 

In themselves, these military and naval measures 
represent little more than routine precautions and it 


would be misleading to exaggerate their importance |” 


Coupled with President Roosevelt's definition of 
Hemisphere defense, however, and the continuing 
conversations with Britain and Australia, they i 
evitably suggest the possibility of a doctrine of sea 
power based on the offensive. In the present situa 
tion, with the British fleet in control of the Atlantic, 
the United States is under no immediate necessity of 
further altering its disposition of naval forces. But 
in the Pacific—and perhaps eventually in the Atlan 
tic as well—the key to control of the seas depends on 
collaboration between the United States and Britain 


W.T. STONE 


Greek 
prelin 
of the 
define 
the C 
and < 
Force 
from 
clashe 
borde 
light 

IT, 
week 
direct 
lel to 
in of 
strate 
boot. 
Italia: 
the G 
separ: 
remat 


* move 


slav | 
frofn 
one O 

Ita 
far b 
the “ 
yet b 
force: 
of Y; 
but t 
by G 
threa 
origi 
tively 


